London Printed for Tim: Child. School


Ductor Historicus: OR, A SHORT SYSTEM OF Universal History, AND AN
INTRODUCTION TO THE Study of that Science.

Containing A CHRONOLOGY of the most Celebrated Persons and Actions from the
Creation to this Time.

A COMPENDIOUS HISTORY of the most considerable Transactions in the World to
the Time of our Savior, In a Series of the Successions of the ANCIENT
MONARCHIES And Governments of the World.

An Account of the Writings of the most noted Historians, with the Judgments of
eminent Critics upon them.

Together with Definitions, and Explications of Terms used in History and
Chronology. And General Instructions for the Reading of History.

Illustrated with proper Observations and Remarks.

Partly Translated from the French of M. de Vallemont, but chiefly Composed
anew by W. I. M. A.

LONDON: Printed for Tim, (...), at the White Heart at the West End of S. Paul's
Churchyard, School.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Lord Churchill.
My LORD,
MY small Endeavors of serving the Public have met with such repeated
Encouragements in Your Illustrious Family, that I have impatiently waited for a
proper Occasion to express my Dutiful Acknowledgments.

Custom, MY LORD, has at all Times justified Dedications, chiefly, perhaps,
because Fortune seldom puts it in the Power of a Writer to show his Gratitude
to the Supporters of Learning any other way: Nevertheless I think it an
unpardonable Rudeness in an Author, boldly to obtrude a Book to a Person, that
can reap either Pleasure or Benefit by it; and therefore I have delayed so long
to wait upon Your LORDSHIP, till the Usefulness of the Present might, in some
measure, atone for the Trouble of the Address.

History, My LORD, of all Sciences is that which is the most suitable to all
Persons; and which best answers the two main Ends of our Studies, Profit and
Delight. But it deserves in a more peculiar manner the Application of those of
Your Rank and Dignity; for History is chiefly conversant about the Lives and
Actions of the Illustrious, and since there is a sort of Collateral Affinity
between Great Men of all Times and Places, it highly concerns them to be
acquainted with one another.

Moreover the Variety of Great Events and Revolutions, the different Laws,
Religions and Customs, which History presents to our Sight, cannot but yield a
very diverting and entertaining Prospect; and the Account it gives us of the
several Characters of Men, and of the chief Springs and Motives of their
Actions, together with the Good and Bad Examples it sets before us, will
certainly go a great way toward the making a Wise and a Prudent Man.

It Is true, MY LORD, that if Examples suffice to form a Great Man, Your
LORDSHIP has no occasion to fetch 'em from abroad; You will find in Your Noble
Father alone, a perfect Pattern of Military and Political Virtues: By Him Your
LORDSHIP may learn to be both a Soldier and a Statesman; Great at the Head of
an Army; Great in Business, but still Greater in a wise Retirement; in a Word,
to be like Caesar in the Field, the Senate House and the Closet.

That you may prove such, is the most sincere and constant Wish of

My LORD, Your LORDSHIPS most humble, most faithful, and most obliged Servant,
A. B.

PREFACE.
IT IS a true, certain and (...) evident Maxim, That all Knowledge or Learning^
call it which you pleas^) is more or less necessary, as it does conduce in a
higher or lower degree to the making Men useful and beneficial to others, and
easy and happy in themselves both here and hereafter. That Knowledge, which has
the greatest Tendency to these Ends, is certainly the most necessary, and
preferable to all other kinds of Knowledge whatsoever. Thus, for Instance,
Divinity and Morality, as they tend chiefly to promote the Welfare and
Happiness both of private Persons and of public Communities, the Knowledge of
them is the most necessary of any others; but yet it does not follow, that all
other Knowledge is unnecessary. Therefore we must crave leave to dissent from
Mr. Norris, who in his Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life with relation
to Learning, has endeavored, by a Metaph^sical ^train of Thought, to prove,
That some sorts of Knowledge are Necessary, but others Contingent; among the
latter of which he ranks Histo^y.

Now, though we bear all due Respect and Veneration to that good and learned
Author, yet we must frankly own, That we disapprove of his Assertion in this
Matter; since it can be made appear by Good and Solid (though not Metaphisical)
Reasons, That History is as necessary in an inferior degree to the Conduct of
Human Life, as Divin^ty, Morality, etc. are in a higher degree necessary to the
same End. The usefulness of this kind of Knowledge, I mean of History, is so
great to All, who are designed for public Employments either in Church or
State, and to all those who would read and know Men as well as Books, that this
very Consideration makes it highly necessary to such But we might advance our
Position still farther, and prove that this kind of Knowledge is in some
measure useful and beneficial, and consequently necessary to Men of the meanest
C^pacities, and of the lowest Size. For though it be true, as the forementioned
Author says, That it does not much concern us when a Bird dropped his Feather
last on the Pyrenean Mountains; yet we presume he will own, That the Knowledge
of the various Revolutions that have happened to the greatest Monarchies; of
the Vicissitudes of Fortune that have attended the greatest Princes; of the
prosperous Success of Good, and the infamous Ends of bad Men; of the Signal
Providence of a Supreme Being that has manifested it self in all these Things,
with the like, (to the Knowledge of all which we arrive by the Accounts of
History) is of nearer and greater Concernment to us, than that Triff^ng Simile
to which he ventures to compare it.

That History is or might be very useful and necessary to the meanest Persons,
appears from the Love they have and the Attention they give to the reading of
the Fabulous Histories of Valentine and Orson, of Cassandra, of Parismus and
Parismenos, etc. For it may be very reasonably inferred, That if such Romances
and Fables, if an old Wive's Tale told with an Air of Probability and Truth in
a Chimney corner, have such strange Effects upon the Minds of the Vulgar as we
see them have, then certainly the true Accounts of the Actions and Lives of the
Ancients, coming in with the joint Testimony of several Historians, must needs
have as great if not greater Effects on the Minds of these Persons. This is not
mere Conjecture, but Matter of Fact; for we will instance in one History, and
that is, the Account Josephus has given of the Destruction of the Jews. This
small part of his History being translated into our Language, is much in the
Hands of the very meanest Persons; and by common Experience we find that they
are as much affected with the Relations thereof, as they are with any of the
pretty Fictions of Romance and Poety; and it is certain that true History is
likely to make better Impressions even on the Minds of these Men, than any
Fable or Tale whatever.

More might be said to demonstrate the Usefulness and Necessity os History, and
that it is a very necessary part of Knowledge or Learning: But so much is said
upon this Topic in the First Chapter of the Second Part of this System, that
we refer our Reader thither.

Having said thus much in General, we think it proper to give the Reader an
Account of our Undertaking in particular; and then to show how great a use may
be made of this short System we have drawn of Universal History.

We are very sensible that there are several Tracts of this Nature in Latin and
French, and some in our own Tongue; but whether they are so accurate and exact,
or whether they take in so much as this short Treatise does, we must leave to
the Judicious and Candid to determine. In the general we must own, That
notwithstanding the Care and Pains we have been at in Compiling this System,
there may be several Faults and Slips therein; but we hope they are only such
as an ingenuous, good Nature will be inclined to pardon. And truly it can never
be expected that any Undertaking of this kind should be perfect and correct,
till such time as Historians: (out of whose Writings such a Collection must be
taken) are better agreed among themselves as to the Chronological as well as
the Historical part of what they relate.

This First Volume of our System we have divided into three Parts, In the First
Part we have treated of Chronology, as being a necessary Preparation for the
useful Reading of History. Therein we have given you the General Definitions,
laid down the Grounds and Rules of the Art, taken Notice of the Uncertainty
thereof, and of the various Opinions of Authors concerning the Time of our
Saviors Birth* Afterward we have set down the most remarkable Aera^s, and
ranged the whole space of time from the Creation of the World down to our Days
under XIV. distinct Epocha's o^ Periods. By this means the Reader is instructed
and informed at what time any memorable Action happened, and when such or such
a Hero signalized himself in the World, who were his Cotemporaries, and what
the rest of the World were doing at the same time. We need not enlarge upon the
Usefulness of Chronology, since every Body knows that for want of an exac^
Knowledge therein ancient Historians were much in the Dark, and often
confounded Persons and Things; whilst our modern Writers being guided by a
clearer Insight into the Series of Times, are more exact, clear and distinct in
their Relations both of Matters of Fact, and of the Agents concerned therein.
The Second Part is an Introduction to History, whe^ein the Benefits thereof are
proved to be so great and so many, that we hope none who impartially considers
the Weight of them, will deny the Knowledge of History to be absolutely
necessary for the better Conduct of Human Life. After this are laid down some
usefu^l uses both for Writing and Studying of History: Then we have given you a
Scheme of History both Ecclesiastical and Civil, with an Account and Character
of the Historians of both sorts. The 3d Part treats of the ancient Monarchies,
which preceded our Savior's time. And herein we have been as exact as the
Brevity of such a Volume could possibly admit. We have consulted Sir Walter
Raleigh, Dr. Howel, Pe^avius, Calvisius, and other considerable Authors; and
from them have drawn our Historical Collection of the Actions, Kings, Hero's,
and great Commanders of these Times: And as to the Chronology we have confined
our selves to the Tables of Helvicus and our Countryman Mr. Tallents, for
which we have given our Reasons in the Treatise it self. And here we must own,
That we are indebted to Mr. Vallemont, a French Author, for the Scheme of the
whole; out of whose Tract, Entitled, Les Elements de l' Histoire, we have
translated several Chapters of the First, all the Second, and the Fifth Chapter
of the Third Part.


This is, in short, the Summary of the ensuing Treatise; the bare representing
whereof we may reasonably suppose to be a sufficient Argument of its Usefulness
to all judicious and unprejudiced Minds.

As for those Gentlemen who have already perused the voluminous Tracts of the
Greek, Latin, and other Historians, it is hoped that even they will be very well
pleased to see at one View what has cost them so much Pains and Time to run
over. We find Travelers, who have been several Years abroad, very much
delighted when they come home, to see in a single Map the Draught of all those
Countries, through which they have traveled. And must it not needs create as
great a Pleasure and Satisfaction in the Minds of such as have read over
Herodotus, Livy, Thucidides, and the rest, to see the Hero's and Actions of
those Historians drawn to the Life in Miniature, and represented as it were in
the narrow Compass of a single Table?

Whether it will be so diverting to those who are already versed in History or
no, we cannot so readily determine; but yet we are in great hopes it will prove
very Beneficial to such as hereafter intend to acquaint themselves with what
has passed in former Ages. To these, our System will serve as an Introduction,
to guide them and give them some Light in the very darkest pieces of Antiquity.
The taste here given them of the great Use and Benefit of studying History, may
prove a great means of exciting them to a farther Enquiry after what is more
largely related by the whole Tribe of Historians. Like the Jewish Spies we have
presented you with the rich Fruits of History: but hope we have not like them
raised an evil Report upon the promised Land, but rather encouraged you by this
Prospect to a further Progress toward, and to an entire Conquest of it.

We need not inform the Learned Men who have the Care and Tuition of young
Persons committed to them, how useful such a Piece as this may prove to such of
their Pupils, as are advanced to some degree of Learning in their Schools. They
must needs perceive that nothing can be more advantageous to one, who is
designed for an University, and who they are willing should make some Figure in
the World, than to be thoroughly accquainted with History. And they will at the
same time see the necessity of allowing him such a Guide as this, unless they
would have him in a confused Darkness march by himself through all the
intricate Mazes of Antiquity. We desire they would but peruse this Book, with
the same Candor and Impartiality, as they would have other Men do their Works;
and then we modestly presume that we shall attain our End, and that this System
will prove useful in in its kind.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. CHRONOLOGY.
Chap. I. Definitions. Page 1. Chap. II. The Grounds of Chronology. 9. The
Testimony of Authors, 9. Reasons of the uncertainty of Chronology, 13. Certain
means of Computing Times, as, 9. 1. By the Testimony of Authors, 18. 2. By
Eclipses and Aspects of the Planets, 18. 3. Vndisputed Epochas, 21.
Chap. III. Of the Uncertainty Chronologers are at concerning the Year wherein
our Savior was Born, 23. A Catalogue of Authors disagreeing in this point, 25.
Chap. IV. The Usefulness of Chronological Tables to Beginners: Different
Divisions of Times in order to help the Memory, 34.. 1. First Division of the
Times into two Parts, 37.. 2. Second Division into three Parts, according to
Varro, 38.. 3. Third Division into four Parts, according to the Poets, 40.. 4.
Fourth Division according to the several Ages of the World, 42.. 5. Fifth
Division of Times into thirteen Parts, 43.
Chap. V. A New Division of Times, or the 14 Royal Epocha's of Universal
Chronology. 44. Epoch 1. Adam, or the Creation of the World, 45. Epoch 2.
Noah, or the Universal Deluge, 47. Epoch 3. The Vocation of Abraham, 49.
Epoch 4. Moses, or the Written Law, 51. Epoch 5. The Taking of Troy. 53.
Epoch 6. Solomon or the Temple finished, 54. Epoch 7. Romulus or Rome
Founded, 56. Epoch 8. Cyrus, or the Jews restored, 58. Epoch 9. Scipio, or
the Carthaginians Conquered, 62. Epoch 10. The Birth of JESUS CHRIST, 65.
Epoch 11. Constantine, or the Peace of the Church, 69. Epoch 12. Charlemaign,
or the Establishment of the new Empire. 74. Epoch 13. Constantinople taken by
the Turks, and the Christian Empire of the East terminated, 83. Epoch 14. King
Charles II. Restored, the ancient Government and Laws of England
reestablished; and Europe in a profound Peace, 91.

PART II. Introduction to History, and a Character of Historians.
Chap. I. Of the several Benefits of History, 97. Chap. II. Rules to be
observed in Writing History, 107. Chap. III. The manner of Studying History, Of
the Four ancient Monarchies; and of the different kinds of Political
Government, 112. Chap. IV. Divisions of History, 121. Art. 1. The Authority of
the History of the People of God, contained in the Books of the Old and New
Testament, 126. The Order of the Books of the Old and New Testament, 131. Art.
2. Of Civil History (...), 145.
Chap. V. The most Celebrated Authors that have written of Church History, 150
An Account of the Qualities, Lives and Writings of each particular Author, 151,
etc.
Chap. VI. Of the most considerable Greek and Latin Authors of Civil Histo^y,
175.. 1. Greek writers of History. Their Qualities, Lives and Writings, and the
Judgments of Critics upon them* 177, etc.. 2. Latin Writers of ancient
History, an Account of each Author and his Works, with the Opinions of Critics
upon them, 197, etc.

PART III. An Account of the Ancient Monarchies which preceeded the Birth of
JESUS CHRIST.
Chap. I. An Account of the Church of God under the Old Testament, 225 Sect. 1.
The State of the People of God under the 22 Patriarchs, 228. A Remark
concerning the Origin of Nations, 230. A Remark concerning the Heads of
Families of the People of God, 235. Sect. 2. The State of the People of God
under the 22 Judges or Leaders, 236. Sect. 3. The State of the People of God
under 22 Kings, 239. The Succession of the Kings of Israel, 244. Sect. 4. The
State of the People of God in the Time of the 22 Ancestors of Jesus Christ,
249.
Chap. II. An Account of the Assyrian Monarchy, 254. The State of the Assyrian
Monarchy, from Nimrod it is first Founder, down to Sardanapalus, which is about
1360 years. 2^^ The State of that part of the Assyrian Monarchy which was under
the Babylonians, from Belochus the first King, to the Death of Belshazzar the
last King; which lasted 271 Years, 260 The State of that part of the Assyrian
Monarchy which was Governed by the Medes from Arbaces their first King, to
Cyaxares or Darius the Mede, 261
Chap. III. Of the Persian Monarchy, 262. The Succession from Cyrus, to
Alexander's Conquest, 262, etc.
Chap. IV. Of the Grecian Monarchy, 267. The History of Alexander's Conquests,
267. to 279 The Kingdom of the Syrians, under the Successors of one of
Alexander's Captains, 280 The Kingdom of Pergamos or Asia Minor, erected by
Antigonus, one of Alexander's Captains, 288
Chap. V. Of the Empire of China, 291 Chap. VI. Of the Kings of Egypt, 297
Sect. 1. The State of Egypt under 47 Kings, surnamed Pharaohs, which lasted
1220. Years; till it was conquered by Cambyses, 299 Sect. 2. The State of Egypt
under 11 Kings of Persia, which lasted 193 Years, viz. to the time it was
subjected to Alexander, 305 Sect. 3. The State of Egypt under the Greeks, viz.
Alexander the Great and the 12 Ptolomy's, which lasted 301 Years; that is, till
Augustus made Egypt a Roman Province, 308
Chap. VII. Of Sicyonia. The Succession of its Kings, etc. 314 Chap. VII.
Argos. The Succession of its Kings, from Inachus to Perseus, 316 Chap. IX.
Athens, 317 Sect. 1. The State of Athens under 17 Kings for 488. Years, 319
Sect. 2. The State of Athens under 13 perpetual Archontes, which lasted 316
Years, 321 Sect. 3. The State of Athens under 8 Decennial Archontes, 322 Sect.
4. The State of Athens under annual Archontes, which lasted 751 Years, 322
Chap. X. Of the Kings of Troy, 330 Chap. XI. Of the Spartans or Lacedaemonians,
332 Sect. 1. The State of Lacedemonia under 14 Kings for 397 Years; that is,
from Lelix to the Heraclides, 333 Sect. 2. The State of Lacedemon under the
Kings called Heraclides, 334 Sect. 3. The State of Sparta under the Kings,
whose Power were restrained by the Gerontes, 335 Sect. 4. The State of Sparta
under the Kings, with the five Ephori, 336
Chap. XII. Of Corinth. The Succession of its Kings, etc. 343 Chap. XIII. Of
the Kings of Mycene, 346 Chap. XIV. The Kings of Thebes, 348 Chap. XV. Of the
Macedonians. 352 Sect. 1. The State of Macedon under 20 Kings, from Caranus to
Philip the Father of Alexander, 352 Sect. 2. The State of Macedon under
Alexander, 355 Sect. 3. The State of Macedon under 17 Kings after Alexander,
355
Chap. XVI. Of the Kings of Lydia to Croesus, 361 Chap. XVII. The Kings of
Tire, till it was conquered by Alexander, 363 Chap. XVIII. Of the Italians,
Latins, Romans, and of the Fourth or Roman Monarchy, 367. Sect. 1. The State of
Italy under the Janigenae or Siculi, which lasted 557 years, 368 Sect. 2. The
State of Italy under 15 Kings, called Aborigines, which lasted 577. from Janus
to Romulus, 369 Sect. 3. The Regal State of Rome, which lasted 245 years, 371
Sect. 4. The Consular State of Rome, from Brutus the first Consul to the
perpetual Dictatorship of Julius Caesar, which took up the time of 464 Years,
divided into fifteen Periods, 378 Period 1. From the Banishment of Tarquin to
the first Dictator, 379 Period 2. From the First Dictator to the Tribunes of
the People, 381 Period 3. From the Creation of the Tribunes to the Decemviri,
382 Period 4. From the Institution of the Decemviri to the Military Tribunes,
384 Period 5. From the Creation of the Military Tribunes, to the burning of
Rome by the Gauls, 385 Period 6. From the Gaul's Invasion, to the War with the
Samnites, 386 Period 7. From the War with the Samnites to that with Pyrrhus,
387 Period 8. From the War with Pyrrhus to the first Punick War, 388 Period 9.
From the beginning of the first Punick War to the second, 389 Period 10. The
second Punick War, 391 Period 11. The third Punick War, to the destruction of
Carthage, 393 Period 12. From thence to the Sedition of the Gracchi, 394 Period
13. From thence to the first Civil War, 396 Period 14. From Sylla's
Dictatorship to the first Triumvirate, 398 Period 15. The Actions of the first
Triumvirate, 399. Sect. 5. The fifth State of Rome under Emperors, wherein
began the Fourth or Roman Monarchy, 401

A SHORT SYSTEM OF Universal History.
PART I. CHRONOLOGY.
THE Eternity of the World, although it be taught by Aristotle, and perhaps
believed by some of our modern Smatterers in Philosophy, is a Falsehood so
palpable, that though we were not taught by Divine Revelation, our own Reason
would easily convince us, That it is but within a certain number of Years that
an ineffably Wise, Eternal and Omnipotent Being, has drawn out of Nothing, by
the powerful virtue of his Almighty Word, not only our Terrestrial World, with
all its Inhabitants, but even the Heavens and all the Parts of the infinite
Universe, wherein Nature displays an innumerable variety of wonderful Objects
and surprising Operations.

It Is needless for our Reason to examine what moved God Almighty to make
Spiritual and Corporeal Creatures, since he had lived Alone and
Self-sufficient, (to use Tertullians's Words) during a whole Eternity. The
least circumstance of the Creation is an Abyss that will make us giddy, if we
look down too fixedly into it. And those Libertines who oppose the Truth which
Faith bids us revere, can never be able to frame a System of the Universe,
either so plausible or comfortable as that which the Christian Religion
proposes to us: For after all their Devices, these impious Sophists are obliged
to attribute to the visible and corporeal World, that Eternity which they deny
to that Supreme God whom they are loath to acknowledge, and whose Power is so
sensibly conspicuous in all that Heaven and Earth present to our View.

But to omit all the many other Arguments that are justly brought to prove the
Verity of the Commencement of the Earth according to the Mosaic Account of it,
we shall use but one, viz. The Infancy of all Arts and Sciences; for if there
had been Men from all Eternity, we ought to suppose they were endu'd with the
same Capacities as all the Men (generally speaking) for the last 5000 Years
have had: And if so, it is the highest pitch of Madness to believe, that they
should lie in an eternal Sleep with respect to their nearest and tenderest
Concerns, without ever minding what might conduce to make their Lives either
longer or more happy, and neglect to exercise their Faculties in improving
(what would be so useful to them) Arts and Sciences; I say, can it be believed
that Men should not as well have made the best use of their Wits before Adam,
as after? But it was not done; for we are fully informed in the History of
Inventions and the Progress of Arts, and can deduce 'em all from that time, and
are also sensible that there are many yet to be learnt; for though this and the
last Age have furnished the World with many useful Discoveries and Inventions,
such as the Mariner's Compass, Printing, Artillery, Telescopes, Microscopes, a
New World as large as the Old, and abundance of Curiosities in Anatomy,
Chemistry, Natural Philosophy and the Mathematics; yet it is just Matter of
Surprise to see Physic, an Art of such great Concern to us, so rude and
unpolished; or, to speak without Figure, so rash and dangerous as it still is;
whereas if there had been an Eternal Generation of Men, so great a Progress had
been made in all other Arts, that they had before now been at Leisure to have
studied this somewhat more minutely, as of late Days (other Works being
dispatched) they have begun to do: And it is not to be doubted but the
succeeding Ages will be as much better experienced in this Art than we are, as
we are in that and many others than our Predecessors were; at least, if the
succeeding Years be as productive of great Genius's as these latter ones have
been. And if the Academies settled for the Improvement of Arts have still, for
some considerable length of Time, such Protectors as we see now adays at the
Heads of them, those Learned Societies will undoubtedly transmit to After-Ages,
such Discoveries in Natural Philosophy, Physic and Mathematics, as may enable
them to draw more ready Helps for the Preservation of Health and the
Conveniences of Life, than we can now pretend to.

These are sensible and pregnant Proofs that not only the Earth is not Eternal,
but also that it cannot be very ancient; for besides what we have mentioned,
there are many other visible Signs of its Infancy, which any Man of ordinary
Capacity and Judgment will be sensible of, if he does never so little attend to
them.

But it is not so easy to know how many Years are elapsed since the Worlds
Creation, or the exact Time when those great Events have happened, which the
Divine Providence or the Passions of Men have in the several Ages of the World
given Birth to: There must be an Art to teach this, and that Art is called
Chronology, from the two Greek Words (...) Tempus, and (...) Ratio; which (as
Navigation gives Rules to Pilots to steer by in great Voyages) instructs us how
to Tread surely in the vast and dark Country of Antiquity.

The following Pages contain an Instruction in this useful Science, as brief as
could be without Obscurity.

DEFINITIONS.
CHRONOLOGY is the Doctrine of Times, and Epocha's.

An AGE or CENTURY is the Space of a hundred Years, or a hundred Solar
Revolutions.

LUSTRUM is the Space of five Years. This Word is seldom used, unless in Poetry.

OLYMPIAD is the Space of four Years, which the Grecians reckoned from one
Celebration of the Olympic Games to another. The first Olympiad begun the Year
of the World 3174. 776 Years before the Christian Era or Birth of Christ.
Olympiads were the Epocha's of the Grecians; their Name is derived from the
Olympic Games, instituted by Iphitus to the Honor of Hercules. They were
celebrated every fifth Year about the Summer Solstice or the 19th of July, at a
Town of Elis in the Peleponesus (now the Morea) called Olympia. Some are of
Opinion, That Iphitus was not the Instituter, but only the Restorer of those
Games, after they had been neglected and laid aside for some time.

However, after he had once fixed them, they were since solemnized, without
Interruption, at the beginning of every fifth Year. The ancientest and most
esteemed of those Exercises was the Race, to which Wrestling was afterward
added; and because the Athletes did Wrestle naked, neither the Laws nor Decency
did suffer Women to be there Spectators. The Prize given to the Victor, was a
Garland of Laurel. Corebus, a Cook, according to Atheneus, carried the Price of
the Race, at the first Olympiad.

EPOCH is a fixed Point, or a certain and remarkable Time in History, made use
of in Chronology to begin to compute Years, and which is generally grounded
upon some great and signal Event.

ERA is the same Thing with Epoch, since it signifies also a fixed and
determined Point among Historians, to begin to reckon Years. The Word Era
comes from the Latin Aes, because they used to mark Years with little Copper
Studs. Perhaps it has its Original from the Ignorance of some Amanuenses, who,
finding these Letters A.E.R.A. Annus erat Regni Augusti, did make but one Word
of them, Era. Some are of Opinion, That this Word was introduced by the
Spaniards, who had drawn it from a Tribute which the Emperor Augustus had made
them liable to; so that Era must come from Aere.

We have, at present, two different Christian Aera's. The first is the Vulgar
Era, whose Author is Dionysius, sirnam'd Exiguus, a Learned Monk that
flourished about the beginning of the Sixth Century, who, out of respect to our
Savior's Birth, thought it fit that Christians should begin to reckon their
Years from the coming of the Messiah. His Design was approved of and followed.
And hence it is that we use this Form in public Business and Writings, In the
Year of our Lord, or The Year of our Redemption, School. But this Dionysius,
notwithstanding that he was a Man of Learning and Integrity, has committed a
Mistake of four Years; for it is certain, That our Vulgar Era is so much short
of the Birth of JESUS CHRIST.

The second Christian Era is the true one, which begins four Years before the
Vulgar; so that this present Year, instead of School. we ought to reckon 1702.
from the Birth of our Savior. But although this last be the true Era, we
shall nevertheless follow that of Dionysius, only to comply with common Usage.
But lest we lead any Body into an Error, instead of saying, for Example, this
present Year from the Birth of Jesus Christ, School. which is false by four
Years, we shall say of the Vulgar Era, School. and then all is right; provided
we take this along with us, viz. That the first Year of the Vulgar Era begins
at the fifth of our Savior. We shall observe all along the same Exactness upon
a like Occasion.

There are three sorts of Epocha's. The First is Sacred; the Second
Ecclesiastical; and the Third Civil or Politic.

I. Sacred Epocha's are those we gather from the Bible, and which particularly
concern the History of the ^ews. As, 1. The Creation. 2. The Deluge, in the
Year of the World, 1656. 3. The Calling of Abraham, 2023. 4. The Jews coming
out of Egypt, 2453. 5. The Foundation of the Temple of Solomon, 2933. 6. The
Liberty granted to the Jews by Cyrus, 3419. 7. The Birth of the Messiah, the
Salvation of the Jews, and the enlightening of the Gentiles, 3948 or 50. 8. The
Destruction of the Temple of Jerusalem, and the Dispersion of the Jews, the
Year of the World, 3969. of JESUS CHRIST, 74. and of the Vulgar Era, 70.


II. Ecclesiastical Epocha's are those which we take out of the Authors who
have writ the History of the Church since the Birth of our Savior, viz. 1. The
Martyrdom of Peter and Paul at Rome, in the Year of the Vulgar Era, 67. 2. The
Era of Dioclesian, or of the Martyrs, 302. 3. Peace given to the Church by
Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, 312. 4. The Council of
Nice, called against the Heresy of Arius, 325.


III. Civil or Political Epocha's are those which regard the Empires and
Monarchies of the World; such as, 1. The taking of Troy by the Grecians the
Year of the World, 2767. before the Vulgar Christian Era, 1183 Years, and 407
before the first Olympiad. 2. The Building of Rome, according to Fabius Pictor,
who wrote first about Roman Affairs, is fixed a little before the VIIIth
Olympiad, on the 13th of the Kalends of May; that is, in the Year of the World,
3198. and 752. Years before the Vulgar Era.

Nevertheless Varro places it five whole Years higher, viz. in the Year of the
World, 3193.

3. The Era of the Seleucides, from whence the Macedonians began to reckon
their Years, is also called the Grecian Years, chiefly used by the Jews since
they were subjected to the Macedonians. This Era begins at the Reign of
Seleucus Nicanor, one of the Captain of Alexander the Great, in the Year of the
World, 3638 and 312 Years before the Vulgar Era. 4. The first Julian Year.
This Year begins at the Reformation of the Roman Calendar, made by Julius
Caesar. The Times of the Roman Fasti were so confounded, through the Negligence
of the Highpriests that Julius Caesar, being himself raised to that Dignity*
thought it his Duty to correct the Abuses which his Predecessors had tolerated.
His first Care, as soon as he came to be Head of the Republic, was to regulate
all Things belonging to Religion. He made use of the Skill of Sosigenes, an
excellent Astronomer, in order to reform the Calendar; and assigned the Year as
many Days as the Sun takes up in passing through the XII Signs of the Zodiac;
since that time the common Year consists of 365 Days. This Reformation was made
in the Year of the World, 3905. and 45 before the Vulgar Era. 5. The Hegira or
Flight of Mahomet: When that Impostor had for some Years been propagating his
false Doctrine at Mecca, and had gained a large Party to his Side, they became
Insolent and gave Offense to the Government, which occasioned the Magistrates
to oppose that growing Faction, and thereby obliged Mahomet to quit that Place,
and fly to a neighboring Town where his Party were more powerful. From this
Flight of their Prophet, which happened on the 16th of July, in the Year of the
Vulgar Era, 622. the Turks date their Writings; which they first took up on
occasion of a Quarrel concerning a Payment; for a Debtor had given his
Obligation to pay a Sum of Money on such a Day of such a Month; which Month
being past at the time of the Demand, the Debtor alleged it was not before the
next Year that he was to Pay; which being brought before Omar III. Emperor of
the Saracens, he found the Inconvenience of not having a Method of ascertaining
the Year, and accordingly instituted the Hegira for an Epoch.


SOLAR CYCLE, is the Revolution of 28 Years, after which the Letters that mark
the Sundays and other Holy Days, return to the same Order they were in at
first. The Sun has nothing to do with this Revolution, which is called Solar,
only because the Sunday, whose Letter we are principally in quest of, is called
by the Astronomers Dies Solis, the Day of the Sun.

LVNAR CYCLE, or GOLDEN NVMBER, is a Period of 19 Years, invented by Methon an
Athenian, who observed that at the end of that time, the Moon began the same
Lunations over again.

INDICTION is a way of Computing, used formerly among the Romans, which
contains a Revolution of 15 Years. It is still in use in Apostolical Bulls and
Rescripts.

ANACHRONISM, is an Error or Mistake in the Computation of Time. Thus Virgil is
guilty of an Anachronism in his Aeneis, by making Aeneas and Dido
Cotemporaries, whereas they lived 300 Years distant one from another. For
Aeneas is placed about the Year of the World 2820. and Dido about the Year,
3112.

SYNCRONISME, is a View of all Cotemporary History.

THE IVLIAN PERIOD, is a space of Time containing 7980 Years. Julius Scaliger,
the Inventer of it, composed it of the Solar Cycle of 28 Years, of the Lunar
Cycle of 19^, and of the Indiction of 15. for these three Numbers multiplied
together, make up 7980.

We suppose, in Chronology, this Period to be 765 Years older than the World.

I have had no regard, in all this Work, to the Julian Period, with which it is
not proper to trouble and puzzle those who study Chronology, only in their way
to History. Therefore I have fitted all the Epocha's to the Years of the World,
and the Years either before or after the Vulgar Era, the beginning of which I
place (according to the most skilful in this sort of Study) in the Year of the
World, 4004. One can never be too careful in removing Difficulties from a
Subject, which is so intricate of it self. For after all, if you tell young
People, and even those that are come to Man's Estate, That the Julian Period
begins 765 Years before the World, you will amaze them to that degree, that though
you tell them afterward, That this is but a Supposition* you will have much
ado to bring them back again to themselves. Now this Period was invented to no
other purpose, than to square by it all the other Epocha's, and reconcile, if
possible, Chronologers one to another; and therefore it does not concern those
who have only a Mind to learn History, and whom it were unjust to engage in
minute Punctilio's of Chronology, which have been ever looked upon as Thorns
very difficult and troublesome to handle.

CHAP. II. The Grounds of Chronology.
Although Chronologers do very much disagree in their Opinions, yet there is an
Art and certain Rules for the placing in order, the Succession of Times and
Epocha's; and this Marshalling of Events which we observe in their Books, is
always grounded upon some Reason or other. They have all the same Guides; but
because every Man follows them after his own way, it is not to be wondered if
the Minds of Men, being so different in their Nature, seldom agree upon the
same Subject.

The Certainty of Chronology depends upon three Principles.

The First is the Testimony of Writers or Authors.

The Second is grounded upon Astronomical Observations, and particularly upon
the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon.

The Third is taken out of certain Epocha's so constant and evident in History,
that it never came into any Man's Thoughts to call them in question.

. 1. The Testimony of Authors.
THe Testimony of Authors is so universally received among all civilized
Nations, that it would be a Breach of good Manners, to question the Certainty
of some Facts which are mentioned in History.

How would that Man be looked upon in the World, that should dare to maintain,
That Xerxes never came into Greece; That Rome was not taken by the Gauls; and,
That Julius Caesar was not stabbed in the Senate House? Although I have not seen
Rome with my own Eyes, says S. Augustine, and never was at Constantinople; yet,
upon the Credit of those that speak of it, I hold it for as great a Certainty,
that there is such a City as Constantinople, as that there is such a City as
Rome. Lib. 13. de^ Civ. Dei. Cap. 3.

However there are Rules which a Man must take along with him, to avoid the
danger of embracing Errors instead of Truth: And 'twere against Reason to
believe upon Trust and without Examination, what we are told to have happened a
great many Ages before.

The late Mr. de Launoy a Doctor of Navarre, and so famous by many Critical
Works upon several Passages of Church History, has given us Four Rules, or sure
Precepts, to discern Truth from Falsehood in Matters related by Historians,
which are these, viz.

RULE I.
In Matters belonging to History and Tradition, those Authors are chiefly to be
credited who wrote of Things transacted in their own Time; provided they are
not contradicted by a Cotemporary Author, of known Integrity and Ability.

RULE II.
Next to Cotemporary Authors, those Writers who lived nearest the Age wherein
the Things were transacted, are rather to be depended on than those who are
more remote from it.

RULE III.
Histories that look Apocryphal or doubtful, and are written by a new or
obscure Author, ought to weigh nothing, (especially if they clash with Reason)
against the constant Tradition of the Ancients.

RULE IV.
We must suspect the Truth of a History related by modern Authors, especially
when they disagree among themselves, and with the Ancients, about several
Circumstances.

These Rules ought to be remembered; for the studious Critic will find them to
be excellent Guides in his Journey through the dark and obscure Regions of
Antiquity; wherein, if he makes not use of his judging Faculty, he may, instead
of improving, very much impair, his Understanding, by being led astray by the
false Relations of ignorant Pretenders to History.

To these Four Rules we must add one more of S. Augustine's, viz. As for
Profane Authors (says he) when they relate Things contrary to the History
contained in the Bible, we must not believe them; for our own Reason will tell
us, That the Divine Spirit (which is conspicuous in that Book by the true
Predictions of Things long before they came to pass) is certainly to be
credited in the relation of Matters of Fact, preferably to all Mankind. De
Civit. Dei, Lib. 18.

Nothing ought to weigh more with Christians than the Authority of the Holy
Scripture; those Bounds which the Spirit of God has set, ought never to be
removed by Men; and therefore it is Ma^ter of just Indignation to see some Men
of Learning, who profess the true Religion, set the Historical Fables (for I
will venture to call 'em so) of the Chaldeans, Egyptians and Chinese, in
competition with the Chronology of the Bible; a Fault so much the more
inexcusable, on account of the notorious uncertainty of their Accounts; for
every Body that has studied History, knows that the Chaldeans or Babylonians
assigned their Monarchy Myriads of Years, and boasted of their Astronomical
Observations for an extravagant number of Ages; and their Histories are so full
of Lies, that Aristotle reckoned among the Tellers of Fables, those that wrote
of the Assyrians. Polit. v. 10.

Nor are the Egyptian Accounts of Time more to be credited; for by reason of an
Emulation between them and the Chaldeans for Antiquity, they have had recourse
to extravagant Fables, and tell us, That the Gods and Demi Gods reigned in
Egypt 34201 Years, before that Empire fell into the Hands of Men; and the
Accounts they give since that time are altogether uncertain and imperfect; for
notwithstanding the Care that they are said to have taken in preserving their
History, Science, etc. by inscribing it on Pillars, and maintaining Colleges of
Priests for its Propagation, yet their History is so imperfect, that even in
the Days of Herodotus they could give no certain Account of the building of the
Pyramids, or the Time of their great Monarch Sesostris; and Plato has declared
in his Timaeus, That the Egyptian Priests, whom the Greeks so often consulted,
to know the Origin of the World, were miserably ignorant of Antiquity.

The Chinese Chronology is still less to be regarded; for not only are their
Histories dated many Ages before the Creation and full of incredible Stories
and Extravagances; as for Instance, It Is related that a certain Hauzu, who
lived in the time of Confucius, lay four-score Years in his Mothers Womb; but
also their own Chronologers differ in their Accounts, for Su-ma-quam a famous
Annalist of China, who lived about the Year, 1066. of the Vulgar Era, does not
make their Empire so ancient as the rest of the Historians of that Nation; for
whereas they make it begin at Folci, Su-ma-quam places it above 250 Years
lower, and maintains that Hoam-ti was their first King.

Wherefore though the Science of the Chaldeans and Egyptians has been so famous
in the World, and the Wisdom of the Chinese be so much talked of now adays,
their Chronology at least ought not to bear any great Authority among us; and
much less ought the Sacred History of the Bible to be sacrificed to it.

Though the Chronology of the Septuagint Bible be by some preferred before the
Vulgar, yet it is utterly irreconcilable with the Antiquities of the Chaldeans:
and Egyptians; the former only carrying the Times higher by 1500 Years than the
Vulgar Account, whereas the latter pretend the World to be Forty thousand Years
older. And whatever Esteem the Chronology of the Septuagint may have among some
Men, either because it is made use of in the Martyrology of the Church, or
because Baronius is pleased to follow it; yet it is certain that the Church does
not prefer it to that of the Hebrew Bible, which it looks upon to be most
Authentic; and a great many Men famous for their Piety as well as Learning,
are of the same Opinion.

It Is true the Chronology of the Septuagint is in the Roman Martyrology, but it
does not from thence follow that it ought to have the Preference. The Reason of
its being there, is because the Church had always an Esteem for what was
Ancient; and her greatest Care being to preserve the more solid Goods, such as
are the Articles of Faith, the Points of Morality, and the Rules of Discipline,
she did not much regard these Trifles of Chronology, but left them to be
discussed by her Learned Disputants; provided they managed them with that
admirable Temper so conspicuous in S. Augustine, who says with relation to
these Matters, Eligo tantam Ignorantiam confiteri, quam falsam Scientiam
profiteri; i. e. I had rather own my Ignorance in these Things, than pretend to
a false Knowledge.

After all it must be confessed, That a Man ought not to be too anxious or
supercilious in Point of Chronology; because it is impossible to make it hang
together so well as to put it beyond Dispute. The Records of Antiquity, as well
Sacred as Profane, leave us too much in the Dark to pretend to it. There will
be still insuperable Difficulties, and we shall meet with a thousand Instances,
wherein it will be impossible for us to know whether we be in the Right or no.
To prove this, we shall produce Five very prevalent Arguments.

Five Reasons of the uncertainty of Chronology.
I. The vast difference there is about Chronology betwixt the Bible of the
Septuagints and our Vulgar, causes such a Perplexity that a Man does not know
which way to get out of it. The Greek Bible reckons 1500 Years more than the
Hebrew and Latin Bibles, from the Creation of the World to the Birth of
Abraham; and the Misfortune is that one cannot tell on which side the Error
lies. Some accuse the Greek Bible of extending the Times too far. Others
maintain, That the Jews have contracted them too much, and that their
Corruption of the Hebrew Bible, has occasioned the same Mistakes in the Latin
Version. This Dispute is the more troublesome, as it is a hard Matter to decide
it. One Thing however is certain, which is, That S. Augustine lays the Fault
upon the Greek Bible, or rather upon those that first Transcribed it from the
Original of Ptolemus Philadelphus, who, as he pretends, have introduced 1500
Years too many in the Lives of the Patriarchs. De Civit. Dei, Lib. 15. Cap. 13.
But every Body is not of S. Augustine's Opinion: And the Author of The
Antiquity of Times restored (with a great many more) has very different
Thoughts, and speaks quite another way of the Greek Bible. So difficult it is
to know which Side to be for in this Dispute.

II. It is very difficult to compute the Chronology of the Bible exactly, by
reason that in the Succession of the Judges of the People of God and the Kings
of Judah and Israel, the Scripture makes no difference between a growing and a
complete Year; whereas it is not to be imagined that a Patriarch, a Judge, or a
King, did live just 900, 100, or 60 Years, without any odd Months and Days.
Wherefore, as Theophilus of Antioch wisely observes, it is impossible exactly
to determine the Times of the Patriarchs and Kings. [ Ad Autol. Lib. 3.]
Therefore Chronologers are obliged to suppose a great Improbability, viz. That
the Years of the Pedigrees of the Bible are always fully expired and complete.
Now if these Years be but just begun, and a Man reckons them for whole and
complete ones, he will stretch out and lengthen the Times; but on the contrary,
if the Holy Writers have omitted the odd Months and Days of growing Years, it is
most certain that we shall shorten and contract the Times, if we keep precisely
to the computation of the Bible. Therefore, in Matters of Chronology, we must
of necessity be satisfied with Conjectures and Probabilities upon a thousand
Occasions: We must persuade our selves once for all, that we cannot have the
Antiquity of the World, but within a few Years more or less; and ought to look
upon all the Projects of restoring the Antiquity of Times to a nice Exactness
and Precision, as foolish and chimerical.

III. The different Names which the Assyrians, Egyptians, Persians and
Grecians, have given to the same Prince, have not a (...) contributed to
confound the ancient Chronology. Three or four Princes have born the Name of
Assuerus, (says the Bishop of Meaux, in his Discourse upon History) although they
had others besides. If a Man was not told that Nabucodonosor, Nabucodrosor and
Nabocolasser, are but the same Name, or the Name of the same Man, he could
hardly believe it. Sargon is the same with Sennacherib; Ozias with Azarias; and
Zedechias with Mathanias; Joachos was also c^lled Sellum; Asaraddon, which is
indifferently pronounced, Esar haddon, or Asor-haddan, is called Asenaphar by
the Cutheans; and, through an unaccountable Diversity, Sardanapulus is called
Tonos Comoleros by the Greeks. Those different Names of the same Person,
differently pronounced by several Nations according to the various Idioms of
their Speech, must needs cause a great Confusion and Disorder in Things and
Persons. This Confusion is so great in the Succession of the Kings of Assyria,
that it is impossible for a Man ever to be truly satisfied about it.

IV. We have few Memorials left of the first Monarchies of the World, an
infinite number of Books being quite lost. If Herodotus wrote the History of
the Assyrians according to his Promise, it never was transmitted to us. The
Greeks have writ very late; and those that have, did not understand the Hebrew
Language, and were often miserably ignorant of the Antiquities of Judea. We may
say the same of the Latin Historians, who being little skilled in the Greek
Tongue, and much less perhaps in the Affairs of the Jews and Grecians, have
undoubtedly writ a great many Things at a venture and very ill digested. The
generality of them have studied to please by the Politeness and Delicacy of
their Writings, and curious and strange Stories, and have neglected the Times
of the Events they speak of, which has cast a great Mist upon History.

V. The Aera's and Years being different almost in every Nation, has occasioned
a great Disorder and Confusion in Chronology. The Grecians computed the Time
from the Olympiads, and the Romans from' the Foundation of their City. More
than that, some Nations had no Epoch at all, and have bethought themselves but
late of using them; and among the rest, 'twas only about the Year, 532. that
the Christians began to reckon their Years from the Birth of JESUS CHRIST.

The same difference is observable in Years as in Aera's: In some Countries
they made use of the Lunar Year of 354 Days, and in others of the Solar of 365
Days, and about six hours. Although we suppose the Historians to have regarded
this difference of Years, yet they could not avoid to make some Mistakes in
Chronology; for besides, that People were then ignorant of the true Motion of
the Sun and Moon, with which we are not perhaps thoroughly acquainted now adays,
(let Posterity be the Judge) it is certain that among the Republics of Greece,
though never so well governed and regulated, they did not agree about the
beginning of the Lunar Year. One begun it precisely at the Conjunction of the
Sun and Moon: Another two Days after, that is, when the New Moon began to be
seen, (...). And others began their Year at the Full Moon.

The several Nations of the World have been no less divided about the Season
where the Year should began. The Hebrews, Chaldeans, Egyptians and Persians,
begin it with the Autumn or Fall of the Leaf; the Grecians toward the Summer
Solstice, and the Romans about the Winter's. The Mahometans, just at the
Equinox, in the Spring; the Indian Gentiles the First Day of March; and the
Arabians at the time of the Sun's entering the Sign of Leo.

All these Things have thrown Chronology into so great an Obscurity, that it is
not in the Power of the greatest Skill in the World to pierce through all the
dark Mists which that variety of Aera's and Years has cast over the Face of
History. Therefore

Varro most wisely calls uncertain, obscure and fabulous, the generality of
those Events related by Historians to have happened before the Olympiads.

Dionysius Halicarnasseus says positively, Lib. 1. That there is nothing
certain in all that the History mentions concerning the Transactions before the
War of Troy.

Macrobius assures us, That we must not expect any Certainty in Roman
Histories, when they relate any thing that happened 260 Years before the
Foundation of Rome; and that concerning those Times, Writers are rather Tellers
of Fables than Historians.

S. Justin the Martyr, in Paraenetico, maintains, That there is nothing
constantly true in Greek Histories before the Olympiads; and that we have no
Account left, either by the Grecians or Barbarians, to inform us of what
happened in those remote Ages.

I have dwelt so long upon this Subject, in order to show that in point of
ancient Chronology, we must depend upon the Accounts we find in the Holy
Scripture, since we can expect nothing concerning the first Times from Profane
Historians. And here we must take notice of the Wisdom of Providence, which has
so well ordered Things, that we have Light enough to make a firm Concatenation
of the Succession of Times; for where Profane History fails us in the first
three thousand Years of the World, we have the Chronology of the Bible to guide
us: And when afterward we find the Accounts of Time more obscure in the Holy
Scriptures, we meet, in Requital, with more Light in the Writings of Profane
Authors. And there begins the Time which Varro calls Historical, because since
the Olympiads, the Truth of Things begins to be conspicuous in History. So that
before that Time we must enlighten Profane History by the help of the Sacred;
and not pretend to correct the Chronology of the Hebrew Bible and our Vulgar;
by the Antiquities of the Chaldeans, Egyptians and Chinese, which is a plain
and visible overturning of the Order of Things, and no better than to give a
blind Guide to one that sees well.

By all I have said, I do not mean to confute the Book of The Antiquity of
Times restored; my only Design is to caution young People, for whom
particularly I write, against a certain Spirit of Curiosity which has been
predominant among us for some Years past, and whose stirring Character is too
apt to remove those Bounds which we ought to preserve with great Veneration. As
for the rest, I both honor and esteem the Merit of the Author, and I am very
far from having any Thoughts to offend him.

. 2. Eclipses, and Aspects of the Planets.
FRom what I have said about the uncertainty of Chronology, some perhaps will
be apt to think, That the Doctrine of Times does not deserve our Application,
and that we must take out of History as much as we can, without troubling our
selves with a nice Marshalling of the Events according to the Order and
Succession of Ages, since, after all, this Order is very doubtful and
uncertain. I know very well that there are those who will give their Sceptism a
free Scope upon this Matter; and if their Opinion could prevail, ancient
History would be in little or no Esteem. But it is not fit to depend upon the
Judgment of those who never studied Things but superficially, and whose Merit
wholly consists in a pragmatical, peremptory way of delivering their Opinions:
For if there be doubtful and obscure Things in Chronology, there are also those
that are undeniably certain and evident.

There are two Books in the World, both Divine ones, from whence Chronology
draws its Certainty. The first is the Book of the Scripture, where we find the
Years of the Patriarchs, Judges, Kings and Princes, of the People of God,
whereby we are able to determine within a small Matter the Antiquity of the
World, and link almost together the whole Succession of Times, except some few
Breaks and Interruptions, which proceed from the Silence of the Scripture, and
which we shall mark in the following Article. But where the Scripture fails us,
Profane History comes in to our Help, so that we can precisely tell how long
that Silence has lasted.

The other Book (which is our second sure Ground for Chronology) is that of
Nature; this, as well as the first, is the Work of God.

1. This Book, by furnishing us with the Motions and Aspects of the Sun and
Moon, and other Planets, and above all the Eclipses, which are so rightly
called the public, celestial and infallible Characters of Times, gives certain
and demonstrable Arguments to Chronologers, of the Times wherein a vast number
of the most signal Events of History did happen. For an Eclipse either of the
Sun or Moon is such a characteristical and identical Mark of a Year, that it is
easy to distinguish it among an infinite number of others, which makes Eclipses
to be looked upon as the most assured Grounds of Chronology. Certainly nothing
can so well characterize the Year of a Battle, of the Foundation of a City, or
the Death of a Prince, as an Eclipse that happens the same Day, or some Days
before or after: Since by means of Astronomical Tables it is found, that an
Eclipse seen upon such or such a Day, ought necessarily to have happened in
such and such a Year. This method is grounded upon Mathematical Demonstrations;
which is as much as if I had said, That it is so certain and evident that Human
Reason can never revolt against it.

By this it appears that in Point of Chronology a Man cannot be an exact
Critic, if he be ignorant of the use of Astronomical Tables for the
Calculation of Eclipses.

Setting aside that this Computation of Eclipses is one of the greatest and
most wonderful Effects of the Reach of Human Understanding, and that there is
an extraordinary Satisfaction in foretelling an Eclipse, together with its
Greatness and Duration, fifty, nay even a thousand Years before it happens,
methinks the great use they are of in History and Chronology is sufficient to
recommend Astronomy to us; by whose Help we arrive at the Pleasure of
calculating them to a very nice Precision. And therefore we must conclude that
none but the dull and ignorant Despisers of all good Literature, can entertain
an Indifference for so fine and important a Knowledge.

Now since the Certainty which Eclipses give to History is infallible, we must
account our selves happy for the care Historians have taken to mention so great
a number of them. It Is true their Diligence, as to this Matter, is particularly
owing to the foolish Error of the ancient Heathens, who looked upon these
Phenomena as Presages of the Death of some great Person, or of the Fall of an
Empire. However* when Historians have marked the Days wherein Eclipses did
happen, they have left at the same time assured Signs and Characters to know
the Years of the Events which fell out about the same Time.

This is the Reason why the Eclipses mentioned by Historians, have been so
carefully collected by skilful Chronologers.

Calvisius makes his Chronology depend upon 127 Eclipses of the Moon, and 144
of the Sun, which he assures us he has calculated himself.

Thus by an Eclipse of the Sun, mentioned by Justin, [ Lib. 22. Cap. 6.] which
happened when Agathocles, the Tyrant of Sicily, was crossing the Sea, to go
over into Africa against the Carthaginians, it is found by an Astronomical
Calculation, That this was in the Year of the World, 3634. and 316 Years before
the Vulgar Era, on the Fifteenth of August.

2. The great Conjunction of the two superior Planets, Saturn and Jupiter,
whereby these two Stars, having run through all the four Trigons, meet again,
according to Kepler, at the end of 800 Years, in the same degree of the Zodiac
would be also one of the most excellent Methods to distinguish and characterize
the Times, if Historians had taken notice of those rare and unfrequent Aspects.

Archbishop Usher tells us, That in the Year of the World, 3998. two Years
before the Birth of our Savior, there was a great Conjunction of those
Planets, such as never happens but once in 800 Years.

There have been but Eight of these great Conjunctions since the Creation of
the World, as one may see by Astronomical Calculations. The last of them
happened in the beginning of this Century, in the Month of December, 1603.

3. All the Aspects of the Planets, which happen but seldom, might serve also
for natural Characters to mark the Times.

4. But among these natural Characters, some are called Civil or Artificial,
because invented by Men: Such as the Solar and Lunar Cycles, the Roman
Indictions, Easter, the Leap-year: Among the Jews, the Jubilees, and Sabbatical
Years; and among the Heathens, the Combats and public Games, such as the
Olympic, which were always celebrated in a determined Time.

. 3. Epocha's.
THe third Foundation of Chronology is drawn from certain constant Epocha's,
which none of the Chronologers and Historians ever called in question. Those
fixed Points in Chronology are like firm Places, where one may stand and
consider upwards and downwards, the more slippery and dark Passages of History.

We have here set down 29 of those Fundamental Points, which most Chronologers
agree upon, with relation to the Years of the Julian Period, and those that
preceded the Birth of our Savior. I have borrowed them from Father Petavius a
Jesuit, a famous Chronologer, [ Rationar. Tempor. par. 2. lib. 1. cap. 15.]
which obliges me, in imitation of that learned Man, to range those 29 Epochs by
the Years of the Julian Period, that we may use them as a common, assured and
standing Rule, to direct us in the dark Places of Chronology.

Years of the Julian Period. Years before Jesus Christ. 4676. 1. The Sabbatical
Year of the Jews, 38. 3938. 2. The beginning of the Olympiads, 776. 3961. 3.
The building of Rome according to Varro, 753. 3967. 4. The Era of Nabonassar,
747. 4154. 5. Cyrus lays the Foundation of the Persian Monarchy, 560. 4185. 6.
Cambisis, Cyrus's Son, began to reign, 529. 4193. 7. Darius, Histaspes's Son,
began to reign, 521. 4234. 8. Sea Fight betwixt Xerxes and the Grecians near
Salamina, 480. 4283. 9. The beginning of the Peloponesian War, 431. 4383. 10. A
Victory gained by Alexander the Great at Arabella; the end of the Persian
Empire, 331. 4390. 11. The Death of Alexander the Great, 324. 4402. 12. The
Era of the Seleucidae, 312. 4429. 13. Ptolomeus Philadelpus began his Reign,
285. 4543. 14. Ptolomeus VI. or Philometor began to Reign, 181. 4546. 15. The
Kingdom of Macedon ends in Perseus, 168. 4546. 16. Antiochus Epiphanes
prophanes the Temple, 168. 4669. 17. The first Julian Year, 45. 4676. 18. The
Era of Spain, 38. 4683. 19. The Battle of Actium, wherein Anthony is
vanquished, and Cleopatra dies, 31* 4684. Whence the Egyptians began an Era,
30* 4714. 20. The Vulgar Era, or the Birth of Jesus Christ, beginning on the
Calends, or First Day of January, the middle of the 4th Year of the 194
Olympiad. Years of the Vulg. Era. 21. The Death of Caesar Augustus, 14* 22.
Claudius succeeds Caius Caligula, 41. 23. Nero reigns after Claudius, 54. 24.
Death of Domitian, 96. 25. The Era of Dioclesian, or of Martyrs, 284. 26. The
Council of Nice is held, 325. 27. Constantine the Great dies, 337. 28.
Valentinian I. began to reign, 364. 29. The Hegira, or Flight of the false
Prophet Mahomet, July 16. 622.
CHAP. III. Of the Uncertainty Chronologers are at concerning the Year wherein
our Savior was born.
IT IS matter of Surprise, that the Professors of Christianity should have lived
so long without knowing precisely how many Years are elapsed since the Birth of
the Savior of the World: And it cannot be denied but that this Ignorance is
very shameful to Christians, whom it so nearly concerns to know all that
belongs to the Mysterious Incarnation of the Son of God. It Is true, that some
time since People have begun to be sensible that the Christian Era was too
short, and that it wanted about two or three Years to begin with the Birth of
our Savior Jesus Christ: They have also found out, at last, that it wants four
complete Years to reach the Birth of our Savior; but this Knowledge is come
but very late.

They have followed that Error for near 1200 Years, without being sensible of
it; and now that we are evidently acquainted with it, we cannot but follow it
on still; since we cannot mend it without making a great many Changes in the
Date of Affairs, both Ecclesiastical and Civil. Which would occasion a greater
Trouble and Disorder, than did in the last Age, the cutting off ten Days for
the Correction of the Calendar.

We are fallen into that Error by following upon Trust Dionysius Exiguus, an
Abbot, who in the Year, 532. began first, among Christians, to make an Epoch of
the Birth of our Savior, and compute the Years from that Time, in order to
make Chronology altogether Christian. It seems this learned Man was not
extraordinary exact in his Computation, though it were at that time not over
difficult, since he lived in the middle of the VI. Century, when they did not
want Monuments and Memorials to settle and regulate that Chronology.

But though there have been great Difficulties in finding out the true number of
Years, that have followed the Birth of our Savior, yet there are infinitely
greater in computing the Years that have gone before it. In that, great space
of so many Years, it is not possible for a, Man not to go astray, in some Place
or other: That^ Way is so long, so dark, so little beaten through by
Historians, especially that part of it where the first Monarchies of the World
lie, that it would be a kind of Miracle if no Body should mistake it, and all
Chronologers go Hand in Hand together.

The same Reasons which prove the Holy Scripture, and the remaining Monuments
of ancient History, to be insufficient to make a clear and firm Concatenation
of the Succession of Times, do also evince by a necessary Consequence, That we
cannot justly determine the individual Year of the coming of the Messiah.
Therefore we must not wonder to see Chronologers so much divided upon this
Matter. This Confusion goes so far, that it is become a Proverb to say, They
agree no more than Chronologers.

However, this Misunderstanding does not proceed from a Desire of contradicting
others, and setting up a Party in the learned World, though the generality of Men
be extreme fond of the Reputation of a new System; but this War, the most
obstinate and irreconcilable that ever was, springs from the very Nature of the
Thing it self, which will ever be full of insuperable Difficulties.

Frederick Gusman, in a Letter to the Elector Palatine, reckons up 40 different
Opinions about the Year of the World wherein our Savior was born.

Calvisius a German, very learned in Chronology, tells us, That he could scarce
find two Authors who agreed upon that Matter. De Annis Mundi, cap. 27. p. 160.

Maestlinus, who had spent all his Lifetime in the Study of the Mathematics
and Chronology, assures us, That he had met with 132 Opinions entirely
different in that respect.

As imperfect as the Doctrine of the Times may seem here to be, yet it has
merited the Application of the most refined and discerning Wits; and a vast
number of Men, illustrious in the Arts and Sciences, have made it their
particular Study. We must not be discouraged by the Difficulties we are to
encounter, since the obstinate and indefatigable Labor of those great Men,
born to surmount the hardest Obstacles, has already cleared and made plain an
infinite number of Facts, which were dark and intricate a hundred Years ago.
Their Discoveries will undoubtedly be carried on further; but in the mean time
we must advertize those, who have a Mind to enter upon this sort of Study, of
what they must look for, and what they will really find in Chronology: First,
That they may not think that there is an equal Degree of Certainty in every
Thing; Secondly, That they do not expect the same Evidence as in the
Mathematics.

Among the Chronologers that disagree about the Year of the World of the coming
of the Messiah, I have chosen those that I thought the most considerable, whose
Computation you have in the following Table: Where you may observe, that of all
those Authors none reckons more than 7000 Years, nor less than 3700.

Diverse Authors disagreeing about the Year of the coming of the Messiah.
Rabbi Naason, 3707. Rabbi Abraham, Rabbi Levi, Rabbi Gerson, 3754. The
Chronicle of the Hebrews, 3760. Some Talmudists, 3784. Benedictus Arias, 3849.
James Gordon, 3880. David Paraeus, 3928. Paulus Aphae, 3937. S. Ierom, 3941.
John Carrion, 3944. Calvisius, Helvicus, Alstedius, 3947. Origanus, Argolus,
3949. Scaliger, Vbbo Emmius, 3950. Cornelius a Lapide, 3951. Beda, Hermannus
Herwart, 3952. Landsperg, 3958. John Picus Count of Mirandola, 3959. Luther,
Scultetus, Johannes Lucidus, 3960. Beroaldus, 3961. Sixtus of Siena, Abbat
Vrspergiensis, Chrytreus, 3962. Tostatus, Melancthon, Funcius, 396^. Gerardus
Mercator, Opmeir, 3966. Butting, Santphurdius, 396^. Bulingerus, 3969.
Nigrinus, Pantaleon, 3970. Brentzhein, Bucholzer, 3971. Theophilus of Antioch,
3974. Bibliander, 3979. Father Petavius, 3984 Archbishop Usher, Tirinus,
Capellus, Thomas Lydyat, 4000. William Langius, 4040. Tornelli, Salianus,
Spondanus, 405^. Labbe, Muller, 4053. Rabbi Moses, 4058. Joseph Son to
Mattathias, 4103. Laurence Codoman, 4142. Riccioli, according to the Hebrew and
the Vulgar Bible. 4184. Odiaton, or Edwicon, an Astronomer, 4320. Cassiodorus,
4697. Origines, 4830. Adon of Vienna, 4832. Methrodorus, 5000. S. Epiphanius
Bishop of Salamina, 5029. Paulus Orosius, 5049. Philo Iudaeus, Sigibertus,
5195. Isidorus of Sevil, 5196. Philip of Bergama, 5198. Eusebius of Cesarea,
5200. John Nauclerus, 5201. Rabanus, 5296. Albumazar an Astronomer, 5328.
Isidorus of Pelusium, 5336. Petrus de Alliaco, 5344. S. Augustine, 5353.
Theophanes, 5500. Cedrenus, 5506. Isaac Vossius, 5590. Suidas, 5600. S. Clement
of Alexandria, 5624. Riccioli, according to the Septuagint, 5634. Nicephorus of
Constantinople, 5700. Lactantius, 5801. Philastrius, 5801. Father Pezon, 5868,
or 5872. Onuphrius Panvinus, 6310. Alphonsus, King of Spain, 6984.
Of all these various Opinions, we must of necessity take up with one; for
'twould be needless, if not vain, to pretend to a new one different from all
the rest; since it is not to be imagined, but that among so many Systems, there
is some or other satisfactory, and upon which one may depend: For my part, I
have pitched upon the Opinion which places the Birth of our Savior in the Year
of the World, 4000. The Reasons for this Choice are these:

1. This space of Time is sufficient to explain and answer the Successions of
the Patriarchs, Judges and Kings; in a Word, all the History of the People of
God, which is the main thing to be considered in the choice of this Epoch. Now
some very learned Men have already made it out, how those 4000 Years do exactly
comprehend all the Series of Sacred History, according to the Hebrew and the
Vulgar Bible; and besides that they fill up the Vacancies which the Silence of
the Scripture has left toward the end of the Fourth Millenary, the extent of
which we cannot perfectly know without the Help of Profane History, or the
Jewish History of Josephus.

The PROOF.
Years of the World. GENESIS contains the History of 2369 Years, from the
Creation of the World to Ioseph's death, 2369. EXODUS comprehends the History
of 145 Years, reaching from the Death of Joseph to the Year, 2514. two Years
before the going out of Egypt, 2514. LEVITICUS takes in the Transactions of one
Month and a half. 2514, 1 m. The Book of NVMBERS contains the History o^ 38
Years and a half; that is, from the second Month after the coming out of Egypt,
down to the Death of Moses, or thereabouts. 2552, 7 m. It Is thought that JOB
lived about this Time, and that Moses wrote his History. DEVTERONOMY contains
the History of one Month and a half. 2552, 9 m. Therefore the Pentateuch, or
five Books of MOSES contain the History of 2552 Years and about nine Months.
2552, 9 m. The Book of IOSHVAH contains the History of 17 Years, because it
begins at the 41st Year after the coming out of Egypt, and ends with the Death
of Ioshuah. 2570. The Book of IVDGES comprehends the History of 317 Years; it
begins at the Death of Ioshuah, and ends at that of Sampson. 2887. The History
of RUTH happened under one of the Judges. The First Book of SAMVEL contains the
History of 101 Years; because it begins with the first Year of the
Administration of Heli toward the Year, 2848. and ends with the Death of Saul,
in the Year, 2949. However this Book does but add 60 Years to the History of
the Book of Judges, because the forty Years of Heli's Government, of which the
first Chapters of the First Book of Samuel give the Particulars, are included
in Sampson's Time, and therefore contained in the 317 Years of the Book of
Judges. 2949. The Second Book of SAMVEL contains the History of David's Reign,
of about 40 Years. 2989. The First Book of KINGS contains the History of
Solomon's Reign, and some Kings of Israel, in all about 126 Years. 3115. The
Second Book of KINGS comprehends the History of 308 Years; during which we see
the Wars and Misfortunes of 16 Kings of Judah, and 12 Kings of Israel, and the
Downfall of those two Kingdoms. But because the first Chapter of this Second
Book, concerning Ochosias and Iosaphat, run back toward the Year of the World,
3108. by that Reason the 308 Years reach no farther than the Year of the World.
3456.
The History of TOBIAH happens about this time.

The First Book of CHRONICLES is an Abridgment of the History of the World,
from Adam to the return from the Captivity. Afterward the Author, resuming the
History of David in particular, pursues it at large, till the time that Solomon
was crowned King, toward the Year of the World. 2990. The Second Book of
CHRONICLES contains the Sacred History from the Year of the World, 2990. down
to the Year, 3468. at which time ended the 70 Years of the Captivity: So that
these two Books do but add 52 Years to the History of the People of God. 3468.
The First Book of ESDRAS contains the History of 82 Years, beginning at the end
of the Captivity of Babylon, and reaching to the 20th Year of Artaxerxes
Longimanus, and the Year of the World, 3550. The Second Book of ESDRAS contains
the History of 31 Years, as far as the beginning of the Reign of Darius Nothus,
in the Year of the World, 3581.
From the Year, 3581. where ends the Second Book of Esdras, the Scripture gives
us no Account of what has happened during 250 Years. This Silence and Vacancy
cannot be supplied otherwise than by the Help of Profane History, which about
this time being clear and full of Light, we may easily perceive, that there are
250 Years from the end of the Second Book of Esdras, down to the Maccabees* or
the Reign of Antiochus Epiphanes.

This Silence of 250 Years lasts to the Year of the World, 3830. The Two Books
of MACCABEES contain the History of 40 Years, and so they lead us as far as the
Year of the World, 3870. The Holy Scripture fails us again in this Place, where
we find a Silence of 130 Years, which continues till the Birth of our Savior
in the Year of the World, 4000.
This 130 Years Silence may be supplied by the Hi^story of the Jews, which
Josephus has probably extracted from the Journals of the High Priests.

It Is plain, by this Chronology of the Historie^ Books of the Bible, that the
space of 4000 Years, which we interpose betwixt the Creation of the World and
the Birth of our Savior, is sufficient to correct and explain the Successions
of the Patriarchs, Judges and Kings, and all the History of the People of God.

2. The space of 4000 suffices also to set in order and connect all that
Profane History tells us, apparently true, about the Antiquities of the
Chaldeans, Egyptian and Chinese; as I shall show anon, when I come to speak of
each Monarchy in particular.

3. The eminently learned Archbishop Usher, after a long and laborious Study,
acknowledges, That the space of 4000, is the most agreeable to the History
(...) the Bible; which he demonstrates in his excellent Work, called, Annals
Veteris and Novi Testament* That Book has been so generally approved of in the
World, that People have been glad to see at the en^ of S. Vitre's Bible, the
fine Chronological Tables, d^^gested according to Usher's Scheme. They have
been abridged since, and put into French, and afterward into English, at the
end of the History of the Bible-wi^^ Figures; and in what manner soever they
have appeared, they have found a very kind acceptance.

Furthermore the Bishop of Meaux has followed it, in his learned Lessons upon
History, to the Dauphin of France. People do not agree (says he) upon the
precis^ individual Year wherein our Savior came into the World* but all agree,
That his true Birth was some Years before our Vulgar Era, which however we
shall follow with the rest, for Conveniency-sake. Without disputing any mo^^
about the Year of our Savior's Birth, it is enough for us to know that it
happened about the 4000 th Year of the World. Some place it a little higher;
others a little lower; and others in this very Year; a Diversity which proceeds
as much from the uncertainty of the Years of the World as that of the Birth of
our Savior. [Discourse upon Universal History.]

4. This Number of 4000 Years is also easy to retain; for all round even
Numbers leave a clear Image, and make a distinct and deep Impression in our
Mind; which is very necessary in Chronology, where Memory has so much to do,
that we can never use too many Helps to support it. Now this Epoch has all the
Advantages that can be desired: For if from the 4000th Year, where we place the
Birth of our Savior, that is, that Point of History that ought to be most dear
and important to us, we run back 1000 Years higher, we meet precisely with the
Dedication of the Temple of Solomon, in the Year of the World, 3000. If we go
on still a thousand Years (wanting eight) higher, we will find the Birth of
Abraham in the Year, 2008. Finally, about the Year of the World, 2500. the Law
is given to Moses: And all those bright and remarkable Points of Sacred History
are expressed by round even Numbers, which extremely ease and help the Memory.

5. There was in the first Ages of the Church an ancient Tradition, That the
World was to last but 6000 Years; which popular Opinion is said to be
originally derived from Eliah's House. But however, it is certain that this
Tradition was grounded upon Rules of Consonance and Agreeableness: The chief of
which was, That God had made the World in Six Days, and rested the Seventh. To
this they added, That according to the Words of the 89th Psalm, v. 4. A
thousand Years before the Lord are like one Day; and therefore that there were
6000 Years appointed for the Labors of this Life, after which time the Saints
would enjoy a Sabbath with God; that is, rest for ever with him. They allowed
2000 Years before the Law, 2000 Years under the Law, at the end of which the
Messiah was to come, and whose Reign was to last 2000 Years more. Finally they
said, That if the World did not endure all that Time, 'twould be because the
Sins of Men should grow to such a height, that God could no longer bear with
them.

Thus the 6000 Years of the World are the Six Days of the Week before God; and
the eternal Sabbath of the Saints, in the Repose of Glory, will be the Seventh.
Sex millibus annorum stabit mundus: Duobus millib^^ inane: Duobus millibus Lex:
Duobus millibus Messia^^ Isti sunt sex dies Hebdomadae coram Deo. Septimus di^^
Sabbathum aeternum est. Mill anni ante occulos tu^ tanquam dies. Psalm. 89.
This ancient Tradition of the Jews, which the first Fathers of the Church have
wi^^lingly received, places, with us, the coming of the Messiah in the Year of
the World, 4000.

6. Those that are taken with the subtle Speculation of the Rabbi's, will find
something that will please the^ in this Epoch of 4000 Years. Among the
Virtuoso's (...) the Cabala, one of the most mysterious ways of Inter^preting
the Scripture is that which they call Sephiro^ which is properly an Explication
of the Holy Text b^ the Elements or Letters, whereof every Word is com^posed.
Now as all the Hebrew Letters, as well as the Greek, are Numeral, all the
Secret lies in considerin^ the value of each Letter, and finding out a
mysteriou^ Number in one or more Words; and it cannot be de^nied, but by this
Method the Rabbi's have sometime hit upon very ingenious and subtle
Explications, W^ speak this, without laying any Stress upon abundan^^ of minute
and frivolous Inquiries, wherewith all the^^ Books swarm.

Of all the Words upon which those Doctors have exercised their Brains in this
sort of Analysis, there none wherein they discover so many Mysteries as i^
this, (...) Bereschith, which begins the Book o^ Genesis, and serves for the
Title, according to the Custom of the Hebrews. 'Twould be impertinent, in this
place, to relate all the Witticisms, scattered up and down in the Books of the
Cabalists, about this Word^ I shall only mention a curious one, which has a
particu^lar relation to the Subject I treat of.

This Word Bereschith, which signifies In Principi^^ In the Beginning, not only
contains the Promise God made of giving his Son (since one may as well read
Barschit; Dabo filium; I shall give the Son;) but it expresses also the Year of
the World wherein the Eternal Father was to give his Son for the Salvation of
Men. This is the Method they use to find out that Year.

1. They take out of this Word all the Letters whose value exceeds 100. Thus
(...) is 200. (...) 300. (...) 400.

2. In the Name of every Letter of the Word (...), they take again the Letters
worth more than 100. Thus in the Letter (...), which they call (...) Beth, is
found the Letter (...), that stands for 400.

In (...), called (...) Resch, there is an (...) worth 200. and the (...) worth
300.

In (...), called (...) Aleph, there is (...) worth 800.

In (...), which they call (...) Schin, there is a (...) worth 300, and the
(...) worth 700.

Finally, in (...), called (...) Tau, there is a (...) worth 400.

Now all these Numbers put together, make up just 4000. which is the Year of
the World of the coming of the Messiah.

Although this be an After-divination of a Thing already past, yet we must own
that there is in it a great deal of Sagacity, and that the happy and precise
Agreeableness which is found betwixt the Number 4000. contained in this Word
(...), and that of the Year of the World wherein we place the Birth of the
Messiah, is not altogether to be slighted.

This difference among Authors concerning the Time of our Savior's Birth,
proceeds chiefly from a Mistake of the Year of the World that Abraham was born
in; for the old Opinion was, That he was the eldest Son of Terah, and born in
the 70 th Year of his Father's Age; but more exact Chronologists, particularly
Archbishop Usher, Sir Walter Raleigh and Dr. Howell say, That he was not the
eldest Son, but born after his two Brethren Nahor and Haran, and in the 130 th
Year of his Father's Age, which makes a difference of 60 Years. Now the time
from Abraham downward is calculated right enough; but by reason of this
difference of 60 Years in his time, the computation from the Creation ( which
was 1948 or 2008 Years before the Birth of Abraham) must necessarily be
different also, when applied to the Years of other Aera's. If the old Account
be followed, which places Abraham 's Birth in the 70 th Year of his Father, and
in the 1948 th of the World, then the Year of our Savior's Birth will fall in
with the 3948 th of the World; but if the other Computation take place, it will
be found to be in the 4008 th Year of the World, which is 60 Years more.
Wherefore our Author's Supputation of 4000 Years falls in pretty well with
this, and may justly enough be followed: But inasmuch as this Account is modern
and not made by the generality of Chronologers, we have not chosen to follow it
in this Work, complying rather with Helvicus and Tallent; which being the
latest, both of good Esteem in the World, and the only two general Chronologies
in English, will to be sure be applied to by our Reader, when he desires more
particular Information than this small Volume can admit of, but he will be
puzzled to find what he wants if the Aera's do not agree: And then it is but
adding 60 to the Year of the World, and you have the other Computation also.
It Is for this Reason that we have ventured to Recede from our Author, and make
the Accounts all along to comply with Helvicus and Tallent; except only, that
for the sake of a round Number we have followed Mr. Tallent, and supposed 3950
Years from the Creation to our Savior, which being but two Years more than
Helvicus, can breed no great difference.

CHAP. IV. The Usefulness of Chronological Tables to Beginners: Different
Divisions of the Times in order to help the Memory.
THE Usefulness of Geographical Maps is now so well known, that it is needless
to give ones self the trouble to demonstrate, how difficult it would be to
learn that Science without them: And it must be confessed, that since the Art
of making Maps and Globes have been so well known, that Study, though formerly a
very crabbed and difficult one, is become a mere Diversion; and to such a
Proficiency may a common Capacity, in our Days, arrive, by these Helps, as to
Vie with a great Master of Antiquity. Of the same Use are Chronological Tables,
and the Study of History; for as Maps, by representing to our Sight the Extent
of Countries and the Distance and Situation of Towns, leave a clear and
distinct Notion of them in the Imagination, and make an Impression upon the
Memory; just so do Chronological Tables figurate to us the Series and
Concatenation of Times: We see there, at once, the Rise of Great Monarchies,
^he Progress they make by impetuous Conquests, and ^fterwards how they are
cantoned and dismembered, and finally dwindle away and disappear, to make Room
for others that succeed 'em.

Also, as by a Map we may see the whole Earth at once, and observe all the
Countries that lie in the same Climate; so Chronological Tables give us a
Prospect of a general Synchronism, that is, the History of what ^as happened,
and the eminent Men that have lived in ^^e same Age, in all the several Nations
of the ^orld.

By the Use of such Helps, the Knowledge one re^^ives is duly digested in the
Mind, without which the ^^eatest Learning will make your Head but a confused
^^^brary. And Order ought to be more exactly ob^^^v'd in the Study of History
than in any other Sci^^ce, because, unless you regard the State of other
^ations as well as of that whereof your Author treats, (...) cannot
sufficiently comprehend the Story; for an ^istorian has always occasion to
speak of other People, ^^an those he immediately writes of; but it would too
^^ch break the Thread of his Discourse to launch out ^o so large Digressions,
as an Abstract of their Hi^^^ry would make; and he is therefore forced to
sup^^se the Reader already informed of it, that he may pur^^^ the Business he
is upon: Besides, by remembering ^^at Figure one Nation makes in the World with
re^^^ct to another, we shall a great deal the better under^^^nd the Reasons of
Actions, and be enabled to make (...) truer Judgment of them. As for Example:
To him ^^o knows. That the Persian Monarchy was much de^^^'d, and the People of
that Nation drowned in Lu^^ry and Sloth, the Victories of Alexander will not
appear so Romantic, as without that Knowledge they necessarily must. Again,
The Story of Dido and Aenea^ will pass well enough upon one that does not know
they lived at 300 Years distance. It Is therefore undoubtedly true, that the
Student in History ought first to be made acquainted with these sort of Tables.

But, as narrow-mouthed Vessels will overflow if Li^quor be poured too hastily
into 'em, and on the con^^trary receive it all if put in gently; so the Mind
(...) Man, if charged with too much Instruction at once forgets it all.
Wherefore the young Student ought (...) be let by degrees into the Chamber of
Knowledge* And at first I would show him only one general Table which should be
a kind of Skeleton of this Scienc^ containing only very remarkable Persons and
Things which afterward may be completed, and by ea^^ Additions all the
History of the World inserted.

This is so reasonable an Axiom, that it is of Self-su^^ficient Force: However,
to give it the better Auth^^rity, we will set down the Words of Iustus Lipsius,
[(...) his 61st Epist.] In the Knowledge of Times it is enou^^ (says he) to
understand the general Series and Order Things, and to see where the Empires,
Wars and (...) remarkable Events have their beginning and end: A^ he wished
that some Body would give us such a Tab^^ Dionysius Petavius has answered his
Desire, and pu^^lish'd Chronological Tables in Latin. And of (...) Days the
like has been done in English, in a sm^^^ Pocket Volume, ingeniously contrived
by Colonel P^^^sons: Others have multiplied the Tables to that deg^^^ that they
make up a whole Book, which it is true are (...) more complete, and of excellent
Use, when the Rea^^^ is grown to more Proficiency. Of these Helvicus is (...)
best, unless our Countryman, Mr. Tallent, may be p^^^ferr'd.

And then, to make the better Impression on the M^^mory, I would have the whole
History of the Wo^^^ divided into certain Epocha's, which should comme^^ from
some very notable Action, and by Synchro^^ applied to other Actions; by which
means the times (...) smaller Events would be the better remembered.

Again, as Geometricians resolve a Problemn by examining it part by part, and
forming an Analysis; so here, if the History be divided first into Two,
afterward into Three, Four, or more Epocha's, it will much facilitate the
Learning. It Is for this Reason that we have made use of this Method, proposing
first only the great Aera's of the World and our Savior; then divide it into
4, 7, and 13 parts, the Times whereof having fixed, we proceed to set down
Particulars in a larger Chronology, divided into Fifteen Royal Epocha's.

It Is not to be expressed what a vast Light these different Divisions of the
Times will give to this Study, from which People have always been discouraged
by reason of its Obscurity. It is well known, That Division, among Logicians,
is one of their best Means of arriving to the exact Knowledge of any Subject in
Dispute; which made Socrates call it, An Art inspired by God.

. 1. First Division of the Times into two Parts.
THe First Part contains all that space of Time from the Creation of the World
to the Birth of JESUS CHRIST; which, according to our Computation through all
this Book, is of 3950 Years.

This is properly what they call The Time of the Old Testament. During this
long Extent, we see the Esta^lishment and Downfall of three Great Monarchies,
^iz. the Assyrian, Persian and Grecian, which have preceded the Empire of the
Romans.

In that space of 40 Centuries, we shall find also a ^reat Number of other
States, Kingdoms and Repub^icks, the greatest part of which became Roman
Pro^inces, when Rome, a little before the Birth of the Son of God, made her
self Mistress of the whole Universe.

The Second Part contains all the Time elapsed from the Birth of JESUS CHRIST
to this present ^ime; which, according to the Vulgar Computation, is ^698 Years.

This is what they call the Time of the New Testament; which space of 17 Ages,
comprehends all the most considerable Events and Transactions in the Roman
Empire; in the Eastern and Western Empires; in the Kingdoms of France, Spain
and England; and in the other States and Republics of Europe, Asia, Africa and
America.

These are the two most important Epocha's in History. One is the Creation of
the World, by the Eternal Father; and the other the Restoration of the World
by the Son of God, consubstantial to his Father.

. 2. Second Divison of the Times, into three Parts, according to Varro.
VArro divides the whole Series of Ages into three Times; the first of which he
calls (...), obscure and uncertain; the second (...) or fabulous; and the third
(...) or Historical.

I. The obscure and uncertain Time, is that from the first Original of Mankind
down to the Deluge o^ Ogiges, about the Year of the World, 2154. and 17^^ Years
before the Vulgar Era, and 1020 before the Frist Olympiad. This Time is called
obscure and uncertain, because the Historios of the Nations of the World give
no Account of what has happened for 2^ Centuries.

II. The fabulous Time begins at the Deluge of Ogiges and reaches as far as the
Olympiads; that is, to the Year of the World, 3174. and 776 Years before the
Vulgar Era, and lasts 1020 Years. It is called fabulous, because, in effect*
whatever Profane Historian have written about those Times, is intermixed with
(...) great many Fables. What they relate about the Argo^nautes, Ulysses,
Helena, Hercules, and some others, is for incoherent that we know not what to
think of it. W^ must make the same Judgment of the Burning of Troy* And if we
should strictly examine what Poets have lef^ us upon that Subject, we should
perhaps be apt to be^lieve, That Troy was never but a Fiction of their
Imagination.

What Herodotus relates from the Taking of Troy to the Olympiads, signifies
very little, and is intermixed with a great many Tales and Romantic Stories.
If he had been serious in his Accounts of the Scythians, Egyptians, and several
other Nations, we should be obliged to call him the Father of Lies and Fables,
whom Cicero honors with the Title of the Father of History. But though we should
be forced to give Credit to those Relations which carry so few Characters of
Truth with them, we would not therefore be much the better for it, since
Herodotus's History reaching no higher than Giges King of the Lydians, who
lived about the Year of the World, 3238. and 712 Years before the Vulgar Era,
he leaves us at a Loss and in the Dark for about 3300 Years, of which he gives
no Account. What we find in Berosus, Manetho, Metasthenes, Philo and Annius, is
still very uncertain; and there is a great deal of Reason to doubt whither there
ever were Kings that bore the Names which those Authors give them. And indeed
we meet no where, in all the Old Testament, with the Name of any of those Kings
of the Assyrians, so much celebrated by Profane Historians; whereas we often
meet with those of the Princes of the Moabites, Ammonites, Mesopotamia, Egypt,
Syria, and others less considerable, that have been either the Enemies or
Allies of the Jews. We must not expect more Light from other Historians:
Diodorus Siculus begins his History at the Siege of Troy: Trogus Pompeius
ascends no higher than Ninus; and who shall instruct us of what has happened
before those Times?

Christian Religion, into whose Hands the Holy Scriptures are deposited, can
alone, by the Light she draws from them, connect the first Times into a
continued and uninterrupted Succession from the beginning of the World, to the
Return from the Babylonian Captivity: And then as we find more Obscurity in the
Accounts of Time in the Holy Scripture, we find, in requital, more Light in the
Writings of Profane Authors. However we must observe, That the Bible serves
only to regulate Sacred Chronology, and gives us little or no Account
concerning the History of the Nations of the Earth.

III. The Historical Time begins with the Olympiads, in the Year of the World,
3174. and 776 Years before the Vulgar Era. It is called Historical Time,
because, since the Olympiads, the Truth begins to shine and be conspicuous in
History.

. 3. The Third Division of the Times, into Four Parts, according to the Poets.
SInce ancient Poets were Historians, Philosophers, Divines, and Masters in all
sorts of Arts and Sciences to the first Men, we must not altogether reject what
they have left us, though intermixed with abundance of Fables and idle Stories.

They divided all the Times into Four Ages: The First was the Golden Age; the
Second the Age of Silver; the Third the Age of Brass; and the Fourth The Iron
Age.

I. The Golden Age, so much celebrated in their Writings, the Poets ascribed to
Saturn's Reign; during which the Prolifick Earth spontaneously produced the
many good Things, which she now bestows only on the laborious Cultivater. Then
Ianus gave Peace to Mankind; Astrea, i. e. Justice reigned in this lower World,
and all Men had every Thing in Common, and lived in perfect Amity together.
They tell us, That this Age lasted till Saturn was expelled his Kingdom.

From this Description it is easy to understand, that this Fable does properly
suit with that Age which our first Parents past in the Terrestrial Paradise;
and that Adam turned out of this delicious Place, whereof he was Master, is
most certainly the same with Saturn, so famous in the Heathenish Poets, who
represent him as an Exile from Heaven, wandering up and down the Earth.

II. The Age of Silver is attributed to Jupiter's Reign, whom Virgil charges
with furnishing Serpents with Poison, and sending Wolves and other fierce
Creatures to annoy Mankind. At that time the Earth yielded nothing but
proportionably to the Care and Labor of the Husbandman. We may extend this Age
as far as the Time when Tyrants arose among Men, who, out of an ambitious
Thirst after Power, oppressed the rest by Violence and Injustice. This Age of
Silver ends with the Time when Nimrod, Cham's Grandson, made himself powerful,
built Babylon, and laid the Foundation of the Empire of the Chaldeans, toward
the Year of the World, 1718. and 62 Years after the Deluge.

Thus far the People of God lived happy, as one may see by the Patriarchs of
those Times: But their Condition was extremely changed afterward, beginning
with Abraham.

III. The Age of Brass begins with the Time when furious Men, possessed by an
unjust Passion for Power and Authority, began to domineer over others. Such a
one was Nimrod, who was the first that fell foul upon his Neighbors, and
endeavored to destroy them by so cruel and bloody Wars, that there is Reason to
doubt whether there be in Nature a greater Enemy to Man, than Man himself. In
this Age happened the War, taking and burning of Troy by the Greeks, in the
Year of the World, 2767. and 1183 Years before the Vulgar Era. The Poets close
this Age of Brass with the Time when there were no more Hero's, or, as they
call them, Demigods.

In this Age of Brass the People of God suffered more than they had done
before: Abraham had great Wars to maintain, and afterward the Israelites were
oppressed under the Domination of the Egyptians, and underwent great Slavery in
the Times of the Judges.

IV. The Iron Age begins with the First Olympiad; that is, the Year of the
World, 3174. And indeed toward that time Hesiod begun to complain that it was
so. Ovid, in the Description he makes of it, says, That all manner of Crimes
begun then to reign; that Shame and Justice fled away, instead of which
succeeded Impudence, Violence, Imposture, and Murder; and that whereas Men were
formerly contented with those Riches which Nature yielded on the Superficies of
the Earth, they begun then to rack her Bowels, and dig the Gold and Silver she
concealed there, which may be called the fatal Cause of all the Disorders and
Calamities which both trouble and dishonor the Society of Men.

Effodiuntur opes, irritamenta malorum.
-- Down deep to Styx below,
With hellish Art the insatiate Miners go.
Mr. Milburn. The People of God, after the Prosperities they had enjoyed under
the Reigns of Saul, David and Solomon, felt the Hardships of the Iron Age: For
the Ten Tribes became tributary to Phul King of the Assyrians, and Salmanassar
having taken Samaria, after a Siege of 3 Years carried the Ten Tribes into
Captivity to Babylon, and so put an end to the Kingdom of Israel. As for the
Tribe of Judah, Zedechias its last King was led Captive, with all the People to
Babylon by Nabuchodonosor, after he had taken Jerusalem, burnt the King's
Palace, and destroyed the Temple, in the Year of the World, 3360. before our
Savior, 590.

. 4. The Fourth Division of the Times, according to the Seven Ages of the World.
THe Time of Man's Life being divided by some into Seven Ages, Chronologers
have thought fit, by a sort of Analogy, to divide likewise all the Times of the
World into Seven different Ages. I suppose they have taken this Method from S.
Augustine and Johannes Damascenus, who divide all the Times of the World into
Seven Parts. However, I shall not follow the Division of those Holy Doctors,
because they allow the Third and Fourth Ages a greater Extent than we do now
adays.

The First Age begins with the World, and ends with the Deluge; it comprehends
1656 Years.

The Second Age began at the end of the Deluge; that is, in the Year, 1657. and
ends at Abraham, with whom God made the first Alliance with Men in the Year of
the World, 2023. it comprehends 367 Years.

The Third Age began with Abraham, and ended at the Deliverance of the Jewish
People, and their coming out of Egypt in the Year, 2453. it comprehends 430
Years.

The Fourth Age begins at the going of the Jews out of Egypt, and ends at
Solomon, or the finishing of the Temple, in the Year of the World, 2940. and
contains 487 Years.

The Fifth Age begins with the finishing of the Temple, and reaches as far as
the end of the Captivity of the Jews at Babylon, when Cyrus gave them leave to
return home, in the Year of the World, 3419. and comprehends 479 Years.

The Sixth Age begins with the Liberty granted to the Jews by Cyrus, and ends
at the Birth of JESUS CHRIST, in the Year, 3950. or according to Helvicus,
3948. It comprehends 531 Years.

The Seventh Age begins with the Birth of our Savior, and comprehends at this
time, School Years, according to the Vulgar Era. This last Age will last to the
end of the World.

5. The Fifth Division of the Times, into Thirteen Parts.
HEre is still another ingenious way of dividing the Times, related by
Alstedius, [ Encyclopoed. Lib. 20. cap. 11. p. 2904.] which consists in
digesting and distributing all the History under VI. Epocha's, the Name of
every one of which begins with a C. so that all the Secret lies in retaining
six Words whose Initial Letter is C. viz. Creatio, Cataclysinus, Caldaei,
Cyrus, Cittim, Caesares.

But because when a Thing is once well begun, it is easy to bring it to
Perfection, we may also carry the Secret a great way farther: For after a
little Study upon the Matter, I have found Seven other Names that begin with
the same Letter; by the Help of which we may lead Chronology under XIII
Epocha's, down to these latter Times.

Years of the World. Years before Jes. Chr. 0. 1. Creation of the World, 3950.
1656. 2. Cataclysm, or Universal Deluge, 2294. 3203. 3. Chaldaean or Babylonian
Empire began, under Nabonassor, whence an Era is dated. 747. 3390. 4. Cyrus,
the Founder of the Persian Empire, 560. 3614. 5. Cittim, is an Hebrew Word
which signifies the Macedonians, from whom came Alexander the Great, Founder of
the Empire of the Grecians, 336. 3804. 6. Carthage conquered, 146. 3950 or
3948. 7. CHRIST, the Messiah, Son of the Eternal Father, 0. Years of the Vulg.
Era. 8. Constantine the Great, first Christian Emperor, 312. 9. Clovis I.
Christian King in France, 481. 10. Charlemaign, or Charles the Great, Emperor,
800. 11. Capet, Hugo-Capet, the first King of the third Race of the Kings of
France, 987. 12. Croisade, or Holy War, undertaken by S. Lewis to fulfill a Vow,
where he was made Prisoner, 1248. 13. Constantinople, taken by Mahomet II. who
put to Death Constantius Palaeologus, called Dragoses, the last Emperor of the
Greeks, 1453.
It is observable that JESUS CHRIST, who makes here the Seventh Epoch, is
placed just in the middle of XIII. So that it is very easy to remember six
Words before and six after.

CHAP. V. A new Division of the Times, or the XIV. Royal Epocha's of the
Universal Chronology.
I Call Royal the following Epocha's, because they are fixed and settled either
at a King, or a Person of Sovereign Authority.

Young People, who generally have good Memories, would do well to learn the
Series of these Epocha's, with the Events I have comprehended under every one
of them.

That this Study may not seem too dry, I have illustrated every Epoch by some
few Historical Passages, or some great and remarkable Action, which I have
placed at the Head of them, the better to strike the ^magination, and imprint a
more lively and deep Image ^n the Memory.

These XIV. Epocha's comprehend the Universal Chronology; since they begin with
the Creation of the World, and descend down to this present Time; I ^ntermix
them with the most curious and important Passages both of Sacred and Civil, or
Profane History, that I may insensibly engage, in this laborious Study, those
Persons that will read nothing but what is pleasant and diverting.

EPOCH I. Adam, or the Creation of the World.
The 23d October, in the Year of the Julian Period, 765. and before the Birth
of Jesus Christ, 3950.

This Epoch reaches to the Deluge, and lasts 1656 Years.

GOD, who had been alone during an infinite number of Ages, and found in
Himself a World, a Throne, and all Things besides, being willing to exert his
Omnipotence and communicative Goodness, brought forth out of Nothing, this vast
Universe. What he made at first was but a dark empty Chaos without Form; and
destitute of the Order and Beauty that afterward appeared in it. In six Days
God formed the Heavens and the Earth, and all that therein is, and created Man
after his own Image, to whom he gave the Command of the Beasts of the Field,
the Fowls of the Air, and all the Things on the Face of the Earth: A Female
also created He, that a Generation of this noble Creature might be continued
throughout all Ages. This happy Couple he placed in a delicious Paradise, which
he himself had planted; but Sin and Disobedience ruined their Felicity, and the
just God was provoked to expel them that happy Place, cursing the Earth with
Sterility, and denying them and their Posterity the Fruits of it without Toil
and Labor. From this divine-form'd Pair have all Mankind proceeded; and from
this Sin of Theirs have all their Posterity been prone to Vice, and subjected
to unruly Passions, which hurried them on in the commission of Evil, and caused
Rapine and Violence to triumph in the Land; from hence it was that Dominion was
assumed by one, and taken from him by another, and almost nothing but Wars and
Revolutions have filled up the Space of Time; the Relations whereof is the
chief Subject of History.

Though the Scriptures name only three Sons of Adam, viz. Cain, Abel and Seth; it
says he begat Sons and Daughters, which undoubtedly he did a great number* as
did also his Sons and Grandsons; but the naming of these only being sufficient
to make a Calculation of Chronology, and deduce the Genealogy of Noah, the rest
were omitted.

Years of the World. Years before Jes. Chr. 130. Abel, a Shepherd, is killed by
his Brothe^ Cain. 3870^ 130. Seth is born. 235. Enos, the Son of Seth is born.
He is the fir^^ that shows his Zeal for the establishing of God's Wor^ship.
325. Cainam, the Son of Enos, is born. 395. Mahaaleel, the Son of Cainam, is
born. 460. Iared, the Son of Mathalaleel, is born. 622. Enoch, the Son of
Iared, is born. 687. Methusalah, the Son of Enoch, is born. 587. Lamech, the
Son of Methusaleh, is born. 930. Adam dies 930 Years old, 302^^ 987. Enoch
VIIth Patriarch being accepted to Go^ is taken up from the World 365 Years old,
without dying. The Place whither he was translated is unknow^ to Men. 1042.
Seth dies 912 Years old. 1056. Noah, the Son of Lamech, is born, 289^^ 1140.
Enos dies 905 Years old. 1235. Cainam dies 910 Years old. 1290. Mahalaleel dies
895 Years old. 1422. Iared dies, 962 Years old. 1536. Noah, 480 Years old, is
commanded by God to work on the Ark 120 Years before the Deluge. 1556. Iaphet
is born. 1558. Shem is born. 1651. Lamech dies 777 Years old. 1656. Methusalah
dies 969 Years old, some few Days before the Deluge or Flood. He is the
longest-liv'd Man that ever was.
EPOCH II. 1656. Noah, or the Universal Deluge. 2294.
This Epoch extends as far as God's Alliance with Abraham, and lasts 426 Years.

THe Wickedness of Man was grown so great, that this darling Creature of Heaven
became its Aversion, and it repented God that he had made him. But though his
Justice provoked him totally to destroy the whole Race, yet because some were
found just, it pleased the Divine Mercy to permit a Generation of Mankind, and
of all Creatures, for his Service, to be preserved to the end of the World; and
therefore when the Crimes of the Inhabitants of the Earth grew intolerable, and
required an extraordinary Punishment, God resolved by Water to destroy the
whole World of Animals excepting only Eight Persons, viz. Noah with his Wife,
three Sons and their Wives, together with a pair of every Beast of the Field
and Fowl of the Air; which by Divine Direction, Noah collected into an Ark or
Ship of vast extent, which, according to the Commands of God, he built; and
after 120 Years Labor having finished it, the Floodgates of Heaven were
opened and the Fountains of the Deep were broken up, and in 40 Days time the
Waters overwhelmed the Face of the whole Earth, so that all Creatures were
destroyed, except Noah and what were with him in the Ark. But the executing
Element having performed the Commands of Heaven, it again returned to its
ancient Habitation, part into the Bowels of the Earth, and the rest exhaled
into Clouds, leaving the Earth dry, and again in a condition to be Cultivated:
Accordingly Noah and his Sons immediately set to work, and in a few Ages the
Land became filled with Inhabitants, and Colonies were Transplanted to remoter
Parts.

1657. A Year after the beginning of the Flood, Noah goes out of the Ark seeing
the whole Face of the Earth dry, and after a positive Order from God.
Shem, Ham and Iapheth, the Sons of Noah, begin to Till the Ground.

The Life of Men shortened by one half.

1723. Heber is born. From him came the Hebrews, and the Hebrew Language. 1757.
Phaleg is born: His Name signifies Division; because 'twas in his time that
Noah divided the Earth among his three Sons.
Iaphet had the West of Asia, from the Mountains Taurus and Aman, and all
Europe.

Ham had Syria, Arabia, and all Africa.

Shem had all the Eastern Asia.

The Age of Men decreases very sensibly, being at this time not above the
fourth part of that of the Ante-diluvian Patriarchs.

1800. About this time they began to build the Tower of Babel in the Plains of
Sennaar. 1816. A sort of Royal Authority has its first Rise in Egypt, where
some more violent than the rest, take upon them to Domineer.
At this Time happened the Confusion of Languages, which were divided into 72.
The Hebrew Tongue remained in the Posterity of Heber. This Confusion stopped the
Building of the Tower of Babel, which those impious People were carrying on.

1900. Nimrod, the Grandson of Ham, began the Babylonian or Assyrian Monarchy.
2950. 1920. The King's Shepherds, who came out of Arabia, settle in Egypt, and
form a Government. 1005. Ninus, the Assyrian Monarch, began to Reign 43 Years
before the Birth of Abraham.
-- Semiramis, his Wife, the famous Assyrian Heroine, succeeded him.

1948. Abraham is born in the City of Vr in Chaldea, a place famous for the
Mathematicians that lived there. 2002.
Zoroaster King of the Bactrians, is supposed to have invented Magic about
this time.

2023. Abraham comes out of Vr by God's Command, to go and live at Charan, a
Town of Mesopotamia.
Hunting and Fowling were then invented.

'Twas about 300 Years before this time, that the Chaldeans began to observe
the Stars and the Motions of the Planets, and practice Astronomy.

EPOCH III. 2023. The Vocation of Abraham 1917.
This Epoch reaches as far as the written Law, and lasts 430 Years.

HEre God begins to make a People Elect, and for that purpose he chooses Abraham
to be the Stock and the Father of all the Faithful; and declares to him, That
he will establish his Worship and his People, which is to be this Holy
Patriarch's Posterity, in the Land of Canaan. Besides the Promise he makes him
of giving him a Son, he adds that of Blessing all the Nations of the Earth in
JESUS CHRIST, born from his Posterity: The Mark of this first Alliance of God
with Men, is the Circumcision.

2024. Abraham, pressed by the Famine, goes down into Egypt, where Apophis then
reigned. He is the same with Pharaoh mentioned in the Scripture, who having
taken away Sarah, Abraham's Wife, returned her untouched to her Husband. 2031.
Berah King of Sodom, with the other petty Kings of the Neighboring Cities,
rebel against Codorlahomor King of Elam, who had subjected them to his
Domination 30 Years before. 2047. Sodom, Gomorrah, Adamah and Seboim, four
abominable Towns, are burnt by Fire from Heaven, because of their infamous and
detestable Crimes. 1903.
Circumcision instituted, for a Token of the Alliance God made with Men in the
Person of Abraham.

2048. Isaac is born, his Father Abraham being 100 Years old, and his Mother
Sarah 90. 2093. The Kingdom of Argos, in the Peloponesus, begins in Inachus,
the first known King of the Grecians, 1080 Years before the First Olympiad.
2207. Thethmosis or Amosis, having expelled the Shepherds Kings, reigns in
Egypt. 2154. The Deluge of Ogyges in Attica, 1020 Years before the First
Olympiad. Varro places it 300 Years higher. 2185. Jacob, through his Mother
Rebecca's Counsel and Assistance, steals his Father Isaac's Benediction, to the
Prejudice of his Brother Esau.
Toward this time began some of the Four Dynasties, or Principalities of Egypt.

Thebes. Thin. Memphis. Tanis, the Capital of the lower Egypt.
2229. Joseph imprisoned upon the false Accusation of Potiphar's Wife, is set
at Liberty at three Years end, having interpreted the Dreams of Pharaoh, who
raises him to the highest Dignities of the State, 1721. 2238. Jacob, pressed by
the Famine, descends into Egypt with all his Family: The Israelites dwell there
215 Years. 2255. Jacob dies in Egypt, after he had adopted Manasses and
Ephraim, Ioseph's Sons: He blesses them, preferring the younger to the other.
2309. Joseph dies in Egypt, having administered the Kingdom under several Kings.
Here ends the Book of Genesis. 2360. The Kings of Egypt oppress the Israelites,
and put them to very laborious and painful Works. 2373. Moses, Son of Amram, is
born of his Mother Iocebeda. Being 3 Months old he is exposed on the Nile,
where the King's Daughter takes him up, and through a miraculous Providence,
puts him out to Nurse to his Mother Iocebeda. At 40 Years of Age he flies from
Egypt into Arabia. 2453. Moses, tending the Flocks of Iethro his Father-in-Law,
is commanded by God to return into Egypt and demand of the King the Liberty of
the Israelites, who groaned under a severe Bondage.
The King refuses the Liberty of the Israelites, demanded by Moses. God visits
the Egyptians with ten Plagues.

At last upon a Tuesday the 5th Day of May, toward Midnight, Pharaoh lets the
People of God go out of Egypt, to the number of six hundred Men on Foot, not
including Children.

Pharaoh pursues the Israelites with an Army. Moses opens a Passage in the Red
Sea, through which the Israelites go dry-foot, and where Pharaoh is drowned
with all his Army.

EPOCH IV. 2453. Moses, or the Written Law. 1497.
This Epoch reaches as far as the Taking of Troy, and lasts 305 Years.

THree Months after the Deliverance of his People from Pharaoh's Tyranny, God
gave his Law to Moses on Mount Sinai. There was heard from the Top of that
Mountain a great noise of Thunder, the Sky round about it was bright with
Lightnings, and the whole Mount seemed to be a great Fire, out of which arose a
Flame like that of a burning Furnace. 'Twas there that God published first,
with his own Mouth, the Ten Commandments, which are still a Compendium of all
the Holy Laws, and are looked upon by all Christians as the most firm and
unshaken Foundation of their Piety, which no Body can strike at without
committing a Crime.

Two Months after the going out of Egypt, the Manna is sent from Heaven, which
served for Food to the Israelites during 40 Years.

The third Month the Law was given: Sacrifices offered, and an Alliance made
betwixt God and the People.

2455. Afterward the Ceremonial Law is given; and the Tabernacle, the
Priesthood, the Holy Utensils, the Priestly Habits, and all that belongs to the
Levitical Service, is settled and regulated. 2470. Dardanus first King of Troy.
2500. Letters brought into Greece by Cadmus. 2493. Moses dies 120 Years old.
Here ends the Pentateuch, which contains 2493 Years, of the History of the
World, 1457.
Joshua, Moses's Successor, goes dry-foot over the Jordan, and enters the Land
of Canaan. The Walls of Jericho fall to the Ground. He stops the Sun that he
may have time to complete the Defeat of the Gabaonites.

2499. Joshua being old, divides the Promised Land among the Children of
Israel, having defeated 31 Kings, and conquered, in six Years, the greatest
part of Palestine. 2517. Joshua dies 110 Years old, having governed the
Israelites during the space of 24 Years. 2671. Gideon judges Israel. 1279.
The Israelites, through their Sins, fall under the Power of the Madianites.
This Fourth Servitude lasts 7 Years.

2679. Delivered by Gideon. 2741. The 5th Servitude of the Israelites under the
Philistines and Ammonites, 1210. 2710. Hercules lived. 2720. The Voyage of the
Argonauts to Colchis for the golden Fleece. 2750. Toward this time Paris, Son
to Priam King of Troy, commits a Rape on Helena. The Grecians, to revenge this
Affront, besiege Troy. 1194.
EPOCH V. 2767. The Taking of Troy. 1183.
This Epoch reaches as far as the finishing of the Temple, and lasts 180 Years.

HElena, Tyndarus's Daughter, being an extraordinary Beauty, Theseus fell in
Love with her, and ravished her from her Parents; but her Brother having
rescued her, gave her in Marriage to Menelaus, Brother to the King of Micenae;
from whom Paris, Son to Priam King of Troy, ravished her a second time. The
Grecians resented this Affront, declared War to the Trojans, besieged their
City, and having taken it after Ten Years Siege, burnt it to the Ground. This
War is the Subject of the two greatest Poems that ever were written, the Iliad
and Aeneid. But the Genius of Homer and Virgil is more to be extolled than the
Valor of their Hero's, for this we see and know to be real, but there is
Reason to believe the other is but Fiction.

These Times are called Fabulous or Heroic, by reason of those that have been
celebrated by the Poets under the Names of Hero's and Demigods, in the History
of which they have intermixed abundance of Fables.

Historians place about this Time, Castor, Pollux, Achilles, Agamemnon,
Ulysses, Hector, Sarpedon Jupiter's Son, Aeneas Son of Venus, whom the Romans
acknowledge for the Founder of their Empire.

Aeneas flying from Troy settles in Italy, marries the Daughter of Latinus King
of the Aborigines, and succeeds him. From Aeneas a Race of Kings succeeded, out
of which sprung Remus and Romulus, the Founders of Rome.

2781. Abdon Judge of the Israelites, famous for his 30 Sons. 1169. 2800. Heli,
High Priest of the Jews, is succored in the Defense of the People of God by
Sampson, then but 19 Years of Age, who kills himself 1000 Philistines with the
Jaw Bone of an Ass. 2808. Sampson pulls down the Temple of Dagon, and at his
Death kills more Philistines than he had done during his Life, 1142. 2848. The
Ark is taken by the Philistines; Ophni and Phineas are killed in the Fight.
Heli the High Priest, hearing this News, falls down from his Seat, breaks his
Neck and dies. 2849. Samuel, the last Judge of the People of God, succeeds
Heli, 1101. 2879. The Israelites ask for a King: God gives them Saul, then 40
Years old, 1071. 2881. Saul is rejected by God. Samuel goes to Bethleem to
anoint David King, then but 15 Years of Age. 2890. Saul dies miserably, having
obliged his Shield-bearer to run him through with his own Sword. 2889. David,
now 30 Years old, succeeds Saul, and is anointed King at Hebron, 1061. 2890.
The Athenians spread their Colonies in that part of Asia minor, called Ionia;
which is particularly owing to the Care of Cod^us the last King of the
Athenians.
The Aeolian Colonies were settled much about that time; and all Asia minor was
by degrees filled with Greek Cities.

2929. Solomon is made King by his Father David. 2930. Solomon succeeds his
Father David. 2932. Solomon, in the 4th Year of his Reign, lays the Foundation
of the Temple of Jerusalem, 1018. 2914. Homer born.
EPOCH VI. 2940 Solomon, or the Temple finished. 1010.
This Epoch reaches to the Foundation of Rome, and lasts 250 Years.

KIng David had made the Project of the Temple of Jerusalem, but the many Wars
wherewith his Reign was embroiled, kept him from putting it in Execution. The
profound Peace which his Son Solomon enjoyed, inclined this young Price to bend
all his Thoughts upon that Work; and he had the Honor of raising upon Earth,
the first Temple that was ever consecrated to the Name and Glory of the True
God. He appointed 3600 Persons to oversee the Workmen; 80000 more to hew and
cut Stones in the Mountains; and 70000 others to carry the Materials on their
Shoulders: He obtained Leave of Hiram King of Tire, to fell Cedar-trees on
Mount Libanus; and in 7 Years time, he built a Temple where the Majesty of God
was sensibly conspicuous, when upon the Day of its Dedication, a Cloud filled
all the Temple, insomuch that the Priests could not stay in it, to perform the
Duties of their Office.

Solomon is courted by the King of Tire: The Queen of Sheba makes him a Visit.

2960. Solomon dissolves into an excessive Love of Women, who make him
idolatrous. 2969. Rehoboam succeeds his Father Solomon. 918.
The brutish and extravagant Haughtiness of th^s young Prince made him lose
Ten Tribes, which Jeroboam drew away both from their God and their King,
constituting a separate Kingdom, called The Kingdom of Israel, in opposition to
the other of the Two Tribes, called The Kingdom of Judah; the former reigning in
Samaria, and the latter in Jerusalem; which Separation continued, till the
Kingdom of Israel was pulled down, and the Ten Tribes carried into Captivity by
Shalmaneser King of Assyria, in the Year of the World 3227.

3026. Achab, 7th King of Israel, reigns with his Wife the impious Iezabel,
Daughter of Ithabalus, King of Tire and Sidon, 924. 3029. Iehoshaphat the good
King of Judah. 3035. Miracles of the Prophet Elijah.
He is taken up into Heaven in a fiery Chariot.

3040. Miracles of the Prophet Elishah, Eli^ah's Disciple. 3040. Lycurgus, the
great Lawgiver of Lacedemon, lived. 3062. Athalia Queen of Judah, after the
Death of her Son Ahasias, resolved to make away with all that was left of the
Royal Family, without sparing her own Sons, that she might reign without a
Competitor. Ioas, Son to Ahasias, was saved alone from his Grandmothers Fury by
Iesabeth, who hid him, when he was in the Cradle, in the House of the Lord, and
so preserved this precious Remainder of David's Family. 3120. Jonah the Prophet
lived. 3125. Hosea the Prophet lived. 3135. Joel the Prophet lived. 3150.
Hesiod the Greek Poet lived. 3155. Amos the Prophet lived. 3180. Isaiah the
Prophet lived. 3190. Micah the Prophet lived. 3174. Olympic Games, instituted
by Iphitus King of Elis, Son of Praxonidas, of the Race of the famous Oxiles.
Here begin the Olympiads, where Varro places the end of Fabulous Times, and the
beginning of the Historical. These were celebrated every fifth Year* or after
four complete Years, 776. 3057. Sardanapalus King of the Assyrians, begins to
reign. It Is said of him, That he built two Towns in one Day, viz. Anchiale and
Tarsus, in Cilicia. After him that Monarchy was divided into Assyrians and
Medes; Arbaces taking advantage of the Effeminacy of Sardanapalus, erected to
himself a Kingdom; and Sardanapalus, pressed by his Enemies, burnt himself in
his Palace. 3075. Carthage built.
EPOCH VII. 3198. Romulus, or Rome founded. 752.
This Epoch goes as far as the end of the Captivity of Babylon, and lasts 218
Years.

REmus and Romulus were Sons of the Vestal Rhea, Daughter to Amulius, who had
usurped the Kingdom of Alba from his Brother Numitor. This Amulius, not willing
to have any Heir, commanded his Daughter's two Sons to be cast into the Tyber:
But the King's Shepherd having found them on the side of that River, took them
up and nursed them at home. At 15 Years of Age they instituted the Feast called
Lupercals; afterward they restored Numitor to his Kingdom; and some time after
they built the City of Rome, of which Romulus was declared the Founder. It was
encompassed at first only with a little Ditch, which Remus leaped over out of
Contempt; but he paid dear for his Jest, and lost his Life for it. Thus began
the Capital of the greatest Empire that ever was in the World.

3205. Obed the Prophet lived. 3220. Habakkuk the Prophet. 3230. Nahum the
Prophet. 3215. Syracuse built. 3228. Salmanassar, King of Assyria, takes
Samaria, the chief City of the Kingdom of Israel, after a Siege of 3 Years, and
carries away the Ten Tribes, in perpetual Bondage, to Ninive. Thus ended the
KINGDOM OF ISRAEL, which had lasted 258 Years since its Division from that of
Judah, 723.
Tobiah and his History are to be placed about this Time.

3235. Sennacherib, King of Assyria, enters Judea with an Army, and carries
Spoil and Desolation wherever he comes. He besieges Jerusalem, but Hezekiah by
earnest Prayer obtains Favor of God, and an Angel of the Lord kills by the
Sword in one Night, 185000 of his Men. From thence he flies to Ninive, where he
is killed, 715. 3235. Numa Pompilius, King of Rome, began to Reign. 3254.
Manasses King of Judah, is taken Prisoner by the Assyrians, and carried in
Chains into Babylon, where he becomes penitent, makes a Prayer, extant in the
Apocrypha; and God restores him to his former Dignity, 696.
Nebuchodonosor or Nebuchadnezzar, the Monarch of Babylon.

3350. Enters Judea with an Army, and takes Ieco^iah King of Judah Captive.
3360. Zedechias King of Judah. In the 11th Year of his Reign, Nebuchodonosor
takes Jerusalem. Zedechias is taken, endeavoring to make his Escape. They put
his Children to Death before him; afterward they put out his Eyes, load him
with Chains, and carry him Prisoner to Babylon. His Palace is burnt; the Temple
destroyed; the Walls of Jerusalem pulled down, and all the Inhabitans led
Captive among the Babylonians. 590. 3375. Nebuchadnezzar's Pride is punished by
God: He loses his Senses, and is reduced to live 7 Years in the Woods among the
Beasts. 3385. Nebuchadnezzar being converted, and restored to his former
Grandeur, dies in the 32d Year of his Reign. 3387. Ieconiah, after 37 Years
Imprisonment, was freed and treated honorably by Evil-marodoch. 3390.
Balthazar, in the midst of a Feast, sees a Hand writing some Words on the Wall,
which, according to Daniel's Interpretation, signify That God will give his
Kingdom to the Medians and Persians: Which begins to prove true the next Night.
3350. Ezechiel began to Prophecy. 3370. Pythagoras flourished. 3391. Cyrus the
Founder of the Persian Monarchy, began to Reign, 559.
Croesus the rich King of Lydia.

3400. Conquered by Cyrus. 3400. Daniel the Prophet flourished.
EPOCH VIII. 3420. Cyrus, or the Jews restored. 530.
This Epoch reaches as far as the Taking of Carthage, and lasts 334 Years.

THe 70 Years of Captivity to which God, in his Wrath, had condemned the Jews,
being expired, in order to their Restoration, he resolved to make Cyrus Master
of all the East, and place him on the Throne of the Kings of Babylon. This
Prince, hearing the Prophets had foretold, That he should rebuild the Temple of
Jerusalem, gave leave to all the Jews, that were Captive at Babylon, to return
to their own Country, under the Conduct of Zorobabel. He took all the Holy
Utensils of the Temple out of the Treasury of the Kings of Babylon, whither
they had been transported, and gave them back to the Jews, who marched away to
the number of 42000 Persons; and were no sooner arrived, but they laid the
Foundation of the New Temple.

3419. Cyrus having conquered and slain Nabboneus, otherwise called (by Daniel)
Darius the Median King of Babylon, becomes Monarch of all Asia. 3421. Cambyses
succeeds Cyrus. 3417. Tarquin last King of the Romans. He is sirnam'd the
Proud. He puts to Death Servius his Father-in-Law; and his Wife Tullia has the
Impudence to drive her Chariot over the dead Body of her Father. 3436. Sextus,
Son to Tarquin, ravishes Lucretia the Wife of Collatinus; in regret thereof she
stabs her self, having first adjur'd her Husband and Friends to revenge the
Injury: Which they immediately prosecuted under the Conduct of L. Iunius
Brutus; and Tarquin with all his Family are expelled. Also the Royal Government
pulled down and a new one erected under Consuls, whereof Brutus was the first.
This happened 245 Years after the City was built. 509. 3429. Darius Hystaspes
succeeds his Father Cambyses in Persia. 3460. The Persians are defeated at the
Battle of Marathon in Attica, by Miltiades the Athenian General. 3465. Xerxes
the great Monarch of Persia, called in Scripture Ahasuerus, began to reign,
485. 3469. Invades Greece with an Army of 5 millions 283000 Men, according to
Herodotus; Plutarch says 5 millions, Theodoret 3 millions. 3470. This great
Army is fought by 5500 Grecians, at the Streights of Thermopilae, wherein the
Lacedaemonians being surrounded, are cut off. The Athenians, admonished by the
Oracle to make use of Wooden Walls, by Advice of Themistocles retire on board
their Ships, which gives Xerxes opportunity to burn Athens. 480. 3470. The
Athenians under the Conduct of Themistocles, defeat the Persian Fleet at
Salamina. Xerxes flies to Asia, leaving Mardonius with three hundred thousand
Persians in Greece. 3471. The Battle of Plataea, wherein the Persians are
totally defeated by the Greeks, under Pausanias and Aristides, and Mardonius
slain. 3486. Artaxerxes Longimanus, succeeds his Father Xerxes, 465. 3430.
Pindar the Poet born, 529. 3450. Heraclitus the Philosopher flourished, 500.
3470. Aeschylus the Tragedian flourished. 480. 3490. Democritus the Philosopher
flourished, 460 3490. Hippocrates the Physician flourished, 460. 3510.
Euripides and Sophocles the Tragedians; also Herodotus the Historian. 3530.
Haggai and Zechariah the Prophets; also Socrates the Philosopher. 3532.
Alcibiades. 3545. Malachi the Prophet, 406. 3550. Aristophanes the Comedian,
400. 3550. Ezra the Prophet. 3565. Nehemiah the Prophet. 385. 3556. Rome taken
and sacked by the Gauls; delivered by Camillus the Dictator, 394. 3560.
Xenophon and Plato flourished. 3585. Demosthenes, Aeschines, the Orators.
Diogenes the Cynick. 3588. Philip King of Macedon, Father to Alexander the
Great, began to Reign, 362. 3588. Alexander the Great born. Diana's Temple at
Ephesus burnt. 3606. Philip King of Macedon, routs the Army of the Athenians at
the Battle of Cheronea, in which his Son Alexander, then 18 Years of Age,
breaks through the Theban Troops. Aristotle flourishes. 344. 3615. Alexander
invades Asia, overcomes Darius Codomannus King of Persia, and made himself
Ruler of all Asia; and thereby erects the Third Monarchy, 335. 3626. Alexander,
after the Conquest of the Indies, dies at Babylon, 33 Years old: His Generals
divide his Kingdoms among them, 323.
Alexander being dead, his Dominions are seized by his chief Captains; these
were Ptolomy, Seleucus Nicanor, Perdiccas, Antipater, Cassander, Lysimachus,
Meleager, Eumenes, Laomedon, Leonatus, Pytho, Philetas, Craterus, Menander.

3638. Seleucus Nicanor makes himself King of Syria, Babylon, etc. 3626.
Ptolomy took Egypt and Africa.
Aridaeus, Alexander's Brother, succeeds in Macedon, routed by Perdiccas.

3633. Cassander obtains the Kingdom of Macedon. 3620. Crates the Philosopher,
Euclid the Mathematician, flourished. 3634. Agathocles King of Sicily began to
Reign. 3662. Seleucus having overcome Demetrius and Lysimachus, becomes Monarch
of Syria, Babylon, Asia, etc. 3668. Antiochus Soter, his Son, succeeds him.
282. 3666. Ptolomeus Philadelphus King of Egypt, began to Reign, 284. 3690 to
3700. The LXXII Translators of the Bible, called the Septuagint. 3670. The War
between the Romans and Pyrrbus King of Epirus. 3686. The first Punick or
Carthaginian War began, A. V. Romans Condit. 489. 264. 3733. The second Punick
War began, A. V. C. 536.
Hannibal the Carthaginian passes the Alps and invades Italy.

3734. Defeats Flaminius and the Roman Army.
Fabius Maximus the Dictator, opposes Hannibal.

3735. Aemilius Paulus and Terentius Varro, with all the Roman Army, defeated
by Hannibal at Cannae. 3737. Hannibal's Army, by Wintering at Capua, becomes
Luxurious and Effeminate; which gives the Romans advantage. 3740. Scipio,
called afterward Africanus, chosen Proconsul of Spain at 24 Years of Age.
3746. Scipio passes over into Africa, and by his Victories there obliges the
Carthaginians to re-call Hannibal. 3737. Syracusa taken by Marcellus Consul,
notwithstanding the vigorous Resistance owing to the ingenious Machines of
Archimedes, the Year of Rome, 590. 213.
EPOCH IX. 3750. Scipio, or the Carthaginians conquered. 200.
This Epoch descends to the Birth of our Savior, and lasts 200 Years.

THe long Wars maintained by the Carthaginians against the Romans, have made
the Name of Carthage famous for ever. The First lasted 24 Years. It was begun
upon the Account of the Mammertins, who being attacked by King Hieroi, and the
Carthaginians, were assisted with great Supplies by the Romans. The 2d Punick
War lasted 17 Years. It was fatal to Rome by the Losses she received from
Hannibal in Italy; but it had a glorious Issue in Africa, where Scipio was very
prosperous, and gained a great Advantage. He twice defeated the Enemy commanded
by Asdrubal, and Siphax King of Numidia: The next Year after he routed
Hannibal, killed 20000 of his Men, and took as many Prisoners, with 11*
Elephants. After which Carthage, besieged both by Sea and Land, submitted upon
Conditions very advantageous for Rome, where Scipio entered, leading Siphax in
Triumph; and merited the Surname of Africanus, in the Year of Rome 553.

3762. Hannibal flies to Prusias King of Bithynia, where he Poisons himself for
fear of falling into the Hands of the Romans. 3763. Scipio the Younger born.
3768. Scipio Africanus the Elder died. 3775. Antiochus Epiphanes King of Syria,
began to Reign.
Rages against the Jews.

3782. He plunders the Temple of Jerusalem, and puts the Macchabees to Death.
173. 3775. Hircanus the Jewish Captain. 3784. Judas Macchabaeus, the Jewish
Captain. 165. 3779. Perseus King of Macedon, wars with the Romans. 3782. Paulus
Aemilius overcomes Perseus, and thereby the Kingdom of Macedon (which had
lasted 645 Years, from Caranus to Perseus, and had for the space of near 200
Years given Masters to Greece and all the East) becomes now a Roman Province,
168. 3801. The third Punick War begins. 3805. The end of the third Punick War.
Carthage taken, plundered and burnt down, under the Conduct of the young Scipio
Aemilius, who wept over the City; afterward returned in Triumph to Rome, with
the glorious Surname of young Africanus, in the Year of Rome, 608. 145. 3795.
Terence the Comic Poet lived. 3816. Scipio Aemilius arrives in Spain. 3817.
Numantia, the second Terror of the Romans, taken and destroyed. 132. 3827.
Mithridates King of Pontus, who had great Wars with the Romans. 4846.
Aristobulus King of Judea. 102. 3866. The Civil War between Marius and Sylla
began, A. V. C. 666, 82. 3867. Sylla returning from the Mithridatick War,
commits great Cruelties in Italy. 3869. -- Is made perpetual Dictator; which
Office he voluntarily resigned at 3 Years end. 3873. Alexandra Salome governs
the Jews, 78. 3882. Aristobulus her Son succeeds, 66. 3887. Jerusalem taken by
Pompey, 61. 3887. Marcus Tullius Cicero Consul of Rome, 61. 3887. Cateline's
Conspiracy detected, 61. 3890. The Confederation or Triumvirate of Pompey,
Caesar and Crassus, whence the Loss of Rome's Liberty is dated, 58. 3895.
Caesar conquers the Gauls. 53. 3896. Caesar invades Britain, 52. 3897. Crassus
rifles the Temple of Jerusalem; slain in Parthia, 51. 3901. Caesar displeased
with the Actions of Pompey, and being denied the Consulate, enters Italy with
his Army, which obliges Pompey to fly, 47. 3902. The Battle between Caesar and
Pompey at Pharsalia, wherein Pompey is slain, 46. 3903. Caesar made Dictator.
Corrects the Calendar. 3907. -- Is killed in the Senate House by Brutus and
Cassius, A. V. C. 710. 41. 3908. Brutus and Cassius being defeated at the
Fields of Philippi, kill themselves. 3908. The Triumvirate of Mark-Anthony,
Lepidus and Augustus. 3919. Anthony and Augustus, having ruined Lepidus's
Party, quarrel with one another. Anthony loses the Battle of Actium, where the
Mastery of the Universe lay at Stake. Alexandria opens the Gates to the young
Caesar. Cleopatria kills her self after Anthony; and Egypt becomes a Roman
Province, 29. 3924. Rome being now risen to the highest pitch of Greatness,
casts her self into Octavius Caesar's Arms; who, under the Name of Augustus,
and the Title of Emperor, remains sole Master of the World. Every Thing yields
to his Fortune; he is victorious both by Sea and Land; he shuts the Temple of
Ianus; all the Universe lives in Peace under his Power; and, at last, JESUS
CHRIST is born upon Earth, to reconcile Mankind to God his Eternal Father. 0^
Virgil, Horace and Ovid; Lucretius, Catullus, Tibullus and Propertius,
flourished.

3910. Herod, afterward styled the Great, made King of Judea by the Roman
Senate. 3913. Jerusalem taken by Herod. 37.
EPOCH X. 3950. The Birth of JESUS CHRIST. 0.
This Epoch reaches as far as the Peace given to the Church by Constantine,
and lasts 312 Years.

THe Time which GOD had determined to diffuse the Blessings of his Mercies upon
Mankind, and give a Savior to the World, being come, the Holy Ghost formed in
the Virgin's Womb, the Body of that Heavenly Child, who was to reconcile the
Plenitude of the Godhead, with the Meanness and Subjection of Humane Nature.
God Almighty, in order to bring the blessed Virgin from Nazareth, her ordinary
Abode, to Bethleem, where the Messiah was to be born according to the Prophets;
orders it so, that the Emperor Augustus issued out a Proclamation, to cause all
the Families of his Empire to be Registered in their Birthplace. Therefore Mary
went to Bethleem, with Joseph her Husband, who was of that Place, and of
David's Family; and because all the Inns were full, and no Lodging to be had
any where, they were obliged to take up with a Stable, where the blessed
Virgin, in a cold Night, brought forth our Lord and Savior, and laid him in a
Manger. That Night, which Christians shall celebrate during all Ages, has given
us the Sun of Righteousness, the Light of the Gentiles, and the Glory of the
People of Israel. This Birth, so dear and precious to all Mankind, happened on
the 25th of December, in the Year of the World, 3950.

JESUS CHRIST is circumcised Eight Days after his Birth, on the Kalends of
January; that is, the First of that Month.

JESUS CHRIST is worshipped by the wise Men, offered at the Temple; and
afterward carried into Egypt.

Herod puts the innocent Children to Death. He dies a miserable Death a little
while after; the Kingdom divided by Augustus between Archilaus, Herod Antipas,
and Philip, our Savior being 2 Years old.

Joseph returns from Egypt, and dwells at Nazareth in Galilee.

JESUS CHRIST is 4 Years old.

Here the Vulgar Era begins.

JESUS CHRIST being 12 Years old, is found in the Temple sitting among the
Doctors, hearing them and asking them Questions, 8. Augustus dies at Nola.
Tiberius reigns in his Stead, 14 Pontius Pilate Tetrarch of Judea, 26. JESUS
CHRIST is baptized by S. John, 29. JESUS CHRIST suffers Death to reconcile Men
to God his Father, 33. S. Stephen stoned, 34. Conversion of S. Paul, 34. First
Council held by the Apostles at Jerusalem, touching a Difficulty started about
Circumcision, which is declared unnecessary, 48. Joseph of Arimathea is said to
have preached the Gospel in Britain, 35. Caius Caligula succeeds in the Roman
Empire, 37. Claudius Drusus Emperor, 41. -- Comes into Britain, 43. Nero began
to Reign, 54. Boadicea the British Heroine being abused by the Romans, raises
an Army and kills 70000, 61. Nero having a foolish Fancy to see a Mock-burning
of Troy, sets Rome on Fire, and lays the Fault upon the Christians. This was
the Occasion of the first Persecution, which was a dreadful one, 6^* S. Peter
and S. Paul suffer Martyrdom at Rome o^ the same Day, being the 29th of June.
S. Peter i^ crucified and S. Paul beheaded, 67* Galba Emperor 7 Months, 69*
Salv. O^ho, 70* A. Vitellius Emperor, 70* Vespasian does a great deal of
Mischief in Judea and bring obliged to leave it, he sends thither a little
while after his Son Titus, who takes and destroys Ie^rusalem: Since that Time
the Jews are dispersed a^^ over the World, 70* Fl. Vespasian Emperor, 71. Titus
Vespasian Emperor, 79, Fl. Domitian, 81. -- He raised the second Persecution
against the Christians, 90. S. John the Apostle is banished, and confined to
the Isle of Pathmos, where he writes his Revelations, 94. Cocceius Nerva
Emperor, 96. Vlpius Trajan, 98. The third Persecution, 99. The Temple Pantheon
in Rome, and 8 Towns in Galatia, beaten down with a Thunder, 110. Adrian or
Hadrian Emperor, 117. -- He came into Britain to repel a Rebellion there.
Builds a Wall cross from the River Eden in Carlisle, to the River Tine near
Newcastle, against the Northern Picts, 123. The fourth Persecution, 124. S.
Justin a Philosopher embraces the Christian Faith, for which he writes an
Apology, and afterward suffers Martyrdom, 126. Jerusalem restored by Adrian
the Emperor, who calls it Aelia. The next Year the Jews rebel in Palestine, and
are defeated; Adrian causes Figures of Swine to be engraven on the Gates of
Aelia, builds a Temple to Jupiter on Mount Calvary, and another to Venus at
Bethlehem, 135. Antoninus Pius Emperor, 138. S. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions,
Disciple of S. Polycarp, flourishes. 156. Lucius of Britain, the first
Christian King in the World, 157. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher,
Emperor, 161. The fifth Persecution, 166. Commodus Emperor. 180. The Emperor
Commodus, the most cruel Man that ever lived; being stung by a Gnat in the
Bath, causes ^he Bath-keeper to be burnt. 180. The Goths begin to Invade the
Southern Nati^ns. 184. Sep. Severus Emperor, 193. The sixth Persecution, 202.
A. Bastianus Caracalla Emperor, 211. Op. Macrinus Emperor, 217. Heliogabalus,
220. A. Alex. Severus, 222. Maximinus, 235. A. Gordianus, 239. The seventh
Persecution, 238. Philip the Arabian Emperor, 244. Traj. Decius, 251.
The Affairs of the Roman Empire are now very much embroiled, The eighth
Persecution, 252. Gallus Emperor, 252. Thirty Tyrants divide the Empire, 253.
Valerianus, 255. The ninth Persecution, 259. Gallienus, 260. Claudius, 267. V.
Aurelianus, 269.


Zenobia, after the Death of her Husband Odenatus King of Palmira, a City
founded by Solomon, marches at the Head of her Armies, and secures her
Husband's Conquests to her Children.

Aurelian the Emperor obtains a Victory of Zenobia, and leads her in Triumph
the next Year to Rome. This Princess was very learned, and understood many
Languages, 272. A. Probus Emperor, 277. The Franks overrun Greece, make
themselves Masters of Syracusa, and having spoiled the Coasts of Spain, they
return home. These Franks were a German Confederate People, inhabiting the
Banks of the Rhine, 281. A. Carus Emperor, 283. Dioclesian, 284. Constantine
the Great born in Britain, 292. The tenth Persecution under Dioclesian, whose
cruel Edict was proclaimed at Nicomedia: The Faith and Chastity of Christian
Virgins are violated; the Holy Books are burnt; above two Millions of Souls
suffer Martyrdom, and among them the Empress Serena, Dioclesian's Wife. The
Sacred History relates, That the Executioners were sooner weary of putting them
to Death, than the Saints to suffer it, 300.
Every Emperor creates a Caesar, who was the Second in Dignity, and the First
Degree to come to the Empire.

Constantine the Great, Emperor, 306. The Image of Constantine, who now
succeeded his Father Constantius Chlorus, being carried to Rome, according to
Custom, is rejected by Maxetius's Orders, 306. Maximinus carries on the
Persecution: But all on the sudden the Face of Church Affairs is altered.
Constantine the Great, a wise and victorious Prince, publicly embraces
Christianity, 310. Constantine overcomes Maxentius and Maximinus, his Rivals,
312.
EPOCH XI. Constantine, or the Peace of the Church. 312.
This Epoch reaches as far as the Emperor Charlemaign, and lasts 488 Years.

WHile Constantine the Great besieged Maxentius in Rome, a bright luminous
Cross appeared to him in the Air, in the presence of every Body, with this
Inscription, In hoc Signo Vinces. The same was confirmed to him in a Dream; and
the next Day he gained that famous and celebrated Victory, which freed Rome
from a Tyrant, and the Church from a Persecutor. At the same time Constantine
openly renounced Paganism, and embraced the Christian Religion; and in the
312th Year of our Lord, he issued out a Proclamation, permitting Christians the
open Profession of their Faith, and to assemble and build Temples. The Church,
whose Brightness and Purity till then had only shined in the midst of the Blood
and Ashes of her Children, assumes a new Face, and from the wild Deserts where
she wandered before, now comes to live in Towns, and finds an Entertainment
even in Imperial Palaces. The Cross was set up as the Defense of the Roman
People, and all the Empire. And the Bishops had, by this first Christian
Emperor's Bounty, both Honors and Riches heaped upon them.

Constantine calls at Nice in Bithynia, the first Ecumenical or General
Council, wherein 318 Bishops condemned the Heresy of Arius, who denied the
Godhead of JESUS CHRIST. There also the Calendar was reformed; a Day for the
Celebration of Easter determined; and the Nicene Creed composed, 325.
Constantine rebuilds Byzantium, which he named Constantinople, and makes it the
second Seat of the Empire, having enriched it with the Spoils of all Europe, he
had now conquered. This is the most flourishing Condition of the Roman Empire,
since the Destruction of Jerusalem, 330. Constantine, Constantius and Constans,
all three Sons to the Great Constantine, divide among them the Empire of their
Father, who dies at Nicomedia, 337.
Gaul and Spain falls to Constantine* Thracia, Egypt and Asia, to Constantius;
Italy, Illyria and Africa, to Constans. It Is said, That from this first
Division, the Imperial Eagle has been spread with a double Head, with Relation
to the two most considerable Seats, Rome and Constantinople: For Constantine,
who was the eldest, died at 3 Years end.

The Emperor Julian the Apostate dies enraged; having received a fatal Blow by
a Lance, in a Fight wherein he rashly engaged in Persia, 363. Valentinian and
Valens Emperors, 364. Theodosius Emperor, 379. The second General Council at
Constantinople, 381. Theodosius dies at Milan. The Empire is again divided
between his 2 Sons: The East falls to Arcadius, and the West to Honorius, 396.
The Roman Empire begins to decay. The Goths spoil Italy.

Alaric King of the Goths besieges, takes and plunders Rome. The Emperor
Honorius shamefully flies to Ravenna, 410. Atolf, first King of the Visigoths
in Spain, which ceases to be under the Domination of the Romans, 409.
The Franks enter Gaul, and raise to the Royal Dignity Pharamond, Son to
Marcomir, one of their Dukes.

The Foundation of the Monarchy of France, 420. Pharamond first King of France,
418. Venice built by those that fled the Goths Cruelty, 421. Fergus, King of
Scotland, who shakes off the Roman Yoke, 422. Valentinian III. Emperor, 425.
The third General Council at Ephesus, 431. Attila King of the Huns, called The
Plag^e of God, spoils Italy. Valentinian the Emperor kills with his own Hand
Aetius a Patrician, the Support of Rome, and the Terror of Attila. From that
time the Western Empire falls so to decay, that it could never come to it self
again, 451. The fourth General Council at Calcedon, 451. The Britains being
deserted by the Romans, and not able to Resist the Picts and Scots, call in the
Saxons to their Assistance, Vortigern being King, about 451. Hengist the Saxon,
erects the Kingdom of Kent, the first of the Heptarchy, 455. Augustus, called
also Augustulus, is the last Emperor at Rome. He is dispossessed by Odoacer
King of the Heruli, a People that came from the Euxin Sea. Thus ends the Empire
of the West, and Italy falls under the Power of Odoacer, who takes the Name of
King of Italy, 476. Theodoric King of the Ostrogoths, drives Odoacer from Rome,
routs him, kills him with his own Sw^^^ and founds the Kingdom of Italy, 493.
Clovis, the first Christian King of France, ^84. -- He kills Alaric King of the
Wisigoth^^^ ^ith his own Hand in the Battle of Poitou. He tra^^^^tes his Royal
Seat from Tours to Paris, ^95. The South- Saxon Kingdom in Britain erected by
Ella, 488. The West- Saxon Kingdom in Britain, founded by Cerdick, 519. The
East- Saxon Kingdom commenced by Erchinwin, 527.
Arthur King in Britain, flourished from 516, to 542.

The Kingdom of Northumberland, began by Ella and Ida, 547. The Kingdom of the
East- Angles, erected by Offa, 575. The Kingdom of Mercia began; Crida being
the first King, 582. Iustinianus Emperor, began to Reign, 527. The Office of
Consuls of Rome, which had continued thus long, ended with Basilius, 541.
Totilas the Ostrogoth takes Rome, 547. The City recovered by Belisarius; but
re-taken by Totilas, 550. He is killed by Narses, 552. Alboinus founds the
Kingdom of Lombardy, and takes Milan and Pavia, 568. The Latin Tongue ceases to
be vulgarly spoken in Italy, 587.
About the Year 550. the Seat of the Empire was totally removed to
Constantinople.

Justinius junior, Emperor at Constantinople, 565. Tiberius II. Emperor, 575.
Mauritius, 586. Phocas, 602. Heraclitus, 610. Cosroes King of Persia beats the
Emperor Heraclius; afterward Heraclius conquers five times, and retake^ the
true Cross, 620.
At this time was Christianity established in Britain; Austin the Monk being
sent by Gregory the Great in 596. is entertained by Ethelbert King of Kent, and
made Archbishop of Canterbury.

Mahomet broaches his false Doctrine about 610. -- Being in danger at Mecca he
flies to Medina, whence begins the Era of the Turks, called Hegira, which in
the Arabian Language signifies Flight, 622.
In 19 Years time that Impostor gained all Arabia, and laid the Foundation of
the Empire of the Caliphs, called afterward Turks.

Damascus and Jerusalem taken by the Sarazens, 636. Constantine Emperor four
Months, Heracleonas six Months, 642. Constans Son of Constantine, 642. The
Saracens infest the Empire; Constans Emperor of Constantinople, is overcome by
them in a Sea Fight, 654. Constantius Emperor, 669. Justinian II. 686. --
Expelled, and his Nose cut off by Leontius, who succeeds him, 694. -- He again
recovers the Empire, 703. The House of Clovis now fallen into a deplorable
Weakness by frequent Minorities, produces none but lazy, ill educated Princes,
who leave all the Authority to the Mayors of the Palace, 693. Theodosius III.
Emperor, 714. The Moors being Masters of Spain, endeavor to spread beyond the
Pyrenees; but Charles Martel Mayre of the Palace repulses them. He defeats them
in the famous Battle at Tours, where Abderame their General is slain, with a
prodigious number of those Infidels, 716. All the Gauls submitted to the French
under Charles Martel, 716. Leo Isaurus Emperor, 716.
Great Dispute about Image Worship.

Constantius Copronymus Emperor, 741. Pepin, Son to Charles Martel, raises
himself to the Royal Dignity, to which Childeric's sloth had opened him a way.
Pope Zacharias declares the French free from the Oath of Allegiance they had
sworn to Childeric, 752. Charles the Great, succeeds his Father Pepin, 767. Leo
made Colleague with his Father in the Empire, 769. -- Marries Irene; makes his
Son Colleague, 777. Constantine with his Mother Irene, 780. Constantius and
Irene expel one another alternately; at length Irene reigns alone, 790.
Alphonsus the Chaste reigns in Spain, and frees it from the ignominous Tribute
of an hundred Virgins, which his Uncle Mauregat had granted the Moors, 793. The
Romans, despising the Government of Irene, then sole Empress; and the Lombards
being grown too powerful, apply themselves to Charlemaign; who having conquered
Desiderius the last King of Lombardy, protected the Popes, won over to
Christianity unbelieving Nations, restored Sciences and Ecclesiastical
Discipline, assembled Councils, and made his Piety and Justice shine throughout
all the World, is declared Emperor of the West. 800.
EPOCH XII. Charlemaign, or the Establishment of the New Empire. 800.
This Epoch goes to the taking of Constantinople by the Turks, and thereby the
Downfall of the Eastern Empire; and lasts 653 Years.

CHarles the Great, called in French Charlemaign, was one of the greatest
Princes that has been. He was Courageous, Learned, and Eminent by a great many
Virtues. He favored very much Men of Learning, having declared himself Patron
to them as well as to the Holy See; for he took no less Care of the Church,
than he did of his Kingdom. Pope Leo III. who in 795. had succeeded Adrian, was
very much abused by his Enemies; which Charlemaign sensibly resenting, came to
Rome to punish the Authors of it. The Pope, out of a grateful Acknowledgment
for the many Favors which both this King, his Father and Grandfather, had done
the Holy See, crowned him on Christmas Day, in S. Peter's Church, and saluted
him Emperor. Thus the 800th Year of JESUS CHRIST gave a New Emperor to the West.

Nicephorus obtains the Empire of the East from Irene, 803. Michael
Curopolitanus Emperor of the East, 811. Leo V. Emperor of the East, 813. The
Heptarchy in Britain was united in Egbert, who was Crowned sole Monarch, 819.
-- He gave the Name of England to his Kingdom.

-- The Danes begin to Infest the Land.

Ludovicus Pius, Emperor of the West, 814. -- His Children conspire against,
and Imprison him for some time, 830. Michael Balbus Emperor of the East, 821.
Theophilus his Son succeeds him, 829. Michael his Son, 842. Ethelwolf Son of
Egbert, King of England, 837. The Dominions of Ludovicus Pius, divided amongst
his Sons. Lotharius has the Title of Emperor, and Dominion over Italy, etc.
Ludovicus part of Germany and France, etc. and Charles sirnam'd the Bald, the
rest, 841 Michael the Eastern Emperor, expells his Mother who had Ruled with
him. 854. Bardas her Brother Rules with his Nephew, 855. Lewis II. Emperor of
the West, 856. Ethelwald King of England, 857. Ethelbert succeeds him, 860.
Ethelred King of England, 866. Basilius Macedo Emperor, 867.
The Danes rage here.

Alfred King of England, 872.
-- He is much molested by the Danes.

-- An eminently Virtuous Prince. He founds the University of Oxford.

Charles the Bald, Emperor of the West, 876. Lewis III. called the Stammerer,
878. Carolus Crassus Emperor, 880.
The Normans, a Northern People, invade and lay waste the Western part of
France, while the Sarazens spoil Italy.

Carlomanus, who had agreed to give the Normans 12000 Marks of Silver to make
them leave his Dominions; is no sooner Dead, but they come again into his
Kingdom, out of a subtle pretense, that the Treaty ended with his Life. Hugh
the Abbot Fights them, and makes such a Slaughter of them, that they left
France in quiet for some time, 884.
However, Lewis the Simple, soon after permits them to settle in that part now
called Normandy.

Leo VI. succeeds his Father Basilius, in the Empire of the East, 886.
Arnolphus chosen Emperor of the West, 888. Eudo charges the Normans, kills
19000 of them, and drives them before him every where, 889. Lewis IV. his Son,
a Child, Emperor, 900.
-- Opposed by another Lewis set up by the Pope.

Edward the Elder, Son of Alfred King of England. 901.
The Hungarians waste Germany, Italy, etc. in the time of Lewis IV. in whom
ended the Line of Charlemaign in Germany; for the Empire was given to Otho Duke
of Saxony, and afterward

Conrad Duke of Franconia chosen Emperor, 912. Alexander Son of Leo, Emperor of
the East, 911. Romanus his Colleague, 919. -- Raises his Sons to the Empire,
they expel him. 944.
And Quarrelling between themselves, are deposed by Constantine, who Reigns
alone, till Poisoned by

Romanus II. who makes himself Emperor of the East, 960. Henry sirnam'd the
Fowler, Emperor of the West, 920. Ethelstane King of England, 924. Otho the
Great, Emperor of the West, 938. Edmond, Son of Ethelston, King of England,
940. Edred Brother to Edmond, succeeded in the Nonage of his Nephews, 946.
Edwin the eldest Son of Edmond, a wicked Prince, 955. Edgar his Brother, a very
good Prince, 959.
Otho the Great, subdued and converted to Christianity. The Danes, conquered in
Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, etc.

John Zimisca Emperor of the East, 969.
-- he obtained Victories over the Sarazens, and honors the Image of the
Virgin Mary, and first coined Gold with this Inscription, Jesus Christus Rex
Regum.

Otho II. Son to Otho the Great, Emperor of West, 973. Basil and Constantine
Brothers, Emperors of East, 975. Edward surnamed the Martyr, King of England,
975. -- Killed by his Stepmother Elfreda, and succeeded by Ethelred with
Elfreda, 978. The Danes invade the Land, and committing great ravage, are all
Massacred in one Day, 1002. Henry called the Saint, Duke of Saxony, chosen
Emperor, 1008. The Sarazens by the Instigation of the Jews, pull down the
Church of Jerusalem, and the Holy Sepulcher, which revives the Devotion of the
Christians of the West, and their Hatred against the Jews, whom they Banish and
Destroy, 1009. Edmund, sirnam'd Ironside, King of England, 1016.
At the same time Canute the Dane, was made King by part of the Nation.

Guido Aretinus a Monk invents musical Notes, 1022. Conrade II. Duke of
Franconia, Emperor, 1025. Romanus III. Emperor of the East, 1028. Michael
Paphlago, Emperor of the East, 1034. Herald the Dane, King of England, 1036.
Hardicanute succeeds him, 1040.
-- a wicked Prince, the last of the Danes; is succeeded by

Edward the Confessor, Son of Ethelred, 1042. Theodora Empress of the East,
1055. Henry III. Emperor of the West, 1039. Henry IV. Emperor of the West,
1056. Michael Stratonious Emperor of the East, 1056. Isaacius Comnenus, 1057.
Constantinus Ducas, 1061. Harald Son of Godwin Earl of Kent, Usurps the Crown
of England, 1066. William Duke of Normandy, invades England, Conquers Harald,
and is made King, 1066. Michael Ducas Parapinaus, Emperor of the East, 1067.
Romanus Diogenes marries Michael's Mother, 1068. and Reigns with him, till
taken by the Turks, and afterward killed by Michael, 1071. Nicephorus
Betoniates ( Michael being deposed) succeeds him, 1078. Alexius Comnenus puts
Nicephorus into a Monastery, and succeeds him, 1080. The Turks separate
themselves from the Sarazens and choose for their Prince, under the title of
Sultan, Tangrolipix, 1048. -- He Conquers Persia, 1059. -- Takes Jerusalem,
1068. Axan succeeds him, 1070.
-- He took Prisoner Romanus Diogenes Emperor and conquers much.

Melec the 3d Sultan, 1086. At this time the Turks were Masters of Syria, the
lesser Asia and all Palestine, where they very much oppressing the Christians,
Simeon Patriarch of Jerusalem, writes to the Pope for Relief, who calls a
Council at Placentia and obtains a general Croisade or War from all the Nations
of Christendom for recovery of the Holy Land, to be Decreed, 1095. Great
Preparations are immediately made for the Holy War, and diverse Princes and
Noblemen, among whom Godfrey of Bulligne, (Duke of Loraine, or rather of
Brabant,) set forward with a great Army, 1096. Solomon Sultan of the Turks,
1097. Jerusalem is regained from the Turks, and Godfrey of Bullen made King of
it, 1099. William Rufus King of England, 1087. Henry I. his Brother, succeeds
him, 1100. Baldwin (Brother to Godfrey) King of Jerusalem, 1101. Henry V.
Emperor of Germany, 1106. Calo. Ioannes Comnenus Emperor of Greece, 1118.
Baldwin II. King of Jerusalem, 1119. Lotharius Saxo, Emperor of Germany, 1125.
-- He restored the Civil Law, the Code and Pandects being found in Italy in
his time.

Conradus III. Duke of Sweden, succeeds him, 1138. Emanuel Comnenus, Emperor at
Constantinople, 1143.
-- He is said to have caused Lime to be mixed with the Meal that was sold at
Constantinople to the Army of the Emperor Conrade, in his Journey to the Holy
Land.

Stephen Earl of Blois, King of England, 1135. Fulco, Baldwin's Son-in-Law,
King of Jerusalem, 1135. Baldwin III. his Brother succeeds, 1143. Noradine,
Sultan of the Turks, 1143. Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany, 1152.
Henry II. King of England, 1154. -- He conquered Ireland, 1172. Almaric King of
Jerusalem, 1163. Saladine Sultan of the Turks, 1170. Alexius Comnenus II.
Emperor of Greece, 1180. Andronicus his Son, 1182. Isaacius Angelus Comnenus,
1185. Henry VI. Emperor of Germany, 1190. Jerusalem re-taken by the Turks,
1187. Richard I. King of England, 1189.
-- He goes to the Holy Land, in his way takes the Island Cyprus. In his
return, is taken Prisoner by the German Emperor.

Alexius Angelus, Emperor of Greece, 1195. Philip succeeds Henry VI. in the
Empire, 1198.
-- Is opposed in it by Otho, who was set up by the Pope.

John steps over his Nephew Arthur's Head into the Throne of England, 1199.
-- By reason of a Quarrel between him and the Pope, the Kingdom is
interdicted, and no Holy Offices performed for 6 years.

-- He had great Wars with the Barons, who call in the French.

-- He first granted Magna Charta.

A great disorder in the succession of the Greek Emperors; for Constantinople
is taken by the Latins, and Alexius Ducas, who had strangled his Predecessor,
forced to fly to Adrianople. 1204. Theodorus Lascarus Emperor at Adrianople,
1204. Baldwin Earl of Flanders at Constantinople, 1204.
A succession in both those Cities continued, till the time of Michael
Paleologus.

Frederick II. Duke of Swaben, Emperor of Germany, 1212. The Inquisition first
erected against the Albigenses, 1222. Frederick Emperor of Germany, goes to the
Holy-war, recovers Jerusalem and is Crowned King of it, 1229.
-- He had Wars with the Pope, was excommunicated, and Anti-Caesars set up.

Henry III. King of England, 1216. -- The Barons rise against him, 1227. --
Magna Charta confirmed by him, 1253. -- Breaks it, the Barons rise again, and
the King is taken Prisoner and detained by Simon Mountfort, 1258. Lewis (called
the Saint) King of France, goes to the Holy-war with a great Army, 1248. --
Takes Damieta; returning home is taken Prisoner, 1250.
Great Confusion in the Government of the Western Empire, occasioned by the
Emperor's Quarrel with the Pope.

Richard Brother to King Henry of England, chosen Emperor, 1256. Michael
Paleologus, regains Constantinople, and Reigns sole Emperor there, 1260. Edward
I. King of England, 1272. Rodolphus Count of Hapsburg, Emperor of Germany,
1273.
From him proceeded the Austrian Family.

Andronicus Paleologus II. Emperor at Constantinople, 1283. Adolphus of Nassaw
Emperor of Germany, 1291. Albert of Austria succeeds him, 1298. Ottoman the
founder of the present Turkish Empire, 1297. Henry VII. Earl of Luxemburg,
Emperor of Germany, 1308. Edward II. King of England, 1307. -- By too much
cherishing Gaveston and the Spencers, he lost the Love of his People, and was
at last deposed, 1326. Ludovicus of Bavaria, Emperor of Germany, 1314.
-- He is opposed by an Anti Caesar, Frederick of Austria, Albert's Son.

Great Disputes at this time concerning the Authority of the Emperor and the
Pope.

Edward III. King of England, 1327.
-- He is victorious in France; his Son Edward (styled the Black Prince) took
the French King Prisoner, and by his Heroic Valor left his Father and Himself
an immortal Name.

This King instituted the Order of the Garter. In his time Wickliff lived.

Andronicus Paleologus III. Emperor at Constantinople, 1328. John his Son
succeeds at 9 Years old, 1341. John Cantacuzen his Tutor, makes himself his
Associate in the Empire, and rules with him till 1354. Charles IV. King of
Bohemia, Emperor of Germany, 1347. The Mariners Compass found out, 1302. Philip
the Fair King of France having great difference with Pope Boniface VIII. is
excommunicated, 1302. Pope Clement V. removed the Papal Seat to Avignon, where
it remained for 70 Years, 1305.
The Albigenses and Waldenses, much persecuted at this time.

Walter Lollard, a notable Opposer of the Romish Superstition, with many of his
Followers, burnt in Austria, 1315. Gunpowder invented in Germany by Barth.
Schwartz, a Monk; and Guns first used by the Venetians, 1344. Amurath the
Turkish Sultan, brings 60000 Turks into Europe, and takes Adrianople, 1359.
Richard II. King of England, 1377. -- Quells the Rebellion of Jack Straw and
Wat Tyler, 1381. -- Is deposed, 1399. Henry IV. Son of John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster succeeds, and begins the Lancastrian Line of Kings, 1399. Wenceslaus
King of Bohemia, chosen Emperor, 1387. Rhodes well defended against the Turks,
1380. Andronicus IV. Emperor at Constantinople, 1384. Manuel Paleologus
succeeds him, 138^. Bajazet the Turk began to Reign, 1388. Tamerlan the Tartar
began to Reign, 1387. -- He conquered Babylon, Persia, China and India
Overcomes Bajazet and puts him in an Iron Cage, 1399.
-- The Great Mogol descended from him.

Wenceslaus the Emperor deposed, 1399. Rupert of Bavaria succeeds* 1400.
By reason of the many Civil Wars, Italy throws of the German Yoke, and several
Governors of Cities make themselves absolute; as the Scaligers in Verona, the
House of Est at Ferrara, the Gonzagues at Mantua, etc.

Sigismond K. of Hungary, chosen Emperor, 1410* -- He erected Savoy into a
Duchy in favor (...) Armedeus, 141^* Henry V. King of England, 141^* -- He is
victorious in France, wins the famous Battle at Agincourt, 1415. -- The
Government of that Kingdom is resigned to him by the King, Charles VI. 142^*
John VII. Paleologus, Emperor at Constantinople, 1417. Henry VI. (a Child) King
of England, 142^*
-- Loses what his Father had gained in France.

-- Richard Duke of York claims the Crown, 144^* -- The Rebellion of Jack Cade
suppressed, 1450. -- The King is worsted by the Yorkists, and finally deposed,
1^60. Albert of Austria chosen Emperor, 143^. Frederick of Austria, his
Brother, succeeds, 144^* The Art of Printing invented, 144^* John Huniades
Emperor of Constantinople, 144^*
-- Is victorious against the Turks.

Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus, famous for his Victor^^^ over the Turks, 144^*
Constantine XIII. Paleologus the last Christian Emperor of Constantinople,
famous for his Valor, 1443. Mahomet II. called the Great, Sultan of Turks,
1451. -- Takes Constantinople, Constantine being slain, puts an end to that
Empire, 1453.
EPOCH XIII. Constantinople taken by the Turks, and the Christian Empire of
the East terminated, 1453.
This Epoch is continued as far as the Year, 1660. wherein King Charles being
Restored, the ancient Lawful Government of England was reestablished.

IT must be confessed that this Epoch begins not so happily as those that have
gone before it, for whereas almost every one of them commenced from some great
Action whereby the Almighty bestowed some benefit upon his People; this alas!
begins with a deplorable state of the Christian World, and shows us the
expulsion of the true Religion out of Greece and its Neighboring Provinces, by
the entrance of the Mohammedan Cruelty into Europe, after it had ravaged almost
all Asia and Africa. But it must be acknowledged, that the Divine Providence
was just in this Punishment of those unworthy Christians, who by intruding
Heresies first, caused Schisms and continual Feuds in the Church; and
afterward by Superstition, profain'd their most Holy Religion; and yet by
bitter Persecution destroyed the Holy Professors of true Christianity, that in
those Ages opposed themselves to the innovated Idolatry and Superstition.

We might justly enough call the last Epoch Dark and Illitarate, as we must
Name this that follows the Enlightened and Learned Age of Christianity; for the
Northern Barbarians that overrun Europe in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, had
so effectually swept away all s^^ts of Learning, that though themselves
afterward be^ame Christians and somewhat Polite, yet it required Ages of Time
to revive that Learning which they had destroyed; and in effect what through the
Wars that happened, and through the absolute Power the Clergy exercised, which
gave them an opportunity of living Lazily in Convents, all the Sciences and
even Arts too, were in a very low Estate, till in this Century the discovery of
the Art of Printing, put Books into the Hands of the Laity, the which being
followed in the next Age, with the appearance of those great Literati* Picus
Mirandula, Desider. Erasmus, Mars. Ficinus, etc. Learning began to Revive, and
by the continued zealous prosecution of the Work that those great Men begun, we
may now venture to say, We have almost arrived to the Perfection of those Ages,
wherein the Greeks and Romans made themselves immortal by their great Erudition
and Ingenuity.

That wonderfully useful Instrument the Mariner^ Compass, had been found out in
the beginning of the Fourteenth Century, by the help whereof, the Portugueze
had ventured to Navigate on the Coasts of Africa, and by degrees advancing, we
find them at length, toward the end of this Age got as far as India, from
whence they brought, by Sea, vast quantities of the rich Commodities of those
Parts, which before that time came but sparingly hither, because brought over
an immense Tract of Land to Alexandria, before we could receive 'em: This was
followed by a discovery of a new World, which Christopher Colombus with great
Hazard, as well as Skill and Pains, found out; and thereby gave the Spanish
Monarch an opportunity of increasing his Dominions to an almost infinite
extent, and of enriching Europe to an inexpressible degree, out of the
inexhaustible Mines of Mexico and Peru.

The following Epoch shows us moreover the Church reformed, and the Christian
Religion restored to its ancient Purity; a Blessing of inestimable value, and
which we ought all to praise God for, and continually pray that he lets not
again Superstition to prevail; or which is worse, Atheism and Irreligion to
Profane our Piety.

Years of Jes. Chr. The Turks having taken Constantinople, proceed in their
Conquests, and gain the Peloponnesus, now called Morea, 1459. Edward IV. Son to
Richard Duke of York, (who had been slain in his Wars against Henry VI.) gains
the Crown of England, 1460. -- Marries the Lady Gray, which disgusts his great
Friend the Earl of Warwick, 1465. -- Warwick raises Wars against him, and in
the end forces him to fly the Kingdom, 1470. -- Henry placed on the Throne
again after 9 Years Imprisonment, but Edward soon expells him, 1471. -- He
dies, leaving his Crown to his young Son Edward V. 1483. Maximilian of Austria,
Son to the Emperor Frederick, Marries Mary Heiress of Burgundy, 1477.
They had Issue Philip, who Married Joan the Daughter of Ferdinand King of
Spain, by which all the Netherlands became afterward united to that Kingdom.

Maximilian chosen Emperor, 1493. Richard Duke of Gloucester usurps the Throne,
and Murders his Nephews, 1483. Richard III. a Tyrant, slain at Bosworth by
Henry VII. who was of the Lancastrian Family, and Married the Daughter of
Edward IV. declared King. 1485. -- Is opposed by two Impostors, Lambert Simnel
and Perkin Warbeck, 1486, 1499. In the Year 1454. the Portugueze discovered the
Cape of Good Hope, and prosecuting their Voyaging, they at length got as far as
the East Indies, which was discovered by Vasq. de Gama, who was sent by the
King of Portugal to that purpose, and arrived before Calicurt, May the 20th,
1498. Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Isabella Queen of Castille by Marriage
unite those Kingdoms, and erect the Monarchy of Spain, 1474. Ferdinand expels
the Moors out of Spain, and erects the Inquisition against them; which gains
him the Title of Catholic, 1496. Christopher Columbus, a Native of Genoa,
having partly by his own Study in Geography, and partly by Information of some
Seamen who had been driven on some far Western Coast, conceived an Opinion,
That there was a large Country Westward of us yet unknown, applied himself
zealously for the Discovery of it; to which purpose he first desired Assistance
of the State of Genoa, afterward of our King Henry VII. and of Emanuel King of
Portugal; by all whom being refused, he at length obtained it of Ferdinand and
Isabella King and Queen of Spain, who in the Year 1492. gave him Three Ships,
with Men and Provisions; with these he set out and happily effected his
Intention, discovering Cuba and Hispaniola, and returned to Spain, 1493.
Afterward Americus Vespusius being set forth by Emanuel King of Portugal,
discovered the Southern Continent of America; which Name he had the Honor to
give to all that vast Country, 149^. Maximilian Emperor, an excellent Prince,
1493. Henry VIII. King of England, 1509. -- he married Katharin of Spain, the
Widow of his Brother Arthur, 1509. Charles V. Son of Philip, who was the Son of
Maximilian and Mary of Burgundy; which Philip married Joan the Heiress of
Spain; by which means Charles succeeded in both these Estates, 1516. and was
chosen Emperor on the Death of Maximilian, 1519.
Fr. Picus Count of Mirandola in Italy; and D. Erasmus Native of Rotterdam,
flourished.

Martin Luther begins to Preach in Germany against Indulgences, and other
Errors of the Church of Rome, 1517. Solomon, styled The Magnificent, began to
Reign, 1520. The Island and City of Rhodes, after a vigorous Defense, taken by
the Turks, 1523.
Belgrade was taken, and Vienna besieged by Solomon.

King Henry of England, Wars successfully with France, 1510. -- writes against
Luther, and obtains the Title of Defender of the Faith, 1521. -- Is divorced
from Queen Katharin, and marries Anne Bollen, 1533. -- Beheads her, and marries
Jane Seymour, 1536. -- Marries Anne of Cleeve, and Katharin Howard, 1540. --
Marries again the Lady Katharin Parr, 1543. -- he advanced Cardinal Wolsey to
the highest pitch of Greatness; who having displeased him is pulled down, and
Cromwell advanced, 1531. -- Cromwell also disgraced and beheaded, 1540.
-- This King suppressed Monasteries, and made way for the Reformation, which
followed in the Reigns of his Son and Daughters.

The Straights of Magellanica in America discovered, and named by Ferdinand
Magellan, 1520.
Mexico and Peru conquered by the Spaniards, about this time.

The Name of Protestant first began, on occasion of a Protestation the
Lutherans made against a Decree of the Chamber of Spire against them, 1529. The
Smalcaldan League, or agreement between the Protestants of Germany for their
mutual Defense; made at Smalcald, 1540. The Council of TRENT, began 1540.
Edward VI. Son of Henry VIII. by his Wife Jane Seymour, succeeds his Father at
9 Years of Age, 1547.
-- a wonderfully wise and pious Prince.

-- he reforms Religion, and expels the Superstition and false Doctrine of the
Romish Church.

-- his Uncle Edward Seymour the Protector beheaded, 1551. Mary his Sister
succeeds him, 1553. -- she restores Popery; marries Philip the Son of the
Emperor Charles V. afterward King of Spain, 1554. -- loses Callice, which had
been held by the English ever since King Edward IIId's time, 1557. Elizabeth
her Sister Queen of England, 1558.
-- restores the Reformation, and reigns with great Wisdom and Reputation 44
Years.

The Emperor Charles V. Resigns all his Kingdoms, 1557. Ferdinand his Brother
chosen Emperor, 1558. Philip II. his Son succeeds him in Spain, 1558. Charles
IX. King of France, 1560. -- The Civil War for Religion began there. 1562. --
The Massacre of the Protestants at Paris, 1572. Maximilian II. Emperor, 1564.
The Wars in the Low Countries against the Inquisition, etc. began, 1565. King
Philip sends Duke d' Alva to suppress it, 1567. William Prince of Orange, heads
the Protestants in the Low Countries, 1572. -- Under whose Protection, Holland
throws off the Spanish Yoke, and soon after Six more of the Provinces join with
them, and altogether conclude a solemn Union at V^recht, 1579.
Queen Elizabeth being at this time at War with Spain, gives them assistance.

The famous Sea Fight at Lepanto, wherein the Venetians kill 20000 Turks, and
sink 200 Galleys, 1572. Henry III. King of France. 1574. The Holy League in
France began, 1576. Rodolphus II. Emperor, 1576. Sir Francis Drake Sails
through the Magallonnie Streights* thence over to the Phillipine Islands and
the East Indies, and having encompassed the whole Globe of the Earth, returns
to England, 1580. Pope Gregory XIII. Corrects the Calander, 1582. William
Prince of Orange, Assassinated at Delft, 1584.
Succeeded by his Brother Maurice, who for many Years maintained the War
against the Spaniards.

The Spaniards with a mighty Armado attempt to invade England, but are totally
routed by the English, 1588. Mary Queen of Scots beheaded in England, 1587.
Henry III. King of France is stabbed by Ia. Clement a Friar, 1589. Henry IV.
King of Navarre succeeds him, 1589.
-- Turns Roman Catholic, restores the Peace of the Nation.

Years of Jes. Chr. -- Makes an Edict at Nants in favor of the Protestants,
1598. -- Is stabbed by Ravillac, 1610. James King of Scotland succeeds Queen
Elizabeth in the Throne of England, 1602. The Gunpowder Plot, 1605. Philip
III. King of Spain, 1598. Peace made between Spain and Holland, whereby the
united Provinces are declared a free State, 1609. Lewis XIII. King of France,
1610. Gustavus Adolphus the famous King of Sweden began to Reign, 1611.
Matthias King of Hungary and Bohemia elected Emperor, 1612. Frederick Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Marries the Lady Elizabeth Daughter to King James of
England, 1612. Frederick II. chosen Emperor, 1619. The Elector Palatine being
chosen King of Bohemia, is opposed by the Emperor, and defeated in the Battle
of Prague. 1620. Philip IV. King of Spain, 1621. The Elector Palatine outed of
all; his Dignity given to the Duke of Bavaria, 1624.
Great Wars in Germany ensued.

King Charles I. King of England, succeeds his Father, 1625. Henry Frederick
Prince of Orange succeeds Maurice, 1625.
Cardinal Richelieu chief Minister in France.

-- He labors to ruin the Protestant Party; and finally, takes the City
Rochel their chief Strength after a long Siege and vigorous Defense, 1628. The
renowned Gustavus Adolphus after many victorious Acts in Germany, Italy, etc.
is slain at the Battle of Lutzen in Germany, November 6, 1632. Christina his
Daughter succeeds him, 1632. Count Tilly the Emperor's General, famous for his
Conquests in Bohemia, Denmark and Germany, died, 1632. Portugal throws off the
Spanish Yoke, and receives John Braganza of the ancient Royal Family for their
King, 1640. Ferdinand III. chosen Emperor, 1637. The Rebellion and Massacre in
Ireland, 1641. King Charles by reason of the Factious disorders in London,
retires into the North, is denied entrance into Hull, 1642. -- Sets up his
Standard at Nottingham, Aug. 2. 1642. Lewis XIV. the present King of France
began to Reign, being then but Five years old, 1643. William II. Prince of
Orange, Father of his present Majesty of Great Britain, succeeded his Father in
all his Honors, 1647. Peace among the Germans, etc. concluded at Munster in
Westphalia, 1648. The Civil War rages in England; King Charles I. Martyred,
164^. The famous Rebellion at Naples (on occasion of the grievous Excises)
headed by Thomas Aniello, commonly called Massanello, 1647. Oliver Cromwell
usurps the Government of England, under the Name of Protector, 1651. The Prince
of Orange dies October 8. 1650. leaving his Princess (the Daughter of King
Charles II.) with Child of our present King, who was Born Nov. 14. 1650. The
Island Iamaica in America, taken by the English, 1655. Christina Queen of
Sweden resigns her Crown, and goes to Rome, 1654. Carolus Gustavus Duke of
Deux-ponts, her Cousin succeds her, 1654. Alphonsus King of Portugal, succeeds
his Father, 1656.
-- Being Lunatic is confined, and his Brother made Regent,

Leopoldus-Ignatius-Iosephus, the present Emperor of Germany began to Reign
July 22. 1658. Oliver Cromwell died Sept. 3. 1658. A War between France and
Spain having lasted 25 Years, is at length ended by a Peace, concluded in the
Isle of Pheasants, near the Pyrenean Mountains, 1659. After half a dozen
Changes of Government in England in one Years time (the Rump being by General
Monk's Management dissolved, and a Free Parliament chosen) it was resolved by
the Parliament, April 20. That Charles II. was lawful and undoubted King, and
Messengers immediately sent to Breda to invite him Home, 1660.
EPOCH XIV. King Charles II. Restored, the ancient Government and Laws of
England Reestablished; and Europe in a Profound Peace, 1660.
ANd here we must make a Stand; for who can pass so pleasant a Sight as this
happy Year gives us of the peaceful State of all Europe, without taking a View
of the agreeable Prospect? In England our celebrated Augustus shuts up the
Temple of Ianus, and by his happy Influence gives the Muses Liberty, and the
Merchant Protection; Learning and Wit flourish, Trade enriches the Nation, and
a general Joy drives away the Sorrows which the late Tyrannical Usurpation had
cast over all the good and honest part of the People: The hungry Beggars that
had usurped the Senate House were now expelled, and forced to refund the sweet
Morsels which they had robbed the King, the Clergy and their Fellow Subjects
of, under the specious Name of Sequestration: In short, the King, the Laws, the
ancient Liberty, Government and Peace was restored, and England was made happy.

In Germany the War which the Emperor, King of Poland, and Elector of
Brandenburg, had maintained against the King of Sweden, was ended; that between
Sweden and Denmark, as also between France and Sweden, terminated; and finally
France and Spain reconciled by the Pyrenean Peace, and afterward by the
Marriage of the the Infanta to the King. So that we may truly call this Annus
Pacificus of Europe, and compare this with the Augustan Age.

May 29, 1660. King Charles II. makes his Triumphant Entrance into London, it
being the Day of his Birth, in the Twelfth Year of his Reign; and on the 23d of
April following was Crowned. Leopold Ignatius being at that time Emperor of
Germany; Philip IV. King of Spain; Lewis XIV. King of France; Alphonso King of
Portugal; Charles X. King of Sweden; Christiern V. King of Denmark; Alexius
Michaeliwitz Czar of Moscovy; John Casimer King of Poland; Alexander VII. Pope
of Rome; Franciscus Molino Doge of Venice; Ferdinand II. Duke of Florence;
Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy; and finally, Mahomet IV. Sultan of the Turks,
1661.
In France Cardinal Mazarine being dead Mar. 9, 1661. that King takes the
Government wholly into his own Hands.

The Dauphin Born, Nov. 1. 1661. King Charles of England marries Donna
Catherina, Infanta of Portugal, May 22. 1662. Venner and the Fifth Monarchists,
make a Riot and bloody Rebellion for a few Days in London, 166^. The first
Dutch War, 1665. A raging Pestilence at London, 1665. War proclaimed against
France, who side with the Dutch. 1665/6. A violent Fire which burnt down the
greatest part of London, 1666. The Dutch at Chatham, 1667. A Peace concluded at
Breda by England with France and Holland, 1667. War betwixt France and Spain,
1667. The Theater at Oxford built by A. Bp. Sheldon, 1668. Treaty of Peace
between Spain and France, at Aix la Chapelle, 1668. The City and Island of
Candia taken by the Turks, 1669. Clement IX. Pope. 1670. The Duke of Lorrain
dispossessed of his Dominions by the French, 1670. The second Dutch War, 1672.
The French King invades Holland, over-runs the Country, and commits very
barbarous Ravage, 1672. Spain declares against France, 1673. A Faction in
Holland headed by de Wit, taking Advantage of the Prince of Orange's Minority,
had some Years before this, resolved no more to admit of a Stadtholder; but at
this time the miserable State of their Country, through the French Tyranny
which was carried on because the Dutch wanted some skilful Captain, made the
People mutiny, and oblige the States to restore the Prince to the Dignity and
Honors of his Ancestors, 1674. Peace between England and Holland, 1674. Victor
Amadaeus, present Duke of Savoy, succeeds his Father, 1675. Pope Clement X.
dies, and is succeeded by Benedict Odeschalci, who took the Name of Innocent
XI. 1676. The Prince of Orange comes over to England, and marries the Lady Mary
(our late gracious Queen) 1677. Peace concluded at Nimeguen between France and
Holland, 1678. -- Also between Spain and France, 1678.
-- Also between the Emperor and France.

The Popish Plot in England, discovered. 1678. The Dauphin marries the Princess
of Bavaria, 1679. The Duke of Burgundy, eldest Son to the Dauphin, born, 1681.
Algiers Bombarded by the French, 1682. The Czar of Moscovy dying, causes
Disputes which of the Sons should succeed; at length 'twas agreed they both
should Reign together, 1682.
War between the Emperor and the Turks.

Tangier quitted and destroyed by the English, 1683. Vienna Besieged by the
Turks 60 Days, at length Relieved, and the Siege raised with great Slaughter of
the Turks, by the King of Poland, Sept. 12. 1683. Genoa Bombarded by the
French, 1684. Luxemburg taken by the French, 1684.
King Charles II. died Feb. 6. 1684/5. and is immediately succeeded by his
Brother James Duke of York.

Earl of Argyle Invades Scotland, 1685. Duke of Monmouth Invades England, 1685.
-- Both defeated, and Executed by K. James, 1685. The Grand Seignior, Mahomet
IV. being deposed, Solomon III. succeeds him, 1687. The French King breaks the
Peace with Germany, and his Son takes Philipsburg, October. 1688. The People of
England, oppressed by King James's Government; the Prince of Orange, in
prosecution of an Invitation to that purpose, comes over to England with an
Army for their Relief, Nov. 5. 1688. King James quits the Government, and
retires privately from Whitehall, Dec. 12. 1688. -- being, put ashore at
Feversham, returns to London, December. 1688. The Prince of Orange comes to
London, and King James retires to Rochester, 1687. -- whence he privately
departs for France, 1688. A Convention or Parliament being assembled, they
declare William Prince of Orange, together with his Princess Mary, King and
Queen of England, Feb. 13. 1688/8. France declares War against Holland, Nov.
1688. K. William and Q. Mary Crowned, Apr. 21. 1689. England declares War
against France, May 7th, 1689. The Convention of Scotland Resolve to offer the
Crown to King William and Queen Mary, Apr. 16. 1689. which the Deputies present
to him, May 16. 1689.
King James passes from France to Ireland, with French Officers and Forces.

-- Besieges Londonderry, which had declared for King William, Apr. 1689.
Ireland standing out for King James, an Army is sent over under the Command of
Duke Schomberg.

The Castle of Edinburgh, which had stood out for King James, surrendered Iun.
13. 1689. William Duke of Gloucester, Son to their Royal Highnesses the Prince
and Princess of Denmark, was born July 24. 1689. Londonderry relieved, and the
Siege raised, July 22. 1689. King William goes over into Ireland with many
Noblemen, and large Supplies of Men and Ammunition, June 16. 1690. The Battle
of the Boyne, wherein King William obtains a very signal and entire Victory
over K. James and his Army, July 11. 1690. Drogheda taken, July 1690. King
William marches into Dublin, July 16. 1690. King James flies back to France,
1690. The first Siege of Limerick, Aug. 1690. The King returns to England,
after having reduced the greatest part of Ireland, Sept. 10. 1690. The King
passes over to Holland, wherein, endeavoring to land in his Barge, is
sorrounded with Ice, and detained 22 Hours, Ian. 20. 1690/1. The Electors of
Bavaria and Brandenburg, the Landgrave of Hesse Cassel, and many Foreign
Ministers, assemble in Congress at the Hague, and conclude a firm Confederacy
against France, Feb. 1690/1. Mons taken by the French, Apr. 8. 1691. The King
returns to England, Apr 10. 1691. The King goes to the Army in Flanders, May
1691. Athlone in Ireland taken by the English, July 21. 1691. The Battle of
Agrim, wherein St. Ruth, the French General for King James, is killed, and his
Army totally routed, July 13. 1691. Innocent XII. the present Pope, Elected,
July 12. 1691. Limerick surrendered, and Ireland totally reduced, October. 3.
1691. The English Fleet obtains a great Victory over the French, and burn above
20 of their largest and best Ships at la Hogue; May 1692. An Earthquake at
Iamaica, which almost totally destroyed Port Royal, June 7. 1692. Namur taken
by the French, July 3. 1692. The Battle at Steenkirk, July 24. 1692. A small
Shock of an Earthquake felt in England, Holland, Flanders and France, Sept. 8.
1692. The French take and barbarously destroy Heidelberg, Spire, Manheim,
Frankendal, and other Places in the Palatinate, 1693. The Battle at
Neer-Helpen, near Landen, July 28. 1693. Charleroy taken by the French, Oct.
11. 1693. Frederick Augustus Elector of Saxony, succeeds his Brother John
George, May 7. 1694. The English Fleet, by Bombs thrown in, burn Ha^re de Grace
and Diep, two considerable Maritime Town^ in France, July 1694.
The Queen taken ill of the Small Pox, Dec. 27. 1694. and on the 29th Her
Majesty, of ever blessed Memory, departed this Life.

Casal taken from the French by the Duke of Savoy, July 9. 1695.
Namur Invested by the K. and his Army, July 9. 1695. and on Sept. 5. the
Castle was surrendered by the French to the Confederates.

Granville, Calais, and other Sea-Towns of France, Bombarded by the English
Fleet this Summer.

A Plot against His Majesty's Life, discovered Feb. 21. 169^. John King of
Poland departed this Life, Iun. 17. 1696. Aeth taken by the French, 1697.
Barcelona taken by the French, 1697. Treaty of Peace at the Palace at Reswick
in Holland; where, on the 10th of September, O. S. a Peace is concluded, and
the Articles signed by the Plenipotentiaries of England, France and Holland,
1697.
A Short SYSTEM OF Universal History. PART II. Introduction to History, and a
Character of Historians.
Written in French by M. P. L. L. de Vallemont; And Englished by Mr. Boyer, and
Mr. Savage.
CHAP. I. Of the several Benefits of History.
IT is altogether unnecessary to say any thing in Commendation of History,
since it is sufficiently known how great Advantages that Study has always
brought to such as have been destined to great Employments: But at the same
time I think my self obliged to set forth some of the Benefits thereof, and to
lay down a few Rules to be observed by those that would make a right use of it.

I. History informs us of Things past, which otherwise we should know no more
of, than we do of those to come. It Is true, Prophecy dives into Matters before
they are parted from their Causes, and which perhaps are not effected till
after a long space of Years; yet, however strong Men's Inclinations may run
that way, it must still be owned, that we are not able to give any tolerable
Account of Futurity, and that it is God alone who has formed the Chain of
Causes, that can know what Effects they will produce. Moreover, what Prophecy
commonly teaches us is so very obscure, that it seems not to care to be
understood, till the Things it treats of are come to pass: When on the
contrary, History may be easily comprehended by us, as containing Matters
handled down from our Forefathers to Posterity, and which we are commanded by
the Law of God to make Search into. Enquire of your Father, and he will inform
you: Consult your Ancestors, and they will instruct you: Deuteronomy. 32.7.

Also we could never have the least Insight into Times past were it not for
Historians, who have all along recorded the most memorable Actions happening in
their Time, and preserved the most precious Thoughts of our Ancestors, which
would otherwise have been devoured by Time, that never makes any difference
betwixt what is past, and what to come. Wherefore Cicero very indiciously terms
History, The Record of Time; The Evidence of Truth; The Life of Memory; The
Mistress of Life; and, The Courier of Antiquity.

In a Word, History gives a Being and Existence to what without it would be
stifled in the Birth; nay, it communicates a kind of Immortality to all famous
Men, whose Actions made 'em to be so much valued while they lived.

II. History is the most excellent and most entertaining Diversion that a Man
can possibly have, since it may be said particularly thereof, what was spoken
in general by a very learned Man, of all sorts of Books, viz. That they were
easy and disinteressed Masters, which might be consulted at all Times; and on
all Occasions, without Fear either of Raillery, Anger or Satyr. Hi sunt
Magistri qui nos Instruunt sine Virgis and Ferula, sine Verbis and Cholera,
sine Pannis and Pecunia. Si Accedas non Dormiunt: Si Inquirens Interr^gas non
se abscondunt: Non remurmurant, si Oberres: Cacbynnos nesciunt si Ignores.
[Rich. Bury Anglor. Regi Cancel* in suo Philobiblio.]

III. Those that are defign'd for great Employs have more need of History than
any others, for they thereby lay a Foundation in their Youth, which proves
afterward very serviceable to them, however they are preferred either in
Church or State, and which otherwise could not be effected but by a great
number of Years.

It was this Consideration that moved the Emperor Basilius to recommend so
earnestly the reading of History to his Son and Successor Leo the Philosopher,
when he says, Neglect nothing* Son, to make the History of the Ancients
familiar to you, since you may there gain with Pleasure and without Difficulty,
what has cost others so much Care and Labor. The Art of Government so
exceedingly capricious and tedious, which could otherwise be attained to only
by a long Experience and tiresome Custom, is taught by History with all the
Ease imaginable. There ^ou may meet both Virtues and Vices in their proper
Dresses, as likewise observe the various Conditions of Humane Life, together
with the parpetual Instability and Vicissitude of Things of this World, as also
the Establishment, Revolutions and Fall of Empires. In a word, you may there
observe how Virtue goes seldom unrewarded, nor Vice unpunished, and that
therefore it is the surest way to Glory and Honor to be Innocent and Just; and
to abhor Vice, which the ^^^enging Hand of God has branded with Infamy in this
World, and prepared Punishments for in the other.

The great Character History bestows on good Men, and the Ignominy it casts on
the Bad, with that Severity which neither spares the Crown nor the Mitre, are
sufficient Motives to inspire the Love of Virtue, and Ab^orrence of Vice,
Cornelius Tacitus says very well, That* it is not one of the least Benefits of
History, that Vice is always therein represented Infamous; for thereby great
Men are deterred from evil Courses, for fear of the Justice of an impartial
Historian. Let a Prince be never so great a Libertine, he will always have
regard to his Reputation, even at a time when he has the greatest Contempt for
Virtue. The Emperor Tiberius, who was immoderately cruel and voluptuous, would
no doubt have been yet more Vicious, had not he dreaded the Account his
Historian would have given of him; wherefore you see him retire at length from
the Eye of the World, and hide himself where he thought to be secure from an
Impartial Pen. Can there then be a Study more useful to Mankind, especially to
Princes, than where they find treasured up all manner of Rules for their
Conduct?

Selymus Emperor of the Turks, did not acquire that great Reputation which
almost obscured the Memory of his Predecessors, who treated History with the
greatest Contempt, but by causing Caesar's Commentaries to be Translated into
his Language; for thereby he became so true an observer of the Conduct of that
great Captain, that in a short time he Conquered the greatest part of the
Lesser Asia and Africa. Also Caesar himself did not arrive to that pitch of
Glory and Honor that we find he did, but through a violent Emulation which he
conceived at reading of the Life of Alexander; insomuch that he could not
refrain from Tears, when he considered that he had done little at an Age when
that mighty Conqueror had subdued so many Kingdoms. Yet, however great might be
Alexander's Ambition, it is certain that he had formed his design of Conquering
the World, upon reading of the Actions of Achilles in Homer, and whom he chose
all along for his Model. But not to go out of France, who does not know that
the Emperor Charles V. laid the Basis of that prudent and politic Management,
which afterward rendered him one of the greatest Princes of Europe, upon the
Life of Lewis XI. written by Philip de Comines? Nothing has so great Influence
over Mankind, as the Impressions received from the Examples of great Men, for
we are naturally apt to believe, through a good Opinion we have of our selves,
that we are capable of doing any thing that has been done before.

Somewhat like this, the Bishop of Meaux speaks of History in his excellent
Discourse addressed to the Dauphin. For, says he, though History were of no use
to other Men, yet ought Princes however to read it, since there is no better
way to bring them acquainted with the Power of Passions and Interests, as also
with the fo^ce of Time, and of good and bad Councils. Histories are made up of
nothing but Actions, all which seem chiefly to be compiled for the Use and
Imitation of great Men: If Experience be necessary to acquire that P^udence
which makes them Govern well, there can be nothing more assistant to them, than
to join Examples of Times past to the Experience of Times present. Whereas
Princes now adays scarce ever care to be convinced of any Error, but at the
Expense of their Subjects or their own Honor, when by the help of History they
might form an infallible Iudgm^nt without running any hazard.

IV. History has those Charms, that it has recovered its Readers from the most
dangerous Sicknesses, nay even when the Art of Medicine has been at loss for a
Remedy. Examples of which we have in two Kings, of Spain and Sicily, Alphonsus
and Ferdinand, both whose Maladies were so charmed by reading Livy and Curtius,
that they were restored to their Health when they had been given over by all
their Physicians.

It Is also reported, That Lorenzo de Medici, commonly styled the Father of
Letters, was recovered from a very dangerous Illness, by the Relation of a
Passage out of the History of the Emperor Conrade III. which was as follows.
This Emperor having reduced the rebellious City of Veinsberg, commanded it to
be entirely destroyed, and moreover ordered that its Inhabitants should be all
made Prisoners* except the Women only. Whereupon these Women made their humble
Suit to the Emperor, that they might save at least what they were able to carry
away; which being granted, Conrade was infinitely surpised to see them march
out with their Husbands and Children on their Backs, and moved to so much
Compassion thereby, that he immediately pardoned the whole City. It was to this
Passage that Lorenzo de Medici owed his Life, which made Bodin to cry out,
Quanquam Historia salutare est Medicamentum? [Method. ad Histor. Proemio, p. 5.

V. History is of that known Benefit in discovering the Truth of the Christian
Religion, that without the Assistance of it and Philosophy, we could never be
able to oppose the Atheists and Pirrhenians.

What we borrow from Philosophy to defend Religion with, is very considerable
and solid; for thereby* through a Contemplation of the Universe, we come to the
knowledge of a Sovereign Being which Created and Governs it, and likewise are
sufficiently convinced, that this great Work cannot possibly be Eternal.

In a word, The just and due Order of all things of this World, produces such a
Beauty and Harmony, as could not proceed but from the great Wisdom and Power of
the Almighty. A Philosopher demanding one Day of St. Anthony, who lived in the
Deserts of Appi, How he could apply himself to the Contemplation of Heaven,
without the assistance of Books? The Holy Hermit answered, This vast Globe
(meaning the World) serves me instead of a Library; and the Creatures therein
contained, are as so many legible Characters, whereby I can discover the
Omnipotence of God, and which by consequence easily disposes me to a Meditation
on his Grandeur.

St. Clement of Alexandria, being inspired with the same Thought, said, That
the World was a large Book* written by the Hand of God; consisting only of
three Leaves, which were the Heavens, Earth, and Sea.

A long time before which David teaches us, That the Heavens declare the glory
of God, Psalm 18. which no doubt made Tertullian observe that God first laid
open the Book of Nature to dispose Men for receiving the divine Writ, being
willing that they should become Disciples of Nature, before they were so of
Grace. Praemisit Deus Naturam Magistram, submissurus and Prophetiam, quo
facilius credat Prophetiae Discipulus Naturae. Tertul. de Resurrect. Carnis.

St. Bernard, who was as famous for his Learning as his Piety, declared often
to his Friends, That the Progress which he had made in the knowledge of the
Holy Scriptures, proceeded from Prayer and Meditation, to which he applied
himself in the Fields and Forests, and where he had no other guides but Oaks
and Beeches.

Those Philosophers also, who were most deeply orewhelm'd with the shades of
Paganism, have termed the World A Cabinet of Contemplation, wherein were
contained all the Curiosities and Riches of Nature, which had been so prudently
ranged and ordered by the Sovereign Wisdom. Naturae Musaeum.

We need therefore only open our Eyes to discover the Wonders of Nature
governed by an Almighty Hand; and when I affirm that Philosophy is sufficient
to convince us that the World is not Eternal, I do not mean only that of the
Schools, but also that of Nature, which is the Portion of all Men. This
Philosophy wherein we only make use of our common Sense and Reason, helps us to
comprehend the Truth of the Christian Religion by a serious Reflection on
Nature. It is that which inspires us when we say to our selves,

1. The World cannot be Eternal, because it has sensible Proofs of its varying
every Day. Mountains lessen and Valleys rise, and Rivers roll their Dregs into
the Sea, where they frequently form dry Land. The Sea likewise changes its
Shores; all which would have been no doubt established and fixed, had the World
been from all Eternity.

2. Whence proceeds the Motion of so many different Parts? Who has ordered the
Sun to make his alternative Courses through both the Hemispheres, and to
occasion Seasons by his Declension and Propinquity? Certainly this Motion does
not proceed from its Mat^er which cannot be considered but as finite,
divisible, mensurable and susceptible only of Motion from an ex^ernal Impulse.

3. Why is this Matter, of which the World is composed, capable of Motion
without which it must have tended altogether to a Chaos? How comes it to pass
that the smaller Bodies of this Matter are rather moved to one side than the
other? Why, if all moved with an equal Rapidity, are they not always followed
by one another without falling into those infinite Spaces where the Atheist
throws them? And seeing the greater Bodies do not all follow the same Track,
nor move with the same Force; as for Example, the Planets turn from West to
East, and the other Stars on the contrary from East to West; let any Body tell
us who it is that has determined and assigned these different Motions, as well
as the Quickness or Rapidity of one, and the great Slowness of the other. The
Moon passes through the Zodiac in a Month, whereas Mercury takes up 87 Days to
perform that Journey, and Venus about 224 the Sun, or the Earth rather, 365
Days; Mars twi^^ as many, and Saturn 30 Years.

Why are some of these Bodies placed above and others beneath? And how comes it
to pass that thi^ Motion continues so long? This I am sure is what the Atheists
connot give a Reason for. To say that Chance has been the cause of all these
Things, is to say nothing* For this Chance what is it, Something or Nothing? Is
it Create or Uncreate? If Created, then it must ne^cessarily have a Creator;
and if it be not Created, it must be distinct from Matter, and consequently
Eternal, Incorruptible, and therefore God.

If it be said that this Chance is nothing, then can it be only an empty Sound
without Signification; and being nothing it must by consequence be incapable of
Action.

It is after this manner, that Philosophy comes (...) the assistance of
Religion, to defend her against h^^ Enemies: When History triumphs altogether
ove^ Atheism by relating the Origin of Arts and Science^ and of all other
Things that serve either for our Necessities, Pleasures or Curiosities. She
also teaches us that not only the World is not Eternal, as the Atheis^ would
have it to be, but also that it cannot be (...) ancient as the fabulous
Egyptian Antiquities suppose it.

1. Philosophy began not to be cultivated by Persons that made an express
Profession of it till of latter date. Every body knows its Origin, and that
among the Greeks it was first taught by Pythagoras. The Moderns have brought it
to great Perfection, which no doubt it would not have had the same occasion
for, were it true that the World was Eternal.

2. Astronomy was first taught the Grecians by Thales, who received it from the
Egyptians, as Diogenes Laertius says, who wrote his Life; and moreover that
they had it from the Chaldeans. We need make no farther enquiries after it
among the Ancients, since the Word Chaldean signified the same thing with them
as Astrologer. There has been great progress made in this Art within this 200
Years.

3. Physic, which is of much greater use, was more Modern. Herodotus says that
heretofore they brought the Sick into their Market Places, and inquired of all
that passed by if they had any Receipt which would be of assistance to them.
Cato the Censor drove the Physicians out of Rome, affirming, That the Greeks
had sent those Butchers among them to Murder them.

4. Law was of no greater Date. We can only ascend in search after its Origin
from Iustinian's Code to that of Theodorus, and from thence to the XII Tables
which the Romans had from the Greeks, viz. Solon and Lycurgus, who likewise
learnt them from the Egyptians, as Plutarch observes.

If it be objected, that at some time or other a Deluge might have happened
exceeding that of Noah's, which carried off the very memory of Arts and
Sciences; I must answer by a Question, How came the Race of Mankind to escape?
This therefore cannot be, and we may conclude that the World is not Eternal.
For it would be a very strange thing that Men should for an infinity of Ages
been Gross, Barbarous, without Policy, without Laws, without Government,
without Morality, Physic, Astronomy, etc. without having the Art of Writing
down their Thoughts; and though they saw the Stars continually pass over their
Heads, never have curiosity enough to observe the Course of them, or enquire
into the Causes of Comets and Eclipses; nay, even to live without discovering
the first Elements of Physic and Philosophy, or making any progress in
Architecture, Commerce or Navigation; it is strange that none of the Ages of the
vast Eternity, should have produced Wits able to invent Mills, Printing, the
Mariners Compass, and the many other most useful things which the few Years (in
comparison of Eternity) since Noah has produced.

CHAP. II. Rules to be observed in writing History.
HIstory being a true Narration for Benefit of Posterity, interwoven with many
memorable Events either of Peace or War, ought to be attempted without Rules
and Art. An Historian is not to be guided implicitly by his Genius, how great
soever it be: And the manner after which we commonly judge of History
sufficiently shows that of all Works of the Mind, none require so great
Attention and so exact a Method.

Nevertheless the Rules I here set down, are not intended for those that shall
write History for the future, but only for Youth that shall read what is
already written. Their Judgments must be elevated and placed as it were above
the Authors they peruse, that the^ may not servilely rely upon them, and
believe whatever they have written to be unquestionable. On the other side it
is a Fault in our Imaginations to slight the Ancients, for Wit has ever been
the Growth of all Age^ and all Countries; yet at the same time it will be
acknowledged no less a Weakness to look upon what they have left us as
Miracles. We ought to treat our Ancestors neither with Submission nor Contempt,
but with a just Enquiry into their Perfections and Deserts.

As the Rules I am about to give are not of my Invention, the Public being
wholly Indebted for them to the ingenious Translator of Salust, so I shall
disclaim all pretense to any Merit thereby, it having been only my Business to
translate the learned Preface of that judicious Critic.

History consists of two Parts, I. Narration, which is the Body of it, and
whose Business is to relate impartially all remarkable Actions of this Life.
And II. Political Reflections, which are its Soul, and which are to be imitated
upon all Occasions.


1. Narration ought to be Brief and Concise, especially in Orations, History
and Epick Poetry, because a Reader there does not care to hear that which he
has already comprehended.

Scaliger has made a very false Judgment of Salust when he styles him, Omnium
Scriptorum Numerossimum; and in my Judgment the two Seneca's, Quintilian, Aulus
Gillius, Macrobius, Sidonius Apollinaris, etc. have given a much better Account
of him.

Three Things contribute to Brevity of Style, 1. Genius. 2. Art. And 3.
Language.

First, A strong and lively Genius is required that may go through with a Work,
and surmount all vulgar Eyes; the Tokens of which are to have Thoughts and
Conceptions, where Truth and Novelty are joined.

Salust was naturally bent to Brevity; and Cicero, on the contrary, to
Copiousness, which is necessary to be known, since that for want of such
Reflection, many learned Men have taken false Measures. Some, that Nature
designed to resemble Salust in his way of Writing, have nevertheless made it
their Endeavors to imitate Cicero; and others, that were born to follow
Cicero, have presumed to imitate Salust; so that by these means both have done
violence to their Genius, and lost that easy genuine Air without which it is
impossible either to move or please. Yet it is absolutely necessary that an
Author who enclines toward the Genius of Cicero, should read Salust, to
prevent his Style from running out; and on the contrary those that come nearest
Salust, should have recourse to Cicero, when their Style is like to be broken
and too concise.

To produce a complete Work, two Things are necessary.

1. Exact Composition. And 2. Careful Revisal. That is to say, neither to
compose with Negligence nor correct with Precipitation, but in both to have a
principal Regard to Art. 2. Art in the Composition prevents making use of any
Thing either foreign to the purpose, or unprofitable; though Art be oftentimes
tyrannized over by an Headstrong Genius, yet Correction always revenges its
Quarrel, and brings a too exhuberant Genius to Reason.
Whilst a Man is Composing, he may give a loose to his Genius; but when he
comes to Revise, he must have his Eyes full of Severity. At the time of a
serious ^^eflection, Art is busied in paring off Superfluities, retrenching
Excursions, and enlivening Obscurities and Flatnesses.

There is a sort of Brevity which proceeds from Chance, Whimsy, and Dryness or
Weakness of Conception or Genius; but this we cannot commend; for Brevity ought
only to be the Product of Knowledge, Reflection or Judgment.

A Writer therefore must beware of too great a Restraint as a Slavery, and too
great a Freedom as a pernicious Liberty.

Historical Narration nevertheless will admit of introducing more Circumstances
than Oratorial, because among all the Circumstances of an Action, an Orator
only makes use of those which are for his purpose: Nay, he has moreover a
liberty of feigning them, where he supposes they may be understood.

Historical or speaking Pictures.

There are two sorts of Pictures: One Dumb, as Draughts and Sculptures of all
kinds; and the other Speaking, as

History, Poetry, and Oratory.

Three Things contribute to render these speaking Pictures agreeable; 1. They
must be done after the Life. 2. They must denote the Persons by the Parts of
them that are most necessary to be known. And 3. They must always have chief
Regard to that Action which best becomes the Person they represent.


Heroes, Harangues or Speeches.

They may be abridged and made conformable to the Style of the History, which
they are made use of in, as Salust most commonly has done.

Three Duties of an Historian,

1. To des^ribe Things. 2. To represent Actions. And 3. To relate Discourses.

Thirdly, Style or Language is to be considered, either as to 1. The Action. 2.
The Ornaments. Or 3. Its Purity.

Relating to Action, it is 1. Sublime. 2. Indifferent. And 3. Low or Humble.

In regard of Ornaments, the first place is given to

1. The Indifferent. 2. The Sublime. And 3. The Low or Humble.

In regard of Purity, the chief Rank is bestowed on The Low or Humble Style.

This last Style is what an Historian ought to make use of, being least warm,
and consequently more comely, since a Mind that it is not embarassed with any
Passion, is more capable of adorning its Discourse; for that long Calm which
reigns throughout the whole Course of History, would infallibly tire instead of
pleasing us, if it were not sometimes quickened and enlivened by a briskness of
Style and variety of Figures. But at the same time others say of History, O
nari Res ipsa negat, Contenta Doceri.


An eloquent Oration, like a Race or a Combat, has an Influence over its
Auditor suitable to the force it bears; when, on the contrary, History rather
resembles a calm Walk, or to say better, a long Voyage, where if its Reader
does not meet with either Pleasure or Profit in the Way, he soon grows weary
and dissatisfied.

An Historian is obliged to set Truth in its best Light, which is an hard Task
and requires no common Capacity.

II. Politic Reflections are to be always practiced, for what good will
reading do a Man if he makes no use of it? To effect this, a Reader must
neither be swayed by ridiculous Niceties nor metaphysical Whimsies, both which
have commonly little or nothing in them.

He must not be one of those overcurious Politicians who often lose their Way
while they seek too many Roads, and who change all their Paths into Labyrinths,
by stuffing their Heads with Chimerical Notions, and preferring the false
Luster of Imagination, to the true Light of Reason. He must view things as they
are* Paint them as they seem; and in fine, judge of them according to the
Draught he has made of them. He must likewise know something of the Heart of
Man, and therefore make no slight enquiry into its Passions.

Politic Reflections may be of benefit to Posterity which often require the
same Observations; for Humane Affairs have all their Turns and Forms, and
commonly come about to the same Point where they first began.

Politics must be Just, Noble, Candid and Gene^rous; yet though they have all
these Qualifications the^ will nevertheless require no ordinary Management to
make them agreeable in History, where they ought to be ranged with a great deal
of Precaution and Prudence* But above all, Politic Reflections are to be made
conformable to the Rules of Justice and Magnanimity.

1. Three ways of making Politics go down in History.

1. By way of Relation; as, Too great Credulity was fatal to such a Prince. 2.
By way of Proposition; as, Credulity is always Pernicious to such as give
themselves up too much to it. 3. By way of Rule or Maxim; as, Men ought to
avoid being too Credulous for fear of incurring, the Hazards which always
attend that Folly.
The first of these is most conformable to the business of History, as being
less Dogmatical and more Instructive; for Political and Moral Instruct^on ought
always to appear very humble in History; yet, when Princes, Heroes, Generals
and Magistrates are introduced, they are too keep up their several Characters.
But when the Historian himself speaks, his Style is to be only Simple and
Narrative.

2. What the Historian ought farther to observe in relation to Politics.

1. He ought to make his Politics keep pace with his Narration. And 2. That
they be inseparable, and that one be made to proceed from the other.
He that shall observe these Rules, will never fail to please, although
oftentimes Declaimers seem more eloquent than Orat^rs, and Sophists more
knowing than Philosophers.

As to the rest, a Reader is to be instructed without being digsusted and
cloyed. It is necessary only to show him the Way, without leading him always by
the Hand. It is sufficient to give him a View, without obliging him to thrust
his Nose upon a Thing. And finally, the best way to make any Man learn what is
either excellent or useful, were to persuade him that he must needs know it
already, whereby he might avoid the Scandal of Ignorance, and you the
Imputation of Vanity.

Partiality, how well soever managed, will ever be prejudicial to History, and
therefore that Rock ought principally to be avoided; which may easily be, by
help of a little Justice or Knowledge. Non probandi sunt Historici qui se
suamque Gentem semper in Capitolis locant; Exteros vero and Hosts suos semper
Vituperant. Eusebius.

Thus I have furnished Historians with excellent Rules, and which ought to be
seriously perused before any attempt the reading of History, because thereby an
Authors Merit may be scanned and traced, both when he has either followed or
neglected the Precepts of Art. And whereas most are tickled by an unmerciful
Criticism on other Men's Works, these Rules will guide them rather to the
finding out of new Charms in Historians.

CHAP III. The manner of studying History. Of the Four Ancient Monarchies; and
of the different kinds of Political Government.
ALthough several Dishes be required to make up a great Feast, yet it is
certain there would be nothing more disagreeable than to serve them up in
Disorder. So it is not sufficient to have heaped up a great many Histories,
unless a Man be able to know which he should choose first, to proceed
methodically in a Study of so vast Extent.

I. The first Thing which ought to be observed to read History methodically,
would be to begin with the easiest, and proceed to the more difficult by
degrees. This Method, which we have already so heartily recommended, is what
Geometricians call Analysis.

I cannot but admire that Bodin, who composed his Method for reading History
about the Year 1566. that is, at a time when no Body ever dreamt of Geometry's
proving a Help to other Studies, should be so well acquainted with the great
Importance of it, even long before Descartes. He required an Analysis to be
first perused by the young Student of Universal History. Vt igitur plena sit
and facilis Historiarum Scientia, principio adhibeatur praestans illa
docendarum Artium Magistra quae dicitur Analysis. He farther adds, That an
Analysis is the most excellent Method that can be followed, since that by
dividing and sub-dividing a Subject into different parts, it soon leads to a
perfect Knowledge of the whole.

So that to comply with the Observations of Bodin, one must necessarily begin
with the reading of an Author who presents us only with simple* Ideas and
general Notions, which we may the easier comprehend, and where we may find
every thing ranged according to order of time, being a Chronological Account of
Events, which we commonly term The Thread of History; without which we might
soon be at a loss in the Labyrinth of so many Ages that have been from the
beginning of the World.

It would likewise be absolutely necessary never to read any of these
Abridgments before we are well versed in Chronological Tables, such as Lipsius
would have made, or such as we have spoken of before. It is unconceivable how
great assistance this would prove in the study of History. Events would then
soon place themselves in the Conception, and follow that Order in our Memories
which we have read them in: When without this Method we confound our selves,
and being once put into this disorder, we rarely or never get free of it. Which
made Bodin boldly affirm, That it was impossible for any body to comprehend the
particular System of any M^narchy, without having been first made acquainted
with the grounds of Universal History by a Chronological Table. It a non minus
errant qui singulas Historias prius Intelligere se posse putant quam universae
Historiae omniumque Temporum Ordinem ac Seriem velut in Tabula proposita
viderint, Bodin Cap. 2. p. 23.

The same Rule must be observed in reading the particular History of any
Country, where special regard must be had to the Chronology of its Kings, the
Beginning, Progress, and several Changes which have happened in that Government,
after the manner as we have hereafter expressed.

Analysis, which ought to be so strictly followed in reading of Universal
History, is no less to be observed in the Study of any peculiar History. We
must begin with that Historian first who comprehends all in few Words; next
proceed to a more copious Author; and at length we may undertake those that
have omitted nothing which might render their History complete.

The like Method is to be followed in reading particular History, which is to
begin with some very plain and easy Abridgment. Bodin would have the Study of
the Roman History to be begun by Sextus Rufus, who in ^our or five Pages gives
a general Idea of the State of Rome, even down to his Time. This he makes to
follow the Epitome of Florus, next Eutropius, and afterward Livy.

This Method of Bodin is not to be found fault with; yet that which I am about
to lay down is unquestionably more beneficial; for when I would speak of any
Monarchy, I immediately look after the several Changes which have happened in
its Government, whereof I pitch upon the most Remarkable to serve me as so many
Epochas to describe that Monarchy under. For Example, When I have a mind to
give an Idea of the Roman Empire, I divide it into Seven different Estates,
which serve as so many Ages: Then I pursue it from its very Origin or Rise,
through all its various Changes, and at lengh bring it to its Catastrophe to
perish in Germany, where it scarce now retains the shadow of what it has
formerly been. Before we read any Roman Historian, it is absolutely necessary
we should be thoroughly acquainted with all these Seven Alterations which that
Empire has undergon. Whereof The First was under its Kings. 2. Under its
Consuls. 3. Under its Emperors. 4. Under the Goths and Vandals. 5. Under the
Lombards. 6. Under the French Emperors. And 7. Under the German Emperors.


The History of the People of God under the Law, (...) what every Person ought
to be acquainted with; and whereof I have met with the most lucky Division that
can possibly be, to instruct Youth to a primary Knowledge of the Affairs of the
Jew. I consider that People under 4 Species of Governments. Which are

1. Patriarchal, under 22 Patriarchs. 2. Judiciary, under 22 Judges. 3. Regal,
under 22 Kings. and 4. Sacerdotal, during the Government of the 22 Ancestors of
our Savior Christ; as hereafter shall more at large appear.

I must own I have not had the like success in my Division of any of the
Monarchies; but still I have this to say, That I have endeavored to make none
bu^ such as were Natural, and which I have drawn either out of their Histories,
the Nature of their Governments, or the several Families that have Reigned.

After being thus prepossessed with these plain and simple Ideas, we proceed to
read History with the greatest Pleasure and Satisfaction imaginable; for then
we can easily digest all the Circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, Manners,
etc.

That our Memories may never want assistance, we should always have a Map of
the Country before us when we read any History, which may not improperly be
called Local Memory. We have already seen how useful a Chronological Table is;
and here we may be satisfied that a Geographical Map is much more necessary.
The elder Vossius said very well in the beginning of his Chronological
Dissertations, That Chronology and Geography, were two inseparable Sisters, and
the two Eyes of History, without which she must inevitably be either Blind or
very Obscure.

If I were obliged to give the Preference to one of these two, It should be to
Geography. Boden says, That if any thing be required to prepare a Man for
reading History, it must be Geography: Vt si Ars ulla Historico necessaria sit,
profecto Geographia sum necessaria Videtur. Cap. 2. page 21.

When one is thoroughly acquainted with the Time and Place, when and where
Matters have been transacted, it is almost impossible to forget them; when the
other Circumstances of History do not make the like lively Impressions.

What I have hitherto laid down for a Method in reading History, would not be
alone sufficient if any extraordinary Progress were intended. What I have still
to add, is the last part of our Method; which is to Collect all the Maxims and
Examples by way of common Place.

What I take to be a Master-stroke in the Art of reading History, is to range
under different Titles the most considerable Passages which we meet with. This
is the great Secret, and whereby we may dive in^o the profoundest Depths, and
reach the widest Exttent.

These Common Places I speak of would be of continual Assistance to us, to
guide us in the many different Courses and Occurrences of Life. We may thereby
benefit by all that the Ancients either did or said, as by the greatness of
their Designs, their Pathetical Expressions and noble Actions; for all human
Affairs may be reduced to these three Heads, which are either to Think, to Say,
and to Do. Conformable to which our Collections may be divided into three
several Books; whereof The 1. should contain the Designs. The 2. the
Expressions. And The 3. the Actions.


Each of these Books may be sub-divided into diverse Chapters, so that one might
be allotted for the Designs that relate to Politics and the Government of
States; the other for such as relate to Discipline and the Reformation of
Manners; and the Third for those that appertain particularly to the Affairs of
War.

As to Expressions, they are of several kinds, and which ought all to have a
particular Place assigned them.

Lastly, Actions may be sub-divided into Virtues and Vices, as they are to be
found in Ethics.

I have said all this only to have an Order observed in Remarks: As to the rest
every one ought to be le^^ to the bent of his Genius, and to dispose his
Studies and Observations according to his peculiar Condition and Ideas. One
whose Genius enclines him to War, will be moved at a hundred Passages, which a
Lawyer o^ Divine will take little or no Notice of. In a word, There are as many
different Minds in the World, as there are Callings and Professions.

However, he that makes these Collections, must be sure to have a principal
Regard to Time and Place.

If it were my Business here to show the Advantages of this manner of Study, it
would be easy for me prove that a Man must infallibly grow learned by the
observing of it, and that there have always been a great number of excellent
Proficients in all Sciences, who have arrived to those degrees of Knowledge
merely by a Methodical Common Place-book, for there a Man at once reaps the
Benefit of what had cost him before so many Years Labor.

Not to interrupt the course of his Reading, he need not immediately enter his
Remarks, but make some short Notes on the Margin of the Book he reads* and
afterward transcribe them into his Common Places, which will produce another
Advantage; for by this second Reading he must undoubtedly engraft them the
deeper into his Memory.

But here a great deal of Care must be taken to reject Minutia, Trifles, which
contribute nothing to the Benefit of the Public; which ought to be the chief
end proposed in reading History. Hoc est illud praecipue in cognitione rerum
Salubre and Frugiferum, omnis te exempli documenta in illustri posita Monumenta
intueri: Vnde tibi tuaeque Reipublicae quod imitere capias; inde faedum exitu,
quod vites. [Liv. lib. 1. Hist.

I would here conclude this Chapter, did I not foresee two Observations which
it is necessary Youth should be acquainted with.

OBSERVATION I. Upon the Four Monarchies.
There is a very considerable Error crept into Chronology and History which
relates to the placing of the Four Monarchies, for they are commonly thought to
have succeeded each other immediately. As first, the Assyrian Empire is
supposed to end with Sardanapalu^, and then the Median to succeed to all the
Power of the Assyrians, which is not true; for although A^baces caused the
Medians to revolt from Sardanapalus, whom he consequently freed from the Yoke
of the Assy^ians, yet the Assyrian Empire continued after this for near 150
Years, to the time that Cyrus the Great ruined it by the taking of Babylon.
What remained of the Assyrian Monarchy after the death of Sardanapalus, was
termed the second Assyrian Empire; which although it was altogether unknown to
the Greeks, yet it is nevertheless famous in Holy Scripture.

The like Fault is committed in regard to the Mede^ and Persians, of which the
Bishop of Meaux speaks thus.

As to what relates to the Monarchy of the Medians, which the greatest part of
Profane Historians place in the second Rank, and separate from that of the
Persians, it is certain that the Holy Scripture unites them together; and over
and above the Authority of these Holy Books, the bare Order of Matters require
it should be so. The Medes, before Cyrus, although they were powerful and very
considerable, yet were they totally eclipsed by the Grandeur of the Babylonish
Kings; but Cyrus having conquered their Kingdom, by the united Force of the
Medes and Persians, and to which afterward he came to be the lawful Successor,
as we have observed after Zenophon; that Great Empire, whereof he was the
Founder, ought reasonably to take its Name from those two Nations, although the
Glory of Cyrus has occasioned that of the Persians to be preferred. Also it may
well be imagined that, before the War with Babylon, the Median Kings having
extended their Conquests all over the Greek Colonies of Lesser Asia, might have
been exceedingly famous among the Greeks, who consequently might have
attributed the Empire of all Asia to them, inasmuch as they were then
acquainted with no other Eastern Kings; for the Kings of Nineveh and Babylon,
who have been more Potent, have scarce been so much as mentioned in those
Remains we have of the Greek Historians; when all that was considerable from
the time of Sardanapalus to that of Cyrus, was wholly ascribed by them to the
Medes.

Bodin imploys all the 7th Chapter of his Method to refute those that make the
Four Empires of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Romans, to succeed
immediately to each other, and who likewise pretend that those Monarchies were
figured to us by the Four Beasts, and the Statue composed of Four Metals,
spoken of by the Prophet Daniel, and which they also affirm are to continue to
the end of the World. But here Bodin finds no great difficulty to demonstrate
that the Roman Empire, which was the last of the Four, came to a Period under
Augustulus in the Year 475. and that from thenceforward it was never more able
to re-establish it self; for it is most absurd to imagine the present German
Empire to be the same with the Roman, as appears by the ancient and modern
Bounds; for the Roman Empire in the time of Trajan, according to Sixtus Rufus,
was bounded on the North by the Danube and the O^cades, on the West by the Isle
of Cadiz, on the East by the Euphrates, and on the South is contained all that
was then known to be habitable in Africa; to which Trajan added moreover his
Conquests in Mesopotamia and Arabia Felix; whereas at this Day what is called
the Empire of the Romans, scarce comprehends the hundredth part of that. All
Asia, as every Body knows, is now under the Turk, Persian, M^gul, etc. and Rome
has nothing left to boast of in Africa, England, France, Spain, Portugal,
Denmark, etc. with all Greece, and the neighboring Countries; as likewise
Sicily, Sardinia, etc. are now fell off from that Empire, and are long since
become New States, under several potent and formidable Kings. Italy, which was
the first Patrimony of the Roman Empire, is at this Day subject to diverse
Princes; and Rome it self under the absolute Dominion of the Pope.

Father M. Lomejer has lately maintained, That the Four Sovereign Monarchies,
boasted of by so many Authors, did not take up all that space of time, from the
building of the Tower of Babel to their supposed Conclusion; for he pretends
that there were other Monarchies both before and after these, as likewise
several considerable Empires which flourished at the same time with them.

The Image which Nebuchodonosor saw in a Dream, did not foretell the Four
pretended Monarchies, seeing that David, who expounded this Dream, says, That
the first should be the Empire of Nebuchodonosor, whose Reign would be the most
Glorious, for that afterward the others would decrease by little and little
till they came to be of small Note. And moreover the Assyrian Empire was in its
declension, when Daniel expounded Nebuchodonosor's Vision.

By all that has been observed we may collect, That those who lay down the
Successions of the Four Monarchies for a Ground of Universal History, may build
upon a deceitful Foundation.

OBSERVATION II. Upon the several kinds of Government.
As there is frequent occasion to speak of Empires, Monarchies, Republics,
Aristocracies, etc. in History; and as it may happen that they may not always
be rightly understood, I do not think it amiss to give some general Ideas of
them; and first of

I. Theocracy, which is when a State is governed by the sole Power and Will of
God. For Example; The ancient Government of the Jews was a The^cracy, as
Josephus observes; for God there administered all Matters relating to a
Sovereignty. For 1. He gave them Laws which were either Political, Ceremonial
or Moral. 2. He denounced War, ordered their Camps, and named their Generals.
3. He created their Magistrates, appointed them Judges even to Readiness time, who
were then, as it were, his Viceroys; and moreover it was by his Order that
Samuel consecrated Saul King of Israel.


Thus we see God was pleased to be a Monarch and Sovereign, Judge and Arbiter
over the Jews; but this Theocracy or Divine Government lasted only to the time
of Saul, when that State became Monarchical.

There was formerly a sort of imaginary Theocracy at Athens, during the time
that Medon and Nileus, Sons of Codrus, disputed that Government between them;
for the Athenians having suffered much by that War, would by no means
afterward admit a King among them, and therefore declared Jupiter sole King of
the People of Athens. It was about the same time that the Jews requested a King
of God.

II. Monarchy is when a State is governed by the Supreme Power of one King,
such as France, England, Spain, etc.

III Despotick Government is where a Prince is accountable to none for what he
does: Such as this, is the Government of the Grand Signior, etc.

IV. Aristocracy is a Political Government, managed by a set number of Nobles;
Venice, Genoa, etc. have this kind of Government.

V. Democracy is a Government where the People have all the Authority. Old Rome
and Athens flourished under this kind of Republic.

VI. Oligarchy is the Government of a Few; of which kind at p^^^ent, are Venice
and Genoa.

VII. Ochlocracy is where the Mob dispose of all at pleasure.

CHAP. IV. Divisions of History.
THERE are great Disputes among the Schools how to divide History; but we do
not think fit to be engaged in either of their Quarrels, looking upon them as
frivolous and of no consequence; and therefore content our selves with affirming

1. That Iustus Lipsius, [Epist. 61. Cent. Miscel.] who divides History into
(...) and (...), that is, true, and fabulous or Poetical History, is not to be
followed, inasmuch as Poetical Fictions and Relations have nothing in the least
to do in what we call History. Aristotle, de re Poetica, says, That History
differs from Poetry, in that the former relates Things as they truly are or
have been; and on the contrary, the latter only represents what they might or
ought to be.

2. That Bodin is not to be imitated in placing natural History, which properly
appertains to Physic, among the Species of History.

3. That Keckerman, who examined so nicely into these foregoing great Men,
instead of reforming them, falls of a sudden into Grammatical Trifles and
Logical Punctilio's, which will be regarded no more by Men of sound Sense than
his tedious Divisions and Sub-divisions of History, in which it is impossible
to follow him without quickly losing Sight of him. We have endeavored to take
a more direct Course, which is by dividing History into 1. Ecclesiastical. And
2. Civil.


Ecclesiastical History informs us of what has happened in the State of Religion.
And

Civil History gives an Account of Occurrences in the Civil State. This
Division is founded upon the admirable Theology of St. Austin, in his Method of
dividing the Holy Books and all the History of the Church. He says, That there
have always been two Cities in the World, which are the City of God, and the
City of the World, and which are remarked in these two Brothers, Abel and Cain,
whereof Abel is the Image of the Citizens of God, and Cain of those of the
World; the former the Younger, the latter the Elder; because Man did not become
a Citizen of Heaven, but through Grace, when he was born a Citizen of the
World. [ St. Austin in Psalm. 61. de Civitate Dei, lib. 15. cap. 1.

Thus all History consists only in representing to us the different Events and
Passages which have ever happened in these two opposite Cities.

The History which treats of the City of God has been ever carefully preserved
in the World, and is divided into the Church of the Jews; and the Church of the
Christians, of the New Testament. The Christian Church may be sub-divided into
several Particulars; as the Churches of every Patriarchate, Kingdom, Province,
Diocese, etc.

The History which treats of the City of the World is the Civil, which may be
divided into the Histories of the Monarchies and Republics that have been
before our Savior Christ, and the History of the Monarchies and Republics
that have come after him. Every Monarchy and every Republic compose many
particular Histories.

Divisions of History.
Universal History comprehends what has happened In the City of God. Universal
History comprehends what has happened In the City of the World. 1. The City of
God, under The Old Testament. 1. The City of God, under The New Testament. The
New Testament, The Latin Church, etc. The New Testament, The Greek Church, etc.
2. The City of the World, comprehends Monarchies and Republics before Ies.
Christ. and 2. The City of the World, comprehends Monarchies and Republics
after Jesus Christ.
To be convinced of the Necessity of thus dividing History, in relation both to
the Church and to Monarchies, we are to remember that Maxim which says, That we
must never wander out of the Road in this Study: As also, that the principal
Design of God Almighty, in the Creation of the World, was the Foundation,
Conservation and Sanctification of his Church; likewise, that the World
subsists by no other Means but by those of the Church; and moreover, that
whatever is excellent and admirable either in the Establishment or Revolution
of Empires, is chiefly occasioned by the Church.

If this be so, it is necessary of course to have Ecclesiastical Matters keep
pace with those of Monarchies, and not to separate the History of the City of
God, from that of the City of the World. This the Bishop of Meaux speaks
admirably well of in his Treatise of Universal History. These Monarchies (says
he) have for the most part a necessary connection with the History of the
People of God, for God made use of the Assyrians and Babylonians to chastize
his People; of the Persians to re-establish them; of Alexander and his first
Successors to Protect them; of the famous Antiochus and his Successors to keep
them Employed; and of the Romans to Defend them against the Kings of Syria, who
were then ready to destroy them. Under the Romans the Jews continued to the
coming of Jesus Christ, whom, when they had Slighted and Crucified, these same
Romans gave their Assistance (though without de^igning it) to the divine
Vengeance, to exterminate this ungrateful Nation. God, who had then determined
to gather together a new People from all parts of the Earth, first ranged them
under the Dominion of the Roman Empire, which afterward proved the principal
means to increase the course of the Gospel. Though this same Roman Empire
persecuted this new People for above 300 Years, yet that Persecution served
only t^ confirm the Christian Faith, and to make it shine the brighter by the
Fortitude and Patience of its Professors. But at length this Empire, finding it
had to deal with something more invincible than it self, was forced to yield,
and receive into its Bosom that very Church, which before it had so long and so
cruelly persecuted; whence it followed that those Emperors did all that lay in
their Power to make that Church Universally acknowledged, which Jesus Christ
had founded; and Rome became thenceforward Metropolis of the Spiritual Empire.
Also when the time was come that the Roman Power, which had vainly boasted it
self of Eternity, was to undergo the Fate of other Empires, Rome, though become a
Prey to Barbarians, yet preserved its ancient Grandeur by means of Religion;
for those Nations, who had Conquered the Romans, having by little and little
softened their Manners by the observation of Christian Piety, their Kings
thought none of their Titles so glorious, as that of being Protectors of the
Christian Church.

Thus the Empires of the World have been serviceable to Religion, and have
preserved the People of God; wherefore that same God which had caused his
Prophets to foretell the diverse Conditions of his People, made them also
Prophecy of the Succession of Empires. You are acquainted with those places
where Nebuchodonosor was marked out to Punish the Pride of the People,
especially of the Jews, who approved themselves so ungrateful toward their
Creator. You have also (no doubt) observed Cyrus named 200 Years before his
Birth, to re-establish the People of God, and to chastize the Arrogance of
Babylon. The destruction of Nineveh likewise was not foretold with less
certainty. Daniel in his wonderful Visions has briefly, but fully represented
to us the Babylonish Empire, together with that of the Medes, Persians and
Greeks. The Blasphemies and Persecutions of Antiochus, were also Prophesied of,
as well as the miraculous Victories the People of God gained over that cruel
Tyrant. In these Prophets you may find all these famous Monarchies come to
nothing by little and little, and the new Empire of Jesus Christ to be so
expressly Uncharacterized, that there is no reason to doubt of its being meant, as
by Name, of the Kingdom of the most High; the Kingdom of the Son of Man, etc.
being Pronounced to be a Kingdom that should subsist even in the midst of the
Ruin of all others and to which alone Eternity was promised.

God therefore, who made use of so many different Nations to Chastize, Employ,
Enlarge or Protect his People, having a mind to be known for the Author
thereof, discovered the great Secret to his Prophets, and caused them to
foretell it before he put it in Execution. Whereupon these Empires, being made
Partners with the Designs of God, their Fate has been foretold by the same
Oracles of the Holy Spirit, which Prophesied of the Succession of the faithful
People.

Nothing demonstrates better the necessary Relation between Sacred and Profane
History, than this excellent Discourse of the Bishop of Meaux, where we may
observe the proceedings of God in the Revolution of Empires, and by what means
the Almighty Wisdom brings his Ends about, even in those Matters where we think
either our Prudence or Policy has had the larger share. I would gladly have all
Youth learn by Heart as much, at least, of this admirable Discourse, as we have
just mentioned; for thereby they may be able to unravel (if I may so say) all
the Intrigues betwixt God and Man, and discover the first Principles of all
Affairs which History has handed down to us. Profane Historians have always
filled us with confused Ideas; but the Bishop of Meaux has demonstrated the
Hand of God to have set all the Springs of Causes at work, and that for the
peculiar end of Preserving and Sanctifying his People. Men, misguided by their
Passions, think all must be related in History that contributes to satisfy
either their Avarice or Ambition; but they are deceived, for like Children they
only see the Wheels of the Movements, without being able to guess at the
Mechanism and Causes of them. The Sanctification of the Church, is the secret
Spring of all that has happened most considerable in the World from its Creation;
and the Fall and Rise of Empires is the Mechanism of the Almighty.

Although we cannot always discover what share God has had in certain Affairs,
yet it must never be denied that he has had any. Who could ever have imagined
that the Grandeur of the Roman Empire, which we commonly look upon as an effect
of the great Wisdom and Valor of the Romans, should have ever contributed
toward the publication of the Gospel, and the glory of the Church?

In a word, there might have been only one History, which should have been that
of the City of God, where Empires and Dominions might have been brought in as
so many Incidents and Episodes, which have only collateral Relation to the
History of the Church. Nevertheless, as the Devil will always have a share in
humane Affairs; and that S. Austin, together with the Holy Scriptures,
attribute to him a Power over the Kingdoms of the World; we divide History into
Ecclesiastical for the Affairs of the Church, and into Civil for the Affairs of
Empires and Republics. We make no use of the Word Profane, as being improper
for the History of Christian Kingdoms, whose Kings are the Protectors and
Cherishers of the Church.

This I presume may be sufficient to justify my preferring this Division of
History, to that of all others which have treated on the same Subject.

ARTICLE I. The Authority of the History of The People of God, contained in the
Books of the Old and New Testament.
THE History of the Jews is contained in the Books of the Old Testament, which
is sufficient to convince any Christian that it is unquestionable, and will
never admit of any Doubt. Yet it is not to my purpose to quote any Fathers
hereupon, or to show what they have advanced, in their Disputes against the
Pagans, to prove the Truth and Divinity of the Bible, those Matters being to be
met with in the Books of such Doctors as have writ upon that Subject.

Nevertheless, as it is chiefly at Genesis that the Deists and Atheists level
their Criticisms, it would not be amiss to say something in vindication of that
Holy Book, and the rather, because the History therein contained being once
established, all the other parts of Religion necessarily follow on course.

1. Then it is certain that Moses was Author of the Book of Genesis. Nay more
positive [says du Pin in the first Tome of his History of Ecclesiastical
Writers, speaking of this Book] than that either Homer was Author of the Iliads
and Odysses, or Herodotus or Thucydides of those Histories that are ascribed to
them. The Holy Bible (continues he afterward) teaches me that Moses was Author
of the Pentateuch. Thus are the Five Books of Moses called, of which Genesis is
the First. Jesus Christ (proceeds Dupin) and the Apostles have assured me as
much; ancient Authors concur in the same Opinion, and all other People agree
with them, etc. We may find in the same Book a number of Witnesses to evince
this Truth, of which some were Jews, others Christians and others Pagans; all
which positively affirm that Moses writ the Book of Genesis and all the rest of
the Pentateuch.

2. Moses, without dispute, was a much more ancient Writer than any of those
Authors who have acquired so great Reputation in the World, and procured Greece
the Title of The Mother of Sciences and Arts; for he lived near 500 Years
before Homer, 800 before the Philosopher Thales, who writ the first concerning
Nature; 900 before Pythagoras, and above 1100 before either Socrates, Plato or
Aristotle, who have been the most celebrated and chief Masters of all the
Wisdom of Greece. [ Preface to the French Translation of Genesis.]

3. It is true that Moses writ the History of the Creation a long time after
it; since that he writ Genesis, it may be, about the Year of the World 2550.
But this ought not to gravel any Man of Sense, for when once he has conceived
that M^ses foresaw future Things, through the Spirit of God which revealed them
to him, it will not be hard to believe, that he was also Inspired with those
that were past and before his Days.

This History also may be very well established, without having any recourse to
Revelation; for it is possible Moses might have said to those of his Time, I am
resolved to write of the Transactions from the beginning of the World to this
Day; and of which, I believe, no Body can be better informed than my self; for
Amram my Father has often said to me, Son, I will relate to you all the History
of the World down even to us, according as I have learnt it from Levi my
Grandfather, who had what he told me from Isaac his Grandfather, with whom he
lived 33 Years. And as for what relates to Isaac, he might have heard all what
he told Levi from Sem, with whom he lived also 50 Years. Now nothing can be
more probable, than that Sem might say to Isaac after this manner; You may
safely believe what I tell you about the Deluge, since I have been an
Eyewitness of all I pretend to know. And you ought likewise to believe me,
when I acquaint you about the Creation of the World, and of all what relates to
Adam, since I lived near 100 Years with Methusalem, my Great Grandfather, who
learnt all these Matters from Adam himself, with whom he lived 243 Years. So
that between Isaac and Adam there are but two Persons, Mathusalem and Sem; and
then between Isaac, and Moses his Father, there is only one more, who is Levi.
Insomuch that to speak plainly, without having Recourse to Supernatural Proofs,
never any History deserved greater Credit than that of Genesis.

A TABLE Of the Hereditary and Domestic Traditions of the Patriarchs, who
might reasonably be presumed to Instruct one another from Adam even down to
Moses.
Born in the Year of the World. Lived Years. Died in the Year of the World.
Adam lived 143 Years with 1. 930. 930. Mathusalem lived 98 Years with 687. 969.
1656. Sem, who lived 50 Years with 1558. 600. 2158. Isaac, who lived 33 Years
with 2108. 180. 2288. Levi, who lived a long time with 2255. 137. 2392.

Amram Grandson of Levi, whom no doubt he had seen; since this Amram was Father
of Moses, who was born only 41 Years after the Death of Levi.

It is certain that Moses writ nothing but what was within the Memory of Man,
since he was only removed from Adam about Four or Five Generations. Between
Adam and Isaac there are but two Persons, Methusalem and Sem; and between Isaac
and Amram the Father of Moses, there is but one, who is Levi.

It follows therefore that Adam, Methusalem, Sem, Isaac, Levi, and Amram the
Father of Moses, have successively conversed with and instructed each other in
the History of the World (which was then only that of their several Families)
especially at a time when there were no other Histories which Men might apply
themselves to, or divert themselves with.

It is not my Design here to confute the several Objections which the Enemies
both of the Jewish and Christian Religion have raised against the Pentateuch,
and other Books of the Bible. That is altogether foreign to my purpose, and
would engage me so deep in Theological Disputes, that I should quickly lose
Sight of my Introduction to History. Any one may be satisfied by Monsieur
Huetius Bishop of Auranches, his learned Treatise concerning Evangelical
Demonstration; or the famous Father Simon's Book of the Inspiration of the
Sacred Writers, what might be answered to the frivolous Arguments which
Spinosa, who lived some short time in Holland, brought in his trifling Treatise
called Tractatus Theologico-Politicus, against the Truth and Divinity of the
Holy Bible. This Author, though born a Jew, falls nevertheless very severely upon
Judaism, without showing at the same time any great kindness for Christianity.
So that we may reasonably infer, That his Design was to abolish all Religion,
particularly the Jewish and Christian, and establish Atheism and Libertinism,
leaving every Body to their liberty of believing what they pleased, providing
at the same time they proved no Disturbance to the Commonwealth. But Father
Simon has sufficiently demonstrated, That this Spinosa was a Blockhead, and
that he understood neither the Critics of the Scripture, nor the Learning of
the Jews.

In a Word* what I have said particularly of Genesis, may suffice to Imprint in
us a more than ordinary Idea of the Authority and Divinity of this Book, which
is the sole Foundation of all the rest of the Bible.

The Order of the Books of the Old and New Testament.
First, the Old Testament consists of 45 Books.

I. Genesis comprehends the History of the Creation of the World, the Lives of
the Patriarchs, the Deluge, the Genealogy of the Offspring of Noah down to
Joseph, and, in short, all the History of 2369 Years.

II. Exodus, so called from its giving an Account of the coming of the People
of Israel out of Egypt, contains likewise the Transactions of Moses in the
Desert; how God gave the Laws of the Decalogue to the People* and whatever
happened during the space of 145 Years, from the Death of Joseph to the building
of the Tabernacle.

III. Leviticus, which contains the Laws, Ceremonies and Sacrifices of the
Jewish Religion; the perpetual Fire, distinguishing Beasts, clean from unclean;
and many other Things, of which the Inspection and Management belonged
peculiarly to the Levites.

IV. Numbers, where is to be found the numbering of the People of Israel after
they came out of Egypt, with their History of 39 Years till they went into the
Desert.

V. Deuteronomy, that is, The Second Law; not that Moses then gave a different
Law from what he had before published on Mount Sinai, but because he therein
renewed it to the Children of such as died in the Desert.

These are the Five Books of Moses, called the Pentate^ch, and which contain
the History of 2552 Years and an half, computed from the Creation of the World.

VI. Joshua. It Is commonly thought Joshua himself was Author of this Book. It
comprehends the History of 17 Years, to be reckoned from the death of Moses to
that of Joshua.

VII. Judges. It is not certainly known who compiled this Book, though some
ascribe it to Samuel. It represents the Republic of the Jews under the
Dominion of Judges, counting from the death of Joshua to that of Sampson. It
contains a Series of History of, it may be, 317 Years; that is to say, from the
Year of the World 2570 to 2887. Therein the Israelites are to be found groaning
under very severe Hardships, God having delivered them over to the Power of
their Enemies, for the Punishment of their Idolatries.

VIII. Ruth. This Book, whose Author is not known, contains an Example of
uncommon Piety, and of the singular Providence of God. Ruth, a Moabitish Woman,
being not willing to forsake her Mother-in-Law, follows her till she comes into
her own Country, where God so employs his Providence for the Welfare of Ruth,
that she marries for her second Husband, Boas a very rich Man of that Country,
and becomes Mother of Obed, Grandfather of David, from whom our Savior Jesus
Christ descended according to the Flesh. There is no doubt but this History of
Ruth happened in the time of the Judges. It Is said to be during the
Administration of Samgar, about 28 Years after the death of Joshua.

IX. The first Book of Samuel contains all that passed under the Governments of
Heli and Samuel, as likewise under the Reign of Saul, for about the space of
101 Years; that is, from the Year of the World 2848, to 2949.

X. The second Book of Samuel comprehends all the Reign of David during 40
Years.

XI. The First Book of Kings contains the History of Solomon's Reign, as
likewise how his Kingdom was divided after his Death. Afterward it treats of
Four Kigns of Judah. There is in this Book a Series of History, for the space of
126 Years.

XII. The Second Book of Kings contains the several Reigns of 12 Kings of
Israel, to the Destruction of that Kingdom; and of 16 Kings of Judah, to the
Captivity of Babylon. This Book also relates wonderful Things of Elijah, and
Elisha his Companion. It contains in all the History of 308 Years.

The Author of the First and Second Books of Kings is unknown; but all together
include the space of 597 Years.

XIII. The First Book of the Paralipomenes or Chronicles.

XIV. The Second Book of the Paralipomenes or Chronicles. These two Books are
so named, because they contain the Acts and other Circumstances which had been
omitted in the foregoing Historical Books. This Second ends at the Year of the
World 3468. where ended likewise the 70 Years of Captivity, when Cyrus gave
Liberty to the People of Judah to return into their own Country, to build their
Temple and the Walls of Jerusalem. It Is commonly thought that Esdras was Author
of these two Books.

XV. The First Book of Esdras, according to the common Opinion, was written by
the Person whose Name it bears. It contains the History of the Captivity of the
Jews, with their Deliverance and Re-establishment in Judea, from the first Year
of Cyrus his Reign to the 20th of Artaxerxes, sirnam'd the Long-handed: All
which comprehends the space of 28 Years, computing from the Year of the World
3468, to 3550.

XVI. The Second Book of Esdras was compiled by Nehemiah. It begins at the 20th
Year of Artaxerxes, and continues even to the beginning of the Reign of Darius
his Son, sirnam'd the Bastard; which comprehends the History of the Jews during
31 Years, and extends to the Year of the World 3581.

XVII. Tobit. There are those that are of Opinion that Tobit, the Father and
the Son, were the Compilers of their own History; but this carries no Authority
along with it. Tobit was one of those Israelites that was transported out of
Samaria by King Senacherib. This Book includes several great Examples of
Virtue, and excellent Principles of Morality. You may there observe Tobit
faithful to God, even under strange Trials. His Charity; the Care he had to
bury the Dead; his Patience after he had lost his Sight; and finally his
admirable Instructions of Piety to his Son. Tobit, the Son, informs us, with
what Dispositions we are to engage in Marriage. In a word, the Providence of
God toward all those that put their Trust in him, shines throughout the whole
course of this Book.

XVIII. Judith. The Author of this Book is by no means known. Huetius was of
Opinion, That it was writ during the Captivity in Babylon; though the History of
Judith, related in this Book, happened, according to the Opinion of the Learned,
before this Captivity. Thus it is thought that this wonderful Expedit^on of
that Pious Widow, who was 64 Years old when she cut off Holofernes's Head, was
transacted after King Manasses was Reestablished. Judith lived 41 Years after
this bold Action, that is to say, to the Year of the World 3389. when she was
109 Years of Age.

XIX. Esther. The History of Esther hapen'd under the Reign of Darius Son of
Histaspes. It is Ahasuerus who is all along mentioned in this Book. The
Composure of it is attributed to Mordecai; but it appears to me that Esther
might also have had a hand in it.

XX. Job. It is thought that this Book was first written in Arabic, and
afterward Translated into Hebrew by Moses. The History of Job can by no means
be a Fiction; the Persons and Nations therein mentioned by their proper Names;
the several Testimonies of Tobit, Ezekiel, and S. James, together with the
Sentiments of the ancient Fathers, ought to convince us that this Story is
true. Job was either before Moses, or else at the same time with him; and this
History probably happened during the Israelites being in the Desert, because
there is no mention made in it of the written Law.

XXI. The Psalms. These are commonly ascribed to David, although there be many
that are none of his, and which have been written a long time after his Death,
as well by Esdras as other Prophets.

XXII. The Proverbs of Solomon. This Book was Composed by him whose Name it
bears, and contains excellent Precepts of Life, as well in what relates to the
Service of God, as our duty toward our Neighbor.

XXIII. Ecclesiastes also belongs to Solomon. This Book decries perfectly the
Vanity of the greatest Enjoyments in this World.

XXIV. The Canticles, or Song of Songs, is also of Solomon. This Book is
altogether Mystical. It describes in a very lively manner the incomprehensible
Love of Christ toward the Church, his Spouse, as likewise the Churches return
to Christ. S. Ierom observes that among the Jews, none were suffered to read
this Book till they had attained the Age of 30 Years; so that we may say with
this Father, That Solomon writ his Proverbs for those that were just entered in
the Paths of Piety; his Ecclesiastes for such as were somewhat advanced: But
for his Canticles, they required a Mind altogether elevated, and disengaged
from the Clogs of this World.

XXV. The Book of Wisdom. This Book contains the Spirit, and many other Things
of Solomon; although in all likelihood he was none of the Author of it. It may be
divided into 3 Parts: 1. Until the VII. Chapter, it is an Exhortation to the
Study and Love of Wisdom. 2. To the X. Chapter, it Explains the Origin of
Wisdom. 3. All the rest, Describes the Effects and Productions of Wisdom.

XXVI. Ecclesiasticus was Composed in imitation of Solomon's Ecclesiastes, as
may appear by the great number of Moral Sentences, almost the same with his.
Jesus Son of Sirach writ it in Hebrew, whereof S. Ierom says he has seen a Copy.

The Greater Prophets.
XXVII. Isaiah, of these, is the Chief and most Excellent. He himself has
collected into one Volume all the Prophecies he made under the several Reigns
of Osias, Ioathan, Ahaz, Ezechias, and even to the time of Manasses, by whose
Command, according to the Tradition of the Jews, he was cruelly Sawed asunder
with a wooden Saw.

XXVIII. Jeremiah Prophesied for 45 Years, to wit, from the third Year of King
Josias, to the fifth after the Taking of Jerusalem, and Destruction of the
Temple; that is to say, from the Year of the World 3375. to 3420. and 584 Years
before the Birth of Christ. He was of the Sacerdotal Race. He always declared
after an undaunted manner, against the Irregularities of his Time. His Style,
according to S. Ierom, is Mean as to Words, but Majestic in its Thought. The
Prophet Baruch was his Secretary, who in Collecting the several Prophecies
which Jeremiah has made upon diverse Occasions, observed no order of Time. This
Holy Prophet was Stoned by some impious Jews in Egypt, who were not able to
bear with the freedom of his Admonitions.

XXIX. Baruch was Secretary and Disciple to Jeremiah, which does not hinder but
he might be of Noble Birth, as Josephus says he was. He says himself, that he
wrote this Book of Prophesies in Babylon, but it is not exactly known at what
time.

XXX. Ezechiel, of the Sacerdotal Race, was Transported under Iechonias into
Babylon, where he began to Prophecy the fifth Year after his Captivity. His
Book is all over full of Riddles and Figures, and which it is thought he
affected, to the end that the Caldeans might not be acquainted with the
condition of Affairs among the Jews. He foretold the Deliverance of this
People, the Reign of Messiah, the Calling of the Gentiles, the establishing of
the Church, its Victories, and the Downfall of its opposers.

XXXI. Daniel, descended of a Royal Stock, was carried, when but an Infant, a
Captive into Babylon by Nebuchodonozor. He was Educated in the Learning of the
Caldees for 3 Years. It was about this time that he delivered Susanna, accused
by the two Vicious Elders; and that but a little after he began to Prophecy.
The Jews will not allow him a place among the Prophets, because (say they) he
lived in the Babylonish Court, rather like a Courtier than a Person inspired by
God; nevertheless Jesus Christ himself, styles him a Prophet.

The Twelve Minor Prophets.
XXXII. Hoseas writ all the Prophesies that go under his Name. S. Ierom finds
his Style Pathetic and Sententious. He Prophesied under 4 Kings, viz. Josiah,
Ioathan, Ahaz and Hezechias. In his Prophecies he takes upon himself the Person
of God. He quarrels with, punishes and repudiates the Synagogue, which he
represents as if taken in Adultery, and places the Church in its stead. Thus he
foretells: 1. The Reprobation of the Synagogue, and the Calling of the Church.
2. He reproves Idolatry and the other Crimes of the Israelites. And 3. He
promises Mercy and Salvation to all such as shall be reclaimed.

XXXIII. Joel. It is no easy matter to find out what time he Prophesied. He
foretells the Destruction of Jerusalem; and under the Symbol of that City, he
speaks of the Destruction of the whole World and the last Judgment.

XXXIV. Amos was a Shepherd or Herdsman of Tecoa, a poor Town. God, who never
makes use of slender Abilities, chose this Person for a Prophet in the Time of
Josias King of Judah, and Jeroboam, Son of Ioas King of Israel, two Years before
that Earthquake, which happened toward the 23d Year of Iosias's Reign, about the
Year of the World 3216. and 788 Years before the Birth of Christ.

XXXV. Obadiah. It is not known about what time he Prophesied. It is thought to
be this Prophet that is mentioned in the III. Book of Kings, Chapter the 18.
and Verse 4. who was Governor of Ahabs House, and who nourished the hundred
Prophets in a Cave. Of all the Prophets, his Prophecy is the shortest, although
for the Mysteries it contains, it yields in nothing to the others Prophecies,
says S. Ierom.

XXXVI. Jonas whom God sent to Niniveh to Preach Repentance, not unlikely under
the Reign of Phul, which we believe to be Father of Sardanapalus, about the
Year of the World 3197. and 807 Years before the Birth of Christ. He was the
only Prophet that God sent among the Gentiles. He himself was Author of the
Account of his Mission to Nineveh. He was Native of Geth-Checher, a Town
belonging to the Tribe of Zabulon in Galilee. This shows either the Ignorance
or Malice of the Pharisees, when they said to Nicodemus, Art thou also of
Galilee? Search and look, for there was never any Prophet came out of those
Parts, John 7.52.

XXXVII. Micah Prophesied under the Reign of Ioathan, Ahaz and Hezechias. He
has the Character of Wit and Style, like to that of Isaias. He inveys
vehemently against the Idolatry, as well of the Two as the Ten Tribes. He
proclaims the Ruin of Samaria and the Captivity of those of Jerusalem by the
Assyrians and Caldeans* and he also foretells their deliverance, and that Christ
shall be born in Bethlem.

XXXVIII. Nahum, whose Country is unknown, foretells the Destruction of Nineveh
by the Caldeans, because that People had persecuted the People of God. It is
likewise a little uncertain where he Prophesied.

XXXIX. Habakkuk. Neither his Country, nor the time when he Prophesied is
known. There would be no great difficulty to know the time, providing this
Habakkuk were the same that the Angel carried by the Hair of the Head to
Daniel's Den; but which the Learned will by no means have to be.

XL. Zephania, Illustrious by his Birth, was of the Tribe of Simeon. He lived
at the same time with Jeremiah, whose Works he seems to have Abridg'd,
especially considering his conformity of Style. He speaks plainly of the
Calling of the Gentiles, the Foundation of the Church, the Remission of Sins,
of Sanctification and Eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ.

XLI. Haggai earnestly exhorts the People of God, to the building of the
Temple. He complains of the Jews neglect therein; and promises Zorobabel who
undertook that Work, after it had been basely forsaken, that the Messiah should
be born of his Race*

XLII. Zachariah lived in the time of Haggai, and he also solicited the
re-building of the Temple. He is full of Enigmas and Figures; he speaks
nevertheless very plainly of the coming of Christ, and of his Life and Passion.

XLIII. Malachi Prophesied after the re-edifying of the Temple. He reproves the
several Abuses which were crept into the Jewish Discipline. As he is the last
of the Prophets, and that no more was to be expected till the coming of Jesus
Christ, he exhorts the People to stick to the Law of Moses, till the Messiah
should appear in the World.

XLIV. The I. Book of Maccabees.

XLV. The II. Book of Maccabees. These two Books contain the State of the
Church under the Third Monarchy, which was that of the Greeks, continuing Forty
Years, from the Death of Alexander the Great, to that of Demetrius Soter. The
Second Book is an Abridgment of the Book of Jason, who was one of the Jews of
Cirena. The Author of the First Book is not the Author of the Second; as it
appears to the Learned, both from the difference of Style, and different manner
of counting the Years.

Secondly, The New Testament contains 27 Books,
I. The Gospel according to St. Matthew, was writ about 6 Years after the Death
of Christ, at the request of those Jews who had embraced the Christian Faith.
St. Matthew, from a Publican, became an Apostle. He has undertaken in his
Gospel, to relate the Royal Race of our Savior, and to represent him according
to the Life he led in the Flesh; wherefore he speaks chieflly (as St. Austin
remarks) of those Actions and Instructions in which the Son of God has in a
manner tempered his Wisdom with his Divine Majesty, that he might render the
Example of his Life, the more Imitable and Agreeable to our Weakness.

II. The Gospel according to St. Mark, was written in the 3d Year of Claudius,
or the 43d of Christ according to the ordinary way of Reckoning, that is 10
Years after our Savior's Death. This Gospel St. Mark writ at Rome, at the
request of the Christians of that Church, and according to the Instructions he
had received from St. Peter, whose Disciple he had been. He has followed St.
Matthew in a many Things, and in some places only abridg'd him; nevertheless,
there are many Passages he has dwelt longer upon, and observed many
considerable Circumstances which St. Matthew omitted.

III. The Gospel according to St. Luke, was writ by him 23 Years after Christ's
Ascension. This St. Luke was a Physician, and as he was very well acquain^ed
with the Greek Tongue, he has writ more elegantly than either St. Mark, or St.
John. He was not of the number of Apostles, as was St. Matthew and St. John,
but one of their Disciples in like manner as Saint Mark.

IV. The Gospel according to St. John the Son of Zebedee, and Brother of St.
James sirnam'd Major, was written at Ephesus about the Year of Christ 96. and
63 Years after his Passion, upon occasion of the Heresy of Cerinthus and Ebion,
both which maintained, That Jesus Christ was but a Man; whereupon all the
Bishops of Asia, and several others, entreated St. John to treat more largely
on the Matter than the Three Apostles, his Predecessors, had done, and to
establish Christ's Divinity beyond Contradiction. It was hereupon that Saint
Austin observed, That the other Three Evangelists had only traced Christ upon
the Earth, and as it were walked along with him in recounting the Actions of
his mortal Life, but that St. John had soared like an Eagle above human Pitch,
and discovered the Word even in the Bosom of God, without being dazzled with the
Luster of his Glory.

V. The Acts of the Apostles are properly the Birth and Establishment of the
Church, which was about the time of the Death of Jesus, and the Accomplishment
of all his Mysteries. St. Paul is particularly celebrated in this History, it
having been writ by St. Luke, who was his Disciple. This Book contains the
History of 29 or 30 Years, from the death of Christ to the time St. Paul was
carried Prisoner to Rome the first time, which was in the Year 63. Which makes
some believe, that St. Luke wrote this Book at Rome at the same time.

The Epistles of St. Paul.
VI. His Epistle to the Romans is placed first, not that it was writ first, but
according to the Dignity of the Place and the Church where it was writ. The
Subject of it is to abate the excessive Pride of the Jews and Gentiles, and to
unite under Jesus Christ as the Cornerstone, by the Bonds of Grace and a
Spirit of Humility. This Epistle was writ from Corinth, in the Year of Christ
57. and 24 Years after his Passion.

VII. His First Epistle to the Corinthians he writ from Ephesus, about the Year
of Christ 57. and 24 Years after Christ's death. Therein St. Paul lessens the
Pagan Eloquence and Philosophy which the Corinthians so greatly admired. He
teaches 'em moreover how to prepare for the Communion, etc.

VIII. His Second Epistle to the Corinthians, writ from Macedon, near the same
time with the First, and sent them by Titus and St. Luke. St. Paul therein
chiefly admonishes the Corinthians to beware of false Apostles, whom he attacks
severely, naming them Deceitful Workers and Ministers of the Devil.

IX. His Epistle to the Galatians was writ to these People from Lesser Asia, a
little while after they had been converted by him, upon account of false
Teachers who had seduced them, by persuading them that the Gospel would not be
sufficient to save them, unless they continued to Circumcise their Children,
and to submit to other Ceremonies of the Law. He brings many Books out of
Scripture to dissuade the Galatians from this Error, and to convince them that
they ought no longer to be Slaves under the Old Law, but to enjoy the Freedom
of the New. This Epistle was writ from Ephesus in the Year of Christ 56. and 23
Years after his Passion.

X. His Epistle to the Ephesians, writ from Rome when St. Paul was in Bonds
there, about the Year of Christ 62. and 29 Years after his Passion. This great
Apostle therein admonishes the Inhabitants of this Metropolis of Asia Minor,
not to give Ear to the Preachers of Judaism, who would not only have the Law
joined to the Gospel, but also intermixed many other Fables with this Error.

XI. His Epistle to the Philippians, writ to the Christians of Philippi in
Macedonia from Rome, where St. Paul was then Prisoner. Here this Holy Apostle
professes a more than ordinary Affection for that People, which he had
Converted, and who sent him thither considerable Subsistence when he was in
want. He exhorts them to continue always steadfast in their Faith, to decline
Disputes, to love Prayer, to be humble and charitable to each other, to be
unshaken in Adversity, and to be always replenished with Peace and Joy.

XII. His Epistle to the Colossians, writ from Rome while he was Prisoner
there, in the Year of Christ 62. This People, being of Phrygia not far from
Laodicea, having received the Faith, they were afterward not a little pestered
with ignorant Seducers, who would needs intermix Judaism and Philosophy with
the Gospel. St. Paul here admonishes them not to suffer themselves to be
seduced by these Philosophers; and moreover to corroborate their Faith, gives
them a Scheme of the Christian Life they should lead.

XIII. His Epistle to the Thessalonians, written (according to the Opinion of
St. Chrysostom) before any of the others. Thessalonica was then Metropolis of
Macedon. This People had been converted by St. Paul, and confirmed in the same
Belief by Timothy, whom St. Paul sent among them afterward. He professes a
great Kindness for them in this Letter which he writ from Corinth, in the Year
of Christ 52. and 19 Years after his Passion.

XIV. His First Epistle to Timothy, whom he styles his natural Son in the
Faith, was writ from Macedon in the Year of Christ 64. St. Paul, after having
made this dear Disciple of his, Bishop, instructs him by this Letter in all the
Duties of that Holy Ministry. St. Austin says, That those who designed to serve
the Church, ought always to have before them the two Epistles to Timothy, with
that to Titus, which all teach how the Ministers of the Gospel are to behave
themselves.

XVI. The Second Epistle to Timothy, writ from Rome, when he was Prisoner there
the second time, about the Year of Christ 65. and 32 Years after Christ's
Passion, and a little before his own Martyrdom. It contains excellent
Instructions for those that God has entrusted with the communicating of his
Gospel.

XVII. His Epistle to Titus seems to have been written from Macedon, toward
the Year of Christ 64. St. Paul having chosen Titus to be Bishop of the Island
of Crete, now Candia, he here sets down the Qualifications which are required
to execute that Function.

XVIII. His Epistle to Philemon was writ from his Prison in Rome, in the Year
of Christ 62. This Philemon was a Person of great Account in a City of the
Colossians, whom St. Paul had converted to the Faith. Onesimus was his Slave,
and fled from him to visit St. Paul at Rome, whom he knew to be his Master's
Friend; whereupon St. Paul converted, baptized, and sent him back to Philemon
with his Recommendation in this Epistle.

XIX. The Epistle to the Hebrews was thought to have been writ by St. Paul, but
some have questioned it. His Design seems to have been the same that he
proposed when he writ to the Romans and Galatians; for in a word, these Three
Epistles appear to have had but one End, which was to prove that true Justice
did not proceed from the Law, but that it is Jesus Christ that bestows it on
us, through Faith and Inspiration.

XX. The General Epistle of St. James. It is termed General, by reason of its
being addressed to all the Faithful, wheresoever dispersed. St. James his
Intention therein was to prove, That Faith without Works would not be alone
sufficient for our Salvation.

XXI. The First Epistle of St. Peter was principally designed for the Jews,
whose Apostle he properly was, as St. Paul was of the Gentiles. He writ it from
Rome, which he couches under the Name of Babylon, a little before his Death.
This Epistle consists throughout of Morality, and which ought to be looked upon
as an Abridgment of a Christian and Pious Life, of which it contains chiefly
the Rules and Instructions.

XXII. The Second Epistle of St. Peter was writ a very little while before the
Martyrdom which happened about the Year of Christ 66. after having been foretold
it from Heaven by a Vision, as he himself relates. This Epistle differs from
the former, which only tended to advise the Faithful to live a holy and
virtuous Life: But in this Second Epistle he admonishes them withal, against
the Illusions of false Teachers; by which he means, as it is thought, the
Followers of Simon Magus and the Nicolaitans, which he decries and contends
with by many solid and pathetick Expressions.

XXIII. The First Epistle of St. John was addressed, according to the Opinion of
St. Austin, to the Parthians; that is to say, to the Believers scattered abroad
throughout the ancient Empire of the Persians, and which was then in the
Parthians Possession. Neither the Time when, nor Place where it was written, is
known. In this Epistle St. John opposes that pernicious Error of Simon Magus,
who was of Opinion, That Faith was sufficient to save us, without good Works.

XXIV. The Second Epistle of St. John was a private Epistle, sent to a
Christian Lady by him, sirnam'd The Elect. He therein altogether overthrows the
Impiety of Basilides and his Disciples, who taught, That Jesus Chrict was not
truly Man, but only a Fantom, and consequently his Passion not real.

XXV. The Third Epistle of St. John is addressed to one Caius, whom that Saint
commended for the Purity of his Faith and Charity both toward his Brethren and
Strangers.

XXVI. The General Epistle of St. Jude, called also Thadeus, was written after
the Death of the greater part of the Apostles, to exhort Believers to apply
themselves steadfastly to the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which they had preached
to them. He therein falls upon the Followers of Simon and the Nicolaitans, who,
contenting themselves with a barren Faith and without good Works, introduced
into the Church a sort of Libertinism and corrupted Morals.

XXV. The Apocalypse, or Revelations of St. John, was written in the Isle of
Pathmos, where this Apostle was confined by the Emperor Domitian, about the
Year of Christ 94. and Two before he writ his Gospel. S. Austin acknowledges
this Book is very hard to be understood, because there are very few clear
Things in it which might serve to enlighten the Obscure; nevertheless there are
some plain and profitable Instructions to be met with in several Places, and
chiefly in the 2d and 3d Chapters, which might be termed the Gospel of Christ
risen from the Dead, by reason of many Doctrins therein mentioned which Christ
pronounced after his Resurrection, and which the Evangelists had omitted.

Thus you have a Catalogue, and an Account of all the Sacred Books. Therein are
contained the Precepts of Eternal Life: And as they are to be ranked among the
number of Fools that contend with Reason, and such among Heretics as dispute
and oppose the Christian Doctrins; So, says St. Austin, are those always to be
ranged with Infidels, who reject the Holy Scriptures. Contra rationem nemo
Sobrius: Contra Scripturam nemo Christianus: Contra Ecclesiam nemo Pacificus
senserit. [Lib. 4. de Trinit. cap. 6.] By the Truth and Piety of these
admirable Books the Authority of the Holy Scripture subsists, and it is a kind
of Impiety to call any of its Authors in question.

But nevertheless we are not bound to have the same Veneration for the other
Ecclesiastic Writers. Such only as have been immediately Inspired by God
Almighty are to be looked upon as Infallible, and those alone are they which
have been acknowledged by the Canon of the Holy Scriptures. As for other
Authors, however Holy they might be, yet we do not rely implicitly upon what
they have writ, but are ready to allow that they have often been deceived and
nay consequently deceive us. In the first part of this Book, Page 10. I have
inserted some Rules which might serve to resolve any doubts met with in the
ancient History. But these we are by no means to make use of in relation to the
Canonical Writings; we must always acquiesce in them whatever difficulties we
meet with, and adore with Simplicity what may there seem Strange and Incredible
to us. But, as I said before, we may take more Liberty with other Authors, and
Condemn or Applaud 'em as we see good. Otherwise we should Sacrifice our Reason
to their Authority, which we are only obliged to do to the Eternal Word of God.

ARTICLE II. Of Civil History and its Authority.
THOUGH we ought to have an implicit Belief, through a kind of religious Slavery,
in whatever the Holy Scripture relates; yet need we not allow the same Credit
to Men who have all their natural Failings, and write only by a fallible
Assistance of their Reason. As Men therefore were never free from Mistakes and
Errors, and as they might very well fall into false Opinions, either through
Ignorance, want of due Examination or just Reasoning; so their Hearts also
might probably be biased by the Prospects of Ambition or Interest, and
consequently they be seduced either into Flattery or Insincerity. So that though
Christian Charity allows of no Distrust, yet ought we always to be upon our
Guard, when we read these Books, where either Ignorance or Design may so easily
lead us astray.

The Scythians were wont to burn all the Histories that came to their Hands;
nay, they never spared any, Because (said they) the Booksellers among the
Greeks and Romans, had their Shops always so crowded with the Valorous Exploits
of their own Country, that they left no room for those of other Nations, who
perhaps might have performed Actions as worthy of Applause. And where they
happened to have any, it was perhaps some Treatise wherein their Neighbors we^e
looked upon with the greatest Scorn and Contempt. Most Historians have been
prepossessed with an Opinion of their own Country, and neglect of due Esteem
for the Merits of others; whence it comes to pass, that we have no History but
what is either Imperfect or Partial, and consequently no true Account of those
Transactions that have from time to time happened in the World.

We must observe that the most warlike Nations have ever been the least
encouragers of Letters. The Muses always preferred a Wreath of Olive, to a Crown
of Laurel: They seek Solitude and Quiet, and are frighted at the noise of Arms:
It Is the Murmurings of a Purling Brook, and the gentle Ruffling of a Western
wind, that encourage and delight them. Sciences and Arts have never flourished,
but in those States whose Dominion was Established and Power dreaded. Egypt
soon quitted its Learning, when the War began to enter its Confines. Greece
equally increased in Knowledge and Conquests; and when Rome became Mistress of
the World, she saw the Muses from all parts fly for Shelter under her Wings.
Before that Time the Romans were more zealous of doing well, than either
speaking or writing so; and took more care to be the Subject of a Panegyric,
than to Pen it.

There are some Pleasant People in the World, who would persuade us, that
Learning lessens Courage, Because (say they) the Greeks and Romans were never
esteemed so great Soldiers, as when they had no Arts nor Sciences among them.

Phocion, one of the wisest and best Men that Athens ever bred, whilst he
governed that State, being tired out with the repeated Importunities of the
Athenians, that they might make War, when he knew they understood but very
little of the Matter; He said to them, Were you to contend with your Enemies
with Words, they would never be able to withstand you, because you talk better;
but whereas Arms can only decide your Differences, they will as surely be too
hard for you.

The Lacedaemonians, on the contrary, being less Polite, were much better
Soldiers; for though they spoke ill, yet they fought well; their Hands were more
ready than their Tongues, and they always gave six blows before they uttered
two words. Hence we have the Style we call Laconique or Lacedemonian, which is
a Concise, but Emphatical manner of speaking and writing, according to the
Custom of the Lacedaemonians. Wherefore we have an Account of their Actions, not
from themselves, but their Enemies.

But notwithstanding all this, there is no Reason to accuse the Muses of
ruining Kingdoms. There have ever been People in the World, both Learned and
Warlike at a time; and in this Age, we have Heroes that ought to give way to
nothing, either to the ancient Greeks or Romans, and who likewise reconcile the
Study of Letters with the Practice of Arms. It were better therefore to say,
That Kingdoms and Empires have all their destined Periods, and that they Perish
through the same necessity with the Hero and the Scholar.

But however it be, this is most certain, that Warlike Nations have seldom or
never writ their own Histories, and much less those of other Nations. We know
little or nothing of the Celtae or Gauls; and are not much better acquainted
with the Customs of the Arabs, their Priests, and other Persons which they set
the most value upon.

The Persian Historians were their Magi, being the most considerable among
them, either for their Knowledge, or the Station they held in the Commonwealth.

The Egyptians, who yielded to no other Nation for Insight into all manner of
Arts and Sciences, entrusted their Priests altogether with the Conservation of
their History, as likewise their Public Memoirs, which contained whatever
related either to Policy, Physic, Mathematics or Religion. It is from these
Priests that Diodorus Siculus had his History, as he owns in his Second Book.
Nay, though Athens abounded with all sorts of Learned Men; yet the most
celebrated in Greece, Traveled to Egypt merely to consult these Priests. Solon,
Plato, Pythagoras, Eudoxus and Democrates had that Knowledge from Egypt, with
which they afterward surpised the Learned World. Cicero owns ingenuously in
his Fifth Book, de Finibus, that Plato went into Egypt on purpose to learn from
those Priests, the Knowledge of Heavenly Matters. And Pythagoras did more; for
he not only Traveled over all Egypt, but also went into Persia to consult the
Magi, about that sort of Learning which was peculiar to them, they being,
beyond any other Nation, versed in the Knowledge of Antiquity.

Thus it is plain, That the Egyptain Priests, and Persian Magi, gave themselves
chiefly up to History.

The Greeks were not so careful in this Respect; they permitted any to write
who had an inclination to do it, whence it followed, that their History was
abominably vitiated by this Liberty; and they became a Proverb by the many Lies
they stufft their Relations with, -- Et quicquid Graecia Mendax,
Scribit in Historiis.


But herein the Romans were much wiser, for they did not allow every Body to
compile their Histories: The Pontiffs who had the care of Divine Worship, and
the Ceremonial part of their Religion, had likewise the Charge of making their
Annals; wherein they were to take notice of the most famous Occurrences in
their State from Year to Year, This Cicero acquaints us with, when he says,
Erat Historia nihil aliud nisi Annalium confectio, cui rei Memoriae Publicae
causa ab initio rerum humanarum usque ad Publ. Mutium Pontificem Maximum, res
omnes singulorum Annorum mandabat literis Pontifex Maximus. Lib. 2. de Orat.

These Annals also were very plain. They contained no more than a Summary
Account of Matters, without entering into many Particulars. It was the Genius of
the ancient Romans to affect Plainness. They were more intent upon deserving
Praise, than hearing it; and they never complimented one Man with what was only
due to the whole Place. A Glimpse of this primitive Simplicity may appear in
their Fasti Consulares, which was scarce any more than a downright Catalogue of
the Roman Consuls.

These Reasons which we have given to doubt of the Truth of History, ought not
nevertheless to extinguish in us all sort of Belief, for what Historians have
written. There are Rules before prescribed to direct us in ancient History,
which are the very Quintescence of Criticism; that is, whatever good Sense or a
sound Judgment could invent, to precaution a heedless Reader, against either
the Ignorance, Negligence or Insincerity of a Writer. Into how many Errors
would a Man fall, if he had not some sort of regard to these Rules? But since
it is absolutely necessary for every body to be acquainted with the worth of an
Historian before they read him; I shall proceed to draw some faint Sketches of
those that have been most famous in the World; since it is my Intention here to
be exact, but not tedious.

CHAP. V. The most Celebrated Authors that have written of Church History.
THE History of the Church under the Law, is contained among the sacred
Writers, which we are never to question as we have said before; yet whatever
Esteem we may have for these Historians, we are by no means forbid to make use
of our Reason when we read 'em, but are allowed to Condemn or Approve 'em as we
think fit.

Over and above the Books of the Bible, which treat of the old Jewish Church;
we have also the Writings of Philo and Josephus, both which we shall say
something of, by reason of the excellency of their Works.

1. Philo was a Jew of Alexandria, who lived under the reign of Caius Caligula,
and who was Head of an Embassy which the Jews dispatched to that Emperor.
Amongst other Things, he writ the life of Moses and Joseph, as also a Relation
of his Embassy to Rome, wherein he did not succeed, Caligula being extremely
offended that the Jews had refused to have his Statue in their Synagogue. This
Author is altogether Platonic, for he imitates so exactly Plato's Style, that
he has been termed by some, The Jewish Plato (...) aut Plato Philonem, aut
Philo Platonem imitatur. In his Book, he explains the Bible allegorically. He
is Eloquent and very Diffusive, and his Moral comes very near that of the
Christians.

2. Josephus, surnamed Flavius on account of the Emperor Vespatian, was a Jew
of the sacerdotal Race of the Asmonians. He was born in the 37th Year of our
Savior, and died in the 93d. He has written the History* of the Jews from the
Creation of the World to the twelfth Year of them. This Work he entitles, The
Jewish Antiquities. He has also written an Account of the Jewish Wars with the
Romans, and of the Sacking of Jerusalem. He has likewise written his own life,
two excellent Tracts against Appion a Pagan, and one concerning the Martyrdom
of the Maccabees. Photius says that Josephus writ Nicely, that he knew how to
charm his Readers, and that he has all along judiciously embelish'd his History
with florid Descriptions, and eloquent Harangues. St. Ierom calls him the Titus
Livius of the Greeks; and Erasmus says, That his History of the Death of the
Maccabees is a Masterpiece of Eloquence.

Authors of the Church History.
I. Hegesippus was a Jew that embraced Christianity. He came to Rome in the
Pontificat of Pope Anicetus, and continued there till the time of Elutherius,
that is, from the Year of Christ 165 to 180.

He is the first Author which has composed a Body of Church History, which he
divided into V Books, and in which he relates the most remarkable Occurrences
in the Church, from our Savior's Passion, to the time wherein he wrote. We
have only some Fragments of this Work now remaining, which Eusebius has
Collected and inserted into his History.

Under the Name of Hegesippus goes an History of the Jewish Wars, and of the
Destruction of Jerusalem, divided into V Books: But (says Du Pin) it is certain
that this Work does not belong to Hegesippus, but to an Author who lived since
Constantin. Some attribute this History to St. Ambrose because of a Manuscript
of it which the famous Father Mabillon found in the Library given by that Saint
at Milan, and which was therefore supposed to have been a Translation of his.

II. Julius Africanus was born in Palestine. He was deputed by the Emperor
Alexander Son of Mammeus, to settle the City of Emmaus, which was afterward
called Nicopolis. He wrote a Chronicle from the beginning of the World to the
3d Year of the Emperor Heliogabalus which he divided into V Books, and wherein
he briefly relates all the memorable Occurrences down to his Time.

This Work we have not at present under the Name of Africanus, but Eusebius has
got it almost all in his Chronicle, with some few Additions and Corrections.

III. Eusebius of Caesarea was born in Judea toward the end of the Empire of
Galienus. He was chosen Bishop of Caesarea in the Year of our Lord, 313 or 314.
He has composed several learned Treatises, but we shall mention none but those
which relate to History.

1. His Chronicle, which is an Abridgment of Universal History, from the
Creation of the World to the time when he lived, which was about the 20th Year
of the Reign of the Emperor Constantin. This Work contains a great deal of
Learning, and had no doubt a prodigious deal of Pains and Study bestowed upon
it. St. Ierom translated it through, though we have his first Part, but very
imperfect.

2. His Ecclesiastical History divided into X Books, is the chief of all his
Works. He has there taken notice of all the most memorable Things that have
happened in the Church, from the time of our Savior, down to when he wrote. He
there gives you an exact Account of the several successions of the Bishops in
the chie^est Cities of the World, as likewise of the best Church-Authors and
their Books. He also reckons up all the Heresies that have crept into the
Church, and particularly mentions what relates to the Jews. He there describes
the several Persecutions of the Martyrs, their Contests and Disputes concerning
Ecclesiastical Discipline; and, in a Word, whatever else relates to the Affairs
of the Church. Without this History we could never have had the least knowledge
of the first Ages of the Church, for those who have writ after him have only
began where he ended. Du Pin, after having affirmed that this History of
Eusebius was not so complete as could have been Wished; Adds moreover* That his
Defects have not been sufficient to obscure his Merit.

The Learned Henricus Valesius has translated him into Latin, which he has
joined to the Greek Text. And some Learned Gentlemen of the University of
Cambridge, have made a Translation of him into English, for the benefit of such
as understand neither Latin nor Greek.

IV. St. Epiphanius was born in the Year of Christ 332. in a Village of
Palestine. He spent his Youth under the Monastic Tutelage of St. Hilarion and
several other Monks of Palestine. About the Year, 366. He was elected Bishop of
Salamis, Metropolis of the Island of Cyprus. The Book he wrote is called (...)
which being against Heresy, is to be looked upon as a Treatise belonging to
Ecclesiastical History. This Tract is divided into three Parts. The First
contains the Heresies that have been before Jesus Christ, which St. Epiphanius
has reckoned up to be 46. The Second consists of 23. and the Third of 11. So
that thus this Book comprehends in all 80 Sects or Heresies. This St.
Epiphanius was an Implacable Enemy of the followers of Origin.

V. Rufinus a Priest of Aquilea flourished at the same time with St. Ierom, to
whom after having been a great Friend, he became an inveterate Enemy. He had a
more than ordinary Esteem for Origin. He set himself to read and translate his
Books, and undertook his defense against all those that Accused him. This Zeal
of his toward Origin, was the chief cause of his Disagreeing with St. Ierom,
who had taken the contrary side. Amongst all the Books of his Composing, we
shall only take notice of those two of Ecclesiastical History; which he has
added to the Translation of Eusebius. He there continues the History of the
Church, to the Death of the Emperor Theodosius. These Books were Dedicated to
Chromacius of Aquilea, and were writ about the time that Alaric King of the
Goths, ravaged Italy. They are indifferently well Penned, yet there are
considerable Faults to be found in the History.

VI. St. Ierom was born in the City of Strigna or Stridon, situate upon the
Confines of Pannonia and Dalmatia, in the Year of Christ, 345. His Father
Eusebius sent him to Study at Rome, under the celebrated Donatus, where he soon
made a considerable progress in Letters. He received the Orders of Priesthood
at Antioch, from the Hands of Paulinus then Bishop of that City.

He has writ a great number of Books, amongst which is to be found A Catalogue
of Ecclesiastical Writers, from the time of Jesus Christ, down to his own when
he wrote. He composed this Tract at the request of Dexter Prefect of the
Pretorium, and in imitation of Suetonius and other Profane Authors, who have
compiled the Lives of the Philosophers and other famous Men.

We have also his Chronicle, which we must not look upon as a bare Translation
of Eusebius, St. Ierom having therein altered and added many Things. Nay, he
has moreover continued this Chronicle from the 20th Year of Constantin, to the
sixth Consulate of Valens, and second of Valentinian, that is, down to the
Year, 378.

VII. Sulpicius Severus a Priest of Again, equally famous for his Birth, Genius
and Piety; who flourished about the same time with St. Ierom and Rufinus. He
was a Disciple of St. Martin whose life he wrote.

The chief of his Works is his sacred History, consisting of two Books, both
which contain a well penned Epitome of the most remarkable Occcurrences in the
Jewish and Christian Churches, from the Creation of the World to the Consulship
of Stilicon and Aurelian, that is to say, to the Year of Christ, 400. He has
all along imitated Salust, for Brevity, but infinitely surpasses him in
clearness and beauty of Expression. We have not any Abridgment of History (says
Mounsiuer Du Pin) so well Digested, and elegantly writ as this Epitome; yet its
Author is not always exact, for he has committed several Errors in the History,
especially in that of the Church. This Author has enlarged very much upon the
Priscillianists, and of all Writers gives us the best Account of them.

VIII. St. Austin was born in Tagasta a City of Numidia, under the Empire of
Constantius, the thirteenth of November in the Year of Christ, 354. He became a
Convert in the 32d Year of his Age, and was ordained Bishop of Hippo in 395.
and afterward Died as piously as he had Lived, the 20th of August in the Year
430. being about 76 Years old.

Although there be a great many things, throughout his whole Works, that relate
to Ecclesiastical History; Yet, we shall here mention only his small Treatise
of Heresies, written in the Year, 428. at the request of the Deacon Quovult
Deus, to whom also it is Dedicated. This Tract is no more than a brief Account
of the several Sects of Heretics, and their principal Errors. He begins with
the Sinonians, and ends with the Pelagians; there being in all 88 Heresies. You
shall scarce meet with any thing in this whole Book, but what is taken either
from St. Epiphanius or Philaster. Monsieur Du Pin speaking of this last, who
has reckoned up 20 different Heresies before the Incarnation of Christ, and 120
since his Birth to the Year, 380. says, That his Style is Mean and Grovelling;
that he had little or no Learning; that he has made several considerable
Mistakes in this small Treatise, which is written with no manner of exactness,
and wherein are abundance of Errors. The same Opinion Cardinal Bellarmin has of
him in his Book, De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis: Father Labbe would have this
Author's Works read with a great deal of Caution, and St. Austin says, That St.
Epiphanius had writ better than Philaster; but that nevertheless he was a
Person of singular Piety and good Morals.

IX. Pallades a Native of Galatia, left his Country about 20 Years old, to
retire among the Hermits of Egypt. He was ordained Bishop of Hellenopolis in
the Year, 401. and afterward chosen Bishop of Aspon a City of Galatia, and
dependent on the Metropolitan See of Ancira. He was a great Friend of Rufinus,
a Defender of Origin, an Allie with Pelagius and Enemy to St. Ierom.

In the Year, 421. He writ a History of the Lives, Actions, Miracles and
Sayings of the most Holy Monks that he had met with in Egypt, Lybia, Thebais
and Palestine. This History was Addressed to one Lausus, which gave occasion
afterward for Naming it The Lausian History. In this Relation there are many
surprising Stories of wonderful Austerities and Examples, which would be
dangerous to imitate. Several learned Men are of Opinion, that this Palladius
was likewise Author of the Life of St. Chrysostom.

X. Paul Orosius a Spanish Priest of the City of Tarragon and Disciple of St.
Austin, flourished under the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius.

The City of Rome having been taken in the Year, 410. by Alaric King of the
Goths; the Pagans had a mind to render the Christians Odious, by accusing them
of being the cause thereof; as likewise of all the other Calamities which befell
the Roman Empire. It was upon occasion of this Reproach, that Paul Orosius, at
the Request of St. Austin, undertook their Defense; by showing that all Ages
have produced the like Misfortunes, and that the Empire of Rome has never been
more free from 'em, than since the Birth of Christ. This Work (says Du Pin) is
a kind of Universal History, divided into VII Books, which is not ill writ, and
yet not over-exact; for there are many gross Faults to be met with, both in the
History and Chronology.

XI. Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus a City of Syria, was born in Antioch. The Greek
Church never had a Prelate more Learned and of a better Judgment. He was
elected into this See about the Year, 423. And in 431. he assisted at the
Council of Ephesus. He wonderfully refuted the Heresies of his time, both with
Tongue and Pen.

Those Works we have of his, sufficiently convince us of his deep Learning and
great Parts.

He wrote V Books of Ecclesiastical History, which begun with the Heresy of
Arius, and proceeded on to the time of Theodosius the Younger; which likewise (
Gennadius says) he continued to the reign of Leo, in V other Books, but which
however are now lost. Vtinam quis tantum Thesaurum eruat e Tenebris sicubi
adhue delitescunt, says Father Labbe the Jesuit.

Among the other Works of Theodoret, there is his Monastical History containing
the Lives of the most famous Anchorets of his Time. This Book is entitled
Philotheus, that is, as Nicephorus explains it, The History of the Beloved of
God. Herein are related great and wonderful Examples of Virtue.

XII. Socrates (say the Schools) learnt Grammar at Constantinople, under the
care of Ammonius and Helladius, both Natives of Alexandria. He has written an
Ecclesiastical History in VII. Books, which either begins or ends that of
Eusebius, that is, from Constantin, and continues to the 17th Consulship of
Theodosius the Younger, which begins with Festus in the Year, 439. so that this
History of Socrates comprehends the space of 140. Years. Photius says, it is
very Uncorrect as to its Style, and less Authentic in expounding the Doctrine
of the Church. He gives us a great deal of reason to believe that he was
biased to the Errors of the Novatians, in that he extremely commends the
Bishops of that Persuasion, and blames the Catholics with a great deal of
Vehemence.

XIII. Sozomen Native of Salamis in the Island of Cyprus, frequented the Bar
for some time, at Constantinople. He has written IX Books of Ecclesiastical
History, from the third Consulship of Crispus and Constantin Junior, both Sons
of Constantin the Great, and both Emperors; to the seventeenth Consulship of
Theodosius Junior, that is to say, from the Year, 324. to the Year, 429. We
have lost a Continuation of this History, for near 20 Years.

It is somewhat strange that Theodoret, Socrates and Sozomenes, should all
Three undertake the same Work, at the same time. The reason I suppose must be,
that they did not like each others Works; For it is certain (says Nicephorus
Writing upon this Subject) that the Readers and Writers are often of different
Opinions. Also these Historians might well be presumed to favor the Party they
Adhered to.

XIV. Victor of Vtica, a Bishop of Africa, in the fifth Century of the Church,
has written an Account of the African Persecution by the Vandals, in III Books,
the beginning whereof, shows that it was composed in the Year, 487. under the
Reign of the Emperor Zeno, about 60 Years after the Vandals had passed from
Spain to Africa over the Streights of Gibraltar. You shall there meet with a
List of the African Bishops, which were then involved in that Persecution,
among which Victor himself was not spared by the Tyrant Huneric.

XV. Cassiodorus was Chancellor and chief Minister to Theodoric the Goth, and
several other Kings of Italy. From the Age of 20 Years he was raised to all the
great Employments in the State, all which he acquitted with that Address, that
he might well serve for a Model to the most refined Politicians that succeeded
him. Under the Reign of Vitigius, perceiving the Power of the Goths begin to
decrease in Italy, he retired from the World to his Monastery of Viviers, which
he had caused to be Built on the Extremities of Calabria. Amidst his most
Burthensom Employments he did not omit Writing several excellent Books, of
which we shall only mention those that relate to History.

His Chronicle, dedicated to King Theodoric, was composed while he was a
Minister of State, says Father St. Marthe in his Life of Cassiodorus. It is
very much Abridg'd, containing only the Names of the Consuls and their
principal Actions. Vossius after Joseph Scaliger, calls this Chronicle Farrago:
Cassiodori Chronicon tantum farrago est, Which Injury against so great a Man,
the learned Benedictin, that was Author of his Life, could not endure. They
find Fault with him (says He) for not being exact in Chronology, in a work
which was purely Chronological. It is therefore that they fall upon this great
Person with so much Gall and Fury. They particularly accuse him of being
deceived in counting the Consuls from the Emperor Tiberius to Dioclesian; but
they might be answered, that he was not deceived only by depending on the
Authority of Eusebius; he reckoned the Consulship of Junius Brutus an Olympiad
sooner than he ought: That the multitude of Consuls, amounting to 25. made in
one Day, caused a great Confusion among Historians, and that in a Word, the
Faults of Cassiodorus are for the most part to be imputed to his Copyers. etc.
He has also written a History, consisting of three Parts and drawn out of three
Authors, viz. Socrates, Sozomenes and Theodoret, all which he has reduced into
XII Books. All these three Historians, he got his Friend Epiphanius the
School-Divine to Translate, and out of them he afterward composed a Body of
History, selecting out of each what he found most Excellent and Proper for his
Purpose.

He likewise writ a History of the Goths, in XII Books, of which we have reason
to regret the Loss; and whereof we have now remaining only what Iournandez
Bishop of Ravenna has preserved, and which is to be found among the Works of
Cassiodorus. King Athalaric owned that this Work was of a profound Reach; that
its Author had therein rescued from Oblivion several ancient Gothish Monarchs
which were quite forgot; that he had reestablished the Royal Race of the Amali
in their primitive Luster, and given an account of 17 Generations of them from
their first swaying the Scepter; and finally, that he had Collected into one
Body, what was before scattered through many Books. Thus Father St. Marthe
speaks of this History, in his Life of Cassiodorus.

XVI. Evagrius (say the Schools) was Native of Epiphania, a City of Syria, and
lived in the Sixth Century of the Church. He writ an Ecclesiastical History,
which he begins where Socrates and Theodoret ended; that is, about the Year
431. when the impiety of the Nestorians was Condemned by the Council of
Ephesus, and concluded it about the twelfth Year of the Emperor Maurice, which
was in the Year 597. Photius says, That this History is very plain and exact.
The Emperors Constantine and Maurice, greatly recompensed this Author for all
his Works, and of which he speaks himself.

XVII. Gregory de Tours, born in Auvergne of noble Parentage. He was one of the
most pious Bishops and celebrated Writers of his Time. His Genius led him so
much to Learning and Piety, that after Euphronius Archbishop of Tours's death,
he was raised to that See in the Year 572. and died in 594. The French are
endebted to him, for the Knowledge of our first Kings, whose History he has
written in X Books, and continued it down to his own Time. He wrote also a
great many other Books.

XVIII. Bid, sirnam'd the Venerable, was born in the Year 673. in a small
Village upon the River Tine in England. He was brought up in a Monastery of St.
Benedict, where his Parents placed him but when Seven Years old. He there read
Philosophy, Divinity, Mathematics and other curious Learning; but above all,
he imbibed the Practice of Christian and Religious Virtues. He died the 26th of
May, in the Year 735. Amongst several of his Works, we have his Ecclesiastical
History of England in V Books, which begins with Julius Caesar's Descent upon
this Nation, and ends with the Year 731. He has also written a Chronicle of VI
Centuries, and some particular Relations of the Lives and Martyrdom of diverse
Saints.

XIX. Paul the Deacon was by Birth a Lombard, and lived in the Eighth and Ninth
Centuries. He was first Deacon of Aquilea, and afterward Chancellor to
Desiderius the last King of the Lombards. When as this Prince was Conquered by
Charlemagne, Paul the Deacon was carried Prisoner into France, where his great
Knowledge and Learning procured him a great many Friends. After various turns
of Fortune which he had undergone, he became a Monk of Mount-Cassin, where he
died in the Ninth Century, but in what Year is unknown.

He has written the History of the Lombards in VI Books; the Acts of the
several Bishops of Mets, and the Lives of St. Arnold, St. Cyprian and St.
Bennet, etc.

XX. Eginard, Secretary to Charlemagne, had diverse considerable Employments in
that Prince's Court. He had a great deal of Wit and Merit, and renounced the
World to become a Monk.

He writ the life of Charlemagne, who had honored him with so particular
Esteem and Affection.

He compiled the Annals of France, from the Year 741 to 829. There are some
other small Tracts of his. He died in the Year 844. though some say sooner and
some later.

XXI. Freculphus Bishop of Lisieux, lived in the Ninth Century. This Prelate
who had been Educated under the Order of St. Benedict, was greatly commendable
for his Doctrine and Piety. He composed a Chronicle, of which the first Part
begins at the Creation, and reaches down to our Savior; this consists of VII
Books. The second begins with the Incarnation of Christ, and extends to the
coming of the Franks and the Lombards about the Year 600. This comprehends V.
Books. He Addresses this Chronicle to the Empress Judith, W^fe to Lewis the
Debonnaire, and Mother to Charles the Bald. He died about the Year 852.

XXII. Luitpra^d Subdeacon of Toledo, Deacon of Pavia, and at length Bishop of
Cremona, lived in the Tenth Century, and was (says Cardinal Bella^min) in very
great Esteem, on account of his Learning and Wisdom. Berengerius II. King of
Italy, sent him in quality of an Ambassador to Constantinople, in the Year 946.
to the Emperor Constantine Porphirigin^tes; whence he returned at the Request
of the Emperor Otho, in the Year 968. who sent him likewise to Nicephorus
Phocas.

Under the Name of this Luitprand, we have VI. Books of History, which
comprehend all the most considerable Transactions in Europe from the Emperor
Arn^lphus, down to his Time.

The Learned pretend, that what follows the Fifth Chapter of the VI. Book, does
not belong to Luitprand, but was written by another Author of the same Time,
who had a mind to continue his History. They also reject his Book concerning
the Acts of the Popes, from St. Peter down to Form^sus. Father Labbe is of
Opinion, That this History was wrote by a Germ^n Monk, toward the Year 895.
The Spaniads father upon this Author, a Chronicle of a parcel of fabulous
Princes, which had never been in the World. Also Father Labbe would have this
Chronicle sent to the Kingdom of Vtopia. Generally speaking nothing, is more
faulty than these Chronological Successions, not excepting the Fables of the
Poets, the Stories of old Women, and of Amadis de Gaul.

XXIII. Witikind a Benedictine Monk of the Abbey of Corby in Sax^ny, lived in
the Tenth Century; the Year of whose death is unknown. The most remarkable of
his Works, is his History of the Sax^ns, in III. Books, together with that of
Henry King of Germany, surnamed the Fowler, and of his Son the Emperor Otho.
This His^ory extends to the Year 973. when Otho died.

XXIV. Frodoard Abbot of Rheims, writ a Chronicle, which began at the Year 919.
and ended with the Year 966. It Is thought he died much about the same time.

XXV. Glaber Rudolphe, a Friar of St. Germains of Auxerre, flourished under the
Reigns of King Robert the Good, and Henry I. his Son. He has written an History
which includes the time between the Years 990. and 1045. Neither the time nor
place of his Death is known; neverth^less he is of great Repute, and was Author
of the Life of St. William, Abbot of St. Benign of Dijon.

This Person was a great restorer of the Monastical Discipline of his Time. He
died at Fecamp in Normandy, the first of January, in the Year 1051.

XXVI. John Curopalate, so called for being an Officer of the Household, to the
Emperor of that Name. He is a Greek Author, who composed a History from the end
of the Empire of Michael Curopalate where Theophanes ended his, to the
beginning of the Reign of Alexis Comnenes Emperor of the Greeks; that is, from
the Year 813. to 1081. George Cedrenus was a Grecian Monk, that lived toward
the middle of the Eleventh Century. He has made an Abridgment of History from
the beginning of the World, to the Reign of Isack Comnenes, who in the Year
1057. succeeded to Michael VI. Emperor of Constantinople. This Cedrenus, was a
great Plagiary, having Robbed John Curopalate of almost all that he says after
the death of Michael I. to the Reign of Isack Comnenes. It was then customary
among the Greeks to rifle the Dead; and this ill Example extended also to
Letters. Eusebius made bold with Africanus. George Sincellus, a Monk of
Constantinople, who lived in the Eighth Century, likewise Pillaged him in his
turn, and moreover Criticis'd upon him most unmercifully. After him, comes
George Theophanus, a Man in other respects good enough, but he could not
forbear treading in the Paths of others; and enriching himself with the Sp^ils
of such has had gone before him. But still herein he was more moderate than
George Cedrenus, whose Theft was so exceedingly extravagant, that Father Labbe,
the Jesuit, in his Book de Script. Eccles. expresses himself very much
displeased, when Vossius made it a Question, Whether George Cedrenus were more
beholden to John Curopalate, or John Curopalate to George Cedrenus. But the
Truth is, these modern Greek Pieces are of no great Worth, for they are
generally made up of the Rags of Antiquity, Patched and Sowed unjudiciously
together.

As all these different Greek Works have been generally Stolen, I have not
thought it convenient to allow 'em any particular Article, but imagine I have
done sufficient to let the World know how little they ought to be Valued.

XXVII. Ingulphus an Englishman of London, was a Monk in the Abbey of
Fontenelles in Normandy, and afterward Abbot of Croyland in England. He
flourished between the Years, 1050 and 1109. when he died.

He has written an Account of the Monasteries in England, from the Year, 664 to
1067. which was the first Year of the Reign of William the Conqueror, whose
Secretary ('it is said) Ingulphus was, after he became King of England.

XXVIII. John Zonarius a Monk of the Order of St. Basil, flourished about the
Year, 1120. He has written an Universal History in III Volumes. Whereof the
First contains the Affairs of the Jews, from the Creation of the World, to the
Destruction of Jerusalem. The Second comprehends an Abridgment of the Roman
History, from the Foundation of Rome to Constantin the Great. The Third
contains the Actions of the Eastern Emperors, from Constantin to Alexis
Comnenes. M. Vossius allows this Author a greater share of Genius and Exactness
than he seems to have Merited by his Works. This Historian before he became a
Monk, had diverse considerable Employments in the Eastern Emperors Courts.

XXIX. Honorius Autunensius, so named from his having been Prebendary of the
Cathedral Church of Autun in Burgundy: He flourished under the Reign of the
Emperor Henry V. about the Year, 1120.

There is a very large Chronicle of his, which M. Vossius says, is a great
Honor to its Author, being of no common Benefit to the Public. Gloriam sibi
and publico f^uctu quaesivit Volumine, quod summa Historiarum, vel Magnum
Chronicum Opus Nuncupatur. Vossius, etc.

We have likewise an Account of the Ecclesiastical Writers, from this Author,
which he entitles, De Luminaribus Ecclesi^e.

XXX. William of Malmesbury or Somerset, a Monk of the Order of St. Benedict in
the Monastery of Malmesbury, where he was Library Keeper. He has Writ Five
Books of English History and Two which are called Historia Novella: It ends
with the Year 1142. when it is thought that its Author died. He is looked upon
to be one of the best Writers of the History of England.

XXXI. Henry Steronius, a Monk of the Abbey of Altaich in Germany, lived in the
14th Century. He has compiled Annals which begin with the Year, 1152. being the
First of the Reign of Frederic Barbarossa, and proceed on to the Year, 1273.
when the Emperor Rodolphus I. of the Family of Hapsbourg, began his Reign.

Eberard Archdeacon of Ratisbonne, continues these Annals down to the Year,
1305. This Author, Steren, likewise writ the several Lives of the Emperors
Rhodophus of Hapsbourg, Adolphus of Nassaw and Albert of Austria, down to the
Year, 1300.

Vlri^ and Conrade Wellirige of Ausbourg, two Brothers and Monks of the Order
of St. Benedict, made an Addition to this Work, which extends to the Year, 1335.

XXXII. Henry of Huntingdon, Archdeacon and Canon of Lincoln in England,
flourished about the Year, 1153. being the time when Stephen King of England
died. He has written the History of England in X Books, from the Descent of the
Angels and Saxons upon Britain, to the Year, 1153. Polidore Virgil says, this
was an excellent Historian: Historicus Egregius.

XXXIII. Petrus Cemester or Peter the E^ter, was Native of Tr^ies in Champagne.
He quitted the Benefice which he had in the place of his Birth, to become a
Member among the Regular Canons of St* Victor at Paris, where he died in
October toward the Year 1198. and his Tomb and Epitaph in the Church of St.
Victor, have been frequently Visited by the Curious. He was a very learned Man
for the time while he lived. He compos*d the History called Scolastick, which
Sixtus of Siena extremely commends, though he says withal, that its Author has
intermixed with it a great many Apocryphal Actions, which have no good Warrant
from Antiquity. In this History, which consists of XVI Books, ^he Abridges all
the Old and New Testament, adding here and there some Notes and Remarks drawn
out of the Fathers and some profane Writers.

XXXIV. Otho of Freisingen, so named for having been Bishop of that City, was
Son to Leopold Marquess of Austria equally Illustrious for his Birth, Learning
and Piety. Being Dissatisfied with the Professors of the College of Newbourg,
which his Father had Founded, he went to Study in the University of Paris. He
afterward admitted himself of the Order of White-Fryars in the Monastery of
Morimond; of which, in a short time, his Virtue advanced him to be Abbot.
Having been chosen Bishop of Freisingen, he returned into Germany in the Year,
1148. when he waited on the Emperor Conrade in his Expedition to the Holy Land.
But upon his Return, being convinced more than ever of the Vanity of Things of
this World, he hasted to his beloved Retirement of Morimond, where he died the
21st of September, in the Year, 1158.

This Otho writ a Chronicle in VII Books, from the beginning of the World to
the Year, 1146. He also compiled the Life of Frederick Barberossa, which
Radevic a Canon of Freisingen continued.

XXXV. William a Frenchman, though some say a German; was elected Archbishop of
Tire in Phenicia, the 30th of May, 1175. He has written the History of the
Holy-War under Godfrey of Bulloign. Which he begins with the Year, 1095. and
ends with that of 1180. This Work comprehends XXIII Books, but the last is not
quite finished. John Harold has hereto added VI Books, after a Fashion. The
Year of William of Tyre's Death is unknown.

XXXVI. Helmodius a Priest of Busoen near Lubec, lived in the Twelfth Century,
in the time of the Emperor Frederic Barberossa. He has written a Chronicle of
the Sclavonians, which begins with the Conversion of the Saxons and the
Neighboring Nations, under the Empire of Charlemagne, and ends at the Year,
1168.

XXXVII. Arnold Abbot of Lubec, has continued this Work and carried it into the
time of Otho IV.

XXXVIII. William the Little, or of Newbury, so called from his being of the
College of that Town in England. He was a regular Canon of the Order of St.
Austin and lived in the Twelfth Century. He compiled V Books of the History of
England, which he begins with the Year, 1066. When William the Conqueror got
this Kingdom, and ends with the Year, 1197. What he relates down to the Year
1135. being that of his Birth, he touches upon but very slightly, but from
thence forwards he treats of Matters with more care and more lagrely. It Is
thought he might Die in the Year, 1208.

XXXIX. Roger Hoveden born at York, lived toward the Year 1200. it not being
punctually known when he died. He descended from a noble Family and was
Divinity-Professor in Oxford. After he had left the Court of Henry II. he
composed an History of his Country in two Parts, beginning with the Year, 731.
where the Venerable Bede ended, and having gone through to the end of the Reign
of Richard I. surnamed Caeur de Lion, he began the Reign of King John, but
finished no more than four Years of it.

XL. Nicetas Choniates a Greek Historian, had considerable Employments in the
Courts of the Emperors of Constantinople about the Twelfth Century. When this
City was taken by the French in 1204. he retired with a Daughter, which he
afterward Married at Nice a City of Bithynia, and where he spent the remainder
of his Days.

He compiled an History or Annals from the Death of Alexis Comnenes, which
happened in 1118. to that of Baudowin, who died in 1205. This History is divided
into XXI Books, and contains the most remarkable Transactions both in Greece
and Asia.

XLI. Conrade of Lichtkenaw, otherwise known by the Name of the Abbot of Vsperg
in the Diocese of Ausbourg, lived in the Thirteenth Century.

He has composed a Chronicle, which begins with Bell King of the Assyrians, and
reaches down to the Year of Christ, 1229. which was the ninth Year of the Reign
of Frederic II. This Work is nothing but a Collection out of diverse Authors,
which he has ranged at Pleasure and according to the Custom of those Times. He
was very Learned (says Father Labbe) in an Age where there was little or none
to be found. He died in the Year 1240. after having been Abbot Twenty four
Years.

XLII. James of Vitry near Paris, was a Person of singular Merit. It Is said he
was Curat of Argentenit in the Thirteenth Century, and after having followed
the Crusade into the East where he was made Bishop of Acon, that he was raised
to the Cardinalship in the Year 1230. by Pope Gregory IX. who also bestowed on
him the Bishopric of Frescati.

He has given the Public III Books of the History of the East and West,
whereof the First begins with the time when the Impostor Mahomet published his
ridiculous Religion, and ends with the Year 1220. The Second treats of the
Affairs of the East. And the Third extends to the taking of Damieta. There are
other Writings of this great Man, but which having no relation to
Ecclesiastical History, I have omitted 'em here.

XLIII. Matthew Paris a Monk of the Order of St. Bennet and of the Congregation
of Cluny* at the Monastery of St. Albans in England, was a Person very Learned
and of extraordinary Piety.

He has written an History of England from the Year 1066 to 1250. which he
afterward continued to 1259. which was the Year of his Death. The other
Addition to the Year 1273. which was after the Death of Henry III. is supposed
to have been made by one William Rishanger.

XLIV. Vincent of Beauvais, a Friar of the Order of St. Dominic, was Native of
Burgundy, and lived a considerable time at Beavais; but was never Bishop
thereof, as some have falsely conjectured. St. Lewis King of France, honored
him with a particular Esteem and assisted him moreover in the composing of his
great Work, which he divided into IV Parts; Whereof the First is Speculum
Doctrinale, where he treats of all the Sciences from Grammar to Divinity. The
Second Speculum Historiale, which comprehends all the remarkable Transactions
from the beginning of the World to the Year, 1254. An Anonymus Author has
continued this History down to the Year, 1494. The Third is Speculum Natural
being all Physics and containing the State of Nature. And the Fourth Speculum
Morale, wherein the Author treats of all kinds of Virtues and Vices.

XLV. Nicephorus Calistus a Greek Historian, who lived in the Fourteenth
Century, and under the several Reigns of Andronicus Paleologus the Elder,
Michael and Andronicus the Younger.

We have an Ecclesiastical History of his, divided into XVIII Books, wherein he
relates all remarkable Matters, from the Birth of Christ to the Death of the
Emperor Phocas in the Year, 610. This History was designed to contain XXIII
Books, but we have now no more remaining of it than the Argument of Five, which
begins with the Empire of Heraclius, and ends with that of Leo the Philosopher,
who died in 911. This Work abounds with Fables, and ought to be perused very
cautiously. Father Labbe says, That among'st the Rags with which this Work is
every where Patched, you shall now and then meet with a piece of very good
Stuff. And Casaubon says, That he sets no greater value upon the Leaves of this
History, than he would upon a Fig-leaf.

XLVI. Nicephorus Gregoracius a Greek Historian, who lived in the Fourteenth
Century, in the time of the Emperor Andronicus Paleologus the Elder, and
probably died in the Reign of John Cantacuzenes Emperor of Constantinople,
about the Year 1345. when that City was taken by the French.

He has compiled XI Books of History, which begin at the Year 1204. and end
with the Year 1341. when Andronicus the Younger died, of whom it is pretended,
that he did not speak very Faithfully. An Historian that is a Courtier is
always biased to that Prince from whom he has received Favors. This was the
Case of Nicephorus Gregoracius. He had lived a great while at the Court of
Andronicus the Elder, and observed how ill Andronicus III. treated that Prince
his Grandfather, insomuch that he forced him to resign his Throne to him and to
become Monk. This Nicephorus could by no means approve of, and therefore when
he comes to speak of this unnatural Grandson, his Disgust sufficiently appears.
Vossius says, That this Historian is neither to be Believed when he treats of
Andronicus, nor when he writes of John Cantacuzenes: Neque de Andronico solum,
sed de Cantacuzeno Mentitur. Voss. de Hist. Grae. Lib. 2. Cap. 29.

XLVII. John Villanius has written a History in Italian, divided into XII
Books, which begins with the time of Nembroth, and ends with the Year of
Christ, 1348. This Author was a Florentine

XLVIII. Flavius Blondus a Native of Forli in Romania, was Secretary to
Eugenius IV. and diverse other Popes. He composed several Historical Works,
whereof there are X Books Romae Triumphantis, III Romae Restauratae, VIII
Italiae Illustratae, III Decads of the Roman History, and a Treatise of the
Origin and Actions of the Venetians. This Author was a Philosopher who regarded
Worldly-acquisitions but little, insomuch that Fortune, which seldom takes care
of those sort of People, suffered him so far to support his Character as to die
Poor, the Fourth of June in the Year of Christ, 1463. Romae Pauper, at
Philosophum decuit, Obiit, says Father Labbe.

XLIX. St. Antoninus Archbishop of Florence, and a Friar of the Order of St.
Dominic, lived in the Fifteenth Century with all the Reputation and Respect
that his great Piety and Learning could procure him: Amongst the rest of his
Works, there is one called Summa Historica, an Historical Abridgment, which
consists of three Parts. The First is from the beginning of the World, to the
Reign of Constantin. The Second contains all remarkable Passages from
Constantin to the Year, 1198. being the time of the Pontificat of Innocent III.
And the Third begins from thence and ends with the Year, 1459. which was the
time when he died, under the Pontificat of Pius II. and the Empire of Frederic
III.

L. Aeneas Sylvius who was Pope by the Name of Pius II. He was Born at
Corsignano, a Village of the Territory of Siena, the 18th of October in 1405.
After having been employed in several important Negotiations, wherein he
sufficiently demonstrated his great Abilities; he was first made Bishop of
Siena, and then Cardinal by Calistus III. in the Year, 1456. and afterward
that Pope being dead, he succeeded him under the Name of Pius II. He has
composed several Works, all which denote his great Learning and Judgment; but
we shall only take notice of those that relate to History.

He has compiled the History of the Council of Basile in II Books. He also
Abridg'd the History of Flavius Blondas. There is also a Cosmography of his, or
the History of the whole World. There is likewise his Europaean History, which
contains several remarkable Transactions in his time. It Is also believed that
he wrote his own Life, though it goes under the Name of John Gobelin his
Secretary. He died the 14th of August in the Year, 1464. when about 58 Years
Old.

LI. Laonicus Chalcocondylas an Athenian, who lived in the Fifteenth Century.
He has written in Greek an History of the Turks in X Books, which he begins
with Othoman Son of Orthogulus, who lived in the Year 1300. and carries it on
to the Year 1463. When Mahomet II. was in War with the Venetians and Mathias
King of Hungary. It has moreover an Appendix which reaches down to 1565.

LII. B. Platina Native of Cremona, according to Father Labbe, and of Verona if
we may believe Moreri, was born in the Fifteenth Century. His Name was not
Baptist as some have thought, but Bartholomew. His quick Parts occasioned him
to be universally Esteemed, especially at Rome, whither he went under the
Pontificat of Pope Calistus II. and was very Munificently received by Cardinal
Bessarion. But Pope Paul II. became very much his Enemy, and kept him four
Months in Prison, after which his Successor Sixtus IV. who knew him better,
bestowed on him the Care of his Library in the Vatican. He wrote the Lives of
the Popes down to Paul II. which Work Onuphrius Panvinius a Friar of the Order
of St. Austin at Verona, who lived in the Sixteenth Century, continued to his
time, which was about the Year, 1568. when he died at Salermo. Platina died at
Rome of the Plague, in the Year, 1481.

LIII. Anthony Bonfinius a Native of Ascoli, lived toward the Year, 1495. He
was a very honest and laborious Man, and had learnt almost all Languages. It
was at the request of Mathias Corvinus King of Hungary and Bohemia, that he
undertook the History of Hungary, which he carried on to the Year, 1495. It
consists of IV Decads and half, that is, XLV Books.

LIVE. Robertus Gaguinus, Head of the Order of the Trinity, was very much in
favor with Charles VIII. and Lewis XII. of France, where he had the keeping of
the Royal Library. He has composed several Works but the most considerable is
his History of France, in XII Books, which reach down to the Reign of Charles
VIII.

LV. Marcus Antonius Sabellicus, Son to a Poor Farrier in Italy, was a great
Lover of Learning, in which he made a considerable progress in a very short
time. We have a History of his from the beginning of the World to the Year of
Christ, 1504. And a History of the Affairs of Venice. Paulus Iovius says, that
he died at Venice in the Year, 1506.

LVI. James Phillip of Bergamos of the Order of the Hermits of St. Austin, was
a Person of singular Merit and whom Pope Innocent VIII. honored with a
particular Esteem. He composed a Chronicle which began at the Creation of the
World, and ended with the Year, 1503. which was the Seventieth Year of the Age
of this Author. He lived afterward Fifteen Years, and died about Eighty five
Years Old, in the Year, 1518.

LVII. Johannes Rauclerus a Nobleman of Germany, Son to John Vergehau, was
Provost of the Church of Subingen, and afterward Professor of the Canon Law,
in the University of that City. This University was Founded by Count Everard
(afterward First Duke of Wirtemberg) in his return from Jerusalem in the Year,
1477. Nauclerus was made Vice Chancellor of it. He has written a Chronicle from
the beginning of the World to the Year 1500. which Nicolas Baselius continued
down to the Year 1514. and which Surius likewise carried on farther to the Year
1574. The time of this Nauclerus his Death is Unknown.

LVIII. Albert Krantz Doctor of Divinity and Dean of the Church of Hambourg,
lived toward the beginning of the Sixteenth Century. He was a Man of great
Learning, joined with admirable Piety. The chiefest of his Works is an
Ecclesiastical History entitled, Metropolis; wherein he treats of the Churches
Founded and Restored by Charlemagne. He has also compiled an History of the
Saxons in XIII Books. Another of the Vandals in XIV. and a Chronicle of Sweden,
Denmark and Norway, which begins with Charlemagne and is carried on to the
Year, 1504. This Author died the 7th of December, 1517. which was the Year that
Martin Luther first published his Doctrine.

LIX. James Wimphelinge a Priest of the Church of Spire, and Professor in the
University of Heidelberg, lived in the beginning of the Sixteenth Century. He
was both Divine, Orator, Philosopher, Poet and Historian. He composed these
Books, viz. Epitome Imperatorum and Rerum in Germania Gestarum. De Episcopis
Argentirensibus, etc. I could never meet with the time of his Death, only I
find that he was 56 Years of Age in the Year, 1508.

LX. Johannes Trithemius Abbot of Spanheim and of the Order of St. Bennet, had
a perfect Knowledge both of divine and humane Sciences, which appears by his
Works, amongst which there are several that appertain to History.

There is First his Chronicle of the Origin of the French and their Kings,
which comprehends the space of 1189. Years, being from King Marcomire to Pepin.
Next we have his Chronicle of the Reigns and Succession of the several Dukes of
Bavaria and Counts Palatin. Then there is his Catalogue or Account of
illustrious Personages which have been most famous in Germany; with several
others which I have omitted, only I must take Notice that his Stenographia
occasioned him to be Accused of Magic by those only who had not sufficiently
considered the nature of his Work, which contained some surprising Methods of
writing after an uncommon Manner. Those who have given themselves the Trouble
to consider of this Book, have Laughed at the Ignorance of these People, who
thought it Consisted only of Speeches to raise the Devil.

LXI. Hector Boethius a Scotch Doctor of Aberdeen, Studied at Paris at the same
time with Erasmus. He has written the History of Scotland in XIX Books, which
John Ferrier a Piemonteze continued. Boethius composed also an History of the
Bishops of Aberdeen. It Is said he was alive in 1526. but the exact time when he
died is unknown.

LXII. Centuriae Magdeburgenses. In the last Age, a certain number of very
learned Men (being Protestants) of the City of Magdeburg in Germany, set
themselves to work to compile a general Ecclesiastical History. Which with
unexpressible Labor and Judgment they brought to Effect; and beginning at the
Apostolic Age, showed the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church in every Age of
it, as also the Changes that happened in every part of it. This Work which the
learned Bishop Montague, calls an Herculean Labor, for it was the first of the
kind, is a very complete Account of all Ecclesiastical Affairs, and has
deserved a very large Encomium from the abovementioned judicious Prelate, as
may be seen in the Preface to his Apparatus. But it must however be confessed,
that this Work has a share in humane Frailty and is not entirely free from
Faults.

LXIII. Caesar Baronius a Cardinal, was born at Sora in the Kingdom of Naples.
He has been famous both for his Piety and Learning. He for twenty Years
together held Conferences in the Church of the Oratory at Rome, concerning
Church History. He compiled Annals of the Church, which we have now Extant in
XII Volumes. He lived in the Thirteenth Century, that is to say, in the Year
1198. He undertook this great Work to oppose the Centuriators of Magdebourg.
Pope Clement VIII. made him Cardinal in the Year, 1596. and he would have been
Pope had it not been for the Spanish Faction, who always opposed him because he
had mentioned little or nothing of them in his Ecclesiastical History, the
Sixth Volume of which they caused to be Burnt. He died the 30th of June in the
Year, 1607. when about 69 Years Old. His History is on all Hands granted to be
a very good and useful Work, and were it not for his excessive partiality,
would be the most excellent in it is kind. Henry Spondanus has made an
Abridgment and Continuation of the Annals of Baronius. They have also been
continued by Father Brovius a Polish Friar, of the Order of St. Dominic; as
likewise by Father Olderic Riwald a Priest of the Oratory at Rome. And Father
Bisciola and diverse others have also made Abridgments of him.

LXIV. Anthony Godeau Bishop of Erasse and afterward of Venice, has been one
of the most famous Prelates of this Age. He has written a History of the
Church, of which I shall say little, because it is in every Bodies Hands, only
I must Affirm that it is Managed with a great deal of Judgment and Candor, and
worthy of an Author who was a Member and first Encourager of the Royal Academy
in France.

We could not better close this Account of Ecclesiastical Writers, than with
the illustrious Name of Bishop Godeau, who has done so great an Honor to his
Country and particularly to the Clergy of France. He died the 21st of April in
the Year, 1672.

I do not pretend here to have given an exact Account of Ecclesiastical
Writers; but I have nevertheless made it my business, to follow those
Catalogues that have been left us by Cardinal Bellarmin and Father Labbe, under
the Title of Index Historicorum Ecclesiasticorum. Also I may well have failed
in ranging them in that due Order, which true Chronology would require; yet I
have chiefly followed Bellarmin, except in Honorius of Autun's Life, whom this
Cardinal and Vossius make to be famous about the Year 1220. when he flourished
about the Year 1120. which is an Error of full a hundred Years.

CHAP. VI. Of the most considerable both Greek and Latin Authors of Civil
History.
BY the little I have said concerning each Ecclesiastical Writer, it may
sufficiently appear, that the major part of Church-Authors have either wanted
Ability or Sincerity to relate things as they ought; yet at the same time
however great their Incapacity or want of Integrity might be, it will be as
readily owned, that their Faults have been nothing in respect of those of the
Civil Historians. Among these you shall every where meet with the Violation of
these two grand Maxims, which an Historian ought chiefly to have regard to,
which are, Never to tell a Lie, Nor conceal a Truth. If History were to be
written only by honest Men, it is certain that it would never stray from these
essential Rules. This Caution was once observed at Rome, insomuch that the care
of History was a public Employment, and entrusted only to great and learned
Pens. But at length with the Caesar's, Luxury and Flattery got the upper Hand,
and then we saw that Function, which was looked upon before as Sacred and
August, Usurped by Persons of neither Birth nor Merit. Suetonius, after
Cornelius Nepos, observes that the first mean Person that had the boldness to
meddle with History, was one Otacilius, who from a Porter, by means of his
great Parts came to be Tutor to Pompey the Great, as likewise that before him
there were none that offered at writing History, but those that were most
considerable in the Commonwealth.

If I were allowed here to Speak my Mind, I should affirm that what has
contributed most toward the corruption of History, is the Complaisance that
some particular Writers have had to publish Princes Lives whilst they Lived, or
soon after their Deaths. Such Relations are Fruit which ought to ripen a long
while before it is served up to the Table: For in Truth a Historian neither
writes as he would nor he ought, of a Prince that is living; because there are
few Princes that would suffer themselves to be represented as they live, Truth
in this Case being not proper to be Spoken: But it is certain that an Historian
is obliged to Publish both the good and bad Actions of the Person he writes of,
without being biased either by Love or Hatred, Hope or Fear. The Holy Bible
mentions as well the Idolatry as the Wisdom of Solomon, and Peter's denying his
Master as his Repentance for so doing; but this is what ought not to be
expected from an Historian that writes his Masters Life while he lives, and
much less where it is written in his Court, as several have been. But what
would you say of a Hireling that writes for a Pension, would not he, think you,
soon forsake his Character of an Historian, for that of an Orator, and instead
of compiling a History make a Panegyric or Apology? In a Word, What can be
expected from a mercenary Pen? Truth has never been Traded with, but Flattery
has always been Sold, for most Authors have Idols to which they Sacrifice
Truth. Some Historians, as well Ancient as Modern, are not to be Read without
the greatest Indignation; because where they promise a History, they produce a
Panegyric. Procopius is continually upon the Elogium of Belisarius. Eusebius
of Caesarea is in a Rapture when he speaks of Constantine, whom he frequently
brings in without any Connection. Epinar^ can never suffer his Charlemagne out
of his Sight. And Paulus Iovius is fulsome when he mentions his Como di Medici.
A Writer never so little gratified immediately soars a pitch beyond himself;
his Prince must appear Charming in all conditions, and consequently be the
Delight of Mankind, for because he has had reason to conceive a good Opinion of
him, he imagins every Body else must do the like. Thus Men's Minds are moved
altogether by Machine. Diodorus Siculus falls foul of Callias for a Flatterer,
since because he had received Favors from Agathocles, he would pretend to
justify his Actions, when on the contrary Timeus, who was banished Sicily by
that Prince, condemns him in every thing, and is as fertile in Invectives as
Callias was in Apologies. The latter being Obliged, had Notions quite contrary
to the former, who was Angry, yet they both saw the same thing after a
different manner. All this ought to Convince us, that Corruption has as many
ways into the Heart of Man, as there are Untruths to be met with in History.

After all, I would not have an Historian so very rigid as never to allow any
thing to his Country, his Prince or Friends; but to determine how far such
Favors ought to go, is the difficulty, and which I should not care to give my
Opinion about, till I had well considered of it.

As we complain of the small Sincerity of Historians, it would not be at all
convenient to Flatter them in the Draughts we are about to make of them, for we
are always to treat them with the same Liberty, as we would have them take in
writing Public Affairs. As near as we can, we ought to Paint them to the Life,
and Speak of their Works with the greatest Veracity. It is of great Importance
to know who speaks to us, and what we are to expect from him.

But to proceed: Having given the Reader an Account of the most considerable
Ecclesiastical Historians, together wherein we have also included the principal
of those that have written General Histories; we shall now proceed to an
Account of the ancient Greek and Roman ones. Wherein we shall besides a short
Relation of the Life and Writings of the Author, give a Character of him from
approved Critics.

. 1. Greek Historians.
I. Herodotus is the most ancient of all the Greek Historians, who have any
Writings extant; and therefore Cicero Styles him, The Father of History, and
Prince of Historians. Nevertheless, Pherecides, Dionysius of Miletum, Hecates,
Xanthus of Lydia, Charan of Lampsacus, Heilanicus and several others, have been
said by Vossius, to have written before him, but their Works have been long
since lost. Herodotus was born 4 Years before Xerxes's Expedition into Greece,
and 5 Years after the Battle of Marathon, which was fought in the third Year of
the LXXII. Olympiad. He was Native of Halicarnassus, a City of Dorida, which
was one of the Provinces of Asia Minor; and flourished from about the Year 3500
to the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, which happened in 3519.

The History we have of his, is divided into IX Books, which bear the Names of
the Nine Muses, (given them, as it is supposed, by some learned Persons on
account of the Elegancy of his Style) and contains a complete account of
Grecian and Barbarian Antiquities, from the time where the Holy Scripture fails
us, viz. The Reign of Cyrus, to the Time of Xerxes. The Dialect he wrote in, is
altogether Ionick, wherein he came so near Homer, that Longinus in his Treatise
of Sublime, assures us, That Herodotus, alone, has so perfectly imitated this
Prince of Poets, that he deserves the Name of (...). It was in Samos, that
Herodotus learnt the Ionick Dialect, and where he Composed his History before
he retired with an Athenian Colony to Thuries, a City of that part of Italy,
which the ancient Geography calls, Magna Graecia.

Herodotus (says Father Rapin, in his Instructions for History) is the first
who has given a reasonable form to History, and his Merit consists in having
Chalked out a Path to those that were to follow him. His Style is Pure, Smooth,
Fluent, Agreeable and Elegant, and Athens exceedingly commended the Charms of
his Discourse. His Subject was both sublime and vast, for it comprehended the
People, Kingdoms and Empires of all Europe and Asia. Yet is he not every where
over-exact, because he took in too much Matter; but still I find him of
Sincerity more than ordinary, since he treats of the Greeks and Barbarians,
those of his Country and Strangers, without the least show of Partiality. I am
of Opinion, that Plutarch was too severe upon him, when he termed him a Partial
Historian; but this Reflection is not to be wondered at, since Herodotus had
spoken so freely of his Country of Boeotia: Rapin accuses Herodotus of straying
sometimes too far from his Subject. For (says he) an Historian is easily
exposed to Ramble, when he leaves his Subject, and then can never command
himself, if his Capacity be not extraordinary: So Herodotus frequently leaves
his Matter to amuse himself with tedious Digressions, which are for the most
part forced and unnatural; wherein, it is true, he follows the example of Homer,
who was justly reckoned the greatest Master of Method, but without the same
success; for though that Author often times takes a Flight, yet it always tends
to the Perfection of his Work, without ever straying from it.

It is certain, says M. de la Moth le Vayer, That Antiquity has left us nothing
more Instructive or Entertaining, than the Nine Muses of Herodotus. They
comprehend (according to Dionysius of Halicarnassus, his just Computation,)
what happened memorable in the World, during the space of 240 Years; that is,
from the beginning of Cyrus's Empire, to that of Xerxes, being the time when
our Historian wrote. The Bishop of Meaux, in his Universal History, terms
Herodotus the Great Historian.

Vossius de Historicis Graecis, Lib. 1. Cap. 3. says, That Herodotus designed
to have written the History of the Assyrians; wherein he was to treat of the
Kings of Babylon, but that he believed that Work was never Published, because
Herodotus was prevented finishing it by his Death. Yet we may read Lib. 8.
Hist. Animal. Cap. 18. that Aristotle accused Herodotus of advancing an Untruth
against Natural History, when he affirmed that an Eagle drank at the Siege of
Nineveh; for it is certain, that those Birds which have hooked Claws never
drink. Now this Passage which Aristotle reproaches Herodotus for, is not to be
found in his Work of the Nine Muses, and therefore must have been in his
History of the Assyrians, Nineveh having been the Capital City of Assyria,
which may give a reasonable conjecture that he had written that History; yet
nevertheless, the Ancients have made no manner of mention of it.

Vossius does not believe that the Life of Homer, found at the end of
Herodotus's History, belonged to him, as some would have it, and the Reason he
gives, seems to carry Authority along with it. For (says he) Herodotus in his
Euterpe, places the Birth of Homer above 200 Years more backward than the
Author of his Life has done.

Herodotus died at Thuries, whither he had voluntarily banished himself to be
the more intent on his Studies and the Composing of his History.

II Thucydides was of illustrious Parentage. It is reported, That his
Grandfather Married the Daughter of a King of Thrace; but what is more
certain, is, That he himself was a Citizen of Athens. He was a young Student in
one of the most famous Colleges of Greece, at the same time that Herodotus read
his History. With this Work he was infinitely Charmed, and could not help
showing so much Jealousy of the Author, as if he had despaired of ever
performing the like, which Heredotus perceiving, immediately Prophesied that he
would be a great Man; and moreover told his Father, That he was happy to have a
Son at this Age, who had so great a Sense of Fame and Glory.

His History was designed to have contained all the Peloponesian War, being
that between the States of Athens and Sparta, which lasted full 27 Years, but
he died while he was about the 21st Year of it: Theopompus supplied the 6 other
Years. This History of Thucydides, is divided into VIII Books.

Cicero professes a great esteem for Thucydides, his manner of Writing; when he
Styles him, Authorem subtilem, Acutum, Brevem, Sententiis, magis quam verbis
abundantem. Lib. 2. de Oratoria.

Father Rapin likewise, in his Instructions for History, affords this Author
great Commendation, for he says the same thing of his Style as Cicero had done
before him. The Style of Thucydides (says he) is more Noble and Lofty, than
that of Herodotus; yet at the same time, it fails of being so Natural and
Easy. In some places it has those harshnesses, which render it Obscure, and it
is every where more Luxuriant than the Style of Herodotus. Thucydides (says the
same Author in another Place) has Fire, Force and Grandeur; every thing in his
Writings keeps up its self, and nothing Languishes and Grovels. It is in this
that he excells Herodotus, who frequently loses himself and grows too
diffusive, where he gives too great a loose to his Genius. Longinus observes
that Thucydides sometimes confounds the most regular Methods, the better to
surprise by a disorder, and to change his Narration the oftener. He also,
sometimes, relates Things past as if they had been present; and this to have
the advantage of describing an Action, which moves a Reader more, as likewise
renders him more Attentive.

Lucian finds fault with this Author's description of the Plague of Athens, in
the second Book of his History; and this perhaps, with reason enough, for
however Prudent he may be allowed in other places, yet there he has run out a
little too much.

Lucian says also, that Thucydides has succeeded better than other Historians
in his Harangues; for what he puts in the Mouths of the principal Actors in his
History, viz. Pericles, Nicias, Alcibiades, Archidamus, sometimes a whole
Nation together, are adm^rable Instructions for Orators, and to which
Demosthenes was not a little beholden, who became so great a Master in that Art.

Vossius says, after Lucian, that Demosthenes copied Thucydides's History eight
times with his own Hand, and likewise, that the Emperor Charles V. always
carried a French Translation of him about him wherever he went.

Monsieur Rapin says farther, That Thucydid^s and Livy, are both sufficient to
acquaint a Man what Genius History requires; for that Antiquity has nothing to
boast of more perfect, than their Works. There is nothing almost to be desired
more in either of them, unless it be, that the former were more Natural, and
the latter more Sincere. Thucydides has established his Reputation with so pure
Ideas, that he deserves to be Credited in all Ages. It is hard to meet with one
of this Author's excellent Temper; who though he had been extremely wronged by
the Tyrant Pericles, yet he always praised him as often as he found occasion,
and did frequent Justice to the Athenians, though they had Banished him their
Commonwealth. He was a Man not at all guided by Passion, and who proposed
only, in what he writ, to content the Judgment of Posterity, by always speaking
the Truth. In a word, Thucydides was exact in all that he writ, and faithful
and disinteressed in all he said; and though he sometimes seems Austere and
Su^ly, yet is it ever what consists with Grandeur.

Photius says, that as Herodotus is to be imitated by those that have a mind ^o
be perfect in the Ionick Dialect, so is Thucydides by such as would excel in
the Attick.

Monsieur Le Vayer says, that Thucydides had the Honor to be the first that
gave a Soul to History, by the several Harangues he made use of in all the
three kinds (...). Wh^^ before him, it was but either a (...) or dead Body. He
flourished about the (...) before Christ, A. M. 3490.

(...) Xenophon the Son of Gallus, a Native of Athens, was all at once a great
Philosopher, a great General and a great Historian. Diogenes Laertius reports
one thing of him, which sufficiently demonstrates his Honesty. He says, that
the Works* of Thucydides having been lost, and one Copy remaining only in
Xenophon's Hands, whereby that Author might have published them for his own; he
nevertheless gave them to the Public, under the Name of their great Compiler.
Notwithstanding this, the Athenians having afterward suspected him of adhering
to the Lacedaemonians their Enemies, banished him their Country. He flourished
about the Year of the World 3560.

He is the first Philosoper that applied himself to write History; insomuch,
that whom we here rank among the Historians, Diogenes Laertius, who writ his
Life, places among the Philosophers.

Xenophon's History in what relates to the Affairs of the Greeks, includes the
space of 48 Years. It begins where Thucydides ended; for Xenophon brings
Alcibiades home again, when Thucydides left him just as he was thinking of his
Retreat.

This Author also writes the History of the Ten thousand Greeks, who were
before supposed to have been lost in Persia, but which he brings back again in
safety to their own Country. Xenophon herein, was both their Historian and
General, for he commanded those Troops, and therefore relates nothing but what
he had either seen, or was done by his order. He made them likewise to overcome
whatever was opposed to them in their Expedition.

His Life of Cyrus, is a Book abounding every where with excellent Morality and
surprising Politics; but still it is thought he had drawn that Prince not as
he was really, but rather as he ought to have been.

Xenophon has all along writ with a great deal of Art. His Style is Attick,
which occasioned him to have the Name of the Be, or the Athenian Muse.
Quintilian says, that it seems to him, that the Graces were very lavish of
their Favors throughout Xenophon's whole Works.

Father Rapin says, that Xenophon had the Skill to make that Pleasant which had
few or no Charms in it self. Also, that nothing is more Coherent, Sweet and
Flourishing, than his manner of Writing.

Hermoneges takes notice of an admirable Model for a tender, kind and
passionate Narration, in the Death of Penthea Queen of Susa, related in the
Seventh Book of Xenophon's Cyrus. This (says Rapin) is one of the most engaging
Passages in all Xenophon. Every thing there is related after an engaging
Manner. He adds elsewhere, That the Picture ought to be according to the
Original, in which Xenophon has been extremely wanting; for in his Delineation
of Cyrus, he has given you only a Hero in Imagination, when he ought to
resemble the Natural one in all respects. Xenophon endeavors to imitate
Thucydides, who keeps within the bounds of his Subject, and who is more
Methodical than Herodotus. If Xenophon wanders never so little, as he has done
in the Fifth Book of his History of Cyrus, in the Adventure of Penthea; yet
this very wandering has some sort of Connection with the Body of his History,
Penthea having been taken by Cyrus in his defeat of the Assyrians, and
Abradates her Husband thereby brought over to Cyrus's Party, and became one of
the Commanders of his Army. In truth, I should not care for being responsible
for several others of this Author's Digressions, which have not always much
relation to the Subject he treats of. It must be out of Respect to Religion,
and the Gods who are so frequently brought in throughout Xenophon's Works, that
what he says is credited. Xenophon is pure in his Language, and natural and
pleasing in his Composition. He has a ready Wit, a copious Fancy, a sound
Judgment, a clear Imagination, and a neat way of turning his Thoughts, but yet
he has little or nothing of Great or Sublime in him. A just Decorum is not
always rightly observed in his History, where he sometimes makes Blockheads and
Barbarians talk l^ke Ph^los^ph^rs. Cicero, says that Scipio, could never lay
him aside after he had once taken him in hand, Longinus calls him a Degree of
Wi^, that was capable either of conceiving or dictating any thing* After all,
he is a complete Historian, and it is to him chiefly that Scipio and Lucullus
were behold^^ ^or their having been so great Generals.

IV. Polybius was of Megalopolis, a City of Arcadia, and Son to Licartas; Head
of the Achaians, that is, of the most powerful Republic in all Greece. His
History comprehends XL Books, of which we have only the Five first remaining,
together with the Epitome of the Twelve others that follow. Marcus Brutus is
suspected to have been Author of this Abridgment, who was so great a stickler
for the Roman Liberty. Brutus, who had no kindness for Cicero's Works, was yet
a Passionate Admirer of Polybius's History, which might probably occasion him
to Abridge it for his private use, to instruct and comfort him, especially
toward his latter Days, when he had so great need of it.

This History contained all that was remarkable in the World, from the
beginning of the Punick War, to the end of that which determined all
Differences between Rome and the Kings of Macedon, by the entire Name of the
Monarchy of the latter. This includes the space of 53 Years. Polybius gives his
History the Title of Universal, because he did not only treat of the Affairs of
the Romans, who were then concerned one way or other almost with all Nations,
but also writ concerning different Interests of the Kings of Sicily, Egypt,
Pontus, Cappadocia, Macedon, Persia, etc.

To Polybius's Credit be it spoken, no Historian ever took more care, or better
measures than he not to relate Matters unfaithfully. He Traveled on purpose to
survey those Countries he was to write of, and passed over the Alps with some
part of France, by reason that he intended to give an Account of Hanibal's
Expedition into Italy.

Let us see what Monsieur Rapin says of him: Polybius (says he) is more Grave
than Thucydides, he does not so often introduce Scipio speaking, although he had
a kind of right to do it, having all along waited upon him in his Wars.
Polybius has frequent Digressions upon Politics, the Art of War, and the Laws
of History, which do not seem very necessary: Polybius is a greater Libertine
than Xenophon. He treats of the Opinions, the People of those Days had of their
Gods and Hell, as Fables, and did all he could to Explode them.

In short, it is not to be doubted, but that Polybius was an Atheist, having
little or no kindness even for that very Religion which he professed. Observe
how he talks at the latter end of his Sixth Book. If (says he) a Republic were
to consist only of Wise and Virtuous Men, what would become of those fabulous
Notions of Gods and Devils? But as there is no State without bad Government and
ill Actions, Religion must necessarily be made use of to instill a Panick fear
of another World, and consequently to deter by pronouncing imaginary
Punishments. This the Ancients have so prudently Established, that it is now
looked upon as Impious and Rash to question it. Causabon undertakes this
Author's Defense, and endeavors to prove that he was not the Man he was
reported to have been. But after what we have just related to him, no Body can
imagine that Causabon succeeded in his Design. Polybius flourished about the
Year of the World, 3828.

V. Diodorus Siculus was Native of Agyrium. He wrote his History at Rome, in
the time of Julius Caesar, and of the Emperor Augustus. And because he would be
sure to Pen it with the greater exactness, before he set about it, he Traveled
through the greatest part of Asia and Europe, with incredible Hazards and
Fatigue. He gives his History the Title of Bibliotheca Historica, by reason
that he had therein collected according to the Order of Time, all that the
other Historians, as Berosus, Theopompus, Ephorus, Philistes, Callisthenes,
Timeus, and several more great Authors had written before him; but the
Misfortune is, that not only these famous Historians Writings are lost, but all
the greater part of Diodorus Siculus; for of 40 Books, whereof his History
consisted, there are only 15 now remaining. What a prodigious Loss is this! All
the Gold of Potosi would not be sufficient to reward the Person that should
recover these admirable Writings. Vtinam, (says Vossius) nobile adeo opus
integrum nobis pervenisset. Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer, upon this occasion
has these Words, I declare I would willingly go to the end of the World, were I
but certain of finding this great Treasure, and I cannot but envy Posterity,
the bare probability of recovering those precious Works.

This is what Diodorus's History contained, according to what he says himself
of it in his Preface. Our Six first Books, (says he) comprehend all that happened
before the War of Troy, together with many fabulous Matters here and there
interspersed. Of these the three former relate the Antiquity of the Barbarians,
and the three latter contain those of the Greeks. The eleven others which
follow these, include all that happened remarkable in the World from the
Destruction of Troy, to the Death of Alexander the Great. Lastly, the other
Twenty three extend to the Conquests of Julius Caesar, over the Gauls, when he
made the British Ocean the Northern Borders of the Roman Empire.

The Style of Diodorus, is that which we term Indifferent; and Photius is of
the same Opinion, when he says that Diodorus's manner of Writing is very clear,
and not in the least affected: That it is not too much after the Attick
fashion, nor too full of Old Words, and that in a word, it is very consistent
with History.

Father Rapin says, Diodorus Sicu^us is a great Man, but that he is too much
beholden to Philistes, Timeus, Callisthenes, Theopompus, and others.

Eusebius of Caesarea, set a great value on the History of Diodorus. He
frequently Quotes it with great Praises, or to say better, he has borrowed most
of his Evangelical Preparation from it.

Pliny, says of Diodorus, that he is the first among the Greek Authors, that
laid aside telling of idle Stories: Primus apud Graecos desiit Nugari Diodorus.

VI. Dionysius, usually styled Halicarnassaeus, because a Native of that City,
as Strabo in the XIV Book of his Geography observes. He came to Rome a little
while after Augustus had ended the Civil Wars, where he lived for 22 Years;
during which time, he collected all he thought necessary to assist him in his
design of writing a History. He owns that over and above the Memoirs, which the
most famous Romans then furnished him with, he was not a little beholden to the
Conversation he had with the meaner Citizens.

His History contained in all 22 Books, to which he gave the Title of The Roman
Antiquities, but whereof we have now only the Eleven first remaining, which end
when the Consuls first began to Govern, which happened in the Year after the
Founding of Rome, 312. The whole Work extended to the beginning of the Punick
War, in the Year of the Founding of Rome, 488.

Dionysius Halicarnassaeus himself, made an Abridgment of his own History, but
which Epitome never reached down to us; yet we should have no reason to regret
the loss of the Abridgment, were we but in possession of the Original. The loss
of this great Work is so much the greater, in that this Author was reputed the
most exact in his Chronology of all other Historians. Scaliger observes, That
we have no Author remaining, who kept good Order in the placing of his Years:
And what is more to be admired, is that Dionysius of Halicarnassaeus, although he
was a Stranger at Rome, yet has writ better of the Roman Antiquities than any
of the Latin Historians.

Le Vayer, cannot forgive this Author for his Credulity, in believing all the
frivolous Stories he relates, which have not the least resemblance of truth in
them. It plainly appears, (says he) that he was imposed upon by all the Old
Women of his time, whose Chimney-corner Tales he reported for Miracles. Few
Historians can escape sometimes telling Rhodomontades, which nevertheless have
an Air of greatness in them, which envigorates their Writings; but this Author
suffered himself to be so wholly carried away by them, that he never cared to
distinguish between Probable and Improbable. Thus he makes Clelia that
illustrious Roman Maid, who had been given in Hostage to King Porsenna, to
escape, and to swim through the Tyber to Rome, where she had only asked leave
to Bath in it. But Valerius Maximus mounts her on Horseback, and makes her
escape that way, which is the more probable of the two; for can it be believed,
that a timorous Girl, who was apprehensive of the least danger, would undertake
to swim through a River, when there was no occasion for it, the Peace being
then almost Concluded? But yet it must be acknowledged, that there is something
Great, Heroic and Wonderful, in a Roman Lady's throwing her self into a River
like a Mad body.

Monsieur Rapin says, That the Exhortation Dionysius Halicarnassaeus puts into
the mouth of Brutus, to stir up the Roman People to revenge the Death of
Lucretia, and the Harangue which he makes for Valerius, about the most proper
form of Government, are both too long and tedious. That Photius extremely
commends his Digression in his VII Book, where he describes the Tyranny of
Aristodemus. That Dionysius Halicarnassaeus in his Roman Antiquities shows a
great deal of Sense, Knowledge, and Reasoning. Moreover, that he is very Exact,
Diligent, Judicious, and much more sincere than Titus Livius. Also, that he is
more to be valued yet at the bottom, that he is a very Prolix Orator.

VII. Plutarch was of Cheronea, a City in Baeotia: His Works show us, that he
was a Philosopher, Historian, and Orator all at a time. He first studied under
Ammonius, and afterward Traveled into Greece and Egypt, to consult the
Learned there; then he returned to Rome, and was greatly esteemed by the
Emperor Trojan, who honored him with the Dignity of Consul. He has writ
several Treatises, but what we set most by, is his Lives of the most
illustrious Men, both Greeks and Romans. He has always met with great
Commendation, whereof Vossius gives an extraordinary Instance. He says, That
Theodorus Gaza being one day asked, If all Books were to be cast into the Sea,
which should be thrown last? Gaza answered, that it should be Plutarch. This
Gaza, was a Person of great Merit, and who retired into Italy, much about the
time that the City of Constantinople was taken by the Turks. There Cardinal
Bessari^n honored him with his Protection, and for his Maintenance procured
him a Benefice in Calabria.

VIII. Arrian, Native of Nicomedia, a City of Bithynia, was a Disciple to
Epictetus. It is reported of him, that he was both a Philosopher, Geographer,
Historian, and Lawgiver. Suidas says, He was brought up to the Consular
Dignity, that he had been in great request among the Romans, and that by reason
of the softness of his Style, he was termed a second Xenophon. Under the Reign
of the Emperor Adrian, he had very considerable Employments. He has composed
VII Books of the Conquests of Alexander the Great, and one which treats
particularly of the Indies.

Photius says, That Arrian has no reason to give place to any Authors whatever,
though they have got the Name of the best Historians.

Rapin says, That Arrian is but a Copyer of Xenophon, and an affected Imitator
of his Excellencies, he having made VII Books of the Conquests of Alexander, as
Xenophon has of those of Cyrus.

There is also of the same Author A Description of the Euxin Sea, and the
several Countries that lie about it. As likewise another Of the Red Sea, with
the Coasts of India, and the Persian Gulf. But these are only Pieces of
Geography, which have little or no relation to History.

M. de la Mothe le Vayer, says thus of this Author, What I shall further add
concerning this Author is of great Consideration, for although Arrian has often
followed Maximus Tirius, for which Ptolomy so severely blames him, yet has he
given a much more exact Description of the Oriental Indies, than Ptolomy
himself has; as the modern Relations of the Portugals sufficiently prove.

Arrian studied in the Place of his Birth, where he became a Priest of Ceres
and Prosperpine before he went to Rome, as appears by his History of Bithynia,
quoted by Photius, but which is now lost, as well as that of the Alani and
Parthians.

IX. Appian descended from one of the best Families in Alexandria, came to Rome
in the time of the Emperor Trajan. He there practiced the Law for some time,
and pleaded with so great Force and Eloquence, that he was soon advanced to be
one of the Procuratores Caesaris, and afterward carried to greater Dignities
in the Empire, under Hadrian and Antoninus Pius.

His History contained XXIV Books, beginning with the burning of Troy, and
proceeding through all the Progeny of Aeneas, to Romulus and the founding of
Rome. Afterward, describing the Reigns of the VII Kings, etc. he comes to the
Empire of Augustulus, and from him onwards down to Trajan.

Of all this great number of Books, we have at this Day but the least part
remaining, which are those of the Punick, Syriack and Parthian Wars, those
against Mithridates, the Spaniards, and Hannibal, together with the Civil Wars
and those of Illyrium; for as to those against the Celtae and Gauls, we have
only a few Fragments left.

Photius calls Appian an Impartial Author, but which some will not allow,
accusing him of flattering the Romans, to whom he always gives the Advantage in
a Battle.

Scaliger says he is a very Novice in History, and that he has stolen what is
best in him, calling him Alienorum Laborum Fucum.

Rapin, says he, was a Copyer of all the Greeks that treated on the same
Subject, which occasioned his Style to be as various as the Books from whence
he stole. He has taken from Plutarch what he thought Fine. Yet after all, his
Works are not so much to be despised, for they contain great Matter of Learning.

X. Diogenes Laertius appears in this Rank, on no other account than that he
has wrote the Lives and History of the Philosophers; for if we should be
obliged to mention none but such as had compiled a Body of History, we must
have retrenched Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, and several others that follow,
they having written only some particular Histories.

To tell precisely the time and place of this Author's Birth is difficult.
There is a great deal of reason to believe he was a Grecian, by reason that he
commends that Country so extremely, for he says, Greece is as well the Mother
of Philosophy as of all Mankind.

Vossius says, Laertius lived under Antoninus Pius, or little after. It is that
Arria, to whom Diogenes Dedicated his Lives of the Philosophers, that was
mentioned by Gallen, in his Treatise de 'Theriaca. She was much esteemed by the
Emperors, because she loved Learning, and adhered to the Philosophy of Plato.

But for Laertius, he sufficiently shows he was of the Sect of Epicurus, as may
appear by several Passages in his Book. He is accused of treating oftentimes of
Matters he did not understand.

XI. Philostrates was of Lemnos, or as some will have it, of Tir or Athens, so
that the place of his Birth is uncertain. He lived under the Reign of the
Emperor Severus, and at the Command of the Empress Iulia, composed the History
of Apollonius Thianaeus in VIII Books. In the Life of this famous Magician,
there are a great many incredible things; and although Philostrates in his
Preface has professed to have followed the best Memoirs, yet is he suspected to
have had very erroneous Guides. He makes his Apollonius work as many Miracles
as one Hierocles did, who compared him to Jesus Christ. But whom Eusebius
confutes in a Treatise written on purpose. Ludovicus Vives speaking of
Philostrates, says, That he has corrected Homer's Fables with much greater of
his own. Magna Homeri Mendacia majoribus Mendacijs corrigit.

There are two or three more Authors of this Name, which we must not confound
with the Author of Apollonius's Life.

XII. Dion Cassius was of Nice, a City of Bithynia. His Father Apronianus was
Proconsul of Cilicia, when as Adrian came to the Roman Empire. Dion Cassius
also himself had had several considerable Employments in the Roman Empire,
particularly had twice the honor of the Consulship conferred upon him; by
which it is plain, that he had all the necessary Qualifications to write the
History of his Time; since he spoke of things whereof he had been Eyewitness,
and as one that had had a share in the Government of the State.

His History consisted LXXX Books, divided into VIII Decads, of which we have
only the least part transmitted to us. The Five and thirtieth Book is the first
of those we have left; and we have but summary Abstracts of the preceding
Thirty four, and an Abridgement of the Twenty last made by Xiphilinus, a Monk
of Constantinople. He had begun his History with the arrival of Aeneas in
Italy, and pursued it down to Heliogabalus, and the beginning of the Reign of
Alexander Severus his Successor: 'Twas under this last Emperor that he
Published his History, which he had undertaken by the Command of Septimius
Severus, and the impulse of his Genius; for Dion Cassius boasts of a Spirit
that directed him, and who had done him many a good turn. And indeed, it looks
very strange, that a Foreigner rich and powerful should live easy, and keep up
his great Credit in Rome, under the Reigns of Commodus, Caracalla, Macrinus,
and Heliogabalus, who took a particular delight in putting to Death the best of
Men. However, if what he related in his 72d Book about his Familiar be false,
yet we must acknowledge the admirable Prudence and wise Conduct of that great
Man, in the most difficult Times for Merit and Virtue.

There Is one thing very unaccountable in Dion Cassius's History, which is his
Satirical Invectives against Cicero, Brutus and Seneca, whom he charges with
the most enormous Crimes. I shall not mention any of them, because they rather
deserve to be blotted out of his Writings, than any stress to be laid upon
them: And it is upon that score, that Vossius charges this Historian with Malice
or want of Judgment; Omnino haec aut insignem judicij defectum, aut malam
mentem arguunt.

At last, Dion Cassius, through the inspiration of his Genius left Rome, and
returned to his Birthplace, to avoid the ambush that the Pretorian Soldiers
had laid for him. He retired to Nice, says Mr. de la Mothe le Vayer, toward
the latter end of his Life, to pass there in quiet the remaining part of it, in
which he did like those Animals, which are said always to come and die in their
Form.

Father Rapin gives us this Judgment upon him: Thus the long Discourse which
Dion makes in the 56th Book of his History, in Commendation of Marriage and
Celibacy, is not very much to the purpose. The Speeches of Agrippa, and
Moecenas to Augustus; the first of which advises him to quit the Empire, and
the others to keep it, are both admirable in Dion Cassius, but they are so
long, that they make up the whole 52d Book. Dion Cassius has lost his Credit
with most Men, by the extraordinary Things he relates without Judgment: For
instead of following the Truth, he runs into improbabilities, as when in the
66th Book of his History he tells you, That Vespasian restored a Blind Man to
his Sight, by Spitting on his Eyes.

XII. Herodian was originally a Grammarian of Alexandria, as well as his Father
Apollonius, surnamed Discolos, or difficult. He spent the best part of his Life
at Rome, in the Court of the Emperors, where he had an opportunity to inform
himself with the curious Nicety observable in his Books, of a thousand fine
things not to be met with any where else.

His History is divided into VIII Books, and contains a Series of Seventy
Years; that is, the Government of all the Emperors that have succeeded one
another, from Marcus Aurelius Antoninus the Philosopher, to the Young Gordianus
Son to the first.

Dion Cassius, and Herodian, are the first that have acquainted us with the
Pagan Ceremonies, which the Romans used in the Funeral Honors paid to the
Ashes of the Emperors, and all that was practiced at their Consecration, and
Apotheosis, that is, as their being ranked amongst the Gods. Dion Cassius gives
us a very curious Description of the Funeral Pomp of the Emperor Augustus,
which is one of the finest Pieces in all his Works; and he does not forget to
tell us with what dexterity they made the Eagle fly from the top of the Funeral
Pile, from whence that Jupiter's Bird seemed to carry up to Heaven the
Emperor's Soul.

Herodian, in imitation of Dion Cassius, describes very finely the Funeral
Rites performed to the Ashes of the Emperor Severus, which his Sons had brought
from England to Rome, in a Vessel of Alabaster: He acquaints us how they were
received with Adoration by the Senate and all the People, and carried in an Urn
by the Consuls to the Temple, where the Sacred Monuments of the Emperors were
deposited, etc. These things deserve to be seen in the Original, to which
therefore we refer the Reader.

Photius speaking of the Merit of Herodian's History, does not stick to say,
that if we attend to all the Parts requisite in an Historian, there are few
Authors that ought to be preferred before him.

XIV. Zozimus, who flourished under the Reign of the Young Theodosius, has
composed a History divided into VI Books. The 1st gives a summary Account of
the Lives of the Emperors from Augustus to Dioclesian, but we want something of
it. Photius pretends that Zozimus made bold with the History of the Cesar's,
written by Eunapius; how far this Charge is true, we cannot well determine,
because we want Eunapius's Work. Vossius relates that there was a Report in his
Time, that the Manuscript of Eunapius's History was in the Library of Venice:
However, the Five other Books of Zozimus are much larger and more exact,
particularly when he comes to the Times of Theodosius the Great, and his two
Sons Arcadius and Honorius, because he then speaks of what he has seen himself
He descends as far as the second Siege, which Alaric laid to Rome, and speaks
of the occasion of his falling out with Honorius.

Photius says, That Zozimus snarls and barks like a Dog at Christians; and it
cannot be denied, but that this Pagan Author had an implacable hatred against
the professors of Christianity, which has made him guilty of Injustice upon
some occasions. For although Constantine, and the other Christian Emperors were
not altogether free from great Crimes, and upon that score ought not to be
spared by an Historian, especially that does not forget their Virtues; yet it
is certain, that the hatred he had for Religion, has given him a singular
Complacency in inveighing against the Vices of Constantine, and other Christian
Emperors. It Is also out of the same Spirit that he charges the Christian
Religion with all the Miseries that befell the Romans; and ascribes the decline
of their Empire, to the Contempt they had for the old Religion, and the Worship
of those Gods, under whose protection Rome had flourished for 1200 Years.

Leunclavius, a Learned German Apologizes for Zozimus, and says, That it is no
wonder for a Pagan to speak ill of the Christian Religion: However, there is an
excess of Heat and Animosity in his Writings, which transgresses the Laws of
History, and therefore can never be justified.

XV. Procopius was of Caesaria in Palestine, from whence he came to
Constantinople, in the time of the Emperor Anastasius. He was both a
Rhetorician and Lawyer, and came afterward to be Secretary to Belisarius,
whose Actions he has celebrated. His History contains VIII Books; the two first
which treat of the Persian War, have been Abridged by Photius, in his
Bibliotheca. The two following speak of the War of the Vandals, and the four
last describe the Wars of the Goths.

Besides these VIII Books, there is still a Ninth, which has made a great deal
of Noise in the World; it is Entitled (...), that is, Inedita, Things not
Published; This is a most bitter and abusive Satyr against the Emperor
Justinian and the Empress Theodora; and these August Persons are no less
defamed in these Anecdotes, than they are commended in Procopius's History. If
they are both of the same Author, Procopius deserves to be branded with the
Character of a base contemptible Wretch, since he could blow Hot and Cold, as
we say, in the same Breath. People have been very hot upon this account; and
Mr. le Vayer, after having arraigned him with his u^ual Abili^y, concludes
however, with saying, That after all, those Anecdotes, were perhaps never
written by Procopius, because according to the Opinion of the Learned, the
Greek of that Work differs very much from that of the VIII Books of his
History. This deserves some Consideration, and teaches us not to be too rash in
condemning any Body.

There is still another Work of Procopius, which is a Treatise, or rather a
History of the Edifices which Justinian raised with a royal Magnificence.
Evagrius tells us, That he had made it his business to repair and build up
again anew 150 Towns. Rapin, says Procopius, in his secret History, is very
exact in things of no importance, and forgets to give us the particulars of
what is most material. Josephus, Appian, Dion Cassius, Procopius, are great
Speakers, as well as Thucidides and Xenophon, who had taken this humor of
haranguing out of Homer. Procopius draws the Picture of Theodora by her Amors.
Procopius discontented with the Emperor Justinian, and the Empress Theodora
follows his Passion and corrupts Truth. Procopius is exact in his Accounts,
because he accompanied Belisarius in the Wars, and was a witness of his great
Actions; but he is too dry in his History of Persia, which looks more like a
Journal than a History. He gratified his Passion by writing his secret History,
but he hearkened to his Moderation by suppressing it; for they Published after
his Death, what he had taken care to conceal during his Life: wherein he is not
altogether inexcusable.

XVI. Agathias tells us himself in his Preface, that he was of Murina, a Town
in Asia, (which he distinguishes from another of the same name in Thrace,) and
followed the Law at Smirna. His History, which contains five Books, was
undertaken by the Advice of a certain Eutichianus, first Secretary of State,
who, without doubt, furnished him with curious Pieces, and important Memoirs,
without which he could not have so well succeeded in it as he has done. He
begins his History, where that of Procopius ends, that is, at the Death of the
Emperor Justinian, or under the Empire of Justin II. Mr. de la Mothe le Vayer
says, That among several very remarkable things which are found in the five
Books of Agathias's History, we must take a particular notice not only of what
he says concerning the succession of the Oriental Monarchies toward the end of
the Second; but principally what he adds in the Fourth, about the succession of
the Kings of Persia, from that Artaxerxes, who wrested the Empire from the
hands of the Parthians who had usurped it. For besides the exactness and
industry of Agathias, in handling this Subject, the authority of one Sergius,
(who procured from the Annalists and Library-keepers of the Kings of Persia,
what this Author reports), carries a great weight along with it.

Having now surveyed the most considerable Greek Historians, or at least the
chief of what are still extant, we shall proceed to the Latin.

. 2. Latin Historians
I. Julius Caesar was as great a Man by his Pen as by his Sword; which makes
Quintilian say of him, that he wrote, and spoke, and fought with the same
superiority of Spirit; Eodem animo dixit quo bellavit. Caesar had almost an
universal Knowledge, and Pliny speaks of him, as of a Prodigy of Learning and
Wit. He learnt Astronomy in Egypt, and Published afterward a Tract concerning
the motion of the Stars; which was the more curious, in that he foretold his
own Death, upon the Ides of March. If what Pliny says, be true, we must own
that Caesar has had a more active and vigorous Mind than all the rest of Men.
He reports, that he used sometimes to Read, Write, Dictate, and hearken to
other People at once; that he made nothing of Dictating four Letters of
Importance at the same time, and that he has often kept seven Amanuenses
employed.

Caesar has composed a great many Works, but I confine my self to those which
relate to History. His Commentaries which contain VII Books, have always been
in great Esteem. They are so naked, says Cicero, and so destitute of those
Ornaments, that he was able to give them, that one may plainly see he never
designed to write a complete History. These VII Books of the Gallick Wars, are
for the most part an Account of Caesar's Actions, and he seldom mentions any
thing but what he has been an Eyewitness of: We may say the same of the three
Books of the Civil War against Pompey, which are certainly Caesar's,
notwithstanding what some have said to the contrary.

The Learned do remark, That his Books are full of excellent Things, and such
as are able to Form both great Captains and wise Politicians; which gives
Vossius occasion to exclaim against those Masters of the Latin Tongue, who put
Caesar's Works into the Hands of their Disciples, only for the sake of the
Elegancy and Propriety of the Language: This, says he, is to admire Leaves,
while we neglect the most excellent Fruit in the World. Vossius's Advice upon
this Matter, is too important to be omitted in this place; these are his very
Words. Sane ex eo haurire est maxima^um and utilissimarum rerum copiam, quam
verborum elegantia contenti negligunt; minus etiam Pueris sapiunt, qui nunquam
ita se arboris frondibus oblectabunt, ut egregios ejus fructus contemnant. [De
Hist. Lat. l^b. 1. cap. 13.

Monsieur Rapin, says Xenophon, has a soft delicate way of Writing: His
Discourse, which is like a pure and clear Stream, has no Parallel in all the
Writings of the Ancients, except Caesar's Style* than which nothing was ever
writ with greater Purity in Latin. The Observation of a modern Critic, who
finds a difference of Style in the Books of the Civil War, which he pretends
not to be written with the same Purity as the Wars in Gallia, is a squeamish
Niceness which I cannot but wonder at; for my part I must freely own, that my
Taste is too gross to be sensible of it, and therefore I am of Suetonius's
Opinion, who puts no difference between them: I am charmed with the Elegancy
and Simplicity of that Author, and find no Body that ever writ with so much
clearness. Thus Caesar, as plain as he is, has something more noble in the
plainness and simplicity of his Discourse, than Tacitus in all the Pomp and
Stateliness of his Expressions: And we meet sometimes with a Negligence in the
Ancients, better than all the Accuracy and Exactness of the Moderns. Caesar's
Narrative is admirable by its Purity and Eloquence, but it is not lively
enough, and wants a little of that Force which he used to desire in Terence.
One cannot be said to write History who barely relates the Actions of Men,
without speaking of their Motives; but he is rather like a G^zet^er, who is
contented to acquaint us with Matter of Fact, without tracing it to its Spring
and Cause. Just as Caesar, who relates simply his Marches and Incampments,
without acquainting us with the Motives of them. All his Narration is too plain
and naked; however, it may be said for him, that he only writes Memoirs. Caesar
has an Extreme entirely opposite to Tacitus: In him you find but a plain, naked
Style, without Tropes and Figures. and destitute of all manner of Ornament.
Nothing is so tedious as a Description too nice and minute; which Faults Caesar
runs into in his Commentaries, when he describes his Warlike Machines. It seems
as if that great Captain, whose Reputation in the Military Science is so well
established, had also a Mind to gain that of a good Ingineer: There is in that
a certain Air of Affectation unworthy of so great a Man. In point of Harangues,
Polibius is more discreet than Demosthenes; but Caesar is more cautious still,
for he seldom makes any of those Speeches, because they do not consist with the
Truth of History, and chooses rather to write bare Memoirs, that his Discourse
may be more plain. Caesar has been the greatest Master of Expression that ever
was. Pedants are in the right when they admire the inimitable Purity of his
Style, but I admire more his good Sense; for never did any Man write with so
much Discretion, and he is perhaps the only Author in whom we find no
Impertinence. He speaks of himself as an indifferent Person, and is ever
constant in the wise Character he has taken upon him. It Is true, he is not a
perfect Historian, but then it is certain also that he is an admirable Pattern
to write History, It Is a great Honor for that incomparable Author, that Henry
IV. and Lewis XIV. have made it their Business to translate part of his Gallick
Wars.

II. Cornelius Nepos flourished in Julius Caesar's time, and is said to have
lived till the 6th Year of the Emperor Augustus. He is thought to have been
born near Verona: From thence he came to Rome, where he got into the Intimacy
and Friendship of several considerable Persons, among whom Cicero and Atticus
do not hold the last Rank. It appears by what we have left of him, that he had
composed the History of the Greek Historians, and that of the Latin Captains
and Historians, with several other Works, which have all been lost We have
nothing left of him but the Lives of the most illustrious Generals, both Greek
and Roman, which Aemilius Probus has endeavored to steal from him. For it is
reported that Probus, to get some Reputation with the Emperor Theodosius,
having found this Work which was quite forgot, published it as composed by him;
but in process of time the Cheat was found out.

Vossius says, That Cornelius Nepos seems to have writ a Body of History, or a
sort of Chronicle which comprehended the uncertain, fabulous, and historical
Times, and grounds his Conjecture upon the Testimony of some ancient Writers.
But however, we have nothing left, but the Grief of having lost them. Vossius
endeavors to justify Aemilius Probus of the Theft they charge upon him, by
saying, That Cornelius Nepos, such as we have it now, is perhaps but an
Abridgment of some greater Work of that Author, made by Aemilius Probus. The
Latin of Cornelius Nepos is very fine, and therefore Vossius calls him Iulian's
Aevi Scriptorum.

III. Sallust was born in a Town of Abrusia, a Province of the Kingdom of
Naples, a Year after the Birth of Catullus at Verona, and died 4 Years before
the Battle of Actium. He was Tribune of the People the same Year that Clodius
was killed by Milo, which is also the same that Pompey was Consul, for several
Months, without a Colleague, Sallust never did any thing for his Reputation in
the honorable Employments to which he was raised; he was all along a Slave to
his Pleasures, and having squandered away his Estate, he was obliged, to
maintain his Extravagancies and Debaucheries, to commit a thousand Robberies,
in the Dignities which Caesar's Favor conferred upon him. He obtained the
Government of Numidia, which he ransacked to that degree, that being returned
to Rome he purchased there a magnificent House and fine Gardens, which to this
Day are called Sallust's Gardens, and a fine Country House besides. We have
observed somewhere, That an ill Man ought not to be suffered to meddle with
History, because it is impossible but that his Work shall have some Tincture of
his Morals. Nevertheless it has fared quite otherwise with Sallust, who is
certainly a good Historian, though a bad Man; and what is still more particular
in him, is, That he inveighs most bitterly against those Vices of which he was
himself guilty.

We have but some Fragments of the principal History of Sallust, which began
with the Foundation of Rome; but Antiquity has transmitted to us two of his
Pieces whole and entire, viz. Catiline's Conspiracy, and the War against
Iugurtha. His Works are incomparable without Dispute, and are generally
esteemed by all the Learned. His Style is severe and short, which makes him
sometimes obscure. Wherefore Quintilian advises Youth to spend more time upon
Titus Livius, than Sallust. For, after all, it is a very hard Matter to avoid
Obscurity, when one endeavors to be so concise; and unless a Man can pretend
to the great Talents which Sallust had, he will never be able to be like him,
both short and intelligible.

There are some Pieces of inestimable Value in Sallust. Spartian calls that a
Divine Oration which is in the beginning of the Iugurthine War, and which
Sallust puts in the Mouth of Micipsa, then ready to die, to exhort his Sons to
be united. This is the same which, as Spartian relates, the Emperor Severus
sent to his eldest Son, toward the latter end of his Life, which is no small
Credit for Sallust.

Now let us hear Monsieur Rapin speak. Sallust is great and sublime in his way
of Writing, which makes Quintilian compare him to Thucidides. But the Question
is, Whether Sallust's Style, as stiff as it is, is not better and more proper
for History, and gives not more Weight and Force to the Discourse? Has it not
also its Beauties? Sallust's Character is to be exact and concise; he is
principally to be commended for the sweetness and rapidity of his Discourse,
which animates him, and gives him so much Life. Sallust's description of the
Place where Iugurtha was defeated by Metellus, serves to acquaint us the better
with the Fight. We see by it the Fortitude of the Roman General, as well as the
Experience of the King of Numidia, in taking all the Advantages of the Ground;
and the whole Account of the Fight is better understood by the Image of the
Place which the Historian sets before our Eyes. The Description of Africa, in
Sallust's War of Iugurtha, is too minute and particular: He should not have
said so much to make the Bounds of the Kingdom of Atherbal and Iugurtha, then
in question. What need was there to describe all that vast Country, and to
distinguish the particular Manners of so many different Nations? Trogus charges
Sallust and Livy (and not without a great deal of Reason) with a wanton and
immoderate Excess of Harangues in their Histories. And indeed all those
Speeches we put in the Mouths of great Men, carry with them an Air of Falsehood;
for from what Memoirs can a Man pretend to have fetched them? And besides, a
Warrior never speaks like an Orator. Therefore Harangues are Supposititious, as
well as that which Sallust makes Catiline speak to the Conspirators, which
probably was secret and extemporary. Most of Sallust's Harangues are always
admirable, but never to the purpose: Nothing can be finer than Marius's Speech;
it is the soundest Piece of Morality in the World, concerning a noble Birth;
every thing there is reasonable, and Antiquity cannot boast of many Discourses,
where one may find so forcible Persuasions to Virtue; but that is out of its
proper Place: And the Air with which he makes Cato and Caesar give their
Opinions in the Senate, himself (as great as he is) is little proportioned to
the rest of the History. We ought to make the Picture of none but important
Persons, wherein Sallust is faulty; for he gives us the Picture of Sempronius,
who is but indirectly concerned in the Conjuration of Catiline. Sallust, with
all his Simplicity, is too prolix when he inveighs against the Corruption and
loose Manners of his Time; he is always angry with his Country, and always
discontented with the Government: He gives us too ill an Opinion of the
Commonwealth, by his Invectives and Reflections upon the Luxury of Rome. Thus
nothing can be more eloquent than the Description of the Condition Rome was in,
when Catiline took the Resolution of making himself Master of it: And when that
admirable Author represents the Commonwealth, corrupted by Luxury and Avarice,
and sinking under the Weight of its own Greatness, he uses the most exquisite
and eloquent Expressions that can be met with in any History. It Is in those
Images that a Man of Skill has an opportunity to show it; and the Historians of
the first Rate are full of those fine Strokes. Sallust's Preambles, which are
great Speeches, full of Sense and manly Eloquence, seem to me to carry with
them an Air of Affectation: They are generally Common Places that have no
Relation to the History. Perhaps this Author had some Pieces of Reserve, which
he employed upon occasion, as Cicero used to do: That Method may be good for an
Orator, who speaks often in Public; but such Precaution is not allowable in an
Historian, who is supposed to be Master of himself and of his time. Among the
Latins, Sallust has a noble Expression, a true Wit, and an admirable Judgment.
No Person ever imitated so well the judicious, exact and severe Style of
Thucidides: He is sometimes stiff in his Expressions, but he never flags; his
Conciseness makes him now and then obscure, his Manners are always true, and he
gives Weight to all what he says. His Sentiments are always fine, although his
Morals were bad: For he continually declaims against Vice, and always speaks
well of Virtue. I find him a little too morose and peevish with his own
Country, and too censorious upon his Neighbor; but take him all together he is
a very great Man.

IV. Titus Livius was of Padua, and not of Apona, as some have imagined: Soon
after he was come to Rome, he got into the intimacy of all the great Persons of
that Capital of the World, which gave him an opportunity to take all the
necessary Instructions for the Composition of his History, which he Published
under the Reign of the Emperor Augustus. He wrote one part of it at Rome, and
the other at Naples, where he sometimes retired to Study, and give himself up
entirely to his great Work. His History reached from the Foundation of Rome, to
the Death of Drusus in Germany, and contained 140 or 142 Books: But we have but
35 of them left, and those too by an additional Misfortune, do not follow one
another. The second Decad is wanting: We have only the first, third and fourth
with about a half of the fifth. As for what we want, we must be contented with
the Epitome or Abridgment which Florus has made of it; if so be that we can see
without indignation, a small imperfect Copy, which has in some measure robbed
us of so great and complete an Original. For Abbreviators are generally charged
as necessary to the loss of the Books which they Abridge. Men are naturally
lazy, and are glad to meet with Epitomes to save themselves the trouble of
reading great Volumes. Thus the loss of Trogus Pompeius is laid upon Justin,
and that of Dion Cassius upon Xiphiliuus, because they have Epitomized them.

There are a world of Learned Men that cry up to the Skies, the Merit of Livy's
History: Vossius, who relates all that has been said in his Commendation, gives
us in four words a fine Panegyric upon that Author; Nothing, (says he) can be
greater or richer than this Writer. Nihil hoe Scriptore est grandius atque
uberius. We have remarked somewhere in this Book, that Alphonsus, King of
Arragon, recovered of a very dangerous Fit of Sickness, by the reading of Titus
Livius: But we have forgot one particular, which does no less honor to that
Author, which is, That this great King as an acknowledgment of his Recovery,
demanded of the City of Padua, the Bone of the Arms wherewith that famous
Historian had writ his History; and having obtained his Requests, this Wise
Prince caused that Bone to be transported to Naples, where he received it like
a precious Relick.

However, in the very Age he lived, Asinius Pollio found fault with something
in him, which he calls Patavinity. This Patavinity was a Country way of
writing, such as North-Country Men and others will have with respect to the
English Tongue, unless they live a considerable time in London, or either of
the Universities. These was, says Quintilian, in Livy, a Country way of
Writing, that betrayed his Birth at Padua, and some Expressions which could
never pass upon the Courtiers, and Politest Men in Rome.

Some think it strange the Livy, who was a Man of Wit, should relate so many
populous Reports, which he did not believe at all himself, as he always seems
to in^inuate. His History is full of Prodigies: Now an Ox has spoken; another
time, a Mule has engendered; and then again, Men and Women, Cocks and Hens have
changed their Sex. There rains nothing but Stones, Flesh, Chalk, Blood and
Milk. The Statues of the Gods are said to have spoke, wept or sweated Blood. In
short, adds Mr. de la Mothe la Vayer, how many Apparitions of Phantoms do we
not find in him? How many Armies ready to engage in the Air? How many Lakes and
Rivers of Blood?

Monsieur Rapin speaks thus of him: The Nobleness of Livy's Expression ravishes
my Soul into ecstasy; it is about Two thousand Years since that Historian
commands a respectful intention from all Nations, by his Awful and Majestic
way of speaking, which has been the admiration of all Ages. To speak the Truth,
nothing satisfies my Mind so well as his admirable choice of Words, always
proportioned to his Sentiments, and his excellent manner of Expressiing the
Sentiments, always conformable to the things he speaks of. In short, he has hit
best of any Man upon that sort of Style, which Cicero advises to Historians:
And it is by that great Pattern, that Buchanan, Mariana, Paulus Aemilius,
Paulus Iovius, (and all those that have outlived the Times they flourished in,)
have squared their way of writing History. Livy has a very engaging way of
telling a Story, which is his admirable Skill of mixing little things with
great ones; because great things by themselves are fatiguing, and require great
attentions, whereas little ones are pleasant, and unbend ones Mind: According
to the same method he varies his Adventures, makes sad things succeed those
that are pleasant, and mixes very discreetly the shining with the Dark, that he
may keep up the Reader's attention by that agreeable Variety. The most perfect
Pattern we find in History, of a great Action related with all the heightening
and enforcing Circumstances, is the March of Hannibal into Italy, described in
the 31st Book of Livy's Annals. This, in my Opinion, is the most finished Piece
in all his History, and we meet with few things of that strength in all
Antiquity. Never was a greater Design framed by a more extraordinary Soul: And
never was any thing Executed with more Boldness or Resolution. The Question was
how to come out of Africa, go through all Spain* surmount the Pyrenees, cross
the Rhine, a River so broad, and so rapid near its Mouth, and whose Banks were
thick set with so many Enemies; open ones self a Way through the ragged Alps, a
thing never attempted before; March continually over Precipices; dispute the
Ground at every step with a People that lay in Ambush in a continued Defile,
and that too among the Snow, the Ice, the Rain, and the Torrents; brave the
Storms and Thunders; wage War against Heaven and Earth, and all the Elements;
draw after one an Army of a Hundred thousand Men of different Nations, and all
dissatisfied with a Captain, whose Courage they cannot imitate. Fear seizes the
Soldiers Hearts, and Hannibal alone remains in an unconcerned Tranquillity; the
Danger that surrounds him on every side casts all the Army into Consternation,
while his great Soul is still composed and serene. All things are described
with the most dreadful Circumstances: The Image of the Danger is expressed in
every word, and never was any thing in History either more finished, or touched
with deeper Colors, and greater or bolder Strokes. Quintilian declares that of
all Historians, Livy has signalized himself most by these render and delicate
ways, wherewith he has touched the softest motions of the Soul: The Rape of the
Sabinae, and the tenderness they expressed to disarm both the Romans their
Husbands, and the Sabins their Fathers: Lucretia's Death, and her Body exposed
to public view, to stir up the People to Rebellion against the Tarquins;
Vetturia prostrate at her Son Coriolanus's Feet, to avert the Siege of Rome
which he intended. Virginia Stabbed by her own Father; the Consternation Rome
was under after the Battle of Cannae, and a thousand such other Strokes touched
in his History, in the tenderest and most delicate manner, and with the most
pathetick Expressions imaginable, are fine instances of it. And it is
principally in this Author, that we ought to study the way of expressing the
Passions as they ought to be touched in History: For he never animates it but
where a Heat is requisite. The Description of the Place where Hannibal attacked
Minutius, in the 22d Book of Livy's Annals, is a Passage extremely well
touched. Livy speaking of Lucretia, who was so handsome in her Husband's Eye,
without mentioning her Face, does only describe her Virtue, and gives us in
four Words the greatest Idea we can frame of an honest Woman: Lucretiam nocte
sera non in convivio, luxuque, sed deditam lanae, inter Ancillas sedentem
inveniun^. Livy goes on his way, without stopping any where; he tells you what
he knows about the things he speaks of, and leaves the Reader at liberty to
make what Reflections he thinks fit, without preventing him by his own: And if
he does, it is but seldom, and then too in few Words, but Noble and Great; as
when he relates the Crime and Punishment of Appius, who had ravished Virginia.
The only Model we ought to propose to our imitation in point of Digressions is
Livy, when he steps out of the Roman History to speak his Thoughts about the
success which Alexander might have had, if he had bent his Arms against Italy.
He is very cautious in speaking his Opinion, and that too without laboring to
prevent the Minds of People by a studied excuse. His Reasoning upon that
Subject is very curious, and not at all out of its place. There are Beauties
that consist only in a turn of Eloquence or Wit. They are very surprising, and
look wonderfully well when artfully placed. Here are some Examples out of Livy.
Porsenna, King of Clusium, besieges Rome. Caius Mutius deeply touched with the
Danger his Country is in by so pressing a Siege, goes into Porsenna's Camp, and
kills the King's Secretary, whom he mistakes for the King himself, who stood
then just by him. The King Commands burning Coals to be brought to force him by
the Torment of Fire, to own his Accomplices: This Courageous Youth, without any
manner of Concern, puts his Hand into the Fire, and lets it burn to the last,
without so much as turning Pale upon the Matter, and thus bespeaks the King;
See what a Contemptible thing Life is to those who have true Glory in Prospect.
These Words spoken with Resolution, presently change the face of things. The
Murderer as odious and abominable as he is, casts the beholders into Wonder and
Amazement: They look upon him with respect, and send him back with
Commendation, at the same time that they were preparing the most exquisite
Torments for his Punishment. It Is only one Word that occasions this sudden
change, and this Word well placed is a very great Ornament in a Narration. Thus
Fabius having retaken Tarentum, Hannibal* the Vanquished, spoke these fine
Words, which savoured still of the Conqueror praising himself to praise his
Enemy: The Romans, said he, have also at last their Hannibal: This is a very
proud way of being humble. These Strokes are very frequent in that Historian;
and indeed, nothing can give a greater Idea either of these we make thus speak
when they do it well, or of him that makes them speak when he does it to the
purpose. Livy persuades more by his sound Morals, than great Capacity: For
through the various Intrigues, Interests, Passions, and other Disorders which
he describes, he gives a glimpse of an honest Mind, which proclaims a better
Man than Historian. We see in them the inmost recesses of the Heart, of those
he describes the very bottom of his own; and among the false Lights he
discovers in their Conduct, he is never out himself. He judges well of all, for
his Soul is as Upright, as his Wit is True. Livy is the most accomplished of
all Historians, for he has all the great Parts requisite to write History; a
fine, clear Imagination; a noble Expression; a true Judgment; an admirable
Eloquence. He has none but great Ideas in his Mind; he fills his Readers
Imagination by what he says; by that means he affects the Heart and moves the
Soul: He has the greatest Genius for History, and is one of the greatest
Masters of Eloquence that ever lived. I don't understand what Asinius Pollio
means by reproaching him with a Country way, savouring of Padua, which he calls
Patavinity. His great Talent is to make People feel what he says, by engaging
those that read him in his own Sentiments, by inspiring them with his Hopes and
Fears, and giving them all his Passions, by his admirable Art of setting the
most secret Springs of the Heart a going.

I hope the Reader will easily excuse me for dwelling so long upon Livy's
History: He is the great Master of this Art, and deserves to be well known; and
since no Man can give us a better account of him than Monsieur Rapin, I thought
it proper to give you this long Abstract.

V. Velleius Paterculus was nobly born, as he proves from those of his Name,
that had born the greatest Employments in the Army. And he had himself been in
the Wars with great Honor and Reputation. He had been Tribune of the Soldiers,
and had Traveled through the Provinces of Thracia, Macedon, Achaia, Asia
Minor, and on both the Banks of the Euxin Sea; so that both by his Employments
and Travels, he had great advantages to write History. The two Books that
remain of History, (for the greatest of his Works are lost,) begin about the
Sixth Year of the Reign of Tiberius, and are dedicated to Marcus Vinicius
Consul, who had Married Tiberius's Granddaughter.

His Style is pure, clear, elegant, and such as is thought worthy of the best
Age of the Roman Empire: There are in his History some particulars not to be
found any where else. Never did any Man know better than he, how to blame and
how to commend; yet, in some Peoples Opinion, he goes a little too far in the
Praises he gives to the House of Caesar Augustus. But how can a Man avoid that
Fault, when he writes his History before the Eyes of the reigning Family?
Therefore I easily forgive him the excessive Praises he gives to Tiberius; but
really he is guilty of too gross Flattery, when he bestowed so much Incense
upon Sejanus, his Favorite, whom he endeavors to make pass for the honestest
Man that Rome ever saw.

Velleius Paterculus is very exact in setting down the Times of the Events he
speaks of; he describes the Original of several Cities; he makes the Eulogy of
those that have been famous in the Wars, in the Government of the State, or in
the Sciences; in short, there is a great deal to be learnt from that Author.

Father Rapin speaks thus: Paterculus and Florus are florid, genteel, delicate
and agreeable in their mean way of Writing. Let Paterculus be pretty, trim and
genteel in the Character he has pitched upon; but let Livy be great and
serious, because small Beauties have need of Ornament to show themselves,
whereas the great ones need no Addition to their natural Graces. We must always
speak within bounds; let an Historian never diminish or exaggerate Things,
either as Tacitus, who casts his Venom upon every Thing, or Paterculus, who
makes every Thing look gay and pleasant.

VI. Quintus Curtius was a Roman Knight; the Age he lived in is not well known,
but the most common Opinion is, That he flourished under the Emperor Vespasian.
Quintilian, who mentions all the Historians of Note in the Tenth Book of his
Institutions, written in Domitian's Time, yet says not one Word of Quintus
Curtius's History; which induces us to believe, That his Work might not have
been Published at that Time; which Opinion is also confirmed by the silence of
the other Ancients.

Quintus Curtius has written the History of Alexander the Great, in X Books;
but the two First, with the end of the Fifth, and some little places of the
Tenth, have been lost. There is not a more excellent Author among the Latin
Writers, than Quintus Curtius: He may be said to be among Historians, what
Alexander is among Conquerors; and that the Panegyrist is to the full as great
as his Hero. So that Alexander would have now no Reason to complain that he had
not, like Achilles, Homer to celebrate his Actions. Some are for Livy's Style,
others for that of Tacitus; but all agree upon the Excellence of that of
Quintus Curtius, which is beyond all dispute worthy of the Age of Augustus, as
Vossius speaks: Imo vel Augustaeo aevo digna est dictio. Iustus Lipsius says
that he is the Author that Princes should make themselves most familiar with,
and that they ought to have him continually in their Hands.

Let us now consult Rapin's Judgment upon this Author: Quintus Curtius, says
that Critic, is shining and florid. Nothing can be more Polite than Quintus
Curtius; he has a florid and gay Expression, which extremely pleases the Men of
Wit. Every thing ought to be grounded upon Reason; and therefore Quintus
Curtius is not always in the right: When he endeavors to make his Hero so
admirable, he does not make him take the wisest Resolution, but on the
contrary, the most Heroic and Perilous; he always finds a Charm in Danger,
and cares not so much for Conquests, as the Honor of Conquering. It is in his
Power to surprise Darius in the Night, and by that means keep him from knowing
how weak he was; ( Darius having double the Men): But this great Man who is
less sollicitous of getting a Victory, than making his Valor to be admired,
attacks the King of Persia in the broad Day, being resolved rather to die with
Honor, than Conquer by a Surprise. Darius after his defeat, offers to divide
Asia with him, and proposes a Match between him and his Daughter; but Alexander
rather chooses to arrive at Glory through Dangers, than become a Master so
peaceably; he will hear none of these Proposals, and aims at nothing but what is
extraordinary. His Historian, I must confess, does him a great deal of Honor;
but does not all this great Honor want a little probability? Does he not make
his Hero more Rash than Wise, and more Venturesome than Ambitious? He thought
those Sentiments more noble without doubt; but on the other side, he has
strained them too far, and has given us Reason to question, Whether he has left
us a Romance or a History. Quintus Curtius might very well have spared to make
Alexander so infamous as he does in some Places. There are some privileged
Persons, whom we ought to treat with Civility and Respect; we may, indeed,
relate their personal Faults, but we must never offend their Dignity, or debase
their Greatness. Quintus Curtius deserves to be commended for his Sincerity,
for he speaks the good and the bad of Alexander, without being prepossessed for
the Merit of his Hero. If one can find Fault with his History, it is for being
too Polite: But nevertheless he has excelled in a pleasant and natural way of
describing Manners. That Character of Perfection which is conspicuous in those
great Men, is not to be found any more in the succeeding Ages.

VII. Cornelius Tacitus was born of a Noble Family of Roman Knights, and was
raised to the highest Dignities in the Commonwealth: He lived under the Empire
of Vespasian and the succeeding Emperors, with all the Reputation and Honor
due to his Birth and personal Merit.

He was in Years when he set himself to Write, and 'twas under the Empire of
Trajan that he composed his History, of which we have but V Books left.
Afterward he wrote his Annals, great part of which have also been lost.
Besides those two Works, he published a Treatise of the Manners of the several
Nations who, in his Time, inhabited Germany; and the Life of Agricola, his
Father-in-law

The Learned seem to be divided as to the Judgment that ought to be made of his
Style; yet the Truth is, that Tacitus is an incomparable Writer. The corruption
of his Text, occasioned by the Ignorance of the Transcribers, does perhaps make
him more obscure than he would be of himself; and this is the Opinion of
Monsieur de la Mothe le Vayer. But let some People say what they please, the
best way is to side with Vossius, who finds so much Eloquence, so much
Correctness and so many Beauties in Tacitus, that he does not stick to say,
that he is be best and wisest of Writers. Quis enim non videt Dictio Taciti,
quam sit elegans, quam tersa and limata? Et tamen major est laus ista, quod
nihil eo Scriptore, vel cogitari possit prudentius.

The Emperor Tacitus, Two hundred Years after the Death of Tacitus the
Historian valued himself upon bearing the same Name with him, and being
descended from him. He caused his S^atue to be placed in all Libraries, and to
preserve his Works to Posterity, he caused them to be Transcribed Ten times a
Year. But all the Care that Emperor used has been in vain, since of One and
twenty Years of his History, we have only the account of one left, and V Books
of about Thirty, according to St. Ierom's Opinion.

The Great Duke Come de Medicis made choice of Tacitus among all other
Historians, as one from whom he expected more sound Precepts and Instructions
for his Conduct, and more solid Satisfaction to alleviate the Cares which are
inseparable from the Government of a State, when a Prince endeavors to merit
the Title of Father of his Country. Casaubon is quite of another Opinion, and
maintains in his Preface to Polibius, that the Reading of Tacitus is most
dangerous for Princes, by reason of the many ill Examples, which are scattered
up and down his Works.

The Style of Tacitus, says Monsieur Rapin, is not very proper for History, for
it is full of Starts; and when it shines, it is like a Flash of Lightning, which
dazles more than it gives light. Tacitus is a starting Wit, that skips from one
thing to another. His Sense comprehended in few Words, is too close for the
Readers Capacity, which is often pusled with it: And because he does not follow
Nature in what he relates, and generally forgets that he Speaks to Men, so he
seldom instructs us as he should. As for Example, when upon the occasion of the
Papian Law, he relates the Original of Laws, or when in another place he
describes the Privileges of Sanctuaries, he does not trace things back to
their beginnings; he never explains things thoroughly, nay, sometimes he gives
a false Account of them, as when he takes upon him to describe the Jewish
Religion in the fifth Book of his History. His Style is also very improper for
it, which is a great Fault in an Historian, whose primary Function is to
instruct. Tacitus is still more uneven than Sallust: His Connexions are
generally forced, and the Thread of his Discourse very much Broke and
Interrupted, which is no small discouragement to the Reader, who cannot follow
him without putting himself out of Breath. There can be no better and exacter
Description than that which Tacitus makes, of the Treat which the Empress
Messalina gave to Silius her Favorite Gallant. This was a Vintage Feast with
all its Ceremonies, the Season being then Autumn, and favorable for that
purpose. Mirth, Pleasure, Effeminacy, Wantonness, Impudence, Lewdness and
Debauchery; all in short is there described, with an exqiusite Elegance and
delicacy of Expression: The particulars are related succinctly, discreetly, and
withal, in a very lively manner: And nothing can be more judiciously placed, to
make, by that gay Picture, the Death of Messalina, which follows soon after,
the more Tragical and full of Horror. In short, there are some happy
Circumstances which give a particular Grace to every thing, when a Man knows
how to employ and place them as he should. As for Figures, Tacitus is not so
scrupulous; he seems to aim at nothing but to dazzle us: The boldness of his
Metaphors and other Tropes, makes his Expression so high strained and
troublesome. Tacitus is an ill Husband of his Fire, for he uses it every where;
his Colors are also too strong and glaring; and because he is often too
expressive in some things, and does not Paint them to the Life, he therefore
seldom affects us. A Description ought not to be too minute and particular, but
such as is the Description of the Isle of Caprea, in the fourth Book of the
Annals of Tacitus; for we find in it the Reasons Tiberius had to retire thither
toward his latter Days, which makes it necessary; and as it is Concise,
Polite, Elegant, and has nothing in it either Impertinent or Superfluous, it
may be said to be a perfect one. Nothing can be finer than the Speech which
Tacitus makes Tiberius Speak to the Senate, upon the Reformation of Luxury, in
the third Book of his Annals: Never did any Historian make a Prince Speak with
more Dignity. A Picture ought to be true and resembling, wherein Tacitus is not
very exact, for he rather chooses to follow his own Fancy, than imitate Nature;
and endeavors more to make fine Pictures, than true ones: If his Pictures can
but please, as that of Sejanus in the fourth Book of his Annals, he little
cares whether they resemble or no, for he makes Sejanus a great deal worse than
he was, if we can believe Paterculus, who commends him. Tacitus draws the
Picture of Tiberius by his Actions, by which only he makes him known. Tacitus's
Politics are often false, because his Morals are not true: Either he makes Men
too bad, or he is not himself plain enough. His Reflections are not natural,
because they want Innocence. He Poisons and puts an ill construction upon
Things. He has by that Humor spoiled several People, who imitate him in that,
though not able to do it in any thing else. The Question of the Phoenix, which is
related in the sixth Book of Tacitus's Annals (upon the occasion of the News
brought to Rome of a Phoenix which appeared in Egypt under the Reign of
Tiberius) is according to the Rules of an allowable Digression. The Question is
scanned and examined by the different Opinions of the Naturalists about this
extraordinary Bird, whose Qualities, Figure and Shape are succinctly described.
These sort of Strokes well placed in a Narration are a great Ornament to it,
and serve wonderfully well to stir up the Readers curiosity and keep his
attention awake. This that follows is a fine Stroke taken, out of Tacitus. In
the height of the Mirth and Frolicks of that famous Treat which Messalina gave
her Lover, they caused a poor simple Fellow called Valens, to get up into a
Tree, and asked him what he saw: A Storm (said he) which gathers in the Air and
comes from Ostia. These Words spoke by that blundering Fellow, spoiled
presently all their Sport, and cast a deep sadness into every Body, though
blurted out at random and without design; for they were a Prognosticating of
the return of the Emperor, who arriving soon after, caused the Empress to be
stabbed, being grown weary of her Lewdness. Those Strokes that have something
surprising in them, are very happy in History. Tacitus has no good Morals; He
is a great Dodger, that covers a bad Soul under a very fine Wit: He is mistaken
in true Merit, because he thinks there can be no other than that of being
cunning; and he always speaks more out of Policy than according to Truth. He
not only has ill thoughts of his Neighbor* but also he shows no Piety or
Reverence for the Gods, as one may see in his Discourse upon Fate against
Providence, in the VI Book of his Annals, wherein he ascribes all to the Stars
and blind Chance, upon the occasion of Trasullus, one of Tiberius's
Astrologers, who was grown his Confident at Caprea. So difficult it is for an
ill Man to be a good Historian; for one has generally the same Principles with
the other. Tacitus relates so many Obscenities of Tiberius, that Bocaline
cannot bear with him for it. Tacitus has a particular way of describing Things
and Persons, different from all the rest; but he sticks too much to great
Things, and will not descend to the little ones, which are not always to be
slighted. He thinks well, but he does not always hit upon a clear Expression.
He is sometimes too much a Philosopher. He is peremptory in his Decisions upon
every thing, and speaks as if the Fate of all the World lay at his mercy. He
Moralizes upon the Follies of others, that he may Lash every Body, and speak
ill of all Mankind: He has spoiled a world of People, by creating in them a
desire of studying Politics, which is the most vain of all studies: This is
the Rock against which so many Spaniards, as Antonio Perez, and so many
Italians, such as Machiavel and Ammiralio have split.

VIII. Lucius Florus was of the Family of the Annae^, of which were also the
Seneca's and Lucan, and which was originally come out of Sp^in, as appears by
what he says in his History to the Honor of that Country. He flourished Two
hundred Years after the Empire of Augustus, and wrote the Roman History in IV
Books. His Style is so florid, that it is almost all Poetical, and full of
Printed Wit^icisms and glittering Thoughts, which makes Vossius say that
Florus's Work is but a continued Declamation. He acknowledges however the
Elegant Style of that Author, and owns that he maintains the Genius and
Character of those of his Family, who were all born to Eloquence and Poetry.
Dictio quoque hanc domum sapit. Nam ea Eloquentiae and Poeseos laud, inclyta
fuit. At dictio Historici hujus est diserta, and poeticae proprior; imo opus
ipsum vox aliud quam declamatio est.

Florus takes some Liberties not to be allowed in an Historian, and which
become none but a Poet. When he speaks of Decimus Brutus his Expedition along
the Celtick Coast, and that of Galicia and Portugal, he assures us that Brutus
would not stop in the career of his Victories, till he had seen the fall of the
Sun into the Ocean, and heard the dreadful Extinction of that fiery Planet in
the Waters of the Sea: That afterward Brutus had a scruple upon him, and was
sorry he was gone so far, fearing to be accounted a Sacrilege, by seeing more
than his Religion allowed him to do. This does not become a sincere Historian,
because it is all false, whereupon Scaliger says, Putida (...) sunt haec.

This that follows is a Vision, which a Man of Sense ought not to relate but as
a popular Report. When he speaks of the Defeat of the Cimbri, by Marius, he
tells us that two Young Men appeared in Rome, near the Temple of Castor and
Pollux, presenting to the Praetor Letters adorned with Laurel, as a sign of that
Victory. We must take notice that Florus is a very ill Guide in point of
Chronology, for either he did not know it, or he did extremely neglect it in
his Roman History. These are the Spots and Blemishes in Florus's History: Rapin
says of him that he is florid, genteel and agreeable in his mean way of Writing.

IX. Suetonius Tranquillus, Son to Suetonius Lenis, Tribune of the XIII Legion,
began to flourish about the end of the Reign of Vespasian. He was in great
Reputation under Trajan and Adrian, having been Secretary of State to the
latter. He was turned out of this Employment for being too familiar with the
Empress Sabina, which was looked upon as a Breach of the respect due to the
supreme Authority.

This Author has writ the History of the first 12 Caesar's; which makes up a
Series of History of above a Hundred Years. He is beyond dispute one of the
principal Authors of the Latin Tongue; and Bodinus assures us, that none of the
other Historians ever writ any thing more exact or more finished than what we
have left of him. St. Ierom, who had taken him for his Pattern, when he begun
his Catalogue of the Ecclesiastical Writers, says that Suetonius has writ with
the same freedom as those Emperors lived of whom he writes the History. And
indeed he relates a great many obscenities which the World would not much care
to know; and it were to be wished, says Muret, that Suetonius had not informed
us so well of so much Lewdness, as Tiberius, Nero and Caligula have been guilty
of. For it is to be feared, that when a Man relates so many Impurities, he may
seem to set up a School to Teach them. There are some other Pieces of
Suetonius, but they do not concern History.

X. Justin, according to the most probable Opinion, flourished in the time of
Antoninus Pius. He is the Abridger of Trogus Pompeius's History, and so they
charge upon him the loss of that great Work.

The History of Trogus Pompeius, contained XLIV Books, and Justin has kept to
the same Number in his Abridgment. The Latin of Justin is very fine, and such
as is thought worthy of the Age of Augustus.

As for Trogus Pompeius, he was a Native of the Country of the Vocontii in the
Gallia Narbonensis, and flourished under Augustus. His Grandfather was made
Free of the City of Rome, through the favor of Pompey the Great: And his
Father, after having born Arms under Caesar, became his Secretary and Keeper of
his Seal. The Loss of his History is one of the greatest Misfortunes that could
happen to the Commonwealth of Learning: It began at Ninus, the Founder of the
Assyrian Monarchy, and came down as low as the Emperor Augustus.

In Iustine's Epitomy of this History, there are many Chronological Faults,
which ought not to be imputed to Trogus Pompeius, for he was a Person too
skilful to be guilty of them.

THESE are the most considerable Writers of the Roman Story, which was
continued by those commonly called Augustan Writers, whose Names were
Spartianus, Lampridius, Capitolinus, Vulcatius, etc. and afterward by Amianus
Marcellinus, a faithful and judicious Historian, who flourished in the Year of
Christ 375. and Aurelius Victor, who lived in 395. and was an Author of great
Prudence.

But to give particular Accounts of these and the many other Historians, who
will claim the same Respect, would too much swell our Volume; and they may be
the rather omitted, because those that follow are abundantly short in
excellence of those we have been speaking of; which the learned Gerhard Vossius
declares and confessed, that the good Days of History were past, and the
doting Age of it began after the Antonines, when he began his second Book of
Latin Historians with these Words, Transitur ad Historiae Senectutem.

It is exceedingly useful to a Reader, to be made acquainted with the History
of the Author's Person and Circumstances, together with a Character of his
Work, before he begins to read it; for whereas without being preinform'd,
perhaps half the Book shall be read before he discover it, and many
Excellencies and Beauties, and it may be Faults, of the Work passed by
unobserved, for want of such Knowledge. The Reader is on the contrary, very
much enlightened, and Studies the Author with a great deal more pleasure and
true Profit, when he is already taught wherein his excellency consists, or
where his Faults lie, that he pass not by the one without proper Notice, or be
(...).

It Is for this Reason, that we have given the preceding Account of Historians,
and have been so large in their Characters; wherein we have not presumed to
give our own Judgment, but only to set down that of such Critics as are of
approved Learning and Judgment: And this, we think, is the properest
Introduction to the Study of History.

We shall proceed now to a short, but distinct, and as exact as possible
Account of the most considerable Ancient and Modern Monarchies and Governments
of the World. But in as much as we perceive that the finishing this Work, so
perfectly as it should be, will take up greater space than we at first
intended, this Volume shall terminate at the Birth of our Savior; and
therefore having in this gone through the Three great Monarchies of Assyria,
Persia and Greece, together with the Chinese and Egyptain Monarchies, and the
several smaller Kingdoms and Republics that were contemporary with, and mostly
swallowed up by them; I say, having gone through these and the Roman History,
till the arrival of that Monarchy to its highest pitch of Grandeur under the
Emperor Augustus; we shall close this Volume, and compose another which shall
continue a General History down to these Times.

A SYSTEM OF Universal History. PART III.
CONTAINING A Compendious History and Chronology of the most considerable
Transactions that happened in the World, from the Creation to the time of our
Savior.

Exhibiting a Series of the History and Succession of the Governments of these
Nations, Viz: I. The Church of God under Patriarchs. The Israelites under the
Judges and Kings, and the Jews under the Highpriests and Captains. II. The
Assyrian Monarchy. III. The Persian Monarchy. IV. The Grecian Monarchy. V. The
Empire of China. VI. The Kingdom of Egypt. VII. The ancient Governments of
Greece, viz. of Athens, Lacedemon, Macedon, Corinth, Sicyon, Argos, Troy,
Lydia, Tire, etc. VIII. The Roman Monarchy, from its Origin to its
Establishment under Augustus.


Printed for Tim. Child. School.

A Short SYSTEM OF Universal History. PART III. An Account of the Ancient
Monarchies, which preceded the Birth of JESUS CHRIST.

CHAP. I. An Account of the Church of God under the Old Testament.
GOD created the Heaven and the Earth, and all that in them is. He created them
out of Nothing, by the sole Power of his Word, for his own Glory. He did not
make them all at once, as if it were out of Necessity; but in Six Days time,
and according to the Order which he thought most convenient. The first Day he
made the Light; the second he made the Heaven; the third Day he divided the
Heaven from the Earth, and caused the Earth to bring forth Herbs, Trees, and
all manner of Plants; the fourth Day he made the Sun, Moon, and Stars; the
fifth Day he made the Fishes and the Fowls; the sixth Day he caused the Earth
to bring forth all the other Beasts; and lastly, he made Man to command all the
rest of the Creation. The seventh Day God rested, having finished all his
Works; that is, he ceased from producing new Creatures. God made Man in his own
Image and Likeness; that is to say, after he had formed a Body out of the
Earth, he breathed into it the Breath of Life. It Is this Soul which is the
Image of God, because it is a Spirit. God having made Man, made also Woman to
be an help meet for him; and he made her of one of the Man's Ribs; that so the
Man and the Woman might love each other entirely, and be made one, as being but
one Flesh.

The Man whom God called Adam, and the Woman whom God called Eve, were Innocent
when they came out of the Hands of their Cteator; but they fell into Sin by the
Malice of the Devil, and involved all their Posterity in their Guilt, and in
all the Miseries consequent thereupon. All Mankind make up one sinful Mass of
Perdition; out of which, God makes choice of a small number of Persons to
compose the Heavenly Jerusalem. These Elect are mixed on Earth in the Church
among the Men of this World, whom God looks upon as Vessels of Wrath, and
abandons to his Justice. These Carnal and Fleshly-minded Men, together with the
Infidels, make up the Church of the Reprobate, which in Scripture Language is
called Babylon. All that happens here on Earth, is for the Sanctification of
the Elect, whose Assembly composes Jerusalem, which is actuated by no other
Principle than Charity; whereas Babylon, a Slave to its Lusts and Passions, is
under the Dominion of Concupiscence. So that the Church, the Object of our
Lord's Mercy, is the only thing which lasts in the World for ever. All Things
pass away, all Things perish; the most puissant Monarchies fall to decay. The
Church alone remains; tho God sometimes seems to abandon it, in order to
purify, correct, and prove it. This is what may easily be collected from the
whole Sequel of this Chronology; where we shall find, that all Empires have an
End, whilst the Church lasts always, and Jesus Christ brings within the Pale of
his visible Church all Nations of the Earth, by virtue of the Cross. This made
St. Augustine to say, that Jesus Christ became Lord of the Universe, not with
the Sword in his Hand, but on the contrary, by having his Hands nailed to the
Cross. His Words are, Quid fortius manu hac, quae mundum vicit, non ferro
armata, sed ferro transfixa.

Forasmuch as Christians cannot have any greater Interest, than to be
acquainted with the History of that Church, whereof they are Members: Their
Curiosity, methinks, might induce them to enquire how the Church of God still
subsists, even when every thing else decays, and submits to the Stroke of Fate
or Time. We can discover the Duration of Monarchies, trace their Beginning,
Progress, and End: But the Church Militant here on Earth is what began, and
will end with the World. What an amazing Sight is this! Can any thing more
excite the Curiosity of a Man of Genius, than to know how this Church, a
Stranger here on Earth, surrounded by so many Enemies, and which so many Kings
and Emperors attempted to destroy, has still subsisted spite of all the Fury
and Malice of Hell?

The Church of God under the Old Testament begins with the World, and ends at
Jesus Christ, who is the Cornerstone which under the Gospel reunites all
Nations in his Church, and which takes away that middle Wall of Partition,
which stood formerly between the Jews and the Gentiles. Its Duration is
according to some about 3950, according to others 4000 Years. But since it is
difficult to trace the Succession of so many Years together, without being
bewildered, we have assigned several Epochas, which may serve as so many Points
of Sight, to direct us farther; or as so many Breathing Places to rest in
before we proceed: We shall therefore consider the Jews to the Coming of Christ
under four kinds of Governments.

The first is Patriarchal, under 22 Patriarchs. The second is Judicial* under
22 Judges. The third is Regal, under 22 Kings. The fourth is Sacerdotal, under
22 Ancestors of Jesus Christ.
Sect. 1. The State of the People of God under the 22 Patriarchs.
This State lasts 2453 Years; that is, from Adam the first of Men and the first
of Patriarchs, down to Moses the first Governor or Judge of the Jews. Years of
the World. Years before Christ. 1. 1. ADAM is created by God, and lived 930
Years. 3950 130. 2. SETH is born; he lived 912 Years. 3820 235. 3. Enos is
born; he lived 905 Years. 3715 325. 4. Cainan is born; he lived 910 Years. 3625
395. 5. Malaleel is born; he lived 895 Years. 3555 460. 6. Iared is born; he
lived 962 Years. 3490 622. 7. Enoch born; he lived 365 Years, and is
Translated. 3328 687. 8. Methusalah is born; he lived 969 Years. 3263 874. 9.
Lamech is born; he lived 777 Years. 3076 1056. 10. Noah is born; he lived 950
Years. 2894 1558. 11. Shem is born; he lived 600 Years. 2392 1656. 12. The
Deluge, wherein all that had Life perished, except Noah and his Family, and the
Creatures which he took with him into the Ark. 2294 1658. 12. Arphaxad is born;
he lived 438 Years. 2292 1693. 13. Salah is born; he lived 433 Years. 2257
1723. 14. Eber is born; he lived 464 Years. 2227 1757. 15. Peleg is born; he
lived 239 Years. 2193 1781. The Chaldeans the first Observers of the Stars.
2169 1787. 16. Reu is born; he lived 239 Years. 2163 1819. 17. Serug is born;
he lived 230 Years. 2131 1849. 18. Nahor is born; he lived 148 Years. 2101
1878. 19. Terah is born; he lived 205 Years. 2072 1948. 20. Abraham is born; he
lived 175 Years* 2002
It is here to be observed, That there are some who place the Birth of Abraham
60 Years later, viz. in the Year of the World 2008, because (as they gather
from Genesis 12.4.) he was but 75 Years old when he departed out of Haran, which
happened after Terah's Death, who died in Haran in the 205th Year of his Age.
This Opinion seems to have very probable Reasons on its side, which inclined
Archbishop Usher, and others, to embrace it. But let the Case be how it will,
^e thought fit to make this Remark, and to inform the Reader, that
notwithstanding this, we chose to follow the Vulgar and more known Account,
that so our Chronology may be all of a Piece, and the Thread of it be the
better continued.

2023. Much about the time it was, that the Nations of the Earth being
notoriously given up to Idolatry, and the Worship of false Gods, God thought
fit to separate to himself a Chosen People from the rest of the Corrupted
World. Abraham was the Person made choice of to be the Head, and Father of all
the Faithful. He always led a Plain and Pastoral, but withal a Noble and
Magnificent Life: From his Loins proceeded the Savior of the World, Jesus
Christ; and he was the first Man whom God honored with his Alliance, stiling
him his Friend. 1927 2048. 21. Isaac is born; he lived 180 Years. 1902 2108.
22. Jacob is born; he lived 147 Years. 1842 2238. About this time Jacob
understanding that his Son Joseph (whom he thought to have been dead) was
living, and preferred to great Honor in Egypt, went down thither, as well to
have the Comfort of seeing him before he died, as to get a Subsistence for
himself and Family, because the Famine raged in all that Country, except in
Egypt. The Scriptures inform us, that Jacob's Family, who went down into Egypt,
was in all 70 Souls. 1712 2453. The Children of Israel remained in Egypt the
space of 215 Years, where they multiplied so exceedingly, even amidst the
Pressures of a very severe Bondage, which they endured after the Death of
Joseph, that they went thence under the Conduct of Moses Six hundred thousand
fighting Men, beside Women and Children. 1497
A REMAKK Concerning the Origin of the Nations of the Earth.
FOrasmuch as the whole Race of Mankind, except Noah's Family, perished by the
Flood; it is from this Family that all the People of the Earth descended.

Noah had three Sons, Iaphet, Sem, Ham.


I. SEM, tho the second Son, is the Person we place first, because from him
descended Abraham, David, and Jesus Christ himself according to the Flesh. He
had five Sons, 1. Elam, from whom came the Elamites, the Grandsires of the
Persians. 2. Assure, from whom came the Name of Assyria, and the Assyrians. 3.
Arphaxad, to whom was born Salah, the Father of Eber or Heber, from whom
proceeded the Hebrews, that is, the Jews, or the People of God. 4. Lud, from
whom proceeded the Lydians, not those of Asia Minor, but others less known upon
the Confines of Persia. 5. Aram, from whom proceeded the Syrians; Syria in the
Hebrew is called Aram.


St. Augustine makes this Judicious Reflection, That the Scriptures make no
mention of the Descendants of several of Noah's Children; as for Instance, of
Elam, Assure, Lud, the Sons of Sem, because they were not the Heads or Chiefs of
any Nation.

Aram had four Sons.

1. Vz, who seized upon Trachonitis, and the Country of Damas, and called one
of these Countries by the Name of Vz, where Job dwelt. 2. Hull, from whom came
the Armenians. 3. Gether, from whom proceeded the Bactrians. 4. Mesh, from whom
came the Mesraeneans, situated along the Gulf of Persia.
Heber, Arphaxad's Grandson, had two Sons.

1. Peleg, so called, because in his Days the Earth was divided into several
Nations and Languages. 2. Ioktan, who had 13 Sons: They were the Chief Heads of
several Colonies, who spread themselves over the Face of the Earth. 1. Almodad,
who became Master of all the Countries of the Indians, from the River Cophena,
which falls into the River Indus, according to Josephus and St. Ierom. 2.
Sheleph. 3. Hazarmaveth. 4. Ierah. 5. Hadoram. 6. Vzal. 7. Diklah, 8. Obal. 9.
Abimael. 10. Sheba. 11. Ophir, who gave his Name to that Country in the East,
from which they fetch Gold: And the Scriptures make mention of Mount Sephar
toward the East, which was upon the Confines of their Country. 12. Havila. 13.
Iobab.

II. HAM had four Sons.

1. Cush settled himself in Ethiopia, which the Hebrews to this day call Cush.
2. Misraim, who went into Egypt, which in Hebrew is called Mesraim, where there
is even at this day a City called Mesra. 3. Phut, from whom proceeded the
Inhabitants of Lybia and Mauritania, where at this very time there is a River
called Phut. 4. Canaan, from whom came the Canaanites, who were in possession
of the Holy Land till they were outed by the People of Israel.
Cush begat Nimrod, who began to be a mighty one upon Earth. He was one of the
greatest Hunters under the Cope of Heaven. The Capital City of his Kingdom was
Babylon; next to it, Erech, that is, Edessa in Mesopotamia; Achads, that is,
Nisiba; and Calneh, that is, Seleusia or Ctesiphonta in the Land of Shinar near
Babylon.

Out of that Land went forth Ashur, who built Nineveh, and the Streets of that
City, and Calah: He likewise built the great City of Resen, which lies between
Nineveh and Calah.

Cush had five Sons more.

1. Seba, from whom came the Sabeans in Arabia Felix. 2. Havilah, from whom
proceeded the Getulians in Africa. 3. Sabtah, from whom came the Sabathenians
in Arabia, where, according to the Account of Geographers, is situated the City
of Sabathai or Sabatia. 4 Raamah. 5. Sabtechah. St. Ierom says, that from these
two last Sons of Cush are descended such People, as it is hard at present to
reconcile their ancient Names with the new ones.
Raamah had two Sons.

1. Sheba, from whom descended the Sabeans, different from those which we have
already mentioned. For there are two Countries of Sheba in Arabia, both of them
famous for the Frankincense which comes from thence in abundance. The one is
writ with a Schin, and the other with a Samech. It Is from the first which the
Queen of Sheba came to visit King Solomon: And in the 71st Psalm, where we read
the Kings of Arabia and Saba, in the Hebrew it is (...), the Kings of Sheba and
Saba. 2. Dodan, from whom is derived, according to St. Ierom, the Name of a
Country of Ethiopia.
Misraim had six Sons.

1. Ludim, from whom came the Lydians, who are in Africa. 2. Anamim. 3.
Lehabim, from whom came the Lydians, formerly called Phuteans. 4. Nephtahim. 5.
Pathrusim. 6. Chas^uhim. As for four of these Nations, Josephus and St. Ierom
declare, That at present they are very obseure, because they were exterminated
in the Wars of Ethiopia.
Canaan had eleven Sons.

1. Sidon, who built the City of Sidon, and gave it his Name. The Canaanites,
who inhabited Phenicia and the Holy Land, have been famous for their great
Commerce, from whence came the Riches of Tire and Sidon. Upon which account it
is, that the Scripture gives in the general the Name of Canaanites to Merchants
and Traders. 2. Heth, the Father of the People who dwelt in the Promised Land.
3. Iebuseus; Iebus was the first Name of the City of Jerusalem, whose
Inhabitants, and those of the Neighboring Country, were called Iebusites. 4.
Amoreheus, the Father of the Amorites, who dwelt in the Promised Land, and whom
God ordered his People to drive out. 5. Gergeseus. From whom descended The
Girgasites. 6. Heveus. From whom descended The Hivites. 7. Araceus; from whom
came the Arkites, and from whom (according to St. Ierom) the City of Arcas near
Libanus took its Name. 8. Sineus, of whom came the Inhabitants of the
Wilderness of Sin, or rather of Mount Sina. 9. Aradeus, from whom descended the
Arvadites, and who gave his own Name to the Cities of Arade and Antarade; of
which Ezekiel makes mention. 10. Samareus, of whom came the Inhabitants of the
City and Country of Samaria. 11. Hamatheus, from whom proceeded the Inhabitants
of the City of Hamath. There are two of these Cities mentioned in Scripture,
the Greater Hamath, which is Antioch, and the Lesser Hamath, called Epiphania.
III. IAPHET had seven Sons.

1. Gomer, of whom came the first Inhabitants of the Country of Galatia. 2.
Magog, from whom proceeded the Greeks, the Messagetans, and the Scythians. 3.
Madai, from whom descended the Medes, and, according to several, the
Macedonians. 4. Iavan, of whom came the Ionians, and all the other Greeks. 5.
Tubal, of whom came the Iberians, who are situated beyond the Euxine Sea, and
not those who dwelt in Spain. 6. Meschech, from whom descended the Muscovites,
or the Capadocians. There is in Capadocia a City formerly called Mazaca, and
since named Cesarea. 7. Tiras from whom proceeded the Thracians.
Gomer had three Sons.

1. Ashkenaz, from whom came the Germans, whom the Hebrews at this very day
call Askenssim. 2. Riphath, of whom proceeded the Paphlagonians. 3. Togarmath,
of whom came the Phrygians.
Iavan had four Sons.

1. Elishah, of whom came the Italians, or the Inhabitants of the Fortunate
Islands, which were called Elisiae. 2. Tarshish, of whom proceeded the
Cilicians, the Capital City whereof is Tarsus. 3. Kittim, from whom descended
the Cyprians, of which the Capital City is called Cytinium. The Hebrews give
the Name of Chittim to all the Cities and Provinces which are upon the
Seacoast; for which Reason it is said of Alexander the Great, that he comes
from the Land of Chittim; and the same Name in Scripture is applied to Italy.
4. Dodonim, from whom came the Rhodians, or rather the Dodoneans in Epirus.
These are the Families of the Sons of Noah after their Generations in their
Nations, and by these were the Nations divided in tho Earth after the Flood,
Genesis X. 32.

And now after all this Account, does it not appear that the World is but of a
short Date? We here find Laws first Enacted; the Manners polished; Empires
founded; and Arts invented; The Earth we find peopled by little and little;
Experience improved; and Mankind by degrees awaking out of the Slumber of
Ignorance. Husbandry then began to be in Use; wild Beasts were caught, and
tamed for the Service of Mankind. Abundance of Inventions and Sciences began
then to appear, and Nimrod the first Warrior, and other of the first Heroes,
began to Signalize themselves. Should we look beyond this Account which Moses
has given us of the Origin of the World, we shall meet with nothing but
Darkness, Obscurity, and Chaos; and no Wonder if Fables and Fictions be the
Product of such Beginnings: Whereas if we fix here, we find Truth, and Light,
and Certainty, whereon to build some Assurance, and to which we may give our
free Assent and Consent.

A REMARK Concerning the Heads of the Families of the People of God.
JACOB had twelve Sons, who were the twelve Heads from whence the twelve Tribes
of the People of God proceeded.

By his Wife Leah he had six Sons.

1. Reuben. 2. Simeon. 3. Levi. 4. Judah. 5. Issachar. 6. Zabulon.
By his Wife Zilpah he had two Sons.

1. Gad. 2. Aser.
By his Wife Rachel he had two Sons.

1. Joseph. 2. Benjamin.
By his Wife Bilhah he had two Sons.

1. Dan. 2. Nephthali.
Jacob, who had a great deal of Esteem and Affection for Rachel, continued the
same Respect for her after her Death. Therefore having only two Sons by her,
Joseph and Benjamin, he adopts the two Sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses,
that so by placing these among the rest of his Sons, he might give himself some
Comfort for the small number of Children which he had by her.

It Is upon this account that Jacob blessed Ephraim and Manasses, as well as his
own Children, which he did after a strange and surprising manner. Manasses was
the eldest, and therefore Jacob's Right Hand should have been laid upon him,
and his Left on Ephraim. But the quite contrary happened, which made Joseph
inform his Father of the Mistake, supposing it had been through the Dimness of
his Sight. But Jacob tells him, I know it, my Son, I know it; Manasses shall
become the Head of many People, and he shall be great; but his Brother Ephraim
shall be greater than he, and his Seed shall become a Multitude of Nations.
Genesis 48.19.

These are the Heads of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and this is it that their
Father spoke to them, and blessed them every one, according to his Blessing he
blessed them. Genesis 49.28.

Sect. 2. The State of the People of God under the 22 Judges or Leaders.
This State lasts 426 Years; that is, from Moses the first Leader of the People
of God, to Saul the first of their Kings. Among these, there are six of the
Leaders who were not Hebrews, but Tyrants, to whom God delivered his People to
punish them for their Sins. Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2453. 1.
MOSES begins to govern the People of God, and leads them for the space of Forty
Years. 1497 2493. 2. IOSHVA governs the Jews, and within six years, about the
year of the World 2499, settled them in the Promised Land. 1457 2510. Joshua
dies, having governed the People of God about 17 years after the Death of
Moses. 1440
The Elders govern the Jews, who are obedient to God for the space of 15 years.

2525. There is an Interregnum among the Jews for the space of six years,
during which time the People lived according as they thought fit. They became
corrupted in their Manners, fell into downright Idolatry, and provoked God to
give them up to the Cruelty of their Enemies. 1425 2531. I. The First Servitude
which lasted Eight years. 1419
3. Chushan-rishathaim, King of Mesopotamia, oppresses the People of God.

2539. 4. Othniel frees the People of God from their Servitude. 1411 2551. II.
The Second Servitude which lasted Eighteen years. 1399
5. Eglon the King of Moab oppresses the People of God.

2570. 6. Ehud delivers the People of God. He was a valiant Man, and, as the
Scripture tells us, was Left Handed. 1380 2631. III. The Third Servitude which
lasted Twenty years. 1319
7. Iabin the King of Canaan oppresses the People of God.

2651, 8. Deborah, who judged the Jews, together with Barak, defeats Sisera,
Iabin's General, and delivers the People of God. Iael, Heber's Wife, fastens
Sisera's Head, while he was asleep, with a Nail to the Ground. 1299 2671. IV.
The Fourth Servitude which lasted Seven years.
9. The Midianites oppress the Jews.

2679. 10. Gideon defeats the Midianites, and delivers the Jews from their
Servitude. 1271
After the Death of Gideon, the Jews fall into Idolatry.

2711. 11. Abimilech, the Son of Gideon, desiring to be made King, kills his
seventy Brethren, and governs the Jews three years. 1239 2714. 12. Tolah judges
the Jews the space of three and twenty years. 1236 2737. Iair governs the Jews
the space of two and twenty years. 1213 2741. V. The Fifth Servitude which
lasted Eighteen years. 1209
14. The Philistines and Ammonites afflict the People of God in the time of
Iair's Government.

2759. 15. Iephtha succeeds Iair, delivers the Israelites from the Servitude of
the Philistines and the Ammonites, and governs the Jews six years. The
Scriptures take notice, that this Man made a rash Vow to sacrifice the first
who should give him the Meeting upon his Return from the Conquest, who happened
to be his own Daughter. 1191 2765. 16. Ibzan succeeds Iephtha, and judges
Israel seven years. 1185 2772. 17. Elon judges the Jews the space of ten years.
1178 2782. 18. Abdon governs Israel the space of eight years. 1168 2767. VI.
The Sixth Servitude which lasted almost Forty years. 1183
19. The Philistines afflict the People of God.

2789. 20. Sampson, when he was about Nineteen years old, being inspired by
God, undertakes to defend the Israelites, whom he judges for the space of
twenty years; and as far as he was able, delivered from the Tyranny of the
Philistines, of whom he killed great Numbers. At last, by the Allurements of a
Woman, he was made Prisoner by the Philistines, had his Eyes put out, and in
Revenge pulled down an House upon himself and three thousand People of the
Philistines. 1161 2810. 21. Eli governs the Jews the space of forty years, who
was so remiss in the Government of his loose and disorderly Sons, that he
provoked God to Anger against him; and upon hearing the News of his Sons
Deaths, and of the taking of the Ark, he fell backwards from his Seat, and
brake his Neck by the fall. 1140 2849. 22. Samuel succeeds Eli, and governs the
Jews the space of one and twenty years. 1101 2879. The Israelites require
Samuel to give them a King: He gives them Saul, who was about forty years old
when he began to Reign. 1071
Sect. 3. The State of the People of God under the 22 Kings.
This State lasted 481 Years, from the beginning of the Reign of Saul the first
King of the Jews, to the end of the Reign of Zedekiah, who was their last King.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2879. 1. SAVL is anointed King by
Samuel, and reigns over Israel ten years. Saul, contrary to the Order of God,
spares Agag the King of the Amalakites; at which God is offended, and sends
Samuel to acquaint him of his Displeasure, who makes Amends for the Fault of
Saul, by causing Agag to be put to Death. 1071 2889. The Army of Saul is
defeated by the Phililistines; his three Sons slain in Battle; and he being
very much wounded, laid violent hands on himself. 1061
2. DAVID having consulted the Oracle of God, returned into Judea, where the
Tribe of Judah anointed him for their King, being then about thirty years old.
Abner, Readiness General, takes his Son Ishbosheth to be King over the other ten
Tribes. But at last Abner being killed by Ioab; and Ishbosheth, after he had
reigned five years, being murdered by two barbarous Assassins, Rechab and
Baanah, David became King of all Israel.

2901. About this time it was that David fetched the Ark home; and Vzzias, who
laid hold on the Ark to keep it from falling, was struck dead. 1049 2926. At
this time David, out of a Motive of Vainglory, caused Ioab to number the
People; for which Offense, God sent the Plague among them, which in three days
time destroyed seventy thousand Men. 1024 2929. David, at the Instance of
Bathsheba and the Prophet Nathan, makes his Son Solomon King, the one being
about seventy, and the other about eighteen years old. 1021 2930. David dies,
after he had reigned above forty years, viz. seven and an half at Hebron, and
three and thirty years at Jerusalem. 1020 2931. 3. SOLOMON, when he first began
his Reign, married the Daughter of Pharaoh, and prays God to give him Wisdom.
1019 2934. Solomon builds the Temple which David had designed to do, but was
prevented from it by reason of the Wars wherein he was engaged. This temple
began to be built the fourth year of his Reign, 480 years after the coming out
of Egypt, and it was finished the beginning of the year of the World 2940, just
1010 years before the coming of Christ. 1016 2969. Solomon dies, after he had
reigned about forty years. 981
4. Rehoboam succeeds his Father Solomon. But this young King following the
Counsel of the young Men, and not that of the old Men, who advised him to use
his People mildly and with moderation in the beginning of his Reign, returned a
rough Answer to the Deputies of his People, and by this imprudent Act lost the
Kingdom of Israel. For all Israel, that is, the Ten Tribes, revolted from
Rehoboam, and took Jeroboam the Son of Nabat to make him their King. Here began
that fatal Division between the Kings of Judah and Israel, which lasted for so
many years after.

We will at present continue the Succession of the Kings of Judah, without
intermixing any thing of the Kings of Israel, that so we may avoid Confusion.
But after we have done with the Account of their Succession, we think it proper
to subjoin the Series of the Kings of Israel, adding what happened most
Remarkable in each of their Reigns.

2986. Rehoboam dies, after he had reigned seventeen years. 964
5. Abijam, a wicked King, succeeds his Father, and reigned three years.

2989. 6. Asa, a good King, succeeds his Father, and reigns one and forty
years. 961 3030. 7. Iehoshaphat, a good King, succeeds his Father, and reigns
five and twenty years. 920
Elias, the Man of God, in a time of Dearth is fed by two Ravens by the Brook
Cherith.

In this King's Reign Elias was taken up into Heaven, and Elisha inherited a
double Portion of the Spirit which rested on that Prophet; and the Children who
mocked Elisha were torn in pieces by two Bears.

3055. 8. Iehoram, a wicked King, succeeded his Father, and reigned eight
years. 895 3063. 9. Ahazias, a wicked King, succeeded his Father, and reigned
one year. 887 3064. Athalia usurped the Throne of Judah, which she held the
space of six years. 886
In her time a dead Man, who by chance was thrown into the Sepulcher of Elisha,
was raised to Life again by touching the Prophet's Bones.

3070. 10. Ioash at seven years old was shown to the People by the High Priest
Iehoiada. He was anointed King, and reigned over Judah the space of forty
years. During the Lifetime of Iehoiada, Ioash behaved himself regularly, and
governed well; but after that Priest's Death, he soon degenerated. 880
Zacharias the High Priest was stoned to Death between the Temple and the Altar
by the express Order of King Ioash, whom he had reproved for his Misdemeanors.

3110. 11. Amaziah, a good King, succeeded his Father, and reigned nine and
twenty years. 840 3139. 12. Vzziah or Azarias, after his Father was killed,
began to reign, and his Reign lasted two and fifty years. 811
In his Reign Isaiah began to Prophesy: He prophesied for above the space of
one hundred years.

Hosea prophesied in the time of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, during the
space of a whole Century.

Joel prophesied about the same time.

Amos.

3191. 13. Iotham, a good King, succeeded his Father Vziah, and reigned sixteen
years. 759
About this time Obadiah prophesied in Israel, when Isaiah prophesied in Judah.

Micah prophesied for the space of fifty years and upwards.

Jonah seems to have been sent much about this time to Nineveh.

3207. 14. Ahaz, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Iotham, and reigned
sixteen years. 743
This impious Prince renewed all the Abominations of Idolatry in Jerusalem,
which provoked the Lord to deliver him up into the hands of his Enemies.

3223. 15. Hezekiah, a good King, succeeded his Father Ahaz, and reigned nine
and twenty years. 727
In his Reign Sennacherib King of Assyria invaded Judah, sent Rabshokah to
Jerusalem to threaten Hezekiah and the Jews: But blaspheming the God o^ Israel,
he sent a destroying Angel among the Assyrian Army, who cut off in one night an
hundred fourscore and five thousand Men.

In his time likewise the King of Babylon sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah, who out
of Civility showed them the House of his precious Things and all his Treasury;
which gave an occasion to Isaiah of prophesying concerning the future
Babylonish Captivity.

Nahum prophesied, and comforted the Ten Captive Tribes.

The Angel Raphael was sent by God to attend young Tobias in the Journey he was
to take.

3252. 16. Manasses, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Hezekiah at the age of
twelve years, and reigned five and fifty years. 698 3274. Manasses was taken
and carried to Babylon in the two and twentieth year of his Reign: But his
Affliction made him reflect, and humble himself in the sight of God; upon which
he was brought immediately back to Jerusalem, where he reigned three and thirty
years more. 676
At this time happened the History of Judith, who cut off the Head of
Holofernes, and delivered the City of Bet^uliah.

3307. 17. Amon, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Manasses, and reigned two
years after him; and was killed treacherously by some of his own Court. 643
3309. 18. Josias, a good King, at the age of eight years succeeded his Father
Amon, and reigned one and thirty years. He re-established the Worship of God
throughout his Kingdom, and exceeded in Virtue all the Kings who had went
before him. 641 3321. Josias, in the twelfth year of his Reign, purged Judah
and Jerusalem from their Idolatry. 629
Jeremiah began to prophecy, and continued it for the space of near five and
forty years.

Zephaniah, Baruch, Habakkuk, and other Prophets, belong to this time.

3338. Josias inconsiderately waged War with Pharaoh Neko King of Egypt,
wherein he was killed, and all the Joy of Judah was turned into Mourning. 612
19. Iehoahaz or Shallum succeeded his Father, and reigned three months.

Neko King of Egypt returning from Assyria, deposed Iehoahaz, and made his
elder Brother Eliakim King in his stead; turning his Name into Iehoiakim, and
carried Iehoahaz along with him Captive to Egypt, where he died.

3339. 20. Iehoiakim succeeded his Brother, and reigned over Judah eleven
years. 611 3344. This year Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon took Iehoiakim
Captive, with an intention to carry him to Babylon; afterward having released
him upon very hard Terms, he left him at Jerusalem, where he remained as his
Vassal. This Nebuchadnezzar carried away with him part of the Vessels of the
Temple, with several Children of the Blood Royal, and several Persons of
Quality, among whom was Daniel and his Companions. It Is here we must begin to
reckon the Seventy Years of Captivity. 606
Daniel begins to prophesy, being then very young.

3350. Iehoiakim was killed by the Babylonians, and cast out to be devoured by
the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the Field. 600
21. Iechonias or Iehoiachin succeeded his Brother Iehoiakim, and reigned in
Jerusalem the space of three months. But Nebuchadnezzar carried him away to
Babylon, with his Mother and the principal Men of his Court, among whom were
Ezekiel, and Mordecai, the Uncle of Esther; with all the Treasures of Judah,
and all the Vessels of the Temple which remained: He made his Uncle Mattaniah
King, and changed his Name to Zedekiah.

3350. 22. Zedekiah the last King of Judah reigned at Jerusalem the space of
eleven years. 600
Ezekiel began to prophecy the fifth year of his Captivity at Babylon, and
prophesied to the seven and twentieth year. He was descended from the Race of
the Priests.

3360. In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, Jerusalem was besieged, taken, and
plundered by the Babylonians. Zedekiah was taken in his flight; His Children
killed before his face, his Eyes put out, himself bound with Fetters of Brass,
and carried away to Babylon. His Palace was burnt, the Temple destroyed, the
Walls of Jerusalem thrown down, and all the People of Judah led Captive to
Babylon, where they remained till the year of the World 3419, before Christ
531. 590
Here follows the Succession of the Kings of Israel.
The State of the Ten Tribes under the Government of Nineteen Kings, from the
beginning of the Reign of Jeroboam, to the end of the Reign of Hosea, in whose
time they were carried into Captivity by Shalmaneser. This State lasted 258
Years. Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2969. 1. JEroboam the Son of
Nobat was made King, and reigned over Israel two and twenty years. He to
strengthen himself, and to keep the People from revolting to Rehoboam, set up
two Golden Calves, the one at Dan, and the other at Bethel, and by this means
made Israel to sin. 981
In his Reign a Man of God was sent out of Judah, who prophesied against the
Altar at Bethel, foretold the Ruin of it by Josiah, restored Ieroboam's
withered Hand, and was slain by a Lion for disobeying the Command of God in
eating* contrary to the Divine Prohibition, at the old Prophet's House.

2991. 2. Nadab, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Jeroboam, and reigned two
years. He, and all Ieroboam's Family, were cut off by Baasha, according as
Ahijah the Shilonite had foretold. 959 2993. 3. Baasha, a wicked King,
succeeded Nadab, and reigned over Israel four and twenty years. He was engaged
in a War with Asa King of Judah, walked in the Sin of Jeroboam, and was
threatened by Iehu the Prophet the Son of Hanani. 957 3016. 4. Elah, a wicked
King, succeeded his Father Baasha, and reigned over Israel two years. He was
killed by Zimri, as he was drinking himself drunk in Tirzab. 934 3018. 5 Zimri
succeeded Elah, but was outed by Omri within seven days, 932
6. Omri succeeded Zimri, killed Tibni who opposed him* translated the Royal
Palace from Tirzah to Samaria, and reigned over Israel twelve years.

3029. 7. Ahab, a wicked and idolatrous King, succeeded his Father Omri and
reigned over Israel two and twenty years. He married Iezebel, the Daughter of
Ethbaal King of the Zidonians; was a Worshipper of Baal; killed the Prophets of
the Lord; was besieged by Benhadad King of Syria, whom he overcame and sent
away with Honor; Caused Naboth the Iezreelite to be stoned to Death, and
unlawfully seized on his Vineyard; and at last was seduced by false Prophets to
go to Ramoth Gilead to Battle, where he was slain, according to the Word of the
Lord spoken by Micaiah the Prophet. 921
In this Kings Reign Hiel the Bethelite built Jericho: He laid the Foundation
thereof in Abiram his Firstborn, and set up the Gates thereof in his youngest
Son Segub; according to the Word of the Lord which he spoke by Joshua the Son
of Nun. 1 King. 16.34.

3050. 8. Ahaziah, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Ahab, and reigned over
Israel two years. He was hurt by a fall, sent Messengers to Baalzebub the God
of Ekron, to enquire whether he should recover or no; Elijah meets and stops
the Messengers, denounces the Death of the King, and brings Fire from Heaven
upon his Messengers. 900 3051. 9. Iehoram, a wicked King, succeeded his Brother
Ahaziah, and reigned over Israel twelve years. He overcame the Moabites by
Elisha's Miracle, was besieged by the Syrians, and afterward slain by Iehu.
899
In his time the Shunamite's Son was raised to Life by Elisha; Naaman was
cleansed of his Leprosy; the Army of the Syrians was struck with Blindness; a
great Famine happened in Samaria; the Syrians raised the Siege in haste, and
leave a great Plenty of Provisions behind them; and the incredulous Lord, who
would not believe the Prophet Elisha, who foretold this Plenty, having the
Charge of the Gate, was trodden to death by the Crowd.

3063. 10. Iehu the Son of Nimshi was anointed King by a Prophet at
Ramoth-Gilead: Killed Iehoram and his Mother Iezebel, and Ahaziah the King of
Judah, and reigned over Israel eight and twenty years. He killed all the Sons
of Ahab, destroyed the Worshippers of Baal, but follows the Sin of Jeroboam,
and worshipped the Golden Calves. 887 3091. 11. Iehoahaz, a wicked King,
succeeded his Father Iehu, and reigned over Israel seventeen years. He was
greatly oppressed by Hazael King of Syria, but was relieved by Prayer. 859
3107. 12. Iehoash or Ioash, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Iehoahaz, and
reigned over Israel sixteen years. He obtained three Victories over Banadad
King of Syria, according to the Prophe^y of Elisha, who died in his Reign. 843
3123. 13. Jeroboam a wicked King succeeded his Father Ioash, and reigned over
Israel one and forty years. He recovered Hamath and Damascus from the Syrians,
but departed not from the Idolatry of Jeroboam the Son of Nabat, who made
Israel to sin. 827 3164. Here happened an Interregnum, which lasted Twelve
Years; after which, 786 3175. 14. Zachariah, a wicked King, succeeded his
Father Jeroboam, and reigned over Israel six months. He was the last of Iehu's
Race, and killed by Shallum. 775 3175. 15. Shallum succeeds Zachariah, and
reigns only one month, and is killed by Menahem. 775 3176. 16. Menahem
succeeded Shallum, and reigned over Israel ten years. He was invaded by Pull
King of Assyria, to whom he gave Money to settle him in the Kingdom. 774 3187.
17. Pekahiah, a wicked King, succeeded his Father Menahem, and reigned over
Israel two years. He was killed by Pekah. 763 3189. 18. Pekah, a wicked King,
succeeded Pekahiah, and reigned over Israel twenty years; and was killed by
Hoshea. 761
In his time Tiglath Pileser, King of Assyria, carried the People of Gilead and
Galilee, and the Land of Naphthali, into Captivity.

3210. 19. Hoshea the Son of Elah, a wicked King, succeeds Pekah, and reigned
17 years. He became Tributary to Shalmaneser, but rebelling against him, was
carried away Captive, with all the Ten Tribes, in the year of the World 3227,
before Christ 723. This Shalmaneser transplanted several strange People into
the Country of Israel, who worshipped Idols, and afterward being plagued, made
a mixture of Religions, partly Heathen, and partly Jewish. 740
And now to this short View which has been given of the State and Condition of
the People of God under the Government of their Kings, it will not be amiss to
add one or two Remarks.

REMARK I.
IN the first place, it may be observed from God's Dealings with his own
People, the Jews, in this whole Period of Time, how and after what manner he
generally deals with Public Communities and Societies of Men. So long as the
Kings and their Subjects were Obedient to his Laws, and served him with an
upright Heart; so long did he give them Peace and Prosperity at home, and
Success and Conquest abroad: But when at any time they deviated from their
Duty, and set up an Idolatrous Worship instead of worshipping the only true
God, then he gave them over to the Will of their Enemies, and made them who
hated them to be Lords over them. This is apparent in the whole Series of this
History, and what Samuel foretold and threatened upon the Establishment of their
first King, was abundantly verified upon them at last, viz. That if they did
wickedly, God would destroy both them and their King: For when the Measure of
their Iniquity was filled, and they had arrived to the highest Perfection of
Impiety Human Nature was capable of; then were they carried into Captivity,
their Temple and City defaced, and themselves made Slaves to the Heathens,
whose Gods they had worshipped. I need not Instance in any more Particulars,
since all the World knows, and our own Nation has experienced, that Public
Communities, considered as such, receive according to their Deserts their
Rewards or Punishments even in this World.

REMARK II.
IN the next Place, it may be observed from the Revolt of the Ten Tribes, how
Dangerous and Prejudicial, and of what ill Consequence, Faction is in the State
as well as Schism in the Church. From Jeroboam down to Hoshea, we find not so
much as one good King who reigned in Israel The first King established his
Usurpation by wicked and unlawful Methods, and the rest continued it by as bad
or worse. They were all Idolaters, and corrupted the People so far, that at
last they provoked God to throw them out of his Embraces, to permit them to be
led away into Captivity by Shalmaneser, and to cut off the very Memory o^ them
from the Face of the Earth: And if God (as the Apostle speaks upon the like
Occasion) dealt thus with the Natural Branches, his own peculiar People the
Jews; let not us then, who by Nature were Branches of the Wild Olive Tree, and
were grafted contrary to Nature into the Good Olive Tree; let not us, I say, be
high-minded, but fear: For Faction in the State, as well as Schism in the
Church, do in their own Nature tend to the Ruin and Destruction of both.

Sect. 4* The State of the People of God in the Time of the 22 Ancestors of
Jesus Christ.
This State lasted 590 Years; that is, from the end of the Reign of Zedekiah,
to the Birth of Jesus Christ, who is that Corner Stone which united the two
Covenant or Testaments. This Genealogy is according to St. Luke's Account in
the Third Chapter of his Gospel. IT must here be observed, That tho we are very
well assured, that these two and twenty Ancestors of Jesus Christ did live
between the end of the Reign of Zedekiah, and the Birth of the Messiah, that
is, before the year of the World 3950; yet we are ignorant how many years each
of them lived, for History gives us no Light in the Case. Nay, it is very
probable that we should not have come to the knowledge of their Names, had not
St. Luke recorded them for us in the Third Chapter of his Gospel. Potest fieri
(says St. Ambrose) ut alii longaevam transegerint vitam, alterius vero
generationis viri immatura aetate decesserint. i. e. It Is probable that some of
them were long-lived, and others cut off by an untimely Death in the very
Flower of their Age. It Is upon this Account that we range these two and twenty
Ancestors within the compass of 590 years, without assigning them an exact
place in Chronology, and herein we follow the rest of the Chronologers. However
we will connect the Succession of the Times together, by some of the most
considerable Events which happened in the Jewish History, of which we will
exactly set down the years.

Year' of the World. Years before Christ. 3360. 1. NERI. He was carried Captive
to Babylon with the rest of the People of God. 590 3376. The three Children are
cast into the fiery Furnace in Babylon, and are miraculously delivered. 574
3378. King Nebuchadnezzar, as a just Punishment of his Pride, was turned into a
Beast; was driven out of his Palace, and after seven years is restored. 572
3386. 2. SALATHIEL. He was among the Captived Jews at Babylon. 564
About this time Ieconiah was advanced by Evilmerodach.

3409. Daniel is cast into the Lion's Den, from whence he was miraculously
delivered by God. 541 3419. 3. ZOROBABEL, by the Permission of Cyrus who had
conquered all the East, lead the People back to Judea, to rebuild the Temple.
He was accompanied by Joshua, or Jesus, the High Priest; and the poorer sort
among the Jews were allowed some sort of Gratuity to undertake this Journey.
The King of Persia was inclined to deal thus kindly by the Jews, because he was
informed that it had been foretold by the Prophets, that he should be the Man
who should cause the Temple of Jerusalem to be rebuilt. 531 3431. Haggai and
Zachariah stir up the People to build the Temple, the finishing of which had
been hindered by the Enemies of the Jews. 519 3433. The Temple was finished and
dedicated in this year, according to Josephus. 517
4. RHEZA.

5. IOANNA.

6. IVDAH

3492. Ezra or Esdras obtained Letters Patent from King Artaxerxes in the
Seventh Year of his Reign; for the carrying back a great many People into
Judea: He return to Jerusalem, saw ^^d bewailed the Sins of the Priests,
Levites* and People, in marrying with the Idolatrous People of the Land; made a
deep Confession of their Sins to God; and prevailed upon them to make a
Covenant to put away their Strange Wives. 458
7. JOSEPH.

3505. Nehemiah obtained from the same Artaxerxes, in the Twentieth Year of his
Reign, a Commission to build the Walls of Jerusalem: He came thither, repaired
and built them in two and fifty days, tho Sanballat and his Companions used
their utmost Power to hinder him. He discharged the poor Jews from their Debts;
the Law was solemnly read by Ezrah, and the Feast of Tabernacles kept. Also a
solemn Fast was kept, and a Covenant made to put away the strange Wives, to
keep the Sabbath, and to pay their Tithes. This is the year, wherein they begin
to reckon the seventy weeks of Daniel. 445 3518. Nehemiah returned to
Artaxerxes according to his Promise. 432 3526. He returns to Jerusalem, reforms
things that were amiss in his Absence, concerning Tithes, the Sabbath, and
strange Wives. 424
8. SEMEI.

9. MATTATHIAS.

10. MAATH.

3588. Malachi, the last of the Prophets, lived about this time: He exhorted
the People to reform and turn to God. It Is probable that he was Contemporary
with Nehemiah. 362 3618. About this time Alexander the Great defeated Darius
the last King of Persia, became Lord of all the East, and in six years time
carried his Conquests so far, that Daniel in his mysterious Visions compares
him to a Leopard, which had Wings. 332
11. NAGGE.

12. ELI.

13. NAHVM.

14. AMOS.

15. MATTATHIAS.

16. JOSEPH.

17. IOANNA.

3731. Ptolemy Philopator reigns seventeen years in Egypt. 'Twas he who
tormented the Jews of Alexandria so barbarously, to turn them from the Worship
of the true God. Several of them at last yielded to him; others redeemed
themselves from his Tyranny by Money; and those who steadfastly adhered to the
Law of God, were treated with the utmost Severity, as may be seen in the Third
Book of Maccabees. 219 3763. At this time Heliodorus, sent by Seleucus
Philopator to spoil the Temple, was whipped by Angels, as appears 2 Maccab. c. 3.
187 3782. Antiochus Epiphanes prophanes the Temple; and here begins the
Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet. 168 3783. Judas
Maccabeus routs Apollonius, Seron, Gorgias and Lysias, the Captains of
Antiochus. 167 3785. He purged the Temple, after it had been polluted three
years together. 165
18. MELCHI.

3797. Jonathan the High Priest is greatly honored by King Alexander, and
destroys the Apostate Jews. 153 3807. Simon made General and High Priest, took
Gaza and the Tower upon Mount Sion in Jerusalem, which had been built by
Antiochus Epiphanes to command the Temple, and levelled that part of the Mount.
143 3815. Simon, after he had governed the People about eight years, was killed
treacherously by Ptolemy in a Feast. He sent some to surprise his Son John,
Surnamed Hircanus, but he escaped, and was made High Priest in the room of his
Father. 135
This John was besieged in Jerusalem by Antiochus Sidetes, opened David's
Sepulcher, and found vast Treasures therein.

19. LEVI.

3845. Aristobulus succeeded John Hircanus, was the first who after the
Captivity took upon him the Diadem and Character of King. He famished his
Mother, imprisoned all his Brethren except Antigonus, whom he dearly loved, yet
killed him, being deceived by Alexandra Salome his Wife. He died of Grief; she
released Alexander and married him. 105 3846. Alexander Iamnaeus succeeded
Aristobulus took Ptolemais, was twice routed by Ptolemy Lathurus, took Gaza and
destroyed it. 104
20. MATTHAT.

3872. Alexandra, Widow to Alexander, joined with the Pharisees, as her Husband
had advised her, because they were in great Esteem with the People: They ruled
all under her, and by degrees cut off the Chief of the Saducees who had
counseled Alexander against them. 78 3882. Aristobulus headed the Saducees,
routed the Pharisees, and was made King. 68 3887. The Temple and City were
taken by Pompey. And because Aristobulus had proved false to him, he sent him
Prisoner to Rome, with Alexander and Antigonus, his two Sons. 63
21. HELI.

3902. The Civil Wars of Rome between Pompey and Caesar, inclined the latter to
release Aristobulus, and to send him back to Jerusalem, that he might prevail
upon the Jews to declare against Pompey. But he was poisoned by some of
Pompey's Party, and his Son Alexander was beheaded at Antioch. His other Son
Antigonus went to Rome, represented the Misfortune which happened to his Father
and his Brother, and complained very much of Hircanus and Antipater. However
Antipater was so highly in Cesar's Favor, that Hircanus was made High Priest,
and Antipater Governor of Judea. 48
22. JOSEPH, the Husband of the Blessed Virgin Mary.

3913. Herod made King of Judea, and reigned over it 38 years. 37 3948. This
year Augustus made a Decree, That all the Roman Empire should be taxed: Joseph
went with the Virgin Mary from Galilee to Bethlehem, where she brought forth
our Blessed Savior Jesus Christ.
A REMARK.
IT is to be observed, That the History of the Jews does not end here. There
were Highpriests till the year of Christ 70, or, according to the vulgar
Account, 67* at which time Vespasian laid Judea waste; but upon Intelligence of
the Death of Nero, he left Judea and went to Rome. Within a while after he sent
his Son Titus, who besieged and took Jerusalem. The Famine was so great in that
City toward the end of the Siege, that a Woman was forced to kill her own
Child to eat, The Temple was burnt, and Titus gave his Soldiers leave to riffe
and burn the City. At this time was fulfilled the Saying of our Savior, who
foretold of Jerusalem that killed her Prophets, That she should be destroyed,
and not one stone left upon another.

Phanias was High Priest when Jerusalem was taken A. D. 70, and forty years
after the Death of Jesus Christ.

CHAP. II. An Account of the Assyrian Monarchy.
HAving in the preceding Chapter given you a short, but exact Account of the
State and Condition of the People of God from the Creation down to our Saviors
time: We shall now proceed to Profane History, where we must not expect to
meet with that Accuracy and Exactness of Chronology, which Moses and others of
the Inspired Writers have observed in their Accounts. In this and the three
next Chapters we will Treat briefly of the Four Great Monarchies, viz. The
Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman: And afterward we shall give you a short
Account of the other Monarchies and Republics, which were Contemporary to them.

The Monarchy of the Assyrians is the first of the four; but before we treat of
it, we think it not amiss to give you a short Description of that Country.

Assyria, properly so called, was a Country of a large Extent, situated in Asia
Major: Bounded on the North by Armenia the Greater; on the East by Media; on
the South by Susiana and Babylonia; and on the West by the River Tigris, which
parts it from Mesopotamia, which at present is called Diarbech. But the Empire
of the Assyrians, or which is called Assyria Major, was of a greater Extent;
for it took in Syria, Mesopotamia, Babylonia, Persia; in a word* all Asia
except the Indies. This was the State of the Assyrians under Semiramis.

It has been observed, that nothing is more intricate and difficult than to
trace the first Beginnings of Monarchies, which are commonly dark and obscure,
and full of Fables. This is apparently true with respect to that of the
Assyrian, the first Rise of which is very hard to find out. Authors are divided
in their Opinions about it; and as they differ very much in the Account they
give us of its first Founder, and of its Duration, so they dissent as much in
the Number, and in the Names of the Kings, who reigned over it. Those who
follow Herodotus, as Usher, etc. make Ninus to be the first Founder of it,
affirming the Chaldeans and the Arabs to have reigned in Assyria before his
time. They place the beginning of this Monarchy about the year of the World
2737, before Christ 1213. So that its Duration from that time, to Belshazzar
the last of the Assyrian Monarchs, takes up 656 years. Others who follow
Diodorus Siculus, such as Sethus Calvisius, Petavius, Helvicus, etc. make
Nimrod to be the first Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy, and place the
beginning thereof in the year of the World 1788, before Christ 2162; so that
the Duration of this Monarchy, according to those Authors, is about 1647 years.

Now tho the former Account seems most Authentic, and carries the greatest
Face of Truth, yet we shall choose to follow the latter likewise in compliance
to the generality of Historians; and herein we shall first lay down the
Succession of the Kings from Nimrod to Sardanapalus, (as they are copied from
Theodorus Zuingerus by Gutberleth,) in whose time the Monarchy was divided into
that of the Medes and Babylonians. After which we will briefly relate the State
and Condition of the Divided Monarchy under its separate Kings, whose Names we
will likewise give you from the same Author.

1. The State of the Assyrian Monarchy, from Nimrod its first Founder down to
Sardanapalus, which lasted about 1360 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 1788. 1. NImrod the Son of Cush built
the Tower of Babel, laid the Foundation of the Assyrian Monarchy, and reigned
56 years. 2162 1844. 2. Belus, reckoned by some the same with Nimrod, reigned
65 years. 2106 1909. 3. Ninus, he built Nineveh, which was founded by Ashur,
conquered Zoroaster King of the Bactrians, and reigned 52 years. 2041 1961. 4.
Semiramis, the famous Assyrian Heroine, built Walls round about Babylon,
enlarged her Territories, reigned 42 years, and was killed by her Son Ninias.
1989 2003. 5. Ninias, or Ninus, succeeded his Mother, and reigned 37 years.
1947 2040. 6. Arius reigned 30 years. 1910 2070. 7. Aratius reigned 40 years.
1880 2110. 8. Baleus, or Balaneus, reigned 30 years. 1840 2140. 9. Armatrites
reigned 37 years. 1810 2177. 10. Belocus Priscus reigned 36 years. 1773 2213.
11. Baleus Junior, he reigned 52 years. 1737 2265. 12. Altades reigned 32
years. 1685 2297. 13. Mamitus reigned 30 years. 1653 2327. 14. Mancaleus
reigned 30 years. 1623 2357. 15. Sphaerus reigned 20 years. 1593 2377. 16.
Mamelus reigned 30 years. 1573 2407. 17. Spartus reigned 40 years. 1543 2447,
18. Ascatades reigned 40 years. 1503 2487. 19. Amyntas reigned 45 years. 1463
2532. 20. Belochus junior reigned 25 years. 1418 2557. 21. Belopares reigned 30
years. 1393 2587. 22. Lamprides reigned 32 years. 1363 2619. 23. Sosares
reigned 20 years. 1331 2639. 24. Lampares reigned 30 years. 1311 2669. 25.
Pannias reigned 45 years. 1281 2714. 26. Sosarmus reigned 19 years. 1236 2733.
27. Mitreus reigned 27 years 1217 2760. 28. Tautanes reigned 32 years. 1190
2792. 29. Teuteus reigned 40 years. 1158 2832. 30. Thyneus reigned 30 years.
1118 2862. 31. Dercylus reigned 40 years. 1088 2902. 32. Eupales reigned 38
years. 1048 2940. 33. Laosthenes reigned 45 years. 1010 2985. 34. Pyriciades
reigned 30 years. 965 3015. 35. Ophrateus reigned 20 years. 935 3035. 36.
Ophraganeus reigned 50 years. 915 3085. 37. Ascarzapes reigned 42 years. 865
3127. 38. Sardanapalus reigned 20 years: He led a soft and effeminate Life, and
at last in the year of the World 3148, before Christ 802, Arbaces conspired
against him, besieged Nineveh, and took it. Sardanapalus, to avoid the Shame of
being taken by his Enemies, burnt himself, with all his Concubines and Riches,
in his own Royal Palace. Upon his Death, the Monarchy was divided. 823
Our Countryman Mr. Tallents, in his Chronological Tables, takes notice, that
Justin in his History says, This Empire lasted from the time of Ninyas or
Ninus, to Sardanapalus, about 1300 Years, which comes pretty near the Truth;
but makes no mention of the Kings who succeeded Ninus, who grew Effeminate and
Inglorious: But the Names Tallents sets down out of Berosus Africanus,
transcribed by Eusebius, which we think proper here to insert; thereby to show
the Variety of Authors Opinions about the Names of these Kings* After Ninus, he
places, 1. Arius. Both the same with those in the former Catalogue. 2. Aralius.
Both the same with those in the former Catalogue. 3. Mamylus. 4. Sparthaeus. 5.
Ascatades. His Name is likewise mentioned in the former List. 6. Amyntas. All
these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those in
the former Catalogue. 7. Belochus. All these with a little Variation of a
Letter or two, are the same with those in the former Catalogue. 8. Balatores.
All these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those
in the former Catalogue. 9. Lamprides. All these with a little Variation of a
Letter or two, are the same with those in the former Catalogue. 10. Sosares.
All these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those
in the former Catalogue. 11. Lampraes. All these with a little Variation of a
Letter or two, are the same with those in the former Catalogue. 12. Pany^s. All
these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those in
the former Catalogue. 13. Sosarmus. All these with a little Variation of a
Letter or two, are the same with those in the former Catalogue. 14. Mithraeos.
All these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those
in the former Catalogue. 15. Teutamos. All these with a little Variation of a
Letter or two, are the same with those in the former Catalogue. 16. Teutaeus.
All these with a little Variation of a Letter or two, are the same with those
in the former Catalogue. 17. Arabelus. These are not in the List of Zuingerus.
18. Chalaos. These are not in the List of Zuingerus. 19. Anabos. These are not
in the List of Zuingerus. 20. Babios. These are not in the List of Zuingerus.
21. Thinaeos. These four the same with those in the former List, only Eupacmes
here is there called Eupales. 22. Dercylus. These four the same with those in
the former List, only Eupacmes here is there called Eupales. 23. Eupacmes.
These four the same with those in the former List, only Eupacmes here is there
called Eupales. 24. Laosthenes. These four the same with those in the former
List, only Eupacmes here is there called Eupales. 25. Pyritiades. 26.
Ophrateus. 27. Ephacheres. 28. Acracarnes. 29. Sardanapalus.


Notwithstanding the Darkness and Obscurity of these Times, and the various
Opinions of Authors about the first Founder, and about the Names and Number of
the succeeding Kings of the Assyrian Monarchy; yet they afford us so much
Light, as to give us occasion to make these following Reflections.

REMARK I.
THOUGH the Title of Monarchy belongs equally to all States that are under the
Government of one single Prince, who is styled the Monarch of that State so
governed; yet in History it more peculiarly relates to the four great
Monarchies of the World, who succeeded each other, and in their Turn conquered
and gave Law to the other Petty Monarchies of the Earth.

REMARK II.
THE first of these Monarchies was (according to the joint Testimony of all
Writers) the Assyrian, which by Historians, both Sacred and Profane, is
promiscuously styled, the Babylonian, the Chaldean, and the Assyrian Monarchy.
It was called the Babylonian Monarchy, because of the Tower of Babel, which
Nimrod the first Founder of this Monarchy built, and because a great many of
its Monarchs held their Court at Babylon. It was styled the Chaldean Monarchy,
because Babylon was in Chaldea, and several of its Kings were Chaldeans.
Lastly, it is called the Assyrian Monarchy, because Ninus, after he had built
Nineveh, the Capital City of Assyria, translated the Seat of the Empire thither.

REMARK III.
FRom the Beginning, Growth and Decay of the Assyrian Monarchy, and of the
other three, we may once for all observe, that the Providence of God, tho
unseen and unregarded, had the greatest Share in advancing them from so small a
Beginning to so great a Grandeur, as to be at last the Terror and Scourge of
the rest of the Inhabitants and Kingdoms of the Earth: That the Designs and the
Glory of this Supreme Being were all along carried on and promoted by these
Humane Instruments, even whilst they only thought of advancing their own
private Interests, and of enlarging their own Territories: That when the
Designs of this great King of Kings and Lord of Lords were once brought about,
and his Glory sufficiently signalized, then he discarded those Instruments,
took the Empire away from them, and bestowed it on another People. This is so
visible from the whole Series, even of Profane History, that it needs no other
Proof than the Considerate Perusal of what Historians have delivered to us
about the various Changes and Revolutions that have happened in the several
great Monarchies of the World. Those who were the Greatest, arrived by degrees
to their Height from very small Beginnings; and when they were there, there
they stopped; some invisible Power giving a Check to their growing Greatness.
Afterward we find, that in the midst of all their Glory, they have either
dwindled away as they rose, or else lost all they had been conquering for
several Ages together, within the compass of a few years or days. And does not
all this sufficiently prove an overruling Providence, which takes care of all
Human Affairs, and disposes of Kings and Kingdoms as he thinks fit?

Having made these short and (we hope) useful Reflections, we shall now proceed
to give you an Account of the State of the Assyrian Monarchy, as it was divided
into that of the Medes and Babylonians. Sardanapalus was conspired against by
two of his Generals, Arbaces and Belochus; the former was made King of the
Medes, and latter King of the Babylonians.

The State of that part of the Assyrian Monarchy which was under the
Babylonians, from Belochus the first King, to the Death of Belshazzar the last
King; which State lasts 271 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3148. 1. PHul. Belochus, after
Sardanapalus, reigned 48 years over the Assyrians 802 3196. 2. Tiglath Pileser
reigned 23 years: His Name is mentioned in the Scriptures. 754 3219. 3.
Salmanasar succeeded, and reigned 10 years. 731 3229. 4. Sennacherib reigned 7
years. This was that King of Assyria mentioned in the Scriptures, who brought
an Army into Judea; besieged Jerusalem; had his Army destroyed by an Angel;
retired in Confusion to Nineveh; and was killed by his two Sons, Adrammelech
and Sharrizer, who fled afterward into Armenia. 721 3236. 5. Assarhaddon
succeeded his Father, and reigned 10 years. 714 3246. 6. Merodach conquered
Assarhaddon, and reigned 40 years. 704 3286. 7. Ben. Merodach reigned 21 years.
664 2307. 8. Nebuchadnezzar I. reigned 35 years: He in the 12th year of his
Reign defeated Arphaxad King of the Medes, by some called Dejoces, who built
the City of Echatane. The next year he sent General Holofernes into the Land of
Judea, who laid Siege to Bethulia, and was beheaded by Judith in his Tent. 643
3342. 9. Nebuchadnezzar II. styled the Great, succeeded his Father
Nabopolassar. This man besieged and took Jerusalem, carried away Zodekiah and
all his Nobles into Captivity, rifled the Temple of its Vessels, brought them
to Babylon, and placed them in the Temple of his God Bell. He dreamed a Dream
of the Four Monarchies, which Daniel explained; erected an Image in Susa; cast
the Three Children into the burning fiery Furnace; was puffed up with Pride at
the Greatness of his Conquests, and the Magnificence of his Buildings; was
deprived of his Reason, and turned out to feed with Beasts; was restored after
7 years; and died after he had reigned 43 years. 608 3386. 10. Evilmerodach
succeeded his Father Nebuchadnezzar, and reigned a little more than 2 years.
564 3388. 11. Nerigloosser killed Evilmerodach, and reigned with his Son
Laborosoarchod about 4 years: The former was defeated by Cyrus, and killed in
Battle; and the latter was slain for his Irregularities. 562 3392. 12.
Belshazzar Son to Evilmerodach, and Grandson to Nebuchadnezzar, succeeded. In a
Profane Feast which he made, he saw an Hand writing upon the Wall, which
Daniel explained; and according to his Prophecy, he was deposed and killed by
his Soldiers, and Cyaxares or Darius the Mede seized upon the Throne, Thus
ended the Assyrian Monarchy, which was translated to the Persians. 558
The State of that part of the Assyrian Monarchy which was governed by the
Medes from Arbaces their first King, to Cyaxares or Darius, their last.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3148. 1. ARbaces having defeated
Sardanapalus, and taken Nineveh, reigned over the Medes 28 years. 802 3176. 2.
Sosarmus reigned 30 years. 774 3206. 3. Medidus reigned 40 years. 744 3246. 4.
Cardiceas reigned 13 years. 704 3259. 5. Dejoces, or Arphaxad, reigned 53
years. 691 3312. 6. Phraortes, or Artynes, succeeded his Father Dejoces,
conquered the Persians, and reigned 22 years. 638 3334. 7. Cyaxeres I.
succeeded his Father, was more Warlike than his Predecessors, but was subdued
by the Scythianss who ruled 18 years; afterward were made drunk by him, and
were killed. He reigned 40 years. 616 3374. 8. Astyages succeeded his Father,
and reigned 35 years. This King sent his Son Cyaxeres, and his Grandson
Evil-Merodach, who with a great Army of Horse and Foot, made Incursions on the
Frontiers of Media. The Assyrians were beaten, and forced to retire. 576 3409.
9. Cyaxeres II. or Darius the Mede, succeeded his Father, and reigned 30 years.
This was he who conquered Belshazzar, and began to lay the Foundation of the
Persian Empire; being, during his Life, called the Empire of the Medes and
Persians, but after his Death united by Cyrus. 541
CHAP. III. Of the Persian Monarchy.
THE second of the four great Monarchies was the Persian, which lasted from
Cyrus the first Monarch, to Darius Codomannus the last, 206 years.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3419. 1. Cyrus obtained the Kingdom
of Persia by the Death of his Father Cambyses, and the Kingdom of the Medes by
the Death of his Uncle Cyaxeres; and by this means founded the Persian
Monarchy. Cyrus died in the 70th year of his Age. But some say, that being
defeated by Tomiris Queen of the Scythians, he had the Misfortune to fall under
her just Vengeance; who cut off his Head, threw it into a Vessel full of Blood,
and insulted over him in these Terms; Satia te sanguine Cyre: i. e. Now Tyrant,
take thy fill of Human Blood. 531 3421. 2. Cambyses succeeded his Father Cyrus,
and reigned over Persia 7 years and 7 months. He was a cruel King, killed his
own Brother Smerdis, crucified Polycrates, and killed himself at last by his
own Sword. 529 3429. Oropastes the Magician usurps the Throne under the false
Name of Smerdis; but within a few months after was killed by seven great Lords,
who conspired against him. Their Names we learn from Herodotus to be Otanes,
Hidarnes, Megabizus, Gobrias, Aspatines, Intaphernes, and Darius. 521 3430. 3.
Darius I. Surnamed Hystaspes, one of the seven Lords who had killed Oropastes,
is acknowledged King by all the rest, which he brought about by this Stratagem.
These Lords could not very well agree among themselves, what Form of Government
they had best have. Otanes was for a Democracy. Megabizus maintained, that an
Oligarchical Government would be most advantageous: But Darius preferred a
Monarchical State before either of the former, and his Opinion met with the
greatest Applause. The Question then rose, who should be their King, since the
Heirs-Male of Cyrus were extinct. At last they agreed unanimously, That the
next morning by Sunrising they should all mount on Horseback, and the Man
whose Horse neigh'd first should be acknowledged King. Oebor, Darius's Groom,
had the Art of making a Horse neigh when he pleased; which Skill he then made
use of in favor of his Master: So that no sooner was Darius mounted, but his
Horse neigh'd, the other Lords alighted, did Obeisance to him, and owned him
for their King. He reigned 36 years. 520
In the beginning of his Reign he married Atossa the Daughter of Cyrus, Widow
of Cambyses, and of a certain Grandee to whom she had been afterward married.
This he did out of Policy to support himself in the Throne, thereby
insinuating, that the Kingdom was not translated to a Stranger, but to one of
Cyrus's Family.

Within a while after, Darius being returned from Hunting, sprained his Foot as
he alighted off his Horse. There were a great many Egyptian Physicians then at
Court, who used their utmost Skill to ease the King; but all to no purpose, for
he neither slept, nor was his Pain abated for 7 days together. At last
Democedes. a Greek Physician, was called for, who managing the Distemper
according to the Grecian Method, gave the Prince something to make him sleep,
and healed him in a few days.

The same Democedes was likewise Fortunate in curing the Queen Atossa of an
Ulcer in her Breast. Among other Favors which that Princess urged him to
demand of her, he entreated her to inspire the King with a Resolution of
conquering Greece. He had his Desire granted, for Darius ordered fifteen of his
chief Nobles to attend Democedes, that they might take a View of the Cities of
Greece, which he intended to conquer. Accordingly they departed from Susa, the
Capital City of Susiana in the Kingdom of Persia, and passing through Phenicia
to Sidon, they furnished themselves with Provisions, and embarked for Greece.
They took a View of the Seaports, drew Charts of the Coasts, omitted nothing
that might be of Use to their Design, went as far as Italy, and visited
Tarentum. At last Democedes being arrived at the Place he desired very
cunningly gave his magnificent Attendants the slip, who in the whole Expedition
followed his Orders; and by this means got to Crotona, where his House was,
leaving the others to get home as well as they could. Other Authors tell us,
that it was Hippias who instigated Darius against the Greeks: But whither one
or either of them occasioned it, it is certain that he sent a great Army against
Greece, which was defeated by Miltiades at the Battle of Marathon, where 110000
Persians were cut off. Darius likewise engaged in a War against the Scythians,
but was routed by them: But he subdued the Rebelling Babylonians by the
barbarous Policy of Zopyrus, who was a great Favorite of Darius; and to serve
his Master, was content to cut off his own Nose and Lips, and so mangled fled
to Babylon, pretending his cruel Master had thus Rewarded all his Services;
which gaining him Credit with the Babylonians, he found an opportunity of
betraying them and their City to Darius.

3465. 4. Xerxes I. succeeded his Father Darius, and reigned 21 years. Upon his
first Accession to the Throne, he was stirred up by Mardonius to engage in a
War against Greece. The Preparations for this War took up 10 years time; after
which, he led so vast an Army against the Grecians, that all Greece could
scarce contain them. He attacked it both by Sea and Land. His Landforces,
according to Herodotus, were above Two millions three hundred thousand Men; and
his Naval Strength, as Cornelius Nepos informs us, consisted of a Fleet of
Twelve hundred Long-Ships, and Two thousand Ships of Burden. All or most of
this great Army was lost in this Expedition. The first Defeat Xerxes met with
was at Thermopylae, where Leonidas and Three hundred Spartans killed Twenty
thousand Persians. After this he was routed at Sea near Salamis by
Themistocles, and forced to make his Escape in a Fisher-boat. Mardonius, his
General, burnt Athens, and was shortly after routed and killed at Platea by
Pausanias. The same day Forty thousand Persians were killed at Mycale in Asia
by Leotychidas, and Xerxes himself at last was killed in his Bed by Artabanus,
Captain of his Guards. Josephus makes him to be the same with Ahasuerus, who
married Esther the Jew; but others pretend Darius Histaspes was the Man. 485
3486. 5. Artaxerxes I. succeeded his Father Xerxes, and reigned 40 years. He
was famous for the Sweetness of his Temper, and for the Greatness of his
Courage. He was Surnamed Longomanus, because his Right Hand was longer than the
other. He killed his Brother Darius, supposing him, by the false Accusation of
Artabanus, to have killed Xerxes; and that Captain attempting to kill
Artaxerxes, was killed by him. 464 3525. 6. Xerxes II. succeeded his Father
Artaxerxes, and reigned only two months: For being made drunk at a Feast, his
Brother Sogdianus killed him as he slept in his Palace. 425
7. Sogdianus succeeded, and reigned only 7 months. He was deserted by his
Friends, deceived by Oaths and Promises, came to Darius Nothus, and was killed
by him.

3526. 8. Ochus, or Darius Nothus, succeeded Sogdianus, and reigned about 20
years. 424 3545. 9. Artaxerxes II. Surnamed Mnemon, succeeded his Father
Darius, and reigned 43 years. Cyrus Governor of Lydia rebelled against his
Brother Artaxerxes, and being aided by the Spartans and other Greeks, offered
him Battle at Cunaxa, where he was defeated and killed. After the Fight was
over, the King ordered the Body of Cyrus to be looked out; caused his Head and
his Right Hand, with which he had been wounded in the Engagement, to be cut
off. 405
This Artaxerxes, in imitation of Cambises, caused such Judges as received
Bribes to be flayed alive; and covered the Tribunals, where they sat, with
their Skins, that so the Judges might have constantly in view the Punishment
prepared for all such Delinquents. He had a Son named Arsames by one of his
Concubines; but Ochus, his lawful Heir, perceiving him to be very much in
favor with the King, killed him; and soon after the King himself died with
Grief at the loss of that Darling.

3588. 10. Ochus, who took upon him the Name of Artaxerxes III. succeeded his
Father, and reigned 23 years. He being assisted by Mentor the Rhodian, subdued
and wasted Egypt, rifled the Temples, and carried away from them all the Books
of Learning and History, which Bagoas afterward redeemed at a great Price.
Artaxerxes derided the Egyptian Gods, and to revenge an Affront, caused an Ox
(under which Figure their chief God Apis was worshipped) to be sacrificed to an
Ass. This King aided the Perinthians against Philip King of Macedon, and at
last falling sick, was poisoned by Bagoas, who being an Egyptian, could not
forgive the Affront put upon his adored Apis. This Bagoas bore a great Sway
both in the Army and in the State, and was the Person that placed Arses the
youngest Son of Artaxerxes upon the Throne, putting all the rest to Death. 362
3611. 11. Arses succeeded, and reigned two years and a few months: But Bagoas
understanding that this King intended to punish him for the Crimes he had
committed, prevented his Design, by poisoning him in the third Year of his
Reign. 339 3641. 12. Darius Codomannus, the Son of Arsamas, was set up by
Bagoas, whom he poisoned, upon suspicion that he designed to serve him as he
had done his Predecessors. He reigned about 6 years. 336
This was the Darius, whom 3616. Alexander gave Battle to, and defeated at the
Granicum, a River of Phrygia. In this Engagement Alexander was in great danger
of his Life, his Helmet being cleft asunder by the stroke of a Scymeter; but
Clytus came in to his Defense, and cut off the Hands of him who was going to
repeat the Blow. 334


The next year Darius offered Battle to Alexander near Issus, a City of
Cilicia, seated upon the Mediterranean; wherein he was defeated, lost 50000
Men, with his Baggage, his Mother Sisigambis, his Wife Statira, his two
Daughters, and his Son Ochus, who was not then above 6 years old. Two years
after this, viz.

3619. Alexander gave Battle to Darius near Arbela, a City of Assyria, wherein
90000 Persians were cut off, and Darius put to flight. This was the last stroke
Darius gave for the Maintenance of the Persian Monarchy. He afterward threw
himself into the Hands of Bessus Governor of Bactria, who traitorously
imprisoned and murdered him; by which the Persian Monarchy terminated, and that
Empire became subject to Alexander, who erected the Third or Grecian Monarchy,
whereof we are next to Treat. 331
CHAP. IV. Of the Grecian Monarchy.
BEfore we show you this mighty Monarch in his Grandeur, it may not be amiss to
speak a little of the Birth, Character and Actions of Alexander before his
Persian Expedition, together with his surprising Progress in the Conquest of
the Eastern World.

'Twas in the year of the World 3595, before Christ 355, that Alexander, the
Son of Philip King of Macedon, was born at Pella, a City in Macedon: His Mother
Olympias, while she was with Child of him, dreamed, That her Bowels were
extended over all Asia; which was verified in the Conquests made by the Son she
at that time bore in her Womb. He was born with all the Endowments of an
Heroic Spirit, had a great and aspiring Soul, a Temper full of Fire, a lively
Genius, and, tho impatient of Restraint, was mild enough to be prevailed upon
by reasonable Advice, till in the latter end of his Reign, when the Persian
Luxury had debauched him. To these natural Qualifications, his Father (a wise
and courageous Prince) added an Education that finished this excellent Piece;
for in his tender years he was committed to the Care and Tuition of Aristotle,
that great Philosopher; by whose Wisdom this Noble Prince was so far improved,
that An Philippo Patri, aut Aristoteli magistro plus debuit Alexander, is
become a common Subject of Declamation in the Schools.

When he was but a Youth, visiting his Father's Stables, he saw the Horse
Bucephalus, whom, when by reason of his fierceness none of the Grooms durst
venture to ride, he undertook to tame, and leaping upon his Back, rode him
round the Ring; his Father surprised, and delighted with the Courage of his
Son, ran to him, and with Kisses and Embraces bad him seek some larger
Territories, for Macedon was too straight to contain so great a Soul. At the
Age of 18 years he showed a wonderful Courage in the Battle of Cheronesus
against the Athenians, wherein (some say) he saved his Father's Life, and
gained the whole Honor of that Expedition.

His Father Philip, after he had gained many signal Victories in Greece, was
preparing for an Expedition into Persia; but was hindered in it by Death, being
killed by Pausanias at the Wedding of his Daughter Cleopatra about the year
3615, and was succeeded by his Son Alexander, who was at that time about 20
years of Age.

Alexander, to follow his Father's Example, went to Peloponnesus, and caused
all the Confederated Cities of Greece to meet at Corinth, where by the Consent
of all, except the Lacedomonians, he was chosen Generalissimo of the Army
raised against the Persians.

Soon after this, viz. in the Spring of the year 3617, he marched through
Thrace, and made Incursions into the Country of the Triballians and Illyrians.
He had a bloody Engagement upon the Banks of the Danube, and therein defeated
Sirmus, the King of the Triballians. Upon occasion of this Battle, a Report ran
that Alexander was beaten, which Demosthenes (corrupted with Persian Gold) so
inculcated at Athens, that the People believed it, and Revolted: But Alexander
soon convinced them of their Mistake, for having finished his Work by the
Reduction of those Barbarians, he returned to Greece; and the Athenians were
wise enough to beg his Pardon, and obtained it; but the Thebans despising his
Threats, were be sieged, their City taken and rased to the Ground, except the
House of Pindar, which Alexander caused to be saved, and gave it to the
Posterity of that excellent Poet.

And now having satisfied his Honor and Revenge, Alexander again bethinks
himself of his Persian Expedition, and passing into Peloponnesus, he was again
declared Commander of the Forces raised for that Service: 'Twas in this Journey
that he gave a Visit to Diogenes the Cynick at Corinth; and soon after the
return from it, that in a Dream he saw the High Priest of Jerusalem, who
Exhorted him forthwith to go to the Conquest of the Persians, wherein he
assured him of Success.

And now all things being prepared, Alexander gave away the Government of his
Dominions to his Friends, distributing to some Villages, to others Boroughs,
and to others Seaports and Territories, and reserving little or nothing,
Perdicas asked him, What he kept for himself? To which he answered, Hope.

And now leaving Antipater chief Administrator, he set forward for Asia, having
60 Long-Ships to transport his Army, which consisted of 40000 Men, whereof
Parmenio was made Commander of the greatest part.

When he came into Asia he visited the Tomb of Achilles, from whom on the
Mother's side he was descended. He said, Achilles was doubly happy, in having
such a Friend as Patroclus during his Life, and such a Panegyrist as Homer
after his Death. After this he passed the Granicum, a River in Phrygia, where
he met with Darius at the Head of 100000 Foot, and 20000 Horse, drawn up in a
Line of Battle. The two Armies joined, and a very sharp Engagement happened
between them. The Persians lost 20000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, and about as many
more were taken Prisoners. Darius and his Army, which appeared so formidable,
were put to flight; and Alexander gained this Victory with the Loss of only 100
Men.

By this means an Avenue was opened into Asia, and Alexander marched to Sardis,
the Capital City of Lydia, which the Governor surrendered to him with all the
Treasures that were therein. From thence he marched to Ephesus, where he put an
end to the Oligarchical Government of that Place, and established Democracy in
its stead. After this he took Miletum by Storm, which was a very strong Town,
and famous for the Colonies it sent out to the Neighboring Islands. But
Halicarnasseus, which stood out against him to the last Extremity, was by his
Orders demolished. In a word, within the compass of a year he became Master of
all Phrygia, Lydia, Pamphylia, Pisidia, Paphlagonia, and Cappadocia.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3617. This Year Alexander signalized
by his second Victory over Darius in the Battle of Issus, in which Engagement
he received a Wound in his Thigh, that hindered him from meeting with Darius,
whom he intended to have killed with his own Hand. The Persians, according to
Iustin's Account, were 400000 Foot, and 100000 Horse: But Quintus Curtius does
not reckon above half so many. In this Battle the Persians lost 100000 Foot,
but others say only 50000. Let the Loss be more or less, Darius was put to
flight, and that he might not be discovered, threw away his Imperial Mantle.
That which went deepest to the Heart of this unfortunate Prince was, that his
Mother Sisigambis, his Wife Statira, his two Daughters, and his Son not above 6
years old, were taken by the Conqueror. But Alexander used them always like
Queens, paid them great Respect, and for their Comfort assured them, that
Darius, whom they supposed to be dead, was still alive. 333
Immediately upon this Victory Alexander sent Parmenio to make sure of
Damascus, the Capital City of Syria, where Darius left incredible Riches, and
all the great Women and Princesses of Persia. The Governor without any Ceremony
betrayed the City to him, but Alexander was so just as to punish the Traitor,
and sent his Head to Darius as a Present. There were 7000 Horse-Loads of
Treasure in the place, which amounted to the Value of above ten millions
Sterling.

He marched into Syria, where he deprived of their Estates all those who made
any Opposition against him. Biblus in Phenicia, and Sidon, were some time
before they would surrender to him; but were at length reduced, and the Kingdom
of Sidon bestowed by Hephestion, Alexander's Favorite, on Abdolominus a
Gardener, who lived in the Suburbs of that City. He subdued all Syria and
Phenicia, except Tire, which held out 7 months, but at last was taken, and 2000
of its Inhabitants hanged on the Seacoast. He took Gaza, and made all its
Inhabitants Slaves, not excepting the Women and Children. At the Siege of this
City he was wounded on the Shoulder with an Arrow, and his Leg bruised by the
fall of a Stone. He went up to Jerusalem with a Design to besiege it, but the
High Priest Iaddus meeting him in his Sacerdotal Ornaments, prevented his
Intention; for Alexander was so struck at the sight of him, that he alighted
off his Horse, and did him Obeisance, crying out, That God appeared to him in
the same Shape, and commanded him to go and conquer Asia. This High Priest read
to him the Chapter in Daniel, wherein it is foretold, That a Greek should
conquer the Persians: Which he was very well pleased at, and sacrificed in the
Temple, offered great Oblations, and gave the Jews full Toleration to live
according to their Laws and Religion.

The next year Alexander marched with his Army into Egypt, where Pelusium
surrendered to him. From thence he went to Memphis, where he found 800 Talents,
and several precious Stones belonging to the Crown. From thence he marched
along the Nile to the very utmost Parts of Egypt, went into the Province of
Cyrene, and visited the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, where the Oracle declared him
to be the Son of Jupiter; which was what Alexander's Ambition aimed at. And
this Extravagance sufficiently shows how far the Excess of Prosperity
transports Men.

After this he went in search of Darius, who on his part rallied his Forces,
raised more, and omitted nothing that might put him in a Posture for another
Engagement. As Alexander made his Approaches, so Darius ordered his Army to
march from Babylon to Nineveh, the River Tigris on the Right hand, and
Euphrates on the Left.

3619. Alexander intercepted Letters from Darius, wherein he solicited the
Greeks to Assassinate their King; which made him, when Darius overcome by the
Civility and Gentleness which Alexander showed to his Captives the Queens of
Persia, sent fresh Ambassadors to him to mediate a Peace, offering to give him
part of his Dominions, and his Daughter in Marriage, return for Answer, That as
for what he offered him, they were already his by Conquest; and that he did not
think it safe to make a Peace with that Man, who every day sought an
Opportunity of Assassinating him. 331
Upon this, each Army prepared for the Engagement, which happened at Gangamela,
that lies on the River Bumela: But forasmuch as Gangamela is only a small
Village, Historians call it the Battle of Arbela, which was a considerable
City, and pretty near the place of the Engagement. There was a dreadful
Slaughter made of the Persians; and tho Darius behaved himself very gallantly
in this Fight, yet he was forced to fly. Alexander, according to Quintus
Curtius, lost no more than 300 Men; but of the Persians, according to the most
modest Account, there were 90000 killed upon the spot, and a greater Number
taken Prisoners. Darius fled to Arbela, and was pursued by Alexander; But he
got thence before his arrival: Alexander found wherewith to satisfy himself for
his Journey thither, for the most precious Jewels of the Crown, to the Value of
about 600000 Pounds, Darius had left behind him.

This Battle put an end to the Monarchy of the Persians, and laid the
Foundation of that of the Grecian.

The Grecian Monarchy begins here, which lasted only during Alexander's Reign 6
Years and some Months. It was afterward divided into four Kingdoms, and lasted
in that State till Julius Caesar was made Perpetual Dictator, 280 Years more.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3619. Alexander proclaimed King of
Asia, offered great and costly Sacrifices to his Gods; and distributed his
Treasures, his Cities, and his Provinces, among his Friends. The Air growing
infectious by the great number of the Slain, obliged him to break up from
Arbela. He marched to Babylon, the Governor whereof opened the Gates to him;
and this great Conqueror made a Public Entrance into that City, where they
extolled his Valor, and praised his Fortune. 331
Calisthenes the Philosopher, who attended Alexander in this Expedition, found
in Babylon Astronomical Observations for 1903 years past, which he sent into
Greece to Aristotle. By which it is proved, that the Chaldeans began their
Observations in Astronomy since the year of the World 1716.

When Alexander perceived his Army to grow insensibly Effeminate by the
Luxuries they met with in Babylon, he ordered them to decamp, and marched to
Susa, where he was received with loud Acclamations of Joy, the twentieth day
after he left Babylon. In Susa he found several Dromedaries, twelve Elephants,
and Money to the Value of about Seven millions Five hundred thousand Pounds,
with a great many Pieces of Purple.

3620. Alexander engaged in several Battles, which he won, and had by that
means a way open to Persepolis, where was the most magnificent and beautiful
Palace of all the East: This Place he took, and by the Instigation of Thais a
Courtesan, burnt it when he was drunk. He found therein 120 Talents, and so
vast a Treasure, as loaded 20000 Mules, and 5000 Horses. 330
After this he marched in pursuit of Darius, who was retreated to Ec^atane in
Media, where he had raised more Forces for another Battle. But Bessus, who
commanded the greatest part of these Forces, assassinated him, and afterward
fled away. Darius being stabbed, was thrown into a Cart, which a Macedonian
happened to meet with. The dying King prayed him to help him to a little Water,
drank of it, and immediately expired. Alexander hearing of it, ran thither,
found Darius dead, wept over his Body, bewailed his Misfortunes, covered him
with his Mantle, ordered him to be embalmed, and sent him to Sisygambis, to
bury him in the Sepulcher of his Ancestors. Then he distributed among his
Soldiers the one half of the Booty which he took in this last Expedition, which
amounted to Three milions eight hundred and fifty thousand Pounds.

Alexander made Incursions into the Country of the Parthians, stayed some time
at Hecatompolis, and at last arrived upon the Frontiers of Hircania. He
conquered where ever he came by his Valor, storming those Towns he could not
win by Treaty.

After this he entered into Zadracarta, the chief City of Hircania, where he
stayed 15 days. Nabarzanes, who had a hand in the Murder of Darius, came
thither to wait upon Alexander, and brought him Presents to gain his Favor,
which was granted him. It was at this place, where Thalestris or Minothea the
Queen of the Amazons, whose Country, according to Q Curtius, was situated
between the River Phasis and the Mountain of Caucasus, came to visit him upon a
Business no way redounding to the Honor of that Princess. But some pretend,
that this whole Matter of Fact, as related by Curtius, is false. It Is said,
that Onesicritus reading the Fourth Book of his History, wherein he treats of
the Adventure of this Queen to Lysimachus, who had constantly attended
Alexander in all his Expeditions; this Lysimachus being then King, said to him
smiling, And where was I then?

It Is certain, that about this time Alexander abandoned himself to Luxury,
Pleasures, Debaucheries, and other Effeminacies of the Persians. He put
Philotus and his Father Parmenio to Death, upon suspicion of being guilty of
High Treason. His good old Soldiers the Macedonians, being jealous that their
old Greek Customs would be abolished, found great fault at his Proceedings, and
took the liberty to Censure him, for causing himself to be called the Son of
Jupiter. To divert which, he drew them out to another Battle, and ordered them
to march against Satibar-Zenes, Governor of the Arians, who had revolted.

3621. This year Alexander marched into the Country of the Arismaspians, a
People of Arachosia, whom he subdued as well as the Inhabitants of Parapamisa.
He passed the Mountain of Caucasus in 17 days, became Master of Bactriana, of
which he made Artabazus Governor. Afterward with a Flying Army he entered
Sogdiana, which is part of Tartary. But Water being scarce in that place,
himself and Army had like to have perished for Thirst. 329
About this time they brought Bessus, the Murderer of Darius, to Alexander, who
stripped him naked, loaded him with very heavy Chains, caused his Ears and Nose
to be cut off, and referred him to the farther Vengeance of Oxiatres Brother of
Darius, whom Alexander affectionately loved. By him he was crucified, and then
quartered alive in the same place where he had killed the King his Master.

3622. Alexander marched against the King of the Scythians, who lived on the
other side the River Tanais. He engaged the Army of that Barbarian, defeated
and put it to flight. From thence he went to Marakand, and reduced all the
Rebels who had taken up Arms against him in Sogdiana; whither the King of the
Scythians sent Ambassadors to him. Here it was that Alexander in his Drink
killed his dear Friend Clitus, the Occasion of which was this: Alexander gave a
Treat to all his Chief Commanders, and in the midst of his Cups began to extol
his own Actions, and to depretiate those of his Father Philip. The young
Generals were very well pleased to hear such fine Things; but the old
Commanders, who had served under King Philip, were offended at the Discourse.
Among the latter was this Clitus, who being a frank and sincere Man, could not
flatter the King in his Vanity, but checked him for his Ambition and
Ingratitude. Which provoked the King so far, that he rose from his Seat, and
would have stabbed him with his Lance in the very Room, if he had not been
hindered from it by several who stood by. But Alexander still intent upon
Revenge, followed Clitus, and stabbed him with a Spear that he took from one of
the Centries who was then sleeping. The next day, when the Fumes of Wine were
evaporated, and the King saw Clitus weltring in his Gore, his Grief was so
great, that he had killed himself, if he had not been prevented by those who
attended him. He kept his Chamber, fasted and mourned for 4 Days together, but
at last was reconciled to himself through the Importunity of some of his old
Courtiers, who brought a great many fine Arguments to persuade him, that he had
killed Clitus justly. 328 3623. Alexander continued enlarging his Conquests,
ravaged and raised Contributions from all the Provinces round about. Oxiatres
Cohortanus, Governor of a small Territory, invited him to a splendid Treat, to
which Alexander made several of his Friends go, and invited them to marry the
fairest Daughters of these Barbarians, himself leading an Example in marrying
Roxana the Daughter of Oxiatres, an extraordinary Beauty. And now he resolved
on attempting the Conquest of India, and issued forth such Orders as he thought
necessary for so great a Design. 327
About this time it was that the King gave Ear to his Flatterers, and would be
adored as a God. Calisthenes the Philosopher, the Kinsman and Disciple of
Aristotle, took the freedom to blame him for it, but was afterward cast into
Prison, where he died in Torments. He was accused under a pretense of being an
Associate in the Conspiracy against the King's Life, for which Hermolaus had
been put to Death before.

Alexander leaving Bactriana, marched into India, intending to push on his
Conquests to the Eastern Sea, that so his Empire might have no other Bounds
than what the World had. He besieged and took Nisa, situated at the foot of the
Mountain Meros, which was consecrated to Bacchus, where the petty Kings of
India waited upon him, and did him Homage. He received them honorably, and
made use of them as Guides to direct him in those unknown Countries. He marched
to Maz^ga, the chief Town of Assaceni, which Queen Cleophis held out against
him with 30000 Men. There he received a Wound by the shot of an Arrow, and the
extremity of his Pain made him cry out, They call me the Son of Jupiter, but at
last I find my self to be no more than a Man. He took this great City, and
Cleophis with a great Train of Ladies waiting upon the Conqueror to implore his
Clemency, was re-established in her Estates. After this he stormed several
Cities, passed the River Indus, and very civilly received a Neighboring King
named Omphis, who came to surrender both himself and his Army to his Service.
Abisarius, a Potent Prince, whose Territories lay on the other side Hydaspes,
sent his Ambassadors to assure him, That he was ready to put himself and
Kingdom under his Protection.

In the midst of these Successes, Alexander sent to King Porus, willing him in
way of Acknowledgment to bring him Contribution-money, and to meet him upon the
Frontiers of his Dominions; to which Porus very haughtily replied, That he
would give him the Meeting at the Head of his Army. But he was convinced of his
Error, for his Army was defeated, and himself taken Prisoner. Alexander being
affected at the Misfortune of this King, and admiring his Courage, restored his
Kingdom to him, and made him one of his Friends. This Defeat of Porus opened
the way for the Conqueror to proceed further into India, several of whose
Provinces he subdued.

3624. This year Alexander took the City of Oxydraca by Storm, where he himself
was the first who entered. He was dangerously wounded by the shot of an Arrow,
which pierced his Armor, and went into his Body. He made War with other
People, and subdued the Musicani, who inhabit the more Southerly Parts of the
River Indus. He caused their King to be hanged, because he had falsified his
Word. From thence he passed into Pathalia, where the King of that Country
waited upon him, and offered him all his Kingdom. 3625. This year having
conquered all he could by Land, he lanched out into the Ocean, to see if there
were any more Provinces left for him to conquer. He returned back by the way he
came; embarked upon Euphrates and Tigris, with a Design to go into the Persian
Sea in search of the Heads of that River, hoping he might discover them, as he
did those of the River Indus. At Susa he married Statira, the eldest Daughter
of Darius, and bestowed the youngest on his Friend Hephestion. 3626. Some time
after he left Susa, and went to Ecbatane, where he spent whole Days and Nights
in Riot and Excess. His Friend Hephestion died there of a Debauch in Drinking.
Alexander caused the Physician, who had tended on this Favorite in his
Sickness, to be hanged. To divert the Grief he conceived at the Death of his
dear Hephestion, he carried on the War against the Cosseans. He subdued them in
the space of 40 Days, tho they fled under the Covert of Mountains, and were
never conquered by the Kings of Persia. Afterward he made his Army pass
Tigris, and marched toward Babylon. The Caldean Astrologers met him, and
advised him not to go thither, for it would be fatal to him; but slighting
their Advice, he went thither, and was received with great Shouts and
Acclamations of Joy. He built in Babylon a Dock capable of containing 1000 Sail
of Ships, and embarking on the River Euphrates, he visited Arabia. It was then
that he laughed at the Caldeans, saying, He entered Babylon, and went out of it
again without any harm done him. Thus in the height of his Confidence he sailed
about the Lakes of Arabia. 324 3627. And upon his return to Babylon, gave
himself wholly to his Pleasures, and especially to immoderate Drinking. The
Journal of his Life represents him in his last Days as a Man drenched in
Drunkenness, and who did nothing but Eat, drink, and Sleep: Potavit,
perpotavit, crapulam, edormiit; solito more crapulam decoxit, One day as he was
offering Sacrifices to the Gods for the Victories he had gained, he feasted
himself and his Friends, drank very hard, and carried on the Debauch till late
at Night. When the King returned from this Feast, a Physician of Thessalia
invited him and his Company to come and drink at his House: The King accepted
the Offer, and carried twenty of his Friends along with him. There was in the
Company one Proteas a Macedonian* who was a great Drinker; the King and this
Man challenged each other to drink, and at last the fatal Bowl came into his
Hands, which he drank off, and with it his Death. Some say, there was Poison in
that Bowl; others, that it was his immoderate and excessive Drinking, which was
the cause of that violent Fever which immediately seized him, and within a few
days hastened his End. He died in the flower of his Age, being but 33 years
old, and was equally lamented both by Greeks and Persians. Sisygambis, who
survived all the Misfortunes of her own Family, yet broke her Heart at the News
of his Death.
And thus have we given you a summary Account of the Birth, Education, Rise,
Growth, Height and Fall of this once Great Man. We have briefly described what
he did before, and what he did after he became the Universal Monarch of Asia,
and (as he thought) of the whole World. Considering the Extent and Largeness of
his Conquests, and the short space of Time he took up in effecting them, we may
see with what Reason the Prophet Daniel compared him to a Flying Leopard. You
see, that within the compass of a very few years, he added to his Petty Kingdom
of Macedon, Thrace, Greece, Egypt, part of Arabia, and of Africa, Syria,
Pamphylia, the two Phrygia's, Caria, Lydia, Paphlagonia, Assyria, Susiana,
Drangiana, Arachosia, Gedrosia, Aria, Bactriana, Sogdiana, Parthia, Hircania,
Armenia, Persia, Babylonia, Mesopotamia, and India. But at last in the midst of
all his Glory, in the very center of his Conquests, he was cut off by an
untimely Death; and tho he boasted himself to be descended of the Gods, and was
adored by his Flatterers as One; yet he found his Mistake, perceived he was but
a Mortal Man, and that he must die like the rest of the Petty Princes whom he
had conquered.

By him fell the Grecian Monarchy too, after it had lasted about 6 years and 10
months. For after his Death, his Conquests were cantoned among his Captains,
each seizing on what Share thereof he could. At first, it is said, the Provinces
were divided among thirty of them: But at last they were reduced to four
Principalities, under four Princes. Ptolemy had Egypt for his Share: Seleucus
reigned at Babylon, and in Syria: Cassander became Master of Greece and
Macedonia: And Antigonus had Asia Minor for his Part. The Reign and Successors
of Ptolemy King of Egypt, and the Reign and Successors of Cassander King of
Macedonia, we shall not treat of here, since they belong more properly to
another Place, where in two distinct Chapters we shall be more particular in
speaking to them. In this Chapter we shall only give you an Account of the
Successors of Alexander the Great, who reigned in Syria, and in Asia Minor.

Sect. 2. The Kingdom of the Syrians.
This Kingdom began under Seleucus Ninacor in the Year of the World 3633,
before Christ 317, and lasted about 253 Years, to the Year of the World 3886,
at which time it was made a Roman Province by Pompey. BEfore we give an Account
of its Kings, it may be proper to give you a short Description of the Country.
Syria formerly was a large Country in Asia, including Assyria, Mesopotamia,
Babylonia, Phenicia, and Palestina; and it has often been taken for the same with
Assyria. Some extended its Bounds as far as the Euxine Sea, and hence we read
of several Syria's in Holy Writ.

But if we cut off Assyria, Mesopotamia and Babylonia from it, then Syria is
bounded on the North by the Mountain of Amanus, which parts it from Armenia: On
the East by Mesopotamia, from which it is parted by the River Euphrates: On the
South by Arabia Petrea: And on the West by part of Egypt, the Phenician Sea,
Cilicia, and a small part of the Mountain Amanus. It is at present called
Souria or Soristen, is one of the finest Champain Countries in the World, and
abounds with pleasant Pastures. Damascus was the Capital City of Syria, which
became a great Kingdom, when the Empire of Alexander the Great was (after his
Death) divided among his Generals.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3633. 1. Seleucus Nicanor was the
first King of the Syrians: He was at first made General of the Cavalry;
afterward became Master of Babylonia, and Antigonus Master of Susiana. 317
This Seleucus being assisted by Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, by Cassander and
Lys^machus, defeated Antigonus, who was the first King of Asia after the Death
of Alexander. He conquered India, put Demetrius Poliorcetes to death in a
Prison, and killed Lisymachus in an Engagement. Justin tells us, that the
Seleucides were all born with the print of an Anchor on their Thigh. And
Historians say, that never any Father loved his Children so passionately as
this Seleucus; for the Proof of which, they relate this notable Instance. His
Son Antiochus fell sick of a violent Passion for his Mother-in-Law Stratonice:
Erasistratus his Physician perceiving it, went and told Seleucus, that his
Son's Distemper was Incurable. How so, said the King? Because (replied the
Physician) he is in love with my Wife. Ah! said Seleucus to him, I know you are
more my Friend than to let my Son die, and to hinder him from marrying your
Wife. Pray Sir, replied Erasistratus, were it your Case, would you let him have
yours? Ay, Ay, said the King, and all my Dominions to boot, if his Life could
not be saved without it. Upon this, the Physician unravelled the whole Mystery
to him, and told him in plain terms, that Stratonice was the Person whom he so
passionately loved. Seleucus was as good as his Word, called the People
together, and made a very pathetical Speech to them, that they might not be
surprised at such an unusual kind of Marriage. For tho he had already a Son by
his dear Stratonice, yet he made no scruple to marry her to Antiochus his
eldest Son, and not a Man opposed it.

Tho this Complaisance was very irregular, yet none can deny but Seleucus was a
very great Prince. He was killed by Ptolemy, after he had reigned about 35
years.

3668. 2. Antiochus Soter succeeded his Father, and reigned about 12 years. 282
3680. 3. Antiochus Theos, the Son of Antiochus Soter and Stratonice, reigned
about 24 years. His Surname of Theos was given him by the Milesians, because he
had freed them from the Tyranny of Timarchus. He was poisoned by Laodicea, one
of his Wives whom he had put away, and afterward recalled to Court. 270 3704.
4. Seleucus Callinicus, or Poron, succeeded his Father, and reigned about 20
years: He died with a fall off his Horse. This King aided by the Gauls, engaged
in a long War against Antiochus Hierax. 246 3723. 5. Seleucus Seraunus
succeeded his Father, and reigned 3 years. He was poisoned in Phrygia by his
Lieutenant-Generals, as he was marching to make War against Attalus. 227 3726.
6. Antiochus the Great succeeded his Brother Seleucus, being sent for from
Babylon by the A^my, which was then encamped in Syria, that so he might take
Possession of the Kingdom. He reigned about 36 years. He was engaged in a War
against several Nations. First, he waged War against Ptolemy Philopator King of
Egypt, was beat by him, and sued for a Peace, which Ptolemy very generously
granted him. Afterward he carried on a War against the Romans, by whom he was
always worsted, so that at last he was obliged to sue for a Peace. This King
likewise routed Malon, received Hannibal, invaded Greece, and was defeated by
Glabrio. At last having his Treasures drained by these unsuccessful Wars, to
fill them up again he resolved upon rifling the Temple of Jupiter in Elimais;
but he was killed in the Attempt by the People of the Place. Before his Death
he nominated his Son Seleucus Philopator for his Successor. 224 3763. 7.
Seleucus Philopator succeeded his Father, and reigned about 12 years. He did
little, because the ill Successes of his Father against the Romans had
exhausted his Kingdom. This is that Seleucus mentioned in the Second Book of
Maccabees, where it is said of him, that because of the Respect which he bore to
the High Priest Onias, he supplied the Temple with its necessary Sacrifices
every year. However Daniel styles him, Vilissimus and indignus Decore Regio. i.
e. The basest and the worst of Men not worthy of the Royal Diadem. 187
About the end of his Reign he was prevailed upon to send Heliodorus to rifle
the Treasures belonging to the Temple of Jerusalem; and it may be very well
affirmed, that his Weakness was the cause of those Troubles and Seditions,
which afterward happened both in Church and State. He was at last killed by
Heliodorus.

3775. 8. Antiochus Epiphanes, or the Illustrious, who had been carried to Rome
as an Hostage after the Defeat of his Father Antiochus the Great, made his
Escape thence at the end of 3 years, and Demetrius the Son of Seleucus was sent
thither in his stead. As soon as Antiochus was returned into Syria, Heliodorus,
who would fain have been King, killed Seleucus. But Eumenes and Attalus outed
Heliodorus, and left Antiochus the Illustrious in quiet Possession of the
Kingdom of Syria, who reigned over it about 12 years. He took away the
High Priesthood from Onias, who was a Man of excellent Piety, and bestowed it
on the Impious Jason his Brother; and the next year he took it again from
Jason, and bestowed it on his Brother Menalaus, who gave more Money than the
former for it. Two years after this a Rumor being spread, that Antiochus died
in his Expedition against Egypt, Jason raised great Disturbances in Jerusalem;
which caused Antiochus, after he had defeated the Egyptians, to exercise
unheard of Cruelties in Judea, and to carry away all their Treasures.
Afterward Antiochus sent Apollonius into Judea, who one Sabbath Day killed a
whole Congregation who were got together to offer Sacrifice. Some say, that he
sent Lysias, Gorgian, Timotheus, and other Commanders against the Jews, who
were all routed by Judas Maccabeus. Much about this time it was, that this
Judas retired into the Wilderness, choosing to live upon Herbs rather than
defile himself with those profane Meats, which in all Parts were then
sacrificed. But at last Antiochus hastening out of Persia to Jerusalem, with a
Design to cut off all the Jews of that Place, fell out of his Chariot, bruised
his whole Body, and died of a loathsome Disease. 175 3786. 9. Antiochus Eupator
succeeded his Father, and reigned about 2 years. Lysias, according to some, but
Philip according to others, governed his Kingdom, made a Peace with Judas
Maccabeus, which was soon after violated. About this time it was, that Eleazar
having assaulted an Elephant upon which he supposed the King was, killed the
Beast, and was crushed to Death by the fall of him. 164
Antiochus having taken Bethsura, went against Jerusalem, and made a Peace with
the Jews; but it being broke, he caused the Walls to be demolished, led away
Menalaus along with him, whom he put to Death as the Cause of all the War, and
put Alcimus into his Place.

3788. 10. Demetrius Soter, the Son of Seleucus Philopator, having made his
Escape from Rome, came to Antioch, put Antiochus and Lysias to Death; and when
he was King, sent Bacchides into Judea with Alcimus, to whom he promised the
High Priesthood. He afterward sent thither Nicanor, who made a League with
Judas Maccabeus; but he having broke it, was soon after killed by Nicanor. This
Demetrius reigned about 11 years. 162
The People of Antioch rebelling against Demetrius, took a young Man named
Alexander, who was said to be the Son of Antiochus the Illustrious, and being
assisted by the Neighboring Kings, set him upon the Throne.

3799. 11. Alexander Epiphanes, or Balas, becoming Master of Ptolemais, sent to
Jonathan to make a League with him; and settled him in the High Priesthood,
which had been vacant 7 years and a half by the Death of Alcimus. This Jonathan
was the first High Priest of the Race of the Maccabees. After this, Demetrius
raised Forces against Alexander, but was defeated and killed by him. By this
means Alexander was established in the Kingdom of Syria, over which he reigned
6 years. 151
Demetrius, the eldest Son of Demetrius Soter, being willing to revenge the
Death of his Father, and to regain his Kingdom, had great Success therein.
Apollonius joined with him, and was sent by Demetrius into Judea to fight the
Jews, who were in League with Alexander. Jonathan and Simon engaged him several
times. At last Alexander ravaged Syria; Ptolemy, Philopator and Demetrius
marched against him, where Ptolemy was wounded in the Engagement. Within a few
days after Alexander was killed by his Domestics, and Ptolemy upon the sight
of his Head died for Joy.

3805. 12. Demetrius Nicanor became at last sole King of Syria, and suffered
the Jews to live very peaceably. Jonathan laid Siege to the Fortress of
Jerusalem, and Demetrius sent to have him come to him, and give him an Account
of that Action. Jonathan still continued the Siege, and pacified Demetrius by
his Presents. 145
No sooner had Demetrius Nicanor disbanded his old Forces, having (as he
thought) no further Occasion for them; but Tryphon laid hold on the Opportunity
to make young Antiochus, Surnamed the Divine, King, who was the Son of
Alexander. He endeavored to make Jonathan his Friend, who did him great
Services.

3807. 13. Antiochus the Divine, set up by Tryphon; but afterward the latter
being minded to be King himself instead of Antiochus, and being afraid Jonathan
should oppose him in his Designs, surpised and killed him. Simon is Elected in
his Place to be both General of the Army, and High Priest. He several times
defeated Tryphon, who, that he might the more easily usurp the Regal Dignity,
killed Antiochus. 143 3809. 14. Tryphon the Usurper. In his time Demetrius
Nicanor marched with his Forces into Media, to strengthen himself against
Tryphon; where he was taken Prisoner by the General of the Army of the King of
Persia and Media. At last the Soldiers could not away with Tryphon, and went
over to Cleopatra the Wife of Demetrius, who surrendered her self and her Army
to her Brother Antiochus Sedetes. 141 3812. 15. Antiochus Sedetes took the
Government upon him, and reigned about 10 years. He at first made a League with
Simon the High Priest, and afterward very dishonourably broke it, sending
Cendebeus against him, whilst he went in pursuit of Tryphon, who retired into
Apamea, which being taken, he was killed there. Simon the High Priest being
very old, sent his Sons against Cendebeus, who beat him. This only served to
foment the Jealousy of his Son-in-Law Ptolemy against the Father and his
Children; who killed the Father and two of his Sons in a Feast to which he had
invited them. In the Eighth Year of the Reign of Antiochus Sedetes, there
happened an Earthquake at Antioch at 10 a clock in the morning, on February the
21st. After this, Antiochus with his Army were cut off in Parthia, which gave
way for his Brother Demetrius to remount the Throne. 138 3822. Demetrius
Nicanor reassumed the Throne after his return from the Parthians, where he had
been Prisoner. But he had debauched himself so much among the Parthians, and
grew by his Pride so intolerable, that neither his Soldiers nor his Subjects
could endure him, but chose themselves another King. 128
16. Alexander Zebenna was the Man they Elected, who was the Son of a certain
great Merchant. Demetrius was abandoned by all Men, fled from one Country to
another, and at last was assassinated as he was going into a Ship: But some
say, he was killed by his Wife Cleopatra. Zebenna in his Prosperity proved
ungrateful to his Friends, and forgot his old Benefactor Ptolomy Physicon, who
had set him upon the Throne. Ptolomy, by way of Revenge, assisted Antiochus
Gryphus against him, who defeated, put him to flight, and afterward killed him.

3826. 17. Antiochus Gryphus reigned 8 years very prosperously, and all Syria
enjoyed a profound Peace. His Mother Cleopatra offended at her Son's good
Fortune, upon his return from the War he had successfully ended against
Zebenna, presented him with a Glass full of rank Poison. He excused himself out
of Compliment, and his Mother still urged him to drink it off, At last he
frankly told her, That he was informed of her ill Will toward him, and that
she could not clear her Innocence better, than by drinking up what she was so
civil to offer him. Upon this she was forced to drink off what she had prepared
for her Son, and so was poisoned. Antiochus Cyzicenus declared War against his
Brother Gryphus, but was defeated by him. 3835. 18. Antiochus Cyzicenus had the
Fortune at last to defeat his Brother Gryphus, who fled away, and was turned
out of his Kingdom, which his Brother became Master of. But no sooner was he
King, but he gave himself up to all manner of Pleasures and Debaucheries. He
associated with none but Comedians, Buffoons, Jugglers and Fencers. He applied
himself very seriously to the making of Puppets dance, and became so great a
Master in that Mechanical Art, that he could make Figures of Birds to fly and
run along, as if they were natural. 115 3856. 19. Seleuchus, the Son of
Antiochus Gryphus, having raised Forces, declared War against his Uncle
Antiochus Cyzicenus. They came to an Engagement, wherein Antiochus was
defeated. His Horse carried him into the Enemies Camp, and he, for fear of
being taken alive, killed himself. 92 3860. 20. Antiochus the Pious, the Son of
Antiochus Cyzicenus, having escaped the Ambuscades which his Uncle had laid for
him, declared War against him, after he had taken upon him the Diadem at Arada.
Seleucus was routed, beaten out of all Syria, and fled into Cilicia. He was
received there by the Mopseates, who being enraged by the extravagant
Contributions which Seleucus raised upon them, burnt him in his Palace with two
of his Friends. Upon this, Antiochus and Philip, two Twin-Brothers of Seleucus,
in revenge of his Death, besieged Mopsuesta, took it by Storm and demolished
it. Antiochus the Pious marched against them, and defeated them. Antiochus was
drowned in a River as he fled away; and his Brother Philip reigned together
with Antiochus the Pious, and afterward they endeavored by War to decide
which of the two should be sole Master. 90 3861. 21. Demetrius Euceres, the Son
of Antiochus Gryphus, was seated upon the Throne of Damascus by Ptolemy
Lathurus: But Antiochus the Pious opposed the new King, being assisted by his
Brother Philip's Forces. Josephus says, that Antiochus the Pious was killed in
a Battle against the Parthians. 89*
22. Philip and Demetrius Euceres, both of them the Sons of Gryphus, became
Masters of the Kingdom of Syria. Thus for these last years the Seleucides
raising continual Commotions with each other for the Crown, were at length cut
off in several Battles. The Syrians offended at these Disturbances, called in
Tigranes King of Armenia, and submitted to his Government.

3863. 23, Tigranes, called in by the Syrians, reigned over them 23 years. But
Antiochus Asiaticus and his Brother, both of them the Sons of King Antiochus
the Pious, reigned over part of Syria, of which Tigranes could not make himself
Master. They went to Rome to Petition for the Kingdom of Egypt, which belonged
to Setene their Mother, and themselves too; and continued their Suit for two
years together. Tigranes put Setene, Surnamed Cleopatra, to Death in Prison;
and by this means, the Title which Antiochus Asiaticus had to the Kingdom of
Egypt, and to part of Syria, fell to the Ground. In several Engagements
Tigranes was defeated by Lucullus the Roman Consul, who was Governor of the
Province of Cilicia. After this Pompey marched to Tigranes, who was so much
terrified at the very sight of him, that he quitted his Diadem, and with a
great deal of Submission and Respect, yielded himself to Pompey. But he moved
with Compassion put the Diadem again upon his Head, re-established him in his
Kingdom of Armenia upon certain Articles, and made Syria a Roman Province. This
happened in the year of the World 3885, before Christ 64. Anno Vrbis Romae
Conditae 688. 87
Having thus given you a short Account of the Kings of Syria, from Seleucus the
immediate Successor of Alexander the Great in that part of his Conquests, down
to Tigranes; we shall in the next place give you a List of the Kings which
reigned in Asia Minor, who possessed another part of Alexander's Conquests.

Sect. 3. The Kings of Asia Minor, or Pergamos.
PErgamos, a City of Mysia, situated on the River Caica in Asia Minor, was the
Capital City of a great State, called The Kingdom of Pergamos, which began
about the year of the World 3634, before Christ 316 years. It had eight Kings,
and lasted the space of 188 years.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3634. 1. Antigonus, one of
Alexander's Captains, who had Asia Minor for his Share, marched against
Eumenes, routed and killed him, being betrayed by his Veteran^ Soldiers. At
last Antigonus was routed and slain by Seleucus King of Syria, and Casander
King of Macedonia. He reigned 15 years. 316 3649. 2. Demetrius his Son
succeeded his Father Antigonus, and reigned 15 years. He was expelled Asia, won
Macedon, but was expelled thence, taken by Seleucus, and within 3 years after
died. 301 3666. 3. Next after him succeeded Philaterus, Intendant of the
Finances of L^simachus King of Thrace, against whom he rebelled, and became
King of Pergamos in the 16th year of his Age, over which he reigned 20 years.
282 3688. 4. Eumenes succeeded his Brother Philaterus, and reigned about 21
years. He subdued several small Places round about Pergamos, and defeated the
Army of Antiochus the Son of Seleuchus near Sardes. At last he died by
immoderate Drinking. 262 3709. 5. Attalus, Nephew to Philaterus, succeeded
Eumenes, and reigned 44 years. It Is said, that he governed with so much
Prudence, and managed his Treasures so thriftily, that his Subjects freely
conferred on him the Title of King, which his Predecessors presumed not to take
up, tho they did hold the Quality and Grandeur of One. He defeated the Gauls
contrary to all Expectation. At last he fell sick at Thebes, and was removed
thence to Pergamos, where he died in a good old Age, being about 72 years old.
241 3753. 6. Eumenes II. the eldest Son of Attalus, succeeded him, and reigned
40 years. His three Brothers, Attalus, Phileterus, and Atheneus, bore so much
Respect as well as Love to the King their Brother, that they becames his
Life-Guards. 197 3793. 7. Attalus II. Surnamed Philadelphus, succeeded his
Brother Eumenes, and reigned about 21 years. He drove Orophernes and Demetrius
Soter out of Cappad^cia, and fully re-established Ariarathes in his Kingdom. He
was conquered by Prusias King of Bithynia, who entered Pergamos, robbed the
Sta^ues of the Gods, and rifled the Temples. Upon this, Atta^us sent his
Brother Atheneus to Rome, to complain thereof to the Senate, who ordered
Prusias to forbear warring against Attalus. P^usias slighted the Orders of the
Senate, burnt the Temples, made great Havoc in the Neighboring Countries, and
defied Attalus, who had shut himself up in Pergamos. The Senate sent a third
time Ambassadors to make up a Peace between him and Attalus, which at last was
effected. This Attalus was a great Friend to the Romans, and a constant
Favourer of Learned Men; at length Peace and Idleness corrupted and spoiled
this good Man, who left his Kingdom to Attalus Philometor, his Nephew. 157
3813. 8. Attalus III. Surnamed Philometor, the last King of Pergamos, succeeded
his Uncle, and reigned only 5 years. He was a very cruel Prince, put his
nearest Relations and dearest Friends to Death, not so much as sparing his
Mother or his Wife. In the Second Year of his Reign he retired into the inmost
Parts of his Palace, where he dressed himself in a very mean Habit, let his
Beard and Hair grow without cutting, never appeared in Public, led a Life
exempt from all manner of Pleasures, and seemed to inflict a Punishment upon
himself for the Crimes he had been guilty of. Having thus quitted the
Administration of the Government, he dug in his Garden, sowed Seeds, and by an
extravagant sort of Humor laid out his greatest Care in cultivating Venomous
Plants, such as Henbane, Hellebore, Hemlock, Aconite, etc. He extracted the
Juice and Liquor, and gathered the Seeds of them, of which he made a great many
dangerous Presents to his Friends. He became so skilful in the Art of Botany,
especially in whatever related to the Manuring of Plants, that he composed a
very curious Book upon that Subject, wherein (as Varro relates) he set down the
Season of Sowing and of Gathering the Seeds of Plants. He applied himself to
Founding of Metals; became a great Master in that Art; cast several Figures,
and made use of them in raising a Mausoleum to the Memory of his Mother. At
last, being too eagerly set upon these sort of Exercises, which exposed him
continually to the Heat of the Sun or the Furnace, he was seized with a violent
Fever, and died on the seventh day of his Illness. 137
Eudemius of Pergamus carried the Last Will and Testament of Attalus to Rome,
and gave the Diadem of the Kingdom and the Royal Robe to Tiberius Gracchus,
Tribune of the People. By this Will Attalus made the People of Rome his Heir:
Populus Romanus bonorum haeres esto. The Romans finding by their Common Law,
that his Kingdom was a part of his Demeans* seized thereon by virtue of these
Words, Let the People of Rome be the Heirs of my Demeans. There was some Fault
found with the Romans for putting such a Construction on his Will; but having
the Power in their own Hands, they made it to be a good Title.

In this City it was that they first dressed Sheepskins, and of them made
Parchment, whereon they wrote before the Invention of Paper; and hence came the
Name of Parchment, called in Latin Charta Pergamena.

CHAP. V. Of the Empire of China.
WE should now, according to our Proposal in the beginning of the Second
Chapter, proceed to the Fourth Great Monarchy, which was that of the Romans;
but upon second Thoughts, we judge it convenient to alter that Method, (how
Natural soever at first sight it may seem,) we shall, before we proceed to
that, give you an Account of those Petty Monarchies, which were Contemporary
to, and conquered one after another by the Three Great Monarchies of the
Assyrians, Persians, and Grecians, and were at last all of them swallowed up by
the Roman, of which they became so many Petty Provinces. But because the
Chinese Monarchy has of late Days been much discoursed of, we shall in this
Chapter, by way of Digression, treat of that Empire, tho it has no relation to,
and was never dependant on the four Great Monarchies, as being never conquered
by them or any other, till of late years they were overrun by the Tartars
their Neighbors; and therefore we should not in this Treatise have inserted
any thing of China, were it not that the Learned World is grown extremely
Inquisitive into all that concerns this great Empire.

If the Accounts and Relations we have of the Chinese were exact and true, it
must be owned that this great Empire is the most ancient, and has lasted the
longest of any in the World. The Chinese Historians maintain, as a thing
Self-evident, the Fohi their first King ascended the Throne 2952 years before
Christ. They tell us, that this Prince, and the seven next who succeeded him,
and had been Elective Emperors, reigned the space of 745 years: That after
this, the Empire of China became Hereditary to several Families, who governed
it the space of almost 4700 years.

However Extravagant and Incredible the Chronology of the Chinese may appear,
yet it may be reconciled to that of the Bible, which we follow chiefly. We need
only suppose, that Noah, who was born 2894 years before the Birth of Jesus
Christ, was Fohi the first Emperor of China. The Description which the Chinese
give us of this Fohi, may very well agree with Noah. This is no such
extraordinary Supposition, if we consider that several Nations looked upon Noah
as their Head and Founder. For is not he that Saturn of whom the Poets speak,
and whose three Sons, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, are Shem, Ham, and Iaphet,
the three Sons of Noah?

After all, suppose we cannot reconcile the History of China, as to its
Chronology, with that of the Bible; yet there is no Question to be made, which
of the two ought to be followed, whether that whereof the Spirit of God is the
Author, or the other which has only Human Testimony to support it. And would it
not be exposing our Holy Religion to the Scorn and Derision of the Profane and
Atheistical, if we should prefer Human before Divine Testimony? This will
appear the more unreasonable, if we briefly consider these two Things. First,
that the Chronology of the Chinese is very dubious and uncertain, their
Annalists cannot agree in their Accounts. su-ma-quam, one of the most
Celebrated among them, makes their Empire to begin in the time of Hoam^ti, 250
years later than Fohi. And then, in the next place, how full of Romantic and
Extravagant Fables is the History? One Instance may serve for all; In the time
of Confucius a certain Lausu lived, who is said to have been 80 years together
in his Mother's Womb. And now, shall we give up the Account in Sacred Writ,
which is True, Certain, and Authentic, which Men inspired by God himself have
given us, which has been approved of by the Learned Men of all Ages, and
confirmed by several General Councils; shall we, I say, give up such an
Account, so delivered, and so authorized, to the vain, fabulous, and uncertain
Account of Human Tradition?

But however, that we may not so much as seem to put the least Slight on that
which so many Learned Men have in such great Esteem, it is requisite to give you
a short Scheme of the History of the Chinese. In doing this, we shall observe
our former Method of reducing the Monarchies to certain set Periods of Time,
and we shall consider China under XXIII. States, from the first founding of its
Empire, to the present year School, which lasted about 4596 years.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 1052. The first State was under eight
Elective Emperors, and lasted about 728 years. 2898 1780. The second State was
under the I. Family named Hia, which had 17 Emperors, and lasted about 448
years. 2170 2228. The third State was under the II. Family named Xam, which had
28 Emperors, and lasted about 632 years. 1722 2860. The fourth State was under
the III. Family named Cheu, which had 35 Emperors, and lasted about 853 years.
1090 3713. The fifth State was under the IV. Family named Cin, which had 4
Emperors, and lasted 43 years. 237 3756. The sixth State was under the V.
Family named Han, which had 25 Emperors, and lasted about 415 years. 194
Years of Christ. The seventh State was under the VI. Family named Heu-han,
which had 2 Emperors, and lasted 44 years. 221 The eighth State was under the
VII. Family named Cin, which had 15 Emperors, and lasted 155 years. 265 The
ninth State was under the VIII. Family named Sum, which had 8 Emperors, and
lasted 59 years. 421 The tenth State was under the IX. Family named Ci, which
had 5 Emperors, and lasted about 23 years. 480 The eleventh State was under the
X. Family named Leam, which had 4 Emperors, and lasted 55 years. 503 The
twelfth State was under the XI. Family named Chin, which had 5 Emperors, and
lasted about 32 years. 557 The thirteenth State was under the XII. Family named
Sui, which had 3 Emperors, and lasted 29 years. 589 The fourteenth State was
under the XIII. Family named Tam, which had 20 Emperors, and lasted 289 years.
618 The fifteenth State was under the XIV. Family named Heu-Leam, which had 2
Emperors, and lasted 16 years. 907 The sixteenth State was under the XV. Family
named Heu-Tam, which had 4 Emperors, and lasted 13 years. 923 The seventeenth
State was under the XVI. Family named Heu-Cin, which had 2 Emperors, and lasted
11 years. 936 The eighteenth State was under the XVII. Family named Heu-Han,
which had 2 Emperors, and lasted 4 years. 947 The nineteenth State was under
the XVIII. Family named Heu-Cheu, which had 3 Emperors, and lasted 9 years. 951
The twentieth State was under the XIX. Family named Sum, which had 18 Emperors,
and lasted 319 years. 960
Hitherto the Chinese had no Emperors but of their own Country; but after the
nineteenth Imperial Family named Sum was extinct in the year of the Lord 1279,
the Tartars became Masters of that Empire, and their Family went under the Name
of Iven.

The twenty first State was under the XX. Family named Iven, which had 9
Emperors, and lasted 89 years. 1279
In the year 1369, the Chinese of the Family of Tai-Minga drove out the
Tartars, and ascended the Throne of the Empire of China, and established the
21st Family named Mim.

The twenty second State was under the XXI. Family named Mim, which had 16
Emperors, and lasted 276 years. 1369
In the year 1645, Zunchin, the last Emperor of the Family of Mim, being
conquered by the Tartars, who invaded his Territories, retired into a Garden of
his Palace, where he hanged himself: And Xunchi, who had conquered China, was
the first Founder of the 22d Family named Cim.

The twenty third State was under the XXII. Family named Cim, and is that
Family which is at present in Possession of the Throne.

We have had so little to do with China, till of late Days, that it is hardly
worth our while to set down the Names, and the Chronological Succession of all
the pretended Chinese Emperors from the time of Noah; yet if any Credit be to
be given to the Account which Father Martini, and Father Couplet, two Jesuits,
have handed down to us about this Matter, I believe we could not put too high
an Esteem on such a Chronological Series of Kings, which reaches to the very
first Ages of the World. But to be plain in the case, We do not think these
Collections to be much worth, since we are uncertain whether these Fathers were
able Critics or no, and upon what Memoirs they founded their Account. For thus
much we learn from their very Histories; That there happened several
Distrubances in China, which occasioned the Loss of a great many of its ancient
Records. Mention is therein made of a certain Yven-ti, the third Emperor of the
tenth Family, who about the year of our Lord 552, when he saw himself
apprehended and made Prisoner, before he would surrender himself, broke his
Sword, and burnt his Library, wherein were above 140000 Volumes, which he did
upon the Consideration, that neither his Sword, nor his Books, would be of any
farther use to him.

In short, let the Case be how it will, I fancy no body would believe me, if I
should here say, That Hoam-ti, the third Elected Emperor, 2697 years before
Jesus Christ, built a Temple to the Supreme Monarch of the Universe; That he
adorned his Head with the Regal Diadem; That he made choice of a
Yellow-colour'd Habit, which none of his Subjects durst wear; That he was a
great Lover of Music; And that he brought Astronomy and Physic to its
Perfection. For we are so uncertain upon what Grounds these things are told us,
that we read all this Account as a perfect Romance. However we shall here
subjoin some Curiosities, which cannot but create a great deal of Pleasure and
Satisfaction to them who read it.

Confucius the Chinese Philosopher.
IN the year of the World 3233, and 717 years before Jesus Christ, was the
famous Confucius born, the greatest Philosopher that China ever had. He drew in
his first Breath in the Village of Leu ye, hard by the City of Kiofeu, in the
Province of Xanton on the North of Nankin. It was under Kimvam, the 24th
Emperor of the third Family, that he began to signalize himself by the fineness
of his Philosophy, to the Profession of which he adjoined a singular Innocence
of Manners. His Writings are full of very fine Maxims, and such as tend wholly
to establish Quietness in private Families, and Peace in the public State. He
was of the Opinion, that it is very important for Sovereign Princes, that the
Fathers should have a Supreme Authority over their Children. He would have
their Authority be very extensive, because in truth the Inclination of a Child
receiving a right Ply betimes, and being kept to an entire Dependence under a
Paternal Authority, would be the more easy to submit to the Yoke of Regal
Power. The Chinese, and the adjacent Nations, such as the Inhabitants of
Tunquin and Iapan, styled Confucius, a wise and a holy Man. His Writings are in
as much Esteem among those Nations, as the Gospel is among the Christians.
There is scarce a City but has a magnificent College dedicated to Confucius;
and every where may be seen Inscriptions in Golden Letters, To the Memory of
the Great Master; or rather, To the Memory of the Illustrious Prince of
Learning. Never did any Philosopher receive greater Honors from his own
Country, insomuch that his Posterity was highly honored, not only by Noble
Titles, but also by great Revenues, and particular Marks of Esteem.

About the year of the World 3728, Xi-hoan-ti, the second Emperor of the fourth
Family, governed with a great deal of Severity and Cruelty. This was the Man
who caused the famous Wall to be built to cover China from the Incursions of
the Tartars.

About the year of the World 3786, reigned Ven-ti, the third Emperor of the
fifth Family, who was a Prince of extraordinary Temper. In his time Paper was
first invented in China.

In the year of Christ 650, Cao-cum caused several Temples to be erected to the
true God, and favored the Establishment of Christianity, which had been
formerly preached in China under his Predecessor.

In the year of Christ 1064, Ym-cum, the fifth Emperor of the nineteenth
Family, began to reign. In his time lived the famous Historiographer
Su-ma-quam, whose Annals begin with Hoam-ti, which most of the Chinese look
upon as the first Founder of their Monarchy.

We hope this short Account of the Chinese, tho by way of Digression, will not
be ungrateful to the Learned World; and shall now proceed to give you an
Account of those other States and Empires, which afterward being conquered,
composed successively a great part of the Roman Monarchy, beginning with that
of Egypt, as being one of the most ancient.

CHAP. VI. Of the Kings of Egypt.
EGypt, anciently called Misraim, and the Land of Ham, Aeria, Potamia, Ogygia,
Melampodus, and Osyria, derived its present Name from Egyptus, the Brother of
Danaus It is part of Africa, bounded on the North by the Egyptian, or rather
part of the Mediterranean Sea; on the East by Arabia Petrea and Sinus Arabicus;
on the South by Ethiopia; and on the West by Cyrenaica. It was formerly divided
into the Upper and Lower Egypt; but at present it is divided into four Parts:
I. Errif, or the Lower Egypt, containing the old proper Egypt and Augusticana.
II. Pechria Demisor, or Middle Egypt, containing the greatest part of old
Arcadia. III. Sahid, or the Upper Egypt, part of old Thebais. IV. The Coast of
the Red Sea, containing part of the ancient Thebais and Arcadia.

There is in Egypt the famous Istmus of Sues, that parts the Red Sea from the
Mediterranean, which several Princes have in vain attempted to cut, so as to
join those two Seas.

There is nothing more obscure or uncertain in History, than what has commonly
been published concerning the Government and Succession of the first Kings of
Egypt. Here we walk even in Egyptian Darkness it self, and cannot set two Steps
forward without being misled. Historians cannot agree among themselves about
the Names, the Time, the Number, nor the Series of these Kings. No body knows
whether these Dynasties, which some look upon as Successive, and which they
range one after another, be not most of them Collateral, and of the same time
or no. Diodorus Siculus says upon his Honor, that for all the Care and Pains
he took in consulting the Priests of Egypt about their Antiquities, yet he
could find nothing in them but what was very dubious and uncertain; and that
whatever has been published of Egypt before the taking of Troy, might very well
be reckoned as Fabulous. What Credit then can we give to what the Greek
Historians have related from the Egyptian Priests, with whom it was very common
to extol the Grandeur and Antiquity of their Nation by Romantic and surprising
Relations? Shall we believe them when they confidently tell us, that the Gods
and Demigods reigned in Egypt* 34201 years before any Kings reigned there?
With such Stories as these did the Egyptian Priests amuse Diodorus Siculus,
when he consulted them about the Antiquity of their Kings. In one word, it
seems very likely that the Egyptian Priests invented those Fabulous Reigns,
that they might not yield the Glory of their Antiquity to the Chaldeans or
Babylonians, who assigned several Myriads of Years to their Monarchy. There was
a kind of Emulation upon this Point between these two Nations, which inclined
their Historians to invent several Successions of Imaginary Kings. This
Emulation is what is very real, the Signs whereof are very visible in the
Writings of the Ancients. Wherefore all that can be said of the first
Government of Egypt with any certainty, is, that Cham the Son of Noah having
planted it, governed this Land for about 160 years, and was succeeded by
Mizraim, otherwise called Osiris; after whom a great number of Kings are named,
but with such a mixture of Fable, that we shall not trouble our selves or the
World with a frivolous Account to their Dynasties, which Manetho would have us
believe were 17, before Thetmosis or Amasis their first known King. We shall
omit likewise to speak of their State under their unknown Kings, or under those
who were styled The Shepherd Kings; and will begin our Account of Egypt with
Thetmosis or Amasis, who began to reign in the year of the World 2207, from
whom we shall continue the Succession down to Cleopatra's Death, when it became
a Roman Province; which happened about the year 3920. This takes up the space
of 1713 years, which being too large to consider all together, we shall treat
of under three distinct States, viz. 1. Under 47 Kings, who all were Surnamed
Pharaoh. 2. Under 11 Kings of Persia. 3. Under the Greeks, namely Alexander the
Great, and the 12 Ptolemy's his Successors.


Sect. 1. The State of Egypt under 47 Kings, Surnamed Pharaohs, which lasted
1220 Years; till the Year of the World 3427, when it was conquered by Cambyses
King of the Persians.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2207. 1. THetmosis, or Amasis, he
drove the Shepherd Kings out of Lower Egypt, who retired into Phenicia, He had
been before King of Thebais or Upper Egypt, and reigned about 25 years. 1743
2232. 2. Chebron reigned about 13 years. 1718 2245. 3. Amenophis reigned 20
years and 7 months. 1705 2266. 4. Amesses, the Sister of Amenophis, reigned 21
years and 9 months. 1684 2288. 5. Mephres reigned 12 years and 9 months. 1662
2300. 6. Maphramuthosis reigned 25 years and 10 months. 1650 2326. 7. Themosis
reigned about 10 years. 1624 2336. 8. Amenophis II. reigned 30 years and 10
months. 1614 2367. 9. Orus reigned about 5 years: He built the Pyramids of
Egypt. 1583 2373. 10. Thermutis, or Acenchres, reigned about 43 years. It Is
said, that this is that new King who knew not Joseph. and who oppressed the
Israelites. He gave order to the Midwives to kill the Sons of the Hebrew Women;
but this not being executed, he injoined his Subjects to drown them. In his
Reign Moses was born, laid in the River, found and saved by Pharaoh's Daughter,
who brought him up as her own Child, and by a signal Instance of Providence
committed him to be nursed by his own Mother. In this King's Reign Cecrops the
Egyptian transplanted a Colony of the Saites into Attica, and there laid the
Foundation of the Republic of Athens. 1577 2416. 11. Rathotis the Brother of
Acenchres succeeded, and reigned about 9 years. 1534 2424. 12. Acencheres I.
succeeded his Father Rathotis, and reigned about 12 years. 1526 2436. 13.
Acencheres II. succeeded, and reigned 13 years. 1514 2449. 14. Armais
succeeded, and reigned about 4 years. This was that Pharaoh, to whom Moses and
Aaron were sent by God to prevail upon him to let the Children of Israel go. In
his time Moses brought the ten Plagues upon the Egyptians; and tho Pharaoh was
hardened by the nine first, yet he was forced by the last to yield to their
Request, and the Egyptians pressed the Israelites to be gone. However Pharaoh
pursued the Israelites with a great Army, but he and all his Men perished in
the Red Sea, whilst the Children of Israel passed over it as upon dry Ground.
1501 2453. 15. Armesis or Ramesses succeeded, and reigned one year. 1497 2454.
16. Amesis or Ramesses Miamun succeeded, and reigned about 21 years. 1496 2475.
17. Armais succeeded, and reigned about 45 years. This is Danaus, who being
expelled the Kingdom by his Brother Egyptus, went into Greece, and laid the
first Foundation of the Kingdom of Argos. 1475 2520. 18. Amenophis III.
succeeded, and reigned in Egypt about 19 years. 1430 2539. 19. Egyptus, or
rather Sethosis, succeeded, and reigned about 51 years. He deposed Danaus, but
was so molested by him, that his Daughters killed 49 of his Sons. In his time
Phoenix and Cadmus came from Thebes to Egypt, and thence went to Syria, where
they reigned over Tire and Sidon. 1411 2590. 20. Rampes or Rhampsaces
succeeded, and reigned about 61 years. 1360 2651. 21. Amenophis IV. succeeded,
and reigned about 40 years. 1299 2691. 22. Ammeneremes or Ammenepthes
succeeded, and reigned about 26 years. 1259 2717. 23. Thuoris reigned about 7
years. 1233 2724. Here happened a Dynasty of the Diospolites, whose Kings are
unknown, and which lasted the space of 143 years. 1226 2867. 24. Smendes
reigned about 26 years. 1083 2893. 25. Pseusenses reigned about 50 years. 1057
2943. 26. Vaphres succeeded, and reigned about 20 years: He is by some called
Mephercheres. This is that Pharaoh who married his Daughter to King Solomon,
and gave her for her Portion Gezer, a City belonging to the Tribe of Ephraim,
which he had taken from the Canaanites, after he had put them all to Death.
1007 2963. 27. Amenophis V. reigned 9 years. 987 2972. 28. Sesonchis or Shishak
succeeded, and reigned 6 years. It was this King to whom Jeroboam fled, and
with whom he tarried till the Death of K. Solomon. After this, Shishak marched
from Egypt to Jerusalem rifled the Temple, and carried away all the Treasures
which were in the Royal Palace of Rehoboam the Son of Solomon. 978 2978. 29.
Spinaces reigned about 9 years. 972 2987. 30. Persusennes reigned about 55
years. 963 3042. 31. Sesonchis reigned 21 years. 908 3063. 32. Osorthon reigned
15 years. 887 3078. 33. Tachelotis reigned 13 years. 872 3091. 34. Petubastes
reigned about 30 years. 859 3121. 35. Sebacon reigned about 12 years, 829 3133.
36. Osorchon, or the Egyptian Hercules, reigned about 12 years. 817 3145. 37.
Tarak reigned 19 years. 805 3164. 38. Psammis I. reigned about 19 years. 786
3183. 39. Bocchoris, Surnamed Saites, reigned in Egypt the space of 44 years.
767 3227. 40. Sabacon or So the Ethiopian began to reign, and having taken
Bocchoris Prisoner of War, caused him to be burnt alive, and reigned in his
stead 8 years. This was that So mentioned 2 King. 17.4. to whom Hoshea King of
Israel sent Ambassadors, to persuade him to pay no Tribute to the King of
Assyria: Upon which, Sennacherib King of Assyria clapped Hoshea into Prison, and
laid Egypt waste. 723 3236. 41. Sevechus, the same with Tirhakah mentioned by
Isaiah, the Son of Sabacon, succeeded his Father, and reigned about 28 years.
714 3264. About this time there happened great Disturbances in Egypt; the Regal
Power was laid aside, and the Kingdom governed by an Aristocracy of 12 Men for
the space of 15 years. 686 3279. 42. Psammeticus, one of the 12, assisted by
the Grecian Soldiers, became sole King of Egypt, and reigned 54 years. In his
time the Scythians having conquered Asia, marched directly toward Egypt. But
when they were advanced as far as Palestine, Psammeticus met them, and by his
Entreaties and Presents diverted them from their Design. 671 3333. 43. Pharaoh
Neco succeeded his Father Psammeticus, and reigned 16 years. He attempted to
cut a River from the Nile to the Sinus Arabicus, but failed in his Design, and
120000 Egyptians perished in the Undertaking. Herodotus tells us, that he sent
a Fleet out of Sinus Arabicus, which lanching out into the South Sea, sailed
quite round Africa. They entered the Mediterranean by Hercules Pillars, called
at present the Straits of Gibraltar, from whence they sailed in a direct Course
to Egypt, where they arrived in the 3d year of their Voyage. This was that King
of Egypt, who defeated Josiah King of Judah, and killed him in Battle. He was
afterward entirely defeated by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, who was very
near conquering all Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar pushed on his Conquests, took from
Neco all his Dominions which lay between the Nile and Euphrates, and forced him
to keep within the Limits of his own Territories. 617 3350. 44. Psammis II.
succeeded his Father Neco, and reigned about 6 years: But he died soon after
his return from his Expedition into Ethiopia. 600 3356. 45. Apries succeeded
his Father Psammis, and reigned about 25 years. He was a great Warrior, took
Sidon by Storm, and put all Phenicia into a very great Consternation. At last
he was absolutely defeated by the Cyrenians, against whom he had waged War.
Upon this, the Egyptians were for deposing Apries, who sent Amasis to pacify
them: But instead of that, they set up Amasis for their King. Apries dispatched
Patarbem to bring back Amasis, but he succeeded not; whereupon he had his Nose
and Ears cut off, as a Punishment of his Default, by the Orders of King Apries.
Those Egyptians who hitherto had continued Loyal to the Interests of Apries,
were so offended at this barbarous Proceeding, that they deserted him, and went
over to Amasis. The two Kings had an Engagement near the Walls of Memphis, in
which Apries was defeated, put to flight, taken Prisoner, confined in Said, and
afterward strangled. 594
Nebuchadnezzar laid hold on this Juncture of Affairs, and whilst these
Commotions and Disturbances were flaming in Egypt, marched directly thither,
and conquered the whole Country: He made a great slaughter among the Egyptians,
and put a vast number of them into Irons. The Jews, who were fled into Egypt to
avoid the Fury of the Assyrians, fell at the same time into the Hands of
Nebuchadnezzar, and shared the same Fate with the Egyptians.

3381. 46. Amasis ascended the Throne, and reigned 44 years. In his time
Cambyses King of Persia resolved upon the Conquest of Egypt, and made
Preparations for it. 569 3426. 47. Psammenitus succeeded his Father Amasis, but
he reigned only 6 months, being conquered by Cambyses King of Persia. 524
A REMARK.
Here we would desire our Reader to take notice, that in the Names and
Succession of these Egyptian Kings we have all along followed Petavius,
Helvicus, and after him our Countryman Mr. Tallents. It Is true, they differ in
some Points from other great Authors, but if they in the Account they give us,
or we in following them do Err, it may be the more excusable, since scarce two
Authors agree exactly in the Names and Succession of these Kings, so obscure is
the History of these Times. We after them have made Thermutis or Acenchres to
be that Cruel Pharaoh who oppressed the Hebrews, and killed their
Male-Children; and Armais to be that Pharaoh who reigned when Moses brought the
ten Plagues upon Egypt, and who pursued the Israelites into the Red Sea, where
he and his Army were drowned. But others have made Ramesses Miamun to be the
One, and his immediate Successor Amonophis III. to be the Other Pharaoh. Which
of the two Accounts is most Authentic is very uncertain, and perhaps neither
of them is true: For it is probable, that one and the same Pharaoh oppressed the
Hebrews, and pepished in the Red Sea. The Scriptures determine nothing in the
case, but only tell us in general, that it was Pharaoh who did this or that;
and Profane History affords us but little Light, to distinguish whether one or
two, or more Pharaoh's were concerned in the Business. We determine nothing,
but leave the Reader to judge as he thinks fit; only we thought it very proper
to add this Remark, to justify our following Helvicus and Tallents in the
Account we have given of the Names, Succession, and Chronology of these
Egyptian Kings.

Sect. 2. The State of Egypt under XI. Kings of Persia, which lasted 193 Years,
viz. to the Year of the World 3619; at which time it was subjected to Alexander
the Great.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3426. 1. CAmbyses reigned after he
had absolutely defeated Psammenitus, who fled to Memphis, where he was
besieged. The City was taken, and Cambyses by way of Contempt ordered him to
take up his Quarters in the Suburbs. Psammenitus, as an Addition to his
Misfortunes, often beheld the Princess his Daughter, with several other Ladies
of Quality, in the Habit of Slaves, who were forced to go and draw Water for
the Persians. She never went by him but she burst into Tears, and made dreadful
Exclamations. This unhappy Prince likewise saw his Son with 2000 Egyptians of
the same Age with him going to be executed, with Ropes about their Necks, and a
Bridle in their Mouths. At last he was removed to Susa, where he endeavored by
several Artifices to raise an Insurrection among the Egyptians; for which he
was condemned by the King of Persia to drink Bull's Blood, of which he died.
524 The next year Cambyses likewise subdued Ethiopia, but carrying his
Conquests too far, it happened that his whole Army being then in a sandy, hot,
and barren Country, had like to have perished for want of Provision. The
Soldiers cast Lots among themselves, and did eat every tenth Man upon whom the
Lot fell. The King of Persia being advertised of this horrible Disaster,
immediately broke up his Camp, and quitted his Design. At his return to Babylon
he died; but upon his going from Egypt he left a Governor over it named
Ariandes. By this means Egypt remained under the Dominion of the Kings of
Persia. 3429. 2. Darius King of Persia reigned over Egypt 36 years. 521 3464.
3. Xerxes King of Persia succeeded his Father Darius, and possessed his
Territories 22 years. 486 3486. 4. Artaxerxes succeeded his Father Xerxes. In
his time Inarus King of Lybia, and Son to Psammenitus, caused the greatest part
of Egypt to revolt, and freed himself from the Tyranny of Artaxerxes. He was
made King by the Egyptians, and called in the Athenians to his Assistance, who
were at that time before the Isle of Cyprus with a Fleet of 200 Sail.
Artaxerxes, upon notice of the Egyptians Revolt, sent against them Achemenes or
Achemenides with an Army of 400000 Foot, and a Fleet of 80 Sail. But Inarus,
with the Assistance of the Athenians, beat the Persians both by Sea and Land,
making great Havoc of them; and among the rest Achemenes himself was killed.
Artaxerxes, upon the News of his Army's Defeat in Egypt, sent fresh Forces
thither under the command of Artabasus and Megabizus. They were near 300000
strong, defeated the Army of Inarus, whom Megabizus wounded in the Thigh.
Inarus was put to flight, and threw himself with the remainder of his Forces
into Byblus, a very strong City of Prosopis, which is an Island in Delta,
formed by two Arms of the River Nile, very near its disemboguing it self into
the Mediterranean. By this Defeat Megabizus became Master of all Egypt, except
Byblus. Within a year or two after the Persians turned the Stream of the River
(which formed that Island) another way, laid Siege to Byblus, which surrendered
to them, and all Egypt was again reduced and brought under the Subjection of
Artaxerxe^. There was still at that time another King named Amyrtes, said to be
the Son of Psammenitus. He reigned in the Fens and Morasses, where the Persians
durst not set upon him. His Forces were inured to Hardships, and resolved to
stand by him to the last. Artaxerxes, at the importunate Requests of his
Mother, yielded up Inarus to her Will and Pleasure, who caused him to be
hanged, and 50 Grecians beside. 464 3525. 5. Xerxes II. 6. Sogdianus; both of
them Kings of Persia, did not reign one whole year. 425 3526. 7. Ochus or
Darius Nothus succeeded them. In his time Amyrtes Saites freed almost all Egypt
from the Tyranny of the Persians, to whom he was an inveterate Enemy, and
reigned 6 years. He was succeeded by Nepherites, a King of a New Dynasty. 424
3545. 8. Artaxerxes II. King of Persia. In his Reign, Achoris King of the
Egyptians raised Forces from all Parts to drive the Persians out of Egypt.
Achoris was succeeded by Psammuthis, who reigned one year; and he again was
succeeded by Nepheretes the last King of the Dynasty of the Saites, who reigned
no more than 4 months. Nectanebis, the first King of the Dynasty of the
Sabennites, reigned 12 years. Artaxerxes at last made a Peace with the Greeks,
intending to join theirs with his Forces for the Reduction of Egypt. But the
Misunderstanding which happened between Pharnabazus General of the Persians,
and Iphicrates Commander of the Athenian Forces, occasioned the Designs of
Artaxerxes to miscarry. 405
Much about this time, Eudoxus a Native of Cnidos a City of Caria in Asia
Minor, being then in great Repute, obtained Letters of Recommendation from
Agesilaus to Nectanabis King of Egypt, desiring Leave to converse with the
Egyptian Priests. The King recommended him to Iconuphis Priest of Heliopolis;
and among these Priests it was, that he wrote his Octaeteride.

3581. Teos succeeded Nectanabis, and reigned 2 years; but sending his Son
Nectanebos with an Army against Syria, this treacherous Son by fair Promises
and Presents won the Army over to his side, and caused them to proclaim him
King of Egypt. Teos fled to the King of Persia, who received him kindly, and
gave him the Command of an Army for the Reduction of Egypt, by the help whereof
he was re-established upon the Throne; but having learned in Persia to live
Luxuriously, he lost his Life amidst his Debaucheries. 369 3583. Nectanebos was
scarce Master of Egypt, but another as Ambitious as himself was proclaimed King
at the Head of an Army of 100000 Men, which he had raised. But this Nectanebos
notwithstanding remained in possession of the Throne, being assisted by
Chabrias who commanded the Army of the Athenians, and by Agesilaus General of
the Lacedaemonians; and reigned 12 years. 367 3588. 9. Artaxerxes III. or Ochus
King of Persia, was the Person that opposed Nectanebos. He sent a puissant Army
into Egypt against him, who in the end conquered and forced him to fly to
Memphis, where seeing he should be taken if he tarried long, he changed his
Habit, and went for Sanctuary into Ethiopia. Others say, that he went in
Disguise through Pelusium, and came to Pella, a City of Macedon. And thus was
all Egypt again reduced by the Persians. This was that Artaxerxes mentioned chapter
3. p. 266. who rifled Egypt of its Treasures and Libraries, and affronted the
Egyptian's God Apis, as has been already related. 362 3611. 10. Arses King of
Persia. 3614. 11. Darius Codomannus, the last King of Persia, who was conquered
by Alexander the Great.
Sect. 3. The State of Egypt under the Greeks, viz. Alexander the Great, and
the XII. Ptolemy's, which lasted 301 Years; that is, to the Year of the World
3920; when Augustus, after the Death of Cleopatra, made Egypt a Province of the
Roman Empire.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3619. ALexander the Great marched
into Egypt, where he found the People disposed to put themselves under his
Protection. For the Persians were grown so intolerable by their Tyranny,
Avarice, and Sacrileges, that the Egyptians upon Alexander's Arrival soon shook
off the Persian Yoke, waited upon him at Pelusium, and submitted to his
Government. Mazagases, Lieutenant to Darius Codomannus, and Governor of
Memphis, delivering up that City to Alexander. In this Expedition Alexander
visited the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, where the Priests (corrupted by his Gifts)
prepared the Oracle to declare him the Son of that God, as has been already
mentioned. Whilst he was in Egypt he built Alexandria, giving it his own Name,
and making it the Metropolis of the whole Country. This was in the Fifth Year
of his Reign, and the First Year of the CXII. Olympiad. When Alexander died,
his Bastard-Brother Arideus was proclaimed King; but his Reign lasted not long,
for Alexander's Favorites shared his Conquests and Empires among them, of
which Ptolemy the Son of Lagus got Egypt for his Dividend. 331 3629. 1. Ptolemy
the Son of Lagus, Surnamed Soter, reigned over Egypt about 35 years, and then
surrendered the Government to his Son. 321 3664. 2. Ptolemy Philadelphus. About
this time the Holy Scripture was translated into the Greek Language by LXXII.
Jews, sent into Egypt by Eleazer the High Priest at the Request of Ptolemy: But
there is some Dispute among the Learned concerning the exact time when this
Version was made, some placing it under the former, but most under the latter
of these two Kings; for Demetrius Phalereus a Grecian, who was a great Man
under Ptolemy Lagi, but not so powerful under his Son, is generally supposed to
have been the chief Promoter of that Work. This Version has been generally
followed ever since, especially by the Romish Church, and is that we usually
call the Septuagint. Ptolemy Philadelphus is also famous in the Learned World
on account of the vast Library of no less than 200000 Volumes, which he
collected by the Assistance of Demetrius Phalereus. He reigned near 40 years,
and died by excessive Drinking, etc. 286 3703. 3. Ptolemy Eu^rgetes, that is,
the Well-doer, succeeded his Father Philadelphus, and reigned 25 years. 247
3729. 4. Ptolemy Philopator put his Father to Death, succeeded him, and reigned
about 17 years. This is that Ptolemy who was such an inveterate Enemy to the
Jews, as was before related in Chapter I. of this Third Part. Aelian tells us,
that he killed his Wife and Sister to please his Concubine Agathoclea, who
governed all; and that he built a Temple to Homer. 221 3746. 5. Ptolemy
Epiphanes, that is, the Illustrious, succeeded his Father when but 4 years old,
and reigned 24 years. He likewise was a cruel Oppressor of the Jews. Antiochus,
Surnamed the Great, who was then King of Syria, upon the News of Philopator's
Death, broke the League which he had made with Egypt; and associating with
Philip King of Macedon, they both resolved upon turning young Epiphanes out of
his Kingdom and to share it between them. 204 3770. 6. Ptolemy Philometor, so
called from that Dutiful Affection which he bore to his Mother Cleopatra,
succeeded his Father, (who died with Poison,) and reigned 34 years and 9
months. This Philometor died in the Physicians Hands, of the Wounds he had
received in his Head by a fall off his Horse in that Battle, wherein he
conquered Alexander Balas King of Syria. Cleopatra, Sister and Wife to
Philometor deceased, was willing to insure the Kingdom to her Son; but Ptolemy
the younger Brother of Philometor, who had reigned in Cyrene, opposed it, and
made himself King. A Party rose up against him in favor of Cleopatra; but he,
to put an end to this Contest, married Cleopatra, his Brother's Widow, and
Sister to them both. On the very Wedding Day this new King killed Cleopatra's
Son, whilst she held him clasped in her Arms. Thus Ptolemy the younger,
Surnamed Phiscon, mounted his Brother's Bed and Throne. 180 3805. 7. Ptolemy
Phiscon, or Euergetes II. was a very cruel Prince, not only to his own Family,
as has been already observed, but to all his Subjects. He reigned about 29
years. In the first part of his Reign he strangled the Grandees of Alexandria,
who had invited him to accept of the Crown; he had no respect to either Sex or
Age, put away Cleopatra, who was both his Wife and Sister, and married her
Daughter, whom he had formerly deflower'd by force. Within a while after he
sent for his eldest Son who reigned in Cyrene, and put him to Death, for fear
the Inhabitants of Alexandria should make him King after him. The People were
so enraged at this, that they pulled down the Statues, and defaced the Images
of the King, who charged Cleopatra, his divorced Wife, with this Fact. Physcon
in Revenge put the Son he had by her to Death, and sent her in a Charger his
Head, Hands and Feet, which he ordered to be served up at her Table on the
Anniversary of that Queen's Nativity. 145 3834. This year the barbarous King
died, and left the Kingdom to Cleopatra his Wife, to whom he had been
reconciled before his Death, and gave her liberty of making which of her Sons
she pleased King in his stead. She would have had Alexander mount the Throne,
but the People constrained her to make choice of Ptolemy Lathurus to be
Phiscon's Successor. 116
8. Ptolemy Lathurus, who was not very well beloved by his Mother, became at
last by her Intrigues odious to the Commonalty. However he reigned together
with Cleopatra 11 years. At last he was so much hated by the People of
Alexandria, that he fled from them to Cyprus, of which his Brother Alexander
had been King for 8 years.

3845. 9. Ptolemy Alexander succeeded, but did not reign above one year. For
falling out with his Mother, he grew jealous of her Intrigues, and thereupon
put her to Death. The Inhabitants of Alexandria were so exasperated, that they
raised an Insurrection, and forced the King to fly. They sent Ambassadors to
Cyprus, to invite Lathurus back again. He reascended the Throne, and reigned
after the Death of Cleopatra 7 years and 6 months. When he died he left a
Daughter behind him named Cleopatra, who reigned 6 months. 105 3854. 10.
Ptolemy Dionysius, Surnamed Auletes, because of his being a great Lover of
Music, succeeded and reigned about 30 years. Some say, he was the Son of
Lathurus. He had a Share in the Civil Wars of Rome, sided with Cato, permitted
him to take the Isle of Cyprus, and drained all Egypt for the Money which he
remitted to the Romans. Upon this his Subjects rebelled against him, and he
fled to Rome, where he gained Pompey's Favor, who re-established him again on
the Throne. 96 3885, 11. Ptolemy Dionysius II. succeeded his Father Auletes,
and reigned about 18 years. His Faiher at his Death ordered by his Last Will
and Testament, that his eldest Son should marry his eldest Daughter, and reign
jointly together; for it was then Customary among the Egyptian Kings, for
Brothers to marry their own Sisters. Pompey, after he had been defeated by
Caesar in the famous Battle of Pharsalia, fled into Egypt, hoping he might find
a secure Retreat with that young King, for the Kindness he had showed his
Father in re-establishing him upon the Egyptian Throne. But he was disappointed
in his Expectation, for Ptolemy, misled by treacherous Counselors, meditated
nothing less than the turning Cleopatra, his Wife and Sister, out of her
Partnership in his Bed and Throne, and to ingratiate himself (as he thought)
with Caesar, sent Septimius a Roman Refugee to murder Pompey upon his arrival.
Julius Caesar pursued Pompey into Egypt, where he heard the News of his being
Assassinated. He was very much troubled at it, but however he endeavored to
make up the Breach between the young Queen and King Ptolemy, who afterward
took an Occasion to fall out with Caesar. They declared War against each other;
Caesar was like to have been cut off, but at last Ptolemy was conquered, and
drowned in his flight. After this, Caesar became Master of all Egypt, which he
was not then willing to make one of the Roman Provinces: For he bestowed this
great Kingdom on his Mistress Cleopatra for some private Favors he had
received of her; and to secure the Government to her, married her to the
younger Brother of Ptolemy. 65 3904. 12. Ptolemy Junior reigned in conjunction
with Cleopatra, who had the entire Authority in her own Hands, because her
young Brother whom she had married was not above 11 years old. 46 3909. Mark
Anthony, charmed with the Beauty of Cleopatra, abandoned the War he was engaged
in against the Parthians, and waited upon that Princess into Egypt, where he
spent whole Days and Nights in Revellings and Banquetings. Pliny makes mention
of a Pearl worth 50000 l. which the Queen powdered, and made him drink off to
excite him to Venery. Whether this be true or no, is not so certain, as that
Anthony married Cleopatra, and bestowed upon her Phenicia, the Lower Syria, the
Isle of Cyprus, Cilicia, Arabia, and part of Judea. The Romans were very much
offended that he should be so Prodigal of what was none of his own, but
belonged to them. Anthony, after he had with great Success conquered Armenia,
returned back to Egypt, where he gave himself up to a thousand Extravagancies:
He styled Cleopatra the Queen of Queens; and Ptolemy Cesareon, her Son, he
called the King of Kings. He never afterward marched out in any Expedition,
but took Cleopatra with him. 41 3919. Augustus Caesar, offended that Anthony had
repudiated his Sister Octavia upon his marrying Cleopatra, rendered him odious
to all the Romans, and made Preparations to carry the War into Egypt against
that Queen, who at Rome was accused of bewitching Anthony. The next year a
Sea Fight happened at Actium between Anthony and Augustus, wherein the former
was defeated. Soon after they engaged by Land, where Anthony's Army was again
routed, and he forced to fly, and was abandoned by his Friends. Anthony, in
despair of Success, laid violent Hands upon himself, and soon after Cleopatra
did the same, by applying an Asp to her Wrist, (as some Authors report.) By her
Death, the Kingdom of Egypt was reduced to a Roman Province in the year of the
World 3920, before Christ 30, Anno Vrbis Romae Conditae 722.
We should now give you an Account of the State of Egypt, as it was a Province
under LVIII. Emperors, viz. XLI. Roman, and XVII. Eastern, which lasted 667
years, to the year of Christ 637; at which time, Omar the second Calif and
Successor of Mahomet conquered Egypt, from Heraclius the Eastern Emperor, by
Amar one of his Generals. But this we shall treat of in the next Volume,
wherein we shall give you a Succession of the Roman and Eastern Emperors.

CHAP. VII. Of Sicyonia.
SIcyon was one of the most ancient Cities of the World: It was situated in
Peloponesus, a Peninsula of Greece, upon a Hill about two Leagues off the Sea.
It Is from this City that Sicyonia, a part of Greece, derives its Name. The
Account of this State is the most Ancient of any in Europe, but withal, the
Darkest and most Obscure. However, to give some Idea of Sicyon, we shall
consider it under two distinct States, which lasted about 966 years.

Sect. 1. The State of Sicyon under XXVI. Kings, from Egialeus, who began to
Reign in the Year of the World 1900, to the 33d Year of the Reign of Zeuxippus,
in the Year of the World 2833, which lasted 933 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 1900. 1. EGialeus reigned about 40
years. 2050 1940. 2. Europs reigned about 35 years. 2010 1975. 3. Telchin
reigned about 15 years. 1975 1990. 4. Apis reigned about 20 years. 1960 2010.
5. Thelxion reigned about 40 years. 1940 2050. 6. Egirus reigned about 32
years. 1900 2082. 7. Thurimachus reigned 45 years. 1868 2127. 8. Leucippus
reigned about 53 years. 1823 2180. 9. Messapus reigned 47 years. 1770 2227, 10.
Peratus reigned 46 years. 1723 2273. 11. Plemneus reigned 48 years. 1677 2321.
12. Orthopolis reigned 63 years. 1629 2384. 13. Melanthus or Marathon reigned
30 years. 1566 2414. 14. Marathus reigned 20 years. 1536 2434. 15. Echires
reigned 55 years. 1516 2489. 16. Chorax reigned 30 years. 1461 2519. 17.
Epopeus reigned 35 years. 1481 2554. 18. Laomedon reigned 40 years. 1396 2594.
19. Sicyon reigned 45 years; from him Sicyonia took its Name, which before was
called Egialea. 1356 2639. 20. Polybus, said to be the Son of Mercury by the
Daughter of Jupiter, reigned 40 years. 1311 2679. 21. Inachus or Ianiscus
reigned 42 years. 1271 2721. 22. Phestus reigned 11 years. 1229 2732. 23.
Adrastus reigned 4 years. 1218 2736. 24. Poliphides reigned 31 years. 1214
2767. 25. Pelasgus reigned 33 years. 1183 2800. 26. Zeuxippus reigned 33 years.
1150
Sect. 2.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2833. THE Second State of Sicyonia
was governed by the Priests of Apollo, on whom the Administration was devolved
after the Death of Zeuxippus. This State lasted only 33 years, viz. to the year
of the World 2866; at which time the Kings of Mycene seized upon this little
Kingdom, and annexed it to their own Dominions. 1117
CHAP. VIII. Argos.
THere were several Places of this Name; but the Argos we treat of here, was
the Capital City of Argia, or Argolidis. It was situated on the Banks of
Planizza: which by the Latins was called Inachus Fluvius, in Peloponesus.
Father Coronelli, in his Description of the Morea, tells us, That this City
formerly Dared the whole World to show its Equal for Stateliness and
Magnificence. We shall consider this Kingdom under two States, which lasted
about 545 years.

Sect. 1. The First State of Argos under IX. Kings, began in the Year of the
World 2093, which is 1081 Years before the first Olympiad.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2093. 1. INachus reigned 50 years: He
is reckoned by the Greeks to be the most Ancient of all the known Kings. 1857
2143. 2. Phoroneus reigned 63 years: He is said to be the first Lawmakers. 1807
2206. 3. Apis reigned 35 years. He was a great Prince, ruled in Egypt. and was
called Serapis or Osiris, as the Greeks report, and ruled also in Spain and
Italy. 1744 2241. 4. Argus reigned 70 years. 1709 2311. 5. Criasus (by others
called P^irasus) reigned 54 years. 1639 2365. 6. Phorbas reigned 35 years. 1585
2400. 7. Triopas reigned 46 years. 1550 2446. 8. Crotopus reigned 21 years.
1504 2467. 9. Sthenelus reigned 11 years. 1483
His Son Gelanor succeeded, and was expelled by Danaus.

Sect. 2. The Second State of Argos under V. Kings, called Danaides.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2478. 1. DAnaus being driven out of
Egypt by his Brother, came into Argos and conquered it. To revenge the Injury
his Brother Egyptus had offered him, he married his 50 Daughters to his
Brother's 50 Sons, and persuaded his Daughters each to kill her Husband. They
all obeyed his Orders, except she who married Lynceus. Hence arose the Fable of
the Greek Poets, who feigned, That 49 of the Daughters of Danaus were condemned
in Hell to an Endless Labor of filling Pails or Sieves that were full of Holes
with Water, which ran out as fast as they poured it in. This Danaus reigned
about 50 years. 1472 2528. 2. Lynceus succeeded his Uncle Danaus, and reigned
40 years. 1422 2568. 3. Abas succeeded his Father Lynceus, and reigned 23
years. 1382 2591. 4. Pretus succeeded his Father Abas, and reigned 19 years.
1359 2610. 5. Acrisius succeeded his Father, and reigned 31 years. 1340 2641.
Perseus put his Grandfather Acrisius to Death, and removed the Regal Power from
Argos to Mycene. From this time it became a Republic, but had a Share in all
the Wars of Greece. 1309
CHAP. IX. Athens.
AThens, the Capital City of Attica, was seated on the River Cephissus, in the
very Heart of that Province, which was looked upon as the most eminent Province
of all Greece. This City was consecrated to Minerva, whom the Greeks called
(...), and has been esteemed one of the most magnificent and flourishing Cities
of the World. Cicero says, that the Athenians were perfect Masters of
Politics, Religion, and Husbandry; that they were the first Founders of Law
and Equity; and that they transmitted these Things to the rest of Mankind. Nor
was Athens only the Public School of Arts and Sciences, but it was likewise
the Seat of Magnanimity and Valor, and as famous for great Commanders, as it
was for Men of Polite Parts and Learning. It Is Areopagus, Liceum, Academy,
Portico, and the vast Number of its stately Temples, have been very much
celebrated and talked of in the World.

The Areopagus was properly the Senate House of Athens, the Place where a
certain Number of Magistrates determined the Causes of Private Persons. It was
to this Place that St. Paul was brought to give an Account of his Doctrine, and
where he made that excellent Discourse, the Subject of which he occasionally
took from an Altar which he had seen in that City, dedicated, THEO AGNOSTO, TO
THE UNKNOWN GOD. Dionysius one of the Areopagites, and a Woman of Quality named
Damaris, embraced the Christian Religion, and were converted by Paul's
Preaching.

The Liceum was a College, where Aristotle taught his Philosophy, for which
Reason it was called the Lycean Philosophy.

The Academy was a fine House with Gardens and Fountains, where Plato taught
his Philosophy. This Name of Academy came from one Academus an Athenian, who
gave that House to Plato, and hence those who were his Disciples were called
Academicks. Arcesilaus, who came after Plato, being willing to reform some
Points of his Doctrine, founded that which was called the Second Academy, of
which, Pericles the Disciple of Arcesilaus was the Head. Arcesilaus taught,
That we cannot come to the perfect knowledge of any thing and that therefore we
ought to suspend our Judgment in all things, without being positive in the
determining any thing about them. There was a Third Academy founded by
Carneades of Cyrene, who taught, That there was some Things probable, and
others true and false, but that the Mind of Man could not tell how to
distinguish them.

The Portico, which was called Pecile, because of the Variety of admirable
Pictures with which Polignotus had enriched it, was the Place where Zeno the
Cynick held his Lectures of Philosophy, whose Followers were called Stoics.

In the History of Athens we meet with Four different States, under which it
appeared to the World, from the year of the World 2394, in which it was
founded, down to the present Times. For there are 10 this day some Remains of
old Athens, which soem call Se^ines, and the Turks Athina.

Sect. 1. The First State of Athens under XVII. Kings, lasted 488 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2394. 1. CEcrops I. (...), came out
of Egypt, brought in their Gods, and was the first that called God by the Name
of Zeus or Jupiter: He founded the Kingdom of Athens, and reigned about 50
years. Pausanias tells us, that in his time the Areopagus was founded, and that
Mars pleaded there first: But others place it in Demophoon's Reign, about 380
years later. In Cecrops's Reign, Deucalion King of Thessaly lived, of whose
Flood the Poets make such large Descriptions. 1556 2444. 2. Cranaus reigned 9
years, and was expelled by Amphictyon. 1506 2453. 3. Amphictyon the Son of
Deucalion succeeded Cranaus, set up the Council of Greece, and reigned 10
years. 1497 2463. 4. Ericthonius the Son of Vulcan expelled Amphictyon,
succeeded and reigned 50 years. He invented Chariots to ride in to hide his
Feet. 1487 2513. 5. Pandion I. the Son of Ericthonius succeeded his Father, and
reigned 40 years. He was the Father of Philomela and Progne; the one, as Ovid
relates, was transformed into a Nightingale, and the other into a Swallow. 1437
2554. 6. Erecth^us the Son of Pandion succeeded his Father, and reigned 50
years. In his time the Isthmian Games were instituted by Glaucus the Father of
Bellerophon. Eumolphus King of Thrace aided the El^usians in in their War
against the Athenians. 1396 2603. 7. Cecrops II. succeeded his Brother
Erectheus, and reigned 40 years. 1347 2643. 8. Pandion II. the Son of Erectheus
succeeded his Uncle Cecrops, and reigned 25 years. In his time the Olympic
Games were instituted by Pelops, who reigned in Peloponesus, which Country
derived its Name from him. 1307 2668. 9. Egeus the Son of Pandion succeeded his
Father, and reigned 48 years. In his Reign the Athenians had a cruel War with
Minos King of Crete, and being conquered by him, were obliged to send 7
Children yearly to be devoured by the Minotaur. In his time likewise, Jason
with his Argonauts went in quest of the Golden Flcece: And Hercules renewed the
Olympic Games. 1282 2716. 10. Theseus succeeded his Father Egeus, and reigned
30 years. He emulated Hercules; destroyed the Robbers; killed the Minotaur;
assembled all the People of Attica in Athens; settled the Government; routed the
Amazons; assisted the Lapithae against the Centaurs; and took Helena. Castor
and Pollux by way of Revenge took Athens, but used it kindly. 1234 2746. 11.
Mnestheus, who was descended from Erectheus, expelled Theseus, and reigned in
his stead 29 years. In his time Troy, after a Siege of 10 years, was taken by
the Greeks. 1204 2775. 12. Demophoon the Son of Theseus succeeded his Father,
and reigned 27 years. 1175 2802. 13. Oxynthes succeeded his Father Demophoon,
are reigned 12 years. 1148 2814. 14. Aphidas succeeded, and reigned only one
year. 1136 2815. 15. Thymetes succeeded, and reigned only 8 years. He killed
his Father, and was afterward killed himself by his Successor. 1135 2823. 16.
Melanthius the Son of Andropompus, who reigned 37 years. 1127 2860. 17. Codrus
succeeded his Father Melanthius, and reigned 21 years. He for the safety of his
People lost his own Life, and by his Death gave them the Victory; for the
Oracle having predicted, that the Party which lost their King should gain the
Victory, he disguised himself, and secretly got into the Enemy's Camp, where he
purposely provoked them, and received his Death for his Country's sake. His two
Sons Medon and Nileus contested the Kingdom, which was the reason why the
Athenians, fearing that they should never have such another King as Codrus, put
an end to the Regal Power, declared that Jupiter was the only King of the
People of Athens, and established Perpetual Archontes, that is, Governors or
Magistrates, who should have the Administration of the State during their whole
Life, and were only different from the Kings in Name, and were accountable to
the People. 1090
Sect. 2. The Second State of Athens under XIII. Perpetual Archontes, which
lasted the space of 316 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2882. 1. MEdon the Son of Codrus
governed Athens 20 years. 1068 2902. 2. Acastus governed 36 years. In his time
happened the famous Ionian Expedition: For the Ionians being driven out of
Peloponnesus by the Heraclidae and the Dorians, under the Conduct of Neleus and
Androclus Sons of Codrus, took Ephesus and other Places in Asia Minor, and
called that part of it Ionia. 1048 2939. 3. Archippus governed 17 years. 1011
2956. 4. Thersippus governed 42 years. 994 2998. 5. Phorbas governed 31 years.
952 3029. 6. Megacles governed 30 years. 921 3059. 7. Diognetus governed 28
years. 891 3087. 8. Phoreclus governed 19 years. 863 3106. 9. Ariphron governed
20 years. 844 3126 10. Thespieus governed 27 years. 824 3154. 11. Agamestor
governed 11 years. 796 3173. 12. Aeschylus governed 23 years. 777 3174. At this
time, being 407 years after the taking of Troy, 12 years before the building of
Rome, and 777 years before Christ, the Olympiads began, each containing the
space of four years. The first Olympiad was very famous for the Prize which
Corebus the Cook won in a Race at the Olympic Games. Here ended the time which
Varro calls Fabulous, because all that preceded the first Olympiad was mixed
with a great many Fables: And here began the Historical Time, because some Rays
of Truth began then to shine forth in History. 3196. 13. Alcmeon governed 2
years; and after his Death, the Government of Athens was committed to Archontes
or Governors, who ruled only 10 years. 754
Sect. 3. The Third State of Athens under VII. Decennial Archontes, which
lasted 70 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3198. 1. CHarops the Son of Aeschylus
governed 10 years. 752 3208. 2. Esimedes governed 10 years. 742 3218. 3.
Clidicus governed 10 years. 732 3228. 4. ^lippomanes governed 10 years. It Is
said, that he tore his Daughter's Adulterer into pieces with wild Horses, for
which he was Deposed. He acco^ding to Suidas was the last of the Race of
Codru^. 722 3238. 5. Leocrates governed 10 years. 712 3248. 6. Apsandrus
governed 10 years. 702 3258. 7. E^yxias governed 10 years. He was the last of
the Decennial Archontes. So that the whole space of Time from Cecrops the first
King of Athens, down to the end of the Government of Eryxius, takes up 874
years. After his Government was expired, Democracy was established in Athens,
and the State was to be governed by Annual Archontes. 692
Sect. 4. The Fourth State of Athens under Annual Archontes, which lasted about
the space of 751 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3268. CReon was the first. 682 3269.
Next to him succeeded Tlesias. 681
Instead of giving you an Account of the Succession and Names of these Annual
Archontes, which would be both a tedious and an useless Undertaking, it will be
more proper to set down those particular Events which contributed to the
Happiness or Misery of Athens; and these we will bring under their proper
Centuries, without affixing the Time to every particular Event, but only to
such as are most remarkable.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3300. In this Century flourished the
Seven Wise Men of Greece, viz. Solon, Bias, Thales, Pittacus, Periander,
Chilon, and Cleobolus. Besides these, flourished Anaximander the Son of
Praxidamus, who was born in Ionia; Pherecydes, Bion Proconessus, Epimenides,
Anaximenes, and several others. The Photians, a People of Ionia, set out a
Fleet, and went and built Marseilles. Within a while after, Pittacus of
Mytelene, one of the seven Wise Men of Greece, was sent by his Countrymen into
Troas, to fight Phrino the Commander of the Athenians, but was conquered. Soon
after, Periander, another of the seven Wise Men of Greece, made a Peace between
the Athenians and the Mytelenians. Within this Century Cylon attempted to make
himself King, but failing of his Aim, fled with his Accomplices to the Altar,
who, contrary to Promise, were all killed by Megacles the Archon of that Year,
which caused great Disturbances and Factions to arise. Epimedides, to free the
City from the Plague, erected that famous Altar mentioned in the Acts to the
UNKNOWN GOD. A second War happened with the Megarenses, wherein Salamis was
recovered. 650 3384. Pisistratus descended from Codrus, became a Tyrant of his
Country. He won the Poorer sort, and by their means made himself King. He was
expelled by Megacles and Lycurgus, afterward sent a counterfeit Minerva in a
Chariot, to admonish the People of Athens to restore him. He married the
Daughter of Megacles, was restored, ruled well for some time, honored Solon,
collected Homer's Verses and put them in Order, built the first Library in
Athens, which Xerxes afterward carried away. He repudiated the Daughter of
Megacles, was again expelled by him; but returned, and was kindly received by
the People. 566
In the 4th Year of the 39th Olympiad, Anno M. 3330, Draco was Archon, and made
such severe Laws, that they were said to be written in Blood; and 22 years
after Solon ruled, who repealed these Laws, and made many excellent Alterations
in the Athenian Government.

In this Century, Thales of Miletum died; and Anaximander, his Disciple, was
the first who discovered the Obliquity of the Zodiac, which his Master could
never find out.

3400. After Pisistratus, his Son Hipparchus succeeded, and after him, his
other Son Hippias. Hipparchus was a great Favourer of Learned Men, but
Harmodius and Aristogiton killed him, who were also killed themselves. Leaena
the Harlot bit off her Tongue, that she might not discover the Accomplices.
Hippias became at last very Cruel, for which he was banished Athens. Upon this
he fled to Darius, and set him upon the Thoughts of conquering Greece. Darius
was so incensed against the Athenians, that every time he supped, he ordered
one of his Servants to cry out, Here M^mento Atheniensium: Pray, Sir, don't
forget the Athenians. By the Instigation of Hippias the Persians did invade
Greece, but were beaten at Marathon by Miltiades, where Hippias was killed. And
when Xerxes, the Son and Successor of Darius, sent another Army of Persians
under the command of Mardonius to invade Greece, they were again routed; at
Thermopylae by Leonidas the Lacedemonian; at Sea near Salamis by Themistocles
the Athenian; at Platea by Pausanias the Lacedemonian; and at Mycale in Asia by
Leotychidas. But since we have already mentioned these Things when we treated
of the Persian Monarchy, we shall not any longer insist upon them. We need only
observe, that after Athens was burnt by Mardonius, Themistocles routed the
Persians, and brought the Athenians back to their City, which they fortified,
and added the Pyreum to it much against the Spartan's Mind. Themistocles was at
last accused of corresponding with Pausanias the Lacedemonian to betray Greece
to the Persians. Tho it was improbable and groundless to imagine, that he who
had hazarded his life in the Defense of his Country, should afterward betray
it to an Enemy; yet upon this Suspicion he was banished, fled to the Persians,
and afterward killed himself, as Plutarch informs us. In this Century, Cimon
the Son of Miltiades was by the Athenians made Generalissimo of the Army then
on foot to drive the Persians out of all Greece. He sailed out of the Port of
Pyr^um with 200 Galleys, and routed the Persians both by Sea and Land in one
day: He was banished by Pericles's Party, and recalled by his Means. Pericles
about this time was Archon or Governor of Athens: He wasted Peloponnesus; made
Peace with Sparta; foraged Sicyon; subdued Eubea; took Samos; and routed the
Corinthians at Polidea. The Athenians in this Period of Time sent a Marine
Supply to the Egyptians against the Persians, who were conquered. The Athenians
in pursuing them made themselves Masters of Memphis; but within a few years
after they had ill Success in Egypt, that whole Country falling into the Hands
of Artaxerxes. 550
In this Century, the Grecian Writers of most Note were Anacreon and Pindar,
Poets; Eschylus the Tragedian, Herodotus the Historian, and Hippocrates the
Physician. Much about this time flourished Meton, the famous Mathematician and
Grand Astronomer of Athens, who found out that notable Period of 19 years; in
which space, all the different Mutations of the Sun and Moon are completed,
and they begin again to move from the same Point of the Zodiac. This Discovery
was received with so much Applause by the Athenians, that they would have it
written in Golden Letters in the most public Place of that City. From hence
came the Title of the Golden Number, the Use of which was handed from the
Greeks to the Romans, and from them to us Christians.

3500. In the beginning of this Century began the famous Peloponnesian War,
which la^^ed 27 years between the Athenians and the Spartans. It first broke
out in the first year of the LXXXVII. Olympiad, when Pithodorus the Archon of
Athens wanted but two months of being out of his Office. About this time a
great Plague reigned in Ethiopia, reached to Egypt, afterward to Lybia, then
to Persia, and last of all reached Athens, where it proved very mortal.
Thucydides gives us a large Description of this Plague in his History. He
speaks of it upon his own knowledge, having been himself infected with it.
Hippocrates, in one of his Tracts, explains the Nature and the Effects thereof,
for he practiced Physic at that time in Athens: Lucretius, who lived a long
time after this, at the end of his Sixth Book gives us likewise a Description
thereof, borrowing a great many Circumstances from Hippocrates. In the 19th
year of the Peloponnesian War, Ninias designing to draw out the Naval Force of
the Athenians very privately by night out of Syragus, and to fall upon the
Enemy, saw about 10 a clock at night an Eclipse of the Moon, which so startled
him, that he laid aside his Design; which was the Cause of the Ruin of himself
and all the Army. After this happened an Engagement between the Athenians and
Lacedaemonians near Miletum, wherein the latter had the Advantage. The Oligarchy
of 400 was abolished at Athens, and that of 5000 was set up, which ordered
Alcibiades, who had been banished, to be recalled, and his Goods which had been
confiscated, to be restored to him. Alcibiades, with Thrasybulus and
Theramenus, were made Generals of the Armies, the Courage and Conduct of these
great Commanders caused a new Change of Affairs in Athens, all Things looking
with a better Aspect than formerly. A Sea Fight happened between the Fleet of
Mindarus, which was joined with the Ships of Syracuse, and the Fleet of the
Athenians commanded by Thrasillas and Thrasybulus. The Victory was a long time
very doubtful, but at last favored the Athenians, who lost 15 of their Ships,
and took 21 of the Enemy's. This Action happened about Cinossema, a Promontory
of Chersonnesus in Thrace, which Place is noted for the famous Sepulcher of
Hecuba, which is there. Here Thucydides concludes his History. There happened
another Sea Fight in the same place between the Athenian and Lacedemonian
Fleets, which last got the Victory under the Command of Hegefandride, their
Admiral. Alcibiades, Thrasybulus, and Theramenus, went to the Relief of
Cyzicus, which Mindarus, the Commander of the Lacedaemonians, would have taken
by Storm. They came to an Engagement, wherein the Athenians were Conquerors
both by Sea and Land; and Mindarus being hotly engaged in the Fight, was slain.
The Athenians intercepted the Letters which the Secretary of Mindarus wrote to
the Ephori of Lacedemonia, concerning the Loss they had at Cyzicus, the Style
whereof is very Laconical: The Engagement has been sharp; Mindarus was killed;
the Soldiers perish for want of Provisions; and what shall we do?

The Lacedaemonians were so far disheartened at this Defeat, that they sued for
a Peace; but the Athenians refused it, being excited to this Refusal by the
Demagogues of the City. These Demagogues were a sort of Men, who were very
fierce, given to Change, and Factious to the utmost of their Power, and who by
their bold Speeches drew the whole Populace after them. But the Athenians often
repented this Refusal of Peace to the Lacedaemonians; and Cleophon, the most
pestilent of these Demagogues, was often reviled for having been the chief
Cause of it. The Athenians put all the Inhabitants of Miletum to the edge of
the Sword, took Cleophona, and making Inroads the night after into Lycia, where
Harvest was nigh at hand, they burnt up all the standing Corn* pillaged the
Villages, and carried off a great many Slaves. Much about this time Alcibiades
was accused at Athens of Corresponding with the Lacedaemonians, and of being
privately in League with Tissaphernes, in hopes that when the War was over,
they would assist him in his Design of making himself Sovereign of Athens. When
Callias was Archon of Athens, which was but a few years after the Athenians
Successes, the Scene of Affairs was much changed, for in a Sea Fight between
the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, the former were routed: And the next year the
Athenian Fleet, consisting of 180 Sail, was taken by Lysander the Admiral of
the Lacedaemonians, of which 10 Galleys with much ado escaped. This Engagement,
which happened near Egos-Potamos in the Straits of the Hellespont, gave
Lysander an opportunity of blocking up Athens both by Sea and Land, which he
besieged so straightly, that he obliged it to surrender to him: And then he set
up 30 Tyrants to rule there, and granted the Athenians Peace, upon Condition
that they would demolish their Walls within 10 days. Whilst these Tyrants had
the Government in their hands, they committed many and great Outrages. Several
of the Citizens were banished, and their Estates confiscated by them. Among the
banished Citizens was Thrasybulus, who fighting in his Country's Cause, with
the Assistance of only 30 Men, first of all took the Fort Phylon in Attica;
afterward his Force increasing, he seized upon the Pyreum, drove out the 30
Tyrants out of Athens notwithstanding Lysander came to their Relief; restored
the City to its former Constitution, and caused an Amnesty to be made. It Is
said, these Tyrants in their short Reign put 1400 Citizens to Death, among whom
the Philosopher Socrates is reckoned, and banished above 5000, all for little
or no Cause. Canon and Athenian, who was General for the Persians, defeated
Agesilaus (who had a while before routed the Confederated Army of the
Athenians, Corinthians, and Thebans,) near Cnidus in a Sea Fight, and with the
Spoils he took fortified Athens. The Athenians perceiving that the
Lacedaemonians were still Powerful by Sea, sent Thrasybulus with 40 Sail of
Ships against them. He scoured the Seas, took a great many Prizes, and raised
great Contributions wherever he came. At last in a City of Asia Minor he
permitted his Army to live so Licentiously, that the Inhabitants were so far
provoked, as to kill a great number of them by Surprise in the night, and
beheaded Th^asybulus himself. Iphicrates, who succeeded him as Admiral of the
Navy, surprised Anaxibius the General of the Lacedaemonians, cut a great many of
his Forces to pieces, and Anaxibius himself fell in the Engagement.

In this Century, Epaminondas the General of the Thebans routed the Spartans
twice at Leuctra, and was at last killed himself at Mantinea. About the end of
this Century, Philip of Macedon engaged in a War against the Athenians, from
whom he took Amphipolis and Potidea; and within a few years after, Demosthenes
made his first Oration against Philip.

The Learned Men of most Note, who flourished in this Century in Greece, were,
Herodotus, Thucydides, and Xenophon, Historians; Euripides, and Sophocles,
Tragedians; Aristophanes the Comedian; Socrates, Plato, and Aristo^le,
Philosophers; Demosthenes the Athenian Orator; Eudoxus the Astronomer; and
Diogenes the Cynick.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3600. Just before the beginning of
this Century began the Phocian or Sacred War, which lasted 10 years. This War
was waged against the Photians who had ^obb'd Apollo's Temple; and the Photians
had for their Generals, first Philomelus, and after him Onomarchus. Philip of
Macedon having defeated the Athenians at Olynthus, granted them Peace; within
two years after he aided the Thebans, and routed the Phocians, whereby he put
an end to the Sacred War. After he had conquered the Athenians, Thebans, and
Phocians at Cheronea, he was chosen General of the Grecians against the
Persians, but was killed before that Expedition. After his Death Alexander
brought an Army into Greece, where there happened some Disturbances; but being
persuaded by Demades the Orator, he pardoned the Athenians, who had conspired
with Attalus against him. In this Century flourished Epicurus, who at 32 years
of Age taught his Philosophy at first at Mytelene, and afterward at Lampsacus.
350 3650. About this time Demetrius Poliorcetes raised a great Army by Land,
and fitted out 250 Sail of Ships to Sea, and parted from Ephesus with a Design
to restore all the Cities of Greece to their ancient Liberty: He retook Athens
and set it at Liberty, and reduced the greatest part of Greece under his
Sovereignty. Some time after the Athenians revolted from him, and sided with
Pyrrhus, upon which he besieged Athens, but broke up from before it, being
persuaded thereunto by Crates the Philosopher. 300
In this Century flourished Aeschines, Lycurgus, Theophrastus, Euclid, Strato
Lamsocenus, Callimachus, Zeno Citticus the Stoic, Manetho, Theocritus,
Berosus, and several others.

3700. In this Century there happened, with respect to the Athenians, but
little of Moment. They sent Ambassadors to crave Help of the Romans against
Philip King of Macedon, who warred against them. It Is said, they sent another
time three Ambassadors to the Senate and People of Rome, to get off the Fine of
500 Talents imposed upon them, for having pillaged Oropus. Those Ambassadors
were three Philosophers, who flourished in this Century, viz. Carneades of
Cyrene, the Academick; Diogenes of Babylon, the Stoic; and Critolaus the
Peripatetick. It was observed, that each of these Philososophers had a quite
different Talent in Oratory: Carneades expressed himself imperiously,
vehemently, and rapidly: Critolaus made a coherent, even, and methodized
Speech: And Diogenes in his Harangue seemed reserved, modest, and afraid to say
too much. This Air of Philosophy being a new Thing there, was very dazzling in
the Eyes of the Romans; and the Youth being charmed with the Conversation of
those Philosophers, were all for studying that Science. But Cato the Censor,
who was of Opinion, That Philosophy would soften the Temper of the Romans, and
make them less fit for War, to which he designed to Discipline them, dispatched
these Philosophical Ambassadors from Rome, and banished all Philosophers out of
that City. 250
In this Century, beside the forementioned Philosophers, there flourished in
Greece, Aratus, Archimedes the famous-Mathematician, Theophanes, Lesbius, and
others.

3800. And now we shall conclude what we have to say on the State of Athens,
since in this Century it ended, and began to be governed by the Romans, of
whose Government we shall have occasion to treat more largely hereafter. 150
CHAP. X. Of the Kings of Troy.
TROY, so famous for ten years Siege, and so much celebrated by Homer and other
Poets upon that account; was a City of Asia Minor in Pbrygia, seated on the
River Xanthus, about a League from the Egean Sea; founded, as some say, by
Dardanus; as others, by Tros. It had no more than VII. Kings; under the last of
which it was taken, and burnt by the Grecians 317 years after its first
founding.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2450. 1. About this time Teucer
reigned over the Trojans, being their first King, and reigned 21 years. 1500
2471. 2. Dardanus the Son of Jupiter and Electra, Teucer's Son-in-Law,
succeeded, and reigned 31 years. 1479 2502. 3. Ericthonius reigned about 65
years. 1448 2567. 4. Tros the Son of Ericthonius and Astyoche succeeded his
Father, and built Troy, which he called Troja after his own Name, and Ilium
after his Son Ilus's Name. He warred with Tantalus, and reigned about 63 years.
1383 2630. 5. Ilus succeeded his Father, and reigned about 40 years. 1320 2670.
6. Laomedon succeeded, and reigned about 44 years. He built the Walls of Troy,
and the Treasuries of Neptune and Apollo; and at last was killed by Hercules.
1280 2714. 7. Priam succeeded, and reigned about 53 years. His Son Paris went
into Greece, and brought thence by force the beautiful Helena* Wife of
Menelaus. Upon this, Agamemnon, Brother to Menelaus, excited the Greeks to a
Confederacy to revenge this Affront. The Grecians having made him their
General, marched against Troy, which, after a ten years Siege, they took, in
the year of the World 2767, before Christ 1183, before the first Olympiad 407,
before the building of Rome 431. 1183
It is here to be observed, that the Account which the Poets give us of the
famous Siege of Troy is full of Fabulous Relations; so that all they tell us of
the chief Hero's of this War, such as Achilles, Ajax, Ulysses, Hector Eneas,
etc. is not to be credited, but the greatest part is to be looked upon as
Romance, and Poetical Fiction, and not as true History.

CHAP. XI. Of the Spartans or Lacedaemonians.
SParta or Lacedemonia was the Capital City of Laconia, and one of the most
considerable Republics of Peloponnesus, seated on the River Eurotus. It was
the strongest City in all Greece, tho it had no Fortifications, and defended
its self without Walls for the space of 800 years against all its Enemies.
Authors are not agreed about the Time, or the Founder of Sparta: Some say,
Spartus the Son of Amilcas; others, that Sparta the Wife of King Lacedemon
founded it. Some assert, that Spartus the Son of Phoroneus King of Argos; and
others, that Lelex was the Founder of it, from whom it was called Lelegia, it
not receiving the Title of Lacedemonia till in Lacedemon's time, who was its
fourth King. And there are others which affirm, that Cecrops the Founder of
Athens was likewise the Founder of Sparta. It is by all acknowledged, that
there was never any People in the whole World more skilled in Politics, than
the Lacedaemonians. We have one famous Instance of this, and which seems to be
almost a Prodigy, viz. That one and the same Government should be under two
Kings at the same time, and so united to each other in their Interests, as to
last above 800 years together under that Form. And it is manifest, that after
this Government of two Kings ceased, both the Glory and Grandeur of the
Lacedaemonians began to decline.

As Authors agree not about the Founder of this Commonwealth, so neither do
they agree about the Time wherein it was founded, nor about the Number of their
first Kings. All things were so obscurely handed down to us before the first
Olympiad, that Chronology and History too must needs be very imperfect. The
famous Usher passes by in his Chronology all the first Kings, as well as those
called the Heraclides, thinking it more proper to be silent, than to advance
any thing on Matters so uncertain; yet since Dr. Howell and others have given
us the Names of these Kings, without mentioning the precise number of the years
of their particular Reigns, we shall consider Lacedemonia under Four distinct
States.

Sect. I. The First State of Lacedemonia under XIV. Kings, not much known,
lasted about 397 Years; that is, from Lelex their first King, to the
Heraclides. But forasmuch as it is uncertain how long each King lived or
reigned, we shall only set down their Names.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2450. 1500 1. Lelex. 2. Miles. 3.
Eurotas. 4. Lacedemon, who married Sparte the Daughter of Eurotas. 5. Amyclas.
6. Argalus. 7. Cynortas. 8. Oebalus. 9. Hippocoon, expelled by 10. Tyndareus.
11. Castor and Pollux. 12. Menelaus, who married Helena, the Sister of the two
former. 2775. 13. Orestes: He killed his Mother and Aegystus King of Argos,
ruled over both the Kingdoms 70 years. 1175 2845. 14. Tisamenus reigned only
two years. 1105
Sect. II. The Second State of Lacedemonia under the Kings called Heraclides,
till such time as their Power was moderated by the Gerontes or Senators.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2847. 1103.

They were called Heraclides, as descending from Hercules: For Aristodemus, one
of his Descendants, had two Sons, namely Eurysthenes and Procles, both which
the Spartans chose for their Kings; from whom descended the two Royal Families
called Eurysthenides and Proclides, who jointly governed Lacedemonia for the
space of 249 years.

The Kings called Eurysthenides.
1. Eurysthenes reigned 42 years. 2. Agis the Son of Eurysthenes succeeded:
From him the Royal Family was called Agidae, and that of Eurysthenes was
extinct. He reigned only one year. 3. Echestratus succeeded his Father, and
reigned 35 years. 4. Labotas succeeded his Father, and reigned 37 years. 5.
Dor^ssus succeeded his Father, and reigned about 30 years. 6. Agesilaus
succeeded his Father Doryssus, and reigned about 44 years. 7. Archelaus
succeeded his Father Agesilaus, and reigned 60 years.
The Kings called Proclides.
1. Procles. 2. Soos, the Adopted Son of Procles, 3. Eurypon the Son of Soos,
from whom the following Kings were called Eurypontides, which put an end to the
Name of Proclides. 4. Prytanis succeeded his Father Eurypon. 5. Eunomus
succeeded his Father Prytanis. 6. Polydectes succeeded his Father Eunomus. 7.
Charilaus succeeded his Father Polydectes: He was the Posthumous Son of
Polydectes, and reigned under the Tuition of Lycurgus, the famous Legislator of
the Lacedaemonians. Lycurgus was Son to Eunomus the Brother of Polydectes, and
Uncle to Charilaus: About this time it was that he made Laws for the
Lacedaemonians.


Sect. III. The Third State of Lacedemonia, under such Kings whose Power was
restrained by 28 Gerontes or Senators, whom Lycurgus instituted.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3096. 854.

This State lasted 130 years, to the year of the World 3198, at which time the
Epheri were set up.

8. Teleclus the Son of Archelaus reigned about 40 years. He was killed by the
Messenians in the Temple of Diana. 9. Alcamenes succeeded his Father Teleclus,
and reigned 37 years. 10. Polydorus succeeded, and was killed by Polemarchus.
In his time the Ephori were set up to Bridle the Kings and Senate. Five of them
were yearly made; and tho the first was only named, and the others styled
Eponymous, yet they were all five of equal Power.
8. Nicander succeeded his Father Charilaus, and reigned 39 years. 9.
Theopompus: The years of his Reign, and the rest who succeeded, are unlimited
till the year of the World 3447.


Sect. IV. The Fourth State of Lacedemonia under the Kings, with the Five
Ephori or Inspectors, instituted by Theopompus 130 Years after Lycurgus.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3198. 752.

This State lasted about 532 years, viz. down to such time as Cleomenes was
defeated by Antigonus King of Macedon.

11. Eurycrates I. the Son of Polydorus. 12. Anaxander the Son of Eurycrates.
13. Eurycrates II. the Son of Anaxander.
10. Zeuxidamus, Grandson to Theopompus. 11. Anaxidamus, his Son. 12.
Archidamus, the Son of Anaxidamus.


Before we proceed to give you an Account of the succeeding Kings of
Lacedemonia, it will not be amiss to speak something of the Wars which happened
between the Lacedaemonians and the Messenians. The first War broke out in the
second year of the ninth Olympiad, being in the year of the World 3207, before
Christ 643. The Lacedaemonians were offended that Ctesphontes had treacherously
seized upon the Territories of Messina, by defrauding his Nephews of their
Right thereto. The Enmity increased by the Battle fought at the Temple of
Diana, wherein Teleclus, the Father of Alemenes who was then King, was killed.
At last they came to an open Rupture, and the War was for many years together
carried on with doubtful Success on each side. At last the Messenians, whose
Country was the Seat of War, seeing themselves almost ruined by the
Difficulties under which they struggled, thought fit to evacuate all the Towns
which lay farthest off the Sea, and to retire to the Mountain Ithomene. After
this Retreat, there was a Cessation of Arms on both sides for some years
together. But the eighth year after, the War broke out afresh between the
Lacedaemonians and Messenians, and was carried on with doubtful Success,
sometime one, and sometime the other, getting the better. In the first
Engagement, the Messenians lost their King Euphaes, in whose stead Aristodemus
was elected: But in the second, being assisted by the Arcadians, Argives, and
Sicyonians, they won the Battle. Now the Lacedaemonians began to despair of
Success, and both they and the Messenians sent to enquire of the Oracle at
Delphos about the Event of the War. The Oracle favored the Lacedaemonians, who
besieged Ithomene, and took it from the Messenians, who became subject to the
Spartans. Whilst this War lasted, it is said, that the Lacedaemonians, for fear
their Nation should decrease, detached 50 of the most robust young Men in their
Army, and sent them into Sparta to get the young Women with Child. The
Offspring of these Virgins, (being from them, which in the Greek is (...),
called Parthenians,) when they were grown up, were slighted, and no body would
own them. Upon, this, they joined in an Insurrection with the Helots, but being
overcome, were forced to remove thence, went into Italy under the Conduct of
one Phalantus, where they built Tarentum.

The Messenians were at last so uneasy under the Government of the Spartans,
that they revolted, and engaged in another War which lasted 18 years; in the
issue, the Messenians were conquered, fled into Sicily, and there built
Messina, which still bears the same Name. We now proceed to the succeeding
Kings.

14. Leo the Son of Euricrates. 15. Anaxandrides the Son of Leo. 16. Cleomenes
the Son of Anaxandrides. This was he who expelled the Family of Pisistratus out
of Athens. He corrupted the Oracle to declare, that Demaratus the Son of
Ariston was a Bastard; at last he was expelled himself, fell mad, and laid
violent Hands on himself. 17. Leonidas the Son of Anaxandrides, and Brother to
Cleomenes, was slain at Therm^pylae with 4000 Greeks, who opposed the Passage
of Xerxes King of Persia. But having already mentioned the Invasion of the
Persians under Xerxes, with their being defeated by Leonidas, Leotychidas,
Euribiades, Pausanias, and Themistocles, the Grecian Generals, we think it
proper to repeat nothing that relates to these Matters. 18. Plistarchus the Son
of Leonidas succeeded his Father.
13. Agasicles the Son of Archidamus. 14. Ariston the Son of Agasicles. 15.
Demaratus the Son of Ariston: He being unjustly expelled as a Bastard by
Cleomenes, fled to the Persians, and entered into their Interests. 16.
Leotychidas the Son of Menares reigned 22 years; but being guilty of Bribery,
he fled, and died in Exile. 17. Archidamus II. the Son of Zeuxidamus, reigned
42 years.


During these Kings Reigns, Pausanias the Spartan being General of the Greek
Forces, was sent by the Lacedaemonians with a Fleet composed of the Auxiliary
Forces of the Athenians, to drive the Persians out of the Grecian Cities which
they were still in Possession of. He did it with Success, but afterward aiming
(as was pretended) to make himself Monarch of all Greece, he was sent for home,
where being convicted of this, and of exciting the Helots to an Insurrection,
he fled for Sanctuary into the Temple of Minerva, where being blocked up, he
was starved to Death.

The Ambition of Pausanias, and the Moderation of Aristides the Athenian,
occasioned the Associated Greeks to translate the Sovereign Administration of
their Affairs from the Lacedaemonians to the Athenians; and to these last they
committed the chief Care of carrying on the War against the Persians, and of
driving them out of Greece.

19. Plistoanax the Son of Pausanias succeeded Plistarchus, and reigned 50
years.

In the Reign of Plistoanax and Archidamus II. happened the famous Peloponesian
War between the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians. It broke out in the first year
of the LXXXVIIth Olympiad, in the year of the World 3520, before Christ 430,
and lasted 27 years. All Greece was engaged in this Quarrel, some siding with
this, some with that Party; but most espoused the Interest of the
Lacedaemonians. The Allies of the latter met at the Isthmus, and under the
Command of Archidamus the Spartan King, invaded Attica. The Athenians, to give
them a Diversion, sent some Forces into Peloponnesus to ravage that Country,
and having driven out the Inhabitants of Aegina, put a Colony of their own Men
into that Place. The next Campaign Archidamus returned to Attoca, where a
deadly Plague laid the whole Country waste, of which great Numbers, among the
rest Pericles the first Author of this War, died. But notwithstanding these
Disasters, Potidea surrendered to the Athenians. For six years together
successively did the Lacedaemonians visit Attica, in which time the Athenians
took Mitylene, and the Lacedaemonians took Platea. In the sixth year of this
War, whilst Agis the Son of Archidamus was in Attica, Demosthenes the Athenian
sailing toward Sicily, took Pylus a Promontory of Lac^nia, and fortified it.
The Lacedaemonians enraged at this, drew their Forces out of Attica, and
besieged Pylus both by Sea and Land. They became Masters of the Island
Sphacteria, over against the Promontory, which they thought would facilitate
their Design. But the Athenians coming upon them with a greater Fleet, blocked
up the Spartan Fleet in Port, and by this means laid Siege to the Besiegers.
The Lacedaemonians sent Ambassadors to Athens to treat about a Truce, but none
they would grant; whereupon those who were in the Island were forced to
surrender upon Discretion, and were put every Man to Death. The Athenians
puffed up with this Success, refused to make Peace, tho upon very Honorable
Terms, but soon repented of their Folly. For within a while after they received
two great Defeats, the one at Delos, and the other at Amphipolis, a Town in
Thrace, where Brasidas the Spartan gave them great Disturbance. At last a Peace
for five years was made, upon Condition, that the Men and Towns (some few
excepted) taken on both sides should be restored.

20. Pausanias the Son of Plistoanax succeeded his Father, and reigned 14
years, and then was banished. 18. Agis the Son of Archidamus succeeded his
Father, and reigned 25 years. It was he who broke the Truce with the Athenians.

Of this Peloponnesian War, there has been already sufficient said, both in
this Place, and in the Chapter which treats of the Athenians. It was there
mentioned, that Mindarus was defeated; that the Lacedaemonians sued for a Peace,
which was refused them; and that at last Lysander the Lacedemonian worsted the
Athenians, took Athens, and placed his Governors there, so that we shall not
here add any thing farther about it.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3555. 21. Agesipolis the Son of
Pausanias succeeded, and reigned 13 years. Aristodemus was his Governor. 395
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3547. 19. Agesilaus the Son of
Archidamus was set up by Lysander, and reigned 41 years. 403


During the Reign of these Kings, the Lacedaemonians sent their Ambassadors to
Nepheretes King of Egypt for a Supply. He granted them 100 Galleys, and a great
deal of Corn. Agesilaus, one of the Lacedemonian Kings, surprised Tissaphernes
the General of the Persians, fell upon and defeated him near Sardes: After this
he took a great many Towns, and struck such a Terror into the Persians, that
they thought their Empire was then tottering. But to divert the Storm, by their
Gold they corrupted several of the Grecian States to declare War against the
Lacedaemonians, among the rest were Thebes and Attica. Upon this Agesilaus was
recalled, and at his return defeated the Confederated Army of Boeotians,
Athenians, Argives, Corinthians, etc. near Cheron^a. But the Athenians were at
first Masters by Sea, C^non the Athenian Admiral defeating the Lacedemonian
Fleet under the Command of Pysander near Cnidus. The Lacedaemonians seeing they
were not strong enough at Sea, dispatched Teleutias with a Squadron of 12 Ships
more. Teleutias making Rhodes, took 10 Ships from the Athenians, commanded by
Philocrates, by which means the Lacedaemonians began again to be formidable by
Sea.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3568. 22. Cleombrotus the Brother of
Agesipolis succeeded, and reigned 9 years. 382


About this time the Lacedaemonians thought it Advisable to strike up a Peace
with Athens. The Peace was no sooner concluded, but they set upon Chastizing
their Allies which had in the late War associated with their Enemies. They
forced the Mantineans to demolish the Walls of their City, and to retire into
the Villages; and the Philiasians to receive those whom they had banished home
again. Artaxerxes King of Persia thinking the Grecians might be serviceable to
him in his intended Expedition against the Egyptians, offered Peace to them:
Which tho at first was refused by some, yet at length was accepted by all the
States, except the Thebans, who were looked upon as Enemies of the common
Welfare of Greece. Upon this, Cleombrotus the King of Sparta invaded Beotia,
but was defeated and killed at the Battle of Leuctra by the Thebans, under the
Command of Epaminondas. This Battle happened in the second year of the 102d
Olympiad, in the year of the World 3579, before Christ 371. Ariobarzanes, the
General of Artaxerxes, sent Philiscus into Greece to make up a Peace between
the Thebans and Lacedaemonians. Their Deputies met at Delphos, but no
Accommodation could be made between them, because the Thebans would not consent
that Messina should be under the Power of the Lacedaemonians. Upon this,
Philiscus declared himself in favor of the latter, and granted them Supplies.
Within a while after, under the Reign of Cleomenes II. they had another
Engagement at Mantinea, wherein Epaminondas was mortally wounded, but yet
defeated the Spartans.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3579. 23. Agesipolis II. the Son of
Cleombrotus succeeded, and reigned only 2 years. 371 3581. 24. Cleomenes II.
how long he reigned is uncertain. 369 25. Acrotatus I. 3611. 26. Aretas the Son
of Acrotatus reigned 44 years. 339 3655. 27. Acrotatus II. the Son of Aretas
succeeded, and reigned 15 years. 295 3670. 28. Leonidas II. succeeded, and
reigned 17 years. 280
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3588. 20. Archidamus II. the Son of
Agesilaus reigned 23 years. 362 3611. 21. Agis the Son of Archidamus reigned
about 9 years. 339 3620. 22. Eudamidas I. Son of Archidamus, and Brother to
Agis, succeeded. 330 23. Archidamus III. the Son of Eudamidas, succeeded his
Father. 24. Eudamides II. the Son of Archidamus. 25. Agis III. succeeded, and
reigned... years.


Leonidas within a while got the sole Power into his Hands: For Agis being
desirous to reform the State, and restore the Laws of Ly^urgus, was strangled
by the Ephori.

3687. 29. Cleombrotus Son-in-Law to Leonidas succeeded, and reigned 25 years.
263 3712. 30. Cleomenes III. succeeded, and reigned about 18 years: He poisoned
Euridamas, and put up in his stead Epiclidas, a Descendant of Eurysthenes. 238
26. Eurydamus the Son of Agis was poisoned by Cleomenes. 27. Epiclidas the Son
of Leonidas, set up by Cleomenes.


This Cleomenes destroyed the Ephori, put an End to their Power, and restored
the Discipline instituted by Lycurgus. He afterward warred against the
Acheans, took from them Argos, and the greatest part of Peloponnesus.
Afterward he was routed by Antigonus King of Macedon, and fled into Egypt,
where he was very honorably received by Ptolemy Euergetes, but barbarously
killed by Ptolemy Philopator. And thus with him ended the Grandeur of
Lacedemonia after it had lasted so many years, and was the Envy as well as
Glory of all Greece.

Three Tyrants afterward ruled, but came all to untimely Deaths. After them,
History is silent as to the Affairs of Lacedemonia; but certain it is, that at
last it became with the rest of Greece part of the Roman Monarcby, of which we
shall hereafter treat at large.

CHAP. XII. Of Corinth.
COrinth was one of the finest, richest, and most powerful Cities of all
Greece. It was situated almost in the middle of the Isthmus, where the Egean
and Ionian Seas meet, lying about 40 Leagues from Pat^as, 25 from Athens, 40
from Lacedemonia, and 12 or 13 from Argos. It was Commanded by the Fort called
Acro Corinthos, which was raised on the top of a very high Hill, where was very
even Ground, and which was encompassed by very strong Walls. Within this Fort
were a great many Fountains of fresh and fair Water, among the rest the
Pyrenian Fountain celebrated by Homer in his Odysseis. The Si^uation of this
Fort was so Advantageous, that Cicero st^led it Greciae Oculus, i. e. The Eye
of Greece. He withal adds, that Corinth composes the Beauty and Luster thereof,
and that it was one of the three Cities which the Romans would acknowledge to
be capable of bearing the weight of a great Empire. In this City St. Paul
sojourned 18 months, in which time he preached the Gospel wi^h good Success,
and afterward wrote to them two excellent Epistles, which are among the
Canonical Writings of the New Testament. This City was at first called Ephyra,
afterward Heliopolis, i. e. The City of the Sun. It was famous for its
Painters, Architects, and Carvers, and was built by Sis^phus.

Corinth, in the several Risques of Fortune which it has run, has appeared to
the World under VI. distinct States.

Sect. I. The First State of Corinth under the Race of Sisyphus, of which there
were X. Kings, which lasted 269 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2543. 1. Sisyphus: The same with him,
who (as the Poets tell us) was condemned to the endless Labor or rouling a
Stone up a Hill, which no sooner was at the top, but rouled down again to the
bottom, and so renewed his Labor.
2. Glaucus, the first Instituter of the Ishmian Games.

3. Bellerophon. He being guilty of Homicide, fled to Argos, where he was
kindly received by King Pretus: But it seems, Sthenobea the Queen of Argos
falling in Love with Bellerophon, tempted him to lie with her, but upon his
Refusal, accused him of tempting to violate her Chastity; (which, by the way,
is much the same with the Story of Joseph and his Egyptian Mistress.) Upon
this, Pretus was offended, sent him into Lycia to his Father-in-Law Iolas, with
Orders to put him to Death. But Iolas, after several Trials of his Valor, so
admired him, that he not only spared his Life, but married him to his Daughter
Philonoe.

4. Orynthion.

5. Phocus.

6. Thoas.

7. Demoph^on.

8. Propodas.

9. Doridas, Both Sons of Propodas.

and 10. Hyanthidas. Both Sons of Propodas.

Under these two last Kings, the Heraclides fell into Peloponnesus, and became
Masters of Corinth. It Is to be observed, that History is so obscure about these
first Kings, that the exact Time and Duration of each Reign cannot be set down.

Sect. II. The Second State of Corinth under IV. Kings called Heraclides, which
lasted 144 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2812. 1. Aletes the Son of Hippota^,
the Son of Antiochus, who was Nephew to Hercules. He reigned 38 years. 1138
2850. 2. Ixion reigned 34 years. 1100 2884. 3. Agelaus reigned 37 years. 1066
2921. 4. Prymnis reigned 35 years. 1029
Sect. III. The Third State of Corinth under VIII. Kings called Bacchides,
which lasted 215 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2956. 1. Bacchis reigned 35 years.
994 2991. 2. Agelaus reigned 30 years. 959 3021. 3. Eudemus reigned 25 years.
929 3046. 4. Aristodemus reigned 35 years. 904 3081. 5. Agemon reigned 16
years. 869 3098. 6. Alexander reigned 39 years. 852 3137. 7. Telstes reigned 34
years. 813 3171. 8. Aristomenes or Automenes reigned only one year. 779
Sect. IV.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3172. The Fourth State of Corinth was
under Annual Magistrates, which lasted 121 Years, viz. From the Year of the
World 3172, to the Year 3293. At this time the Government was changed into
Aristocracy For 200 of the Bacchides ruled in Common, and only created a
Prytanis every Year from among themselves; till at last it fell under the
Tyranny of Cypselus and Periander, who reigned about 73 Years. 778
Sect. V.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3245. The Fifth State of Corinth, was
that of the Re-establishment of their Liberty. By this means it became a Free
Republic, and had a great Share in the Wars carried on by the Grecians against
the Persians, and in the Wars between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, as has
been already observed. This State lasted about 439 Years.
Sect. VI.
The Sixth State of Corinth was under the Romans; of which we shall have
occasion to speak when we come to the Roman Monarchy.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Mycenians.
MYcene was a City of Peloponesus, situated between Argos and Corinth. It was
founded by Lacedemon the Son of Semele: But the Kingdom of Mycene was founded
by Perseus the Son of Danae, after he had killed by an Accident his Grandfather
Acrisius King of Argos. So that this State is to be looked upon only as a
Continuation of the Kingdom of Argos, the Regal Authority being translated
thence by Perseus to Mycene about the year of the World 2641, before Christ
1309.

This Kingdom or State lasted 218 Years under VII. Kings.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2641. 1. Perseus reigned about 57
years. Before he was King he did many great Exploits; among the rest, overcame
the Gorgons, three Sea Monsters. 1309 2708. 2. Sthenelus succeeded his Father,
and reigned 8 years. 1242 2716. 3. Eurystheus succeeded his Father Sthenelus,
and reigned 43 years. In his time lived Hercules, said to be the Son of Jupiter
and Alcmena, who by Eurystheus was injoined to destroy diverse Monsters, in
hopes that he would have been killed by them: But he always returned home
Conqueror; which gave an occasion to the Story of the twelve Labors of
Hercules. Eurystheus jealous of the growing Greatness of this Hero, made War
against the Herac^idae, wherein he and all his Sons was killed. 1234 2759. 4.
Atreus and Thyestes, the Sons of Pelops, and Grandsons of Tantalus, reigned
conjunctly the space of 8 years. They had another Brother named Plisthenes, who
died whilst young, and committed the Care of his two Sons, Agamemnon and
Menelaus, to his Brother Atreus. He married Aerope, the Mother of these
Children, and Daughter to Minos, with whom Thyestes was caught in the Act of
Adultery. Atreus was so enraged, that he first banished his Brother, then
recalled him within a while after, and having killed his Sons, dressed them,
and served them up to him to be eaten. Hence arose the Proverb of Thyestes's
Supper. 1191
Atreus, after the Death of Eurystheus, became Master of all Peloponnesus, and
put the Heraclidae to flight.

2767. 5. Agamemnon reigned 15 years. He declared War against the Trojans in
the Behalf of his Brother Menelaus. After Troy was taken, he returned home, but
was there immediately killed by Aegysthus and his own Wife Clytemnestra, who
lived in Adultery with Aegysthus. 1183 2782. 6. Aegysthus the Son of Thyestes,
born in Incest, after the Death of Agamemnon, succeeded and reigned 7 years.
1168 2789. 7. Orestes the Son of Agamemnon revenged his Father's Death upon
Aegysthus and his own Mother Clytemnestra, whom he slew: After which he ran
mad, but was restored to his Senses at the Altar of Diana in Taurica. He
reigned 70 years over Lacedemonia and Mycene. 1161 2859. Orestes left two Sons
behind him, viz. Tisamenes and Penthilus, who were Dethroned by the Heraclidae,
as they were returning to Peloponnesus. 1091
CHAP. XIV. Of the Thebans.
BOEOTIA, one of the States of Greece, was bounded on the West by Phocis, on
the East by the Eubean Sea, on the North by Locris, and on the South by Attica
and Megaris. The Metropolis of this Country was Thebes, but who built it is
uncertain. Calydnus is said to have reigned first in that Place, after him
Ogyges, but last Cadmus. But since the Account of the Thebans before the Reign
of Cadmus is very obscure, we shall pass that by, and begin our Account with
him.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2525. The State of the Thebans under
XIV. Kings, which lasted 295 Years. 1425
1. CAdmus was the first King of the Thebans. The Grecians tell us, that he was
the Son of Agenor, who sent him and his other two Brothers in quest of their
Sister Europa, whom Jupiter had ravished; forbidding them to return, unless
they brought their Sister with them: That Cadmus at last, after many fruitless
Journeys, came into Boeotia, where despairing of ever meeting with his Sister,
being admonished by the Oracle, he built, or (as it is most probable) repaired
Thebes, and added a Fort to it, which from him was called the Cadmean Fort;
That he married Harmonia the Daughter of Mars and Venus, of whom he had one Son
named Polydorus, and four Daughters, Semele, Ino, Autonoe, and Aga^e: That he
at last warred against the Illyrians, conquered and reigned over them, leaving
the Kingdom of Thebes to be governed by his Son Polydorus. This is the Account
which the Grecians give us of Cadmus.

But tho they in Honor to him say, he was a King's Son, yet the Sidonians, his
Countrymen deny it, and affirm, that this Cadmus was only the King's Cook, and
that he ran away with a certain Musick-Girl called Harmonia. His coming into
Greece was about the same time that Joshua governed Israel, so that it may be
very justly supposed, that he carried a Colony of the Canaanites, whom Joshua
had expelled, into Greece. Whether this or the other Account be truest, we
shall not here stand to determine, tho upon very weighty Reasons the latter
seems to be most probable. However, most agree, that this was the Man who first
brought Letters into Greece from Phenicia.

2. Polydorus succeedded his Father, married the Daughter of Nycteus, by whom
he had one Son Labdacus, whom at his Death he left to the Care of his
Father-in-Law.

3. Labdacus succeeded. In his time Epopeus the King of Sicyonia ravished
Antiope, the other Daughter of Nycteus; upon which, a War broke out between
them, wherein they both died of their Wounds which they received. Upon the
Death of Nycteus, his Brother Lycus was made Labdacus's Governor, who
administered the Government so faithfully, that Labdacus upon his Death
committed his Infant Son Laius to his Care.

4. Laius succeeded his Father. In his Reign, his Governor Lycus having
punished Antiope according as Nycteus had ordered him, was at War with her two
Sons, Amphion and Zethus, and was killed by them in an Engagement. Thebes was
taken by them, and the young Child Laius very narrowly escaped.

5. Amphion and Zethus reigned over Thebes. Amphion built Walls round Thebes,
married Niobe the Daughter of Tantalus, and Sister of Pelops; who having a
great many Children, boasted that she was a better Breeder than Latona her
self, which occasioned her to lose them all. For Apollo was commanded to kill
all the Males, and Diana all the Females; upon which Niobe was so stupefied,
that the Poets feign she was turned into a Stone. Tho this Account is rather
Romance, than true History, yet we thought it would not be amiss to insert it,
that so our young Reader may have some Light even in the Fictions of the Poets
which he may meet with. A while after Amphion and his whole Family were cut off
by the Plague; Zethus pined away upon the Death of his Son, whom his Wife had
unfortunately killed; and these Brothers being thus removed, the Thebans
restored Laius again to the Throne.

Laius married Iocasta the Daughter of Meneceus, by whom he had a Son; but the
Oracle advising him to beware of him, he bound his Feet, and exposed him in
order to make him away. The infant was according to his Order exposed, but
found by a Shepherd* and brought to Polybus King of Corinth. He took care of
the Child, brought him up as his own, and cured him of the Swelling which he
had in his Feet, from whence he was called Oedipus. A long time after, Laius
uncertain what was become of his Son, and Oedipus ignorant who were his
Parents, both went to make their Enquiries at the Oracle. In Phocis they met by
chance, where Laius very roughly commanding him to give the way, was killed by
his Son, whose hot Blood it seems could not brook such rude Provocation.

6. Upon the Death of Laius, Creon the Brother of Iocasta usurped the Throne,
till such time as Oedipus did explain the Riddle of the Monster Sphinx. For all
Travelers, who passed by where she sat, had the Riddle proposed to them upon
these Terms, That in case they could not explain it, they should be put to
Death; but whoever did, should marry Iocasta, and be King of Thebes. Oedipus
unriddled the Riddle, and married his own Mother Iocasta, after he had killed
his Father: Both which he did ignorantly. At last a full Discovery was made,
both of the Murder and the Incest of Oedipus; upon which Iocasta hanged her
self, and he was kept Prisoner by his Sons, sent to Athens, and there died with
King Theseus.

7. Eteocles and Polynices, the two Sons of Oedipus, agreed to reign
alternately; but Eteocles being once upon the Throne, would not let his Brother
have his Turn in the Government. Upon this, Polynices made his Aplication to
Adrastus King of Sicyon, his Father-in-Law. Adrastus, to revenge the Affront,
marched at the Head of an Army, and sat down before Thebes. After many dubious
Skirmishes, it was agreed, That the two Brothers should determine the Quarrel
by fighting a single Duel. They accordingly fought, and killed each other, but
did not put an end to the Contest; for a sharp Engagement followed, wherein the
Soldiers of Adrastus were cut off, and himself rid away full speed for his Life.

8. Laodamas the Son of Eteocles succeeded, but being in his Minority, Creon
the Brother of Iocasta was his Governor. Within ten years after, the Sons of
those who were cut off in the last Battle, to revenge themselves upon the
Thebans, raised another War, wherein Thebes and Laodamas were taken.

9. Thersander the Son of Polynices set up by the Victors, who leading the
Beotians against Troy, was slain by Telephus in Mysia.

10. Pencleus made King by the Beotians, but engaging with Euryphilus the Son
of Telephus, was slain in the Battle.

11. Tisamenus the Son of Thersander succeeded.

12. Damasicthon the Son of Opheta, and Nephew to Pencleus.

13. Ptolemeus succeeded.

14. Xanthus the last King of Thebes was killed in a Duel by Melanthus the
Messenian. With him ended the Kingdom of Thebes, which was turn^d into a
Commonwealth in the year of the World 2820, before Christ 1130. But still the
Thebans had a great Share both in the Intestine and Foreign Wars with which
Greece was engaged, as appears in the Accounts we have given of Athens and
Lacedemonia.

CHAP. XV. Of the Macedonians.
THE Kingdom of Macedonia or Macedon, so called from Macedon the Son of Osiris,
or, as some say, from Jupiter and Aethra, was bounded on the West by the
Adriatic Sea; on the East by the Egean Sea; on the North by the Upper Moesia;
and on the South by Epirus, Achaia, and Thessaly.

This Kingdom began in the year of the World 3137, under Caranus the Heraclide,
and lasted 645 years, till it became at last a Roman Province.

We may consider this Kingdom under three distinct States.

Sect. 1. The First State of Macedon under XX. Kings, of which, Philip the
Father of Alexander the Great was the last, which lasted 477 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3137. 1. CAranus the Heraclide
founded this Monarchy, and reigned 28 years. 813 3165. 2. Cenus succeeded, and
reigned 12 years. 785 3177. 3. Thurimos succeeded his Father, and reigned 38
years. 773 3215. 4. Perdiccas I. succeeded his Father, and reigned 51 years. It
seems he showed the Place where he and his Successors should be buried. 735
3266. 5. Argeus the Son of Perdiccas succeeded, and reigned 38 years. 684 3304.
6. Philip I. succeeded his Father Argeus, and reigned 38 years. 646 3342. 7.
Aeropus the Son of Philip reigned 26 years. He was carried in his Cradle
against the Illyrians, who thereupon were routed. 608 3368. 8. Alcetas
succeeded his Father Aeropus, and reigned 29 years. 582 3397. 9. Amyntas I. the
Son of Alcetas, succeeded, and reigned 50 years. 553 3447. 10. Alexander I.
Surnamed the Rich, succeeded his Father Amyntas, and reigned 43 years. He slew
the Persian Ambassadors, who would have abused the Macedonian Ladies; sent two
Images of massy Gold to Delphos and Elis, and would not be corrupted by the
Persians, but discovered all their Plots against Greece. 503 3490. 11.
Perdiceas II. the Son of Alexander, succeeded, and reigned 28 years. 460 3518.
12. Perdiceas III. succeeded, but reigned a short time, being killed by 432 13.
Archelans, his Bastard Brother, who succeeded, and reigned 24 years. 3542. 14.
Orestes the Son of Archelans succeeded, was committed to the Tutelage of
Eropus, who killed him and succeeded. 408 15. Eropus the Governor of Orestes
reigned about 6 years. 3548. 16. Pausanias the Son of Eropus reigned only one
year, being put to Death by 402 3549. 17. Amyntas II. the Husband of Eurydice,
who ascended the Throne, and reigned 24 years, but had a troublesome time on it.
401 3573. 18. Alexander II. succeeded his Father Amyntas, and reigned only one
year. He sued for Peace from the Illyrians, and sent them his Brother Philip as
an Hostage, who was by them sent to the Thebans. 377 3574. Ptolemy Alorites
usurped the Throne, but was killed by Perdiccas after he had reigned 3 years.
376 3577. 19. Perdiccas IV. governed Macedon 5 years* He was slain in a Battle
fought against the Illyrians, left his Son very young, whereupon the
Macedonians made his Brother Philip II. King within a short time after his
Death. 373 3588. 20. Philip II. ascended the Throne with a great many good
Qualifications. He was Courageous and Prudent, and when he was Hostage at
Thebes, he dwelt with Epaminondas, a great Philosopher, as well as a great
General. His Conversation with so great a Man was of extraordinary use to him,
as appeared afterward in the whole Sequel of his Life. And it may be very
justly affirmed, that the Grandeur of the Kingdom of Macedon, the Greatness of
Alexander, and perhaps the Grecian Monarchy, was owing to the Instructions
which Philip learnt from Epaminondas. He reigned 26 years. 362
This King made his Peace with the strongest, but subdued the weakest
Countries; such as the Athenians, Pannonians, and Illyrians. He set all Greece
into Flames, and took an opportunity from their Divisions of becoming their
Master.

3595. This year Alexander was born at the City Pella. Some Authors tell us,
that on this very Day Philip received these three extraordinary Pieces of News:
1. That Parmenio had defeated the Illyrians. 2. That he had won the Prize at
the Olympic Games. And, 3. That he had a Son brought into the World. But the
Learned Critics have discovered, that these Events were not at the same time.
What is most certain is, that on the Birthday of Alexander, the Temple of
Diana at Ephesus was burnt by a Villainous Incendiary, who was willing by this
Act to render his Name famous, or rather infamous, to Posterity. Great Care has
been taken to smother his Name, but Theopompus in his History tells us, he was
called Erostratus. 355 3605. This year Philip besieged Perinthus, a Town in
Thrace, but the King of Persia jealous of the growing Greatness of King Philip,
succored the Perinthians, which gave occasion to Philip to think of carrying
on a War against the Persians. Within a while after he set upon the Athenians,
and defeated them in the Battle of Cheronea, where his Son Alexander about 18
years old signalized himself. At last having made Preparations for the War
against Persia, he was slain at his Daughter's Wedding by Pausanias a young
Macedonian, to whom he had refused Justice. 345
Sect. 2. The Second State of Macedon under Alexander the Great, lasted only 13
Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ* 3614. ALexander the Great raised
Macedon to the highest Pitch of Grandeur, for at last this mighty Conqueror
within 12 or 13 years extended the Bounds of his Kingdom so far into Europe,
Asia, and Africa, that Macedon might then very justly have been styled, The
Mistress of the Universe. The Danube, and the Black Sea bounded his Conquests
Northward; the River Hydaspes, the Indian Sea, the Gulphs of Persia and Arabia,
bounded them on the East; and Cyrene the Capital City of Cyreniacum, or
Pentapolis in Africa, bounded them Southward. All this large Tract of Country
was under his Dominions. But having already treated of the Progress of his
Conquests, in speaking to the Grecian Monarchy, chap. 4. we shall not trouble
our selves or our Reader with any Repetitions. 336
After Alexander's Death at Babylon, there happened a long Contest between the
Commanders about the Election of a Successor; at last they agreed to salute
Arideus King. This Arideus was Alexander's base Brother, whom King Philip had
by a Comedian named Philinna.

Sect. 3. The Third State of Macedon under XVII. Kings, lasted 155 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3627. 1. ARideus was only a Titular
King, all his Authority being in the Hands of four Governors or Tutors, viz.
Perdiccas, Python, Antipater, and Polysperchon. When he ascended the Throne, he
took the Name of Philip Arideus, and reigned only 6 years and 4 months, for he
was put to Death with his Wife Eurydice by the Order of Olympias, Alexander's
Mother, upon her return into Macedon. 323 3633. 2. Cassaneder succeeded him,
and reigned 19 years. He returning at the Head of an Army from Peloponnesus,
besieged the Queen Olympias in Pydna, forced her to surrender, and put her to
Death. Afterward he married Thessalonice the Daughter of Philip, and made
young Alexander the Posthumous Son of Alexander the Great, with his Mother
Roxana, Prisoners in the Fort of Amphipolis. Within a while after a League was
struck up between Ptolemy, Cassander, Lysimachus, and Antigonus, four of
Alexander's Commanders, upon these Conditions; That Cassander should be Master
of Europe, Lysimachus of Thrace, Ptolemy of Egypt, and the other Countries of
which he was in Possession, till such time as Alexander the Son of Roxana
arrived to years of Maturity; but that Antigonus should still preside over
Asia, where the Greeks should live under their own Laws. This League did not
last long, for each of them was for getting the whole Power to himself; and
this they thought the more feasible, when he, who was Sovereign over them all,
and whose Vicegerents they pretended to have been, was once removed out of the
way. For Cassander no sooner understood, that the People were well affected to
Alexander, and talked openly of seting him at liberty, and placing him upon his
Father's Throne, but he ordered both him and his Mother to be put to Death
privately. Hercules, another Son of Alexander the Great, whom he had by Barsine
the Daughter of Artabazus the Persian, was invited from Pergamos into Macedonia
by Polysperchon, who envied Cassander's growing Greatness, and was at the Head
of an Army against him; but when they were just ready to engage in Battle,
Cassander by large Promises won over Polyspherchon to his side, who killed the
young Prince and his Mother. 317
Hitherto those who had seized upon Alexander's Conquests were contented to be
styled Governors of the Provinces; but when the Blood Royal of Alexander was
extinct, each of them took upon him the Name of King, thereby to create to
themselves the greater Respect from their Soldiers. Cassander when he died left
three Sons, Philip, Antipater, and Alexander.

3652. 3. Philip succeeded his Father Cassander, and scarce reigned a whole
year, for he died of a Consumption. 298 3653. 4. Antipater I. and Alexander IV.
succeeded their Brother, and reigned a little more than 3 years. The former of
these killed his Mother Thessalonice, because she favored Alexander most, tho
she conjured him by the Breasts that gave him suck to spare her Life. Upon this
the two Kings fell out, and Alexander, to revenge this unnatural Crime, sent
for a Supply from Pyrrhus King of Epirus, and Demetrius Polyorcetes of
Peloponesus. They came to an Engagement, wherein both the Brothers were cut
off. 297 3656. 5. Demetrius Poliorcetes, that is, The City Taker, usurped the
Kingdom of Macedon after the Death of the Brothers, and reigned 7 years. He
aimed at driving Lysimachus out of Thrace, but was diverted from his Design at
first by Pyrrhus King of Epirus, who invaded Thessaly, but having made Peace
with him, he raised an Army of 100000 Foot, and 12000 Horse, with a Fleet of
1500 Sail, a greater Force than any had been raised since the Death of
Alexander. Which migh^y Force putting Seleucus, Ptolemy, and Lysimachus, under
some fear, they entered into a Confederacy, and prevailed upon Pyrrhus by their
joint entreaties to violate the Peace, Lysimachus from Thrace, and Pyrrhus from
Epirus, invaded Macedon both at once, and by that means Pyrrhus having taken
Byrrhea, was saluted King of Macedon by the Army of Demetrius. 294 3663. 6.
Pyrrhus reigned over Macedon only seven months. For 287
7. Lysimachus claimed his Share in the Government, and having driven Pyrrhus
out, reigned 5 years and an half. Demetrius being turned out of Macedon, at
last threw himself into the Hands of his Son-in-Law Seleucus, who received him
kindly, but made him his Prisoner at large; where giving himself up to Hunting,
Drinking, and Gaming, he died within 3 years after. Lysimachus was at last
defeated by Seleucus in Phrygia, where he was slain in Battle. It Is said, that
his Dog stood by his Carcass, and guarded it from Fowls and wild Beasts.

2669. 8. Seleucus puffed up with his Victory, marched into Macedon, over which
he r^igned only 7 months, being treacherously killed by Ptolemy Ceraunus. 281
9. Ptolemy Ceraunus, after the Death of Seleucus, took Possession of the
Kingdom of Macedon. Antigonus Gonnata the Son of Demetrius Poliorcetes opposed
it, but was defeated in a Sea Fight, and forced to fly into Beotia. Ptolemy
married his own Sister Arsinoe the Widow of Lysimachus, being received by her
into her own City named Cassandrea; and afterward killed her two Sons, which
she had by Lysimachus, in her Arms. About this time a great many Gauls, finding
their own Country too narrow to entertain them, marched in three Companies
under three Leaders in quest of a new Country to settle in. One Company was led
into Thrace by Cerethrius; another into Pannonia by Brennus and Acichorius; and
a third into Macedon by Belgius. The last of these Ptolemy, who thought himself
as able to fight, as to commit Villainies, opposed, and was defeated, taken
alive, and slain by them.

3671. 10. Meleager succeeded his Brother Ptolemy, but within two months time
was outed by the Macedonians, who put in his stead Antipater the Son of Philip,
Brother to Cassander. 279
11. Antipater II. he reigned only 45 days.

3672. 12. Sosthenes a famous Macedonian, raised the Youth of Macedon, and
marched at the Head of them against the Gauls; he fought and defeated them, and
by this means delivered his Country. The whole Army proclaimed him King, but he
refused that Title, and would be only styled their General. He did not meet
with the same good Success against Brennus, another Leader of the Gauls, who
fell into Macedon, plundered and ravaged all that lay in his way, and at last
defeated and routed Sosthenes himself. He died after he had presided over the
Kingdom about 2 years. 278 3674. 13. Antigonus Gonnata, the Son of Demetrius
Poliorcetes, having made Peace with Antiochus Soter, marched into Macedon, took
Possession of that Kingdom, and reigned over it 34 years. He drove the Gauls,
whom Brennus had left behind him to guard the Passes and the Frontiers, out of
Macedon. In his time the Gauls, who marched in several Bodies before, drew into
one, assisted King Nicomedes against Zypeus, who had seized on part of
Bithynia, and having defeated Zypeus, they settled upon the River Haly, in that
Place which afterward from them was called, Gallo-Grecia, or Galatia.
Antigonus, at his first Accession to the Throne, met with some Disturbance,
first from Pyrrhus King of Epirus, and then from Alexander the Son of Pyrrhus,
but within 2 or 3 years the Storm blew over, and he was established in the
quiet Possession of that Kingdom. 276 3708. 14. Demetrius II. succeeded his
Father Antigonus, who rendered himself odious to the Etolians, by inclining Agro
the King of the Illyrians to aid the Mydionians, who were besieged by the
Etolians. He became Master of Cyrene and all Lybia, and died after he had
reigned 10 years. Upon his Death, he left a Son behind him very young, named
Philip. Antigonus, Surnamed Doson, because of the magnificent Promises of which
he was very Liberal, was constituted Governor to the young Prince. He married
his Pupil's Mother, and by his Bounty and Clemency prevailed so far upon the
People, that they made him King. 242 3718. 15. Antigonus Doson, the Governor of
Philip, reigned 12 years. After the Death of Demetrius, the Cities of Greece
shook off the Yoke of Tyranny, and joined themselves to the Republic of the
Acheans. Aratus the Sicyonian was a great Promoter of the Interests of the
Acheans, and freed Athens from the Dominion of the Macedonians. The Etolians
envying their Success, joined in a War with Cleomenes King of Sparta against
them; upon which the Acheans finding themselves unable to resist so great a
Power, implored the Assistance of Antigonus Doson, who repelled Cleomenes, and
gave him so great a Defeat, that he was forced to fly from Sparta to
Alexandria. Antigonus used the Spartans extreme kindly, and permitted them to
enjoy their ancient Laws and Privileges; but in the midst of all his Glory he
was forced to march back to the Defense of Macedon, which the Illyrians had
invaded. He defeated and put them to flight, but straining his Voice too much
in the Battle, he burst a Vein, and soon after died of a Consumption. 232 3730.
16. Philip IV. the Son of Demetrius, at the Age of 16 took the Government upon
him, which devolved to him by the Death of his Governor and Father-in-Law
Antigonus, and reigned 42 years. 220
This King was a very Martial Prince, warred against the Etolians, and defeated
them several times. He was so far puffed up by the Success he met with, that he
aimed at nothing less than the becoming Universal Monarch of the whole World,
and was for pushing his Conquests to the very Walls of Rome. Hence arose the
War between the Romans and the Macedonians, of which we shall have occasion to
speak more particularly when we come to treat of the Roman Affairs which belong
to this time. It Is enough at present to acquaint our Reader, that Philip failed
in his Design, was beat several times by the Romans, forced to make a Peace
with them, and was the Cause of hastening the Downfall of the Macedonian State.
In his time several Prodigies happened in Asia, among the rest a great
Earthquake which overthrew several Cities, and swallowed up others. From hence
the Soothsayers prognosticated, That the Roman Empire, then in its Rise, should
swallow up the Empire of the Greeks. At last Philip died of Grief, and deputed
Antigonus, his Kinsman, to be his Successor. But his Son Perseus being
certified of his Father's approaching Death by his Physician, secured the
Kingdom to himself.

3772. 17. Perseus succeeded his Father Philip, and reigned 10 years and 8
months. 178 3782. This year Perseus having given the Romans great Provocations,
they engaged in a War against him, and he prepared to oppose them. He entered
into an Alliance with Gentius King of the Illyrians, and did all the Mischief
he could to the Romans. The day before that Battle, wherein Perseus was
entirely defeated, Sulpitius Gallus Tribune of the Soldiers, by the Permission
of Paulus Emilius the Roman Consul, made a Speech to the Army, wherein he
advised them not to be terrified, if they saw the Moon in a total Eclipse that
night, from two a clock to four in the morning* since it was no more than
happened at other times, according to the Calculations of Astronomy. That very
night the Eclipse did really happen, which caused the whole Army to admire the
profound Skill of Gallus, and was a great Encouragement to them, as it was the
contrary to the Macedonians. The next day they came to an Engagement, wherein
Perseus was defeated, put to flight, taken, and carried to Rome to grace the
Roman Triumphs; and thereby ended the Kingdom of Macedon, which became a Roman
Province, after it had lasted 645 years, from Caranus the first King. This
happened 168 years before Christ, in the first year of the 153d Olympiad, Anno
Romae Conditae 585.
CHAP. XVI. Of the Lydians.
LYDIA is a Country in Asia Minor, of which, Sardes was the City of greatest
Account, and where the Kings of the Lydians usually kept their Court. It was
situated upon the Banks of Pactolus near the Mountain of Tivoli, and was one of
the most ancient Cities in the World. Tho Lydia has been a State exposed to
various Turns of Fortune, yet History affords us but little Light therein. The
Kingdom of Lydia had XXII. Kings, who reigned the space of 505 years: But of
these we have no Account, except of the first and the four last; after them
till Cresus, the last of their Kings, were five more.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2733. 1. Argon or Agron the Son of
Ninus, or according to others, the Son of Alceus, reigned first at Sardes, but
of XVII. of his Descendants we have no knowledge. 1217 3150. 19. Adrysus
reigned 45 years. He was of the Line of Hercules. 800 3395. 20. Alyattes I.
reigned 14 years. 755 3209. 21. Meles reigned 12 years. 741 3221. 22. Candaules
or Mirsilus the Son of Mirsus, the last of the Line of Hercules, reigned 17
years. He was killed by Gyges, with whom he saw his Wife too familiar. 729
3238. 23. Gyges having usurped the Throne, sent large Presents to Delphos;
attacked Miletum and Smyrna, and took the City of Colophon by Storm. By this
means the Kingdom of Lydia was translated from the Family of the Heraclidae, to
the Mermnades; in whose Family it lasted the space of 170 years, of which Gyges
reigned 38. This Gyges was at first a Slave, and kept the King's Herds, from
whence he rose up at last to be King. 712 3276. 24. Ardis the Son of Gyges
reigned 49 years. In his time the Cymmerians, a People of that Country, which
at present is called Lesser Tartary, were driven from their Habitations by the
Scythians, marched out of Europe into Asia, keeping still along the Seacoast,
and took Sardes, the Capital City of Lydia. 674 3325. 25. Sadiattes the Son of
Ardis succeeded, and reigned 12 years. 625 3337. 26. Alyattes II. succeeded his
Father Sadiattes and reigned 57 years. He was the youngest Brother. The
Inhabitants of Sardes had recourse to the Clemency of Alyattes; for Cyaxeres
King of the Medes would have had them submit to him, but Alyattes refused it;
from whence arose a War of 8 years between the Lydians and the Medes. This King
had by his Wife Carica a Son, named 613 3394. 27. Cresus, who reigned 14 years
after the Death of his Father. He was one of the richest and most potent
Princes of the World; made the Greeks his Tributaries; conquered the Phrygians,
Mysians, Thrasians, etc. It Is said, Esop, so famous for his Fables, lived in
his time in Phrygia; that Cresus sent for him to Sardes, where he treated him
with a great deal of Respect; and that going from Sardes to Delphos, he was by
the Inhabitants of that Place thrown off a high Rock. Cresus puffed up with his
Prosperity, asked Solon, who gave him a Visit, what he thought of his Glory and
Grandeur? Solon replied, That no Judgment could be passed upon the Happiness of
Man from the course of a few years, but by the close of his Life. Cresus
derided the Philosophical Severity of Solon, but soon found by a sad and fatal
Experience, that what he said was too true. Within a while after Cresus made
Preparations for a War against Cyrus, but was defeated by the Army of the
Medes. 556 3408. This year Cresus, after the gaining several Victories in
Cappadocia, supposing Cyrus had no great mind to fall upon him, disbanded his
Army, and retired to Sardes, where he thought to have spent the Winter very
quietly. He was scarce got thither, but Cyrus came and sat down before it with
his Army; and after 14 days Siege the City was taken, and Cresus condemned to
be burnt. This unfortunate King considering he was now drawing to his End,
remembered what Solon had said to him about the Happiness of Mankind, and
thrice invoked the Name of that great Philosopher. Cyrus moved with Compassion
toward him, set him at Liberty, and afterward asked his Advice upon all
Occasions. 542
Thus with Cresus ended the Kingdom of the Lydians, after it had lasted 675
years. For afterward it was subject to the Persians, Greeks, and Romans, and
at present to the Turks.

CHAP. XVII. Of Tire.
TIRE was a Seaport Town, built upon a Rock, and the Capital City of Phenicia.
If what Archbishop Usher says be true, it must be acknowledged, that this City
was more Ancient than Troy and Corinth. For he tells us, it was founded in the
year of the World 2499, by Agenor the Father of Phoenix and Cadmus, who came
from Thebes in Egypt, into Syria, to fortify Tire and Sidon. But Josephus
assures us, that it was not built till about the year of the World 2733. It is
likewise to be observed, that the most ancient King of the Tyrians, which we
can meet with in History, was Abibal the Father of Hiram, the Friend of David
and Solomon. It Is certain, that the Tyrians were very Powerful by Sea, but
whether they were the first Inventers of Letters, (as some assert) is not so
certain. To give you some Idea of such a confused History as is that of Tire,
we shall consider this Kingdom under Four distinct States.

Sect. I. The First State of Tire under XII. Kings, which lasted 213 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2886. 1. A Bibalus reigned 35 years.
1064 2921. 2. Hiram succeeded his Father, and reigned 34 years. This was that
King of Tire, who sent King David Cedar-Trees, Carpenters, and Masons, to build
his Royal Palace. 1029 2955. 3. Baltazar or Baleastartus reigned 7 years. 995
2962. 4. Abdastratus succeeded, and reigned 9 years. 988 2971. 5...... the Son
of the Nurse of Abdastratus, reigned 12 years. 979 2983. 6. Astartus reigned 12
years. 967 2995. 7. Aserim or Astarimus, his Brother, succeeded, and reigned 9
years. 955 8. Pholes or Pheletes reigned 8 months. 3006. 9. Ithobaal the Priest
of Astartus reigned 31 years. 944 3037. 10. Badesorus reigned 6 years. 913
3043. 11. Matgon or Mettinus reigned 9 years. 907 3052. 12. Pygmalion reigned
47 years. After him we have no Account of the Affairs of the Tyrians for 250
years together. 898
Sect. II.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3099. The Second State of Tire, which
is very obscure and unknown, lasted 250 Years: For in History we meet with no
mention of any of their Kings, except Eluleus, of whom very little is said. 8^1
ELuleus reduced the Gitteans who had revolted. In his time God humbled the
Tyrians, who were grown very Insolent by the Greatness of their Riches, and
that long Prosperity which they had enjoyed. Isaiah, in the 23d Chapter of his
Prophecy, foretells the Miseries which were to fall upon Tire as a Punishment
of its Pride and Cruelty, especially toward their Neighbors the Israelites.
It seems as if Isaiah in his Chapter acted the part of an Historian, rather
than that of a Prophet, every thing being there so naturally described. The
Riches, Vanity, and Luxurious Way of these Wealthy Merchants living, who were
the principal Inhabitants of Tire, are therein so lively represented.

Sect. III. The Third State of Tire under X. Kings, which lasted only 64 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3349. 1. IThobaal reigned 24 years.
In his time Nebuchadnezzar laid Siege to Tire, which after 13 years he took,
and instead of Ithobaal, set up Baal for King. 601 3373. 2. Baal reigned 10
years. After his Death the King of Babylon set up Judges to govern Tire. 577
3383. 3. Eeni-Baal the I. Judge governed 2 months. 567
4. Chelbes the Son of Abdeus governed 10 months.

3384. 5. Abbarus governed Tire the space of 3 months. 566
6. Mitgon, and the two Sons of Abdelin, governed the space of 4 years.

7. Gerestrapus, the two Sons of Abdelin, governed the space of 4 years.

3388. 8. Balatorus governed the space of one year. 562 3389. 9. Merbaal was
sent from Babylon to Tire, to preside there in the room of his Brother
Balatorus deceased: He governed 4 years. 561 3393. 10. Hiromus came from
Babylon to Tire to reign, instead of his Brother Merbaal deceased. He governed
20 years. Here we meet with another Chasm in the History of Tire, which lasted
about 205 years, whereof we have no Account. 557
Sect. IV.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3413. The Fourth State of Tire, which
is very dark for 205 Years; for History is silent about it, till such time as
it was besieged by Alexander the Great, which happened in the Year of the World
3618, before Christ 332. 537 3618. THis year the Inhabitants of Tire sent a
large Crown of Gold to Alexander, as a Compliment to him for his Conquests. He
told their Ambassadors, That he would come himself to Tire, to pay the Vows
which he had made to Hercules. The Ambassadors replied, That he needed not to
come so far as Tire to do that, since the Temple of Jupiter stood without the
City, in the Place where old Tire stood. Alexander took this as an Affront, and
as if they seemed to deny him Entrance into their City, whereupon he threatened
to lay it in Ashes. Accordingly he besieged it, and after 7 months, with the
loss of a great many Men took it by Storm, put all the Tyrians to the Sword,
and burnt their City. In this general Calamity Strato and his Son were spared,
to whom and their Posterity Alexander gave the Kingdom of Tire. 332
Quintus Curtius tells us, That Tire rose out of its Ashes, was rebuilt in a
short time, and so strongly fortified, that it held out 15 months against
Antigonus King of Asia.

Thus have we given you a summary Account of the Empire of China, the Kingdoms
of Egypt, Sicyon, Athens, and the other States of Greece, of Lydia, Tire, etc.
We are sensible there were other Petty Kingdoms, such as Cyprus, Sicily, Crete,
etc. but forasmuch as they did not then make any great Figure in the World, and
since History does not say much about them, we did not think it proper to
insert the Account of them in this our System.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Italians, Latins, Romans, and of the Fourth or Roman
Monarchy.
OUR Reader must not expect in this short System of Universal History, that we
should give an accurate and particular Account of all the Roman Affairs, since
many of the Ancients, such as Diodorus Siculus, Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Livy,
and others, who have only given us an Account of part of them, have filled
whole Volumes with that Account: And since our Countryman, the ingenious,
industrious, and indefatigable Mr. ECHARD, has favored the World with a large
Book, even of his Abridgment of the Roman History. It Is enough that we give
only a Taste of the most eminent Transactions, which contributed toward the
making Rome so famous to future Ages; that by this means the Reader may be the
better prepared, and the more excited to look into more Voluminous Tracts,
which treat of these Matters. It must be likewise acknowledged, that all the
Account we have of Italy before Romulus is very Fabulous and Precarious, and
such as no Historian can rely upon. However we shall give you a short Account
of what passed in Italy before those Times, tho we shall not vouch to the Truth
of all that is contained therein; nor do we desire to impose any thing upon the
Reader, but leave him to be a Free Thinker, and his own Judge in the Case.

Having by way of Preface said thus much, we shall divide this Chapter into V.
Sections. In the First, we shall consider the Italians under the Government of
the Ianigenae or Siculi. In the Second, we shall consider them under the
Government of the Aborigines. In the Third, we shall consider them under the
Seven Kings. The Fourth Section shall give you an Account of the Consular State
of Rome. And the Fifth shall treat of the Fourth or Roman Monarchy.

Sect. I. The First State of Italy under the Janigenae or Siculi, which lasted
557 Years.
IT IS said, that Gomer the Son of Iaphet first planted Colonies in Italy: But
we have no certain Account of this, only that the first Inhabitants were called
Ianigenae or Siculi. It must not be expected, that we should give an exact
Chronology of these dark Times; we shall therefore only give you a Catalogue of
the Principal Men (whether Kings, or only Petty Governors, is very uncertain)
who lived within this time.

Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2044. 1. Aurunus: It seems he built a
Temple to Ianus. 1906
2. Malotages.

3. Sicanus, the Husband of Ceres, who taught the People Tillage.

4. Several Tyrants.

5. Osiris drove them out, and was chosen King.

6. Neptune.

7. Lestrigo.

8. Hercules Libycus.

9. Tuscus.

10. Alteus.

11. Kittim, or Atlas, or Italus out of Spain, ruled the Ianigenae.

12. Iasius.

13. Dardanus: He killed Iasius, and afterward fled into Thrace.

14. Tyrrhenus: He came out of India, and his Subjects after him were called
Tyrrhenians.

We have no Account after him of any King or Governor for above 100 years
together.

Sect. II. The Second State of Italy under XV. Kings, called Aborigines, which
lasted 577 Years, from Janus down to Romulus.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 2621. 1. JAnus the Son of Erectheus
King of Athens came into Italy, was received by the Aborigines, and built
Ianiculum. He reigned 10 years. 1329 2631. 2. Saturn expelled Crete by his Son
Jupiter, fled into Italy, civilized the People, taught them Tillage, coined
Money, etc. He reigned 19 years. 1319 2650. 3. Picus the Son of Saturn
succeeded, and reigned 41 years. 1300 2691. 4. Faunus succeeded his Father, and
reigned 42 years. 1259
In his time Evander, and Carmenta his Mother, came out of Arcadia, and taught
them Letters; and Hercules living with Evander, killed Cacus.

2733. 5. Latinus reigned 36 years. He had a Daughter named Lavinia, whom
Aeneas married. 1217 2769. 6. Aeneas, after the taking of Troy, came into
Italy, where he built Lavinium, killed Turnus King of the Rutuli, married
Lavinia, was drowned, and afterward Deified, He reigned 5 years. 1181 2774. 7.
Ascanius or Iulus, the Son of Aeneas by Creusa, succeeded his Father, and
reigned 38 years. He resigned Lavinium to Lavinia and Sylvius her Son, built
Alba, and left the Kingdom to Sylvius. 1176 2812. 8. Sylvius the Son of Aeneas
by Lavinia succeeded, and reigned at Alba 29 years. 1138 2841. 9. Eneas Sylvius
succeeded his Father, and reigned 30 years. 1109 2871. 10. Latinus II. reigned
51 years: From him the People were called Latins. 1079 2922. 11. Alba Sylvius
succeeded his Father, and reigned 39 years. 1028 2961. 12. Capetus I. called by
Ovid, Epitus, succeeded, and reigned 26 years. 989 2987. 13. Capys succeeded,
and reigned 28 years. He built Capua. 963 3015. 14. Capetus II. succeeded, and
reigned 12 years. 935 3027. 15. Tyberinus succeeded, and reigned 8 years. He
was drowned in the River Tyber, which has its Name from him. 923 3035. 16.
Agrippa Sylvius succeeded, and reigned 41 years. 915 3076. 17. Alladius or
Aremulus succeeded, and reigned 19 years. He imitated Thunder, and was
swallowed up with his Palace. 874 3095. 18. Aventinus succeeded, and reigned 37
years. The Aventine Hill derived its Name from him. 855 3132. 19. Procas
succeeded, and reigned 23 years. When he died, he left his Sons to rule by
turns yearly. 818 3155. 20. Amulius expelled his elder Brother Numitor, and
reigned 25 years. He killed Numitor's Son Lausus; made Rhea, Numitor's
Daughter, a Vestal Virgin; ravished her afterward in the likeness of Mars, by
whom he had two Sons, Romulus and Remus, killed her, and exposed them. 795
3180. 21. Numitor is restored by his Grandsons, Romulus and Remus, to the
Throne, and reigned 18 years. 770
Thus have we given the Reader some glimmering sort of Light into the State of
the Italian Affairs, even in these dark Times. We shall now proceed to what
History gives us a clearer Insight into, and by what follows, we may perceive
from what small Beginnings, and by what Steps and Degrees the Romans rose to
that Grandeur, as to be at last the Masters of the greatest part of the then
known World.

Sect. III. The Third State under VII. Kings, called the Regal State, lasted
245 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3198. 1. ROmulus was 18 years of Age
when he laid the Foundations of the City of Rome upon the River Tyber, near the
Place where he and his Brother Remus were brought up. At first he took in only
Mount Palatine, on which he built about 1000 Houses; but within a while the
Inhabitants increased to such a Number, that they were forced to take in six
Hills more, so that Rome from hence was called The City with 7 Heads. At first
there was only a Colony of 300 Horse, and 3000 Foot; but to increase the Number
he set up an Asylum, which was a Sanctuary to all Malefactors and Discontented
Persons. 752
Romulus, upon founding the City, killed his Brother Remus, for some Affront he
had given him. He, upon his Grandfather's Advice, left the People to choose
what sort of Government they pleased, who immediately made him King; and being
established upon the Throne, he divided the People into three Tribes, each
Tribe into ten Curiae, and each Curia into ten Decuriae: Another Distinction
which he made of the People, was into Patritians and Plebeians. He made choice
of 100 of the former to assist him in the Government, who were called the
Senate: Such as he enrolled in this Assembly were called Patres Conscripti, the
common Title of all Senators for ever after. The next thing he did, was to
settle the Authority of King, Senate, and People: After which he raised 300
young Men out of the Curiae, to be a Guard to his Person; and made choice of
twelve Lictors to be his constant Attendants, to punish Offenders, and to obey
his Commands.

His next Device to increase the City, was to get Wives for his Subjects;
whereupon by Advice of his Grandfather, and the Consent of the Senate, he
proclaimed a Feast and Public Games in Honor of Neptune, which caused a great
Concourse of Men, Women, and Children, from all Parts. In the midst of the
Solemnity, upon a Signal given, the Romans with drawn Swords seized upon 683
Virgins, for whom Romulus chose so many Husbands. This Act incensed their
Neighbors, who immediately prepared for a War against the Romans. The Cities
of Cenina, Antemna, and Crustuminum, begun the War first, but were defeated by
Romulus, for which he triumphed; and at his return, marked out a Spot of Ground
upon Mount Capitoline for a Temple ^o Jupiter Feretrius, the Place where the
Capitol afterward stood. The Sabines, who were principally concerned in the
late Affront, were the most backward, but withal, the most formidable of those
who warred against the Romans. They marched against Rome under the Command of
their King Tatius, took the Capitoline, and were very near giving a total Rout
to the Romans. But the Sabine Women, whom the Romans had stolen and married,
put an end to the War, made them Friends, and the Sabines came and increased
the number of the Inhabitants of Rome. The Peace was made on these Terms:
First, That Romulus and Tatius should reign jointly in Rome. Secondly, That the
City should be still called Rome, from Romulus; but the Citizens Quirites, from
Cures, the Native Place of Tatius. Thirdly, That the two Nations should be
united, and as many Sabines as pleased should be made free of Rome. Upon this
the Capitoline was taken in, built upon and inhabited by the Sabines, 100 of
the principal Men among them being added to the Senate. Tatius was soon after
killed by the Lavinians, and Romulus remained sole Monarch of Rome, fought
against the Fidenates and others with good Success. But tho he was thus engaged
in continual War yet he laid the Foundation of Religion, and enacted several
wholesome Laws. At last he was killed, as is supposed, in the Senate House, and
his Body carried away Piecemeal by the Senators, who concealed the Murder, and
reported that he was taken up among the Gods. He reigned 37 years.

After his Death there happened an Interregnum for a whole year; but the People
being dissatisfied at that sort of Government, resolved upon Electing a new
King. Numa Pompilius, a Sabine, was chosen, who at first refused, but at last
accepted of the Kingdom.

3236. 2. Numa Pompilius succeeded Romulus, and reigned 44 years. 714
This good King had an opportunity, by the Peace he enjoyed, to complete what
his Predecessor had begun. He first Disbanded the 300 Celeres, who were the
Guard of Romulus; then built a Temple to Ianus, brought in the Pontifices,
Ordained the Vestal Virgins, and Instituted the Orders of the Salii and the
Feciales; and to gain the more Credit and Obedience to his Constitutions, he
pretended they were dictated to him by the Goddess Eggeria, with whom he said,
that he had often and immediate Converse. His Religion was chiefly the
Pythagorean. Besides those Religious Matters, he made many good and wholesome
Laws, and by both softened the Genius of that rugged People, and strengthened
that City, which had been founded upon War and Bloodshed. One of the Principal
Things he did, was the Reformation of the Year; which in Romulus's time was
much out of Order.

3279. 3. Tullus Hostilius, the Son of that Hostilius, who in the Reign of
Romulus had behaved himself very valiantly against the Sabines in the Citadel,
was created King by Universal Consent, and reigned 33 years. 671
In his time the Albans robbed and pillaged in the Roman Territories; and the
Romans, to revenge the Injury, did the same to the Alban State; upon which, a
War broke out between them. Both Parties drew up their Army in Battalia, but
agreed at last, that the Quarrel should be decided by a Combat of three Persons
on each Side, and the Conquering Party should have the Preeminence and Command
over the other. The three Horatii for the R^mans, and the three Curiatii for
the Albans, undertook the Combat; wherein two of the Horatii were killed
outright* and the three Curiatii were wounded; the third Horatius by a
Stratagem fought with, and killed the three Curiatii, and so went off Conqueror.

Tullus Hostilius warred against the Fid^nates and Vele^tes, who had in the
last War with ^iba drawn their Forces together at Fidenae, with a Design of
falling upon both Albans and Romans, after they had weakened themselves in
Battle. He drew out an Army of both against them, and routed them,
notwithstanding the Treachery of Suffetius the Alban General, his Ally; who,
after the Battle, was condemned to be torn in pieces by Wild Horses for his
double Dealing. This King sent and demolished Alba, transplanted the
Inhabitants to Rome, allowed them Mount Celius to live in, and granted them all
the Roman Privileges. After he had conquered the Fidenates, he warred with the
Sabines, and subdued them; and began a War against the Latins, which lasted
several years. At last he died, some say by Lightning, with his whole Family,
tho more probably by some Treasonable Practices.

3312. 4. Ancus Martius, the Grandson of Numa, was made King, and reigned 24
years. 638
This Ancus was much of the same Temper with his Grandfather, and was for
restoring the Religious Ceremonies, which had been neglected in the last Reign.
He was no great lover of Fighting, but was at last forced to be a Warrior
against his will. For the Latins contemning him as a sluggish Prince, made
Incursions into the Roman Territories. Upon this he was obliged to proclaim War
against them, according to the Ceremonies appointed by his Grandfather Numa. He
defeated them in several Rencounters, forced them to sue for a Peace, and
obtained a Triumph over them. Some of the Latins he transplanted to Rome, and
granted them the Aventi^e Hill to build upon, and possess. After this, he
fought with great Success against the Fidenates, Sabines, Veientes, and Volsci,
whom he subdued. Beside these great Actions abroad, he did many at home. He
rebuilt the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius; fortified the Hill Ianiculum; made a
large Ditch called Fossa Quiritium; built a large Prison in the heart of the
City, fronting the Forum; enlarged the Pomaerium of the City; and built a Town
called Ostia at the Mouth of the River Tyber.

In his time Lucumo an Hetrurian, the Son of Demaratus a rich Merchant of
Corinth, came to Rome with his Wife Tanaquil from Tarquinia in Hetruria. He
changed his Name into Lucius, adding that of Tarquinius from the Place of his
Birth. By his Liberality, and magnificent way of Living, he became known to
Ancus, and was beloved by the People. Ancus made him a Senator, and at his
Death, Guardian of his two young Sons; who being Minors, occasioned an
Interregnum, and gave opportunity to 3336. 5. L. Tarquinius, Surnamed Priscus,
to manage the Public Affairs, and in the end obtained the Government; for in a
Speech to the Senate he in a manner begged the Crown, and was made King, and
reigned 38 years. 614


In the beginning of his Reign, the better to ingratiate himself with the
common People, he chose 100 out of the most Eminent of the Plebeians, and added
them to the Senate, which made up the number of 300. These last were called
Patres minorum Gentium; i. e. Senators of a lower Degree. He likewise increased
the number of Vestal Virgins, from four to seven.

The Latins warred against him, but were forced to sue for Peace. After this
he defeated the Sabines twice, and obliged them to do the same. Next he had to
deal with the Hetrurians or Tuscans, whom he likewise conquered in several
Battles, and humbled them so far, that they owned him for their Prince, and in
token of their Allegiance, presented him with a Crown of Gold, an Ivory Chair,
a Scepter with an Eagle on the top, a Purple Coat wrought with Gold, and a
Purple Gown pink'd. This King built the Walls of the City, which before were
patched up in haste, with large square Stone; adorned the Forum with Porticos,
Galleries, and Shops; made several Cloacae or Common-Shores to carry the Filth
of the City into the Tyb^r; built the Circus for Public Games, with Seats and
Galleries for the Spectators; and laid the Foundation of the Capitol. At last
he was killed by the two Sons of Ancus Marcius.

3374. 6. Servius Tullus succeeded, and reigned 44 years. 576
This Prince was the Son of a Noble Prisoner taken by Tarquin at Corniculum, a
Town in Latium. He was in great Repute with Tanaquil the Wife of Tarquin, who
gave her Daughter in Marriage to him, and was an Instrument of making him King.
The Senate was against it, but the People were for it, and elected him at the
Comitia Curiata. Not long after his Settlement, he according to Promise divided
the public Lands among the poorer sort. He enlarged the City, taking three
Hills to the four former, viz. the Quirinal, Viminal, and Esqueline. He divided
the City into four Parts, making four Tribes instead of three; and first
instituted the Census, or Numbering the Citizens, according to six distinct
Classes or Orders. After this he instituted the Lustrum, which was to be
repeated every five years; and was the first who coined Money at Rome with the
Image of a Sheep, whence it had the Name of Pecunia.

Nor did he only settle Affairs at home, but took care likewise to suppress
Disturbances abroad. For the Hetrurians revolting, he had Wars with them for 20
years successively, defeated them several times, triumphed over them thrice,
and obliged them to sue for a Peace. He married his two Daughters to the
Grandsons of Tarquinius Priscus, Aruns and Tarquinius, who was afterward
Surnamed Superbus. The latter had a mild-natur'd Wife, the former an imperious
Dame. Tarquin agreed with his Brother's Wife, to kill the one her Husband, and
the other his Wife, and afterward to marry together, which was accordingly put
in Practice. After this, Tarquin killed his Father-in-Law, and his Wife Tullia,
hastening to salute her Husband King, ordered her Chariot to drive over the
Body of her dead Father in that Street which before was called Cyprius, but
after the Fact it was called Vicus Sceleratus.

3418. 7. Tarquinius Superbus having thus barbarously killed his Father-in-Law,
usurped the Kingdom, and reigned 25 years. 532
Upon his mounting the Throne, he put all the Friends of Tullus to Death, and
dreading the natural Consequences of his Tyranny and ill-gotten Greatness, kept
a stronger Guard than ordinary about his Person. He managed the whole Affairs
of the State himself, slighted the Senate, diminished their Authority, cut off
several of them, and seized upon their Estates: Among the rest, Marcus Iunius
was one, who left behind him a Son named Lucius Iunius. Lucius fearing he
should suffer the same Fate with his Father and eldest Brother, counterfeited
himself a Fool, was thence called Brutus, and kept by Tarquin in his House to
make his Children sport. He carried on the Dissimulation for many years very
dexterously, and was at last the chief Instrument in banishing the Tyrant.

Tarquin was engaged in several Wars, first marched against the Sabines, and
subdued them: Then began a War with the Volsci, which with some Intermissions
lasted above 200 years, and took from them Suessa-Pometia: Next he fell upon
Gabii, which he took by the Treachery of his Son Sextus, who, under a pretense
of Deserting from his Father for some Injuries offered him, got to be their
General, and cut off the chief Citizens. After this he built the Capitol, and
bought the three Books of the Sibyls Oracles, (six of the nine that were
offered him being burnt,) which Books were kept as Sacred by the Quindecimviri
in the Capitol, and perished in that Building when it was burnt in Sylla's
time. At last he proclaimed War against the Rutili, and invested their
Metropolis Ardea. At the time that the Army ^ay before this City it was, that
Sextus, Tarquin's Son, inflamed by Lucretia's Beauty, stole privi^y to
C^^latia, where she resided, and ravished her. The virtuous Lucretia almost
dead with Grief and Shame, sent for her Father from Rome, and her Husband
Collatinus from the Camp, desiring them to bring along with them some of their
particular Friends. Publius Valerius came with her Father Lucretius, and Lucius
Iunius Brutus with her Husband; to them she related the whole Story, and
immediately with a Poniard stabbed her self to the Heart. They were startled at
the Sight, and filled with Grief and Indignation; but, to their great Surprise*
Brutus throwing off his Disguised Folly, declared his Resolution, and made them
swear upon the bloody Poniard to assist him in revenging this, and the other
Wickednesses of Tarquin and his Family, by expelling him and them the
Government. And immediately entering upon Action, they shut up the City-Gates,
and assembled the Senate, who being made sensible of the Wickedness of their
King and his Family, issued out a Decree of Expulsion against Tarquin:
Afterward Brutus brought out Lucretia's Body, exposed it to the People, made a
Speech to them, recounting all the Tyrannical Acts of Tarquin, and prevailed
upon them to take up Arms for the maintaining their Liberty. The King hearing
of these Things, rid with his Sons and some Friends to Rome, where they found
the City-Gates shut against them. Thereupon they spurred back again to Ardea,
but Brutus being got thither before them, prevailed upon the Army to do as
their Friends in the City had done before them. By this means Tarquin was
forced to fly where he could find a Retreat, and with his Banishment ended the
Regal Power at Rome, which was turned into a Consular State. This Change
happened 245 years after the Building of the City, in the first year of the
68th Olympiad, in the year of the World 3443; 31 years after the Ruin of the
Assyrian Monarchy, and setting up of the Persian; 175 before the beginning of
the Macedonian; 507 years before Christ.

Sect. IV.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3443. The Consular State of Rome,
from Brutus the first Consul, to Julius Cesar' s being made Perpetual Dictator,
lasted 464 Years. 507
IN treating of the Consular State, since the proposed Brevity will not allow
us to give you a List of the several Consuls, or of the particular Actions
which happened in their Times; and since to consider so great a space of Time
all together would confound our Reader; we shall therefore reduce the Whole
under several of the most remarkable Periods, to render the Idea of the Roman
Affairs the more clear and conceivable. In our assigning these Periods, we beg
leave to follow the Method of our Friend Mr. Echard, which seems to us the most
Easy, Natural, and Intelligible, of any we have hitherto met with; and we
freely own, that in this part of our System we shall borrow a great many Things
out of his excellent Abridgment, and hope none will be offended with us for it.

I. Period, from the Banishment of Tarquin, to the First Dictator, which lasted
10 years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3443. Tarquin being banished, the
Romans resolved upon choosing no more Kings, but to elect two Consuls yearly
out of the Patritians. These Consuls were elected by the People in a General
Assembly called Comitia Centuriata. The first Consuls were L. Iunius Brutus,
and L. Tarquinius Collatinus. In their time Tarquin sent Ambassadors from
Hetruria to Rome; but their Proposals being rejected, they had recourse to
underhand Practices; by which they won over to Tarquin's Interest several young
Noblemen, and among the rest, two of the Sons of Brutus, who conspired against
the Consuls, and were beheaded. Collatinus resigned, and Valerius Poplicola was
chosen Consul in his stead. About this time Tarquin brought an Army against
Rome, engaged the Romans, was defeated, but Brutus the Consul was slain by
Aruns the Son of Tarquin, as he alternately fell by the Hand of Brutus.
Valerius made a great many good Laws, and among the rest one, whereby two
Quaestors or Public Treasurers were created. After the Death of Brutus, he was
suspected by the People of aiming at the Regal Power; but he soon removed their
Jealousy, by holding an Assembly for the Election of another Consul, wherein
Lucretius was chosen, but he dying a few days after, M. Horatius succeeded; in
whose time the Capitol was finished, and dedicated. Valerius was chosen a
second time with Lucretius Tricipitinus. Before this year was out, Porsenna
King of Clusium espousing Tarquin's Interest, marched against Rome, besieged
it, and was very near taking it; but being at first repulsed by Horatius
Cocles, and afterward struck with Admiration at the Bravery and Undauntedness
of Mutius Scaevola, and at the Courage of Clelia a Roman Virago, he made Peace
with the Romans. These three noble Acts are too Heroic to be passed over in
Silence, and therefore we cannot omit to mention them, tho our designed Brevity
will admit of but a very short Relation; when Porsenna attacked the City, his
Onset was so vigorous, that the two Consuls were wounded, which so disheartened
the Romans, that retiring in Disorder to the City, the Enemy had entered with
them, if the Courage of Horatius Cocles, who alone defended the Passage of the
Bridge, had not hindered them, and given an Opportunity to those that were got
over to break down the Bridge; which being effected, the valiant Hero leaped
into the River, and (tho wounded) got safe over. Mutius's Action was equally
Brave, for the City being extremely straightned by Porsenna's Siege, and other
Reliefs failing, he got into the Enemy's Camp in Disguise, resolving to
Assassinate the King, but by mistake he stabbed his Secretary; and being
examined, boldly declared his Intention, and with invincible Courage thrust the
Hand that committed the Mistake into the Fire, in Punishment for the ill
Service it did its Master. Porsenna surprised at the Roman Courage, not only
pardoned Mutius, but also concluded a Peace; for ratifying of which, Hostages
were delivered, and among them ten Roman Virgins: But it seems even the Women
among the Romans scorned to be Prisoners, for under the Conduct of Clelia, one
of their number, these ten Virgins got from their Keepers, swam over the Tyber,
and in spite of the Enemy's Darts got safe home. Within a year or two the
Sabines began to be very troublesome to the Romans, making Incursions into their
Territories, but were defeated by them in several Battles. In the heat of this
War came Actius Clausus with 5000 Sabines to Rome, and became the Head of the
Claudian Family. Tarquin still restless and dissatisfied, had his last Recourse
to the Latins, whom he excited to declare War against the Romans, and at the
same time fomented the Differences which were then at Rome between the richer
and the poorer sort. To obviate the Mischiefs which might arise from an Enemy
abroad, and Foes at home, a particular Magistrate named the Dictator was
created, who for a set time should have the sole Administration of Affairs in
his own Hand. This Dictator was never made but upon extraordinary and emergent
Occasions.
II. Period, from the First Dictator, to the Tribunes of the People, lasted 5
years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3453. Largius Flavius, one of the
Consuls, was the first Dictator, who chose Sp. Cassius for Magister Equitum,
the Master of the Horse. He had 24 Axes and Rods carried before him, and by
these Ensigns of Royalty awed the People, and quieted the Tumults of the City.
He began the Census after the Pattern of Servius Tullus, wherein 150700 Persons
of full Age gave in their Names; but he made a Truce with the Latins for one
year. When the Truce was expired, both Parties prepared to take the Field. The
Romans perceiving the Latins were very strong, thought fit to create a second
Dictator. The Choice fell upon Posthumous, who chose Ebutius Elva for his
Master of the Horse. He hastened his Levies, marched against the Latins,
engaged and defeated them near the Lake Regillus. Upon this, the Latins
earnestly sued for a Peace, which was granted them. Thus ended all the Wars
made upon Tarquin's Account, who being abandoned by all his Friends, fled to
Aristodemus the Prince of Cuma, where he soon after died, in the 90th year of
his Age. 497
Upon the finishing of this War, Posthumous laid down his Office, and Appius
Claudius and Servilius Priscus were made Consuls. And now the Differences
between the Plebeians and Patritians broke out afresh, and were carried so
high, that neither the leading them to fight against the Vosci, Aequi, and
Sabines, nor all the Proposals of the Senate, could reconcile and bring the
meaner sort back from Mons Sacer, whither they were retired, till such time as
they granted, that they might choose Annual Officers of their own among
themselves, to protect them from the Injuries and Insolences of the
Patritians. The Senate was forced to comply with their Demands, and they made
choice of L. Iunius Brutus, Sicinius Bellulus, C. and P. Licinius, and Icilius
Ruga, for their Officers, who were called Tribunes of the People. They were at
first only Five, but at last their Number increased to Ten, who in time grew so
Exorbitant, that by some Authors they were styled Pestes Reipublicae. This
remarkable Change of the Roman State, from Aristocracy to Democracy, or rather
to a mixture of both, happened in the 260th year of the City, 46th after the
beginning of the Persian Monarchy, and in the 3d year of the 71st Olympiad.

III. Period, from the Creation of the Tribunes, to the Decemviri, lasted 42
Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3458. The Office of Tribunes being
ratified by the Senate, the Commons obtained farther, that they might choose
Two out of their own Body yearly to assist these Officers; which Assistants
were afterward called Aediles. Upon these Grants made, the Commons readily
Listed themselves to march against the Volsci, under the Command of Posthumous
the Consul. He took Longula and Polustia from them, and invested their
Metropolis Corioli, which was taken by Storm through the Bravery of a valiant
Patritian named Caius Marcius, who from thence was Surnamed Coriolanus. Upon
this, and the Defeat of the Antiates, who came to the Relief of Corioli, the
Volsci were forced to make Peace. Within a short time Coriolanus was accused by
the Tribunes of aiming at Sovereignty and Tyranny, and condemned to Perpetual
Banishment. He retired to Antium, excited the Volsci against the Romans, being
made their General, marched against his own Countrymen, took several Cities
from them, and at last sat down before Rome it self. This struck such Terror
into the Romans, that both Senate and People unanimously agreed to send him
Ambassadors with Proposals of Restoration. He rejected all, but at last being
conquered by the Entreaties of his Mother, his Wife and Children, drew the
Volsci from Rome, and was afterward cut in Pieces by them. 492
After this, the Romans were engaged in several Wars abroad with the Volsci,
Hernici, Aequi, Veientes, Hetrurians, and Sabines; we shall not relate the
Particulars of each, but only in General take notice, that in some Engagements
the Romans were worsted, in most came off Conquerors, and forced their Enemies
to make Peace. At home there happened great Disturbances within this Period of
Time, the most Remarkable of which, with some other considerable Things, we
think fit briefly to relate. The first Disturbance arose from the Lex Agraria,
the Law for dividing the Conquered Lands among the Meaner sort, which was the
occasion of many Disorders and Mischiefs for many years together. It was at
first proposed by Cassius, thrice Consul, who aimed at the Sovereignty, and
promised to be put into Execution by the Senate, who waved the doing it for a
great many years: But at last Cassius, when out of his Consulship, was called
to an Account for his Ambition, and was condemned to be thrown down the
Tarpeian Rock, which was accordingly done. The next great Disturbance happened
upon the account of one Volero, a turbulent Man, who when made Tribune to
revenge an Affront offered him by the Consuls, who would some time before have
listed him for a Common Soldier, was a great Instrument of passing a Law for
the Establishing the Comitia Tributa. Within this time the whole Family of the
Fabii, who undertook to defend the Roman Frontiers, and had posted themselves
in a Castle called Cremera, were all cut off by the Enemy. Quintius Cincinnatus
was taken from the Plow, first made Consul, and within a year made Dictator; in
both which Posts he behaved himself with a great deal of Prudence, Conduct, and
Courage. Within the same compass of time happened first a Famine, and then a
Plague at Rome, which cut off a great many of the Inhabitants. At last they
sent Ambassadors to Greece, to bring such Laws from thence as were most
Excellent and most Conducive to the Good of the Commonwealth. Upon their Return
the Decemviri were created, who were ten Men to be Elected yearly out of the
Chief of the Senate. Upon this the Consuls elect resigned, and were made two of
the Decemvirate, and the Tribunes, Aediles, Questors, etc. were divested of all
their Authority. This notable Change of the Roman State happened in the 302d
year of the City, in the 2d year of the 82d Olympiad, 88 years after the
beginning of the Persian Monarchy, and 450 years before Christ.

IV. Period, from the Decemviri to the Military Tribunes, lasted only 8 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3500. The Decemviri were elected
annually by the Comi^ia Centuriata, as the Consuls were; but governed one at a
time by turns, the rest differing little from private Persons, only they had a
Beadle going constantly before them. At first they governed with so much
Justice, Moderation, and Equity, that the People were charmed with their
Conduct and Administration; but they soon degenerated to Tyranny and
Oppression, which occasioned the short Duration of their Power. The first Set
of these Decemviri reduced the Laws brought from Greece, with some Additions of
their own Customs into ten Tables, and the next Decemviri added two Tables
more, from whence they were called, The Laws of the Twelve Tables, so much
talked of by the Roman Authors. 450
The Decemvirate regarded neither Senate nor People, but cut off the most
considerable Citizens of both sorts. Among the rest, Siccius Dentatus, the
Roman Achilles, was killed traitorously by a Party of 100 Horse, which he
headed against the Sabines. At last Appius, one of the Decemvirate, attempting
to abuse the Daughter of Virginius, hastened the Downfall of that Form of
Government, which ended in less than 3 years time, and returned to its former
State of being governed by Consuls. Valerius and Horatius were made Consuls for
the remaining part of the year. After which, the Tribunes thought fit to call
the Decemviri to an Account. Appius was committed to Prison, and before his
Trial was found dead. Oppius, the next to him in Guilt, was accused, condemned,
and killed himself in Prison. The other Eight banished themselves. This year
the Consuls warred so successfully against the Aequi, Volsci, and Sabines, as
to deserve a Triumph. Within 3 years after the Romans obtained another signal
Victory over the Aequi and Volsci. And now the Tribunes being more turbulent
than ever, nothing would satisfy them but the passing two Laws, the one for
permitting Marriages between Patritians and Plebeians, and the other for making
the Plebeians capable of the Consulship. The first was passed; but as an
Expedient for the other, it was proposed, That six Governors should be chosen
with Consular Authority, three Patritians, and three Plebeians, who were styled
Tribuni Militum, i. e. Military Tribunes.

V. Period, from the Creation of the Military Tribunes, to the Burning of Rome
by the Gauls, lasted 54 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3508. The first Military Tribunes who
were created, were only three Patritians, whose Office expired at the end of 8
weeks, and Consuls created afresh. This year two new Officers, named Censors,
were chosen out of the Patritians to estimate Men's Estates, and to inspect
into the Lives and Manners of Men: And the Romans gained a Victory over the
Volsci, leading Clu^ius their General in Triumph. Within 3 years after, Sp.
Melius, by his Bounty to the Poor, affected to be King; upon which Q.
Cincinnatus was again made Dictator, and chose Servilius Ahala for the Master
of his Horse, who slew Sp. Melius in the Forum. The Tribunes enraged at the
Death of their Friend Melius, caused Military Tribunes to be created for one
year. The next year Consuls were again created, and a War carried on against
Tolumnius King of the Veientes, to whom the Fidenates had revolted. This War
proved so dangerous at first, that the Romans were forced to create a Dictator,
but they obtained a signal Victory over their Enemies, Corn. Cossus a Tribune,
in the Army killing the King Tolumnius, and obtaining the Opima Spolia, which
he offered to Jupiter. 442
It would be too long to relate the particular Wars which the Romans had with
their Neighbors the Volsci, Aequi, Fidenates, and Veientes; to tell you of the
several Dictators made in this time, and of the Change of the Government from
Consuls to Military Tribunes, from them to Consuls again, which ever and anon
happened. We think it sufficient to recite some of the most memorable Passages
of these Times. The Questors were increased from Two to Four, but a long time
e're they could get any Plebeians to be chosen into that Office. The Military
Tribunes were increased first from Three to Four, and then to Six; but a
considerable time before they could get any Plebeians into the Number. In this
Period of Time the Slaves conspired to fire the City, and seize upon the
Capitol, but were discovered and executed. The Romans proclaimed War against
the Veientes, besieged the City Veii, which was taken after 10 years Siege by
Camillus, who won over the Falisci by his Generosity to yield to the Romans,
and was for little or no reason afterward banished: After this the Galli
Senones entered Italy under the Command of Brennus, invested Clusium, broke up
thence, marched toward Rome, defeated the Romans at the Battle of Allia,
entered Rome, killed several of the Senators as they sat in their Robes in the
Senate House, and burnt the City, all but the Capitol, which still held out
against them.

VI. Period, from the burning of Rome by the Gauls, to the War with the
Samnites, lasted 46 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3562. After Rome was burnt, the Gauls
laid Siege to the Capitol, which they were nigh taking by Surprise in the
night, had not the Romans discovered the Assaulters by the Cackling of some
Geese. Camillus, who had been banished, laying aside his private Animosities,
returned to Rome at the Head of 40000 Ardeans, and expelled the Gauls. He
persuaded the Romans, who were for removing to Veji, to fix at Rome and rebuild
it. M. Manlius who had before saved the Capitol, was accused of Aiming at the
Sovereign Power, and was condemned to be thrown down the Tarpeian Rock, which
was accordingly executed. In this Period several Dictators were created, among
the rest, one to drive a Nail on the right side of Jupiter's Temple in the
Capitol, and two others for the Assembling the Comitia Centuriata for the
Election of Consuls, who were never known to be created upon the like Occasions
before, Within this time the Tribes were increased, the Aediles Curules
appointed, public Stage Plays instituted to appease their Gods in a sore
Plague, several Battles fought successfully against the Gauls, the Aequi,
Volsci, and Hetrurians; a Plebeian Dictator was created; a Law made, That one
of the Consuls should be a Plebeian; and the Military Tribunes were for ever
laid aside, 78 years after their first Creation, 388
VII. Period, from the War with the Samnites, to the Wars with Pyrrhus King of
Epirus. This Period takes up 63 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3608. Hitherto the Romans had only to
do with their next Neighbors, but now increasing in Strength and Power, they
ventured to engage the Warlike Samnites, a People above 100 Miles off Rome. The
occasion of this War was the Samnites falling upon the Campanians, who sent
their Ambassadors to Rome, to put themselves and their Country under the
Protection of the Romans. Upon this the two Consuls marched against them, and
after an obstinate Fight, Valerius, one of the Consuls, defeated them in
Campania; whilst the other Consul Cornelius, by his ill Conduct in Samnium, had
like to have lost the Victory, which was retrieved by the Boldness of P.
Decius, a Tribune in the Army. After these Defeats the Samnites made Peace, and
became one of the Roman Allies. 342
The next War which the Romans made, was against the Latins, who aided the
Enemies of the Samnites, then in Confederacy with Rome. Against them, Manlius
Torquatus and P. Decius Mus were sent by the Senate, who came to an Engagement
with the Enemy, wherein Decius, one of the Consuls* was killed, and Manlius,
the other Consul, gained the Victory. Manlius returned in Triumph, but was
received by the old Men only, the young Men refusing to do him that Honor,
because he had beheaded his own Son, for charging the Enemy (tho successfully)
contrary to his Orders. The next Consuls warred against the Latins, overthrew
them, and Publius the Plebeian Consul was afterward made Dictator, in which
time he procured three remarkable Laws to be made. At last the Latins were
wholly subdued, and brought to an entire Submission. Within this Period Publius
Philo, formerly Consul and Dictator, was made Praetor, and was the first
Plebeian who attained to that Honor. Minutia, a Vestal Virgin, was buried
alive for Incontinency; the Romans fought the Sidicini, and defeated them; the
Gauls threatened to attack the Romans, upon which a Dictator was created; 170
Women were put to Death for the Art of Poisoning, upon which a Dictator was
created to drive a Nail into Jupiter's Temple, being the second created upon
such an Occasion; and a War was carried on against the Inhabitants of Privernum
in the Volscian State, wherein the Romans were at last Conquerors. It would be
too tedious to give you a particular Relation of the Wars which the Romans had
with the rest of the Italians, we think it sufficient to tell you in general,
That they engaged the Samnites with great Success, forcing them four times to a
Peace; That they were successful against the Tarentines, the Palepolitians, the
Aequi, Hetrurians, and Vmbrians; That in this compass of Time several Dictators
were created, several Tribes added to the old ones, and the Cawsey, called Via
Appia, made by Appius Claudius, one of the Censors. At last the Tarentines in
Confederacy with the Lucani, Messapii, Brutii, Apulii, and Samnites, declared
War against the Romans, but the Confederates not being able to oppose the
Romans growing Power, were in a short time forced to send for Pyrrhus King of
Epirus to come over and assist them; who was the first Foreign Enemy the Romans
had ever engaged. Within this Period the Plebeians procured the Plebiscita to
pass into Laws, and to bind the Patritians, which was confirmed by Q.
Hortensius the Dictator, and from him called Lex Hortensia: A Law was made,
That not the Bodies, but the Money and Goods of Debtors, should be responsible
for their Debts.

VIII. Period, from the first Wars with Pyrrhus, to the first Punick or
Carthaginian War, lasted 16 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3671. Pyrrhus King of Epirus being
invited into Italy by the Tarentines, and others, warred against the Romans;
defeated them twice; offered to enter into an Alliance with them, which was
rejected; went into Sicily to drive the Tyrants thence; returned into Italy;
was routed by Curious the Roman Consul; and privately retreated into Greece,
leaving a Garrison behind him in Tarentum, which was soon after surrendered to
the Romans. From this War with Pyrrhus, the Romans learned Skill in Martial
Affairs, and particularly the Art of Encamping, by taking the Camp of Pyrrhus
as it was pitched. During this War, which lasted about 6 years, Pyrrhus was
astonished at the Generosity of the Romans, and especially for their detecting
the Villainous Designs of his Physician, who had offered them for a small
Gratuity to poison his Master. Soon after his Departure, the Romans subdued the
Tarentines, Samnites, Lucanians, Hetrurians; and in a word, completed the
Conquest of all I^aly in the 489th year after the building of the City. Within
this Period, Ptolemy Philadelphus King of Egypt sent Ambassadors to
congratulate the Roman Success, and to enter into an Alliance with them, and
they in Compliment did the same to him. About the same time Silver was first
coined in Rome, the Money before being all Brass; and a third Dictator created,
for driving a Nail into Jupiter's Temple, to assuage the Plague that reigned in
the City. 279
IX. Period, from the beginning of the First Punick War, to the beginning of
the Second, which lasted 47 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3687. Hitherto the Romans carried on
their Wars only against their own Countrym^n the Italians, but had never as yet
set foot out of Italy, till at last they declared War against the
Carthaginians. The Romans began this War in Defense of their Allies the
Mamertines, against whom Hiero King of Syracuse warring, was assisted by the
Carthaginians. This War lasted 24 years, the most remarkable Transactions
whereof we think fit briefly to relate. Appius Claudius, one of the Consuls,
was sent into Sicily, raised the Siege of Messana, defeated Hiero and the
Carthaginians twice, and returned to Rome with a noble Triumph. The next year
both the Consuls were sent to Sicily, and Hiero was affrighted into Obedience
and an Alliance with the Romans. After this, the Romans having learned from the
Carthaginians to build Galleys, sent out a Fleet of about 120 Sail, which
engaged the Carthaginian Fleet, and defeated them. This first Victory by Sea
was gained by Duilius, one of the Consuls, who afterward raised the Siege of
Aegesta, and took Macella by Storm. The next year they invaded the Islands of
Sardinia and Corsica, which they took from Hanno the Carthaginian General, who
was slain there: Many Towns in Sicily were taken and lost on both Sides. After
this, the Romans resolved to remove the Seat of War into Africa, set out a
Fleet of 330 Sail under the Command of Regulus and Manlius, Consuls; Regulus
defeated the Carthaginians a second time by Sea, made a Descent upon Afric,
and became Master of Clupea, a City seated on the Promontory of Hermea. Regulus
was left Proconsul there, who afterward engaged and killed a Serpent of a
monstrous size; was defeated, and taken by the Carthaginians, aided by
Xantippus the Lacedemonian; was afterward sent to Rome upon his Parole, to
procure a Peace, but (in love to his Country more than his own Life) dissuaded
the Romans from it, and with unspeakable Courage returned to Carthage, and died
there in Torment. At last the Romans proved so successful, that they became
Masters of all Sicily; subdued the Carthaginians a third time by Sea under the
Command of Catulus, forced them to buy a Peace with a vast Sum of Money, and
submit to Conditions very Advantageous to the Romans. In this War, the most
considerable Commanders among the Carthaginians, were, Annibal, Amilcar, and
Asdrubal, the first of which, being the Admiral of their Fleet, was crucified
by his own Soldiers, after he had been unfortunately beaten by the Romans at
Sea. 263
During these Wars abroad, the People of Rome had no leisure to quarrel at
home, but all was quiet between the Patritians and Plebeians. The year wherein
the War was ended is another, and the last Addition was made to the Tribes,
which now made up the Number 35. About this time the first Tragedies and
Comedies were made by Livius Andronicus a Grecian, who was afterward followed
by Nevius. Soon after the Peace, the Carthaginians fell into an Intestine War,
which lasted above 3 years, and was ended by Amilcar. After this, the Romans
were invited by the Sardinians into their Island, which the Carthaginians
stomack'd, but were forced to yield, not being in a Posture to begin a new War.
The sixth year after the Carthaginian War, the Temple of Ianus was shut the
second time, the Romans being at Peace with all their Neighbors, which lasted
five years. In the sixth it was opened by a War they had with Teuta the Queen
of the Illyrians, who had affronted the Romans, by killing Lucius, one of their
Ambassadors. They fought against the Illyrians both by Sea and Land, took
several Towns from them, and forced them to beg Peace. After this the Praetors
were increased to four, two of which were sent to Sicily and Sardinia. The
Romans had Wars with the Cisalpine Gauls, defeated them in several Rencounters,
and obliged them at last to submit. About this time the Libertini or Freed
Slaves raised great Disturbances in Rome, which were soon quelled. The
Illyrians revolted, but were reduced by Aemilius and Livius the Consuls.

X. Period, from the beginning of the Second Punick War, to the finishing of it
by Scipio Africanus, lasted 17 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3734. The Occasion of the second
Punick War, was the Success which the Carthaginians had in Spain, and their
taking Saguntum, then in Alliance with Rome. The Romans sent to demand the
Carthaginians to deliver Hannibal their General up to them, which being
refused, they declared War against them. 216
The War being broke out, Hannibal leaving Hanno to take care of Spain, marched
at the Head of 50000 Foot, and 9000 Horse, directly toward Italy. He first
crossed the Pyrenaean Mountains into Gaul, passed the Rhosne, arrived at the
Foot of the Alps, and in 15 days passed those inaccessible Mountains with great
Danger and Difficulty, with the loss of above half his Army. When he got
footing in Italy, he defeated Scipio, one of the Roman Consuls, at Pavia, and
his Colleague Sempronius in another Battle near the River Trebia. From the
Country of the Gauls, Hannibal marched into Hetruria, where at the Lake called
Thrasymene he defeated the Romans again, cutting off their whole Army, and
their Consul Flaminius, with a Detachment of 4000 Men sent by Servilius the
other Consul, to join Flaminius before the Battle. Upon these Defeats, the
Romans created Fabius Maximus Dictator, who chose Minutius Rufus for his Master
of the Horse. This Fabius marched against Hannibal, and wearied him out by
Delays, from whence he was called Cunctator; but his Master of the Horse
imprudently engaged the Enemy, and had been entirely defeated, if Fabius had
not come in to his Assistance, and brought him and the Army off. The next year
happened the famous Battle of Cannae, wherein the Romans were defeated, and
Aemilius, one of the Consuls, killed, with 50000 Men, 2 Quaestors, 21 Tribunes,
80 of the Senatorian Order, and a great many Knights.

This last Defeat caused a dreadful Consternation in Rome, but yet they would
not hearken to any Overtures of Peace. Had Hannibal upon this Success marched
directly to Rome, he had in all probability completed his Conquests; but
drawing his Army into Quarters of Refreshment in Capua, his Soldiers grew
Effeminate, and ever after he declined in his Fortune, for in the next Campagn
he was defeated thrice by the Romans. After this, Hannibal had Tarentum
betrayed to him, and the Romans besieged Capua and took it, tho attacked by the
Enemy who came to its Relief; and tho to divert them from their Design,
Hannibal marched toward Rome, from whence he decamped without doing any thing.
At last Asdruhal, the Brother of Hannibal, was sent into Italy with Supplies,
but himself and Army was cut in pieces by the Romans, under the Command of
Livius and Nero the two Consuls.

Notwithstanding these Wars with Hannibal, the Romans proclaimed and carried on
a War against Philip King of Macedon: In Sardinia they had great Success,
killing in one Battle 12000 Carthaginians, taking many Prisoners, among the
rest Asdrubal, Hanno, and Mago, Persons of Note. Sicily revolted from the
Romans, but was at last wholly subdued by them, Syracuse after 3 years Siege
being taken by Marcellus and destroyed. In Spain the Romans Affairs were
managed with great Success by Scipio, upon whose Death young Scipio, afterward
Surnamed Africanus, was sent into Spain in the Quality of Proconsul. Five years
after, this Scipio was made Consul, sent into Sicily, afterward crossed into
Africa, re-established Masanissa King of Numidia upon his Throne, having taken
Syphax the Usurper Prisoner. He gave the Carthaginians so much Disturbance,
that they were forced to recall Hannibal, who, upon his arrival in his Native
Country, had an Interview with Scipio; but when no Accommodation could be made,
they came to a Battle, wherein the Romans proved Conquerors, and the Enemy
forced to sue for a Peace, which was granted them upon Terms very Honorable
and Advantageous to the Romans. And thus ended the second Punick War, after it
had lasted about 17 years.

XI. Period, from the end of the Second Punick War, to the end of the Third,
and the Destruction of Carthage, containing the space of 55 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3751. Soon after the Peace with the
Carthaginians, the Romans carried on a War against Philip King of Macedon,
which was occasioned by his entering into an Alliance with Hannibal after the
memorable Battle of Cannae. They had a fresh occasion to do this at the earnest
Request of the Athenians, and the Complaints of Attalus King of Pergamus, and
the Rhodians. Sulpitius Galba, the Consul, was sent against him, who defeated
him several times, and was near taking him; by the Assistance of Attalus and
the Rhodians he raised the Siege of Athens. This year Furius the Praetor
obtained a great Victory over the Gauls, who had revolted, and invested
Cremona. After this, Quintus Flaminius the Consul was sent against King Philip,
who beat him out of the Streights, whilst his Brother Lucius, with Attalus,
regained several Confederate Towns. Upon this, the Treaty of Peace was set on
foot, but came to nothing, till Philip being defeated at Cynocephalae, was
forced to beg Peace. 199
About this time the Romans gained two signal Victories over the Gauls. Within
a year after, some Disturbances were raised in Rome about the Oppian Law: And
soon after they had Wars with Antiochus King of Syria, who was several times
defeated by Scipio Asiaticus and Africanus, the two Brothers, and at last
forced to a Peace upon very Dishonorable Terms. Within 3 years after the War
was ended against Antiochus, Scipio Africanus was called to an Account by the
Tribunes, but came off Honorably, and withdrew to Linternum in Campania, where
he lived retiredly. After this, the Romans had only some Petty Wars with the
Ligurians, Istrians, Sardinians, Corsicans, and Celtiberians: But within a
short time had Wars with Perseus King of Macedon, who broke the League which
his Father Philip had made, and was defeated, taken Captive, and led in Triumph
by the Romans, as has been already declared. At last the Romans found a
Pretense to begin the third Carthaginian War, which was their being in Arms
against Masanissa, a Roman Ally. Accordingly a War was proclaimed against them,
with a full Resolution utterly to destroy Carthage. Three years together it
held out against the Roman Consuls, but in the fourth was taken, and laid in
Ashes by Scipio Aemilianus, who by this Victory confirmed the Surname of
Africanus, to him and his Heirs for ever. Within this Period of Time, the
number of Praetors was increased from Four to Six; Rome began to be Polished by
the Conversation it had with the Grecians; and Plautus and Terence, two
Comedians, flourished, the former brought Comedy, the latter the Latin
Language, to very great Perfection.

XII. Period, from the Destruction of Carthage, to the end of the Sedition of
the Gracchi, lasted 23 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3806. Now Rome began to enlarge its
Dominions abroad, but grew Corrupt and Degenerate at home. This year Corinth,
one of the noblest Cities of Greece, was taken by Mummius, one of the Consuls,
and suffered the same Fate with Carthage, and with it the Republic of the
Acheans perished. In Spain several Places revolted, but were reduced by Scipio
Africanus to their former Obedience, after he had taken Numantia, a City in
Gallicia, and demolished it. In Sicily a Servile War broke out, but the Slaves
who began the War were in a short time broken and dispersed. After this, there
happened some Risings at Athens and Delos, which were with some trouble
suppressed. At last the Romans had great Wars with Aristonicus about the
Kingdom of Pergamos or Asia. Attalus, the last King, had made the People of
Rome his Heirs, upon which they entered into Possession of that Kingdom; but
Aristonicus, the Bastard-Brother of Attalus, seized upon it as his own Right
and Inheritance. This was the occasion of the War, which ended within a year or
two, Aristonicus being taken Prisoner, led in Triumph, and afterward strangled
in Prison by order of the Senate. 144
Tho the Romans were thus Successful abroad, yet at home their Glory was
sullied by many inglorious Factions, Jealousies, Seditions and Contentions. The
chief Fomenter of these, was Tiberius Gracchus, a Man of a restless and
turbulent Temper. He being made Tribune, preferred a Law, forbidding any Man to
possess above 500 Acres of the Public Lands, and ordering the Overplus to be
divided amongst the Poor. This Law he carried, and three Men, called Triumviri,
were yearly appointed to be Judges what Lands were Public, and what Private.
This so much disgusted the Senate, that under the Conduct of Scipio Nasica,
they set upon Gracchus in the Capitol, and killed him, and 300 more of his
Faction. His Death did not put an end to the Dissentions, for his younger
Brother Caius being first made one of the Triumviri, and afterward Tribune,
gave the Senate great Disturbance, till being at last much persecuted by them,
he caused his Servant to kill him. Within this Period flourished Lucilius the
famous Satyrift, and the third Order among the Romans, called the Equestrian,
was set up, to be the Judges of corrupt Officers.

XIII. Period, from the end of the Seditions of the Gracchi, to the end of the
First Civil War in Italy, which takes up the space of 41 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3829. During the late Troubles, the
Sardinians rebelled, and were reduced by Aurelius; and the Fregellans were
punished with the loss of their City by the Praetor Opimius. About this time
was carried on the War with the Allobroges, who, together with the Arverni and
Ruteni, were defeated by Fabius Maximus, and Gallia Narbonnensis was reduced
into a Province. The Scordisci, a People of Gaulish Extraction, inhabiting
Thrace, were defeated by Didius the Praetor, and the Consuls Drusus and
Minutius gained a Triumph over them. 121
Some time after this happened the Iugurthine War. The occasion of this War
was, that Iugurtha, Grandson to Massanissa King of Numidia, having killed his
Brethren, seized upon that Kingdom, whereupon the Romans declared War against
him. They were several times diverted from prosecuting it by the rich Presents
which Iugurtha made, but at last he was defeated, first by Metellus, and
afterward by Marius, who subdued him, (notwithstanding the Assistance of his
Father-in-Law Bocchus King of Mauritania) took him Prisoner, and led him and
his two Sons in Triumph to Rome. About the same time the Romans warred with the
Cimbri, who were def^ated by Marius, together with the Teutones and Ambrones.
In Sicily a second Servile War was ended by Aquilius Nepos, the Colleague of
Marius. At home there happened some Disturbance occasioned by Saturninus, one
of Marius Friends; at first he was favored by M^rius, but at last his Fortune
declining, Marius forsook him too, and he was cut in P^eces by the Equites in
the F^r^^n. About this time flourished Lucretius, the famous Poet. After this
there happened a Quarrel between the Sen^tor^^^ and Equestrian Order, which
Drusus the Tribune accomol^ted; but this Man afterward proposing the Agrarian
Law was stabbed in the Court of his own House. But these Troubles did not end
with the Death of Drusus, for several of the Italians, who thought themselves
injured, joined in a Confederacy against the Romans, viz. the Lucanians,
Apulians, Marsi, Paligni, and Samnites, with many others. Against them the two
Consuls, with Marius and Sylla, were sent, who were worsted in several
Engagements, but at last within 3 years became Conquerors.

No sooner was the Social War finished, but two others broke out. One was with
Mithridates King of Pontus, against whom, Sylla, one of the Consuls for that
year, was sent. Marius opposed the sending Sylla on that Expedition, whereupon
Sylla returning to Rome, forced Marius and Sulpicius the Tribune, his Friend,
to fly for it, and declared them, with 10 more, Enemies to their Country. Upon
this, Marius fled into Afric, and Sylla departed on his Expedition against
Mithridates. Whilst he was gone, Cinna and Octavius were made Consuls, the
former of which proposed the recalling Marius, but the latter opposed it; and
so hot was the Contention, that Cinna was forced to leave the City, and being
joined with Marius, raised an Army, went and sat down before Rome, entered it,
and committed great Outrages therein: In the mean time Sylla was engaged
against Mithridates in Greece, first routed his General Archelaus, and at last
forced the King himself to a Peace. Upon this, he returned to Italy to revenge
himself on Marius, Cinna, and all their Adherents. Marius died, and Cinna was
killed by the fury of the Soldiers before his Landing. At length Sylla came,
defeated all that opposed him, entered Rome, committed many and great Cruelties
there, was the first who published Tables of Proscription, and procured himself
to be made Perpetual Dictator, which was a great Step toward the Downfall of
the Consular State, and which happened in the 672d year of the City, in the 4th
year of the 174th Olympiad, and 80 years before Christ. Within this Period of
Time the Capitol was burnt, but by whom, or what means, is uncertain.

XIV. Period, from the Perpetual Dictatorship of Sylla, to the first
Triumvirate, which was 22 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3870. Whilst Sylla was Dictator, a
second War broke out with Mithridates, which was ended in two years. In the
third year of his Dictatorship he laid down his Office, retired into the
Country, and there died. After this, a dangerous War broke out in Spain against
Sertorius, one of Cinna's Faction. Pompey was sent against Sertorius, who was
killed treacherously by Perpenna, one of his Commanders, who himself was
afterward overthrown, taken and killed by Pompey. 80
The year before this, a third War broke out with Mithridates, against whom
Lucinius Lucullus, one of the then Consuls, was sent. He did many great and
memorable Actions against that King, routed him and Tigranes King of Armenia
often, and in a short space reduced all Pontus, except a few Places, to the
Romans. About this time Spartacus the Gladiator having raised an Army of about
70000 Vagabonds, and overthrown many of the Roman Commanders, was conquered by
Licinius Crassus the Proconsul in Apulia. Whilst Lucullus was carrying on his
Conquests over Mithridates and Tigranes, Pompey was sent first to scour the
Seas of the Pirates, who were sent out by Mithridates to infest the Italian
Coasts; which having done, upon his return he was made Commander in Chief
against Mithridates and his Allies. Upon this, he set upon his Expedition,
subdued Mithridates and Tigranes; the latter of them made Peace with the
Romans, but the former being Deposed and made Prisoner by his Son Pharnaces,
got an honest Gaul to put an end to his Life. Pompey marched against Darius the
Median, and Antiochus King of Syria, for molesting the Roman Allies. Afterward
he went into Judea, entered Jerusalem, and made all Iewry Tributary to Rome. At
length he returned home loaded with Honor and Glory, obtained a Triumph, which
lasted two days, wherein appeared the Son of Tigranes, with his Wife and
Daughter; Zozima, the Wife of Tigranes himself; Aristobulus King of Judea, the
Sister of King Mithridates, with her five Sons, and some Ladies of S^ythia.

Whilst Pompey was abroad, a horrid Conspiracy was carried on at home by
Catiline and his Accomplices, which was discovered to Cicero the present Consul
by Fulvia the Courtesan of Q. Curious, one of the Plotters. Upon this, Catiline
was banished, several of the Conspirators apprehended and put to Death, and the
whole Plot was quashed by the Vigilance and Care of Cicero, who was the first
Man that was styled the Father of his Country. After these Disturbances, Caesar,
who had been Questor and Aedile, was made Praetor, and afterward attained the
High Priesthood. Upon the expiring of his Pretorship, he procured the
Government of Spain, prevailed upon Crassus, a wealthy Man, to be his Security
for 830 Talents; having run so far in Debt by his Profuseness, returned to
Italy, stood for the Consulship, and entered into a Combination with Pompey and
Crassus, who were styled the first Triumvirate, and managed the Affairs of Rome
at their Discretion.

XV. Period, from the First Triumvirate, to the Dissolution of it by the Death
of Crassus and Pompey, and to the Perpetual Dictatorship of Caesar, which takes
in the time of 15 Years.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3892. We are now arrived to that part
of the Roman Affairs, which make up a great part of their History; but yet to
keep to our proposed Brevity, we shall relate only the principal Matters, and
that as briefly as possible. The first Effect of this Triumvirate, was the
promoting Caesar to the Consulship, one Bibulus being his Colleague. As soon as
Caesar was Cousul, he confirmed all Pompey's Acts, won the Commonalty over to
him, by preferring and enacting a Law for dividing certain Lands in Campania
among such poor Citizens as had three Children or more, procured the Province
of Gaul to be assigned him for 5 years, and accordingly at the end of his
Consulship marched thither with four Legions. 58
Before he went away, he married his Daughter Iulia to Pompey, procured his two
Friends, Gabinius and Piso, to be made Consuls, and Clodius one of the
Tribunes. In his Absence, Cicero was banished by the Instigation of Clodius,
and Cato sent against Ptolemy King of Cyprus. Cesar's first Enterprise was
against the Helvetians, whom he defeated, and killed near 200000 of them. After
this he turned his Forces against Ariovistus King of Germany, who had molested
the Sequanians, the Roman Allies, had an Interview with him, came to an
Engagement and defeated him, killing about 80000 Germans upon the Spot.

The next year Caesar marched against the Belgae, who had confederated against
the Romans, gave them Battle, defeated them, and the rest bordering upon the
Seacoast, yielded. After this, he led his Army against the Nervians, and cut
them all in Pieces. Upon the News of these Victories, the Senate of Rome
decreed a solemn Festival for 15 Days, and this year Cicero was recalled from
Banishment.

The next Spring Caesar designing for Italy, sent out Servius Galba, one of his
Lieutenants, against the Antuates, Veragres, and Seduni, whom within a short
time he defeated. Soon after his return from Italy, he marched against the
Veneti and subdued them, and about the latter end of the Campagn went against
the Morini and Menapii, but did nothing against them. In the mean time Crassus
and Sabinus, two of his Lieutenants, subdued the one the Sontiates, and the
other the Vnelli. This Winter Caesar went to Italy, took up his Head Quarters at
Lucca, where the Triumvirate entered upon new Measures, and Pompey and Crassus
being made Consuls, continued Caesar five years longer in his Government in
Gaul, and assigned Syria and the Parthian War to Crassus, and Africa and Spain
to Pompey. And by this time Caesar had got wherewithal to pay his Debts, and
make Presents to his Friends.

In the fourth year of Cesar's Expedition, he fought an Army of Germans, being
430000 strong, defeated them entirely, cast a Bridge over the Rhine, relieved
the Vbii, returned and crossed the Seas to Britain, made them submit, and
returned again to Gaul; and reduced the Morini and Menapians.

The next year he crossed again into Britain, gave them Battle; defeated them,
and their General Cassivelan sent to him for a Treaty. Upon his return into
Gaul, he relieved Q. Cicero, one of his Lieutenants, who was besieged by the
Eburones.

The sixth Campaign, Caesar reinforcing his Army with three Legions more, and as
many Auxiliaries as he could get, subdued the Nervii, Senones, Carnutes, and
Menapii; crossed the Rhine a second time; marched against the Suevi; turned his
Arms against the Eburones; returned to Gaul, and put the Sicambri to flight,
who had set upon Cicero's Camp. After this, he fell afresh upon the Eburones,
and then called a Council in Gaul to punish all Revolters, and for the
supplying his Army with Necessaries.

Whilst Caesar was thus Successful in Gaul, Crassus raised his Levies for the
Parthian War; in his Journey marched through Jerusalem; rifled the Temple of
its Treasure to the value of 10000 Talents; fell upon the Parthians, but was
routed and killed by them. Thus fell Crassus one of the Triumvirate, and by
this means gave rise to the Contests between the other two, which soon after
ensued. Pompey kept at Rome, and did all he could to lessen Caesar, and to raise
his own Esteem.

After the Death of Crassus, great Contests happened in Rome; Clodius was
killed by his great Enemy Milo, and Milo was banished to Marseilles. Pompey was
made Consul alone, and afterward took Scipio Metellus for his Colleague, having
lately married his Daughter Cornelia. In the mean time Caesar carried on his
Conquests in Gaul, and in two years time completed them: He put in for the
Consulship in his absence, but was opposed by Pompey, who made two Laws
particularly levelled against him; after which, Cesar's Enemies proposed to
recall him from his Government, which was violently opposed by Curio, who with
Anthony and Longinus fled to him disguised like Slaves. Upon this, the famous
Civil War between Pompey and Caesar broke out, which lasted two years, and ended
by Pompey's Death. For Caesar leaving his Province without Leave of the Senate,
passed the Rubicon, became Master of Ariminum by Surprise; which put Rome into
so much Disorder, that Pompey with the Consuls and Senate retired to Capua, and
thence to Brundusium. After this, Labienus upon some Disgust left Caesar, and
went over to Pompey's Party. Caesar advancing, took the Towns of Picenum, which
lay in his way, and became Master of all that Province. Then he marched against
Lentulus, who had possessed himself of Asculum; but upon his Arrival, retreated
from the Place. The next Town he invested was Corfinium, which, after some time
and resistance, he took, Domitius being taken, and Lentulus coming out to
Caesar, begged his Pardon. After this, he marched directly to Brundusium,
blocked up the Place and took it, Pompey retreating with his Forces to
Dyrrachium, a City in Epirus, to which Town the Consuls were already gone.

Caesar being now Master of all Italy, but not in a Capacity to pursue Pompey
for want of Shipping, went to Rome to settle some sort of Government. He there
filled up the Senate, seized upon the Treasury for the carrying on the War, and
soon after went to Spain. He drove thence Afranius and Petreius, two of
Pompey's Lieutenants, became Master of all Spain, and took Marseilles, which
was held out against him by Domitius. Upon his return to Rome he was made
Dictator, but having made several Laws, laid down that Office in 11 days time.

After this, Caesar undertook his Expedition against Pompey, rendevouz'd at
Brundusium, he shipped off five of his twelve Legions, and sailed to Epirus. At
last being joined with the rest of his Forces, he marched toward Dyrrachium,
where he besieged Pompey in his Camp, forced him to break up, came to an
Engagement, was defeated by him, and had been irrecoverably lost, had Pompey
known how to have made good use of his Success. But he giving Caesar time to
recover himself, the Decisive Battle was fought in the Plains of Pharsalia,
wherein the two greatest Generals of the World disputed for Universal Empire.
The Engagement was sharp on both Sides, but at last Pompey's Army was defeated,
himself forced to fly from Place to Place, at length to Alexandria, where upon
his Landing he was treacherously killed by Achillas, and Septimius a Roman
Tribune. Thus fell this great Man, and by him fell the second Head of the
Triumvirate, leaving Caesar to be sole Master of Rome. This happened in the
706th year of the City, and 46 years before Christ.

After the Fight at Pharsalia, Caesar followed Pompey into Egypt, where he heard
of his Death, caused a stately Sepulcher to be built by the Place where he had
been murdered, with a Temple, which he called the Temple of Wrath. He then went
to Alexandria, espoused Cleopatra's Interest, worsted Photinus, Administrator
of the Government, and by firing Ptolemy's Fleet, burnt down the famous
Alexandrian Library, wherein (as some report) were 700000 Volumes. At the
beginning of this Expedition, the Senate of Rome made him Consul for 5 years
together, Dictator for a whole year, and Tribune for his Life. After this, he
marched from Egypt against Pharnaces King of Bosphorus, whom he subdued so
soon, that in writing to Anicius at Rome, he expressed the Celerity of this
Expedition in three words, Veni, Vidi, Vici. Upon this he embarked for Italy,
and went to Rome, where he was scarce arrived, but called away again to subdue
the Remains of Pompey's Party, who had rallied themselves in Africa under
Scipio and Cato, and Iuba King of Mauritania. Against these he marched, and in
a Decisive Battle put an end to the Pompeian Faction on that side the Water;
after which Defeat, Cato killed himself at Vtica; Iuba and Petreius killed each
other in Despair; Afranius, Sylla, and Scipio, fell into the Hands of Sitius,
one of Cesar's Lieutenants, and were likewise killed. Upon this, Caesar returned
in great Triumph to Rome, which lasted 4 days. On the first, he triumphed over
Gaul; on the second, over Egypt; on the third, over Pharnaces in Asia; and on
the fourth, over Iuba. After this, he paid his Soldiers, made large
Distributions of Corn and Oil amongst the People, and entertained all Comers at
22000 Tables. Upon this he was made Master of Manners, committed the Power of
Judicature to the Senators and Equites, enacted several Laws, and regulated the
Roman year; which Regulation we still follow, calling it the Julian Account,
and the Old Style. Whilst Caesar was doing this at home, he was called away
afresh to Spain, to subdue the two Sons of Pompey, who had raised a great Party
against him there. He went with the Character of Dictator: soon reduced Spain,
killed Cneius Pompey, but his Brother Sextus escaped. He returned to Rome and
triumphed, tho a little ungratefully to some of Pompey's Friends. Upon his
return, he was made Consul for 10 years, Perpetual Dictator, and Censor during
Life; styled Deliverer, afterward Imperator, then Father of his Country.

From hence the Fall of the Consular State is dated, after it had lasted so
many years, and weathered out so many Shocks. The first Interruption it met
with, was the Creating of Dictators. It was afterward retrenched by the
Tribunes of the People; then intermitted by the Decemviri, and Military
Tribunes. After this, the Sedition of the Gracchi, the Perpetual Dictatorship
of Sylla, and the Triumvirate of Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, were so many Steps
toward the Ruin of the Consular, and setting up of the Imperial State.

Sect. V. The Fifth State of Rome under Emperors, wherein began the Fourth or
Roman Monarchy 43 Years before Christ. Of the succeeding Emperors, and State of
Rome, we shall have occasion to treat in another Volume.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3907. 1. JVlius Caesar was the first
Emperor, tho that Title was not fully settled till Augustus's time. 43
No sooner was Caesar advanced to this Honor, but he made several Alterations
in the Government. The Praetors he increased to the number of Sixteen, the
Questors to Forty, the Senators to Nine hundred, and the Aediles to Six; of
which, two were Patritians called Curules, and four Plebeians. The next year he
entered upon the Consulship with M. Anthony, Master of his Horse; pardoned all
who had been in Arms against him; caused Pompey's Statues to be set up again;
rebuilt Carthage and Corinth, sending Colonies to both Cities; resolved upon
marching against the Parthians, to revenge the Death of Crassus, and thence to
enter through Hircania into Scythia, to open himself a way through Germany into
Gaul, and so return to Rome: But a stop was put to these vast Designs by his
Death.

Several of the Senators were offended at his Ambition, which they gratified ^t
first, by heaping new Honors upon him, in order to make him fall the more
glorious Victim. The first Disgust they took, was, that when they waited upon
him in a full Body to the Temple of Venus, where he was, he rose not up, but
received them sitting. The next Offense Caesar gave both Senate and People, was
his displacing the Tribunes for imprisoning some Persons, who put Diadems upon
his Statues. Another Indication of his Aim, appeared in his Behavior at the
Celebration of the Feasts called Lupercalia, wherein Anthony offering him a
Crown, he finding the People not so well pleased at it, as he presumed they
would have been, refused it twice. These and suchlike Proceedings of Caesar
incensing the Senate against him, above 60 of the Senators conspired to kill
him, the chief of whom were Brutus and Cassius, two Praetors. One day being
invited to the Senate, under a Pretense of doing him farther Honor, he went to
the House, notwithstanding the Caution given him by Spurina the famous Augur,
to beware of the Ides of March, and notwithstanding the frightful and ominous
Dreams of himself and his Wife Calpurnia. No sooner was he seated, but the
Assassines fell upon him, and with 23 Wounds killed him; who expiring, sunk
down at the foot of Pompey's Statue. Thus fell the Great Julius Caesar, in the
56th year of his Age, the 4th year of his Government, the 43d year before
Christ, the 710th year of the City, and the year of the World 3907. He was no
less famous for his Learning, than for his Valor and Conduct* having in his
excellent Commentaries given us a particular Relation of his Expeditions in
Gaul.

Upon Cesar's Death, great Confusion and Disorder happened in the City. His
Colleague Anthony, and his Friend Lepidus, resolved to revenge it to the utmost;
whereupon they led out a Legion into the Campus Marti^, which so startled the
Conspirators, that they sent to Anthony for an Accommodation, who referred all
to the Senate, which being assembled, an Act of Oblivion passed, Caesar's
Ordinances were ratified, and all Things seemed quiet for the present. The next
day Anthony ordered Caesar's Will to be read to the People, wherein he adopted
his Sister's Grandson, made him Heir of three Fourths of all his Estate, and
Pinarius and Pedius of the other 4th Part. To the Romans he bequeathed his rich
Gardens, and to every Citizen a certain Sum of Money. Among his second Heirs,
Decimus Brutus, one of the Conspirators, was named. This raised the People's
Indignation against the Conspirators, and their Affection to the Memory of
Caesar. Immediately after, his Body was brought out, and burnt on a sumptuous
Pile, Anthony making his Funeral Oration, wherein he extolled the Merit of
Caesar, and heightened the People's Passion of Revenge.

No sooner had Octavius (afterward called Augustus) received the News of his
Uncle's Murder, but he forthwith left Apollonia in Greece, and went for Rome.
Upon his coming thither to ingratiate himself with the People, he sold his
Inheritance to pay off the Legacies given 'em by his Uncle. He thought to have
been secure of Anthony's Friendship, but was deceived in his Temper; for he
aimed at the Sovereignty himself, and in opposition to Augustus, proposed the
promoting Sextus, the only surviving Son of Pompey. After this, Anthony
procured the Province of Macedonia to be assigned him; then leaving that
Province to his Brother, demanded the hither Gaul for himself, which had been
allotted to Decimus Brutus. This the Senate refused; whereupon he betook
himself to force, led a considerable Army into Gaul, was declared an Enemy to
the State, and Octavius, with the two Consuls Hirti^s and Pansa, were sent
against him. At last they came to a general Battle, wherein Anthony was
defeated and fled to Lepidus, and both the Consuls died of their Wounds.
Decimus endeavoring to make his Escape to Brutus and Cassius, then in Greece,
was betrayed by Sequanus Governor of Aguileia, and his Head sent to Anthony.
Octavius returning to Rome, could not obtain a Triumph, nor the Consulship,
till being disgusted with the Senate, he sent for Anthony and Lepidus into
Italy, with whom he entered into a strict Combination, and so began the second
Triumvirate.

The first thing the Triumviri did, after the Establishment of their Authority,
was the issuing out a dreadful Proscription of 300 of the Senatorian, and about
2000 of the Equestrian Order. Among the rest, M. Tullius Cicero, the celebrated
Orator, fell a Sacrifice to Anthony's implacable Revenge, and his Head and
Hands being cut off, were ordered to be set upon the Rostium. Then they began
to exact Money of the richest Ladies in Rome, who were related to their
Enemies; afterward raised Levies, which were Headed by Anthony and Octavius,
who leaving Lepidus to preside at Rome, marched into Greece against Brutus and
Cassius. They came to an Engagement at Philippi in Macedonia, defeated the Army
of the Conspirators: Brutus and Cassius killed themselves, and (as some say)
fell by the same Swords with which they had killed Caesar.

Upon the Fall of Brutus and Cassius, the Triumviri began to act as Sovereigns,
and to divide the Roman Dominions between them. Several days after the Victory
were spent in punishing their Enemies; after which, Anthony undertook to go
into Asia to raise Money for the Soldiers Rewards; and Octavius to lead the old
Troops into Italy, to put them in Possession of the Lands that were promised
them. Anthony first visited Greece, then made his Progress through Asia, where
he squeezed Money from them, and all the Princes of the East, who were
dependent on the Roman State, waited upon him. Several of Brutus's Party
surrendered themselves to him, who were all Pardoned, except such as had imbrued
their Hands in the Blood of Caesar. Whilst he was in Cilicia, he cited
Cleopatra Queen of Egypt thither, who waited upon him in Person, diverted him
from Revenge, charmed his Heart, and made him follow her to Alexandria, where
having sacrificed her Sister Arsin^e to her Revenge, he spent the next year in
Softness and Luxury.

Anthony being engaged in his Pleasures in Egypt, Octavius was busy in settling
the Affairs of Ital^^ and dividing the Lands among his old Soldiers, in which
Distribution C^emona and Mantua suffered most. After this, Lucius Brother to
Anthony, by the Instigation of (...) his Brother's Wife, declared himself
against the Triumvirate, but was at last forced to retreat to Perusia, a strong
City of Hetruria, where being closely besieged by Octavius, he was constrained
to surrender himself. Thus ended this Dangerous War in a few months time, and
Octavius returned in Triumph to Rome.

After this, Octavius and Anthony had two little Quarrels, but were reconciled
first by Pollio on Anthony's side, and Maecenas on Octavius's; afterward by
the Mediation of Octavia, Sister to Octavius, and Wife to Anthony. Anthony
first sent Ventidius, then marched himself in Person against the Parthians,
whom he subdued, and settled several Kings in the East: And whilst he was thus
employed, Octavius, with the Assistance of Lepidus, routed Pompey by Sea, and
outed him of all Sicily; Sardinia and Corsica having before revolted to
Octavius. But Lepidus aiming to get all Sicily under his Command, was turned
out thence, and banished by Octavius to Cyrceum. Thus fell one Head of the
second Triumvirate, and Pompey soon after, who had fled for Sanctuary to
Anthony, was slain by his Order in Phrygia.

Upon the Banishment of Lepidus, Rome began to take Breath, and Octavius was
received into the City with a general Joy. The first thing he did, was the
clearing Italy and Rome of the Robbers, who of late had been very troublesome
to both. Among Pompey's Papers, were several Letters a^^ Memoirs of the Chief
Senators, enough to have occasioned new Disturbances, which Octavius generously
brought into the Forum, and publicly burnt them, protesting, that with them he
sacrificed all his Private Resentments for the Public Good. This Generous Act
endeared the People so far to him, that they made him Tribune for Life. Having
disposed of the Government of the Provinces, he marched against the Illyrians.
And now Anthony by his Debaucheries with, and his Prodigal Liberality to
Cleopatra, began to grow Odious to the Romans. He marched against the
Parthians, but with such ill Success, that he was forced with the loss of the
fourth part of his Troops, and all his Baggage, to save himself in Armenia.
Another thing which gave Disgust to the Romans, was his leading Artabazus King
of Armenia in Triumph into Alexandria, which they looked upon as a notorious
Affront offered by a Roman General to Rome, which for so many years had enjoyed
that Honor peculiar to her self alone. These Miscarriages Octavius took
advantage of to raise his own, and to lessen the Esteem of Anthony; but had no
fair opportunity of declaring War against him, till he was justly excited by
the Affront which he offered to his Wife Octavia, Caesar's Sister, whom by the
Insinuations of Cleopatra he sent back again to Rome, without so much as seeing
her, tho in Person he waited on Cleopatra to Alexandria.

This Affront so provoked Octavius, that he thought of nothing but Revenge; and
after he had ended his Wars with the Illyrians, he made Preparations for his
Expedition against Anthony, and proclaimed War against him. At last Anthony
marched as far as Actium, a Town on the Coasts of Epirus, and Caesar embarked at
Brundusium, crossed the Seas, and surprised Toryne, a City near Actium. After
this, they had an Engagement by Sea, wherein Anthony's Fleet was conquered,
which Victory was followed by the total Revolt of all his Landforces, who
submitted to Caesar, and were all spared by him, except some few who had been
his professed Enemies. Upon this Defeat, Anthony declined in his Fortune, shut
himself up in Alexandria, and at last by the Desertion of his own Troops, and
the Success of Caesar, he grew so desperate, as to lay violent Hands upon
himself. Thus fell the second Head of the Triumvirate, leaving Octavius Caesar
the sole Master of all the Roman State; which happened in the 724th year of the
City, the 3d of the 187th Olympiad, and 28th before Christ.

Upon the death of Anthony, Caesar sent to Cleopatra, to assure her of his
Kindness and Generosity; but she denied Proculus, his Messenger, admittance
into the Place, where she had locked her self up with her two Maids. Afterward
being surprised, and taken by Proculus, Caesar gave her a Visit; but she
understanding by Dolabella, that he intended within three Days time to send her
and her Children to Rome to grace his Triumph, killed her self, by applying an
Asp to her Wrist. Before she did this, she sent a Letter to Octavius, desiring
she might be interred in the same Tomb with Anthony, which was accordingly
done. By her Death, Egypt was reduced to a Roman Province, and Caesario, the
Son she had by Julius Caesar, was soon after put to Death by the Order of
Octavius. Upon his Return to Rome, he Triumphed three Days; for Illyricum; for
the Battle of Actium; and for the Conquest of Egypt. After this, by his
Clemency and Policy he so far won the Hearts of the Romans, that at last they
desired, that he alone would take upon him the Administration of the
Government, and afterward conferred upon him the Venerable Name of Augustus.

Here begins the Fourth, or the Roman Monarchy.
Years of the World. Years before Christ. 3925. 2. Augustus Caesar, the second
Emperor, being fully established in the Government, did many great Things for
Rome. It was he, who by his extraordinary Conduct and Prudence restored the
Tottering State to its former Splendour and Tranquillity, enlarged its Grandeur,
and raised its Glory to the highest Pitch. To him were sent Ambassadors from
the farthest part of the Indies, and from the Scythians, to desire Alliance. 25
After this, he subdued the Pyreneans, Cantabrians, and Asturians, who had
revolted; and the Parthians at length submitted to him. In his time Learning
began to flourish, and Learned Men to be encouraged; among those of greatest
Note, were Virgil, Horace, Ovid, and Livy; Caesar himself being a great
Favourer of Learned Men. He exchanged the Name of the Month Sextilis, calling
it after his own Name, Augustus. He was not addicted to Vice, nor could be
justly charged with any Act of Cruelty or Tyranny, except what he did in
Conjunction with the other two Heads of the Triumvirate; at Rome by the bloody
Proscription, and at Philippi after the Victory obtained over Brutus and
Cassius. He issued forth a Decree, ordering all within the Roman Empire to be
Taxed; shut the Temple of Ianus by an Universal Peace; about which time it was,
that Jesus Christ, the Prince of Peace, and Savior of the World, was born in
the Flesh.

The remaining part of Cesar's Reign, together with his Successors, will be
Treated of in the Second Volume, wherein we shall give you an Account of the
Monarchies since our Savior's Birth.

And thus have we, with all the convenient Brevity, given the Reader a Taste of
the Roman History; and none ought to be surprised, that we have given it a
larger Space in our System than has been allowed to any of the former, since it
ought to be considered, that the Actions of the Romans have been more, greater,
and more clearly transmitted to us, than any of the former. It must be likewise
observed, that this Last or Fourth Monarchy is of a larger Extent, than either
that of Assyria, Persia, or Greece; since in Europe it took in Italy, both the
Gauls, Spain, Greece, Illyricum, Dacia, Pannonia, with part of Britain and
Germany: In Asia, all the Provinces which go under the Name of Asia Minor,
Armenia, Syria, Judea, with part of Mesopotamia and Media; And in Africa,
Egypt, Africa, Numidia, Mauritania, and Lybia.

FINIS.
THE INDEX.
A.
ABdon judges Israel. p. 53, 238 Abel. 46 Abijam K. of Judah. 24 Abimelech. 237
Aborigines in Italy, their Kings. 369 Abraham. 49, 229 Actium, (the Battle of.)
409 Adam. 46, 228 Adrian. 67 Aeneas settles in Italy. 53, 369 Aeneas Sylvius's
Hist. 170 Aeschines. 60, 329 Aeschylus. 60 Africanus (Julius,) his Chronicle.
151 Agamemnon K. of Mycene. 347 Agathias's Hist. 196 Agrim, Battle there. 95
Ahazias K. of Judah. 241 Aix la Chapelle, Peace there. 92 Alaric K. of the
Goths. 71 Albert of Austria, Emp. Ger. 80 Albigenses persecuted. 81 Alcibiades.
60, 326, 327 Alexander the Great. 60 -- His History. 267 to 280, 355 Alexandria
in Egypt built. 309 Alexius Comnenus. 78, 79 Alfred K. of England. 75 Almarez
K. of Jerusalem. 79 Alphonsus the Chaste, K. of Spain. 74 Alphonsus K. of
Portugal. 90 America discovered. 86 Amos. 67, 241 Amos's Prophecy. p. 137
Amurath, Sultan of the Turks. 81 Anacreon. 325 Andronicus Paleolog. II. Emp.
C.P. 81 Annibal, the Carthaginian Admiral. 390 Anthony (Marc.) 64, 312, 313,
406, 408, 409. Anthony of Florence's Hist. 169 Antiochus Epiphanes. 62
Antiochus Soter. 61 Antoninus (Marc. Aurel.) 67 Antoninus Pius. 67 Appius's
History. 190 Aratus. 330 Archimedes. ibid. Archontes, Governor of Athens, 321,
etc. Argonaut's Voyage. 52 Argos, the Kings of it. 316 Aristobulus. 63
Aristobulus K. of the Jews. 252 Aristophanes. 60, 328 Aristotle. 328 Arnold of
Lubeck's Hist. 166 Arphaxad. 228, 230 Arrian's Hist. 189 Arthur K. of Britain.
72 Asa K. of Judah. 40 Ascanius, Son of Aeneas. 369 Asia Minor, the Kings of it
after Alexander. 288, etc. Assure, Son of Sem. 230 Assyrian Kings, their Names,
and time of Reign, from Nimrod to Sardanapalus. 256 Athaliah. 56, 241 Athens,
its History. p. 317, etc. -- Burnt by Mardonius. 324 -- Plague there. 325 Atolf
K. of the Goths in Spain. 71 Attila K. of Hunns. ib. St. Augustine, his
History, Works, 155 Augustulus, Emp. 71 Augustus Caesar. 64, 406 -- Emperor of
Rome. 410 Aurelianus (V.) 68 Austin the Monk, Archbishop of Canterbury. 72
Austrian Family, its Founder. 80 Axan, Sultan of the Turks. 78
B.
Babylonian Kings. 261, etc. Babylonish Captivity of the Jews. 243 Bajaret,
Sultan of the Turks. 82 Baldwin K, of Jerusalem. 78 Baronius's Annals. 173
Baruch. 243 -- His Prophecy. 131 Bede's History. 159 Belgrade taken by Turks.
86 Belshazzar K. of Babylon. 261 Belus K. of Assyria. 255 Berah K. of Sodom. 49
Bergamos ( James of) his Hist. 171 Berosus, his History. 329 Boadicea Q. of
Britain. 66 Boethius (Hector) his Hist. 173 Boetia, its Situation. 348
Bonfinius's History. 171 Boyne, Battle there. 95 Breda, Peace there. 92
Britain; Joseph of Arimathea preached there. 66 -- Lucius, first Christian King
there. 67 -- Christianity established there. 72 -- The Saxons called in. 71 --
Saxon Heptarchy erected. 71, 72 -- The Danes infest the Land. 76, 77 Brutus and
Cassius. 63, 405 -- Their Death. 407 Brutus (L. Iunius.) Founder of the
Consular State of Rome. p. 378, 379
C.
Cadmus. p. 301 -- Brought Letters to Greece. 52 -- His Story. 349, etc. Caesar
(C. Julius.) 63, 399 -- His Victories. 400, etc. -- In Britain. 400, 401 --
Perpetual Dictator, and Emperor of Rome. 404 -- His Writings: 197 -- His Death.
405 Cainam. 46, 228, 231 -- His Sons Founders of Nations. 233 Calendar
corrected by Caesar. 403 -- Corrected by P. Gregory. 88 Callymachus. 329
Cambyses. 59, 262 -- Conquered Egypt. 304 Candia taken by Turks. 92 Cannae, the
Battle there between Hannibal and the Romans. 392 Canticles (the Book of.) 135
Canute the Dane, King of England. 77 Carloman K. of France. 76 Carolus Gustavus
K. of Sweden. 90 Carthage built. 56 -- Conquered by Romans, and destroyed. 63,
394 Carthaginian War: First. 61, 389 -- Second. 61, 391 -- Third. 61, 394
Cassiodorus's History. 162 Catiline's Conspiracy. 399 Catullus. 64 Centuriae
Magdeburgens. 173 Chalecondylas's History. 170 Charlemain K. of France. 73 --
Declared Emperor. 74 Charles Martel governs France. 73 Charles the Bald, Emp.
75 Charles V. King of Spain, and Emperor. 86 -- Resigns his Crown. 88 Charles
I. K. of England. 89 Charles II. K. of England restored. 91 -- His Death. 93
China; the History of its Monarchs. p. 291 to 297 -- The Wall between it and
Tartary built. 297 Choniates (Nicelas) his Hist. 166 Chronicles (the Book of.)
133 Cicero (M. Tull.) 399, 400 -- His Death. 407 Cimon, General of the Greeks
against the Persians. 324 Cinossema, Battle there. 326 Claudius, Emp. 68
Clelia, a Roman Virgin, her remarkable Courage. 380 Cleopatra Q. of Egypt. 312,
407 -- Her Death. 409 Clovis K. of France. 71 Cecrops, Founder of the
Athenians. 300, 319 Codrus K. of Athens. 320 Coecles (Horat.) his Courage. 380
Collatinus, Lucretia's Husband, Consul of Rome. 378 Colossians (Epistle to.)
142 Columbus discovers America. 86 Confucius, the Chinese Philosopher. 296
Constantine the Great, Emp. 69 Constantine XIII. Palaeologus, last Emp. C. P.
83 Constantinople, General Council there. 70 -- Taken by Turks. 83 Consular
State of Rome, its Beginning. 378 Corimodus, Emp. 67 Corinth, its History and
Kings, 343, 344, etc. Corinthians (Epistle to.) 141 Coriolanus (C. Mar.) his
Story. 382 Crassus. 399, 401 Crates the Philosopher. 61 Cresus K. of Lydia. 58,
362 Cromwell (Oliver) usurps the Government of England. 90 Curopolates his
History. 162 Cyrus, the first Persian Monarch. 262
D.
Donatus K. of Argos. p. 301, 316 Daniel. 58 -- His Prophecy. 136 -- Cast into
the Lionls Den. 250 Dardanus K. of Troy. 52 Darius Codomannus K. of Persia,
overcome by Alexander. 267 Darius Hystaspes K. of Persia. 59, 262 Darius
Nothus. 265 K. David. 54, 239 Decemviri; a sort of Government at Rome, created.
384 -- Their ill Government, and expulsion. ibid. The Demetrii, their
Successors. 284, etc. Demetrius Soter K. of Syria. 283 Demecritus the
Philosopher. 60 Demosthenes. 60, 328 Deucalion. 319 Deuteronomy, its Contents.
131 Dictator at Rome, first created. 381 Dioclesian, Emperor of Rome. 68
Diodorus Siculus's History. 185 Diogenes Laertius's Writings. 190 Diogenes. 328
Dion Cassius's History. 191 Dionysius Halicarnasseus's History. 187 Domitian
Emp. of Rome. 67 Draco's Laws. 323 Drake sailed round the Earth. 88
E.
East Indies, first Voyage thither. p. 85 Eber. 228 Ecclesiastes (the Book of.)
134 Ecclesiasticus. 135 Edgar. 76 Edmond. ib. Edmond Ironside. 77 Edred. 76
Edward the Confessor. 77 Edward the Elder, King of England. 76 Edward the
Martyr. 77 Edward I. 80 Edward II. 81 Edward III. ib. Edward IV. 85 Edward VI.
87 Edwin. 76 Egbert K. of England. 75 Eginard's Hist. 16^ Egypt, Children of
Israel in Bondage there. 22^ Egypt plagued by Moses. p. 330 -- The Kings of it.
297 to 313 -- Conquered by Nebuchadnezzar. 303 -- Subject to the Persian
Monarchy. 305 to 308 -- Subject to Greeks. 308, etc. Eli, Judge over Israel.
238 Elias the Prophet. 241 Elijah. 55 -- Raises the Shunamite's Son. 246
Elizabeth Q. of England. 87 Elon judges Israel. 238 England infested by Danes.
75 Enoch. 46, 228 Enos. ib. ib. Epaminondas. 328 Ephesians (Epistle to.) 141
Ephori of Lacedemon instituted. 335 Esdras (the Book of.) 134 Esther (the Book
of.) ibid. Ethelbert K. of England. 75 Ethelred. ib. Ethelstan. 76 Ethelwald.
75 Ethelwolph. ib. Evagrius's Hist. 159 Euclid. 329 Eudo K. of France. 76
Evilmerodach K. of Babylon. 261 Euripides. 60, 328 Eusebius's History and
Chronicle. 153 Exodus (the Book of.) 231 Ezekiel. 58 -- His Prophecy. 136 Ezra.
60 -- His Prophecy. 250
F.
Fabius Maximus. 61, 392 Flavius Blondus's Hist. 169 The Flood. 47, 288 Fohi
Emp. of China. 291 Freculphus's Chronicle. 160 Frederick Barbarossa, Emp. 79
Frederick II. Emp. goes to the Holy Land. 80 Fredoard's Chronicle. 162 French
Monarchy founded. 71 Fulk K. of Jerusalem. 79
G.
Galatians (Epistle to.) p. 141 Galba Emp. Romans 66 Gauls sack Rome. 60, 386
Genesis (Book of.) 131 Gideon. 52 Glaber Rudolphus's Hist. 162 Gloucester
(present Duke of) born. 94 Godeau's Hist. 174 Godfrey of Bolleign, K. of
Jerusalem. 78 Golden Number found out. 325 Gomer's Sons, Authors of Nations.
233 Goths invade Italy, etc. 67 Gracchus turbulent at Rome. 395 Gregory of
Tou^'s Hist. 159 Gunpowder Plot in England. 89 Guns invented. 81 Gustavus
Adolphus. 89
H.
Habakkuk. 57, 243 -- His Prophecy. 138 Haggai. 60, 250 Ham. 230 Hannibal the
Carthaginian General. 61, 391 -- Passes the Alps, and invades Italy. 391 --
Defeats the Romans. 392 Harold K. of England, conquered by William. 77
Hardicanute the Dane, K. of England. ib. Hebor. 48, 228, 230 Hebrews (Epistle
to.) 143 Hegira of the Turks. 7, 72 Hegisippus's History. 151 Heli. 53
Heliograbalus. 68 Helmodius's Hist. 166 Hengist the Saxon K. of Kent. 71 Henry
I. K. of England. 78 Henry II. 79 Henry III. 80 Henry IV. 82 Henry V. ib. Henry
VI. ib. Henry VII. 85 Henry VIII. 86, 87 Henry III. K. of France, stabbed by
Clement. p. 88 Henry IV. K. of France, stabbed by Ravillac. 89 Heraclides,
Kings of Lacedemon. 334 -- Kings of Corinth. 345 Heraclitus. 60 Herald the
Dane, K. of England. 77 Hercules. 52, 347 Herod the Great, 64, 253 Herodian's
Hist. 193 Herodotus's Hist. 177 Hesiod. 56 Hezekiah K. of Judah. 242 Hipparchus
K. of Athens. 324 Hipias K* of Athens invited the Persians into Greece. 324
Hippocrates. 60 Hircanus, High Priest of the Jews. 253 Holland declared a Free
State. 89 Holofernes beheaded by Judith. 260 Homer. 54 Holy League in France.
88 Honorius Autunensis's Chronicle. 163 Horace. 64, 410 Horat. Coecles defends
the Bridge at Rome against Porsenna. 380 Hosea. 56, 241 -- His Prophecy. 136
Hoshea K. of Israel carried Captive with the 10 Tribes. 247 Hovedon's Hist. 166
Huntingdon ( Hen. of) his History. 164
I.
Jacob. p. 50, 228 -- His Sons. 235 Iair judges Israel. 237 St. James, his
Epistle. 143 James I. K. of England. 89 James II. 93, 94 Iaphet. 47, 230 -- His
Sons Authors of Nations. 233 Iared. 46, 228 Iavan; his Sons Authors of Nations.
234 Iebus; Jerusalem so called. 233 Iehoaz K. of Judah, deposed by the K. of
Egypt. p. 243 Iehoram K. of Judah. 238 Iehos^aphat. 55, 240 Iehu K. of Israel.
246 Ieptha judges Israel. 238 Jeremiah. 242 -- His Prophecy. 135 Jericho built.
245 St. Ierom's Hist. Works. 154 Jeroboam K. of Israel. 244 Jerusalem taken by
the Babylonians. 244 -- Temple rebuilt by Zorobabel. 250 -- The City and Temple
taken by Pompey. 252 -- Taken by Vespasian. 253 -- Oppressed by Turks, the Holy
War began. 78 -- Regained by Godfrey. 78 -- Retaken by Turks. 79 Jews, the
Government of them from the time of Zedekiah, to the coming of Christ. 249.
etc. -- Their Kings. 252, etc. Iezebel. 245 Ingulphus's Writings. 163
Inquisition erected in Spain. 85 Job (the Book of.) 134 Iocasta Q. of Thebes
marries Oedipus. 350 Joel. 56, 242 -- His Prophecy. 137 St. John. 67 -- His
Gospel. 140 -- His Epistles and Revelations. 144 John K. of England. 79 Jonah.
56, 242 -- His Book. 137 Joseph. 50, 229 Joseph of Arim^thea. 66 Iosephus's
Hist. 163 Joshua. 52, 236 -- His Book. 131 Ireland conquered by the English. 79
Isaac. 50, 228 Isaiah. 56, 241 -- His Prophecy. 135 Israel, the Kings of it.
244 Israelites; their several Servitudes and Deliverers. 237, etc. Israelites
carried Captives to Babylon. p. 243 -- The Ten Tribes carried into Captivity by
Shalmaneser. 247 -- Oppressed in Egypt by Thermutis. 300 Italy, its first
State. 368 Judah (the Kings of.) 240, etc. St Iude's Epistle. 144 Judges (the
Book of.) 131 Judges (the Israelites governed by.) 236, etc. Judith (the Book
of.) 134 -- Cut off Holofernes Head. 242, 260 Iugurthine War. 396 Julian
Account of Time. 403 Iustin's History. 219
K.
Kings (the Book of.) p. 132 Krantz's History. 172
L.
Lacedemonia; its History, and Kings. p. 332 to 337, 342 Laius K. of Thebes.
350 Lamech. 46, 238 Law given by God. 51 Leopoldus the present Emp. 90 Lepanto,
Battle there. 88 Lepidu^. 406, 408 Leuctra, the Battle there. 341 Leviticus
(the Book of.) 131 Lewis XIV. K. of France. 90 Livy. 410 -- His History. 203
Lollard (Walter) burnt. 81 Lombardy, Kingdom founded. 7^ Lucius Florus's
History. 217 Lucius K. of Britain. 64 Lucretia ravished. 59, 377 Lucretius the
Poet. 64, 396 Luitprand's History. 161 St. Luke's Gospel. 139 Luther preaches
against Indulgences. 86 Lycurgus. 55, 329, 335 Lydia, its History and Kings.
361, etc.
M.
Maccabees (the Book of.) p. 139 Maccabeus, the Jewish Captain. 252 Macedon,
its History and Kings. 352, etc. Magellanica (the Straight of) discovered. 87
Mahalaleel. 46, 228 Mahomet. 72 Malachi. 251 -- His Prophecy. 138 Malmesbury (
William of) his History. 164 Manasses K. of Judah. 242 Manetho's History. 329
Mardonius the Persian General. 265, 324 Mariners Compass invented. 81 St.
Mark's Gospel. 139 Mark Anthony. 312, 313, 406, 408 -- His Death. 409 Mary Q.
of England. 87 Mary II. dies. 96 Massanello at Naples. 90 St. Matthew's Gospel.
139 Matthew Paris's History. 167 Maximilian, Emp. 86 Medes (the Kings of) from
Arbaces to Darius. 261 Messenian War. 336 Messina built. 337 Methusalem. 46,
228 Mexico and Peru conquered by the Spaniards. 87 Micah. 56, 242 -- his
Prophecy. 138 Miletum, Battle there. 326 Military Tribunes in Rome created. 385
Misraim Son of Ham. 231 -- His Sons Authors of Nations. 232 Mithridates. 63,
397 Moors expelled Spain. 85 Moses. 50, 229, 236, 300 Musical Notes invented.
77 Mutius the Roman burns his own Hand. 380 Mycale, the Battle there. 326
Mycene, its History and Kings. 347
N.
Naaman's Leprosy cleansed. p. 246 Naboth. 245 Nahor. 228 Nahum. 57, 242 -- His
Prophecy. 138 Nebuchadnezzar. 57, 260 -- Takes Iehoiakim Prisoner. 243 --
Turned into a Beast. 249, 260 Nehemiah. 60 -- Rebuilt the Walls of Jerusalem.
250 Nero, Emp. 66 Netherlands united to Spain. 85 Nice, Council held there. 70
Nicephorus Calistus's Hist. 168 Nicephorus Gregorianus's Hist. ib. Nimeguen,
Peace there. 93 Nimrod. 48, 232 Ninus K. of Assyria. 48, 255 Nio^^, her Story.
350 Noah. 46, 228 Normans settle in France. 76 Numa Pompilius. 57, 373 Numbers
(the Book of. 131
O.
Obadiah. p. 241 -- His Prophecy. 137 Oedipus K. of Thebes, his Story. 350
Ogyges Deluge. 50 Olympic Games, and the computation of Time from them
instituted. 56, 321 Orange ( Will. Prince of) Heads the Protestants in Holland,
and is Assassinated at Delft. 88 Origin of the ancient Nations of the Earth.
230 Orosius's Hist. 156 Otho Freisingensis's Hist. 165 Ottoman, Sultan of the
Turks. 80 Ovid, the Poet. 64, 410
P.
Pallades's Hist. 155 Parchment first made at Pergamos. 291 Paris's Rape of
Helen. 52, 330 Parthians, their Derivation. 337 Patriarchal State of the
Israelites. p. 228 Paul the Deacon's Hist. 160 Pausanias the Spartan General.
338 Peloponesian War. 325, etc. 339 Pepin K. of France. 73 Pergamos, the Kings
of it. 288 Pericles, Archon of Athens. 325 Perseus K. of Mycene. 347 Perseus,
last K. of Macedon. 360 -- Defeated by the Romans. 394 Persian Monarchy began.
262 -- Monarchs, from Cyrus to Darius. 262 to 267 Persians invade Greece. 264,
339 St. Peter's Epistle. 143 Petrus Comestor's Hist. 164 Phaleg. 48, 228, 231
Pharamond K. of France. 71 Pharsalia, Battle there. 402 Philaterus K. of
Pergamos. 289 Philemon (Epistle to.) 142 Philip K. of Macedon. 60, 266
Philippians (Epistle to.) 141 Philistines afflict the Israelites. 238 Philo
Iudaeus, his Writings. 150 Philostratus's Writings. 191 Phocian War. 328 Picus
Count of Mirandola. 86 Pindar, the Poet. 60, 325 Pisistratus, Tyrant of Athens.
323 Platea, the Battle there. 60, 265 Platina's Hist. 170 Plato. 60, 328
Plautus. 394 Plutarch's Writings. 188 Polybius's Hist. 184 Pompey. 63, 398,
399, 401 -- His Death. 402 Printing invented. 82 Procopius's Hist. 195
Protestant, the Name first began, 87 Proverbs (the Book of.) 134 Psalms (the
Book of.) 1^. Ptolemy Lagi K. of Egypt. 309 Ptolemy Philadelphus. ib. The
Ptolemies, their Successors. 309 to 313 Punick. Vide Carthaginian. Pyrrhus K.
of Epirus. 61 -- Wars with the Romans. 388
Q.
Quintus Curtius's History. p. 210
R.
Reformation of Religion in England. p. 87 Rehoboam. 55, 240 Rhodes besieged by
Turks. 82 -- Taken. 86 Richard I. K. of England. 79 Richard II. 81 Richard III.
85 Richelieu (Cardinal) chief Minister in France. 89 Rochel taken. 89 Rodolph
of Hapsburgh, Emp. 80 Romans (the Epistle to.) 140 Rome founded. 56, 371, 372
-- Its Regal State. 371 -- Its Consular State. 377 -- Factious Disorders there.
383, 395 -- Burnt by the Gauls. 386 -- Its History and Wars. 371, ad finem.
Romulus King and Founder of Rome. 371 Rufinus's Hist. 153 Ruth (the Book of.)
132 Ryswick, Peace there. 96
S.
Sabellicus's Hist. 171 Saladine, Sultan of the Turks. p. 79 Salmanasser. 57
Salust's Hist. 200 Samaria, whence so called. 233 Sampson. 54, 238 Samuel. 54,
238 Samuel (the Books of.) 132 Sardanopolis. 56 Saturn K. of Latium. 369
Scanderbeg K. of Epirus. 82 Scipio Africanus. 62, 293 -- Aemilius, or African
Junior. 62, 394 Seleucus Nicanor K. of Syria. 61, 280 Semiramis Q. of Assyria.
49, 256 Senacherib K. of Assyria. 57 -- Invades Judea. 242, 260 Septuagint
Translation of the Bible. p. 61, 309 Seth. 46, 288 Shem. 47, 228, 230 Sicyonia,
the Kings of it. 314, etc. Sidon built. 233 Sisyphus K. of Corinth. 344
Smalcaldon League made. 87 Socrates the Philosopher. 60, 328 -- His History.
157 Sodom and Gomorrah burnt. 50 Solomon K. of Israel. 54, 240 Solon. 323
Solomon the Magnificent. 86 Sophocles. 60, 328 Sozomen's Hist. 157 Spain,
Arragon, and Castile, united. 85 Spanish Armada against England destroyed. 88
Sparta. Vide Lacedemon. St. Stephen stoned. 66 Stephen K. of England. 79
Steronius's Hist. 164 Strato. 329 Suetonius's Hist. 218 Sulpicius Severus's
Hist. 154 Sumaquam the Chinese Historian. 297 Sylla. 63, 397 Syracuse built. 57
-- Taken by the Romans. 393 Syrian Kingdom began by Seleucus Nicanor. 281 --
His Successors. 281 to 288
T.
Tacitus's History. p. 212 Tamerlain the Tartar. 82 Tangropylix, first Sultan
of the Turks, 78 Tarentum built. 337 Tarquins, the Original of the Family. 375
Tarquinus Superbus, last King of Rome, his Story. 376, 377 Tartars conquer
China. 195 Terah. 228 Terence, the Poet. 63, 394 Thales. 323 Thebes, its Hist.
and Kings. 348 Themistocles. 60, 324 Theocritus. 329 Theodoret's Hist. 156
Theodoric K. of the Goths. p. 71 Theodosius. 70 Theophanes. 330 Theophrastus.
329 Thermopylae, the Persians routed there. 324 Theseus. 320 Thessalonians
(Epistle to.) 142 Thetmosis or Amasis K. of Egypt. 50, 299 Thrasybulus. 327,
328 Thucydides's Hist. 180 Tigranes K. of Syria overcome by Romans. 288 Timothy
(Epistle to) 142 Titus (Epistle to.) ib. Tobit (the Book of.) 133 Totilas takes
Rome. 72 Trent, Council there. 87 Tribunes of the People at Rome. 381
Trithemius's Hist. 172 Triumvirate at Rome. 399 -- The Second. 407 Troy, its
Hist. and Kings. 330 -- Taken by the Greeks. 53, 331 Tullus Hostilius K. of
Rome. 373 Tire, its History and Kings. 363 to 367
V.
Valentinian. p. 70 Velleius Paterculus's Hist. 209 Venice built. 70 Vespasian
(Flavus) 67 Vespasian (Titus) ib. Victor Uticensis's Writings. 167 Vittimius's
Hist. 169 Vincent of Beauvais's Writings. 167 Virgil, the Poet. 64, 410 Vitry (
Iam. of) his Writings. 167
W.
Wenc^slaus, Emperor of Germany. p. 82 Westphalian Treaty. 90 Wickliff lived.
81 William Conq. K. of England. 77 William Rufas. 78 William Pr. of Orange
born. 90 -- Restored to his Honors in Holland. 99 -- Marries the Lady Mary.
ib. -- Comes to England. 94 -- Declared King. ib. Wimpheling's Hist. 152 Wise
Men of Greece lived. 323 Wisdom (the Book of.) 135 Wittinkind's Hist. 161
X.
Xenophon. p. 60 -- His Writings. 182 Xerxes King of Persia invades Greece. 264
Xerxes II. 265
Z.
Zachariah. p. 60, 250 -- His Prophecy. 138 Zechariah K. of Israel. 247
Zedechias. 58 -- Carried Captive to Babylon. 244 Zenobia Q. of Palmyra. 68
Zephaniah. 243 -- His Prophecy. 138 Zodiac, its Obliquity discovered. 324
Zonarius's Hist. 163 Zorobabel leads back the Jews to Jerusalem. 250 Zozimus's
History. 19^
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Tim. Child.
A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers, and of all Church Affairs, from the
time of our Savior, to the end of the Ninth Century. Written in French by L.
E. du Pin, and Englished with Additions. Folio.

A Continuation of this Work to the end of the Twelfth Century, will be
published in May, School.

Thesaurus Geographicus, a New Body of Geography, or complete Description of
the Earth, and of the most considerable Cities thereon. Illustrated with
Historical Remarks, and above 50 Maps and Copper Cuts. Folio.

Ovidii Metamorphosis, cum Notis and Interpretatione in usum Delphini. 8o.

Sallustii Historia, cum Notis and Interpretatione in usum Delphini. 8o.

Joan. Clerici Ars Critica, in qua ad Studia Linguarum Latinae, Graecae and
Hebraicae via munitur; veterumque emendandorum, and Spuriorum Scriptorum a
Genuinis dignoscendorum Ratio Traditur. 8o.

The Acts and Negotiations, together with the particular Articles at large of
the General Peace concluded at Ryswick by the Illustrious Confederates with the
French King. 8o.

Dr. Gibson's Anatomy of Human Bodies. The 5th Edition, corrected and enlarged
both in the Discourse and Figures. 8o.

Alcali Vindicatum: An Impartial Enquiry into the Fallacious Reasons and
Erroneous Philosophy of a late Physico-Medical Essay touching Alcali and Acid,
etc. By W. Coward, M. D. 8o.

A Physico-Theological Discourse upon the Divine Being, Providence of God,
Existence of Humane Souls, Revealed Religion, Modern Inspiration and
Enthusiasm; with Epistolary Conferences between Dr. Horneck and the Author. 4o.


