THE PRECIOUS BLOOD OF THE SON of GOD Shed without the Gates of Jerusalem For
the Redemption of Lost and Undone SINNERS: Whereby his great Love to Mankind is
Undeniably Manifested, In these following PARTICULARS; His Agony in the Garden;
being betrayed by Judas, being falsely accused before Annas, Caiaphas, Herod and
Pilate; his being Scourged, Scorned, and Spitefully Used; his Condemnation and
Going to Execution; how he was Crucified; of his being Reviled, and Pardoning
the Thief upon the Cross; and of his giving up the Ghost. All which is
Practically Applied and Improved, for the bringing of Sinners out of the Way of
Sin and Hell, into Wisdom's Ways, Whose Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all
her Path's are Peace.

By that Eminent Divine, Mr. John Hayward.

The Tenth Edition.

London, Printed for Robert Gifford, in Old Bedlam, without Bishopsgate, 1699.
Price bound ^^s.

TO THE Christian READER,
Dear Hearts;
BY the reading of this small Treatise, you may in some measure, be made
sensible of what Christ has done for you in order to your everlasting
Salvation: Wherein his great Love is manifested unto all: For greater Love has
no Man than this, to lay down his Life for his Friends; but he has laid it
down for his greatest Enemies, to redeem them from everlasting Destruction. By
these sad and dolorous Sufferings of our Savior, we may see also what a
dreadful and Soul-destroying thing Sin is, that nothing but the precious Blood
of the eternal Son of God could make Satisfaction for it. Oh what Cause have we
then to admire and adore the mighty God of Heaven for his infinite Mercy
toward us, in sending his Son, his only begotten Son, Christ Jesus, to redeem
us from Death and Hell! Seeing such great things have been done for us, let us
make it our daily Practice and Business to walk in some measure answerable to
them: That we may so do, is, and shall be the hearty Prayer of your Soul's
Cordial Friend;

JOHN HAYWARD.

OF Our Savior's Agony IN THE GARDEN.
Matthew. Chap. 26. Ver. 38. Then says he unto them, My Soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death; tarry ye here and watch with me.
AND not designing to take notice of the Meanness of his Birth, and that
continual Course of Sorrow and Misery, that attended the former part of his
Life; wherein he took upon him not only the Form of a Sinner, but a Servant: I
shall consider the time only toward his Death; wherein, in a most especial
manner, his great love to Mankind is manifested: For as every natural Motion
grows more ardent toward the end; so the Love of Christ toward the true
Church, his Spouse. Not that he loved us better in the latter part of his Life;
but it did then most appear: As some sort of Fire, the more Water is thrown
upon it, the hotter it burns; so both the Apprehension and Presence of Death
was so far from lessening his Love, that it did rather increase it.

Therefore, as in all the Passages of his Life, so more especially toward his
Death, all his Doctrine was Holy, Just, and Good, (Milk for the Weak, Meat for
the Strong, Medicine for the Sick, not too deep for the Simple, nor too shallow
for the Wise) but as a Ford wherein the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant swim;
all his Actions were the Works of Justice and Mercy, Examples of all Virtues,
but most especially of Humility, which is the Foundation of all other Virtues,
as Love, Pity, and Compassion, whereof our Miseries stood most in need.

His Life was so Pure and Holy, that by that Example he has set us, we may
plainly see what is either wanting or amiss in our selves, even the Book which
the Prophet Ezekiel speaks of, That he saw, Ezekiel. 2. written within by
Instruction, without by Example of Life; wherein we have what to contemplate,
what to imitate, and what to admire: So that whosoever does not only study, but
like the Prophet, seek, he shall attain inestimable, both Knowledge and Virtue.

When our Savior begun his Passion in the Garden of Gethsemane, he was
accompanied with those three Disciples, who not long before had seen his
Glorious Transfiguration upon Mount Tabor; to the end, that seeing so great a
Change, they might be sensible of the greatness of God's Severity, and of his
Love. O Treasure of Heaven! O Light and Life of the World! How was his Glory
obscured! his Strength abated! his Courage appaled! insomuch that he did
acknowledge to his Disciples, that his Soul was heavy unto death.

Our Savior began his Conflict with Prayer, giving Example to us, in all our
Troubles to do the like; teaching us also in what manner we ought to pray;
first, in that he did fall prostrate upon the Ground, he did thereby instruct
us, that with the greatest Humility and Reverence we must present our selves
before the Majesty of Almighty God: Secondly, by his earnest praying, with what
fervency of Spirit we ought to beat at Heaven Gates. Thirdly, by his often
praying, we have an Example of Perseverance, until he that does engage us to
beg, shall let us have his Favor so far as to obtain. Lastly, He has taught
us to renounce our own Wills, and to resign our Desires to the pleasure of
Almighty God. These things, if at all times we endeavor to perform, but
especially in the Agonies of Death, the Angels will certainly come to comfort
us; for God will cerly send us strength to bear, what he is not pleased to
remove.

But wherefore did our Savior pray, That if it were possible this Cup might
pass from him? Did he not freely and voluntarily offer up himself for Sin to
save Sinners? yes, desirously; for no necessity could be cast upon him; no
complaint of Justice, because he was innocent; no necessity through weakness,
because he was Almighty, for he had twelve Legions of Angels at his Command;
but it was to comfort and strengthen his weak-hearted Members, that their
Courage might not be cast down under any Trial or Tribulation that God might
call them to! And also he did hereby declare, That he did bear the natural
Weaknesses of our Flesh: For none can possibly imagine the greatness of those
Sorrows and Miseries that he went through.

Lastly, he would manifest to us, That he did consist of two Natures, and two
Wills; not so separate as to make two Persons, nor so confounded as to make one
Nature and Will, but distinguished in their essential Properties and
Operations. In his Humane Will, he did pray to avoid this Cup; in his Divine
Will, he did desire it. He did desire Death, in regard of the end; but in
regard to it self, he did pray to avoid it. Yet his Humane Will was not
contra^y or repugnant to his Divine Will: Yet being surprised with the fear of
Death, through the frailty of his Hamane Will, he seemed not to think of that
which he perfectly did know; not as drawing or declining from his Father's
Will, but forthwith resuming his Resolution, submitted himself to his Decree.

There is no Question bu^ the Pains that our Savior did endu^e in his ^dv were
exceeding great; yet nothing comparable to the Torments of his Soul. In bodily
Pains it is possible some have born as much as he: But as for the Sorrow of his
Soul, the unspeakable Sorrows of his Soul there was never any came near him:
And indeed, the Pain of the Body is not comparable to the the Sorrow of the
Soul, Prove. 18. 14. The Spirit of a Man shall sustain his other Infirmities:
But a wounded Spirit who can hear?

And first begun his Sorrows in his Soul. For as Sin begins always at the
Soul, and from thence extends to the Body, it was most proper that the
Punishment of Sin should begin at the Soul, and afterward proceed to the Body.

This Grief of Soul of our Savior's was very great, as one of the Evangelists
testifies, Matthew. 26. 37. He began to wax sorrowful, and grievously troubled:
Another, Mark 14. 34. He began to be afraid, and in great heaviness: and says,
Luke 22. 14. He was in an Agony. But in a more peculiar manner he did express
it himself, Matthew. 26. 38. Now is my Soul tr^ubled, now is my Soul heavy even
unto death; and also by Actions in that when no violence was offered to his
Body, no Man stood near him to do him any harm; he was so much inwardly pressed
in Spirit, and in so great an Agony, that in an extreme cold Night when he lay
upon the cold Earth, all the Forces of his Body were distracted, the Humors
disturbed, the Pores opened, and he was cast into a great and bloody Sweat: not
a thin faint Sweat, but consisting of such great Drops, which issued so
plenteously from every part of his Body, that they came through his Apparel,
and trickled to the Ground in great abundance, Luke 22. 44. Sure never was any
Garden thus watered, never Ground thus wet. Adam might moisten the Earth with
the Sweat of his Brows; but never was it moistened but at that time with a
bloody Sweat.

O let us therefore look upon our Savior, and upon our selves: Upon our
Savior as upon the true Adam, not cast, but came out of Paradise of his o^
Love and free Will, for to redeem us from our Sins: laboring in a bloody
Sweat, to get for us the Bread of Life: Upon our selves, as those that were at
that time his only Tormentors; for the Executioners did not then tear him with
Whips, they did not then press a Crown of Thorns upon his Head. It was not the
Nails nor the Spear that then did pierce him, but it was our Offenses that did
so much afflict him; our Sins were the heavy Burden under which he did so
grievously sweat.

For then were represented to him the Sins of the whole World, both past and to
come; which to him who bears so great a Love and Zeal to the Honor of his
Father, it could not but be an unspeakable Sorrow and Trouble to him.

Then also was presented to him the most terrible sight in the World, the great
Fury of the Father, before whose Majesty, when he is moved to Wrath, the Angels
cover their Faces, the Mountains sweat, the Earth trembles, the Sea flies;
before whom, if he appears as Judge, no Creature can stand; and verily, if the
Wrath of God against one Sinner, for one Sin, be termed Unquenchable Fire, a
Worm that does not, Watling, and Gnashing of Teeth, and yet not sufficiently
expressed: What Words can the Wisdom of Men devise to represent the
terribleness of that Judgment that was against him, who was to drink of the
whole Cup of his Father's Wrath; not for one Sin only, but for the Sins of the
whole World; and if he had left one drop, if he had not drank up the very
Dregs, we had not been excused from eternal Damnation. Also he beheld the
Ingratitude of many, who would not endeavor to make any profit to their own
Souls, of this great Benefit, which doubtless was a sharper cut to him than all
the outward Torments he endured; ever as it is less grievous to a Man to take
pains for another, than to know that his Pains shall not be regarded.

Our blessed Savior did bend under this heavy Burden, and dipped his Garments
in his own Blood; and he took the Cup of his Father's Wrath, which had no
mixture of Mercy in it: He did lay upon his Shoulders a light Burden, and a
sweet Yoke: but we have laid upon him an unmerciful Load, which none but
himself is able to bear. No Element is heavy in its proper place; and therefore
as one that diveth into the Water, feels not the Weight of the Water which is
above. So he that is plunged in the depth of his Sins, has no sense how heavy
they are, because Sin is there in its natural place, But Sin in our Savior was
out of its proper place, and above its Sphere, and therefore lay the more
grievously upon him. For if a Sinner that is sanctified is oftentimes pressed
with his own Sins, that he cries out with holy David, Psalm 38. My iniquities
are a sore Burden, too heavy for me to bear: How grievous must this Sea of Sin
be to him who is Sanctification it self, and from whom it all flows?

O heavenly Father! What is this that thy innocent Son, thy only Son, thy Son
in whom thou art well pleased, in this humble and heavy manner labors before
thee? Their Fathers hoped in thee, and thou did deliver them; they called
upon thee, and were not confounded. Wherefore then is thy innocent and only
Son, begotten of thy Substance, forsaken of thee? How shall we sinful Wretches
expect to find any Mercy with thee, seeing thou art so seve^e against thy only
Son? So merciful a Father against so good and loving a Son: Is not thy Wrath
appeased when thou see this miserable Spectacle of him that is so dear unto
thee? This bloody Sweat, whereof every drop is of greater value than a Thousand
Worlds? Is it not a sufficient Satisfaction for our Sins, a sufficient Price
for our Redemption? O admirable and upright Justice! for this was but a small
Skirmish to the main Battle which did follow after. Sure if thy Eyes, Holy
Father, were fixed upon the Cross, whereunto thy only Son was fastened, thou
would not be satisfied nor appeased, because thou had before ordained, that
Death, which was a Curse belonging to Sin, must also be the Punishment of thy
Son; that the Devil that prevailed by a Tree, should also be by a Tree subdued.

O what a painful Purchase has our Savior made! what a sharp Price has he paid
for our Redemption! how intolerable may we think was the end of his Sufferings,
when the beginning was so dreadful! and how cruel were those Torments, that
were by him to be endured, which were so terrible in being feared! O therefore
let the sight of our Sins draw some Drops of Tears now from our Eyes, seeing
they did draw so many Drops of Blood from every part of our Redeemer's Body:
Take a little touch of that Grief which did lie so heavy upon him whose Power
sustaineth the Heavens, that it made his Soul heavy unto death, being so deeply
drowned in the Nature of Man, that he seemed to forget that he was God. Let us
accuse and condemn our selves of all manner of unworthiness, and take up with a
godly Sorrow, both for love to our Savior, and in hatred to our Sins; the one
for suffering for our sakes; and the other for being the only cause of it; and
let us not be like to the Disciples that were with our Savior, who fell into a
sound and secure Sleep, whilst their Master both watched, prayed, and sweat a
bloody Sweat for their Redemption: He was like a loving Father, who spares no
pains to get Bread for his Children, whilst they remain free both from Trouble
and Care: If drowsiness of Spirit overcomes thee, pray to God to awaken thee
with his Heavenly Voice; if that will not do, to make you smart with the Rod of
Affliction, that so you may watch and pray lest you fall into Temptation.

Let us by this grievou^ Agony that vexed his Soul, by that terror and
trembling that wholly possessed his Body, and by all the pains wherein he was
plunged for us detestable Sinners, beseech him, that in the last hour of our
lives, when Fears and Distresses come upon us, that he would give us steadfast
strength and confidence in his Mercy, that in that hour when we are leaving the
World, he would not leave us; and in this fearful Conflict not to forsake us,
but send his holy Angels to assist us, and to minister Courage and Comfort to
us, that no Temptations of the Devil may prevail against us, but that he would
be pleased to arm our Hearts with Humility and Patience, that they be not
distracted or distempered with any fear of Grief; but that in all things our
Desires may be conformable to his Will.

Let us implore his Goodness to give us such constant courage, such hope, such
love toward him, that the weaknesses of our Flesh may not be overcome by any
fear of Death, but we may both safely and sweetly pass from the Society we have
with thee here by Grace, to the Society which the Saints enjoy with thee in
Glory Mat. 26. 48.

Of our Savior's being sold, betrayed, and apprehended.
Matt. 26. 47. And while he yet spoke, lo Judas, one of the twelve came, and
with him a great multitude with Swords and Staves, from the Chief Priests and
Elders of the People.
BUT when the Son of God did in so high a degree, both love and value the Sons
of Men, that he thought nothing painful to himself that might be profitable to
them; yet see how the Sons of Men did either value or love the Son of God; they
took all Occasions, first to slander him, and afterward to slay him; they sold
him one to another for thirty Pieces of Silver.

O devilish and malicious Spirits, to hate the Author of our eternal Salvation.
As no means are thought bad enough to bring him to his Death, so to undervalue
the Lord of all Creatures, as not many Beasts are sold at so base a Price! O
infinite inequality of Affection between God and Man! God came to save Man, and
Man goes about to destroy God: God bought Man with the dearest Drops of his
Blood, and Man sold God for Thirty Pieces of Siver: O the Love of the Lord
Jesus was great, when he came to redeem those that were lost, and the Savior
of the Redeemed, how great was his Love, to come into the World, when he had no
need, nor we any Merit, to sanctify it with his Justice, to enrich it with his
Grace, to enstruct it with his Doctrine, to confirm it by his Example, to
redeem it with his Blood? that as by the Pride of one, who being but Man, did
aspire to be God, we were condemned; so by the Humility of another, who being
God, became Man, we should be saved.

Being sold at the Price of Thirty Pieces of Silver, to such cruel Merchants as
desire no Profit by him but his Life, the Traitor Judas, whose Feet a little
before he had washed, came unto him, attended with a bloody Band: And how
willing our Savior was to embrace his Passion, did appear by his voluntary
presenting himself to them, and in that he turned not away his Face from this
barbarous Beast that came to kiss him. But, O innocent Lord! What have thou to
deal with Traitors and Tormentors? What Courtesy between the Lamb and the
Wolf? What Commerce between God and Belial.

Our Savior did not only permit Judas to kiss him, but he did also smite his
obstinate Heart with this soft Speech, Friend, wherefore come thou? do thou
betray the Son of Man with a Kiss? But wherefore did our Savior call Judas
Friend, when he had betrayed him? To testify, that although the Knot of
Friendship was broke on his part, yet on our Savior's it remained whole and
entire, to reduce him again to his Friendship; for if he could have said
without despair, with holy David, I have sinned, he should presently have
heard, I have forgiven.

If our Savior had kissed Judas, he should never have despaired, or destroyed
himself; for his Kisses inspire Life; and therefore the Spouse begins the
most excellent Canticle with these Words, Cant. 1. 1. Let him kiss me with the
Kisses of his Mouth. 1 John 4. 10. It is he that has loved us first. Ephesians. 1.
4. It is he that has chosen us, and not we him: Or if Judas had kissed him, as
the Psalmist speaks of Psalm 2. 12. Kiss the Son lest he be angry; That is, if
with sincerity of Soul he had rendered him that Faith and Homage that is due to
him, it had gone well with him; but because he was like one of those whom the
Prophet speaks of, Isa. 9. This People approach to me with their Mouths, and
their Hearts are far from me; because he came with a treacherous Hypocrisy,
this Kiss could draw no Virtue from him, but turned it to his Condemnation: O
cursed cruelty; cursed, because obstinate; cruel, because unjust, which neither
the Power of a Miracle was able to astonish, nor the Kindness of a Benefit
could any way appease.

But they proceeded notwithstanding to lay Sacrilegious Hands upon him, as upon
a Malefactor, to bind his Holy Hands (which had wrought so many Miracles among
them) with rough and knotty Cords, his Disciples either forsaking of him, or
falling off from him; and to lead him away in a more opprobrious manner than
the Ark of the Testimony was taken and carried away by the Uncircumcised
Philistines. Poor and miserable Jews, whom do you thus hale away? Against whom
have you taken up Arms? Your Prisoner has made you Captives; he whom you have
bound with Cords, has chained you with Fetters of Iron; he has been to you as
a Bait, or a Hook that takes the Takers: Never was Force so unfortunately
applied: Never was Prey so impossible to be held, and so dangerous to be let
go; for he soon got out of your Hands, but you shall never avoid his Curse. O
People, well beloved, thy malicious Madness has made thee miserable, thou art
ruinously cast down, thou art finally cast out, and that which was no People is
planted in thy place: You came with Torches and Lanthorns to apprehend the Son
of Truth, but you would not see his glorious Light, therefore you remain the
blindest People in the World; insomuch that all the Prophecies that have been
spoken of you have been performed by you against your selves.

But what Folly is this, O ye Jews! how far is it beyond all Folly, to carry
him with Bands of Men, that went of his own Accord? into whose Brain could it
sink, that he would break away that went voluntarily himself?

He that has power to give Life unto the Dead, could he not have kept himself
in Life? He that delivered others from Devils, could he not have delivered
himself from you? Assure your selves such was his infinite Charity, wherewith
he goes to the Cross, to appease his Father's Wrath, and redeem the Sins of
the World, that you should have more to do to keep him in Life, than you have
to carry him to his Death: He has far greater, both care and haste to redeem
you, than you can possibly have to murder him; for he had not redeemed us, if
his Death had been forced upon him; if his Sacrifice had not been voluntary, it
had not been satisfactory; we could not have been saved by his Obedience, if he
had not died of his own accord; and therefore his Father having given, and he
accepted of the Sentence of Death, he used no means to escape; for he was not
driven by Force, but drawn to it by his Obedience to his Father, and Love to
us: There is no Man that fears Death, but he whom Death is able to kill: But
Death had no such Power over the Son of God, for he did voluntarily lay down
his Soul, even when he would himself. O senseless Jews! He that is to bury so
many Figures, to fulfill so many Prophecies, to accomplish so great a Business
as the Redemption of the whole World, to what end should he run from you?

By all this you may see what base abuse was offered to the Son of God;
Certainly if it had not been the Will of his Father, and of himself, it had
been better that Mankind should have rotted in their own Corruption, than that
infinite Virtue, perfect Felicity, the true Glory, the eternal Word and Wisdom
of the Father, should be so basely and vilely abused by those Sons of Belial.
But since it was his Pleasure, because by this way he would manifest his Love,
it is our part to accept it with thankful Hearts, and with Reverence, both to
love, honor, and praise him for the same.

Therefore let us lift up our Voices at all times, and in all places, to the
Praise of Almighty God, for this his unspeakable loving kindness, since he has
so far pitied our Condition, as to come into it himself, to exalt us to his
Glory: O admirable Dispensation of Grace! thou have poured forth thy Treasures
without measure upon us; we can desire no more than we do enjoy in thee, for
thou have exalted us above the Heavens. Our Savior was seated in Majesty and
Glory, environed with Angels, hearing the sweet Harmony of his own Praise,
doing wonderful things in Heaven, and in the Earth, and in all the deep places:
But we lay in the Mi^e of our Miseries, just fallen into the bottomless Pit of
everlasting Sorrow, void of the poorest Comforts of Calamity, either helpless
pity, or vain Hope. But our Savior bowed down the Heavens, and came down; not
by changing place, but by manifesting himself in a holy Humanity: He was
admirable in Heaven, but he became miserable and contemptible upon Earth: He
changed the Name of Majesty into Mercy: and did cover himself with the
Sackcloth of Mortality, and did enter, as it were, into Perdition, wherein he
did both willingly wallow and take delight: But our Savior received no Spot
nor Soil; but he did stretch forth his Hand to the Work of his Hands, whereby
he drew sorth; he did cleanse, he did cloth, he did comfort and confirm us, he
did reach forth his Hand by his blessed Birth, he did draw us by his Doctrine,
he did cleanse us by his Death, he did cloth us by his Resurrection, he did
comfort us by his Ascension, and he did confirm us by his sending of the Holy
Ghost; therefore let us praise and magnify the Lord for his great Love toward
us; for in all his Works he was ours mo^e than his own; he took the Burden of
our Miseries upon him and laid the Benefits of his Merits upon us, he heard the
Cries of the Poor, and came down from the highest Heaven to the D^ngeen of this
World, to deliver them from their Distress, and to restore them to that
Innocence and Immortality from whence they were fallen. He was sold to redeem
us, he was apprehended to discharge us, and he was bound to unfetter us; all
which he did plainly signify in what he said to those that came to take him,
John 18. 2 I say unto you, that I am he, therefore if you seek me, let these go
their ways.

Of our Savior being had before Annas, Caiaphas, Herod, and Pila^e.
Matthew. 26. 57. And they that had laid hold on Jesus, led him away to Caiaphas
the High Priest, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled.
AFter that Judas had betrayed him with a Kiss, and they had taken him, they
led him away before Annas, the Father-in-law to Caiaphas the High Priest; Annas
sent him bound to Caiaphas, where the Scribes and Elders were assembled. He was
accused of Blasphemy, but very ^sly and wrongfully: And there an Officer in the
Court, in the full Face of Justice, give him a Blow on the Face, contrary to
the Rules of any Court of Judicature: Yet all these Ind gn^ did our blessed
Savior with ind^gable Patience bear. Which Patience if we observe together
with all his Behaviors in the other Passages of hi^ Passion, we shall find a
perfect Cure for all our Impe^fections, and a straight Rule to direct us in all
the Affairs of this Lise.

O Gracious Countenance, which fills the Heavens with Glory, which the Angels
with Joy and Ravishment do desire to behold! O perfect Image of the Father! how
deeply was thy Beauty, and thy Majesty over clouded with Disgrace? O infinite
Humility! O f^t Lord! Is it possible that there should remain in the World any
Footsteps of Pride, after this admirable Example of Patience? O Earth and
Ashes! thy God did with deep silence endure all these Indignities, and thou
stirrest, thou starest, and turmoilest thy self, and tormentest others, upon
the least touch of thy Reputation: God did pray for those that blaspheme him;
but we di^d ^in or scorn to look upon a Man that has given us the least
affront imaginable. God would be esteeme^ a Sinne^, when he was pure from any
soil of Sin: But we, although de^ble Sinnars, think much of any that do not
think us Righteous.

God was abased to the lowest degree; but we would be advanced above all Men,
above the Angels, yea, above God himself. Ah proud Flesh! it cannot swell so
high, but Vengeance will sit above it; it cannot lift up it self so lofty, but
God's Hand shall strike it down. God and Pride could not dwell together in one
Heaven, much less in one Heart.

Our Savior has taught us to love our Enemies, Matthew. 5. 44. to do good to
them that hate and hurt us, that we may be the Children of our Father which is
in Heaven. What shall we further say? we are desirous to be esteemed the Sons
of God, we are ready to assume that Name unto us, although it may be we are
Hypocrites and Liars. And how can this be, when we think our selves
dishonored, if we revenge not the least Indignity that is done unto us? yea,
when no moderate either Satisfaction of Revenge, will suffice to appease us? If
it be so with us, let us be ashamed to call God our Father; and let us tremble
to say unto him, F^rgive us our Offenses, as we forgive them that have offended
us, For this is as if we should say, Forgive us not, because we will not
forgive; or in pl^iner Terms, Damn us, Lord, because we will be damned.
Undoubtedly they who are the Son^ of God and Christians in Deed and in Truth,
must not only a^rive at this degree of Goodness, not to return Evil for Evil,
but they must advance higher, to return Good for Evil; they must declare by
their Actions, that they have not only surmouned Evil, but that they have
attained to that which is good, and in such a degree as to overcome Evil with
Good. Romans 21. 8.

Therefore let us learn to be of an humble Spirit; if we did but know the
Virtue of true Humility, we should abandon the chiefest things in the World to
a^in it. If we desire to have Mercy, Humility will help us to it, as it did the
Publican: If we desire the Grace of the Gos^el, our Lord says, He was sent to
preach it to the poor: It was hid from the wise, and revealed to the little
ones. Would we have our Prayers heard? Ecclus. 35. 17. The Prayers of the
Humble shall pierce the Clouds, and will not depart till the Highest regard it.

If we desire Glory and long Life, an humble Spirit will help us to it, Prove.
22. 4. They are the Rewards of Humility, if we desire to live under the
Protection of God, and to participate of his Grace, as, no doubt, there is none
in the World but what does so, Psalm 34. 17. 1. Pet. 5. 5. The Lord preserves
the lowl^, and gives Grace to the Humble. For as Water runs to the low
Grounds, so do the Graces of God flow to the humble Hearts. In a Word, if we
are desirous to pass the time of this Life in Peace, Mat. 11. 29. Learn of me,
says our Savior, for I am ^eek and humble of Heart, and so you shall find
rest in your Soul^. If we desire to be everlastingly happy in the Kingdom of
God, we must then humble our selves as little Children, Motth. 18. 4. For
Heaven is like a stat^ly Palace with a low Door, wherein no Man can enter
except he stoop: Humility is not only a Virtue, but a Vessel that contains all
other Virtues.

This unquiet Night wherein they had our Savior before Annas and Caiaphas
being scarce ended, they led him to Pilate the Roman President of the Province;
for the Jews at that time were under the Dominion of the Romans, who although
they allowed them the use of their Religion, yet they barred them from all
Civil Jurisdiction, and all Cognizance of Capital Crimes, as in other Provinces
it was the custom so to do: So although the Jews had condemned Jesus of
Blasphemy, and cried out against him, He is worthy to die, yet they had no
Authority to put him to death: and therefore they led him to the Roman
President for the Territory of Jud^a. But when Pilate understood that Jesus was
born in Galilee, which belonged to the Jurisdiction of Herod the Tetrarch, he
sent him to Herod, who at that time was at Jerusalem. Now Herod had been
desirous of a long Season to see Jesus, because of that admirable Report that
run of him, whereupon he was then joyful of his coming, hoping to have seen him
wrought some Miracle: He questioned him concerning many things; but he enquired
out of vain Curiosity, and with no true Intention or End: Christ answered him
nothing, according to that which St. James says, Jam. 4. 3. Ye ask and do not
receive, because ye ask amiss.

Hereupon Herod with all his grave Counselors and gallant Courtiers,
interpreting the Silence of Jesus for Simplicity, did openly contemn him, and
for a plain Decla^ation, not of his Innocence, but his Simplicity they arrayed
him in White Raiment, and sent him back again to Pilate; that he who had been
taken before for a Man of evil Behavior, and namely, a Glutton, a Drinker of
Wine, a Companion of Sinners, a S^irrer of Sedition, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer,
possessed with a Devil, should then pass for a very simple Man.

O true Comfort of all Afflictions, whether by public Injustice or private
Injuries! let us learn by these Exemplary Instructions of our Master to make no
account of the Judgments and Estimations of this World; let us leave off to be
so ambitious, as to affect the vain Breath of humane Praise, which is like to
an Echo, a mere empty Sound without Substance which feeds and flatters us with
wrong Names, pleasing our foolish and idle Fancies, till we fall into the Pit
of everlasting Destruction: For we may easily see and find by daily experience
how variable Men are in their Opinoins, constant only in unconstancy and
persisting in nothing more than in change.

They who cried Hosanna in the Highest, soon after cry, Let him be crucified:
They who saluted him for their King, do presently profess, That they have no
King but Caesar: They who met him with Olive Branches, do now present him with
Swords and Staves: They who did spread their Garments before him, now take his
own Garments from him: They who did acknowledge and adore him for the Son of
God, they in few days prefer Barabbas, a Thief and a Murderer, before him:
Therefore by this you may see what cause we have to give credit to the Judgment
of the Men of this World.

Who will trust the Love of this World, which is so uncertain? Who will be so
base as to fawn upon it for a few crumbs of such fading Credits? Who then will
be so foolish to take all pains to please it? nay to be more careful of what
the world will say of them, than what God shall say of them in the last day?

Behold, from hence we may draw both Divine and Moral Comforts in all Miseries,
that either Malice or Unkindness can bring upon us; Divine, for that no greater
Reproach, Shame, or Infamy can befall us, than did our Lord and Master for our
Sakes: Moral, for that we may see how foolish and false the Opinions of Men
are, prone always to judge well of the wicked, and hardly of the Good.

For behold, here Virtue is counted Vice, Truth Blasphemy, and Wisdom Folly.
Behold the Peace maker of the World is judged a seditious Person? the Fulfiller
of the Law, a Breaker of the Law; our Savior a Sinner, our God a Devil.
Wherefore should we murmur or repine at any Trouble that does befall us? God
handles thee no otherwise than he did his only Son? no nor so bad neither; and
it is not only a Comfort, but a Glory, to be a Partner and a Fellow-sufferer
with Christ; he delights to see in us some Representation of himself. How can
we be Members of Christ, if we will not participate with him in his Suffering?

Hereby we are farther taught, that the business of God's Glory, and the Health
of Men's Souls, howsoever base or ignominious it may seem to the Judgment of
the World, must be resolutely undertaken and performed by us, from the King
upon the Throne, to the Peasant upon the Dunghill.

Of our Savior's being spitefully used and abused.
Matthew. 26 67. Then did they spit in his Face and buffeted him; and others
smote him with the Palms of their Hands.
NOW when Jesus was brought again from Herod to Pilate, the Jews refuse to
enter into the Judgment Hall, lest they should be defiled, and thereby made
unfit to eat the Passover; so scrupulous were they in an outward Ceremony, when
their Consciences were guilty of many bloody Pollutions, especially at this
time, in using their uttermost endeavors to destroy the Lord of Life.

They had not long besore hired Judas to betray Jesus, suborned false Witnesses
against him, encouraged Officers in a most unsufferable manner to abuse him;
yet was all this covered with an outward show of Religion.

And whereas it is nothing but Justice to bring the Accusers and Accused Face
to Face, they did not; and although they charged him with Blasphemy against
God, and Treason against the Emperor, yet they persuaded Pilate to so much
Injustice, as to enquire no farther into it, but to condemn him upon their
Words, affirming, That by their Law he was worthy to die, and that if he had
not deserved Death, they would not have brought him. O cursed piece of
Injustice! But, O blessed Savior, what great Satisfaction did he make Pilate
for remaining one Night in his House, by sprinkling every part thereof where he
came, with his most precious Blood?

What can we say for our selves, so wretched as we are? How do our Sins defile
our Souls, seeing they have so defiled the pure Glass of the Majesty of the
Father, so troubled the clear Fountain of all Beauty and Delight?

O blessed be this Son of Justice, and Light of his Father's Glory, for his
being willing to receive that great Punishment that was due to us for our Sins.
Isa. 63. 2. Wherefore is thy Appar^ red, and thy Garment like him that treads
in the Wine press.

Were it not more Justice, that we the Offenders, should suffer for our own
Deserts, than that our innocent Lord should thus be tormented for them? Had it
not been fitter that our filthiness should have remained upon us, the proper
Dunghill, than ^o be cast upon him, the Purity of all Beauty and Glory?

O let us intercede with our precious Redeemer, to give us Hearts that will
yield him that Obedience and Praise that is due to him, for this his
unspeakable Love toward us: Let us beseech him not to cast us off, whom he
has created for himself, and redeemed with his most precious Blood: Let us
heartily desire, and fully resolve to be his, and to bear Fruit to no other but
to him, who has planted us, and does continually both water and purge us: Let
our Hearts be so much set upon him above all: Let our Tongues continually
praise him, our Feet follow hard after him, our Hands serve him, our
Understandings always contemplate upon him, our Memories never let him go, our
Will always delight in him, and our Souls enfolded in the Flames of his Love.

O Lord, environ us with fiery Walls, shut all the Gates thereof, set the
Cherubims to keep the way, that nothing may enter but thy self: Let us pray all
the Creatures of this World, and if they will not be entreated, we will abjure
them by virtue of that Obedience we owe to our Lord, to come not near, nor
trample within this Garden, for all is the Lord's; we will observe all to serve
him; you shall be all mere Strangers unto us; we will abandon all Creatures for
the love of him who has abandoned his Kingdom for Love toward us, for this
end were we created, and we can make no better Recompense for all his
Sufferings, but to love him only, and always to praise him.

Blessed be the Name of the most high God, who is the Comfort of our Life, the
Light of our Eyes, the End of our Desires: All his Angels and Saints, yea, all
Creatures for ever praise him, for by the Merits of his unspeakable Charity and
Humility, he bowed his back to endure the Misery that was due to us for our
Sins. He has not only freed us from all Evil, but also has given several
degrees of his Graces to us, and has taken upon him our Flesh, and gave us of
his good Spirit. He took upon him our Sins, and has given us his
Righteousness. He took upon him the Punishment that we could not avoid, and
gave us that Glory which he did possess by making himself like unto us; he has
in some degree made us like himself in the sight of his Father; and by his
suffering that which we deserved, he has procured that for us that we could
not deserve: So that all his Troubles have conduced to our Joy: His Dishonor,
our Glory; his Misery, our Merits; his Sufferings, our Satisfaction; his
Reproach has made us without Blame; his Bands has freed us, his Stripes
healed us, his Sorrows comfort us, his Travels refresh us, his Condemnation
justieth us, and by his Death, has brought us unto eternal Life.

Now when Pilate saw that Jesus looked so pitiful, he thought the sight of him
sufficient to break the blood Purposes of his Enemies; he led him forth to the
People, and said, Behold the Man! what would you have more? if it be for Malice
that you are so violent against him, behold how miserable he is! If for fear,
behold how contemptible! Faults he has done none. Certainly this showing of
Jesus does plainly show he was made a woeful Spectacle; so woeful, as Pilate did
verily believe, that the very sight of him would have moved the hardest Heart
to relent, and say, This is enough we desire no more. But their insatiate
Cruelty importuned Pilate, some with Persuasions, others with confuse Clamours
and Cries, that he might be crucified. They had the Devils mind. Nothing
satisfy but Death? no Death, but the Death of the Cross? Although our Savior
was accused of Blasohemy, of which he was guiltless, yet the Death of the Cross
is not that Punishment that is due for such a C^ime by the Law of Moses, the
Blasphemer was to be brought forth and stoned by the Congregation. Levit. 24.
14, 17. M^ses says, Bring the Blasphemer out of the Host, and let all the
Congregation stone him.

But all this was done that the Scriptures might be fulfilled: The Death of the
Cross was appointed by the Father, and accepted by the Son; it had been
prefigured and prophesied: Jesus himself had foretold more than once, That he
should be delivered by the Jews to the Gentiles to be crucified. What then
shall we say, but with the Church of Jerusalem, acknowledge, Acts 4. 27. That
Herod and Pilate, with the Gentiles and People of Israel assembled, to do
whatsoever the Hand and Counsel of God had determined. Many times before, when
the Jews went about to apprehend our Savior, they wanted Power, as John 7. 30.
and 10. 30. when upon suspicion of Blasphemy, they would have stoned him, Joh.
8. 59. when they would have thrown him headlong from the edge of an Hill, he
easily escaped them, Luke 4. 29. even in the day time in their popular Cities
environed with the thickest Throngs, because then his time was not come, and
also these were not the Deaths appointed for him: But when the time came that
the Jews should deliver him to the Gentiles to be condemned and crucified, he
voluntarily submitted himself into their Hands.

For when the time was come, he would not escape, nor the Jews could desire no
other Death for him, but the Death of the Cross. Among all that vast Multitude,
there was not any variety either in Voice or Opinion; they all agreed to take
away Life from the Son of God; they all agreed he should be crucified; they all
agreed to prefer Barabbas, who had slain the living, before him who had brought
the dead to life. If we separate the Work of God from the Work of Man, we shall
find the greatest Mercy in saving Enemies, and the greatest Cruelty and Malice
in oppressing of a Friend. This is usually two Properties of the Wicked, first
in Matters of Virtue to disagree; so many Men, so many Minds; but in Wickedness
and Mischief, being quickened by one Spirit, they all jump in one Judgment,
always concur in one Desire.

Seeing then that our Savior ^ound so little either Pity or Compassion amongst
the Jews, let us turn our Eyes upon this pitiful Object, and say to our selves,
Behold the Man, behold his B^unty, Behold his Love, and behold his Distress!

And if we find nor feel no Compassion of those Pains and Anguishes he endured,
we may assure our selves we want the true Love that we ought to have for him;
for they who love, are always truly sorrowful for the Miseries and Calamities
of those they affect. If we find not in us this Testimony of Love, let us abhor
to join in Malice with the barbarous Jews, in crying against him, Let him be
crucified; for as often as we consent to any Sin, so often we cry out, Crucify
him, crucify him.

Therefore if any evil Temptation beset us that may happen to be too strong for
us, and overcome us, let us present this Spectacle before us, and say to our
selves, Behold the Man! which Words, although they are but few and seem to
contain small Matter, yet if we examine them well, they will put a holy
Restraint upon us, that will keep us from committing any Evil against our
Savior, and fill us with Praises and Thanksgiving to him for all those Mercies
and Favors that he has purchased for us, by his suff^ring the Death of the
Cross. Let us behold the Greatness of our Sins, by the Greatness of those
Sorrows our Savior did sustain: Behold how necessary it was to satisfy for
Sin! Behold how grievous the Satisfaction was! By this we may see how
abominable Sin is, and the Severity of God's Justice against it; and we may
partly imagine what Revenge God will take upon those Sinners themselves, who
will neither acknowledge nor accept of the Benefit of Redemption, seeing he so
severely punished his most dear and innocent Son for their Sin.

O sweet Jesus! engrave these thy Miseries and Torments thou did endure, upon
our Hearts, that continuing in Contemplation upon them, we may not be so
unthankful and luke warm in our Affections toward thee, or so careless of our
own Welfa^es, as to commit that which is so painful to thee, and so hurtful and
dangerous to our selves. Remember, O Lord, what we are to thee, and thou to us,
and do not leave us, or fly from us; but let us find thee, and lay hold on
thee: We make a long Journey unto thee; we proceed slowly, we often stay by the
way, often go back; but do thou, O Lord, strengthen us; do thou guide our
stumbling Steps, and draw us with the Line of thy Love.

And because our Weaknesses are so great, that we do often fail either in
Purpose or Power to resist Sin, cease not, we beseech thee, to present thy
fresh bleeding Wounds, to the merciful Majesty of thy Father sor us, and with
that Love wherewith thou did not only suffer, but offer thy Body to be
dishonored for our sakes; vouchsafe always to interpose the same between his
Justice and us: (...) although the sight the^eof was not (...) ^o appease the
Hat^ed of thy E^ies, yet will it pacify the Wrath of thy Father; because
whatsoever thou did suffer it was in obedience to his Will, to restore his
Honor, and to satisfy his Justice.

O Almighty God, behold here the Man whom thou have appointed to be a Mediator
between thee and us Sinners, even the Man in whom thou art well pleased, Matthew.
3. 27. Behold the Man! whose Righteousness will answer thy Justice, whose
Punishm^nts are sufficient to satisfy for all the Penalties of our Sins:
Behold his Humility, behold his Obedience, ^hold his Satisfaction! O that his
Suff^rings were balanced against our Sins! Certainly they would so far exceed
both in weight and worth, that thou shou^ in Justice rather pou^ forth thy
Mercies upon us, for the one, than to hold them from us by thy ^pleasure (...)
the other: O most just and merci^ God, let this bruised Body be always in thy
heavenly fight: Fix thy E^ upon his Merits, and have Mercy (...) on us for his
sake; graciously grant us not only pardon for all our Sins, but participation
of his Righteousness, that in the Purity thereof we may be justified in the
last Day.

How our Savior was condemned, and led to the place of Execution.
Matthew. 27. 22, 22. Pilate says unto them, What shall I then do unto Jesus,
which is called Christ? They all said unto him, Let him be crucified. And the
Governor said, What evil has he done? But they cried out the more, saying,
let him be crucified.
NOW although Pilate had openly declared, That Christ was innocent, and also
that he had Authority to acquit him, yet gave way either to the Favor or Fury
of the Jews, rather than to Justice, he pronounced Sentence of death against
him, and delivered him to his cruel and merciless Enemies: O unjust President!
by thy own Judgment, thy Judgment was unjust, for thou gave Sentence of death
against him, whom thrice before thou had pronounced Innocent. Certainly in
thee, O President, this was the greatest piece of Injustice thou could
possibly have committed; but it was a just Sentence of the High President of
Heaven, before whom all the Sins of the World stand in naked view; and who will
not suffer one of them to pass unpunished: therefore because the whole World
was not able to make satisfaction for one Sin, he drew the Sword of his
Justice, and smote therewith his Innocent Son, who only was able of all Men,
both to bear and to break his Wrath off from Sinners for Sin. But O just Judge!
thou art never stirred to Wrath but by Sin; thou art never very wrath but with
great Sins. At this time thy Wrath was very great, and thou did grievously
smite thy only Son; but in him thou could find no Sin at all.

What! did thou not only release Offenders, but with Caiaphas the
High Priest, cause the Innocent, without cause, to be smitten? And is it not
more against the Law of Justice, to condemn the Innocent, than to discharge and
acquit the Guilty? How then may we count it Justice, which does not only
release Offenders, but also punishes the Innocent? O Light! which had decreed
this Mystery in thy holy Counsel from the beginning, open thou our
Understandings, break off the Mistiness from our Minds, that we may plainly see
and understand this great Work of Justice and of Mercy, which is more admirable
than all thy wonderful Works besides.

Certainly he is not unjustly charged, although he owes nothing from himself,
that undertaketh another Man's Debt; nor does the Judge do any more wrong in
giving Sentence against a voluntary Surety, than if he gave it against the
principal Debtor. It is pity to see a Man pay that which he never had any thing
for; but if he will submit himself to be a Surety, and in kindness rep^sent the
Person of the Debtor, Justice must have her Course against him. It is pity to
see a harmless Lamb lie bleeding to Death; but if it be appointed sor a
Sacrifice, it is the Nature of a Sac^ifice to be so used. Even so, althoug^ ou^
S^our was without ^in in himself, (...) (...) (...) ^ty and Sacrifice, he did
j^ly ^ffer for the Sins of others: Although by Innocence he was free, yet b^
Love he became entangled in Debt. For his own Innocence God was well pleased
with him, but for our Impurities, he justly gave way to his Wrath against him:
He was justly charged, not with that which he had done, but for that which he
was pleased to undertake: We in justice should have been smitten with these
Sorrows: This blow in justice was bent against us, but he in love stepped between
the Blow and us, and took the full weight of it upon himself, Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6.
He took upon him our Infirmities, and bare our Sorrows; He was wounded for ^ur
Iniquities, and broken for ^ur Transgressions; The chastisement of our Peace
was laid upon him, and with his Stripes were we healed. All we, as Sheep, were
gone astray every Man to his own way; and the Lord has laid upon him the
Iniquity of us all.

So then it was his Love, and his Father's Justice that cast him into these
Extremities; Love entreated that Sinners might be saved; and Justice exacted
that Sin might be punished: To satisfy both which Suits, the mean was found
that one unspotted Innocent not subject to Death, and yet willing to die? Who
was without Sin, and yet able to make satisfaction for Sin, should thus ^ruelly
suffer for all Offenders.

And it may be, O innocent Lord, this might be one secret Cause why Barabbas,
although a villainous and great Offender, yet he bare no Man's Sin but his own:
but thou wast charged with all the Sins of the World.

This also might be a great cause of thy great silence, that neither the Malice
of thy Accusers, nor Falsehood of Witnesses, nor Injury of Officers, nor Cruelty
or Partiality of Judges, were able to break it.

Thy Innocence needed no Defense, but our Guiltiness could not possibly be
defended.

Thy Innocence was well enough known to thy Enemies; our Guiltiness was too
well known to thee; therefore being now charged with the Sins of the whole
World, and being appointed by thy Father's Justice, and in thy own Love
submitting thy self to suffer, and make satisfaction for all Men's Sins; thou
did with holy Job 32. 37. Lay thy Finger upon thy Mouth.

Not because thou wast not justly provoked to reply by many Indignities, in
regard of thy self: but in regard of us, nothing could justly be said, there
was no place for denial, none for desence and therefore with a magnanimous
silence, thou endurest all as was prophesied of thee by the Prophet Isaiah,
Chap. 53. 7. He was oppressed and afflicted; He opened not his Mouth, He was
brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter; and as a Sheep before her Shearers is dumb,
so he opened not his Mouth.

O most blessed, O more than most p^ecious silence of our Savior! which has
by this silence not only opened our Mou^hs to speak, but to cry out with a loud
Voice, and full Assurance, Abb^ Father.

O blessed Savior, Our Offenses have stopped thy Mouth, but thy Innocence has
opened ours: In regard of our Offenses, thou have nothing to say; but with
regard to thy Innocence, we may cheerfully say, Father, What have thou to say
to us? Thy innocent Son has not only made full Satisfaction for our Offe^, but
(...) ^arted of his innocence to (...); (...) (...) (...) only made us
unpunishable by his (...), but with his innocenc^ (...) us honourabe before
thee (...) ^iful Father, behold what Ad^m de ser^ed, and be^old what my Savior
has done: Adam rebelled against thy Maje sty, both as rhou a^ God from
everlasting, and as thou art Creator and Lord o^ all the World, over which he
aspired to be absolure Master.

For the first our Savior was condemned of Divine Treason, namely of Blasphemy
against God, by Caiaphas the High Priest, the chief Judge of Religious Affairs;
who as he did bear a Figure of Christ in this World, should above all Men have
known him, and declared him to others.

Secondly, he was condemned of Human Treason, namely, Rebellion against the
Emperor, by Pilate, a President of the greatest Monarch in the World. Seeing
therefore he has been condemned for us in High Treason, both against God and
Man; seeing he has endured the Punishment for all our Rebellions, What have we
any further to answer? His Obedience has made Satisfaction for our riotous
Rebellion: By his Condemnation are we acquitted; his Condemnation at a Tribunal
on Earth, has acquitted us before thy Tribunal in Heaven: His Sufferings are a
sufficient Discharge between us and thy Justice; and his Love is a sufficient
Discharge between his Sufferings and us, because his Love ^eh nothing for all
hi^ Sufferings, but only that we love him again.

O what an unspeakable Obligation is this! not only to love our S^iour, but to
love him above and before all: one would think it were impossible to do any
otherwise th^n to love him (...) (...) Glory and Majesty to suffer so much
^sery, to save us from e^l Dam^tion.

O good Jesus! O Health of our Souls! have Mercy upon ^s, we beseech thee, and
help us to strike this Fire within our Hearts; let our Souls be satisfied with
thy sacred Love.

Thou art, O Lord, our (...), out last End, the Mark ^hether we aim, the Po^t
whereto we sa^, the Ferm, the R^t of all our Desires. Wherefore then do we not
love: wherefore do we not desire thee with that ardency wherewith all Creatures
do love and desire the place of their Rest?

The Fire and the Air do overthrow Mountains, rend up Rocks, shake the whole
Earth, to break forth to their Natural Places: wherefore do not we break
through all Impediments, all Hindrances, and leave all Creatures to come to
thee, who art the only place both of our Refuge and Rest?

O our Desires, O our sweet solace, our assured st^ength, wrap our Souls in the
Flames of thy Love, that all careless coldness may be consumed thereby, possess
our Souls so inti^ely with that Divine Fire, that we may have no sense of any
worldly things.

Most Sweet, Loving, Beautiful, Noble, Rich, Wise, Glorious, and worthy to be
both loved and adored! O life of our Soul, who did die to give us Life, who
did die to kill death, mortify us wholly, even our Wills, and all our evil
Inclinations, and whatsoever is ours within us: Then revive us again in thy
lively Love, by uniting all the Faculties of our Souls unto thee, and making
them obedient to thy Will. Seeing we have so rich a Treasure, so liberal a
Distributer of the same; how is it possible we should not rise in Hope? Justice
has sound out a way to strike the Innocent, and cannot Mercy find a means to
save the Guilty? Assuredly yes; for it is a greater Miracle that God should be
condemned and crucified, than that Man should be acquitted and live.

If therefore we have the greater, we have no cause to sear the less: for
Justice has executed her Severity upon the Innocent, and Mercy will show her
Favor upon Offenders.

Yea, if it was Justice that the Innocent should be condemned and executed, for
to make Satisfaction for Sin, it is Justice also, that the Offenders for whom
he suffered, should be discharged from that Debt, that the voluntary Surety
has fully paid: Therefore although Grace is not due to a Sinner, as a Sinner,
yet it is due to him as he is redeemed. It is Mercy that a Sinner should be
saved in respect of the Sinner, but it is Justice in respect of Christ, the
Just was handled as a Sinner, that Sinners might be accepted of as just; for it
is not agreeable to Justice, that one Offense should be twice punished. H^ has
joined, he has united himself to us. As he cannot be condemned again, so
cannot we likewise be condemned, except we break Union, and wilfully fall from
him.

O let us admire, love and adore this great Love of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
then we shall never break Union with him, or fall from him, but be in^allibly
saved by him.

The Sentence of Death being given forth against Jesus, they laid that heavy
Tree upon his Shoulders, that had been unmercisully battered with Whips:
tor^enting him not only with the Sight, but the Weight of that which was
appointed to be the Instrument of his (...): Which painful Burden, with ^he
sull Weight of all our Sins, he refused (...) to take upon him, but went on his
way with great Ala^ity, both in Love toward us, and in Obedience to satisfy
his Father's Justice, as a true Isaac, bearing the Wood for the Sacrificing of
himself.

But whither does our Lord go? What has he to do upon this stinking Hill of
Calvary, which being a place of common Execution, is tainted with pu^rified
Bodies? To be sure he will find there no sick Persons to cure, no Devils to
cast out, no Temples wherein to teach; but there he will find Dead to raise,
and Sinners to forgive, there he will find many scattered Souls of executed
Offenders, which expect his coming, which as the true Elizeus, thy dead Body
should restore them to Life?

What should all this mean, that our Savior has not only made choice of an
infamous Death, but of an infamous Place; the Place was infamous, but the Death
was accursed; for cursed is every one that hangs on a Tree: It did not
satisfy his Love to die for us, but he must die the most accu^sed, death to
assure us thereby, that he had delivered us from the Malediction of the Law.

Certainly our Savior's Death contains many Mysteries. It is not enough for
us to say, that he died for us, but we are further to consider how ye would
die; which was by the ignominious death of the Cross: with whom also? even with
Malefactors: When? in the principal strength and beauty of his Age: In what
Year? in the great Year of Jubilee: Upon what Day? at the great Solemnity of
the Passover, even when they did celebrate the Figure of him: In what place? on
the Mount of Calvary, only made glorious by his Death.

He was neither privily made away, nor tumultuously slain; he dyed not in a
Corner that dyed for all the World; he was condemned in the public place of
Judgment, and suffered upon the common place of Execution: upon a Day and a
Year of the grea^est Solemnity that could be. God set him upon the Stage of the
Wo^ld, to declare as well his Fury against Sin, as his Love and Mercy toward
Sinners.

O glorious Calvary! where the Prince of Light did encounter and overcome the
Prince of Darkness, where at one instant our Life for a time ended; and our
Death did for ever dye: Therefore let us not only seek our Savior in the
Temple, but upon Mount Calvary; for in the Temple he scourged Sinners; but upon
the Mount he died for them, upon that he opened his Arms to embrace them.

It was objected against him, that he was a Friend to Publicans and Sinners:
True, he was a true Friend to them indeed, but his Friendship did never more
plainly appear than in this Action, and upon this place; in this place he was
most friendly to Sinners: In Heaven he is giorious: In Hell furious: In the
World mavelous; but upon Mount Calvary he was merciful and gracious; and
without his Mercy upon Mount Calvary, we could never enjoy his Glory in Heaven.

Well then, let our Souls accompany our blessed Sav^our in this painful
Passage, toward this place of his Combat; also bow our selves under his Cross;
not upon necessity and constraint, as did Simon Cyrenius, for nothing is more
grievous to serve or be served by Constraint; but let us do it cheerfully and
freely, which will be best accepted by him. For although he can command us as
Slaves, yet will he have us entreated as Sons. Let us not be ashamed to stoop
under Christ's Cross; for he has now taken away both the Infamy and the Curse
of the Cross; he has made the Cross a Tribunal, a Throne of Judgment; be not
ashamed of that Name which was a Reproach among the Romans, as Gibbet-bearer,
or Cross-carrier; because Malefactors used to bear their own Crosses. Our
Savior has made this Action not only unblameable, but honorable, and in some
degree necessary to us; and take this Advice, howsoever his Body was enfeebled,
partly with watching and Injuries all the Night before, and partly with
Cruelties all that Morning; howsoever we see him charged with a Massy Cross,
whereof Simon Cyrenius did bear up that end that dragged behind him: We see him
also charged with a more ponderous Load, namely, the full R^ge and Fury of
God's Wrath against Sin, which no Creature could help him to bear, had he not
been su^ained by his Almighty D^ty? howsoever, when we see him either burdened
or ^ied, let us cast our Sins upon him; for woe be unto us, if when they nail
him to the Cross, they nail not our Offenses with him: Assuredly, unless our
Sins are crucified with him; we shall never be raised to Life by him; sear not
that he will shrink from them, or shake them off; for he has manifestly
declared both his Courage and his Care: His Courage appears in that he forbad
the Women to weep for him; he manifested his Care in showing himself more
sensible of their Calamities than his own.

But stay let us consider, and run not so fast by so high a Mystery: What new
thing is this? Our Savior would not speak one Word to Herod, nor make Pilate
any Answer, although he was urged to it; but without Request he turned his Face,
and spoke to them that wept after him.

Herod questioned upon Curiosity, and Pilate by way of Authority; but the
Daughters of Sion wept out of pure pity, and therefore the Words of the one
reached no farther than his Ears, but the Lukewarm Drops of the other pierced
his Heart: He takes pity upon those that take pity upon others: he values the
Tears of the Pitiful, much more than the Words of the Mighty; for which cause
he did not only turn and speak to those weeping Women, but did seem more
sensible of their Tears, than his own Torments.

By this we may see which is the best way to obtain Favor of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that it is better to sue to him with force of Tears, than multitude of
Words, because Words are formed by the Tongue, but Tears commonly proceed from
the Heart, possessed either with Grief or Love: Let us use few Word, and weep
more, for this is the Language of Heaven; this the most prevailing Voice to
call upon God; Tears overcome the Invincible, appease the Omnipotent, and
torment the Devil more than Hell fire: When Tears cry to God, when he is
importuned by true Tears, he will not delay to come to comfort us, but will
grow presently familiar with us.

But O Redeemer of our Lives, wherefore is it thy pleasure that we should not
weep for thee? Thou did weep for Lazarus; thou did also weep for the Stones
and Walls of Jerusalem, and will thou not permit us to weep for thee? Do thou
make so small an account of the loss of thy Life? Shall we so little value the
shedding of thy most precious Blood? What Law of Equity or Justice is it, to
command us to love thee, and yet to forbid us to weep for thee? For how does he
love thee, that weepeth not at thy most cruel Torment? Or wherefore do thou
consent we should weep for our selves, and not for thee? Are we of greater
value than thou? And can any of us be less worthily, or more shamefully
punished?

What shall we say? Shall we with Reverence leave this high and obscure
Mystery, among many others to thy Divine Judgment? Or would thou signify to
those weeping Women, that they should not judge of thee as then they saw thee;
nor of thine Enemies, nor of themselves, according to that State wherein then
they were? Or do thou give us to understand too, that it suffices not that
we weep for thee, if we do not discern how we weep; because right Weeping
consists not in multitude, but in well placing of our Tears? Or is it thy
pleasure we should not weep for thy Death, but the Workers of thy Death?
According to which Rule, we have more cause that commit, than those that suffer
outrage and wrong: Or would thou have us to understand, that our Life should
be a long Martyrdom, a continual crucifying of our selves, and that we may have
more reason to show Compassion to the Wicked while they live, than the Good
when they die? For it is better to die, than to live amongst wicked Men,
because in Death there is but one bitter Morsel to swallow, but the Society of
the Wicked is a continual Torment.

Or, Lastly, Did thou mean that we should not weep for thee, in compassion to
our selves, because our Sins are so great, that we have time little enough to
lament for them? And as thou art grieved at our Sins more than thy own
Sufferings, so thou take greater pleasure that we let fall Tears for them,
than for thee; for if we should not bewail our Sins, thy suffering for us will
little avail us.

First therefore we must weep in compassion to our selves, and then for thy
Passion: We must acknowledge our Offenses first, and then be much agrieved for
thy Wounds: for if thou had suffered for thy self, it should have been our
Duty to weep only for thee; but since thou did suffer for our Sins, it is
most convenient that we should pour forth Tears principally for them.

However it is, forbid us not, O good Jesu! Forbid us not, we beseech thee, to
weep for thee, for if thou do, with Tears we will entreat thee that we may
weep.

We will entreat thee rather not to weep for the traitorous City Jerusalem,
than not to suffer us to weep for thee. O Lord of all Life! Do not only permit,
but enable us to weep, and accept our Praises watered with our Tears.

With bended Knees, and with all our Hearts, swallowed up with a true Sense of
our own Unworthiness, and with all Fear and Reve^ence, we weep and worthless
Worms, prostrate our selves before thee, O Lord Jesus Christ, and give unto
thee most humble Thanks for thy exceeding Mercy and Love toward us. What have
we, Lord, that we have not received from thee? For thou art All, our Creator,
Redeemer, Sanctifier, and Glorifier; for thou have given to us both the State
of Nature and of Grace, and has also prepared for us the state of Glory; and
because to this high End many Means are required, of thy infinite Goodness thou
art unto us as well the Means as the End; thou art our Defender, our Keeper,
our Governor, the merciful Scourge of our Sins, the Curer of our Infirmities,
the Instructor of our Ignorance, the Director of our Knowledge and Power; thou
sustainest, thou stirrest, thou orderest and helpest us in all our good
Endeavors: Thou art our Lord and our God, even all the Goodness that we have,
and all that we can expect.

How our Savior was crucified.
Matthew. xxvii. 35. And they crucified him, and parted his Garments, casting
Lots; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet. They parted
my Garments amongst them, and upon my Vesture did they cast Lots.
WHen he came to Mount Calvary, there was the bloody Banner displayed, there
planted he the Tree of Life, the Fruit thereof expelled the Poison which the
Fruit of the forbidden Tree had wrought, Genesis 28. 12. And he dreamed, and
behold a Ladder set upon the Earth, and behold the Angel of God ascending and
descending on it. Then pitched he the Ladder, which Jacob saw but in a Vision,
the top whereof reached up to Heaven, whereupon not only the Angels go up and
down with our Prayers unto God, and his Mercies unto us, but God himself
descended to Man, and Man ascended up to God.

And first, to make his Death the more reproachful, they stripped him of all
his Garments, which the Soldiers cast Lots for; yet although the Law commanded
that Malefactors should be crucified, yet it did not command they should be
crucified naked.

Wherefore then, O good Jesus, was this Extremity used against thee? Were thy
Executioners so covetous as to enjoy thy Apparel, or were they so cruel to
increase thy Shame? Or would thou testify thy Love, in that thou would
not be exempted from any Ignominy we had deserved; and in that thou did
discover thy naked Flesh, and not hide any part of thy Body from us, as before
it had been covered with Figures and Ceremonies as with a Veil: When Adam had
sinned, he would have hid himself from the Presence of God, because he was
naked, being then attached with Impurity of Soul, as well as Obscenity of Body,
which are the chief Causes of Shame; but our Second Adam took both this Sin and
this Shame upon his naked Body, to carry them to the Cross, and to crucify
them with him.

Assuredly, O our Salvation! howsoever thy Body was naked of Apparel, it was
loaded with our Sins, as thy Apostle St. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2. 24. He bare our
Sins in his Body on the Cross. For who could have violated thy Holy Members, if
thy Father had not found our Offenses in them; if he had not found this
Accusation against thee, This Man receives Sinners, and harbors
Malefactors? Did thou not know, O our Redeemer! that in whose Hands the Thest
is found, he must be answerable for the same? Should not the Father handle thee
as a Sinner, seeing he finds thee so charged with Sins? The Justice of thy
Father finds all our Sins upon thy Body, executed upon thee, and crucified
them and thee together.

Hereby thou have given us Example, First, to be merciful toward the Needy,
seeing that out of Compassion to us, thou had no Pity upon thy self, but were
clothed with our Sins, and our Shame, to clothe us with thy Innocence and
Glory.

Secondly, To moderate our Desires in the vain, either Bravery, or Glory of
this World, the Bellows of Pride and of Presumption, which do not only clog but
quench the Devotion of our Spirits, even as a Tree by having many superfluous
Branches, becomes less fruitful; and as a Lamp which with a little Oil is
cherished, but choked with much: For thou came into the World to encounter
their principal Evils, Pride, Avarice and Riot, which proceed from the love of
three things, as Honor, Riches, and Pleasure, all which are Branches of one
Stock, namely, the love of our selves, which is the universal Root of all Sins;
from these Branches, all forbidden Fruit, all the Choke Pears of this Life are
gathered. Against these, thy Lise, Doctrine, and Death did chiefly tend. Then
they stretched his naked Body upon the hard Deathbed of the Cross, and fastened
it thereto with blunt and rough Nails driven through his Hands, and through hi^
Feet, out of which Wounds issued golden Streams, Zacb 11. Like the four Rivers
o^ the Garden of Eden, to water and fructif^ the whole World.

And with such Rage did the murde^ous Jews hunt and thirst after the Blood of
Jesus, that within the space of three Hours, after they had brought him to
Pilate, he was accused, condemned, scourged, despitefully used, and lastly,
fastened to the Cross.

Then they raised him up between two Thieves, and placed him in open view, to
be tormented with a cruel ^ingering Death, the whole Weight of his Body bearing
downwards, and rending wider the Wounds of his Hands and Feet, which by the
Tenderness of the Sinews, are the most sensible Parts of the whole Body. Having
also to encounter with he World, and the Devil, who is the Prince of the World,
with Death also and with Sin, which is the Cause of Death. Alas! how far is the
Madness of the World? how far is the Love and Liberty of Christ extended? Was
God thus angry against Sin? Would ^o other Satisfaction se^ve? Was the Ju^tice
of God so rigorous? Was the Re^emption of Man so preciou^? One Diso^edience was
sufficient ^osed they Man^nd; and were all these ^hese ^equisite or their
Redemption? (...), Lord; for Experience teaches us, That it more easy to
ruinate than to repair One Fire brand is sufficient to destroy a whole City,
which cannot without much Time, Toil and Cost, be repaired O most righteous and
upright Judge how merciful were thou toward Sinners and how severe against thy
own Son: He was born in great Baseness; the World no sooner received him, but
i^ persecuted him, and chased him into foreign Countries.

As his Body grew, so increased h^ Burden both of Labors and Wants, u^til in
the end he was betrayed to h^ Enemies, by one of those that were h^ Followers.
Is any thing more admirab^ than this? Liberty was sold, Liberali^ tied,
Innocence accused, Justice condemned, and Life executed! Is any thi^ more
admirable? The Wisdom of t^ Father was derided, his Power beat and bound, his
Beauty defiled, his Gl^ry with Reproaches and Reproofs obs^red. Is any thing
yet more admirabl^ God (...) (...), God was scourg^ God (...) (...) to the
Cross, and set to the (...) show and shame of World. What shall I say? God in
his Humanity died. Stay, O our Souls, or we are not able to step any father,
H^b. 1. 3. Lord, I heard thy Words, and was afraid; I saw thy Works, and my
Bowels were troubled; I was amazed, and my Lips did shake.

Certainly our weak Faculties are unable to comprehend this great Mystery: They
can never reach this boundless Height, they can never fathom this bottomless
Depth; we may coldly speak of it, and drowsily affect it, but Principalities
and Powers stand astonished at it^ Therefore let us list up our heavy and and
dull Souls after him, even after the Man of Grief, Isa 53. But he was wounded
for our Transgressions; he was crucifi^d for our Iniquities; the Chastisernert
of our Peace was upon him; by his Stripes we are healed.

But, O King of Glory! what h^dst thou deserved? what hadi^ thou done? Pilate
could find in thee no Cause of Death, but only the abundance ofthy Goodness and
Love; for it was^our Sins that thus distressed thee: ^hese Nails, these Whips,
these S^reams of Blood, are perpetual Monuments of our wicked Lives: Pilate,
Caiaphas, and all the rest, either thy Judges or Tormentors, whom we charge
with this cursed Cruelty toward thee, were only secondary and instrumental
Causes; we are the principal Cause of all thy Troubles and Afflictions, we
cannot shift it to any other, but say every one to himself as the Prophet
Nathan said to David, thou art the Man: I am the Man; I am he that did thus
afflict thee; we have committed the Offense, and thou would bear the
Punishment. We have surfeited our selves with Sin, and thou would take the
bitter Potion to purge us. Thou did fast for us in the Wilderness, thou did
sweat for us in the Garden, thou did bleed for us upon the Cross; so thy Head
underwent the Cure for the Members.

O then that our Heads were but Fountains of Tears, that we might therewith
wash the Wounds, und bathe the Bruises that our Sins have made.

O Lord, let us worship and adore thee, for thy Loving Kindness is very great;
let us praise thy Holy Name and give unto thee hearty Thanks, because thou have
so loved us, as with thy most precious Blood to wash away all our Sins, and
reconcile us again to thy Father's Favors: Blessed art thou therefore for
ever, who art the Reconciler, the Redeemer, and Savior of Mankind, the
Vanq^isher of Hell and of the Devil, the Give^ of Life, the Destroyer of Death.
What does stay our Hearts, O Lord, that they run not unto thee? Is any Clog so
heavy, any Chain so strong, that, can either hold or hinder us from hastening
unto thee? If all the things of this World are nothing but a Flower, fresh to
Day, and dead and gone to Morrow; shall such light Matters as any thing this
World can afford in comparison of thee, keep us from coming to thee? No, Lord:
Can a small weak Wind stay a heavy Stone in the Air from falling to its natural
Place? Shall the light Chaff of this World (for all is no more) stop our coming
to thee, who art our last End, our perfect Felicity, the true Rest and Center
of our Souls? No.

Come unto him all hungry and thirsty Souls, this is the handful of Meal, 1
Kings, 17. and the little Oil of the Widow of Sarepta, which will never waste;
this is the mystical Rock which Moses struck with his Rod in the Wilderness,
Exodus 17. 6. out of which gushed forth Rivers of Waters of Life; all you that
dislike your sinful Birth, may be born again, John 14. 4. Come all afflicted
Consciences; this is the good Samaritan, who will pour Oil and Wine into your
Wounds, Luke 10. 34. Come all you that are oppressed with Poverty, bring hither
your empty Vessels, 2 Kings 4. This is the Pot of Oil of the Widow that came to
Elizeus, wherewith, and by no other means, you may pay your Debts. Be not
discouraged because it is little, the Virtue thereof is great; it will never
cease running, as long as there is any Vessel to fill. Come all ye that desire
to be at Peace with God, this is the perfect Peace Offering; this is the sweet
Sacrifice, whose Blood cries not for Vengeance, as did the Blood of Abel, but
cries for Pardon for all Offenders. This is the Gate through which we must
pass, if we go into Heaven; this is the Ark whereinto we must enter, if we will
be saved; this is the Palace of Peace, Psalm. 132. 14. This is my resting Place
for ever and ever; here will I dwell; for I have a delight herein.

How our Savior was mocked, and reviled; and how he prayed for his Enemies.
Matt. 27. 39. And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their Heads.
AFTER they had thus cruelly crucified Jesus, the Highpriests, with the
Scribes, Elders, and Pharisees, and after them the Multitudes: so prevalent are
the Examples of great Men, that also the Soldiers tormented him, and one of the
Thieves that suffered with him, reviled and blasphemed him, disgracing the
Doctrine he had taught; one upbraids him and says, Thou that destroy the
Temple, and buildest it again in three Days, save thy self. Another bid him
come down from the Cross, and they would believe him. Another cries, He saved
others, himself he cannot save. Another, He trusted in God, let him deliver him
if he will have him; for he said, I am the Son of God. He that suffered for
all, had all against him, and among all that great Multitude that at that time
was at Jerusalem, there was not one who would openly avow Jesus to be the
Christ; whereby our Lord Jesus would show to us, That our Redemption is his
singular Mercy and Grace; for there was not one but what made himself unworthy
of it, some for Malice persecuting, others for Fear disowning, the rest not
regarding of him, as thinking that which concerned them most, concerned them
nothing at all: And it was a Mystery that our Savior was condemned by the
Jews, and afterward by the Gentiles; That he was delivered by the Jews to the
Gentiles; that he was pursued to Death by the one and by the other, who died
indifferently for them both.

Go to, go to, ye base Children of the Synagogue, mock on, Leave you have in
regard to us; double your Malice in Revilings if you please; you do us greater
Kindness thereby than you are sensible of; for look, how fast his Infamy does
grow, so fast does our Shame decrease. Whatsoever will do us good he has
imparted to us, and has taken to himself whatsoever might do us harm. But in
regard of your selves, O ye stiff-necked Jews! it had been better your Tongues
had been torn out of your Throats, than they should have been thus impiously
employed; all your insulting is but like the putting of a red hot Iron into
cold Water, to make a great Noise to extinguish your selves: For since you have
disavowed the God of your Fathers, and have said, you would have no King but
Caesar; since you have said, His Blood be upon us, and upon our Children; since
you have maliciously taken away his Life, and reproached his Death, your Walls
have been thrown down, your Temple burnt, your Kingdom ruined, your selves
either slain or captivated, or chased into strange Countries, where you have
been h^ted and oppressed, and never suffer to knit into one Body again; which
Curse shall be upon you to the end of the World. As you have quitted him, and
delivered him to the Gentiles, so has he ever since discharged you, and
planted his Church, especially amongst them. As you have renounced your King,
who was so plainly prophesied, and so long expected; and betaken your selves
only to Caesar, so he has delivered you into Caesar's Hands; he has given you
your Choice: but it cost you dear, it cost you the Lives of eleven hundred
thousand Persons in one Siege, besides ninety thousand, who were made Captives.
And because you did not only say, Let this Blood be upon us, but also added,
and upon our Children, you have your Desires; for your Posterity have been
dispersed and despised in all Countries, and in most Piaces evil-entreated. So
it often falls out, that the Wicked have no greater Punishment in this World,
than the Accomplishment of their own Desires. It is the common Reward of Evil
Doers, to be the Instruments of their own final Ruin.

But with respect to our Savior what can be sufficiently said? To be so
afflicted as never was any! for he was despised and evil-entreated in the midst
of all his Afflictions; in all Calamities it is some Comfort to find some
Compassion; we desire generally, if we cannot be delivered or eased, to be
pitied, to see some that condole our Misery, who wish us well, who want not
the Will, but the Power to relieve us. But these Bandogs of Satan, these
Hell Hounds had utterly put away all sense of Humanity from them: They were so
far from Pity, that they were mightily pleased and satisfied, in seeing the
unheard of Cruelty of themselves, and Calamity of our Savior. Again, a
generous Heart is more touched with Grief, to see his Enemies take pleasure in
his Death, than to endure it; yea, oftentimes a free and noble Spirit takes
not his Death from his Enemies so unkindly, as one spiteful and abu^ve Word.
Again, these Injuries and Despites were so much more sensib^e to the Son of
God, by how much more than others he deserved the contrary. For in all our
Calamities, it does much ease the pain we endure, when we compare it with the
Fault we have committed: But because our Savior could compare these Contempts
that were put upon him, not only with his Faults, nor his Innocence only, but
with his innumerable and inestimable Deserts, he did the more grieve at them,
or rather at the Malice from whence they did proceed. And further, his Love was
so great for the Salvation of Men's Souls, that his Torments were not so
grievous to him, as to see that they did his Tormentors no good: It was worse
than Death to him, to see his Executioners would make no profit of his Death:
even as a loving Friend esteems less his Labor for another, than to find it
unprofitable and not accepted; or as a good Mother grieveth more at the
ung^ateful and ungracious Behavior of her Child, than at the Travails she
endured at its Birth.

But O impudent and audacious Jews! wherefore did you misreport what Jesus had
said? A thing well spoken, may easily be corrupted by Report: Jesus did never
say, I will destroy, but, destroy you this Temple. He said not, I will build
it; but, I will raise it in three days; not meaning your material Temple; but
his own Body, John 2. 9. which was indeed the true Temple of God; not in a
Figure, but really and personally: Because in him dwells the fullness of the
Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9.

And was it not sufficient for you to blaspheme Jesus, but must you st^etch out
your Throats into high and horrid Blasphemy against the most High? He trusted
in God, let him deliv^r him, if he favors him. What! do you think God was
not able to deliver him out of your Hands? Or must he deliver whom you please,
or when you please, or after what manner you will prescribe? Did ever any trust
in God and was not delivered? Or did God ever finally forsake those whom he
favors? Or is delirance from temporal Calamities, an assured Sign of God's
Favor? No.

Certainly God delivers the wicked out of desperate Distress; many times he
suffers the Godly to sink under bo dily Oppressions; but this is no
concluding Argument, that he favors the one, or forsakes the other. O ye
great Doctors of the Law, that by Prosperity and Adversity judge of the Favor
or Hatred of God, tell us then, whether God loved best, Abel or Cain, Jacob or
Esau: Tell us, wherefore were not the Prophets delivered from Death, who were
murdered by your Fathers, and whose Sepulchers you did build. If such
Deliverances be an infallible Argument both of favor from God and trust in
him, verily the Judgments of God are not only secret and unsearchable, but for
the most part counterpoint to that which the natural sense of Man would
prescribe. Temporal Occurrences may go and come, we may flourish, or we may
wither in this World, as God in Mercy or Judgment may see best for us: But
nothing makes a Man miserable or happy, but that which is eternal.

O crucified Jesus on the Cross! we love thee on the Cross, we adore thee on
the Cross, we believe in thee, who upon the Cross did give thy self to Death
for us; what has a Man more than Riches, Honor and Life? all which thou did
bestow upon the Cross to redeem us: For thou who di^st create all things, did
hang naked upon the Cross; thou who thought it not Robbe^y to be equal with
God, wast numbered with Malefactors; thou who at the Lord of Life, did suffer
a most shameful Death; and that we may not fall short of this great Benefit,
that thy precious Blood be not unprofitably shed for us, we prostrate our
unworthy Souls, and cry unto thee, not as the Jews did, to come down from the
Cross, but, which is more, to raise us up, and fasten us unto thee; for they
whom thou love, are known by nothing more than by taking part with thee in
thy Passion; not to save thee, but to save our selves.

Save us, Lord, from our Sins, save us from the Power of all our Spi^itual
Enemies, from the Decei's of this wicked World, save us from the flattering
force of our own Appeti^es, which is the mightiest and basest Tyrant we have to
deal with, defend the Dignity and Glory of our Souls, from being Slaves-to our
sensual Lusts, that we be not captivated to the false Pleasures of this Life.
Deliver us from variety of worldly Desires, from vain Hope, from vain Fear.
Above all, deliver us from thy Wrath, and from thy Curse, and from the
inseparable Companion thereof, eternal Death. Let some small Drops of thy most
precious Blood distill into our Souls, that we may present it to thy Father in
full satisfaction for all our Sins. Give unto us the full Fruit of thy Death,
Grace here, and Glory hereafter.

O Lord Jesus! O the Salvation of our Souls! behold we come to thee, as we are
poor vile Creatures; we make bold to approach to the Rivers of thy Mercy, to
the sweet Streams of thy Grace, to the true Son of thy Justice, whose Beams are
spread over the whole World, and gives great Light to all those who do not
wilfully shut their Eyes. Behold we prostrate our unworthy Souls at thy Feet;
we do not revile, but we praise and ado^e thee; we do not mock, but we mourn at
thy Passion. O thou who were pitiful to thy Enemies, be not hard to thy
Supplicants, thou who did pray for them that reproached thee, pray for us
that pray unto thee; lift up thy Voice unto thy Father for us, and cease not
till he has forgiven us.

Of our Savior's pardoning the Thief, his tasting of Vinegar; how he cried to
his Father.
Luke 23. 43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day shall
thou be with me in Paradise.
WE are further encouraged, O our Redeemer! to crave not thy Prayer only, but
also thy Pardon, by Example of the Thief that died with thee; who although he
had spent his Life in all manner of Debauchery and Wickedness, yet when he
desired thee, thou did presently return answer, This Day thou shall be with
me in Paradise: O sweet Word, O Heart, nothing so tender; thy Lips are the
Honeycomb, Honey and Milk do flow from thy Tongue; thou did pray for Sinners
upon the Cross, to show thy self our Advocate: Thou did pardon Sins to show
thy self our Judge. What is this, O liberal Lo^d, how mavelous are thy
Mercies toward us! To those who mocked, reviled, and blasphemed thee, thou
made no answer; but when the Thief prayed to thee, his Petition was no sooner
made, but forthwith it was granted: Thou gave more also than he did desire;
the Thief desired thee only to remember him, and thou did give him the
Kingdom of Heaven. But when, O gracious Lord? Even that present Day. With whom?
Even with thy self; implying hereby, that the same Glory thou did enjoy, thou will give to thy Elect, for which Reason they are called Coheirs with thee,
Romans 8 27. This Glory and Felicity is perfect in thee, and from thee
distributed in measure, as from the Head to the Members.

What would thou deny us or what would thou not give unto us, if we were
to thee such Servants, as thou art unto us a Lord! Seeing thou art so bountiful
and ready to forgive such open Offenders, which although it ought not to
encourage us to defer our Repentance until the end of our Lives, because of
this Conversion of the Thief; as it was the last Work thou did in thy Life,
so it was not the least: Yet it may encourage us never to think our Sins too
great, or our time too short to obtain thy Pardon.

Come unto him then all ye that are feeble hearted, and never think you shall
be damned. See what a Lover of Men he is, how desirous of our Salvation! see
how easy to be entreated for the greatest Matters, and how ready to give his
Glory at the first Request! He seeks all Occasions, he desires nothing more
than to bestow it upon us: He forgave David his Sin upon the first
acknowledgment: He gave to the Thief his Kingdom upon the first desire. He that
is so inclinable to forgive Sins, and to give Glory, wherein can he be hard or
unkind to us? If ye will say, ye have done little Service whereby he should
hope for so high a Reward. Fear not; it suffices that you have a desire to
serve him. This is a Property of him, That he is liberal and merciful; for
which Virtues he is especially commended, not so much to regard the Work of our
Bodies as the Willingness of our Minds.

He so thirsts after the Salvation of our Souls, that he often accepts our
Purpose for Performance; it suffices many times that we are prepared in Will,
the rest he does supply by his Grace. His gracious Goodness perfecteth what we
have, and supplieth what we want.

Be not therefore affrighted at his terrible Justice, but rather comforted; let
them fear who are stubborn and flinty-hearted, who will not be converted and
come to him, who follow Vanity with all their Might, who boldly sin, and then
say, What Evil have I done? Let them tremble who are so far from calling upon
him, as they will not know him: It is dreadful for such to fall into his Hands.
But they who are smitten with Sorrow for their Sins, they who arise and return
to him, let them be encouraged with this, That he that has drawn them, will
certainly receive them.

It is not the Thief alone who was received; but let all Sinners be brought
forth, and there is not one that can be named, were he never so great, who
truly repented and was converted, but he was justified. He so loves converted
Sinners, that if it were necessary so to do, he would rather suffer death
again, than consent that one of them should be damned.

O happy Thief! how pleasant were thy Pains, how delightful was thy Death,
being assured thou should ^orthwith reign with him in Heaven, who suffered
with thee, and for thee upon Earth. The other Thief demanded of Christ to be
delivered from the Cross, and it was conditional, if thou be the Son of God; he
desired neither as he should, nor what he should: But the converted Thief
having heard him openly profess, That his Kingdom was of another World, desired
no bodily Benefit, but only to be remembered of him when he came into his
Kingdom. Pilate in his Tribunal, the People standing by, and the Thief in
Fetters, heard these Words of Jesus: But Pilate contemned him, the Multitude
mocked, and the Thief only believed in him.

Assuredly, O good Jesus, thou art a most invincible King, otherwise thy
Children could not be able to sustain their continual Combats, nor ever be
drawn out of the cruel Bondage of Satan: Nor Pilate would not have written upon
the Cross, altogether against the advice of the Jews, Jesus of Nazareth, King
of the Jews. But the same Spirit that guided Pilate to pronounce him innocent
guided him also to write this Inscription: And in truth the Hebrew Word
Messiah, and the Greek Word Christ, which signifies anointed, was the Original
of the Unction of the Hebrew King. Yet our Savior was not declared by his Name
to the Fathers at the first; to Adam and the Patriarchs he was revealed under
the Title of The Seed of the Woman: Jacob called him Sheloh; but to David this
Son was promised, under the Figure and Shadow of Sol^mon, by the Title of a
King whose Dominion has no end, 2 Samuel 7. 13. 1 Chronicles. 22. 10. Since which
time, the Glory of this King has been excellently extolled, as well in many
Psalms, as by the Prophets in all Ages. This King was manifested by the Angel
to the Virgin Mary, Luke 1. 32, 33.

The wise Men in the East were not ignorant of him; yea, many Histories do
testify, That about the time that Christ was born, a common Brute did run
throughout the Empire of Rome, and did declare, That a great Pursuivant King
should be born among the Jews; this held Herod in great Jealousy and Fear,
Matthew. 2. 3. The Apostles also did apprehend it, albeit according to the vulgar
Error, until they were otherwise instructed.

Thou art a Lilly, O blessed Savior and Redeemer, amongst many Thorns, thou
love neither Idleness nor sloathful ease: We must endure not only Labor but
Smart, if we will enjoy thee. If we will have thy Head, it is crowned with
Thorns; if thy Heart, it is pierced with a Spear; if thy Hands and Feet, they
are struck through with Nails. Thou art a Lilly amongst Thorns.

After the Troubles and Turmoils of many Years, when Christ drew nearer toward
his Death, the heavier was his Father's Hand, the weightier was his Wrath, the
more Stripes did he double upon him; in the Garden of Gethsemane he cried to
his Father, Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me: But now
feeling that which then he feared, the Storm now breaking upon him, which did
then begin to appear, he cried out again, My God, my God, why have thou
forsaken me? At both these times, what were either his Feeling or his Fears,
what the Torments of his Body, what the Anguish of his Soul, whether he did
despair, or how far his Despair did reach, it i^ dangerous to define; we know
them not we may be too adventurous to determine concerning them. The Suffering
of Christ are known only to the Hea^ that felt them; but to be altogeth^
abandoned in these Extremities, to have no Comfort afforded, no Care taken,
(...) be bereaved not only of the Help, but (...) the Pity of all, which in
some degree (...) very Man does find, seems to be the accomplishment of
Miseries.

First, He was deprived of all Earthly Comforts; for his Disciples, some
betrayed and sold him, others forsware him, all fell away and fled from him.
And as for the People among whom he lived, working many Miracles, and doing
good, they preferred Barabbas before him. It was they, who in the midst of his
miserable State, most insolently insulted over him: It was they, who when he
cried out, Eloi, Eloi, did in a base manner de i would him, saying, He calls for
Elias: It was they, who when with extreme Faintness and Pains, and by reason of
the great loss of his Blood, he did thirst, not only denied him a drop of
Water, as Abraham denied to the rich Glutton in Hell, but gave him Vinegar and
Gall to redouble his Torments.

Secondly, He was deprived of all heavenly Comforts, which is the true
Restorative in all dolorous Distress: And this was the cause of his heavy Cry;
not that his Friends, but his Father did then forsake him; not that Earth, but
that Heaven did not yield him any Comfort.

All the Punishments which the damned do endure, are commonly brought under two
Heads, viz. Pain of Sense, and Pain of Loss: Now the Pains of Sense were very
sharp, both upon the Body of our Savior, and upon his Soul; upon his Body, not
only in regard of the greatness, and baseness, and variety of his Torments, but
also in regard of the Body it self; for as it was miraculously made, so was it
of a more perfect Constitution, of a more apprehensive Sense to feel Torments,
than Bodies brought forth by an ordinary Course of Nature. The Pains of his
Soul were unspeakable, even unanswerable too. Christ remained always, during
this Combat, personally united to the Person of the Son of God, who could not
be severed from the Father and the Holy Ghost* But it received no Comfort or
Assistance for a time, to relieve it from the full Sense of God's severe
Indignation against Sin: For as a Soul is no^ essentially separated from a Body
tha^ sleeps, and yet it works not a^ when the Body is awake; otherwis^ than
to keep it in Life; so in this extreme Agony of our Savior, the Deity was not
severed from the Humane Nature; only it did not exercise the Actions, to
administer Comfort and Strength, otherwise than to support it from being
overthrown. The Heavenly Father did then forsake his innocent and only Son, and
yet was not the Union between them dissolved; he dissolved not the Union, but
withdrew his Vision, and restrained those Beams which might any way refresh the
passionate Powers of his Soul.

Many Martyrs have suffered violent and terrible Torments, which they did not
only quietly, but cheerfully endure. Will you know the Reason? They were
delivered indeed, but therewith also they were not forsaken; for the Grace of
God did administer such sweet and secret Supplies of Comfort, that they tired
their Torme^tor in bearing patiently all those Torments which merciless Tyranny
could execute or invent; but in Christ, in regard of his infinite Dignity, (for
that it is that se^teth the Sacrifice at so high a Price) the least Torment,
although only in Body, might have sufficed for redeeming many Worlds, yet would
he suffer greater Torments than can be conceived: First, to manifest thereby
his exceeding Love, in making our Redemption the more valuable: For the less he
had suffered, the less had his Love been esteemed: And also to awake us, and to
leave us inexcusable if we love him not again. Lastly, to stir us up to settle
our Assurance in our Tribulations, but most especially our Hopes upon him, when
we suffer for his sake.

O God of our Salvation! grant unto us, thy unworthy Servants, we beseech thee,
That at the Separation of our Souls from our Bodies, we may spend our last
Breath in these Words of our Savior, Father, into thy Hands I commend my
Spirit, Comfort us then with the Virtue of his Passion, which is Life to the
Dead, Pardon to the Wicked, and Glory to the Saints; that ending the last
Minute of our Lives in the midst of his Wounds, in the very depth of his Death
and Blood, we may confidently commit our Souls that thou may receive them
readily into thy Hands. Receive thy precious Son for a Ransom, and with him
receive the Souls of thy Servants whom he redeem ed; for as he died in
Obedience to thee so died he also for our Redemption. We have nothing to offer
unto thee but his Death, nothing but his Blood, the Love where with he gave us
his Blood: His Soul he has comm^ unto thee, but unto us he has given his
Blood; this is all our Treasure, this is all our assured Trust: Of this Blood
we will not return so much as one Drop unto thee, unless it be in exchange of
everlasting Life.

Of the Death of our Savior, and how they opened his Side with a Spear.
Matthew. 27. 50. Jesus, when he has cry! again with a loud Voice, y^lded up
the Ghost.
AFter, when Jesus knew that all things were performed, he cried with a loud
Voice, and bowed his Head, and gave up the Ghost; and the Sun was darkened; the
Veil of the Temple rent through the midst, John 19. 30. And the Earth did
quake, and the Stones were cloven, and the Graves did open, and many Bodies of
the Saints which slept arose, and came out of the Graves, after his
Resurrection, and appeared unto many, Luke 23. Matthew. 27. When the Centurion,
and they that were with him watching Jesus, saw the Earthquake, and the things
that were done, they feared greatly, and said, Truly this Man was the Son of
God.

What is this, O gracious Lord God! who ever saw two such Contraries combined
together! Whoever saw such Misery joined to such Might! when was so great Glory
accompanied at any time with so great Grief! Who is he that is so humble, and
yet so high! Who is so powerful, and yet so poor! He that is contemned on
Earth, is honored in Heaven; he that is fastened naked to the Cross, makes the
Earth to quake; he that died, raised the Dead to Life. O our sweet Savior!
thou did now manifestly declare who thou wast, and wherefore thou came into
the World.

The Centurion, and they that were with him, did acknowledge thee to be the Son
of God, and the Dead whom thou raisedst to Life, did testify that thou came
to overcome Death. We will make no account of the Jews scoffing at thee, seeing
the Heavens, the Earth, the Living and the Dead, did witness for thee.

And thus likewise in all the other Passages of his Life, our Savior did so
bear and behave himself, that he never did so high a Miracle, but therein his
Humanity did appear; nor did he ever so mean a Work, but his Divinity did
therein shine: All his Actions participated of both his Natures; in every thing
that he did or suffered, the Glory of the one was joined with the Humility of
the other. It was great Humility to be conceived, but it was great Glory to be
conceived by the Holy Ghost. It was great Humility to be born, but it was great
Glory to be born of a pure Virgin. It was great Humility to be born in a
Stable, but it was great Glory to be worshipped of the Wise Men. It was great
Humility to lie among Beasts; but it was great Glory to be honored by the
Angels. It was great Humility to be circumcised, but it was great Glory to be
named Savior. It was great Humility to be baptized among Sinners, but it was
great Glory that the Heavens opened, and that the Spirit visibly descended upon
him. Lastly, it was great Humility to die upon the Cross, but it was great
Glory that both Heaven and Earth were disturbed thereat: That all Creatures
adored his Death, except Man only, for whom he died.

The Sun beholding his great Creator naked, drew in his Light to cover him with
Darkness, for as our Savior was betrayed, apprehended, scorned, reviled, spit
upon, and buffeted in the Night; so it was not inconvenient that the residue of
this Work of Darkness should in Darkness be accomplished, even as he said to
the Jews, Luke 22. 52. This is your very hour and power of Darkness. But let us
consider, here are three Miracles before us: First, That this Eclipse of the
Sun happened on the Fourteenth Day of the Moon; that is, in the full Opposition
of the Sun and the Moon: Whereas natural Eclipses happen in their Conjunction,
when the Moon is directly interposed between the Sun and our Sight. It
continued the space of three Hours, whereas natural Eclipses continue not above
the fourth part of an Hour, and hardly that. It was a total Eclipse, which
never happened by the Interposition of the Moon, by reason it is so far
inferior to the Sun in magnitude.

What then shall we say, but that the Sun drew in his Light, because it should
not display so sad a Spectacle! That the Heavens hid their Beauty, and suited
themselves to their Makers State, that they covered the Body of Jesus, that was
sacrilegiously used, with Darkness as with a Veil! One Star showed the Glory of
the Lord at his Nativity; but the most glorious Star pe^formed this Service at
the time of his Death; neither was this Darkness ever better resembled, than by
the Darkness that was spread over the Land of Egypt, but now over Goshen, where
the Jews did inhabit. At this time the Land of the Jews only was darkened, and
all other Countries remained Light. And that time the true Light was only among
the Jews: since this time they have been the greatest Strangers to it. And at
the end of this Darkness, when Jesus cried with a loud Voice, and yielded up
the Ghost, the Earth trembled also, and the Rocks did rend, whereof in the Land
of Jewry, in the Kingdom of Damascus, and in the Mountains of Arabia, Monuments
and Accounts of it remain unto this Day. Therefore do not think, O ye Jews, as
his Life ended, so did his Power: He that laid down his Life, retains his
Power both in the Heavens, and upon the whole Earth; and was a less Matter to
rise again, than to suffer himself to die. You cannot say, that these things
which were done at the very Hour of his Death, were done by any ordinary means;
wherefore you must acknowledge in him Divine Majesty, or Devilish Malice in
your selves. You were maliciously bent against him indeed, but if all Men in
the World oppose and be against him, you see by what means he is able both to
declare his Glory and his Power, when no Man either durst or would open his
Mouth in his Defense. He did but utter his Voice, and Five great and terrible
Tongues did speak for him: The Sun, which is the lively Lamp of the World, the
Earth, the Rocks, the Veil of the Temple, and the Dead, when all Men were
silent; the Elements, the Stones, the Dead did speak, they all preached his
Mercies, and thundered forth his Threatenings.

O good Jesu, it was a great Voice indeed, whereat the principal Powers of
Heaven, Earth and Hell di^ sh^ke, which did astonish the Living and the Dead.
As the Cry of our Sins did reach to the Justice of thy Father, so did thy Voice
reach to his Mercy: Thou did cry with a great Voice to call the Living, and
summon the Dead; that if any should lose himself, if any would not be converted
to thee, it should not be because he was not called, but because he would not
come.

But woe be to every Soul which is not converted, which will not come; woe be
to every Soul that is not moved at this Voice, this mighty Voice. O crucified
Jesu, have Mercy upon us poor Sinners, that are prostrate before thee, and let
our humble Voices enter into thy Ears, that thy mighty Voice may sink into our
Souls. Give unto us a true Sense of these thy Sufferings, both of Compassion
(as it is reason that the Members should condole with the Head) and also of
Fear, that our Minds be not more heavy than the Earth that trembled, that our
Hearts be not more hard than the Stones that did cleave, and that our Souls be
not more fleepy than the Dead that did arise at the Power of thy Passion. O
great Redeemer of the World, if all Creatures did fear thee when hanging upon
the Cross, what will they do when thou shall come to Judgment? If thou were so
mighty in thy greatest Weakness, what will thou be in thy gre^test Glory? If
these Effects did accompany the Works of thy Mercy, and the Voice of thy Love,
where with thou did call all Men to come to thee, what will the Work of thy
Justice do, and the Voice of thy Fury, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting Fire?

We adore and admire thy Blood, thy Death, thy Burial, thy victorious
Resurrection, thy Ascension into Glory: By these we are refreshed, from these
we draw the Breath of Life, O our Savior, we desire thee only, we offer up our
selves wholly unto thee; we want nothing, we wish for nothing but only thee;
for thou alone art sufficient for us; thou art our King, our Lord, our Tutor,
our Governor, our Father, the Paradise of our Hearts, the Nest where our Souls
shall rest for ever, the Haven wherein we shall be saved, the Glass wherein we
shall behold our selves, the Staff that only stays us, the Treasure whereto
we trust. Who is so liberal as he who has given himself for so vile Creatures?
Who so loving as he, who has not spared himself for his very Enemies?

O most gracious Lord and loving Father, who despisest none that comes to thee,
but do rather help them, and accompany them, and lead them in the way,
receive our loose or lost Souls which seek after thee; raise us up by the
virtue of thy Passion, from the death of Sin, and by the same Virtue endow us
with Wisdom and Strength, that by the one we may prevent, and by the other
resist the Attempts of our most dangerous Enemies, the Flesh, the World and the
Devil: The Flesh idle and voluptuous, the World vain and curious, the Devil
subtle and malicious. Grant unto us by the same Virtue, that the Yoke of thy
Commandments may be sweet, and the Burden of thy Cross light unto us; that we
may contemn the trifling Vanitis of this World, and not weakly yield to the
Calamities or vain Pleasures of this Life, but that with unmovable Minds, we
may bear the one, and forbear the other.

All this was done against Jesus, upon the Day of the Preparation for the
Passover, according to the corrupt Tradition of the Jews, for Jesus, who most
punctually observed the Law, had eaten the Passover the Day before; and because
the Day following was an high Sabbath, and the Law had ordained, That the Body
of the Offender should not hang all Night upon the Tree, the Jews desired of
Pilate, that the crucified Bodies might not hang upon the Cross, being very
scrupulous in small Matters, but had wide and naughty Consciences in Matters of
Weight. Against Jesus they made particular Suit, that his Sepulcher should be
made sure for three Days, lest his Body might be taken away, because he had
said, that within three Days he would rise again to Life.

So they buried him in a Garden, close adjoining to the City, whereby the
Providence of God did cut off many Cavils and Doubts, which might have been
made, in case his Body had either been removed far off, or secretly buried, or
left abroad.

In this Garden Jos^ph of Arimathea, in his Li^e time had built his Tomb, which
doubtless he did, to put himself in remembrance of Death, in the v^y midst of
his Delights; but the entombing this Body of Jesus, in this Garden in the midst
of our chiefest Delights, should make us always mindful of his Death.

His Body was richly dressed to the Funeral, that the Prophecy of him might be
fulfilled, Isa. 53. 9. His Grave shall be with the Rich at his Death. And
further, to manifest the same unto us, which he spoke upon the Cross, that he
had accomplished his Charge; that the terrible Tempest of his Sufferings he had
fully bo^n; that his Honor and Estimation was then to follow.

To instruct us also, that the difference between Men and Beasts does not
determine with our Lives, but that the Dead are to have honest Respect, not
only out of particular Kindness, or of Blood; not only out of general Humanity,
engraved by the Finger of Nature in all Men, but also out of Christian Duty;
partly in regard of the many Graces imparted to the Bodies of Men in this Life,
and partly to testify our Faith of the Resurrection and Hope of Glory in the
Life to come.

And also his Body was put into a new Sepulcher, wherein no dead Body had been
laid before, to the end that his Enemies should not suspect or surmise that he
raised some other to Life, as he did the dead Body of Elizeus, and not himself.

Lastly, they stopped the Mouth of the Sepulcher with a great Stone, which
could not without great force and noise be rolled away; they sealed this Stone,
and set a Guard of their own Men at Arms about it, to make sure as they
thought, that his Body should not be taken away; but as it usually falls out,
that the greatest Enemies of the Truth, are the greatest means to advance it;
so the Seals and Guards did the more evidently seal the Resurrection of Jesus,
than all the other Circumstances besides: They did evidently declare, That he
was not carried to the Sepulcher as a Captive, but that as a Victor he pursued
Death to his Cavern and Fort, namely, the Grave: And there gave him so deadly a
Wound, that he should be no more Death, but the Entrance into Life.

But when he that would not descend from the Cross, did rise out of his Grave,
when he had broken the Chains of Death, when he was returned, with Daniel, out
of the Lion's Den, and with Jonas, out of the Whales Belly; they corrupted the
Watch to say, That whilst they slept his Disciples came and stole him away. And
this was the Accomplishment of their Malice, this did set them altogether
without excuse, this is also the nature of Sinners in a desperate degree, who
in despite of God and their Consciences, will not fear to offend; whatsoever
Sin they are not able by some color to defend, they will endeavor by another
Sin to conceal. But, O good God, how blind is Malice! What so absurd! What so
senseless, which it will not say or do, either to attain or maintain some
devi^sh Design? For if the Disciples had stolen away the Body of Jesus, to
what end should the Clothes have been left? To whom did they more properly
belong than to the Body that was enfolded in them? Is it probable, O ye
stiff-necked Jews, that any Thief would have been so religious as to have
stolen the Body and left the Clothes? Would any have been so adventurous, as
to have stayed the taking them off, and folded them together in such order,
whilst the Watch slept round about them? All Men know that Myrrh sticks as
fast as Pitch or Glue? And what Pleasure, or what leisure can we imagine the
Disciples should have to stay to pull off his Clothes, that doubtless stuck
extraordinary close, and to bear away the Body rather naked than covered?
Theft, Deceit, a guilty Conscience always is afraid, they want time, they
dispatch hastily what they go about, they have no leisure to lay things in
order; a guilty Conscience ever works in extreme Fear. Could the Disciples be
any way secure or sure, that whilst the Seals were broken, the Stone removed
from the Mouth of the Tomb, the Body uncased, the Linen folded, and orderly
disposed, that the Watch all of them should continue in sleep? Assuredly if the
Body had been stolen, the Linen and the Myrrh, being Matters not easily to be
left, and worth carrying away would never have been taken off, and left in such
order.

Your selves did see, when he was stripped at the Cross, his Apparel did so
cleave to his battered Back, by reason of the congealing of his Blood, that
they could not be pulled off without tearing away several parts of his Skin;
but look upon the myrrhy Clothes, that is of a far more cleaving Nature than
Blood, and tell us what Token of violent pulling off you did see? O assure your
selves, O ye stiff-necked Jews, that such a mangled Body could never be
unwrapped out of myrrhy Clothes in great haste, without light, or much help,
but many pieces of his sweet Skin, and bruised Flesh, would have been seen: But
what such Testimony did any of you find? Can any Man believe that you would
either omit to enquire after such Circumstances, or else conceal it, if it had
been found? In that you did take no notice hereof, your own silence has
utterly condemned you; and it is plain, that our Lord Jesus Christ, in spite of
all you Malice and devilish Actions against him, is risen from the Dead, and
now sits at the Right Hand of God the Father, from whence he shall come to
judge the World in Flames of Fire, to pour his Vengeance upon all those that
fear him not, nor call upon his Name.

We are much afraid, O good Jesu! of that strict Account wherewith we shall be
charged at that Day, we doubt we shall be able to give but a slender Reckoning,
seeing we have scarce retained it in our Memories; because so much as we love
and cherish our selves, so much do we forget thee; and it is no less a Fault
not to make Profit of thy Blood, than it was to shed it. Sweet Savior, let thy
precious Blood stream within our Souls, that all our Thoughts may be bathed in
it; let all Actions be valuable or Vile, according as they participate thereof;
let us be careful of nothing more than that we be not too careful about the
Matters of this Life; let us fear thy Judgments now, that then we may be
confident in thy Mercies. O blessed Stream! whereof one Drop is sufficient to
satisfy all our Thirst, whereof if one small Drop had fallen into Hell, the
Damned thereby might have been saved. If there were ten thousand Worlds, and
they would all embrace this Redemption, there would be enough and to spare for
them all.

FINIS.

