Pour Mounsieur de C. sur son traitte de, la politic Francoise.
Sixain,
Si donner de moyens au plus grand Roy du monde,
D'Estre Maistre absolu sur la terre and sur l'onde,
C'est marque d'un Esprit, and rare and marveilleux;
Je puis dire en d'epit de toute la critique,
Que ce traitte de Politic,
Ne fut dicte que par les dieux.
To this effect.
If that to give the Great French King in hand,
The means to sway over all, both Seas, and Land;
If this be Wit, (which none can well deny)
Then to the Teeth of all Critiques,
I Will maintain these Politiques
Are Wit, above the Sky.
Louis XIV Roy de France* et de Navarre.


THE POLITICS OF FRANCE.

By Monsieur P. H. Marquis of C.

WITH REFLECTIONS On the 4th and 5th Chapters; Wherein he Censures the Roman
Clergy, and the Hugonots; by the Sr. l'Ormegregny.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, 1691.

Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709


The Authors EPISTLE TO THE FRENCH KING.
SIR,
ALL the Nations of the Earth wait with impatience for the Oracles which Your
Majesty's high Wisdom disposes it self to Pronounce: and the whole Universe,
by submitting to the Laws which you are about to give this Kingdom, will
declare, That you alone deserve to Command all men. If the Delphique Priestess
scrupled not to style Lycurgus a God, for his having settled the Spartans in
order; what must not Fame say, when it shall publish Your Majesty's August
Name? Future ages, Sir, shall proclaim aloud what You perform in Yours; and
report the splendor of Your Heroic Virtue. Happy the People who already find
the effects of it; but a Thousand times Happy they of Your Majesty's Subjects,
whom You permit to offer at Your feet some token of their Admiration. You have
often done me the Honor to grant me this precious Favor; and I beseech with
lowest respect, that You further please to accept the Piece I now present You.
It satisfies not the greatness of my Zeal, that during the course of my Life, I
incessently speak of the Passion I have for Your Service; my Writings must
inform Posterity of it after my death; and the whole World ever know to what
degree I am,

Sir, Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Subject and
Servant, P. H. D. C.

THE PREFACE.
THE Bookseller will needs have a Preface to encourage the Sale of the Book.
Now, for my part, I think there needs no other recommendation than its Title;
for those that will not be induced to buy it, because it is French, will not
fail to have it for the sake of its Politick's; yet, if any should scruple
laying out their Money only on the Credit of the Title Page, their Scruple (I
doubt not) will be removed, when they are told that the Author of the Growth of
Popery, says; That this Book is the measure of the French Kings Designs, and
I Am sure there is none of us all that will be-grudge Two Shillings to be made
Privy to his Councels. But if neither of these things, nor the Credit it had in
its Native Language, will cause the Book to Sell, I cannot imagine how a
Preface should do it; for I know few (if any) that read the Preface of a Book
they intend not to Read also; I have known some, indeed, Read the Book, and
omit the Preface, which I doubt would be the Fate of this, should I make it
long, I shall therefore only tell you how this Scheme of the vast Designs of
the French King became Public, and so conclude. The Author was a Person bred
up under Mr. Colebert, and to show his Abilities, he writ this Treatise, and in
Manuscript presented it to the French King, which was favorably received; but
afterward, Vanity prompting him to Publish it in Print, the King looked upon him
as one that had discovered his Secrets, and turned his Favor into Frowns,
caused him to be imprisoned in the Bastile, where he continued a long time, and
was not delivered thence, but to Banishment, which, to those that read the
Preface, affords one Encouragement more to Read the Book, since it discovers a
Secret which most Men seek more after, and delight more in than Wisdom or Truth.

THE POLITICS OF France.
CHAP. I.
1. What the Politics are. 2. What their Object, End, and Means. 3. The
different sorts of Governments. 4. That Monarchy is the best.

THE Politics are the Art of Governing States. The Ancients have called 'em a
Royal and a most Divine Science, surpassing in excellency, and superior to all
others. They have allowed them the same precedence in practical Learning, which
the Metaphysics and Theology, have among the Speculative.

The means which the Politics prescribe, are comprised under the heads of an
exact Observance of Religion, a doing Justice in all cases; a providing that
the People be protected in the times of Peace and War; and a preserving the
State in a just and laudable mediocrity, by exterminating the extremes of
Poverty and of Riches.

The Politics have three principal branches: Namely, the three sorts of
regular Governments, in which Men live under the Authority of Laws.

The First is Monarchy, in which one only Prince does command for the Public
good.

The Second is Aristocracy; in which the honestest and wisest Persons, being
elected out of all the Subjects, have the Direction and Administration of
Public Affairs.

The Third is Democracy, in which all Deliberations and Orders are held, and do
pass by the Agency and Vote of the People.

The principal end to which a Democracy tends, is Liberty. That of an
Aristocracy, is Riches and Virtue. The end of a Monarchy, is, the Glory, the
Virtue, the Riches, and the Liberty of the Country.

A Tyranny, the most dangerous of all vicious and unlawful Governments, stands
in direct opposition unto Monarchy.

A Tyrant commands merely for his own Personal, not the Public Profit: A
King does the contrary.

Tyranny is destructive to the Glory, the Virtue, the Riches, and the Liberty
of the People.

An Aristocracy often falls into an Oligarchy; and this happens when a
determinate number of persons is no longer chosen out of the whole to Govern,
and the choice is made of the Rich and Noble only; not generally out of all the
Citizens.

Sometimes there rises up Oligarchy, even within Oligarchy; and this comes to
pass, when the Magistrates are chosen of the Noblest and Richest of some
preferred Families, not of all the rich Gentry.

An Aristocracy is in some sort an Oligarchy, but much better than that which
is simply such: Forasmuch as in an Aristocracy, Justice is administered to
persons of all ranks, according to desert; which in an Oligarchique State is
not done.

A well-tempered Aristocracy is of long duration, and seldom comes into the
danger of suffering any Change.

An Oligarchy, on the contrary, such as was the Government of the Decem-viri,
or Ten, at Rome, and of the Thirty at Athens, is easily corrupted. For the
persons who are in command, do frequently usurp a Sovereign Authority. Such
Usurpation is not styled a Tyranny; (for this is of one alone) but strictly a
Dynastie; that is, a Potentacy or Power, violently assumed and retained,
contrary to the disposition of the Laws. The Greeks (whose the word Dynastie
is,) do take it in this case, in an ill sense.

An Aristocracy and an Oligarchy are dissolved, when some one among the Rich,
the Noble, or the Brave, does attain to an overgrown height. Thus Caesar became
Master of Rome. The Aristocracy is also in danger, when they that Govern, come
into contempt with the multitude, or are hated by them, so that the inferiors
grow factious, and mutiny against them, as happened at Rome, when the Tribunes of
the People were first created.

The apprehensions which the more than ordinary virtue of some excellent
persons, gave the People of Greece, caused the introducing of Ostracisme among
the Athenians, and of Petalisme at Syracuse: Punishments, but glorious for such
as were condemned to them.

A Democracy likewise, sometimes, turns into an Oligarchy. And that is, when
the dregs of the ignorant people, seduced by evil Orators, (whom the Greeks
call Demagogues, or, Leaders of the People) do dispose of Affairs tumultuously,
with uproar and violence, without respect to Law or Equity. Thus the Athenians
seduced by their speakers, did put to death Aristogenes, and other Captains who
had fought in company with Thrasibulus, and gained a notable Victory upon the
Lacedomonians, their enemies.

Obligarchies are the means sometimes that People lose their liberty: and fall
into servitude. Pisistratius became Tyrant of Athens that way, and Dionysius of
the Syracusians.

There are as various Monarchies, Aristocracies, and Democracies, as there are
different manners of men. But I have discoursed all this only cursorily; and I
design not any further to engage my self in these matters, my purpose being to
speak precisely of the concerns of the French Monarchy.

There are two sorts of Monarchy, unto which all Regal Governments, of whatever
quality imaginable, are reduced; whether Elective, Hereditary, Barbarous,
Despotical, or any other.

The first of these is entitled, The Lacedemonian; in which the King has but
a limited Authority. The second Aeconomical; in which the King has a Sovereign
and Absolute power in his Kingdom, as the Father of a Family has in his house.

It Is no longer a question, Whether Monarchy be the best Government, the case
having been often debated by Politicians, and still decided for Regality. And
indeed it is of greatest Antiquity, least susceptible of change; most conform
unto the Government of GOD himself; and not only represents the Authority which
a Father exercises in his house, but it also necessarily occurs in an
Aristocracy, and in Democracy it self. For, both in the one and the other of
these States, the Sovereignty is entirely one; so that no single person can
possess any the least parcel of it. In an Aristocracy, no one of the Senators
is a Sovereign; but the whole Senate being united of one accord, is King. In a
Democracy, no one of himself has power to make the least Ordinance; the People
assembled are the Monarch. Thus every where appears an indivisible Sovereignty;
so conform to the Laws of Nature is Monarchy.

In fine, it may be said, that there never was Aristocracy, but founded upon
the corruptions and ruins of some Monarchy: moreover, that Tyranny, it is direct
contrary, is the worst of all Governments. Now from all that I have said, it
follows by a necessary consequence, That the Monarchique State is better than
any other.

CHAP. II.
1. Of the true good and happiness of States. 2. Of the true good and happiness
of a King. 3. How Felicity may be acquired.

THings reckoned under the notion of Good, are of three sorts. Corporal, as
Health, Beauty, Strength, Agility, and the like. External, which we commonly
call Goods of Fortune; as Birth, Riches, Dignities, Reputation, Friends, and
such others. The third sort are those of the Soul: these are simply and
absolutely good, that is, good of themselves; and so they can be no other but
virtue alone.

Things accounted good are no further such indeed, than as they promote our
Felicity, and bring us to it; Corporal and External things are not instruments
to effect this. But the good of the Soul is the true happiness.

Felicity is not a simple habit; otherwise a man asleep would be happy: but it
consists in action, which is the true use of Virtue.

The Soul makes us capable of living happily: for happiness is measured by
virtue* nor can we be counted happy, but proportionably as we are counted good.

The intention of Political Science is, to bring to pass, that men lead their
lives happily; as I have observed in the precedent Chapter. It Is therefore
certain, that it requires they be actually virtuous.

All that I have been discoursing is of constant and confesses truth. Whence
clearly results, That the Politics consider virtue in a much more noble manner
than Ethics do; for these, confining themselves to the forming of idle
speculations, can produce but an imperfect felicity, which the Schools do call
Theoretical. The Politics on the contrary go further, and causing us to
exercise virtue, do give us a Practical, that is, solid and perfect Felicity.

In fine, it is not doubted, but the Act is preferrable to the habit. Besides,
the Ethical or Moral discourses of virtue, can have no other aim, but at most,
the welfare of particular persons; which does not always produce that of the
Public: And the Politics, regarding the welfare of an whole State, provide at
once for that of each particular; as a good Pilot, in endeavoring the safety
of his Ship, procures necessarily, the safety of all that are embarked in it.
Also, the care of the welfare of particular persons, seems to be beneath the
Politics, except so far as it is necessary for the public good. Yet sometimes
particular Men must of force suffer for the Public Good; as when a Malefactor
is punished, and when some Houses are pulled down to save a Town from Fire, and
from Enemies.

The happiness of a State is of the same quality with that of particular
persons. For as we say, a Man is happy when he has Strength, Riches, and
Virtue; in like manner we say a Commonwealth is happy when it is potent, rich,
and justly governed.

A Monarch is, in reference to His State, what the Soul is to Man. There is no
doubt therefore, but that the proper Goods of a King are those of the Soul: and
that he can possess no other. Fortune being beneath a true Sovereign, and
extrinsick to Him, cannot give him ought of that kind from Gold or Glory: All
that He has does arise from His own Virtue, His Power, His Treasures, and the
various effects of Beneficence which he holds in His Hand, do not constitute
His Happiness: as GOD Himself is not Blessed by external Blessings, but only
confers them as a distribution made to His Creatures, and that He may cause
them by sensible means to experiment His Goodness.

The Magnificence of a Man renders him considerable, if his Spirit in it be
Great and Heroic.

But it is not enough to have spoken of that which constitutes Felicity, we
must take some account of the means which conduce unto it.

Nature, Constancy and Reason, do contribute to endue us with Virtue. The two
former do enrich the Mind, and dispose it to receive Virtue; then Reason being
cleared by the light of Precepts, makes it spring up, and cultivates it.

Of all Precepts, those of greatest efficacy are the Political, which being
indeed Laws, do command and oblige Men to obey, in a manner, blindly:
necessitating and constraining us to live well, whether we will or no. It Is
upon this ground it has been said, That there lies no servitude at all in
submitting to the power of the Law; and that it is the proper act of Men truly
free, to reduce their inclinations, and subject their practice to the same:
Forasmuch as the conforming of Life and Manners to the impulses of Virtue,
which is always right, always incorrupt, is in truth a setting our our selves
at full liberty, and an enfranchisement from the Empire of importunate and
irregular Passions.

But of these general Theses enough. It is time at length to enter upon the
subject which occasioned my taking up the design of this present Treatise.

CHAP. III.
1. Of the French Monarchy. 2. Of the Situation and Quality of France. 3. Of
the Nature of the French.

THE Monarchick Government does not more excel other Governments, than the
French Monarchy does all other Monarchies on Earth. It is hereditary, and for
Twelve whole Ages there has been seen Reigning from Male to Male, upon the
Throne of France, the August Posterity of Meroue of Charlemagne, and of Hugh
Capet. For it is exactly proved, that these three Races of our Kings, are
Branches issued out of the same Stock. This very Succession, so Legitimate as
it has been, and so long continued, makes at present the surest foundation of
the welfare of the State; and carries in it Splendour, Reputation and Majesty.
Indeed to how many Ills are Elective Kingdoms exposed? How many Cabals? How
many Complottings; and in truth, Wars, are kept on foot by so many different
agitations? The one and the other Roman Empire, and the Kingdom of the Poles,
do administer sensible proofs of this Opinion.

If the Spartans heretofore did draw so great an advantage from the Honor they
had to be commanded by Princes of the Blood of Hercules: The French have far
greater cause to glory; since in the Catalogue of His Majesty's triumphant
Ancestors, there may be counted an hundred Heroes greater than Hercules himself.

Is there a Monarch in the World, whose just power is more absolute, than that
of our King? and by consequent, is there a Monarchy comparable to the French
Monarchy? It is necessary that the power of a good King be not confined within
other bounds than Reason and Equity do prescribe: otherwise there will ever be
division between Princes and People, to the ruin of them both. What a disorder
would it be in Man, if the Eye or Hand should fail of following the impulses of
the Soul? this disobeying and rebellious Member would prove dead, or seized
with a Palsy. If then the whole Body should fall into an universal revolt
against the Spirit of Man, all the Symmetry, the Order and economy would be
utterly defaced. Thus the Subjects in a Monarchy, once ceasing to yield their
King a full Obedience, and the King ceasing to exercise His Sovereign Authority
over them, the Political Ligatures are broken, the Government is dissolved, by
little and little all is reduced to extreme calamities, and ofttimes to
Anarchy, and an annihilation. Such are the inconveniences that occur in
Royalties of the Lacedemonian kind, where the Prince has but a limited
Authority; and if all that England suffered in the late times were portrayed
here, it would be easy to observe of what importance it is unto the felicity
of a Monarchy, that the Prince do in it command without restriction. In fine,
the obedience of instrumental parts, as those of Organical Bodies, and the
Subjects of a State, is of so indispensible a necessity, that the common good
and conservation of that Whole, which they compose, depends upon it. In
Democracies, even the most tumultuous and disorderly, all must bow under the
Will of the multitude, though blind, ignorant and seduced: in like manner, the
parts of the Bodies of Brutes must act by their motions, though they be in rage
and madness. And the reason of this necessity is, that the Body and the Soul,
which is the form thereof, are but one indivisible Whole; so a King and
Subjects are together but one whole, that is, one State.

In fine, the French Monarchy is accompanied with all the mixture that can be
desired for a complete and perfect Government. The Counselors of State do
compose an excellent Oligarchy in it; The Parliaments, and other Officers of
Judicature do form an Aristocracy; The Provosts of Merchants, the Mayors, the
Consuls, and the General Estates do represent rarely well limited Democracy; so
that all the different modes of governing by Laws, being united in the
Monarchy, do render it as excellent and consummate, as Reason can propose. The
Regality of France is therefore of the Oeconomick kind; in which the King has
an absolute power in his State, as the Father of a Family in his House; and
though he govern at His pleasure, and without contradiction, it is always for
the good of His Kingdom: even as the Master of an House does Rule it with an
entire Authority, and incessantly provides for the accommodating of this
Family. There is nothing Despotical nor Barbarous in France, as in the States
of the Moscovites and Turks. In short, our Laws are Holy and Equitable, to a
greater degree than in any Commonwealth that ever was; and they are conceived
with so much prudence and judgment, that they are apt to make the People happy
in the gentle times of Peace, and enable them to triumph in the occasions of
War.

The Situation and Compactness of France are known to all the World; so that it
would be a needless labor, should I here expatiate, to show the Beauty and
Richness of our Grounds and of our Rivers: or declare how we abound in Wine, in
Corn, in Silk, in Wools, in Cloth, in Wood, in Cattle, in Salt, in Mines, and
in Money; how necessary we are to our neighbors; and to what degree we may
forego their Succors and their Merchandise. I might justly be accused of a
fondness for superfluous Discourse, if I should particularly consider all these
great advantages; and as much, if I should speak of the pureness of the Air,
and the incredible number of Inhabitants: the most ignorant having a full and
an assured knowledge of 'em. I shall only say, that it need not be wondered at,
if Men whom Fortune brings forth, and breeds up in so excellent a Climate, be
capable of handsomely contriving, and successfully executing the haughtiest
Enterprises. In fine, its an unspeakable satisfaction to a Man that sets
himself to Treat of the Politics of France, that he may know the French, of
all the People upon Earth, are the most susceptible of Learning, of Policy, and
of Government. For if one consider the Situation of the Country, he may be
assured, that the Constellations of Heaven are eminently favorable to it. The
Experience and Skill of the Ancients do inform us, that the Situation of
Regions is the prime cause of the temperature of the Men in 'em; as it is of
the quality of the Plants and Fruits which they produce.

The Laws of this State being so Judicious as they are, do argue the Wisdom of
those that enacted them; and of the People that accepted them; whereof the long
duration of the Monarchy is a second proof.

On the other hand, the great Acts of the French do speak their Valor. They
serve in our Age, for examples to all Nations in matter of execution; and not
only so, but are as eminent likewise for their Counsels: And they have choice
of the best Generals on Earth to lead Armies, as well as of the best Soldiers.
That heat and impetuosity which is taken to be visible in all their attempts,
is an effect of their high Courage; and the confidence they show, with somewhat
less of restraint and respect than prudence could wish, can be imputed to
nothing but their fearlesness: In fine, the Emperor Charles the Fifth, declared
with very much judgment, That the French seemed to be Fools, but were really
wise.

Now, since we know what France is, let us examine what may most conduce to the
well-governing of it, to the conserving it in Plenty, and in Reputation; in
what it may be augmented, and how its interests with the neighboring States
ought to be secured. In a word, let us see what way may be taken to maintain
the parts that compose it, in so regular an harmony, that they may all
incessantly contribute to the weal of the Monarchy.

CHAP. IV.
1. Of the Clergy. 2. Useful means to obstruct Frauds in Beneficiary cases. 3.
Of the Monastic Religious of each Seu.

OUr Ancestors have ever been great observers of Religion. Long before the
coming of JESUS CHRIST, the Druids were their Priests, and had an entire
direction, not only of affairs relating to the service of their false Gods, but
of those too which concerned distributive Justice; even in the general
Assemblies held by all the Gauls, whether for confirmation of Peace, or for
reconciliation of disagreeing parties, who might embroil the Republiques, or
whether the making of some common National enterprises was in question, still
there was no resolution formed, but by their advice. No wonder then, if since
the Truth of the Gospel appeared, and made known the holiness of Christianity,
the Prelates have conserved so many Prerogatives and Considerations. They have
been called to the Royal Counsels; they have assisted at the decision of the
most important affairs, they have every where hold the first rank; much has
been attributed to their Judgments, and the respect had for their Character and
Dignity, has gotten them great and signal privileges, which have exempted
them from contributing to the burdens of the State; though at the same time
wealth was heaped upon them by Alms and Foundations. But as Churchmen, after
the mode of the Court of Rome, use to convert whatever is freely granted them
into a point of Religion; in such manner, that by little and little, they
engage the tender Consciences of the faithful in vain scruples, and possesses
them with a superstitious fear of offending; they have not been wanting to
assert and maintain, that these exemptions and privileges were not liberally
given them; that Kings did but settle them in possession of an advantage which
was by Divine Right inseparable from their Profession: that they, while Men of
War fought for the Glory and Liberty of their Country, sufficiently did their
part, in lifting up, as as was anciently done, their eyes and hands to GOD, to
impetrate His powerful Protection: that their Arms were Prayers, Oblations, and
Penitence, which they never forbore to use for the public safety; that from
the Caves and Deserts whither they retired, they sent up Meterials to the
highest Heavens, which formed into Thunder there, might fall back upon, and
beat down the enemies of the French name. In fine, That if Gentlemen gave their
blood, and the People their sweat and labors for the welfare of the Kingdom,
they Day and Night did pour out Tears at the feet of Altars to disarm the wrath
of GOD. Upon such reasonings as these the Ecclesiastics have founded their
pretenses for possessing those goods, of which, public and private Piety had
made them Proprietors, without concerning themselves for what success the
general affairs of the State might have.

But this is not all, they have tried by diverse reiterated attempts, to make
themselves Masters of all the Temporal Jurisdiction, and draw Civil causes unto
their Tribunal: nor have they forgotten any pretext which they thought might
promote this dangerous enterprise; sometimes they have pleaded, That the Church
alone having right to judge of the Validity of Marriages, as being* a
Sacrament, all that depended on 'em ought to be handled before Ecclesiastic
Judges. Sometimes again, That Christians binding themselves in their Contracts
by an Oath, the cognizance appertained to them. Such Kings as perceived that
these attempts did tend to the overthrow of their Authority, withstood them
with a right Kingly vigor. But what difficulties were there not of necessity
to be overcome for a full attainment of their end? and what resistance did not
the Churchmen make to maintain themselves in so unreasonable an Usurpation?
Our History affords us examples of it, which I cannot call to mind without
grief and wonder. Their obstinacy has gone so very far, that they have forced
our Kings to grant them Declarations upon unequitable and disadvantageous
conditions; and so capitulate with them both for the Tenths and Acknowledgments
of the Lands which they possess; as also for the Rights of Mortmain and
Indemnity. I cannot tell by what name I should call these proceedings. Our Sirs
of the Clergy could not doubt, but that being born Subjects of the Crown,
nothing could release them of this duty; and that the privileges which they
have, or rather which they have invaded, being founded upon the holiness of
their Character, could not extend to these Temporal Goods, which always are the
States. Yet the old error is so potent, and their imagination so strongly
prepossessed for these Immunities, that they can scarce acknowledge the Kings
Sovereignty to this day. What clamor did they not raise about the Arrest of
the last Commission of Oyer in Auvergne? with what fervor did they charge
their Deputies to remonstrate to His Majesty concerning it? Yet this Arrest
innovateth nothing; but is, in all respects, conform to the prescript, and
pursuant to the use of Charles the VIII. his Pragmatique Sanction, Kings and
Emperors, never practiced otherwise in such cases. Nor can it be denied, but
that Religion coming, among others, under a Political consideration; and Kings
being Protectors of the Church, of its Doctrine, and of its Canons, it is a part
of their Office to notify to men the Laws of GOD. The Tables were consigned to
the hands of Moses, not to the hands of Aaron; and in the Temple of GOD, the
Law of GOD was often heard by the People, from the Mouth of their Kings. It Is
upon this account that Melchisedec was both King and Priest; and it is from this
intention that the Emperors confirmed the first Synods, that They sometimes
gave judgments contrary to Sydonical decisions; and that other Christian
Princes have had liberty to receive, or not receive Councils, though Legitimate
and Universal. Nothing is more consentaneous to perfect equity, than that the
Gentlemen of the Clergy be obliged to contribute to the public charges: They
receive vast sums from the State; and what they pay to the King out of 'em,
amouts not to a sixth part of what they duly ought to pay.

But to reduce them gently to reason, approaches must be made by degrees; and
in ways that may be to them unperceivable. First, they may be calmly told of
the right of Mortmain, which being part of the ancient inheritance of the Crown
cannot be alienated. They may ever and anon be put in mind, that Residence is
of Divine Right; that it is unbecoming a Prelate, or an Ecclesiastic, to keep
a great Table, to have a multitude of Pages, Horses, Dogs; intimation may be
made them, that the King intends to restore the ancient Law of Fiefs; by which
all sorts of persons concerned, are obliged to set forth, at any time, a
certain number of Soldiers, equipped and paid at their charge. In fine, they
may be required to make a new valuation of ordinary Rents. For what pretext
will they have to complain, or be discontented? Can they find any fault at all
in it if His Majesty does put things in their Primitive State; which is the
foundation of all public Order and Discipline? Other insinuative means may be
set on work, which shall make no show at first, yet may prove in the sequel, of
incredible advantage to the King's Affairs.

While I speak here of the Clergy, I pretend not to speak of any but Bishops,
Canons, Parish Priests, and Chappellans. I know well, that taking the word
Clerus in its ancient latitude, it may be said to comprehend all Christians:
but I extend it not so much as to Monasticks, who in truth were, at their rise,
so far from having particular and conventual Churches, as now they have, that
they were reckoned Laics, that is, of the People, and had their places
separate from the Priests.

Whatever care Kings hitherto could possibly take to hinder frauds in
Beneficiary matters, they have not been able to find means effectual for it:
Their prudence has been still surmounted by the pravity of men, which never
wanteh artifice and expedients in occasions that concern their profit. However,
these frauds are of such a quality, and so important, in reference to the
salvation of all Christians, that the charitable sagacity of the Laws ought to
be indefatigably exercised about them: neither Pains nor Authority should be
spared, in a design whose accomplishment is so necessary. And indeed, what
mischief does not follow; for example, when a wicked man, by intrusion, gets
possession of some Benefice with Cure of Souls, all his Sacerdotal Functions
are so many Sacriledges; (for he is a suspended person, ipso facto) all the
Absolutions he gives are null; the Fruits of the Benefice cannot be his,
because he is not the lawful Guardian of it; and so his appropriating them to
his use, is a continued Larceny; for which he is indispensibly bound to make
restitution. But be it a Bishop that commits this act of intrusion; and all the
Consecrations of Priests which he shall solemnize are null, whence will result
a nullity of all the Absolutions those pretended Priests shall give. What a
concatenation of Crimes? what a dreadful series of Evils, Simonies,
Confidences, and other bad means which are used to finger Benefices, do tend to
the same Consequences. Sure, the cure of this Malady, Mortal to so many
thousands of Souls, is an achievement worthy of a King.

I am of Opinion then, that to cut up the root of all these disorders, the King
might create a Secretary in his Council of Conscience; and when this Officer is
in possession of his charge, a Declaration of His Majesty's should come forth;
by which, to obviate the great abuses that have crept int-Beneficiary matters,
it should be ordained that all the Benefices in the Kingdom be Registered by the
said Secretary of that Council, and no dispatch there made until the Deeds,
upon which a Benefice is claimed, have been seen and signed, and placed in the
Register by the same Secretary, upon pain of the nullity of all that may have
been petitioned for, and granted; Cognizance of all causes arising in
consequence of this Declaration, must be given to the Grand Council, and this
addition of Jurisdiction would facilitate the verification of it.

This Declaration would produce several advantages. One is, that there could be
no more fraud used, in order to demissions, or to resignations; and the Bankers
of the Court of Rome would no longer have means to promote the cheats of
pretenders to Benefices. Another is, that the King would exactly know all that
the Church does possess in France; which is a matter of extreme necessity, both
for the regulating of the Tenths, and also for other considerations. A third
advantage would be, that in process of time this Secretary of Conscience might
make a Bank in the Roman Court, which is, to the King, of unspeakable
consequence: for by this means, all the Money that goes into Italy out of
France would be known; and upon such knowledge it would be more easy for him
to take his measures with the Pope and College of Cardinals. A fourth
advantage is, that the King, by degrees, might become Master of all the
Benefices of the Kingdom, in the same manner as the Pope is Master of the
Bishoprics and Abbeys; which would augment the Royal Authority. That I may
explain my self, I will resume the thing from its original. In the first Age of
Christianity, the first Bishoprics were conferred without any Bulls from the
Pope at all. Afterward He bethought Him, to send or write unto the Chapters,
who then chose the Bishops, and recommended to them, to respect the merit of
such or such a one, when they should proceed to the Election. I think that
Alexander the III. was the first Inventer of these kind of Letters; and they
were called Bulls, because they were sealed up with the Pope's Seal, ( Bulla
being Latin for a Seal.) At the beginning, these Letters which the Popes thus
sent, were but simple Letters of favor and recommendation: but it happening that
the Chapters reverenced them, and that here and there, at least, one, who had
obtained them, was chosen; all pretenders to Bishoprics came to believe, that
it was necessary to obtain them. Thus, what was at first but, as has been
said, a recommendation, became at length a point of right and duty. Such was
its Rise. Now this being certain, there may be use made of the example: and
thus, when a considerable Benefice should be vacant, the King might order, that
a Letter be written to the Patron, and some Person recommended to his
Nomination. There is no cause to doubt, but the Patron will Nominate whom His
Majesty has thus recommended; so that insensibly it will grow a Custom, to
take the King's recommendations, as otherwhile persons did those of the Popes;
and as the Bulls became at length necessary for Bishoprics and Abbeys, so the
King's Letters shall become necessary for all sorts of Benefices, and He render
Himself Master of all Churchmen. The King, in this, will have sufficient
reason, because He being Protector of Religion, which is the prime Pillar of
every State, it is His interest to know whether they that shall be provided of
Benefices, be Orthodox, and of good Life; lest they spread some bad Doctrine
among the people; for Heresies and Scandals do cause division in the
Commonwealth, as well as Schisms in the Church. Besides, it concerns the
tranquillity of the State, that Curates, who have the direction of Consciences,
be well-inclin'd for the good of the Kingdom, and ready to keep particulr
Persons in their duty.

To descend now unto the case of the Monastic Religious, and find out a way
(for rendering them useful to the State) to take them off from that laziness and
loathsome beggary in which they live, as also reduce them to such a number as
may be proportionate to other ranks of men in the Kingdom. It is to be noted,
that there are three sorts of Monasticks. The first is made up of the Orders of
S. Augustine, S. Benedict, S. Bernard, and Premonstrey. These are they that
possess the bulkie riches of the Church; I mean the Abbeys and Priories. The
second sort comprehends the Carthusians, the Minimes, the Coelestins, the
Feuillans, and some others, who possess Goods with propriety, and beg not but
by Toleration. The third kind, is that of the mere Mendicants, who subsist by
Alms, as do the Jacobins, the Cordeliers, the Carmelites, and their branches,
that is, the Reformed, as they term 'em, who are issued from them. These,
notwithstanding their Vow of Monastic Poverty, yet are not destitute of some
foundations: but they plead for themselves, that the Pope is Proprietor of the
Goods, they do but take the Profits; which certainly is a vain and frivolous
subtilty. The Female Religious being comprised under these three kinds, there
is no need to make of them a separate Article.

There are too to many Monks. Its an abuse so prejudicial to the Kingdom, that
the King can no longer dissemble it: it is time to take it seriously and
effectually in hand. For Monks live in single state, they raise no Families,
get no Children, and so are barren grounds that bring forth no fruit to the
Crown. Beside, the blind obedience by which they are tied to the pleasure of
the Pope, does form a foreign Monarchy in the very bowels of France; and into
it they train along the credulous people, which is a thing of very great
consequence. This Polity is founded on the abusive and pernicious Maxims of
Rome; which too are purely Political. For, that the obedience which Monasticks
give the Pope, is Religious, there is no color to pretend: nor is there a
Christian but sees what his duty binds him to in this case; and is altogether
subject to his Holiness in Doctrinals, without need of making particular vows
to oblige him. The name of Religion in the matter, is but a phantasm, and a
false pretext which the Court of Rome assumeth, to augment its Temporal Power,
and to have its creatures in all quarters. By consequence the abuses ought to
be retrenched, as was done by Charlemagne in his time, and sundry other great
Kings.

But for the effecting of this I should not at all advise, that the attempt be
openly made. For that would be to draw upon the undertakers, the importune
clamours of all the Monks, and their Zealots; nay, to draw Rome upon their
backs, which might cost them some trouble. In fine, it would be to draw on them
the People; who are ever fond of Novelties that surprise them, or are
prejudicial to them, and always averse to those which they have foreseen, and
are profitable for them. It Is therefore by-ways that must be taken. The first
which seems to me fit to be pitched upon, would be, to require of the Monastic
Communities, that they dispatch Missions unto America, and the Indies, to
convert the Salvages, and administer the Holy Sacraments to Christians. The
Monks, who are commonly imprudent, will strain to set forth the greatest number
of their fraternity they possibly may, in hope to make considerable
Establishments; thus there will be forwardness enough to embarque. The present
juncture is advantageous for this design. For they are charged with more
Persons than they are able to maintain; Charity being evidently cooled toward
them. A second means may be, to debar them the conversation of Women. It is
scandalous to see Religious Men receive visits from them in Churches; and
there, in presence of the Holy Sacrament, spend whole Afternoons with them. For
remedy it might be ordained, that they should have Parlours, where Women might
go to consult them. The thing is a point of deceney; and Parlours, the
Carthusian Friars, and all Nuns, generally have. The third means might be, that
the Fathers of such as enter into Religion, should pay an Annual Pension to the
Order, by way of Alms, during their Sons life; which is the practice in Spain.
This Pension, some will say, causes in Spain an huge multiplication of Monks.
But it is not the Pension that fills the Cloisters in that Country; it is the
license the Monks have to do what they please. In France they are not upon such
Terms. A fourth means, is to oblige the Monasticks to abide in their Convents,
and not go abroad but very rarely, and for urgent affairs: so do the
Carthusians. A fifth, to embroil the Monks with the Bishops; for which they are
sufficiently disposed. A sixth, to prohibit that Children of Sixteen (when as
yet they know not what they do) bind not themselves by Vows, which engage them
for the whole remainder of their lives: but remit that Ceremony till their 22d.
year of Age. The seventh means would be to suppress that Congregation, as they
call it, among Monastic persons, (as for instance, there are the Congregations
of S. Maur,) and command, that the Religious who make profession in an house,
do there fix; not coursing from Lower Britannie, for example, unto Paris; nor
incessantly changing, as their wont is, unless some indispensible necessity
does oblige to such changes. The Carthusians keep in their houses, and run not
from place to place: Nuns do the same. The Voyages of Monks, and all their
transmigrations, have no other end, but to get an universal acquaintance.
Beyond all this, it may be declared to the Monks, (at least its a thing that
should be done in its season) how that the King understands not their Monastic
Profession does Exempt them from his Jurisdiction. Thus the Orders being purged
from their impurities, will resume their ancient Iustre, and be true Seminaries
of Doctrine and Sanctity. In fine, no person will doubt, but the King may take
cognizance of all that concerns the external Policy of the Church; because this
is in such sort annexed to the Government of States, that not a Patriarch, nor
even the Pope himself, can make any regulation of it without His Majesty's
consent.

That reason of State which presses for a retrenching of the number of Monks,
does also reflect upon Nuns; and that with the more Justice, because the
greatest part of young Women, who become Votaries, are driven thereunto by the
violence of their kindred. There will never want just means to hinder this
abuse from having a longer course. As for instance, Young Women may be declared
incapable of making vows before 22 years of age at the least. It may be
enacted, that they never shall be Professed, [ i. e. settled of the Order] in
the Convent where they have had their Education, either as Pensionaries or
Novices. This would be well enacted. For oft-times the Nuns, in hope to the
gainers by their Portions, do flatter the silly Maidens, and persuade 'em to
live with them. All kind of humane iuducements must be removed, and the
inspirations of the Holy Ghost, left to their full operation. It may again be
ordained, that Recluses do take no Money, as a Portion, but only simple
Pensions yearly for life, and those likewise cautiously limited. A Law too may
be made, that the Goods which might fall to a Daughter from her Parents, and
her collateral Kindred, should at their Decease, fall to the State, and the
King by representation, be invested with the same Right to the Goods of the
deceased as this Daughter had had, to recompense the Public for the loss
sustained by a Recluse, being incapacitated to raise a Family. Further, a
general Regulation might* be made of all Marriages of young Women, with due
respect had to the quality of each of 'em in particular; and it might be
ordered, that in case any of them would take up a Religious life, they should
carry as much with them into Religion, as into the Married state. For if the
Order was* that Daughters becoming Votaries, should have less Portions than
those that Married, Fathers, so hugely covetous they are, would compel them to
the Cloister. But when they shall find no profit in taking this course, they
will rather choose to dispose of them in Marriage, and make Alliances by that
means.

This subject inclines me to say summarily, that the moderating of Portions is
a piece of the ancient Civil Law of the French, and of diverse other Nations, in
which Daughters had nothing at all. Thence it is as we see in the Customs, that
a Nobleman is licensed to Marry his Daughter with a Nosegay of Roses, and she
becomes disabled to pretend to any other Portion, provided the Match be
suitable and fitting. This moderation is necessary: Forasmuch, as the vast
wealth which is given to Daughters in Marriage, does incommode the richest
Houses. Moreover, Gentlemen themselves would no more contract undue Alliances;
and so the Nobility recover their ancient esteem. Young Women's Birth, their
Beauty, their Discretion, their Virtue, and their Ability in the management of
Domestic Affairs, would be to them instead of Wealth. They would make it their
care to lay up a rich Stock of so many precious things, that perhaps it may one
day come to pass, that Men will, as heretofore they did, give Money to have
Wives; whereas at present, Women do so to purchase Husbands. I have spoken here
of Marriages occasionally; I am well aware, that the Matter ought to be
reserved for another Chapter. To conclude, its a great ingredient of the Glory
of a King, to honor the Holy See; to love and protect the Bishops, to maintain
the Gallican Church in its Liberties; never suffer that any propositions be
advanced any way, that may wound the Authority of the Canons; and employ all
the rigor of his Ordinances a against persons, who shall have the rashness to
publish a suspected or erroneous Doctrine.

Additions to CHAP. IV.
1. That Bishops ought to be near the King. 2. Of the Pension to be paid the
Order for a Monk entered. 3. Monasticks cannot Alienate; therefore neither sell
a Rentcharge. 4. They shall not have power to purchase.

I Have affirmed Chap. 4. That Bishops are obliged by Command of GOD, unto
residence. This is true: yet forasmuch as they are also the Kings Subjects, and
Royal Dignity requires, that his Majesty have Bishops about him, as the Roman
Emperors after Constantine had; it is fit to ordain, That each Bishop be at
Court Three Months every year, attending His Majesty, to Honor Him; during
which time they may negotiote their Affairs; and the rest of the year abide
fixed in their Diocesses; the King assigning to each of them the Months in
which their presence will be needful.

In the same Chapter, I have said, That to prevent the vast number of Monks it
should be ordained, that the Parents of such as enter into an Order, should pay
an annual Pension to that Order during the persons Lives. The effect of this
Law would be, that such a Pension being a Monachal Right in form of Clericature
given by Act of State; they that would have Revenue enough to be Monasticks,
would have enough to be Secular Priests. And so persons, whose Devotion should
incline them to take Orders, and Consecrate themselves unto GOD, would rather
choose to remain Seculars, than shut themselves up in a Cloister all the
remainder of their Lives. Now the more to fortify this Law, it should be
added, That Bishops make no more Priests upon the Title of Poverty, upon
Penalty of maintaining them: The reason against it, as to Secular Priests,
being as strong in reference to Regulars; because it is no less a disparagement
to the Clergy, that a Priest Monk do beg, and fall into extreme poverty, (which
may happen) than that one of the other rank do so.

It is manifest, that Monastic communities have no power to Alienate any
thing; and that Monks do daily re-enter into their Estates, which they
possessed heretofore. Hence it follows, that neither can they charge them with
any Rents for Money taken up: Forasmuch as by these kind of Contracts, they
Mortgage their Lands: but to engage an Estate in such a manner, is to make a
kind of Alienation.

It Is a fetch of the Benedictine Monks to take up Money for Rent to be paid by
them; that so they may appear always poor, and have pretexts to solicit the
liberality of devout People: also that they may have Protectors, for the
greater number of their Creditors is, the greater is the number of persons
interessed in their conservation.

Yet there is nothing more unjust than this Custom: For there are Monastic
Communities that owe more than all their Goods, moveable and immovable are
worth. The Monks care not though their House be ruined, nor though they ruin
some of their Creditors, provided themselves subsist. For by passing from one
Convent to another, they are quitted of all the Debts they have created.

It greatly concerns the Public to Prohibit these kind of Contracts, that
Monasticks may be kept from defrauding any Man for the future; and to decree,
that the Contractor shall pay the Rents Contracted for, and they bound to do
it, both all in common, and each of them in particular: then, that the Notaries
be Fined and Declared incapable of bearing any Office: Or if insolvent,
condemned to the Galleys for 101 years: Moreover, that the Purchasers of such
Rents shall, for their part, pay a Mulct of 3000 Livres to His Majesty, and the
principal Money be converted to His use.

Besides, it would be very fit to require all Notaries, all Creditors of
Monasticks and the Monasticks themselves to make Declaration of the Sums and
Rents charged upon them, bring in the Contracts for the same before
Commissioners nominated by the King to be Registered, and this within a time
expressly limited: which being once passed, no more shall be received; and all
Contracts not Registered, remain null, and as if they were cleared. This course
would be very severe, but excellent to reduce the folk of the Cloister to
Reason.

There is an important Observation to be made too, namely, That all the
Contracts which Church men have made, are utterly null, unless their Creditors
can make it appear, that the Money they lent did turn to the profit of the
Church, and that there was an authentic permission to make such Contracts.
This Doctrine is a point of Law; for the Church is ever a Minor, and all that
it possesses has come from the liberality of particular persons; without
whose consent, or at least the Magistrates, and such as are capable of it, the
Ecclesiastics can make no alterations in the Estates they have received. So
that the King may not only forbid Contracts for the future; but also Declare
those to be dissolved, which have been made heretofore, and discharge the
Monasteries of them. Debts have been annulled for less reasons often. It must
likewise be prohibited to Monks, and to the Church, to purchase any Estate in
Land, or High-rents, upon pain of such Contracts being null and void in Law;
and the Sellers and Notaries incurring the forementioned penalties.

Our Lords the Prelates have lately bethought them, and resolved to compel
such Gentlemen as have Chapels in their Houses, where the Sacrifice of the
Mass has been at any time performed, to profane the said Chapels, or endow
them with Land for the maintenance of a Priest. This would be a means to gain
the Church more than Two hundred thousand Livres of Rent at one blow; wherefore
it will be fit to Ordain, that this enterprise of the Bishops do not take
effect; except in case of Chapels built hereafter, and built for other persons.

CHAP. V.
1. Of the Hugonots; and whether it be for the good of the State to put them
out of France. 2. Politic means to extirpate their Heresy. 3. Of their
ancient Confession of Faith.

A King cannot have a more Illustrious Object of his Cares and Application,
than the preserving of that Religion which he has received from his Ancestors
in the States he governs: because diversity of Belief of Divine Service, and of
Ceremony, does divide his Subjects, and breeds Animosities among them: Whence
arise Contentions, War, and in the end an universal defiance. Unity of belief,
on the contrary, knits Men together; and it is seldom seen, but that
Fellow Subjects who call upon GOD in one and the same Temple, and offer at the
same Altars, do also fight with the same Arms, or under the same Banners. If
this Maxim be generally true in Christian Politics, and the Religion we
profess the only one, as it is, that we can savingly embrace, the Princes are
obliged to maintain it with all their Might, and employ that Sovereign Power
for the Glory of the true GOD, which they hold of his Goodness. The Pagans,
whose particular conduct was so prudent and just, and who have left us so many
Examples of wisdom and virtue, made it their principle, not to suffer in their
Republics any novelty that thwarted the common and popular belief; and they
adhered so peremptorily unto it, that they would not so much as permit any man
to undeceive them of their Errors. The Books of Numa Pompilius, which had been
found near his Grave, and contained the ancient Religion of Rome, the Senate
caused to be burnt; because the Praetor Rutilius, who had been commissioned to
read them, affirmed upon Oath, That the Contents of them tended to subvert the
Religion which the People observed at that time. They refused, even to open
their eyes unto the light of truth, though known to them, when they apprehended
it would be novel to the people. They rather chose to stick to Fables, which
length of years had consecrated among them, and the multitude was through
custom addicted to. Thus too the Athenians thought they did an act of necessary
Justice in condemning Socrates to death, for having taken on him to persuade
the people that there was but one only GOD. They knew however, that in truth
this Philosopher was the Wonder of his time, the Honor of the City, and of all
Greece: the discerning men amongst them were convinced of the solidity of this
Doctrine, and the Sect of the Stoics made profession of it; so that it must be
confessed, the fall of Gentilism, and subversion of Idols, is an effect of the
hand of GOD, who alone can work miracles of Grace and Omnipotence.

The Kings, His Majesty's Predecessors, have set themselves with unwearied
diligence to preserve the Catholic Religion inviolable: They have never failed
to be Protectors of the Apostolic See, and the Church. They expelled the
Arrians; they turned their Arms, and exposed their lives against the
Albigenses; they vanquished them; they destroyed them; they punished the Poor men
of Lions: In fine, they have provided that Christianity receive no harm in any
places unto which their Authority extended. The last Age produced a new Monster
to oppose the Church. France saw him born in her bosom, and unhappily bred him
up, with several accomplices of his Impiety and Revolt. History will tell
Posterity how much Blood was shed during the course of well nigh Fourscore
years to quell this dangerous Sect: and the world well know, that the Zeal
there was to reduce Heretics to their duty, did take up the Reigns of Six of
our Kings; the glory of cutting off the last head of this Hydra, being reserved
for his present Majesty. But it is expedient to see what weapons must be used
for an execution so long expected.

There is no cause to doubt, but that upon the Principles of Christianity, and
Maxims of Policy, its necessary to reduce all the Kings Subjects to one and the
same Belief: And though they that make Profession of the pretended Reformed
Religion, be now without Arms, without Strongholds, without Treasure, without
an Head, and without Allies; yet they are not out of case to be feared. They
still retain a remembrance of their boldness, and by-pass'd Rebellions: they
look back on the Towns they once seized, and out of which they could not be
driven but by force of Arms, as if they were their proper Inheritance, and had
been unjustly plucked out of their hands; they bear in their hearts the same
aversion for Order and Discipline, that they ever had; and their minds are
always inclining to revolt, and to Confusion and Anarchy* It disquiets them not
to think who shall head them; they have Soldiers of their own number, whom they
can advance to be Captains by giving them Authority to command them. They
persuade themselves, that if they were in Arms, they should want neither Money
nor Friends. They believe, that the Glory of the King attracts as much Envy on
him as Admiration; and that his Virtue raises in his Neighbors no less Anger
than Terror. In short, there is ground to think, that he will have more than
an Hundred Thousand Men of his Enemies in the heart of his State, while there
are Huguenots in France; they too, perhaps, do but wait an occasion to make
their Musters. Thus they are perpetual Obstacles to the Designs that might be
formed; and though weak, may nothwithstanding be dreaded. It Is true, the honest
men of their Communion do well know, that they cannot be in a calmer repose
than they now enjoy by the Grace of the King, and under the security of his
Edicts* but in these matters the multitude carries it. These are a Torrent,
that by its Rapidity, overturns Rocks which seems unmovable.

It will be said, that the good treatment which the Huguenots receive, does
preserve the friendship of the German Princes for France; and if favorable
Justice should be no longer done them, the King would lose the most potent and
most considerable of his Allies. This discourse is but a found, and void of all
substance of reason: for, beside that the Princes of Germany are not of the
Religion of our Heretics; They need not the Kings Protection for maintaining
the Huguenots in their pretended liberty of Conscience: but the French Arms
securing them against the power of Austria, and principally of the Emperor, who
has diverse pretensions upon them; they cannot recede from the Alliance they
have made with his Majesty; nor will they do it, though the last man of the
Huguenots was brought to the Scaffold: nay, forasmuch as the Kings Forces are
so useful to all those Protestants, it will would be their interest not at all
to Arm themselves for the Huguenots preservation, but far otherwise, even to
promote their expulsion out of France: and the reason is, because if this party
were in a condition to raise stirs, the King would have his hands full of work
to repress them: and so his Forces being dissipated, the Emperor might take his
time to enlarge his Domination: the thing that Charles the Fifth did, when
Francis the First was not in a possibility to succor the Princes. It being
therefore certain, that the Liberty of Germany has its support and prop in the
Arms of the King; they are not sollicitous there for the affairs of the
Huguenots in France: and since the Protestants* of the Empire are knit to his
Majesty by other engagements than those of Religion, they will continue the
same Deportment; and his Majesty on his part, will always have the same reasons
to succor them, though the time should come that he should have no more
Huguenots in his Kingdom. No succor neither may they hope for from England;
that is a State too weak to make any trial of strength against France: all the
English there are must pass the Sea; and the Isle be disfurnish'd of Soldiers
and Provisions; yet this all would be nothing to purpose: mean time their
affairs would lie exposed to the Levity and Lunacy of the people. Holland and
Swedeland are of like consideration; and they both have other Interests to
Negotiate with the King, than those of the Huguenots. Denmark is defective in
power. The Calvinists mount unto a strain of Policy above ordinary, when they
would have us believe, That whatever is not of the Roman Communion is of the
Opinion of Charenton: the Lutherans of Germany, notwithstanding, sympathize
with them less than with us. Thus the King has nothing to be afraid of from
the pretended Allies of the Huguenots. Yet these men, as I have already said,
are to be feared; and they would be seen stoutly to bestir themselves, if some
extraordinary Commotion should happen in France, as a Civil War, or some great
Invasion by Foreign Enemies; in such a Juncture they would do as they did in
the War of Paris: they took up Arms, and respectively protested they were for
the Kings Service; but if the Peace had not been soon made, they would not have
forborne to think themselves necessary; and to make all the Propositions that
they could imagine advantageous to their party. They would have re-demanded
their places of Security; they would have pressed for a restoring of their
Temples, for an augmentation of their pretended Privileges, and for a free
exercise of their Religion: and, according to their good old custom, have
uttered Complaints and Menaces. But if by ill chance a Victorious Army of
Strangers, whether Catholics or Religionaries, should enter the Kingdom, the
King must resolve to see the Heretics declare against him, or else content
them in all their pretensions, which would prove an engaging of his State in
like Calamities, as our Fathers in their time saw.

It ought to be ordained, that they shall exactly follow their ancient
Confession of Faith which was permitted them in France; and that such as vary
from it, shall be no longer reckoned in the number of those of the Protestant
Reformed Religion, who have Liberty of Conscience given them.

These Huguenots have no ground at all to plead the Edict of Nantes so loudly
and bravingly as they do: they extorted it by violence, and with Sword in hand:
yet was it but an Interim, an Order taken, until they should inform themselves
of the truth; which they have had time enough to do. But did they not violate
it themselves by the War of Languedock, that other of Sevennes; and again by
that of Rochelle? nay, they called the Enemies of the State unto their Succor,
and took a course to bring Fire and Sword into all parts of the Kingdom.
Shortly, in matter of Government, that which is good at one time, is frequently
not so at another; all things must be accommodated to the general rule of
Policy, which is, that the good of States be incessantly procured. When the
Edict of Pacification was accorded, there was provision made for the welfare of
France: if that welfare does now require that the Edict be revoked, there is no
remedy, revoked it must be, or neglected.

From all this which I have said it follows, that the King has most just cause
to secure himself from the Professors of the Protestant Reformed Religion, and
put them into such a state, as he may have nothing to apprehend from their
particular. Perhaps it will be said, that it is expedient there be Huguenots in
France, because they oblige the Churchmen to study, and to live with the
greater circumspection, and a more exact observance of the rules of their
Profession. But this consideration is not worth the considering. The Church of
GOD will never be supported by these humane means. He is in the midst of it,
and governs it Himself by His Holy Spirit, which animateth and fills it. At
whatever time there shall be no more Huguenots in France, there will be fewer
bad, and a greater number of good men; which the King should particularly
desire; since States are always sustained by people that love Virtue, etc. It
passes therefore for certain, that it is fit the King do disable the
Religionaties, as to their doing any harm, and as to their giving cause of
suspicion.

It remains to examine what way may most readily and most commodiously lead
unto this end. I would not advise that these People of the other Religion
should be compelled to depart out of France, as the Moors were out of Spain;
which proved in the sequel, so prejudicial to the whole Country. 'Twould be a
piece of inhumanity to drive the Huguenots in that manner: they are Christians,
though separated from the Body of the Church: besides, this course would
deprive the State of not a few good Families, and put the unhappy numbers of
them out of all hope of Conversion and Salvation: so that the King, in this
concern, should do well as seems to me, to imitate the Church, the common
parent of all Christians; who, in the Remedies She prepares, ever mingleth
mildness and Mercy, with Justice, and Compassion with Correction.

The first means then which the King might employ, should be to provide, that
the Huguenots might frequent the coversation of the Catholics with more
familiarity than they do. For by this coversation they would, in time, be
undeceived of the Opinion with which they are pre-possess'd, that we hate them;
they would put off the Aversion they have for us; they would know our
Deportment; and be informed of our Doctrine in the points that offend them;
because they understand not the Mysteries of them; which would induce them to
confess, as St. Augustine did on the like occasion, That the Church does not
teach things as they once thought it did. Nothing is to my Understanding, or
can be, more effectual for the Conversion of the Heretics, than this frequent
Conversation; it is not possible, but that at length, the spirit of Men should
yield unto impression; the plumage of the Eagle, it is said, consumes that of
other Birds; Light dissipates Darkness, Truth triumphs over Falsehood.

The second means should be, to confer a recompense of Honor upon Converts;
and to make a Stock for this purpose, which might never fail. I should think it
would be none of the best course to exclude the Huguenots from all Employments;
they must enter into lesser Offices, though not at all into the greater. The
reason is, because if they be put off from all kind of public business, they
will accustom themselves to tarry at home idle, and their ambition will be
extinguished in such sort, as perhaps they will make it a point of Religion to
do nothing; whereas being taken to ordinary Offices, they will habituate
themselves to a living among Catholics, and their Ambition will awaken, when
they shall compare themselves with their Superiors.

The third means I offer is, to select some particular Men, and create them
such business referring to Religion, as may constrain them to attend the
Council, and keep following the Court. Business of that kind may be started to
Gentlemen, upon the Exercise they have in their Houses. There is not one of
them but is obnoxious to a Process in that case; and the Bishops will, with
joy, be the Prosecutors. Besides, the King's Procureur (or Attorney) General is
concerned to know, whether Marriages, Baptisms, and Burials, be solemnized with
due accurateness in these private houses; and whether good and faithful
Registers of them be kept or no: Great defects herein being easily supposeable,
the same will be just matter of complaint against the Owners, as negligent in
observing the concession made them, of having Exercise in their Castles. The
like may be done, if others, contrary to the Edict, be admitted to these
Preachings beside the Domestics.

A Fourth means would be, to oblige the Religionists to put again in due state
the ancient Chapels of their Houses, which they have demolished or profaned;
the pursuance whereof ought to be by the diligence of each Bishop in his
Diocese. There must not be made a common affair of it to all the Huguenots in
general, but diverse particulars only be fixed upon. And the thing it self is as
reasonable as any. For they had no right to destroy Temples that had been all
along destined to Divine Service, according to the Religion of the King,
received by all the Kingdom, and also professed by our Progenitors.

The Fifth means is, that when an Affair of such quality as I mentioned, comes
before the Council, the Deputies which the Huguenots have at Court in the name
of them all, be not permitted to intervene in it. There are 3 Reasons for the
putting by of these interventions: The First is, that the Huguenots cannot
constitute a Body in France, nor assemble without the Kings express permission.
The Second, that Private and Particular affairs ought not to be set up in the
rank of those that are general and public. The Third, that the King will do
Justice without their intervention. The Deputation should not be all at once
abrogated outright; but no regard must be had to what the Deputies represent
in the name of all the party.

The sixth means should be, that the King do take effectual order the Huguenots
may no longer have their dwellings, nor their Exercise in places not Royal; at
least such as have any Lords of the Protestant Reformed Religion for
Proprietors. As for Example, Vitrey in Bretannie, belongs to Monsieur the
Prince de Tarante, who is of that Religion; and it belongs to him by a Demise
made him of it by Monsieur de la Tremouille. The Huguenots have there a Temple
and a Religious Exercise: this Town they must exchange, and have another for it
given them; reasons will not be wanting to color such permutations: there is
nothing that may contribute more to their Conversion. For it will be an
incredible displeasure to them to live among people with whom they have no
Acquaintance, nor any Union, either by Interest or Blood.

A Seventh means is, to suppress by natural death, all Huguenot Counselors.
The Chambers of the Edict are now of no more use.

The Eighth is, to give them for their Synods Catholic Commissaries; such as
are somewhat versed in the Controversies, and have the skill to favor the
Wranglings that are continually among them. These Commissaries were heretofore
all of them Catholics. Particular Synods, when Petitioned for, must not be
denied them; but National ones should never be granted: and at the close of all
their Sydonal Assemblies, Money should be demanded of the Ministers for the
King's Affairs, by way of Loan or of Tenths, or under some other pretexts.

The Ninth means is, to get them prosecuted for their common Debts, and so
cause them to sell, by Decree, some of their Temples, which sure cannot be
judged to be in Mortmain, or Un-alienable.

A Tenth is, to Prohibit that any Subject go out of the Kingdom without the
King's Permission. For the Huguenots must not depart out of France; and they
will be comprised under a general Prohibition.

The Eleventh is, to take order the Confessors may intimate to the poorer sort
of Catholics, that it is a point of Conscience to serve Huguenots.

The Twelfth is, to oblige them on a Political account, unto an Abstinence from
Flesh, upon those days which the Catholics do so observe, in like manner as
they are already obliged to heed the Festivals, out of respect to the Public
Religion: then hereupon, severely punish such as shall transgress in the one or
the other of these two things.

The Thirteenth means is, to endeavor the Marrying of Catholics to the
Huguenots, and cause the Children issuing from such Marriages, to be Educated
in the Roman Religion.

A Fourteenth may be, to hinder the Huguenots from selling any Estate they have
in Land: for this kind of possession does tie them to the Interests of the
State.

The Fifteenth and last, is, to change the place of that Academy which they
have at Saumur, and fix it in some other Town, as Vange, or Beaufort. There is
a President for such a change in the Translation of the like Academy from
Montauban to Pullaurens. The pretext for drawing them out of Saumur is, that
this Town being a Pass on the Loire, and maintaining the Communication of
diverse great Provinces, the King cannot be too well secured of it: beside, this
planting an Academy at Saumur, is an Usurpation; the Huguenots having never had
a Patent for it. It would signify nothing, should the Huguenots allege, that
they have it for a place of security: For they are now as the King's other
Subjects be, who do not at all demand any. What would come of it, if all
Collective Bodies should demand places of Security? It Is a madness.

Further yet, it might be declared, That Proponents, who aspire to the Office
of Ministers, should be obliged to teach a course of Philosophy, or two years
in Theology. Thus there would be fewer Ministers than there are; and at length,
their number being diminished, the number of Huguenots would infallibly
diminish also. The King might likewise ordain, That the Proponents should be
examined in presence of such Commissioners as he should please to appoint; to
the end they might undergo a rigorous Trial. For His Majesty is concerned, that
these Ministers be perfectly well studied, left they prove promoters of
Sedition, and not Pastors. At the time of their Examination, the same
Proponents should be obliged to answer all the Catholic Doctors in any
controversial questions they should think fit to move. The Huguenots cannot
refuse this Proposition; because their Proponents ought to be prepared in all
matters: and since the Huguenots affirm, that their Ministers are their
Bishops, there must no person be a Minister who has not attained to the Age of
Twenty seven years at least. These are summarily the humane means that seem to
me most conducible to the Conversion of the Professors of the Protestant
Reformed Religion.

CHAP. VI.
1. What Nobility is. 2. Of the Nobles of France, of their Degrees, and the
Ranks of Gentlemen. 3. Of the Orders of Knighthood. 4. In what respects
Gentlemen may be useful to the King.

HAving examined what relates to the Clergy, the First of the Three Orders that
compose the Body Politic of France; it is time to speak of the Second, which
is that of the Nobility: Nobility is a Quality that renders the Possessors of
it Generous, and secretly disly disposes their Soul unto an affection for
Honorable things. The Virtue of Ancestors does make this excellent impression
of Nobility upon persons; and there is in seminal matter, I know not what
spirituous and energetical Principle, that transmitteth and propagateth the
inclinations of Parents unto their descendants: as is obvious to remark; not
only in Men, and in all the Animals, which have a natural Generation; but also
in Plants, and in things evidently most inanimate. This Ancestral Virtue,
verily, gives us the first tincture in order to a right Noble Accomplishment;
and every Man issued from great and illustrious Bersonages, does continually
feel a kind of elastick impulse in the secret recesses of his Heart, which
thrusts him on to imitate them* and their Memory spurs him on to Glory, and
brave Actions: but if through negligence, or the degeneracy of an ill nature,
it so comes to pass, that he answers not the hope which the Grandeur of his
Progenitors gave ground to conceive of his Deportment; in this case, all the
Luster of their Ancient Reputation which environed him from the instant of his
Birth, and whether he will or no, accompanied him all along the course of his
life, it does, I say, by making him be noted, for ( Nobilitas a noscendo
dicitur) but promote his shame, and the more conspicuously show his defects
unto the augmenting and justifying a contempt of his Person. Thus an actual
Virtue is necessary for Gentlemen, that they may be able to bear up the weight
of their condition, which otherwise presses them quite down. The greater the
Rank and Honor of their House is, the greater their Dishonor; and so much the
deeper that Precipice into which their dissoluteness does cast them.

There are usually noted three kinds of Nobility. The First is a Nobleness of
Blood: when the source of a great extraction is hidden in the obscurity of a
long succession of years, and cannot now be discovered. This kind is in
greatest esteem among Men: and indeed we call things that are left us of this
quality, Venerable, and do bear a sort of Religious Respect to them: we are
generally possessed too with a persuasion, that whatever is unknown, is full
full of Mysteries; hence Objects of such a nature are apt to surprise us; and
we hereupon are awed at them, and do admire them. Such effects, the greatness
of an unsearchable high-descending Pedigree does produce. Nor need we much
scruple to affirm, that this kind is the only proper and genuine Nobility; and
that the Two others are only Nobilitations. What difference is made between a
person Noble, and one Ennobled, is familiarly known. This first kind of
Nobility is thought to require a possession of the Virtue of Ancestors, and
withal, a possession of their wealth; this too in so essential a manner, that
if each of them be not jointly possessed, the Nobility is extinct. We daily see
proofs that evince the Justice and the Truth of this Notion. Be it intimated by
the way, that the Virtue here mentioned is the Military Art.

The Second kind of Nobility, is that which takes its rise from Offices and
eminent Employments, unto which the Laws have annexed this mark of Honor.

The Third is acquired by the Prince's Letters, which are called Letters of
Nobilitation. It is a right peculiar to the Kind to give such Letters; as the
Roman Panegyrist once said to the Emperor Trajan. It belongs not but to Caesar
to create a Nobility. It is for none but the King to Honor brave and valiant
Subjects with this Quality. This Third and last kind is least considered:
because the Person who acquires it, has not the Virtue of Ancestors for a
foundation and caution of his own. Yet it is sometimes more considerable than
either of the two others; and Marius in Salust had great reason to tell the
Gentlemen of Rome; that he had rather begin the Nobility of his Race, than
faintly continue it, or unworthily lose it; and that it was more Glorious for
him to transmit to his Posterity a sparkling Virtue, hard to be followed, than
plod slowly on upon the slight, and almost effaced tracks of a common Virtue
which his Ancestors had left him. In all these three kinds of Nobility, there
must be the personal Virtue of the Person invested with 'em: for when all is
done, it is but Virtue that confers effective worth.

All Nations have had a particular esteem for Nobility, nor can any
well-ordered Commonwealth be named, which has not invented some singular mark
of Honor to make it conspicuous. The French in this point, have surpassed and
outdone all People upon Earth; as for the first, Antiquity, Caesar observes,
that the Nobles, that is, the Gentlemen, had among the Gauls, as much power
over the Plebeians, as Masters at Rome had over their Slaves. After Gaul was
reduced to the State of a Province, Nobility preserved its ancient
Prerogatives; and the Emperors knowing, that the Nobles loved Glory, and sought
it above all things, styled them Honorati, and gave them an absolute precedence
in all Assemblies of the Gauls. For the Romans had thought it necessary to
weaken the Authority of the Druids. In the time of Christianity the same Order
was continued; and the Nobility gave their Suffrage apart in the Election of
Bishops, expressly before the People; yea, even before the Clergy themselves.
Upon the declining of the Empire, the Gentlemen did, in France, judge the
Causes of their equals; and hence, without doubt, came into use the
Parliaments, Courts and Assemblies, which our Kings held of their Peers and
Barons; that is, of the qualified Gentlemen of their Kingdom, when a Case of
some Peer or Grandee of the State was to be Tried. The Nobles were
distinguished anciently from Plebeians, by their Hair, which they wore long,
for a mark of their ancient Liberty; and when any one of them committed a fault
that was unbeseeming his Birth, the rest Sentenced him to depart the Country,
or cut off his Hair; This was therefore a no less punishment than Exile. In
Charlemagne's time, the Gentlemen of France named themselves Franks, by way of
Excellence. In fine, the French Nobility has alwavs had such an high degree of
Excellency, and so great a pre-eminence, that it was preferred in all Cases; as
when vacant Bishoprics or Abbeys were to be provided for; or when the
principal Magistracy and Seats of Judicature were to be filled up, or the
Government of important Places, Warlike employment, and the Leading of Armies,
were to be dispoled of. To conclude this Matter, it may be affirmed, that Kings
did take the Gentlemen into a partnership with themselves, as I may term it, in
the Regality; they honored them with part of their Power, by conferring on
them Fiefs, and by entrusting them with the charge of doing Justice, and of
Commissioning Officers to that end.

Hereupon it was necessary to put a gradual difference between Gentlemen
themselves: nor is it indeed sufficient that they all have so many excellent
Prerogatives above the vulgar, or common sort, as we call them. For Nature is
alike in every Man, and all Men are Born equal. Fortune on the contrary, and
Virtue, distinguish one from another. But natural Reason requires there be
Order in all things. It Is Order that makes the Beauty and Symmetry of the
Universe. Now as a Musical Consort does not make a perfect harmony, but by a
diversity of Notes; so a Political State can be neither comely nor complete,
unless there be a difference between the parts that compose it. I know that
Nobility, being as Philosophers call it, an Inherent Quality, does lodge with
its whole Essence, in each of its Subjects: As the quality of a Soldier is, for
its Essence, in the person of a Corporal, as well as of a Captain or General
Officer. Yet there is a great distance, and many intervening degrees, between a
General and the meanest Musquetier in an Army. Thus the meanest Gentleman in
the Kingdom is Noble; and to speak after the common Proverb, is Noble as well
as the King; but the one is severed from the other by an immense graduation.
So, though all Gentlemen be equal in Nobility, yet they are not so in Riches,
in Lands, in Alliance, in Friends, in Offices, in Authority, in Age, and in
Reputation. Again, they are not equal in Spirit, in Knowledge, in Experience,
nor in Wisdom; therefore it has been with much prudence ordered, that they
should have some external marks of these differences; and for this end, there
have been created Princes, Dukes, Counts, Marquesses, Barons, Knights,
Batchelers, Esquires; leave has been given them to bear Helmets and Crowns
upon their Armories: In short, no pains have been spared to find out things
that might any way adorn their Quality; and their Valor has been publicly
rewarded, for an excitement of others to a generous emulation.

Here, I cannot forbear to blame those Gentlemen who give themselves the Title
of Knights, of Marquesses, or of Counts, by their own private Authority. This
is a shameful Usurpation; and so far from heightening the Luster of Nobility,
that it injures them. For a Gentleman who takes upon him the quality of a
Marquess, and well knows he is none, makes a perpetual Lie, a thing directly
contrary to his Honor, and to the profession he makes, of being a devoted
constant defender of Truth. Beside, this huge number of Marquesses, Lords and
Knights, does bring those Qualities into contempt; and is a cause, that true
Marquesses are not considered now, as they of right ought to be. It Is therefore
extremely important, that provision be speedily made in the case. For this
confusion destroys the usefulness of those Dignities, they being such as his
Majesty should keep in his own hand, and Husband them with deliberation and
frugality; that they might be distributed on occasion, to Men of Honor, and
such as have evidenced a Zeal for his Service, and for the good of his Kingdom;
that the persons also to whom they are Granted, might fully enjoy them, with
all the advantages and Prerogatives that are by custom annexed to them. I will
not omit, that it is necessary to give the Nolity the greatest respect that may
be; to the end, that Citizens may conceive the greater desire to become
Gentlemen; which should be granted them, when they have raised themselves to a
Worthiness of it, either by just acquiring a remarkable Estate, or doing some
illustrious exploit in War.

The whole Constitution of the Nobility is Military: Nevertheless there have
been instituted in France, particular Orders of Knighthood, of which, the King
is Grand Master Himself; and into which He admits such Gentlemen as He
accounts most worthy of it. Such are the Orders of the Holy Ghost, and of St.
Michael. There are others, of which the King is barely Protector; The Order of
S. Lazarus is of that nature. But this is of no great advantage to the State:
Because all Beneficences, all Favors, all Honors and Employments, should come
directly and immediately from the Hand and Bounty of the King. For the
continuation therefore of this Order of S. Lazarus, His Majesty might unite the
Grand Mastership of it to the Regality, as the King of Spain does.

CHAP. VII.
1. Of the Third Estate. 2. Of the Husbandmen. 3. Of Artificers. 4. Of
Merchants.

MY beginning to Treat of the Three Orders of the Body Politic of France, as
the Clergy and the Nobility, leaving the Third Estate to be last spoken of, is
a method like theirs, who having some Edifice to examine, do begin at the top;
and settle to consider the upper Stories, before they look on the Foundations.
In truth, the People are the Basis upon which all Republiques have their
standing. It Is they that manure the Ground, and cause it to bear Fruit. It Is
they that pay the Subsidies; that breed Workmen, and furnish the Merchants. Yet
that which we call the Third Estate, does not consist of Peasants, or the mere
rural sort; It Is principally the Freemen, and Communalties of Towns, and
Officers of Justice, that compose it. This Third Estate was not called to the
General Assemblies of the Gauls, either in the time of the Romans, or during
the First and Second Race of our Kings; it was well forward in the Third before
they had that privilege. I believe, not until the Reign of Philip the Fair.
But it is not upon this matter that I am now to insist.

However, in speaking of the Third Estate, the whole Popular body is to be
considered; and it may be divided into three parties of men; namely,
Husbandmen, Artificers, and Merchants. Of the Officers of Justice we will speak
in the next Chapter. The least-infected, and best party of the People, is the
Husbandmen that daily labor; which takes up their Heads and Hands, all the
year long without intermission, keeps them in simplicity and obedience. There
cannot be too great a number of 'em; especially not in France, by reason of the
Fertility of the Country; and our Corn being Transported into Foreign parts, we
ought to make great Stores of it, and have as much as may be in a readiness.
Exact care must be taken, that these Men may always be in a condition to take
pains: and that they have but little converse with Townsmen, whose little
labor, and other manners, might corrupt their innocence. And, that Ease and
Plenty do not render them insolent. For there is nothing more dangerous and
insufferable, than a sort of rich Peasants. No less care must be taken, that an
extreme penury do not reduce them to extreme misery. For too great Poverty
lying on them, they no longer have either Men or Cattle: they are tied up to
ill Diet, lodge on the ground: suffer Hunger and Cold: their Children perish
for want of Food; there are Epidemical Diseases bred among them; they are not
succored; they dye away: by this means the Country is dispeopled; and being
void of Inhabitants, the Grounds are unhusbanded, and abandoned. When I shall
come to discourse of the Finances* I will point out a way to preserve
Country People in a moderately-commodious Estate: at present I will only say,
that it would be to very good purpose to create a Superintendant of Husbandry;
who should have his Eye on those affairs, and see, that the Grounds be
cultivated, Vineyards well kept, and Meadows fitly ordered: in like manner as
there are Masters of Waters, and Forests, who take care that the Woods be not
damnifi'd; and Surveyors for the Highways; and in fine, Jurats for every Craft.

The Second party of the Popular order, is the Handicrafts-men, or Artificers;
these are no less useful to the State than any other. For, besides that
Manufactures do keep men at work, and engage them; they are the cause that the
Silk, the Wool, the Skins, the Flax, the Timber, and the other Commodities that
grow in France, are made use of; and that Country People have the means to
barter these things, and put them off; especially being wrought into Wares not
made in Foreign parts, we shall grow to be further principal Manufacturers, as
we already are of Hats for Spain, and Stuffs for all Europe: which is a matter
of exceeding great consequence: and in process of time, when the work is once
on foot, things will pass from hand to hand, and oft-times go out of the
Kingdom. All this quickens Trade, and makes Money pass to and fro: which
promoteth the Public, and therewithal at once, every ones private welfare.

It Is not enough to have Husbandmen and Artificers in a Kingdom* there must of
necessity be Merchants also: for without their Industry, the Artificers Shops
would be Stores never emptied; the Granaries would remain full of Corn; and the
Cellars, of Wines; and nothing be gone. We will more largely treat of this,
when we come to the Article of Commerce.

CHAP. VIII.
1. Of Officers of Justice. 2. Of Parliments, and other Supreme Courts. 3. Of
Presidial Courts. 4. Of the King's Council. 5. Useful means for the good of the
State, in relation to Officers of Justice. 6. Of Solicitations.

IF men were entirely just to one another, and each of 'em (in the phrase of
one of the greatest Greek Philosophers) a Law unto himself; there would need
neither Law nor Magistrate to keep them in perfect tranquillity. But Nature
being corrupted, we no longer consult that Original Righteousness, which is
inseparable from reason, and which without intermission, inwardly presses us
to render to all their due, as exactly, as we would should be done to
ourselves. Always self-love, often necessity, sometimes hatred, avarice, or one
passion or other, does blind us, and induce us to violate this eminently holy
and equitable Law; in such sort also, that we suffer ourselves to be
transported unto excesses hard to be believed. We equally use fraud and force
to content our injustice and irregular desires. Whereupon it has been
commodiously done by wise Men, to form, as may be said, a new reason, which
they called Law. But because Laws are of no use, except they be armed with
Correction to punish such as despise them; and have some soul, and living
principle; therefore Magistrates have been created* who are to pronounce the
Oracles which those Laws inspire, to put the Laws in Execution, and maintain
the Authority of them. These Officers are chosen of the best and most
intelligent Men in a State; and if Commonwealths be duly regulated; ordinarily
the Rich are preferred before the Poor, and Nobles before Plebeians; because
it is supposed they have a greater measure of knowledge and virtue; and by
consequence are less capable of certain mean things, in which a necessitous
condition, and a mean extraction, might engage them. Thus Ministers of Justice
in France, called Men of the Robe, are in truth necessary in Public Society.
For if there was no evil-doer, Laws and Magistrates would be of no more use,
than Joyners, and the Doors they make for the security of Houses, if there were
no Thieves: whereas, should not a Man in a whole Kingdom ever swerve from right
reason and pure equity; there must nevertheless be Priests for Religion;
Soldiers for defense against Foreign Invasions that might happen; and People
who may some of 'em Till the Ground; others apply themselves to Trades and
Manufactures, that Men cannot be without. So that these three sorts of Persons
are inseparable from a Commonwealth; and they make up the Three Estates we
have spoken of, which have been received without any contest.

Yet it seems, that of late, the Parliaments have sought to infuse into some
green heads, that they composed a Fourth Order in the Kingdom; and the same,
not only distinct from the other Three, but altogether superior to them, by
reason of their Sovereignty, and of the Power they have to deliberate upon the
pleasure and Edicts of the King. If they should not be brought off from this
opinion, perhaps they would draw the other Sovereign Courts and Officers of
Judicature into the same Error; an Union of them all not being deniable:
because otherwise the affair of Justice would in France, form two bodies; which
may not be. But from allowing this Fourth Body in the State, namely that of
Justice, a ridiculous inconvenience would follow; to wit, that a Sergeant (or
Catchpole) of a Village, would be a member of a body superior to that of the
Nobility; and by consequence, in some sort, superior to a Marquis. For in
matter of Hierarchy, the last of a more excellent Order, is greater than the
first of a less excellent one: as the lowest of the Archangels, is greater
than the highest of the Angels.

But to clear the difficulty before us, it must be remembered, that heretofore
in France, the Estates which were called Parliaments, did assemble twice a year
for two considerations: one was, to judge of Appeals, that were made from
judgments passed by inferior Officers. The other, to give the King Counsel when
He demanded their Opinion about Government of the State. For always, during the
first and second Race, the King's did dispose of Public Affairs, as of Peace
and War; and this is so much a truth, that if those ancient Parliaments had had
the disposing of the State, they would never have suffered, that the Children
of Lewis, when they had divided the Kingdom among them, should have fallen to
make War one upon another; which could tend to nothing but a public
desolation. They would as little have permitted the enmities of Brize, Haudet,
and Fredegonde. In like manner under the Second Race, they would not have
endured that the Sons of Lewis the Mild, should act such outrages on their
Father, that Charles the Bald should have given Neustria to the Normans. In the
Third Race, that Lewis the Gross should have ruined so many great Lords; who
made up the greatest-part of the Parliaments: that Lewis the Younger should
have yielded up Guienne by the Divorce of Eleanore: that the Count of Burgundy,
and the Duke of Britannie, and some others, should have leagued together
against Queen Blanch. In fine, there are thousand and a thousand examples in
History, which* do evidence that these Kings always had the free and Sovereign
administration of their State: nor will there one be found to prove, that the
Parliaments ever contradicted them. They presented themselves at the feet of
their Princes, with Petitions, and humble Remonstrances: they made no
resistance, nor exercised Authority. So that our King's have been King's
indeed, always absolute Masters* and for proof hereof, it will be sufficient to
look into all the Statutes; there it may be seen how they spoke, and what part
the Estates had in them. The principal end of Parliaments therefore was, to the
end the Lawsuits of particular Persons; and people perceiving that Appeals
brought to them were received, and sentences invalidated; many, to try Opinions
in their cases once again, became Appellants: by this means affairs were
multiplied; and that contesting parties might not have the trouble to come up
from the remotest parts of the Kingdom, Deputies of the General Parliament were
appointed, they also styled Parliaments, and to be ambulatory. The Commission
they had, was sometimes for three Months, sometimes for six, according to
exigence of State; but always by the Command and Letters of the King. These
Parliaments went into the Provinces, to judge the causes that were brought
them; almost in like manner as we now see done at the Extraordinary Sessions:
which instead of diminishing the number of Causes to be dispatched, as had been
conceived, really augmented them. Philip the Fair saw cause to make such a
Parliament sedentary at Paris, another at Rouen, a third at Thoulouse; and
succeeding Kings established others in other Cities, as they are at present.
From this faithful account it resulteth, that the Parliaments are not a Fourth
Body in the State; but be extracted out of the Three ancient Orders; at first
they were taken out of the Clergy and Nobility only: because the Commons at
that time were not considerable afterward, These also were received in. Other
Sovereign Societies are but Images of these Parliaments. As to the Sovereignty
of the Parliaments themselves, it neither is, nor ever was other, than an
emination of the Sovereignty of the King, in whom that Quality is natural, and
indivisible. The Parliaments can pretend to no more than His Majesty may please
to impart to them.

The Sale of Offices of Judicature having been introduced, there followed
diverse creations of new Officers, both in matter of the Revenue, and also in
that of Justice: among others, those of Presidial Courts were instituted: which
perhaps was done, only out of a pecuniary interest; a needless degree of
Jarisdiction being thereby set up, and such a one as tends to the involving
and oppression of the Kings Subjects. These Courts are so many petty
Parliaments, in judging supreamly, and finally in some cases: yet by the trick
of Pettyfogging Practice, ways are found to get Appeals from judgment passed,
to be received, and new processes begun, to the vexation and undoing of the
parties concerned. There have been in all times, chief Judges in Towns; as
Bailiffs and Seneschals; a thing of indispensible necessity for keeping the
People in order: all the fault that can be found in it, is by reason of their
number, which certainly is excessive.

It Is not enough that the King has Parliaments and other Officers to
determinate differenamong His Subjects: there must also be a Counsel about His
Majesty; by whose Advice, He may correct all ill Administration of Justice; may
reverse all Sentences given against the Mind and Intention of the Statutes; and
maintain Order through the whole extent of His State. This Counsel is the
Sacrarium of the Monarchy: and the persons admitted into it, who may justly be
styled the Eyes, the Ears and Hands of the Prince) ought to have a profound
Knowledge in Affairs, acquired by long and approved Experiences: They must love
the Kingdom, the Kingly Power, and the King's Person. They are the Seminary,
whence are taken Intendants of Provinces, Ambassadors and Ministers for
Negotiations with Strangers. The Counsel is composed at present of Gownmen
only. It would not be much amiss, nay, on the contrary, it would be very well
done: if the King pleased to communicate this Honor unto other Professions,
when there were found Persons capable of it: Because this Preference gives the
Gentlemen of the Long Robe too much Authority; whereas there is need of
retrenching what they have already; much rather, than of conferring any new
advantage upon them, as we shall show hereafter. As for the Royal Privy
Council, in which Secret Affairs are debated, and which ought to be of very few
Persons, that Matters may be kept in silence, and not untimously divulged; I
will not speak of it in this place; nor say, in what manner it ought to be
composed: because this depends upon the pleasure of the Master of it; and each
King takes a different course in it. There have been Princes who committed the
principal Care of all Affairs to one single person: and France has seen, for
instance, the Cardinals of Amboise and Richlieu. Others have parted
Employments, and shared them among as many persons as there were different
Affairs. So did King Henry the Fourth. This, in my Opinion, was the more wisely
done; for that in matter of Government, the great Secret is to divide
Authority, and hold the balance even between a plurality of Persons. History
teaches us of what consequence it was to our Kings of the first Race; that
they had but one Maire of the Palace; and how dear it cost their Posterity.
Upon a like reason of State the Roman Emperors divided the charge of the
Praetorian Prefect. But Ministers, whatever for number, must for qualification,
be Men of Virtue and approved sufficiency: They likewise, after the manner of
the Egyptians, ought to be reprehended and punished for all that the King does
amiss, and contrary to Law.

The incredible number of the Ministers of Justices in France, is in truth,
somewhat monstrous; Neither is there any disorder in the State, more pressing,
or requiring a more speedy Application of the Royal Authority. The truth is, if
a Man consider this multitude of Magistrates, will he not have ground to say,
that the French are extreme hard to be governed, seeing so many great
Personages are employed in Governing them? Again, it may be said, That this
Nation, so* Illustrious by the Glory of its Actions, and by so many Victories
wherewith its Arms have been honored, is yet incapable of virtuous
Inclinations; since there is need of force to reduce them to the rule of the
Laws: though GOD never gave Men a more precious Present. On the other hand, can
it be affirmed, that our Legislators wanted Wisdom, or did not sufficiently
show it in making the Laws? Yet if reflection be made upon the multitude of
Lawsuits, whereof the vexation is a grievance to the Kingdom, may not a Man
persuade himself, that Equity is banished thence, and Upright dealing utterly
discarded? Should it then hereupon be taken for granted, that the private sort
in France are not good conditioned People; can it be imagined that the Public
Government is any thing reasonable and proper for its due ends? But if a Man
proceed to penetrate further into the Internals of the State, and there behold
what a desolation the corrupting of Justice has made, loosning and breaking
the most Sacred ties of Friendship; in fine, if he observe how the Monarchy
has often been in danger of subversion, will he not wonder that the Public
Fortune has held out, and Families been born up in the Storms that have so
many times turmoild them?

The excessively great multitude of Officers, being the principal cause whence
so many mischiefs take their rise; the remedy must be first applied thereto.
And this remedy is nothing else, but such a retrenchment as is expedient, or,
to say better, necessary to be made. The fewer Officers of Justice there are,
the more Soldiers and Artificers, and Merchants, and the fewer litigious
Actions will be. For it is manifest that business of that kind has ever
multiplied, as the number of Officers has been augmented: in like manner, as
the more Physicians, the more Patients. To arrive at the end proposed, it would
be convenient, that after mature deliberation upon the estate of France, the
number of its Inhabitants, and the quantity of Law-business, it be advisedly
stated in the King's Council, what number of Officers were fit to be reserved,
and of what quality they should be; then that the rest be suppressed gradually,
as the persons dye away, or at once by a Declaration. What, in my opinion,
might particularly be done, is as follows.

First, The Presidial Courts being composed of Officers that are needless to
the State, a charge unto the People; having also but a novel interloping
Jurisdiction, the fruit of an evil Counsel given to King Henry II. and a mere
invention to get Money; the extinction of them is not to be doubted of; but
effected by a substraction of the Officers Annuities. By this means the King
will save that Pay, which amounts unto a Sum considerable to the State; and the
Royal Jurisdictions, each in its Precinct, may do what those Presidials, upon
which they depend, are wont to do. The Presidial Clerks place, its being
engaged, (or bound for security to one or other) as is usual, should not hinder
the execution of this. Aflair: And when by decease there are no more Officers
left, care shall be taken of the concern of those to whom the places were
engaged, the regulating whereof will by that time have no difficulty in it.

Secondly, Of Sergeants, Two Thirds wholly must be suppressed.

In the Third place, all Proctors, that are not Advocates; and a certain number
of Advocates should be appointed in each Parliament and Jurisdiction, who might
do the Office of Proctors. This is not incompatible. For the thing is already
in use many parts of France. The benefit of this regulation is manifest; in
that the Proctors are very ignorant that have but a slight tincture of
practice; yet out of Covetousness they often draw up Writings for their
Clients, and make them pay as dear for 'em, as if the best Advocate had taken
the pains. Mean time these Writings, for the most part, are nothing worth; and
the poor Suitors frequently lose good Causes, through the naughtiness of their
Proctors, and for want of being well defended. Again, such an order taken,
another advantage would accrue, namely, that Advocates being Proctors, they
will be obliged to follow what the Judges shall prescribe them; whereas at
present they make a jest of it, and will not Plead but when they please. There
cannot be a regulation made in France more profitable in matter of Justice; and
if the King, in a necessity of State, would make a Money matter of it, which
might at any time be done, there would be raised out of it, for all France,
more than 20 Millions. But it had need be gone about with a great deal of
Address. A Third advantage by this regulation is, That all Advocates being
Proctors, there would no more slip into the Court a sort of young Men, who
shelter their Ignorance and Idleness under a Lawyers Gown and a square Cap.

In the Fourth place, All the Masters of Requests belonging to the Palace, or
Court (of Justice) of France, should be suppressed. And the Truth is, it seems to
me a contradiction, that these Officers should be Counselors of Supreme
Courts, yet not empowered to judge any thing supreamly. But that the Commoners
of the King's Household and other privileged persons, may not be deprived of
the benefit of the Committimus, Power must be given them by special privilege,
to commence their Actions, and prosecute them in a Chamber of Enquests. I say,
by special privilege, because I know the Parliaments take no cognizance
ordinarily, save of Appeals: but in the case now expres'd, this special
privilege shall superadd to them this new kind of Jurisdiction. And it will be
highly advantageous to those Commoners and Priviledg'd persons; for by this*
Expedient they would get a decree speedily upon one Trial, and finally end
their business. It is to be noted here, that the first stating of Cases, in
order to an Hearing, is not so incompetent to Parliaments, but that they do the
thing for substance, upon demands incidentally made. Yet this is meant only in
behalf of privileged persons, and all such as claim the right of a Committimus.

Fifthly, The Judges Provosts of Towns are to be suppressed, and they laid to
the Seneschalsies and Bayliwicks. For, what are so many different Officers in
one and the same Town good for?

In a Sixth place, All the Courts of the Aids should be united to the
Parliaments; and this done, when the Officers of the Supreme Court in each
kind, have been reduced to the number which its judged meet to retain. I will
say more of this in the Chapter of the Finances.

Seventhly, All the Elections are to be suppressed, and the Assessing of
Parishes, done by the Treasurers of France; of the Seneschalsies, by the
Lieutenant of the Province. I shall speak more plainly of it in the Chapter of
the Finances and Taxes. Where also the Suppression of Storehouses of Salt, and
of the Gabells, shall be treated of in the Article of Gabells. Besides, the
Chamber of the Treasury, and the Court of Moneys, should be joined to the
Chamber of Accounts; and half of all the Chambers be suppressed likewise. For
thirty Officers may do all that the Chamber of Accounts, the Treasury, and the
Court of Moneys now do, In fine, it is for the King's Service, and the good of
the State, that all the Presidents Places be suppressed, as well those of
Superior Courts, as of others: and the Office of Presidents be discharged by
Commission. It Is to be considered* that this new Order would much augment the
King's Authority. For what will not Counselors do to obtain a Commission to
preside? and having obtained it, what will they not further do to keep and
confirm themselves in it? It Is pertinent to recall to mind here, that the
Mighty Prince Philip the Fair, at his making the Parliament Sedentary, made the
Count of Burgundy first President of it. And that anciently, the first
President of the Chamber of Accounts was the chief Butler of France: Likewise,
that at that time, and long after, the Chancellors of France were of the
Church, or of the Sword; and great Dignities not given to Men of the Robe
privatively. Which being done since, without doubt gives them too much credit,
and leaves the Nobility too little. It is important that the thing be not
continued, but on the contrary, all restored to Primitive Order. As for Country
Courts, it is fit they be narrowly limited, and brought to be merely predial and
dominial; that is, for Rents and the Fealties of Lordships: not capable of
determining an Inventory, or receiving a suit between parties, for more than
three Livres. To conclude, the shortning of proceedings in Law, would much
conduce to the reduction of Officers.

Let it not be objected, that this reduction of Officers, and such a multitude
of Suppressions, will ruin a multitude of Families. For though it were so, yet
should not the thing be stuck at; the Reformation of a State being concerned:
nor is the ill of particular persons to be put to account, when the Weal of the
Public is in question, GOD Himself, who is King of Kings, and Eternally Just,
how many men did He destroy by that universal deluge for the Reformation of the
Universe? How many Isralites did He cut off in the Wilderness, to save the
gross of the People? There is plenty of examples in this kind, and Sovereigns
have a right to do like things with like Justice, when the general welfare of
their Subjects is concerned. Kings are Eagles, to whom GOD gives His
Thunderbolts to carry: the strokes that come from their hands do come from the
hand of GOD, whose Images and Instruments they are.

To conclude, it is a thing which cannot be dissembled, that the Parliaments,
constituting an Aristocratick Government in part, as they do, are quite
contrary to Monarchick Government. Aristocracy is adverse to Regality; because
of all Governments it comes nearest to it. As, to use the very terms of Hesiod,
a Potter envies, and is against a Potter. Be it remembered here briefly, that
Theopompus King of Sparta having created the Ephori, at last after a great deal
of time, Cleomenes was fain to put them to death; when they had slain King
Agis. The Senate becoming too potent, overthrew the first Roman Monarchy, and
in one word, what has our Age seen in the trial of Chenailles? and what did a
former in that of Chancellor Poyet?

A second source from which the Evils of litigious suits do arise, is the sale
of Magistracies. The Emperor Alexander Severus sound this mischief in his
Empire; it having been introduced by Domician. S. Lewis saw cause to weed the
abuse out of His Kingdom; it having got in through the confusion and trouble of
some precedent Reigns. It will be glorious for the King to do in His State what
the Emperor Severus and S. Lewis did in theirs, with greatest glory to their
Memory. But as Policy requires, that in such enterprises, way be made by
degrees, and greatest events brought on by small beginnings: so it is necessary
here, to proceed leisurely, and with measured steps. The fixation of Offices
has been much advanced already: for though what has been done seemed to
signify an authorizing the sale of them: yet in truth, there has been ground
gotten. To continue the work, and bring it to perfection, there must a Decree
pass, or a Declaration be made, and published at the Seal, by which the King
declares, that he purposes no longer to admit any opposition in matter of
Title to Offices. This is just; for the King ought to be ever Master, and have
the liberty to bestow the charges of His Kingdom on whom he pleases, and
thinks worthy of 'em. Thus no one will be alarmed: but this Declaration will
extend unto the price it self, by a consequence easily deducible; namely, since
the principal and essential right to Offices consists in the Title, and the
price is but an accessory, as they term it: it is reasonable, that the price
always follow the Law of the Title: as the Title to a Benefice brings in the
Revenue of it; And as in Marriage, the Validity of the Sacrament makes the
Validity of the Contract, and of the civil effects. Thus receiving no more
opposition at the Seal for the Title; there neither will be any in reference to
the price: and hence it will come to pass, in tract of time, that Offices will
be no longer security for Money; which will diminish the price of them, and
insensibly bring it to nothing. But it is very just too, that the Mortgaging of
Offices, as has been done hitherto, be obstructed for the future. For the
Officer may dye before he has paid the Paulette; whereby his Office is
extinct; or if of Grace the King revives it, the value of what arises from the
casualty, is much less than the sum for which the thing was engaged: so that
there must loss certainly accrue. But if the King make a new creation of an
Officer, all engagements are gone: for it is then no longer the Office that
formerly it was.

Let it not be said, that without the Sale of Offices, the Casualties will be
worth the King nothing. For the contrary is true: and if the Casualties be
worth Him Two Millions, by reason of that sale of them, His Majesty will make
Four Millions of 'em, if they be no longer saleable. Forasmuch as in this Case,
they will be no longer Hereditary; and being no more Hereditary, they will
revert to the King upon the decease of every Titulary: and so the King may
dispose of 'em in favor of the Person that is most acceptable to Him, and if
it please His Majesty, the new admitted Officer may fine to the Coffers of His
Treasury Royal, as the Officers of Gentlemen do to the profit of the
Monasticks. As to the Objection, that by such suppression of Officers and
Jurisdictions, and taking away the sale of Offices, the King will lose the
Revenue of many of His Clerks places, and of the Paulette; The Answer is easy;
for as to the Clerks places suppressed, the King will be recompensed by the
greater value of those that shall remain; and as for the Paulette, the
retrenchment of the wages of the Officers suppressed, will be much more
considerable.

A third cause of vexatious Law-driving is, that Offices of Judicature are
gainful to those that execute them. An evil this, the dangerousest of any that
can affect a State; for all becomes suspected, all becomes corrupt where profit
is to be made; Avarice and Ambition creep in; Justice, Uprightness, and Truth,
depart: whereupon we may conclude with the ancient Proverb, That Money does
many things which the Devil cannot do. For an entrance upon a Reformation in
this matter, it would be good to ordain, First, That Judges not the Kings,
should take no more Spices. Secondly, That Judges in the Royal Courts should
not decree Executions for their attendance against the parties that are in
contest. Thirdly, That if Spices, (or Fees upon sentence obtained) be allowed,
the parties shall give what they will, as the former custom was, and not be
compelled. Fourthly, That there be no more transacting by Commissaries in
Sovereign Courts.

Judges should be forbidden to admit any solicitation from parties at Law,
even though it be but to let them know the difficulties of their Affairs, and
put them in a way to clear the same. For a Judge ought not to be prayed to do
his Office, in favor of a man whose case is good, much less of one whose case
is bad.

CHAP. IX.
1. Of some general Orders in Government. 2. Of punishment and recompense. 3.
Of Royal Virtues.

IN the Chapters now dispatched, I have inserted many things which may be of
use for the Kings service, for the general good of His State, and of every of
His Subjects in particular. In the Chapters that are to follow, others very
considerable shall be added. However, I judge it not amiss to make here a
distinct Chapter of some important points, which I cannot easily rank any other
where.

It has been long in dispute, whether it be good to alter Public Laws? and
upon debate of the Question to and fro, it is concluded, that there is oft-times
so pressing a necessity, that it cannot be forborne: but withal, that such
alterations must be insensible to the People, who hardly come off from old
Customs; and cannot be brought to any new observance, but by a long
circumference, and ways to them unknown. Legislators are Physicians of
Commonwealths, and in this case ought to imitate the ordinary Artists of that
Profession, who seeing the whole habit of a body out of order, and that to
preserve the Patient from Perishing, it is necessary to change it, do prescribe
remedies, which the more slowly they operate, the surer their effect.

Now the first Law, which in my Opinion might be made, or rather renewed in
France, is to banish thence all Usuries, of whatever quality, except among
Merchants; and those should be expressly prohibited, which arise from personal
Obligations, under pretense of damages and interests; even interests adjudged
by sentence not excluded; this pretense being but a means to authorize Usury,
and defraud the Law, which forbids it. Usury was strictly prohibited among the
ancient Inhabitants of Candie: but the coveting of Riches, to elude the
severity of this Statute, disposed the borrower, that he should seem to have
stolen the Money he had need of, and which in reality was lent him. By this
Artifice the Debtor was constrained to pay the Interests; which were not
adjudged to the Creditor on the account of any Loan, but in hatred of Robbery,
which he said had been committed upon him. This means cannot be used in France;
for that Theft is there a capital Crime, both in Religion and in Policy. But
the Spirit of Man being unbounded, and having more craft when bent to
transgress, than the Law has prudence to hinder evil doing, the taking of
damages and interests has been introduced amongst us; which is an equivalent
to the Cretan expedient. For the feigning a detension of Money against the
owners will, as is done in France, and the Debtor thereupon condemned to pay
the Interests, can be no other thing for substance, than the feigning a
Robbery, as was done in Candie.

There is not any Nation of note, in which Usurious Contracts have not been
prohibited among the Subjects. It Is known what the Law of the Church in this
behalf is, and what that of the Old Testament, so often repeated in Scripture,
was. Usury sure, has caused the greatest disorders that have hitherto troubled
the tranquillity of States. The Athenians, the Spartans, and the Romans, did not
forbid it only; but were also forced to abolish Debts contracted; and for
public benefit, rescin'd the compacts and promises that private Men had made,
though they seemed inviolable, as having been made under the Authority of the
Laws, and upon the security of general custom, which they were not wont to
overruled. An act of very particular consequence All Usurious Contracts should
be annulled, yea the culpable and accomplices as to the crime of Usury, put to
death; the Usurer in Plato's opinion, being worse than the Thief.

The second Law should be, to permit Contracts for annual Rent out of Land: yet
with charge, that they be published for public security; as I have said
elsewhere, when I treated of the shortning of Lawsuits. Withal, regulating to
a denier, the Arrearages, which are a kind of Usury, but the most tolerable of
any seeing there is an Alienation of the Land; and it is a fiction prudently
hit upon by the Popes Calixtus the Third, and Martin the Fifth. As for the
Declaration in form of an Edict which is to be made herein; Contracts, even the
formerly made, should be reduced to the Thirtieth denier. The Romans limited
Use to the hundredth, afterward to the Two hundredth, and at length abolished
it altogether.

A third Law should be, that no sum lent to any Son of a Family, or to others
under 25 years of age, without the consent and authority of their Relations, do
produce any action; no not thought the Contracts be ratified by the Debtors,
after they come of age. Vespasian made a like Ordinance; and there is nothing
more effectual to repress the greediness of Usurers, or the debauch of young
people: whereupon they would set themselves to labor, to exercises and study.
The profit which these Laws would yield the State, beside their stopping the
course of great Evils, would be, that persons who are always concerned, and
impatient to be getting, seeing they could not put out their Money at Interest
easily, and that the Interest of their Contracts would be at too low a rate,
must of force apply themselves to two things, each of which is eminently
advantageous to the Kingdom. For they would addict themselves to Trades and
Husbandry* or put their Money in the hands of Merchants to make benefit of it,
if not enter into partnership with them, which they should be permitted to do.
For Usury in matter of Commerce, was never forbidden, and is the Secret that
the Hollanders have found, to make all their people Merchants. On the other
hand, the Genoeses have engaged themselves in Traffic, upon observing the
profit it yielded.

The fourth Law might be, that Gentlemen be disabled to sell their Fiefs or
Inheritances, until they have made declaration of their Poverty in open Court.
Among the Israelites, Lands engaged reverted to their ancient owners at the
Jubilee. The Spartans Lands were not divided at all; I mean those 7000 portions
which Lycurgus had lotted out. The Locrians in like manner sold not their
Estates: the same is observed in Flanders. The Fiefs of the great Houses of
Bretanie are never parted out. Substitution of Heirs in France does hinder the
Alienation of Lands. In Spain Gentlemen cannor sell their Estates: And Lastly,
the Demesne of the Crown in France, is in-alienable, which may prescribe a Law
for all Noble Families. This Ordinance would make Gentlemen good Husbands. When
the Jews, the Lacedaemonians, the Syracusians, the Romans, and all
civilized-People, made a partition of their Lands, they considered the benefit
that might thence redound to their States, and very wisely provided, that all
such as possessed Inheritances should fix in the Country: having an Estate
there which they could not carry away, they would love the places where they
had their subsistence; and every one defending his own Possession, all would
jointly defend the Commonwealth, and fight for the Public Interests.

The Fifth Law should be, that a Gentleman being ruined, and having
acknowledged his Poverty in Court, should be no longer Noble; there being no
Estate so shameful, as that of a Man of Quality reduced to an extreme Misery.
On the contrary, that a Plebeian, when he has raised himself an advantageous
Fortune, which might be limited at 50000 Crowns, should be ennobled; provided
always, that the profit had been made by laudable and lawful means.

A sixth Law should be, to hinder the public begging of the Poor, by
appointing the greatest penalties upon it; and ordain, for that end, that every
Parish both in Town and Country, do maintain their own Poor, not suffering them
to wander; punish all that make a Trade of it; send the stoutest of them to the
Galleys, and set all the rest on work according to their ability. This is a
means to fetch out that idleness which is among the meaner sort.

The seventh Law might be, to render Fathers responsible, as to Civil
Interests, for all the Faults and Crimes their Children should commit while
they depend on them, and under 25 years of age; or, however, whilst they dwell
in their Fathers House. The Mulct to be allowed for afterward in the Patrimony
of those faulty Children; This Law is in force in Bretanie, and was so at Rome.
Masters, in like manner, for the faults of their Houshold-servants; and paying
an Arbitrary Fine besides, because they ought to correct them. In the Third
place, Provost Marshals and their Officers, for all Robberies and Murders
committed on the Highways, Burglaries, Counterfeit Coin, and other the like
Crimes within their district, if they took not up the Malefactors, and brought
them to their Trial. This Law would hinder well-nigh all mischiefs of this
nature; it being, as may be said, of public Notoriety, that Provosts hold
Intelligence with all persons of ill Life. Again, all Lieutenants criminal and
Judges, for the Crimes committed in their Towns, by the same reason. Masters of
Inns, and Houses of Entertainment, for the Crimes committed by their Guests,
while they are in their Houses. Owners of Houses, for the Crimes committed by
their Tenants during their term; because they ought to know, and answer for the
good abearing of such as they entertain. Captains and Officers for the Crimes
of their Soldiers; the Inhabitants of an House for those committed in it. This
is done in Spain. In the Turkish Towns, the Townsmen of each Street are
responsible for what is done there; And if a Man be slain, the Townsman before
whose door he falls, is sentenced to pay for his Blood. This Order is
excellent. For as soon as there is a noise in the Street, all run thither, and
the Authors of the Fact, whatever it be, are seized, brought before the Judge,
and forthwith punished according to the quality of the Crime. In parallel to
this Rule of Government in Turkey, severest penalties must be imposed upon such
as transgress the Laws, and especially the Laws that relate to Public Order
and Policy; those Penalties also speedily inflicted; otherwise the said Laws
will be of no use. For example, It Is ordained in France, that no Lackey wear a
Sword; that no Towns-man have Arms; or that Bakers make their Bread of a
certain Weight, or other things of like nature. They that obey not, must be
instantly punished, the Rich by pecuniary Fines, the Poor by Corporal
Penalties. The Turks cause Offenders who have not Money to pay their Fines, to
be beaten with a Lath.

An Eighth Law, All Printers and Booksellers must be forbidden, and that upon
pain of death, to Print, Sell, Disperse, set to Sale, or keep any Book of what
Quality or Subject soever, without its having been Approved, and License given
them under Seal in due manner; after which may nothing be added to the Book.

But as it is just to punish bad Subjects, so it is reasonable to reward the
good: and them that out of love to their Country, employ themselves in
advancing its Reputation and Glory. The King ought to be the sole Master and
Arbiter of all Rewards; and confer them himself, so as they that receive any
Beneficence of His, may be convinced they owe it to His Bounty. This would be
an infallible means to attract to Him the hope of His Subjects, and together
with it, their Respect, whereupon every one would strive to please Him, in
doing of his Duty, and no body promise himself any Grace or Advantage, but by
his Merit, his Services and Diligence. There are several kinds of Rewards with
which His Majesty may Honor His Subjects; I say, Honor them; because a
Subject, in receiving a benefit from the hand of the King, receives withal, a
mark of the Esteem which is had of his Person, and of the satisfaction he has
given in his Conduct. Nothing can be more glorious to a Man of Worth; nothing
can yield him a truer Contentment. A Gift from an ordinary hand is many times
somewhat shameful to him that takes it; and hence comes the adage, That it is
better to Give than to Receive. But when a King is the Donor, the Dignity of
the Royal Hand does add to the Gift a new quality, which augmenteth the Worth
and Excellency of it: whence it is, in such a case no less praise to receive
than to give.

This now which I have affirmed, cannot be doubted of: yet it may be taken for
evident, that of these rewards, there are some purely Honorable, others only
Profitable; and a last sort, both Honorable and Profitable too. The reward
purely Honorary is, when the King confers upon a Subject some Dignity which he
had not before; as upon a Plebeian, the quality of Gentleman, upon a Gentleman
that of Knight, or Marquess, etc. and permits him to carry Fleurdelizes in his
Coat of Arms, or some other* Memorial of a great Action: Or grants him the
privilege to wear a Crown in his Crest, or the like. This kind of reward is
unlimited, because Sovereignty is a source from whence new Honors and
Dignities incessantly flow; as projections of Light do every moment issue from
the Sun, without exhausting its secondity; and on the contrary, the more rays
that it emitteth, the more resplendent is it in it self; so the more Honors a
King confers, the greater Luster He adds to His own Royal Majesty. The Romans,
of any People upon Earth, did most abound in conferring rewards of this nature:
and on that account, brought into use Crowns, Triumphs, Statues, Rings,
Inscriptions, Public Praises; and stuck not to grant Deifications, Temples and
Sacrifices: such a love they had for Virtue; and so ingenious were they to
inhance the merit of their Fellow-Citizens: thus inciting them to worthy
Persormances, and principally to an advancing the power of the Commonwealth.
For any man that has a Noble Spirit, and is Virtuously disposed, does more to
merit a just reward, than he would to gain the Empire of the World: because in
the issue, it is always Virtue that triumphs; and oft-times but Fortune that
rules. In conformity to this example, which both Antiquity, and the Authors of
it, and Experience, do render Illustrious, the King may Honor such as serve
Him best, with Honorable Titles; but ought to punish all those, who, without
His Permission, dare assume and usurp them. It Is necessary that there be a
difference of rank between Persons; and the distinguishing of them by their
merit, is to be preferred far before all discrimination made by their Wealth.

It would also be very commodious, that as the Honor of Knighthood is purely
Personal, so the King should make the Dignity of Baron, of Marquess, of Count,
etc. Personal likewise; not real, or annexed to Estates; the said Dignities to
become extinct by decease of the persons invested with them. This Expedient, to
recompense Men of worth, being well managed, would produce a mavelous effect;
and an whole race, thereby become Men of Merit. For, what would not the Son of
one of these personal Marquesses do, to prevent falling from that degree of
Honor which his Father had? and how could he choose but press vigorously on in
the Court of Honor that has been thus marked out to him? But in this case,
there is one thing to be further done, which might much profit the State, by
laying a more Express Obligation on the Nobility to serve the King: and that
is, that the King do give His Letters for personal Marquessates, in such form
as they may be verified in the Parisian Chamber of Accounts, and the Persons
Honored with them, do homage to His Majesty thereupon. Such kind of Homages
have been done heretofore for Officers, and even for Pensions, though but of
two hundred Livres. The Emperor in Germany has, in this manner, made
Gentlemen, and Counts of the Empire, as for example, the late Count de Guimene;
who had not a foot of Land within the Emperors Jurisdiction. The King of
England creates a Gentleman, Baron, and Earl of a Barony, or County, in which
the Gentleman possesses Nothing.

The second kind of Gratifications and Rewards, is of those that are purely
gainful and pecuniary; as Pensions, Tickets for Money, Acquittances by Patent,
Ransoms, Confiscations of deceasing Strangers goods, and the like. These
however, carry a great deal of honor with them, as I said before. The third
kind, is of those that are at once both gainful an honorable, as Great
Offices, Governments, etc.

Upon this matter of Rewards, there is this further Reflection to be made;
namely, that a King never be informed of a good Action, but He gratify the
Actor, either with Praises, or with Benefits. In fine, all these favors must
be regulated by consideration of His Service, and the welfare of His State.
GOD, in giving Princes a Sovereign Power, inspires into them Affection for
their People. But His will is, that it be a Paternal Affection; that a King do
open His Bosom to His Subjects, as His very Children; and that all His Counsels
and Designs be levelled at their Felicity; without which, Himself cannot be
happy. It Is principally for this great and glorious effect, that Kings are
Images of GOD, and be fortified with His Spirit.

I have said, that Monarchs are in their Kingdoms, what the Soul is in the Body
of Man, that external Goods cannot enrich them; that Virtue alone is their
proper Portion, as it is of GOD Himself. It now remains I should say what
kind of Virtue it ought to be.

It Is necessary that a Great Prince have Piety, to give His Subjects an Example
of it; and bettering of them in this, is the security of His State. He must be
just to govern them. A Government never is of long duration without Justice.
This Queen of Virtues comprehends, (as Aristotle judiciously noted) all the
rest. A King I say must be Just, to render unto every one, and unto Himself,
what is respectively due. The third Virtue of a Prince, is Prudence, to foresee
of Himself what may betide His States. Thus a wise Pilot has the skill to
foresee Calms and Storms: he knows by secret notices, whether the Winds will be
favorable, or contrary to his Voyage. The fourth Virtue is Magnanimity; a
weight this, that keeps the Soul always in the same position, and gives it so
settled a firmness, that neither good nor bad successes can put it out of place;
and a King appears unalterable: He thus bears up the hope of His Subjects; they
look upon Him as an assured succor against Fortune, and persuade themselves,
there is somewhat of Divine Quality in His Person. Of Royal Virtues, a fifth is
Clemency; It pertains to the greatness of a King, that He be benign, and do
commiserate the weaknesses of His Subjects; who are Men as He is. Mischances
are pardonable, and it seems to me, it is too much rigor to punish a poor wretch
for a Crime committed out of imprudence, or by necessity; and of which he is
less guilty, if I may say it, than his ill destiny, It Is to Criminals of this
kind, that Grace should not be denied: and when a King gives one of His
Subjects his Life, who has been condemned to death, he should rejoice more at
the feeling in the Secret of his Heart a Will to Pardon: than at the having in
His hand the power to punish. To give a Man his Life, is in some sort to create
him; and the preserving of his Being, is a giving of it. It would be, it is
true, a great fault, to stop the course of Justice, in case of public Crimes,
and such as have disturbed the Peoples Peace: Yet in sum it is Noble, that a
King be inclined to compassion and Mercy. It Is an action appropriated unto GOD,
to disarm His Anger: Upon this ground the Roman Poet said, That those
Thunderbolts which Jupiter throws, might be diverted.

The sixth Royal Virtue is Liberality. One of the Ancients pronounced, that it
was less disadvantageous for a King to be overcome by Arms, than by Liberality.
A Poet introduces Mark Anthony excellently saying, That he had nothing left
him but the Benefits he had conferred. And to say true, A Great Prince never
enjoys His Wealth, but when He has given it. Liberality enricheth Him, and
makes Him Purchases of inestimable value. For thereby it is, that He wins the
love of his own People, and becomes admired of all others. When I say
Liberality, I mean a judicious Liberality, such as is a Virtue, not an
exorbitant profuseness; a Liberality always exercised with Advantage, and with
Glory.

To conclude in short; when I consider other Virtues, I do not find any one of
them all improper for a King; but it is impossible a King should have those
which I have mentioned, without having every one of the rest; since they are
inseparable Companions, and must be united to make a Virtuous Man.

CHAP. X.
1. Of Finances, or a Princes Treasure. 2. Means to make the Subjects more
numerous. 3. Of the Officers that manage the King's Treasure. 4. Of the King's
Demesnes. 5. Means to recover the Demesnes. 6. Of Taxes. 7. Means to ease the
People. 8. Of the Free Cities. 9. Of the Gabells. 10. Means to augment the
Receipt of the Gabells, and ease the People. 11. Of the Saltfree Country. 12.
Of the Countries of State, and Free Gifts. 13. Of the expending of Money. 14.
Of the reserving it.

THE Art of Finances, or the Treasury, is a principal part of the Politics;
and so much the more necessary in a State, in that Money is the Soul of all
Affairs. A Commonwealth is no further powerful, than proportionably to the
richness of its public Treasury, and the greatness of the yearly Income that
maintain it. This the French Name plainly imports; for Finance is an old
Word, signifying Power, and comes from the ancient Verb Finer, which is to be
able, to may or can.

Three particulars are here to be considered. First, Just and easy means to
make Money. Secondly, the prudent expending it. Thirdly, the keeping it in, and
laying it up for necessities that may happen; as Famine, Pestilence, War, Fire,
Shipwreck, and such like.

We have in France three general means to make Money; The King's Demesnes.
Impositions on the People, Merchandises, etc. Of this last I will speak in the
Chapter of Commerce. I will say nothing here of Conquests; which may come in
for a Fourth means of Getting; I will treat of them elsewhere.

Before any further advance into this matter, it will be pertinent to observe,
that the fundamental Wealth of a State consists in the Multitude and Plenty of
Subjects. For it is Men that Till the Ground; that produce Manufactures; that
manage Trade; that go to War; that People Colonies; and in one word, that bring
in Money. To make way in France for multiplying of Men, and oblige them to
Marry, the King may at once do two things, after the example of the Emperor
Augustus. First, He may decree Privileges and Advantages in favor of such as
shall have diverse Children; exempting them from Guardianships, from being
Collectors, from Commissions to look to the Fruits of Sequestered Lands, and
other burthensom Offices: He may discharge them from Subsidies, and even give
them some Estate. Secondly, He might impose penalties upon those that Marry not
before a certain Age: and take part in the Successions of all sorts of persons,
who in contempt of Law and Wedlock, live single, not having impediment by any
natural infirmity. It Is upon a like consideration, that I said in a former
Chapter, the King, to restrain Parents from compelling their Daughters into
Cloisters, might Declare, that the right of all Recluses in any Succession, was
vested in Himself: And it is for the very same reason that the Ancient Earls of
Flanders were Heirs to all the Priests that were their Subjects.

Now to that which Augustus did for the inducing of his Subjects to Marry, the
King might add Two particulars: One is, That the First Year a Man Taxable did
Marry the first time, being under 26 years of age, he should be exempt from all
Subsidies and Impositions, and public Charges, even quartering of Soldiers, in
case he kept House apart, and was settled in a Dwelling of his own. If the newly
Married be the King's Officer, his Office should not fall into the King's hand,
if he died within the year. Commanders also, and Soldiers should be dispensed
with, as to their serving for that time, unless on urgent necessity, or some
important occasion. The other partilar which in France had need to be added to
Augustus's Ordinances, is, to take effectual Order, that persons once Married,
be not so easily separated again as they are. For it is to no purpose to
contract Marriages, if they be not stuck to, and the coupled Parties cohabit
not.

A strange abuse in this matter of separation has crept in of late, nor know I
how the Officials have become so favorable in it, or how the Parliaments have
suffered it. Now-adays, a Woman that would have, as they say, her swing, and
without control, practice all that her giddy, witless, and often times wanton
humor prompts her to, raises stirs in the House, at length tires out her
Husbands patience; hereupon, she complains of his Vices, has Servants suborned
for her purpose; a Divorce comes to be adjudged upon their Depositions, the
Husband is sentenced to yield her up her Goods, and not only do that, but also
to let her have possession of her Dower, or of a good part of it; at least to
allow her a great Pension. Then this Woman reties, takes an House, and lives
after her own fashion, which is not always the most commendable in the World;
her Husband the while, sinking under the whole weight of his Household Affairs.
Had she counted upon nothing else, but that of necessity she must live with her
Husband, and in his House, she would have formed her self to it, and not have
played her vexatious pranks; so she had promoted the happiness of her Husband,
and of the Children, and together with it, her own. For application therefore of
a remedy in this case, it must be a Law That a Wife shall not sue for a
Separation' as to Person or Habitation, but by the advice' of four of her
nearest Kindred; Men of known Integrity: and that a Separation being ordered,
either by Sentence in Court, or by Accommodation between the parties, she shall
be bound to enter a Monastery, without egress again; nor suffered to admit a
visit from any man there; it being contrary to Public decency, that a Woman
who has lost her Husband, (for to be separated from him, is to lose him)
should appear openly, and maintain commerce with other Men. On the other hand,
her Sex, and all seemliness requiring, that in this estate she hide her self,
and hide withal her ill fortune, and her grief for it. I would too that a very
slender Pension be adjudged her. And since Husbands will be found in fault on
their part likewise, and discover their ill husbandry, it would be very just,
that the disposal of their Estates be not left to them, nor the possession of
more than a part of 'em: as is the case of Wives: and that supposing they have
Children, the Money arising from the remainder, should be received, employed,
and administered by a Guardian: He to account for it to the said Children in due
time. If there be none, the Revenue exceeding the Pension should be laid out on
Hospitals, and other necessities of the State. This Law should extend to
Separations already made. And such rigor being practiced in matter of
Divorces, there would be no more of 'em. Husbands and Wives would be under a
reciprocal Obligation, to live together, and to live together discreetly: so
they would breed up a Family that might prove the contentment of their Life,
the comfort of their elder years; and be beneficial to the whole Kingdom.

There is a further consideration to be made in the matter of the Finances; and
it is this, namely, that it is expedient the King should declare, that for the
future He will be Creditor, and Donotary to His Receivers and accomptable
Officers, fot their Wives dotal Money, and Marriage settlements, and for their
Childrens Portions and Donatives: then explaining the late Ordinances to take
away all difficulty, declare further, the crime of misemploying the public
Money to be punishable by death; and ordain, that the Interests, Amends, and
civil Reparations adjudged against Criminals of that kind, should fall upon
their Heirs or Legatees. This Law is rigorous; yet it is just and necessary:
forasmuch as it will strike terror on the Financiers: who having no hope to
escape Justice, could not entertain a Thought of committing a fault that would
ruin all that is dearest to them. Beside, the Romans punished even with death,
the very friends of those whom they condemned for Crimes against the State; the
History of Sejanus affords unquestionable proof of it.

That which we call the Demesne of the King, and of the Crown, cannot be
Alienated, nor is it liable to any charge or encumbrance. This Law is
Fundamental in all kind of Commonwealths, as well as in France. But here
things are judged to belong to the Crown three manner of ways from all
Antiquity: As the Sovereignty, the power of War, Subsidies, and the like. By
Declaration; when the King, by His Letters, declares some particular united to
the Crown. By Confession, when for the continued space of ten years, the
Receivers have accounted for it to the Chamber. There are many questions
proposable in reference to the Demesne; but it is not our business to State
them. Chopin may be consulted, who has learnedly written of this Subject.

In necessities of the State, diverse things have been engaged by the King to
the use of private private persons, who have paid in Sums thereupon. Yet these
persons cannot hinder, but that the things may be recovered. And there are two
equitable ways to effect this. The First is, by making a Principal of what is
due to those Creditors, and assigning them Rents upon the Town Hall of Paris,
or some other place; of which there are examples. For when the King had Sold,
or rather engaged some Rights of His unto particular Men, they have been
resumed by Contracts for a Rentcharge. Now those Rights were Demesne, upon
which, to recover the Demesne, Rents were charged. The same course then may be
taken again. Nor could the Engagees have any cause to complain; for the
engagements made to 'em, are but to secure their due, and give them not any
propriety: their security therefore will be as great when they have Contracts
for Rent. For the one and the other pertains to the Demesne still. And such
kind of Impositions in like manner, the power to impose them being Royal and
Dominical, the Engagees concerned will by this means have security for
security, and Rent for Rent. But that the King may reap advantage from this
exchange, it is necessary to settle a Stock for the raising of these new Rents;
and to that end, a new Imposition must be laid upon the Clergy, the Countries
of State, Cities, Commonalties, Companies, Colleges, Merchants, and other
Members of the Kingdom, the Engagees themselves paying their proportions. There
is in this no inconvenience at all: because the Demesne having been engaged for
the preservation and defense of all the Corporations in the Kingdom, it is
natural, that they all contribute to free it again.

The second way to disengage the Demesne, would be, by giving ready Money
instead of Rents, and making an Imposition for this end, which might be more
easy. A reimbursement should be completed in five or six years. Mean time,
and before all things, the Engagees must be put out of Possession, and order
given, that the Receivers of the Demesne do take up the profits. For if any
condition be proposed while the said Engagees are in possession, they will make
a thousand difficulties at it; and on the contrary, if they no longer possess,
they will readily consent. But that the matter may be transacted with less
noise, it ought to be expedited in each Parliament apart: or at least the
Receivers commanded, by virtue of a Decree of the Kings Council, to receive all
the profits, and even those of the engaged Demesnes. If there be not made a new
imposition, in order to recover those Demesnes, the affair will not be of
advantage to the King; and there may one be very justly made for the reasons
now alleged, and for the putting of things again in order, Let us pass unto
the art of the Tallies.

The Imposition of the Tallies [or Taxes] is a kind of Subsidy or Aid laid upon
the people. Under it, (in France) are comprehended the Tallion, and the
Subsistence; as they term them. The Tallie is hugely equitable; it is ancient;
it is necessary; and in use all the world over. For there never was People that
paid not to defray the public Expenses. In France it is so moderate, and may
be so easily paid, that it has been known to be higher than now it is: because
the sums that make it up are received without much trouble: Yet at present,
though it be considerably diminished, the People are scarce able to pay it, and
the Country extremely incommodated by it. The prime cause of this is, that the
ratable persons considered, the rates are not duly proportioned; the rich
Peasants, the Justicers of the Villages, the Gentlemen's Farmers, the Eleus, and
other Persons of Power, are so eased, that they pay almost nothing, and the
poorest of all do bear all. A second cause of the mischief is, that they who
are Commissioned to receive the Tallies, do so run up the charges, that they
far exceed the principal, and thus draw Money out of the Peoples hands, which
they can part with but once. When the Sergeants of Villages need a Cow, or
Corn, or some piece of Houshould-stuff, they go to the Peasants houses where
they know the same is to be had; there they make Seizures, and then Sales at
what price they please. They seize and sell whatever they find, to the very
Household-loaf of Bread that has been cut, and is in use: upon this, the poor
Rustic has nothing left to help himself, but is utterly distressed, and can
no longer do his work. The greatest part of these Officers must be suppressed;
the more there are of them in the matter of the Finances, the more disorder and
oppression there is. For all of them look for profit; and they spoil all by
their avarice and ignorance.

To remedy the two Evils that have been mentioned, effectual order must be
taken that the Peasants may pay equally; that is, in proportion to the estate
they have; and pay without charges superadded. First, all the Taxes should be
made real, as they are in Languedoc, that every one may pay. Secondly, The Tax
should be levied in kind of the fruits that are received from the Lands and
Tenements, as Wine, Sider, Beer, Corn, Cattle, and the like; the quantity that
is to be taken being stinted and fixed, for example, to a Tenth part. A Peasant
that might have ten Bushels of Corn, would very willingly pay one to the King,
and might do it without inconvenience. But when for payment of Forty Sous in
Money, which he has not, the Sergeants and Collectors seize upon, and sell the
ten Bushels of Corn, which too are prized at an extreme low rate, and all is
spent in charges, does he not really, instead of Forty Sous, pay Twenty Livres?
This turns not at all to the profit of the King, and tends to the undoing of
his People.

Under the name of Lands and Tenements this Tenth might be extended unto Houses
in Cities, Towns and Villages, and they ordered to pay a Tenth part of the
Money they might be let out for; which should be very low rated. In like manner
a Tenth or Twentieth part might be taken upon Contracts for a Rentcharge. For
these are stocks, and a real Estate. The Ecclesiastics, who have sure been
wary men, have taken their Rents in kind, and these sorts of Rents are now
infinitely augmented. The greatest part of the Revenues of the Romans and
Egyptians themselves, was paid in Fruits. They paid their Armies and Officers
with them. Many Kings have taken a Tenth of Estates, oft-times a Fifth,
sometimes a Third. It is not necessary that the People have Money; but they
must have Fruits for sustenance of life. The King might have Farmers of this
Tenth in each Parish, or in each Election, who might let out under*Farms of it
to the Peasants, as is done in the Tyths of the Church.

If it be thought fit to take things in kind, there must be Magazines in
Cities, as there are Storehouses for Salt: in them the Receivers should sell
the Fruits, or reserve them, as Joseph did in Egypt. The King will need them
for Armies, for Fleets, for Victualling places of strength, for Transportation
into Foreign parts; especially in case of a Famine. This is practiced in many
Countries abroad, and particularly in Italy. What is done in a petty State, may
be done in a great Kingdom. It is not to be doubted, but that if the Tallie
were thus raised, it would go further than it does, and the People suffer no
incommodity by it at all. But one thing which presses more at present, is, the
putting of the Country in case again. For this end, the rich must be permitted
to give Cows, Sheep, and other Cattle, upon terms, to the poor Peasants. This
is done in very many places, yea, in the greatest part of the Kingdom. The too
severe, and over-scrupulous Parish Priests prohibit it; but they will not any
longer be able to do so, when the thing is publicly permitted.

It seems unreasonable, that some certain Cities should, upon imaginary
Privileges, be for ever exempted from the charges of the State; and mean time,
the Country bear the whole weight of them. The pretext of these Franchises has
induced diverse of the Peasants to retire to these places. Order must be taken
in the case, and all these Cities obliged to contribute to the expenses of the
Kingdom, which they are so considerable a part of. They may then be brought to
pay, under color of Subsistence or Loan. There should be Garrisons sent them,
or Soldiers quartered upon them* that all the Beams of the State may bear their
part in public affairs, and so the weight be more easy to them, whereas one
alone would be over-charg'd, and break under it.

The third means the King has to bring Him in Money, consists in the Gabells.
Some have said, that the Gabells are not of the nature of the Kings Demesne:
and their reason is, because the Ordinances for the first imposition of them do
import, that it was not the Kings intention they should so be. The contrary
might be true. For, beside that the Salt Pits did heretofore belong to the
Emperor, as goods of the Empire, the sums that are raised out of them* are
raised by public Authority, and turn to the profit of the whole Kingdom: as
has been done for many Ages. But however that be* not to enter into a dispute,
which can be of no consequence here, I will consider the Gabells according to
the present state of things. I will not say when this kind of Imposition did
commence in France; nor upon what examples of Antiquity our Kings did ground
themselves. Not will I explain, how, beside the Gabells of France, which are
called The grand party, there are the Gabells of Provence, Dauphine, Languedoc,
and Lionnois; because the thing is known, and makes not to our purpose.

The Gabells are paid in France by two different means. First by Impositions;
so in places neighboring on the Salt-free Countries. There, for fear the
Subjects would not take Salt at the Kings Garners, the Officers see how many
Minots each Parish ought to take: then a rate is made in the Parishes, for it,
as for the Tallie. The second means is without Imposition: this is the use in
places remote from the Salt-free Countries. There, because prohibited Salt
cannot be brought in, every one fetches from the Garners at the price current.

The King receives a great deal of Money from these Gaballs; but the People pay
excessively beyond what comes into His Coffers. The infinite number of Officers
belonging to a Storehouse, the Receivers, the Commissioners, the Archers, the
Charges, the Portage, the Fees of Officers, to whom Presents are also made, do
swallow up huge sums, which the King fingers not, and the People do pay. For
there is not a petty Gabeller but lives handsomely by his Employment: not a
Commissioner but makes him a Fortune, and grows rich upon it, making good
cheer, and great expenses. It Is of very much importance that a remedy be
applied to the malady; and in truth, the vexations which the King's Subjects do
suffer under pretext of the Gabelle, are not to be comprehended. The Archers
enter into Houses, to search (they say) for concealed Salt: in obedience to
Authority the doors are opened to them; mean time themselves covertly convey in
some Bags: hereupon they form a Process; and the Master of the House is
excessively fined: nor do they depart till they have pillaged all they can lay
hands on. If entrance be denied them, they force the House, and act all
Hostilities: nor dares any one complain; all are at their Mercy; and thus they
ruin the poor Persons whom they single out. This is no way beneficial to the
King's affairs, nor is it His intention, that His Subjects should be so ill
treated. But it is easy to break them of this course.

First of all, it must be debated in the Kings Council of the Finances, what
sum is fit to be taken for the Salt; this sum being determined at ten or twelve
Millions; for example, two several parts of it shall be set out, to be yearly
paid: one for the Country-Parishes, another for the Cities. Each of these
allotted parts shall be sent into each Generality, and thence to the places
where there is a Storehouse of Salt. The allotment for the Country shall be
divided by the Parishes, as is now done for the Tallie, the Subjects among
themselves rating every one's proportion. The Gentlemen, the Church* men, the
Monasticks, and others, must be engaged in it, and bear their part: because
they are charged by reason Salt is so dear as now it is; and by consequence,
the King making a change to the profit of all, all ought to be taxed, to
recompense the diminution that will follow in the Finances.

The second Sum allotted for the Cities, shall in like manner be sent to the
Generalties, and Salt-Garners, that such Rents as the Towns are to pay the King
may be divided; The houses may be measured by the Perch, and the Rents assessed
accordingly; much like to what is done for cleansing the Strrets at Paris. The
Cities that claim a Freedom, as Angers, Orleans, and Paris, shall enter into
this contribution, for the same reason that the Ecclesiastics and Gentlemen
do; inasmuch as they will notably profit by the suppression of the Gabells, and
abatement of the price of Salt. For it is to be observed, that that measure
which now costs at Paris five and forty Livres, might amount not to two Crowns,
and so proportionably in other Cities.

Now the number of Perches in each City being known, (having been taken by
Commissioners of the Kings, who might be Citizens) it will be very easy, on
any necessity, toraise an aid from the City, upon the proportion of the said
Perches, by way of Loan or Subvention, or under some other title. And that the
Citizens may not oppose the Kings intentions in the matter, permission must be
given to each City, to treat every year with what Merchants they please; and
agree a price for the Salt that shall be there sold through the whole year; He
to sell it, who will oblige himself to afford it best cheap; (except the
Citizens had rather leave it free for all Merchants that would, to bring in,)
always understood, that there be no power to compel any one to buy. The like
may be done in every Village; the Gentleman causing Salt to be Sold in a
Servant's name, and making the profit of it. This course, will, without doubt,
be gain to the People; and Salt being sold in such manner, it may be brought to
pass, that the Commodity it self shall pay the Rents which shall be due to the
King, and they the while, buy it at much a lower rate than they do. So that
clearly, all sorts will receive such a proposal with applause. To augment the
cheapness of Salt, it should be ordained, that it be free from paying to
Lordships, and by the Load, and from Imposts.

The thing being resolved in the Council, the King shall make a Declaration in
form of an Edict, by which His Majesty shall take off the Impositions upon
Salt, on condition the Towns and Parishes will pay Him yearly the Sums He shall
resolve upon in His Council: and that until the Declaration be executed, the
Gabell shall continue its course. It would be needful to ordain, that these
Sums be paid into the hands of the Receivers of the Tallies. For there would be
no more need of a Receiver of a Salt-garner. What are so many Receivers good
for, but to consume all? In this case, the Receivers of Salt must be otherwise
disposed of. This Declaration would include a suppression of all the Officers
of the Gabells; for when Salt should be freely Sold, the King would have no
more use of 'em. As for their re-imbursement, provision might be made, either
by continuing their wages during their Lives, or by assigning them Rents, which
might be redeemed for little and little; or by giving them ready Money. The
People too might be charged with this re-imbursement, in favor of the
suppression of the Gabells. This Affair might be worth the King a great deal,
and can never fail of being beneficial: the People will gain six Millions by
it, beside the quiet it will yield them. It being put in execution, the King
may purchase the Salt Pits, upon the greatest part of which, He
would-previously have the Tenth part of the Salt, if He took the Tenth of all
Revenues, as I said before. Again, in doing as has been showed, He would have
an Army ready raised: for all the Gabellers must be led into the Field. There
are in their Companies notable stout Men, who also have been in action.

As for the Salt-free Countries which have bought out their freedom, no one
durst touch them hitherto, by reason of the strength of the Huguenots, the
Civil and Foreign Wars, and other Considerations, as the Minority of Kings,
etc. But now that the King is Master, and in a condition to make Himself be
obeyed; it is reasonable, that he do oblige so many great and rich Provinces to
bear a part of the burdens of the State, in proportion to their ability, for
the easing the rest of France. And to this end, one of the three following
Propositions may be made them. First, to take a reimbursement of the Sums paid
by them; which re-imbursement shall be made, by granting them a diminution of
the Tallies, without putting hand in Purse other ways. Hereto may be subjoined,
that the King may not wholly discharge them: because such a discharge tends
to the oppressing of his other Subjects: that a King may indeed augment and
diminish Subsidies, as seems him good, but not extinguish them; it not being
possible, that a Kingdom should subsist without public Incoms: that it must be
remembered on this occasion, how Nero proposing to take off all the Imposts that
were paid at Rome, the Senate opposed it, as a thing that would be the ruin of
the Empire. The Second Proposition might be, that these Provinces be obliged to
pay the King a yearly Rent, by way of Supplement, and in confirmation of their
ancient Treaty. The Third, that the Tallie, and other Impositions on them, be
augmented, to even the balance, which cannot be done any other way.

There are certain means to maintain the Finances; among others, the Free Gifts
that are presented to the King by the People of those Provinces, which are
called Countries of State. No other Order need be taken with them, but to
hinder as much as may be, that the principal Members of these States be not in
the Offices they bear, unjust at the Public cost. Yet they must make their
advantages in them, otherwise the States would come to nothing; which would
occasion no small confusion, and a retardment of the King's Affairs. His
Majesty might make Himself Master of the Deputations, and gainful Commissions,
which are given to the States: As for example, in Bretannie, Monsieur the late
Marshall de la Milleray, nominated alone, or rather, caused to be nominated
whom he pleased, and there was no more deliberating after he had given order;
'twas one way he had to gratify his Friends. Monsieur the Duke Mazarin, does
the same still; which may, in His person, succeed well: but the King may cause
whom he will to be nominated, and the liberty of the States will not suffer by
it any prejudice, or innovation at all: for such is the condition of things in
these places. I will not speak here of the Farms of Iron, nor of others of like
value. These things run in ordinary course.

But having spoken of the bringing in of Money, I must speak of a due laying
out, and a like due laying up thereof. The advantage of an Exchequer does not
consist in the bare getting in of Money; but also in a meet expending of it:
and there is no less profit in giving of it forth, than in receiving of it.
It Is necessary the King should spend to maintain his Revenues. For if all the
Sums that come into His Coffers should not issue thence again, no one, in the
end, would be able to pay Him any thing. The Kings of Egypt, who took a third
part of their Subjects Estates, caused the Labyrinth to be built, the Pyramids
to be erected, the Lake of Meotis to be dug up, and other Fabrics raised,
which are incredible to Posterity. Their design was to disperse among People,
the Treasure they received from them; and withal, banish sloth and idleness out
of their States. These two Vices, so dangerous in Kingdoms, the Egyptian Laws
did so strictly provide against, that there were particular Magistrates
appointed, unto whom every private Man was obliged to give an account every
year of all that he had done throughout the year; which was executed with so
much exactness and rigor, that if any one had taken an ill course to live, or
not preserved his Estate, he was severely punished for it. The same thing was
done at Athens, and the Romans had Censors, who took the like care; they had it
in charge, to make a review of all the People every fisth year, and inform the
Senate of all that was amiss in the Commonwealth. I have often wondered, that
there is no such Officer in France: and that each ones Estate is not precisely
known, which it is hugely important, it should be; because in difficult times,
when the Kingdom perceives it* self involved in urgent necessities, succor must
be drawn from every one in proportion to his Interest in the Public Fortune,
that is, in proportion to what he possesses in the Kingdom.

Expense must be made with good Husbandry; and a judicious parcimony observed
in it; that it run not out to a profusion on one hand, nor sink into a sordid
avarice on the other: If Measure and Rule be not kept in the issuing out of
Money, all the Gold of Asia will be but a small matter. Caligula found the way
to consume in his debauches in one year, the immense Treasures which his
Predecessor had been heaping up all along the whole course of his Empire. Thus
it is expedient, that a King do cause the sums to be paid which are charged
upon the Receipt of his Finances; and also that He give liberally; but always
so order the matter by his Prudence, that nothing go out of, or be kept in his
hand, but for the preservation and prosperity of His Subjects.

I said in a former Chapter, that there were too many Officers in France; that
the wages they draw from the King were unprofitable, nay, prejudicial to the
State. Since the Sale of Offices was introduced, diverse new Creations have been
made. All these Edicts were merely to get Money in some pressing Occurrences;
and nothing but the conjunctures of the time rendered them tolerable. Now that
those occurrences are over, and the conjunctures passed, things must be reduced
to due order, by suppressing all those new Officers.

I noted, that wherever Magistracy brought gain, disorders would creep in; the
reason of which is very clear, and very natural. For it is infallibly certain,
that Judges will augment the number of Suits, while those Suits will bring them
in profit. Consequently, useless Officers being suppressed, and provision made
in the case by a due reduction, sufficient Salaries must be allowed them, and
they forbidden to take any thing of the Plaintiff or Defendant, upon the
Penalties expressed in the ancient Statutes. And that the King might make a
stock to raise those Salaries, without charging His Finances, it should be
ordained, that such as go to Law shall, when they commence their Suit, deposite
a certain sum into the hands of the Clerks: this, to be done in all the Royal
Jurisdictions. As for other Judges, they ought to take nothing at all: the
proprietary Lords must defray the charge of their Courts, if they will keep up
the Power to hold them: they having it of the King upon this condition, from
the first Grant of the Fiefs.

In matter of the Finances, it is not sufficient to have the Secret of getting
Money, and the skill of duly expending it: but there must be also a right
course taken to make reserves of it. The Romans had a public Treasury, where
every year they laid up certain sums for the necessities of the Commonwealth.
Other Nations were no less provident. History tells us of the Stores of David,
of Croesus, of Midas, and many others. The King having settled an Order in His
Finances, both as to Expenses and Receipt, it will be very prudently done of
Him, to limit what he shall think fit to reserve: and this reservation should
make the first Article in his Finances, and be continued until he has in his
Coffers, in some secret place, the fourth part at least of all the Coin in the
Kingdom: the rest (if well used) may be sufficent for all the People to
maintain Commerce, and pay the King's Revenues I say, this reserve should be in
a secret place, and known only to persons of approved Fidelity. For if many had
notice of it, such a store might occasion Seditions, and Civil Wars. Now a
fourth part of the Money being once laid up apart in the King's Coffers, some
addition to it shall be made continually from year to year, in proportion to
what comes in anew.

Yet liberty must be left to Persons, for some time, to have Gold and Silver
Plate: yea, it would do well, to augment the use and mode of having it, if it
may be; and that for three reasons. First, because the Goldsmiths perceiving
hope of gain, will not want inventions and industries to get into France as
much Metal as possibly they may, either in ingots, or bars, or coined pieces.
Secondly, because by this means Riches will be kept in the Kingdom, and when a
season for it comes, all they that are owners of such Plate, may be commanded
to carry it to the Mint, and there receive the price of it. The third reason
is, because the Goldsmiths having wrought up, and made Plate, contrary to the
direction of the Statute, (which undoubtedly they will do) a search may be made
in the case, if affairs require; a search highly just, and no less advantageous.

Two regulations must be made for the Goldsmiths, and they enjoined to observe
them, upon pain of forfeiting Life and Goods; and so strict an hand held over
them, that of all who trangress, not a Man be pardoned. The first is, to
prohibit their working upon any piece of Gold, or Silver Coin. The second, that
they do not change the form of any prohibited Plate: rectify and mend it they
may. At the same time, all Persons that have any such and would put it off,
must be commanded upon great penalties, to carry it to the Mint, where ready
Money shall be paid them for it, at the current price; they making proof that
they are the true owners; and this to avoid Thieveries which may have been
committed. These two regulations will oblige the Goldsmiths to make use of new
Silver, or Foreign Coyns, and thus they would cause a very considerable
quantity of either to enter into France.

The State would receive no small profit by taking a due order in matter of
Coin. It should be ordained therefore in the first place; that no more be made
any where but at Paris; and all other Mints, and their Officers, suppressed as
Useless. The Romans, who had so much Money, had but one place to make it in,
which was a Temple of Juno's at Rome. Charlemain forbad any Money to be made
otherwhere than in His Palace. And the truth is, should all the Money of France
pass through Paris, the King would much better know what quantity of it was in
His Kingdom. Secondly, the Court des Monnoyes must be suppressed, and united to
the Chamber of Accounts, as I have said heretofore. In the third place, the
value of Brass Money must be abated; this kind of Coin being the ruin of the
State. It cannot be believed how many Liarts and Sous the Hollanders have
brought into France. It would be convenient to set the Sous at two Liarts
a-piece, the Liarts at a Denier, and the Doubles at an Obole, (half a Denier:)
but this should be done by little and little, and the fall made by degrees,
that the people be not ruined: mean time, Silver pieces of six blanks, others
of a Sous in value, and of twelve Deniers, are to be stamped. Brasiers, and
workers in Metal, must be forbidden to melt up any Sous, Liarts, or Doubles;
or otherwise use them in work. For after the Reduction, a Sous, a Liart, and a
Double, would be worth more in work than in Money; and that quantity of them
which is in the Kingdom being preserved, would suffice for Commerce in small
wares; they also being less* worth in Money than otherwise, Foreigners would
bring in no more of them. In the fourth place, it is fit that a Gold-coyn be
made of the value of the Leuis's; this Coin to have on the front a Sun, the
face thereof representing the King, with these words about it, Nec pluribus
impar, and the year it is made in: On the reverse, a Cross charged or cantoned
with Fleurdelizes; and the ordinary Motto, CHRISTVS vincit, regnat and im^e^at.
Of this Coin there should be half and quarter pieces made, as there are half
Crowns of Gold. This new Money should be called Suns, and all Gold Louises made
in France, forbidden. As likewise all cravens of Or Sol, and Crowns of the
Queen. New Silver-coyn also should be made; the pieces called Monarques, or
Dieudonnes, or some other names; in them the Figure of the King crowned after
the manner of Antiquity, with the Title Ludovicus XIV. Franciae Rex: on the
reverse, a Cross with Fleurdelizes, and the ordinary Inscription. Of these
pieces there must be some of twelve Deniers, others of two Sous, six Deniers:
others of five Sous, of ten Sous, of twenty, of forty. And to have matter for
them, all Loueses of sixty must be forthwith prohibited: because a multitude of
false ones go abroad. Afterward, the Loueses of thirty Sous, made any where but
at Paris, shall be called in; and there must the new Coyns be also made. They
will be well received by the People; for that every one has an extreme
affection for the King; and because in France we account by Livres, or Franks,
and have no such Money; the Quardecues being no longer current. This new
Coining of Money is likely to bring a great deal into the Kings Coffers.

Gold and Silver must be held in France at an higher rate than they bear among
Strangers; that we may draw it hither* nothing has brought us so much Gold
from Spain, Italy, and other Countries, as the permission sometime granted,
that light pieces should pass. The same thing should be done awhile, for once
again: it would cause all Foreigners to come and take off our Wines, our
Linen, and our Corn.

I should not forget to say, as I put an end to this Chapter, that the Masters
of Accounts, the Correctors and Auditors, having wages of the King, ought not
to take any other Salary for any thing they do, that directly refers to His
Majesty's service; I mean, for the Accounts of the Treasurers of the Reserve,
and other Accomptable Officers: for they are paid for this by their wages:
practicing in the manner they do, they take, as the saying is, two Tolls of one
grist.

I said, that it was not at all just, that the Masters of Accounts, Auditors,
and Correctors, take Fees for the Accounts they examine, forasmuch as they
receive Wages and Privileges from the King: also this Custom was anciently
practiced, and this would be to reduce things to the primitive State. I well
know, that the pretense of these Fees is founded upon the creation of some
Chamber of Accouuts, where those payments are made that never go to the
Chamber; but this pretext is frivolous; for the Chambers of Accounts in
Montpellier, and elsewhere, ought not in like mauner to take any Money for
examining the Accounts of the King: so these new Chambers take away no Money
from that at Paris, that peradventure takes from them the homages, and the
verification of gifts; but in this the Clerks only are the loosers, and the
Master Auditors and Correctors are not concerned.

Addition. Of the fine gross Farms.
I said but a word by the way of fine gross Farms, which is one of the projects
to raise Money by; the fine gross Farms are let upon the Merchandise, and upon
the receipt of the Kings Rights; to avoid the charge of all these, an agreement
might be concluded with all the Merchants, to pay every year a certain sum to
the King at Paris; and upon their doing this, they should not be molested in
their passage on the Rivers, or by Land, for any Toll or Custom.

CHAP. XI.
1. Of Peace and War. Of Sciences, of Arts, of Laws, of Public Edifices, and
Shows. 2. Of Arms, of Arsenals, Artilleries, of Fortified places and Governors.
3. Of Armies, of Conquests; how a Conquered Country should be preserved.

EIther Calm or Storm, if perpetual, would alike unfit the Sea for Navigation.
The Waves must not rage, and swallow up the Vessels they should bear: but there
must be Wind enough to fill the Sails, and give convenient motion; nay some
little Tempests are of use to quicken the Pilots skill; whom continual fair
weather would entice into a dangerous idleness. Just so is it necessary, that
there still be, in a great State, especially in Nations of the French temper,
some moderate agitation, and that the noise of Arms produce an effect upon
them, like that of the Winds upon the Sea. Peace, by general consent, is that
at which all Politicians do aim; nor can it be denied to be preferrable to War,
being natural, as Liberty is. Yet War has its peculiar advantages; and those
to such a degree, that we may account it to be of Divine Right. To say true,
what other right did GOD give His People against the Kings of Canaan? In short,
War makes the Peace of Kingdoms the more firm, as a Storm causes the Air to
resume a more settled serenity. The prudence of Laws therefore should have
provided Expedients for the preservation of States in each of these seasons:
and the Wisdom of Legislators has been justly taxed, in that they have not
sufficiently thought upon this provision. The Poet, upon this ground, gives his
Ulysses all along, the company of Minerva, and disguiseth her a great many
ways, that she might not be parted from him. In sum, the Mythologists
representing this Goddess armed, and bearing both the Shield and Thunderbolt
of Jupiter her Father, do therein let us know, that the Wisdom of a good King
ought to serve Him both for Peace and War. And such was the manner of teaching,
in deepest and most remote Antiquity: Philosophy then but growing up, and
bashful, durst not show her full luster unto depraved and ignorant men, to whom
She was yet very much a Stranger. She accosted them veiled with the shadows of
Fable; and went softly and secretly about the preparing of their reason to
receive her illuminations and instructions. But to return to our similitude; A
Storm does not reach to the whole extent of the Ocean; and whatever Tumults be
in some part of a Kingdom, yet the whole does not so feel the shock of War, but
that in others, Peace subsists; so as the Glory of Arms, and the Contentments
of a full Tranquillity, may be had together. Nevertheless, since these two
different times do require like different cares; each of which were enough to
take up the whole application of an excellent King; it is expedient to consider
them severally.

Peace is undoubtedly proper for the Cultivation of Arts and Sciences. Knowing
Men there must be in a Commonwealth; it being necessary that there should be
good Men. For knowledge it is that enlightens our Soul, shows us Virtue, and
inflames us with desire to possess it. I join Sciences here and Arts; it being
impossible that Men should have the one without the other. For as they are
Images of GOD, they are moved by a natural propension, to produce one thing or
other; so that having acquired general Speculative Principles, they necessarily
descend to Practical operations, which are performed by particular Rules, from
whence Arts take their rise. This is done during a Calm; then the Soul, not
interrupted by any violent agitation, enjoys, and by reflections, which by its
leisure and repose permit it to make, views its self. It Is in these precious
hours that it may come to know the Dignity of its Original, and be assured of
its Immortality. At such a time, having and keeping its faculties united, it
gathers the fruit of a solid Wisdom; which is unto the Soul, as the Sun is to
the Eyes of the body; and being of all goods the greatest, communicates its
self in precepts; whereof Law is the abstract and consummation, giving the same
spirit to all the People.

To proceed: it is important, that Cities be enriched with public Buildings,
as Temples, Palaces, and other sumptuous Edifices; because People have, by that
means, the more affection for their Country. The Trojans regretting their
defeat, were grieved more for the ruin of Troy, than the subversion of its
Empire. And the Jews in Babylon lamented the demolishing of the Temple, where
they had offered their sacrifices, more than they did the loss of their
Liberty. This affection of People for their Country, is likewise augmented by
the contentment they receive in it; and this Maxim was a principal reason why
the Greeks and Romans exhibited to their Subjects public shows.

It Is in a time of Peace that a Prince should prepare His Forces for War: yea,
He ought to be always in Arms, they being the Ornament of His Royal Majesty,
and support of the Laws. A People not armed does degenerate; and we see, that
Nations heretofore eminently redoubtable, are now bankrupt as to Valor and
Reputation. Croesus after his defeat, counseled Cyrus His Conqueror, in
recompense for the Favor which had been showed him, to disarm the Lydians, and
promote among them Music, good Cheer, and Pleasures: so they would never
revolt, nor fail of obeying His Command. This Counsel of Croesus was really
good: For by that means the Inhabitants of Lydia lost their former love for
War, and forgot their ancient virtue. Yet it is not expedient that Arms, which
are the Kings, (for He has the power of the Sword) should be in the hands of
all private Persons alike: and the difference between a Citizen and a
Gentleman, a Soldier and a Country-Labourer, not be discerned: Arms therefore
must be in their hands whom the King intends for that employment: and He being
every ones Protector, securing all by His Authority, all others must be
expressly forbidden to bear any, without His permission, upon pretense of
Hunting, or Journey, or Enemies: and this upon pain of being Fined, and in case
of reiterated Offense, sent to the Galleys. These Penalties too must not be
merely comminatory, but as they term it, Legal, and of indispensible necessity.
Not that Gentlemen should all be deprived of the liberty to wear a Sword: on
the contrary, it is fit to be enjoined them, that they never neglect to do it;
because it is the mark of their Quality, and continually minds them of the
Virtue of their Ancestors. It may be prohibited them to carry Firearms; yet
it is convenient to permit them to keep in their Houses Musquers, Firelocks,
Pistols, and other Arms; for that they naturally are Defenders of the State,
and by consequence ought to be furnished for any occasion that may be offered.
For the same reason it is meet that Gentlemen be enjoined to keep their Stables
stored with good Horses, to breed up and manage a number of them for their
Service in War. But to this end, the use of German Horses for the Coach, must
be forbidden, and none of them suffered to come into France: but Mares only for
breed.

Lawyers, Ecclesiastics, Citizens, Merchants, Artificers, Husbandmen, should
never wear a Sword, because it is not their Profession; and I would as much
approve a Gentleman's fancying to wear a Lawyers Gown, or a Priests Cassock.
But that no such person do abuse this Honorable mark, it must be ordained as a
fundamental Law of Honor, that whoever strikes with a Sword, a Man, who, (not
being of such profession) has none, shall be declared actually fallen from all
Honor, and as a very Plebeian, yea Villain, (to use the old word) depraved
from all Gentility, and reduced to the rank of a Labourer.

Since Arms are the Kings, as I said, it is expedient that there be Magazines
in diverse parts of the Kingdom: they, committed to the custody of safe Hands,
and persons of unquestionable Fidelity: in them a store of all sorts of Arms
Offensive and Defensive; ready fixed, to Arm 40000 Men. There should be
Equipage for Horses, Boots, Spurrs; One of these Magazines should be placed at
Paris, to cover Picardy, Champagne and Normandy. One at Lion, for any occasion
that might happen on the side of the Mediterranean of Italy, of Swisserland, or
the Franche Comte. One at Toulouse, or some other City of Languedoc, for all
that might be apprehended from Spain, or the Sea of Guyenne. And one at Angers,
to secure the Coasts of Bretagne, and Poictou. There need be beside these, two
Arsenals for the Sea; which I shall speak of in their place. It will be
necessary to have in the Magazines a good number of Cannon for Battery, and of
Fieldpieces ready mounted with Powder, Ball, and Equipage for the Horses of
the Train.

The King should have, for the security of his State, several Fortified Places
in his Kingdom. It Is an ill piece of Policy to neglect them; and good heed had
need be taken, that he that may chance to win a Battle, and become Master of
the Field, do not at the same time become Master of the Cities also. It is
known what Revolutions England has suffered by it. And on the contrary,
Flanders clearly shows what a Country thick set with Fortresses is. Yet Excess
being every where vicious-I would observe a mediocrity here. But, above all,
there must be left no Fortifications in Towns or Castles, which belong to
particular Lords: except the King places in them other Governors than the
Proprietors. These kind of Places embolden Persons of Quality that possess
them, to Declare themselves, and make Parties in a time of Civil War: what
passed at Tailebourg in the last Troubles, is an example fully authorizing what
I have proposed. I will say more of strong Places and Garrisons in the Chapter
of the Education of Children.

It is not sufficient to have such strong places, and them well furnished with
Garrisons and brave Soldiers; unless there be given them Captains fit to Command
them, and to be their Governors. In each place then there must be four sorts of
Officers. The Governor, the King's Lieutenant, the Governor's Lieutenant, and
the Major. These all having their Commissions from His Majesty, it is
expedient, that, as far as is possible, their bearing Office be limited to a
certain time; to the end, that the continuing of 'em longer may be in nature of
a recompense for their Services. And they thus attending with the greater
diligence to their Duty; I should also wish, that being continued in
employment, they should change place. As for example, That a person who has
been the King's Lieutenant three years at Dunkirk, should go serve as
Lieutenant Governor at Peronne, or elsewhere. Not that such a Change were fit
to pass upon all the Officers of a place at the same time. But let their
Commissions last three Years, and every Year one be changed, that they may
serve together one Year only. It is meet to, after the manner of the Turks,
that their Commissions expired, they be kept a Year without employment, to see
whether there be any complaint against them. These alterations would work two
effects equally advantageous to the King's Service. The First is, that every
one would stick to his Duty. The Second, that the King always having such kind
of Employments to give, there would be more persons to hope for them; which
would much more strongly engage them to well-doing. The same usage should be
introduced, if it be possible, in reference to Governors, the King's
Lieutenants. There is a concluding observation to be made; namely, that it
being the Custom for Governors to have some Companies of Carabines, which they
call their Guards; they give them Cassocks of their own Livery. I would have
this Order changed; and that the King should every year send each Governor a
Troop of Horse to serve about him for a Guard; they having the King's Cassocks
as a Badge of their Commission; and their Officers carrying the Staff in
presence of their Governor during their year of service. This would be a means
to augment the Authority of the King, and not diminish that of the Governors.

As to Armies, it cannot be precisely said of what number of Men they should
consist; nor whether they ought to be strongest in Horse or in Foot. This
wholly depends upon the enterprises that are made, upon the quality of the
Country, and nature of the Enemy. I should advise, that a Great King do keep
Troops on foot, even during Peace, nothing is so necessary to a State as old
Soldiers. Augustus, after his Victories, did not cashier the Forty Roman
Legions; which proved to be the safety of the Empire. Constantine, on the
contrary, disbanded them; and thence came, in the issue, the dissolution of the
Power of the Romans Augustus however, and the other Caesar's, committed a great
fault in keeping the Pretorians in a Body, for the Grandeur of their Persons;
and History tells us what lamentable changes they made in the succession of the
Emperors. The Turks have fallen into like disasters by following the like
usage. I should therefore judge it expedient to divide the Troops into several
Quarters, and keep them in far distant Garrisons. The ancient Kings of Egypt
had a great many Soldiers perpetually in Pay, and were always apprehensive of
their Instructions: but found a way to secure themselves from all such
Seditions of their Armies. Dividing them into Bodies, according to the
diversity of Nations, they gave them different Ensigns; as for instance, to
some a Crocodile; to others a Dog; to a third sort a Cat; and so the rest. Now
the Egyptians being hugely Superstitious, they were easily induced to believe,
that their Tutelary Deities were included in the figure of those Beasts which
were given them for Ensigns; and that they had the same Antipathies among them
in Heaven, which those Beasts that represented them, had to one another upon
Earth. Thus under a Veil of Religion, those People were possessed with an
aversion for each other, like those Animals which they had been ordered to
carry in their Banners; yet all were close united, and perfectly at accord for
the common defense of the State: so nothing could be executed against the
intentions of the Prince; because as soon as any should begin to stir, the rest
would immediately have opposed them. Upon this example the King might divide
all his Troops by Provinces; and though there should be no engaging of Religion
in the case, yet much advantage would, without fail, be drawn from thence. For
the Nations would strive to outvie one another, with more zeal and ardor than
the Regiments now do. These Regiments themselves might have names given them
from the Arms of their Provinces; as that of the Bretons might be called the
Regiment of the Ermine; that of the Normans the Regiment of the Leopards, etc.
Jutius Caesar raised a new Legion among the Gauls, and gave it the name of the
Lark. But what I say in this particular, is but the giving my Opinion. For I am
not of the mind, that the order of the Militia should be changed, or Regiments
disbanded, which consist of the best and most Warlike Troops that are in the
World.

It Is ordinarily a great question; of what Soldiers an Army should be composed.
We have Subjects and Foreigners. The Subjects are Gentlemen and Plebeians. The
Plebeians are Citizens and Rusticks. On the other hand, of Foreigners, some
are the Auxiliary Troops of Allies, which serve at the cost of their own
Princes: as when the King sent succors into Germany, and unto the Hollanders:
Others are Troops that serve at the cost of the State which employs them. The
Ancients termed them Mercinaries. Such at this time are the Suissers, and not a
few Germans. All these different sorts of Soldiers may be used, as necessity
and the conjuncture of Affairs requires. The Romans did so. It is true, by
their Treaties of Alliance they always obliged their Allies to send them a
certain number of Soldiers; but these were not incorporated with their Legions;
and it is clear, that Subjects are ever best; of Subjects, Gentlemen have
ordinarily more courage than others. Of Plebeians, those of the Country are to
be preferred before the Inhabitants of Cities; because Peasants are more
accustomed to Labor and Hardship than Townsmen are. Auxiliary Troops serve but
for a time; and often, when some continuation of service is demanded of them,
they impose hard conditions. Mercenaries will have Money, and care not if a
State be ruined, so themselves are paid. In fine, Strangers may on the sudden
change Interests and Party; so of Friends becoming Enemies; and that in
occasions of greatest importance. Mercenaries above all, do serve without
affection, and seldom stand it out in Fight unto the utmost. They push on a
Victory indeed, but scarce ever win a Battle. In short, Strangers should be as
little made use of as possible: and scarce for any other cause, but that
Enemies might be deprived of their Aid. When Strangers only are taken into
Service, the Subjects grow less Warlike, and the most considerable of them
despise War, as is done in Spain; and extremely ill done. The Carthaginians
were ruined principally by the fault they committed in employing Numidian
Troops and other Strangers; and not sending out their own Citizens in their
Armies.

I will not here speak of the Art of War; it is a matter that deserves a Chapter
apart. Yet I will say cursorily, that the Rules of it change as Time and
Seasons do. We neither attack Places nor defend them, in the very manner that
the Ancients did. There is also a great deal of difference between their way of
fighting and ours; so that they had not the Arms which we now use. All of
precept for the leading of an Army, that fails not nor changes, is, that
Discipline be exercised; wherein Commanders should never be remiss.

The only School of War, is War it self: and twenty Years experience will
better make a great Captain than an hundred Years Reading. Not but that we have
examples of General Command given to persons, who never were in Armies before.
There are elevated Spirits, to whom nothing is impossible; but the instances
are rare; and it is too too hazardous a course to rely upon them. For a Captain
must have, not only spirit and courage, but also credit with his Soldiers;
which cannot be gotten but by service. In fine, it is necessary for a great
State to keep War on foot, and Men of Quality must be employed in it: to the
end there may always be a stock of good Soldiers, and a breed of Generals.
These two things give a Nation mavelous advantages and esteem among
Foreigners.

Though France now be a most powerful Monarchy, by means of its Extent, of its
Situation, the Fruitfulness of the Soil, the Number of its Inhabitants; and
though greatest States have not always most strength, as biggest Men are not
always stoutest; yet were it to be wished, that the King did add unto his
Kingdom, First all the Low Countries to the Rhyne. This Conquest would re-settle
Him in possession of the ancient demain of His Predecessors, giving France gain
its primitive limits. It would make him Master of the Northern Seas, and by
consequence, Arbitrator between the Crowns of Sweden and Denmark, Poland, etc.
Conquest must be aspired to out of a thirst of Empire, being an unjust thing,
(if we believe Aristotle: for I would not determine, but that the right of War
were a very lawful right, consonant to what I have said in the beginning of
this Chapter;) but the desire of Conquest should principally be for the doing
of good to all Men; which is the end why GOD gave them Laws. The more Subjects
and Power a just Prince has, the better will it be for the World. Secondly, It
were convenient that the King had Strasbourg, to keep all Germany quiet. In the
third place, He need have the Franche County, to lay a restraint upon the
Suisses, least dividing themselves between the Empire and France, or serving
Spain in a War there, they strengthen his Enemies. In the fourth place, Milan
is necessary in respect of Italy, to give the lesser Sovereigns and Republiques
protection, and balance the Power which the King of Spain has usurped there.
In the fifth place, Genoa and all its Territory, pertains to the King: nor
would the Genoese have revolted, had it not been for the bad counsel given to
Francis the First, to discontent Doria. Genoa would make the King Master of the
Mediteranean Sea; beside, those two Acquisitions would keep the Duke of Savoy
locked up within French Territories: So he would never depart from the King's
Service, being entirely His dependant. We must re-enter the Isle of Elba, and
into Portolongone, and Piombino, on the continent, to drive the Spaniards out
of Italy. Here our nearness would keep the Duke of Florence, the Dukes of
Parma, of Modena, and of Mantua, and even the State of the Pope, in a
submission for France. Corsica would not stand out after the reduction of
Genoa; and then Sardinia would be no difficult Conquest. This would strongly
favor any stirs on the account of Liberty or Discontent that might be raised
in the Kingdoms of Sicily and Naples: nor would it be an hard matter to raise
them in time.

On the Coast of Bayonne there would be need of Fuentaravia; and those parts of
the Kingdom of Navarr which the Spaniards have in possession, might be justly
re-demanded. The King might also carry His Arms into Catalonia: we have ancient
pretensions there; and the Conquests of it would be no less easily achieved
than it was in the time of the last War. Majorca and Minorca would follow
without trouble. Thus the King would be absolute Umpire of the Mediterranean,
and of all the fortune of the Spaniards. If it should happen one day that the
Queen, or Her Descendants, should have an Hereditary Right there, the King
would be in a condition to do Himself reason in these matters. The means of
making these Conquests severally, cannot be showed without particular
discourses.

Mean time, what I have said is not, in truth, to be done in a day: it would be
an enterprise of many years. Yet there is nothing of mere fancy it it. I
propose no Conquest to be made but what has really been made, except that of
the Isles of the Mediterranean, which our Kings never minded; for that before
Charles the Eighth they never were in case to strengthen themselves at Sea.
Bretagnie was separted from the Kingdom, the Wars of Italy took up every Reign
unto Henry the Second. Then followed the affairs of Religion, which put a stop
to all the designs that might have been formed in this behalf.

Here one thing I suggested in the precedent Chapter, is to be remembered;
namely, That Conquests do afford a State one expedient to get Money. In this
the Roman Captains are to be imitated; who made it a point of Glory to lay up
extraordinary sums in the Public Treasury; and their Triumphs were as
illustrious by the wealth they brought home with them, as by the Enemies they
had defeated in their Expeditions. It would be very material therefore, that
Generals should account it a Glory to them, to bring the Spoils of their
Enemies unto the profit of the King and Kingdom; or at least make the Conquered
Countries maintain and pay their Armies. But the difficulty is not to make
Conquests; the Arms of the French will be Victorious wherever they appear. All
the trouble is to find out the secret how to keep what has been gotten. It is
fit to say something on this particular.

The means to preserve Conquered Countries which the Ancients used, and that
with good success, are in a manner these. Transportations, and shiftings of the
People. As when the Chaldeans led away the Jews to Babylon. The taking away of
their Money, of their richest Goods, their Antiquities, their Holy Things and
things of Religion; as was done with the ancient Idol-gods, and as the Ark of
the Covenant, the Tables of Moses, and the Israelites holy Writings, were dealt
withal. The same for substance might be done among us, by shifting of Saints
Relics and Consecrated Images. The leading away of the ablest Men, and such
as have greatest credit with the People. So did the Romans when they carried
some of the Greeks out of their Country to Rome, and treated them there with
all possible kindness and civility. In like manner as to Artificers: the Turks
drew at one time 30000 Workmen out of Persia. The Romans, out of their Enemies
whom they had vanquished and taken in War, reserved those whom they thought
stoutest, and made them fight on the Theater, the People being Spectators,
destroying them by that means. Christianity suffers not such inhumanity.
Slavery was always practiced in the case of Prisoners of War, and the ransom we
make them pay, is an Image of that old Custom. Some People to this day stay
their Prisoners, or send them away to punishment, after the fashion of the
Ancients.

To proceed, other means in reference to conquered Countries are, the mixing of
the old and new Subjects by Marriage, the Conquerors accommodating themselves
to the manners of the Conquered, taking up their modes, eating with them, as
Alexander demeaned himself toward the Persians. Then again, the ruining the
Fortifications of their Towns; the taking Hostages of them: the taking away
their Arms, and keeping them weak; the abstaining from their Wives; the giving
them no jealousy in matter of Love. To have little converse with them,
especially in their Houses; and when any is, to see it be with seriousness and
decency; to honor them; to do them a pleasure on occasion; not play with them;
not pick any quarrel with them: not touch their Liberty, nor the Goods that
have been left them: not disquiet them for matters of Religion. To do them
Justice, maintain them in their Laws and Customs, and in their manner of
Government, as the Romans did; who permitted the People whom they had subdued,
to have their accustomed Laws To be diffedent of them, and show a confiderde in
them. To appear not desirous of their secrets: not interrupt them in their
pleasures: make them pay the Tribute agreed upon with them exactly, not at all
augmenting it. To keep word with them in all things, seldom meddle in their
affairs, except it be to accord them: to lend them no Money; but owe them some,
and punctually pay the Interests of it: not let them know the true State of
affairs; not give them entrance into strong holds; which must always be well
furnished with Men and Provisions* That the Governor never come among them
without being strongest, or having Hostages. To prevent their assembling, and
hinder as much as may be their having Commerce with Neighbors that are under
another Prince's Dominion: to keep off all kind Strangers from Houses, and
severely punish such of 'em as shall cause the least trouble, or any motion
that may tend to Sedition. If our Conquerors had practiced in this manner,
Italy and Sicily would have been French to this day.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Sea, and its usefulness. 2. Means to augment the Kings Power there. 3.
Of Commerce. 4. Of Colonies.

THE Water of the Sea are wholly obnoxious to the humorousness of Fortune; and
the Wind that governs them turns and changes with as much inconstancy as
that blind Goddess. Yet it is certain, that those States whose renown is
greatest in Story, did not establish their supreme Dominion, but upon the power
they attained to at Sea: as if Virtue, stout and undaunted, had resolved to
Combat and Conquer her Enemy in the very seat of her Empire. The Romans are one
instance, (whose example is ever to be followed with as peculiar a diligence,
as their conduct of matters was with singular wisdom, and hard to be imitated:)
They imposed not upon the World their Laws, till they had forced the Seas to
receive and acknowledge them. Had they not set out Warlike Fleets, they had
never accomplished their glorious Designs; they had never extended their
Frontier beyond Italy; never brought down the Pride of Carthage; nor Triumphed
over all the Crowns on Earth. The Egyptians, the Persians, and the Grecians,
considered the Sea as the principal support of their Domination. Xerxes having
caused the H^li^spout to be to punished (as he termed it) with Stripes,
accounted his Vanity satisfied in the sight of all Asia, which he drew after
him into Greece, with so much Magnificence and Pomp, that it seemed as if
Jupiter Himself was come down from Heaven. The Venetians still renew every year
their Alliance with this Element, by an old fond superstitious Custom, casting
into the Sea a Ring, as if they espoused it: perhaps by this use they would
inform all the particular Subjects of their Common wealth, that they should be
content with the inconstancy and infidelity of their Women, since the State of
espousing the Sea, espouseth inconstancy and infidelity it self. The Riches of
Tunis, of Algier, of Holland, and England, plainly prove the necessity there is
for Princes to be Strong at Sea, and do show the Profit which does thence
accrue. These are petty States, yet dare measure their Forces with those of the
Greatest Monarchs. The former of them are Turkish Slaves, the others revolted
Burghers; and how insolent soever the English are, they must confess, that all
the British Isles laid together, do not equal the half of our Continent,
either in Extent, or in Fruitfulness of Ground, or for Commodiousness of
Situation, or in number of Men; in Wealth, in Valor, Industry, and
Understanding; yet they fear not to affirm themselves Sovereigns of the Sea.
Had they cast up the Wracks they have suffered, and the Battles they have lost;
had they well examined our Ports and Havens: in fine, had they compared the
Coasts of France with those of England, they would condemn their Vanity, as
Canutus, one of their ancient Kings, did.

It Is true, all States are not disposed unto Navigation: either because they
are too far up in Midland Countries, or because the temper of the People suits
not with it; or because they want Subjects: but it is so far, that any of these
Obstacles should hinder the French from addicting themselves unto it; that on
the contrary, all things conspire to raise desire of it in them; and to give
them hope of advantageous success. The work however is such as must be
leisurably carried on, and perfected by little and little; so great a design
continually allarming Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, Friends and Foes. A
precipitation of it would be its ruin. I say not what number of Vessels would
be fit for France to put to Sea. But I affirm that the King may keep an hundred
Galleys, and an hundred Ships on the Mediterranean; and a Fleet of Two hundred
Sail upon the Ocean. The more Vessels He shall have, the more enabled He will
be to recover the expense made about 'em. As to the building of such numbers
six or ten years of time may be allotted for it: and there is Timber in France,
there is Cordage, there are Sails; there is Iron and Brass; there are Victuals
and Workmen; so that the King's Subjects will gain the Money which is laid out
in 'em. Is it not far better for the King of France to build Ships for the
employing and enriching of His Subjects, than it was for the Kings of Egypt to
build their useless Pyramids? There need be no anxious enquiry whence a Stock
should rise for this advance; every year will bring in Money; and the Vessels
once made, and their Guns mounted, it will not cost the King a Quardecu for
other Equippings. 'Twill be but to give the Captains Places in the Ships and
Galleys, on condition to fit them out; and there will more persons come to take
them, than there will be Offices and Places to be bestowed. It Is true, Fleets
being out, there will need vast Sums to maintain them: but the Sea will yield a
maintenance for the Sea, either by Commerce or by War. Neither will it be
always proper to keep so many Vessels in service. On the other hand, it will
not be necessary to have so many Troops at Land as are at present. For Spain or
Italy will not dare to disfurnish themselves of their Men; so there will be no
need of a Land-Army but toward Germany. The number of Rowers will be made up
by bringing Men from Canada, and the American Islands: or by buying Negroes at
Cape Verde: or by sending all Malefactors to the Galleys. And when things have
taken their course, Seamen will be had; time, and the profit that will accrue,
will afford store, and bring them in from all parts of the World.

Hereupon the Corsairs of Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli; will not be able to keep
at Sea; and the French being continually on their Coasts, they will be
constrained to tarry at home for the guarding of their Towns: so not in a
condition to send out Troops for collecting the Tribute which they exact of the
Arabs, and Princes who lie further up in Africa; the Tributaries will, without
fail, revolt: and the King may in the sequel, Treat with them for their
recovering their Liberty, and take them into his Protection, There is no cause
to fear the Power of the Ottoman Port in this particular. For beside that the
Turks are no good Seamen, the Grand Signior does make no such account of the
Pirates of Algier, as that their fortune is considerable to Him. The Friendship
of the French is more necessary for Him, both in point of Commerce, and in
reference to other Interests.

The Fleets which the King might keep upon the Ocean, would make Him Master of
all the Powers and Trade of the North. Yea, though the English and Hollanders
should unite against France, they could not avoid their ruin in the end. For
how should the one and the other make good their Commerce, which is all they
have to trust to, if they were forced to maintain great Armada's to continue
it? The point of Bretannie is the Gate to enter into, and go out of the
Channel. Fifty Ships of War at Breast would keep this Gate fast shut; and they
should not open it but by the King's Command. Spain and Portugal would not be
able to attempt any thing but by His permission, if there were kept a Fleet on
the Coast of Guyenne. Thus there would need no War almost to be made for all
these things; nor His Majesty's Forces hazarded. It would be sufficient to give
his Order to Forreiners. Nor will it be difficult to cut them out work in their
own Countries, and by this means stay their Arms at home, and make them spend
their strength there. I shall something of this in its place hereafter.

There is one further excellent means to strengthen the King at Sea: and it is
the taking Order that no more of His Subjects go to Malta. To do this, there
must be given in Fee to the French Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, some Isle
in the Mediterranean, as for Instance, the Isle du Levant, for which they
should pay an acknowledgment to the King, as they do for Malta to the King of
Spain. There might be given them too on the same condition, an Isle in the
Ocean, as Besle-Isle, l'Isle-Dieu, or the Isle of Ree: so that the French
Knights fighting not but against the Enemies of their Country, they would make
War upon the English as upon Turks; and keep the Islands at their own charge,
whereas the King is fain to keep great Garrisons, and be at vast expense to do
it. There is no cause to fear that they will ever give the King any trouble:
for being French, they cannot fail of Affection or Obedience: and their
Kindred, together with the Wealth they have in France, will be perpetual
Hostages to the King, and caution for their Fidelity. This Project is just: for
of ten parts of the Knights of Malta, no less than eight do come from the
Commanderies of France; and it is easy to be put in execution; for there need
be only a stopping the income of the Commanderies to effect it. The Order in
general will find its advantages in it; both in that there will be an addition
made it of two considerable Islands: and that the King will receive the Knights
into a more particular Protection than he has done hitherto. The number of
Commanderies may also be augmented, by giving them some Maladeries, (or
Hospitals for the diseased) which are always usurped by People that have no
right to them at all.

Be it observed in the last place, that it is very requisite the Office of
Admiral, and Powers of the Admiralty, should be united to the Crown. It has
been an ill Policy in France, and a Diminution of the King's Authority, to
communicate unto a Subject so much of His Sovereignty at Sea as has been done.
He must resume it to Himself, and be every way Supreme alone: Then He may
appoint a select number, whose charge may be to give Him advice of the State of
Maritime concerns; and hold a Council from time to time upon them in His
Majesty's Presence, if He please to assist. These Officers shall in this
Council judge of Prizes, and other Sea-affairs; and when its necessary, be
Commissioned, some of them, to visit the Ships, and make report, or send their
acts in Writing concerning them. Other Officers for the Marine shall be
Military: they, to execute the King's Orders, and have the conduct of Designs
and Enterprises in the usual manner. It is important to the King's Service,
that the Captains of Ships and Galleys, be honored with Dignities and Rewards.
There may be created Mareschals of France for Armies at Sea: as there are for
those at Land, with the same Honors and Prerogatives. The Romans decreed a
Triumph for Captains who had been victorious at Sea, and called it a Naval
Triumph. They gave also Naval Crowns, as well as Mural and Civical. These
Honors would eminently promote the King's intention as to the Marine. There
must be two Arsenals erected: One in Provence, in some Town upon the Rhosen,
for what relates to Naval Expeditions on the Mediterranean: another upon the
River Loire, for all occasions on the Ocean. By means of these two Rivers, it
will be easy to bring out to Sea all the Vessels that are builded: and all
necessary Provisions and Tackling whatever. Nor need it be feared that any
Enemy should get up these Rivers: they too may be shut up by Bridges, or by
Chains, or by Forts.

His Majesty's Power thus strongly settled on each Sea, it will be easy to
secure Commerce in France, and even draw the Merchants thither from all parts.
I say secure Commerce: for till all this be done, it will ever be uncertain and
dangerous. Now it is unnecessary to expatiate here, in proving what profit
Commerce brings in to most potent States; the thing is generally known, and all
Men convinced of it. Again, I know not why it has been said, that Trading is
contrary to Virtue; except it be, for that Merchants are incessantly busied in
studying inventions to get Money, and be in a sort, Servants to the Public.
The Romans, the Thebans, and the Spartans admitted not any Citizen of theirs
unto the administration of Affairs, unless he had for Ten whole years sorborn
Merchandising: because they would not have their principal Magistrates
accustomed to Gain, and expert in the means to do it. These kind of
inclinations being blameable in persons, who being destined to great
Employments, ought to be above all Considerations of private Interest.

Commerce in every Commonwealth ought to take its measure from the temper of
the People, from their strength, their wealth, the fertility of their Grounds,
and the situation of their Country. Therefore Order must be taken, that things
traded in be useful, and in a manner, necessary. For it is a rule in Oeconomie,
that a Man spend not his Money in what is pleasing, though he needs it, but
only in what is absolutely necessary. But necessity is stated by the Birth, the
Dignity, and the Estate of Persons; as for example, noble Furniture is
necessary for a great Lord; not so, for every meaner Gentleman: and thus in
oaths cases, proportionably still to the rank and fortune of Men. It must be
studiously prevented, that Commerce introduce not into a State, Superfluity,
Excess and Luxury; which are often followed with Ambition, Avarice, and a
dangerous corruption of Manners. And forasmuch as it is not sufficient to
Commerce, that there be people to Sell, but Merchants must be had to buy,
otherwise no Wares can go off; in which all the advantage of Trade does
consist: it is meet, that Traders furnish themselve, with necessaries, rather
than with things that merely tend to Ease, or Magnificence. Among necessaries,
those make up the first rank, which do sustain Life it self; the second is of
them that are for convenience; others are also necessary to preservation from
Diseases, the injuries of Time and violence of Enemies, as Medicinals,
Dwelling, Arms.

There is every where a twofold Commerce, which is visible in France, more than
in any other part of the World. The First is for things ordinarily found in the
Country, some of which are spent by the Inhabitants themselves, and others
transported. The Second, for Foreign Merchandises. We have in France, Wines,
Corn, Linen and Salt, in so great a quantity, that we send them into the
neighbor Kingdoms; and the quality of them is so excellent, that strangers
cannot forbear to come and carry them out of our Ports. We have Cattle, Skins,
Wool, Tallow, Oils, and other things necessary for Man, of which Foreiners
export very little, but our selves do in a manner spend them all: and this is
the great wealthiness of France, that we have enough to serve our turn without
Foreign Merchandises; but Foreigners cannot do well without ours. We receive
from other Countries, Minerals, Pearls, Precious Stones, Silks, Spices, and
what seems to be matter of Luxury. Order should be given, that in France, the
Commodities we have be made use of, before any Foreign Merchandises be
employed: because this Order followed would bring in the people Money, and take
off their Commodities; which would incline every one to fall to the work of his
Calling, and the whole Kingdom be thereby hugely benefited.

It has been a question offered to debate, Whether Traffic in France should
be managed by the Subjects, or by Foreigners? Many Reasons might be produced
in the case, upon each hand: but to make a short decision; it is evident, that
Foreigners must be allowed to gain by our Merchandises, if we would have them
take them off. For if we carry them home into their Ports, we shall make less
sales, and be at greater cost, than if they came to fetch them. Yet that our
Merchants may share in the profit, they may enter into Partnership with them,
or be their Commissioners here, or freight them themselves, provided, they sell
at somewhat cheaper rates, and so be content with moderate gain; or take in
payment, and exchange, the Foreign Commodities.

By means of Commerce, as well as by War, there may be French Colonies planted
abroad, and so the dominion of the King extended, even to far distant
Countries. All the Nations of the Earth are intermixed, and may be termed
Colonies, some of one People, some of another: Of as many as are known, few can
be affirmed to be originally of the places they inhabit. But to plant Colonies
out of danger, they must be seated in as much nearness still as is possible:
For if they be separated at too great a distance, it will be difficult to
relieve them: and perhaps they may revolt, or some one or other make himself
Master of them; and so the State will be in danger to lose its Subjects.
Secondly, it is necessary, that Colonies be placed in such Countries as are able
to maintain the Families, that are designed to make them up: otherwise
Provisions, and Money it self, must be carried to them, which would cause loss
and damage to the Common wealths that send 'em. In the third place, the Country
should bear things that may yield profit to the State, which erects the Colony.
Fourthly, the Situation should be such, as the State may have succor, and
forces from them, both for War, and for Commerce. In the fifth place, the
Country should not be so Fertile, and so much profit to be there made, that the
ancient Subjects should be drawn thither, and the State drein'd of People, as
has happened to Spain, by means of the West Indies. In fine, for prevention of
the inconveniences, I have mentioned, means must be used to have always
Hostages from those of the Colonies, that they may be kept in their duty, and
in the greater adherence to the interest of the State.

CHAP. XIII.
1. Of the Education of Children. 2. At what age it is expedient to Marry them.

NAture gives us the first fundamental dispositions for Arts, and all sorts of
Prosessions; and we feel a certain propension leading us to one kind of life,
rather than another. Some say, this impression comes from the Power of the
Stars, which by secret, influences from our temper; others affirm, that we
derive our inclinations from our Ancestors. However it be, it is certain, we
have movings, the Principles whereof are in our selves; we bring them into the
World with us, and cannot quit them: it is true, rules may be applied to them,
and they corrected, when faulty, but to change the quality of them, is
impossible This regulation, or amendment, is effected by discipline; which can
only give an after perfection to the works of Nature, keeping to her foregoing
draughts, and designs, and completing what she has begun.

A principal point then, in reference to Children, is to know their Genius,
that they may not be put out of their natural order, but employed in things to
which they are Originally bent. The Philosophers, to make known the difference
of capacities, have told us, that as for Souls, some are of Gold, others of
Silver, other of Iron; and that as a good Essayor must not mistake himself, in
distinguishing these three Metals; so a good Politician should not fail, in the
judgment he makes, of the Children that are in the State: it is a piece of his
profession to discern, what each of them will be proper for, that the
intentions of nature may be sortify'd, and polished by precepts.

There are no Commonwealths, but have in them Priests, Judges, Counselors of
State, Soldiers, Sea men, Merchants, Artificers, Husbandmen; Children must be
educated for these different Professions, and timely enabled to discharge them.
It Is fit, that in the case of the younger sort, Three Ages be distinguished.
The First, from their Birth, to the end of the Seventh year. The Second, from
that Seventh year to the Fourteenth. The Third, from Fourteen unto one and
twenty. Childrens first Five years should be spent in their Nursing up; and
they not disquieted with any higher documents. It Is good, to put them upon some
gentle exercise, as they are growing, and cause them to endure cold; they will
have the more Vigor, by that means. There are some Nations, that plunge their
Children into running Water, and give them slight Clothing in the midst of
Winter: so the ancient Gauls are noted-to have done. The bodies of Children
must be plied to the acting of all kind of Postures, and Motions; this will get
them a facility and dexterousness for any thing. After the age of Five years,
unto Seven, it is convenient to tell them stories, that may raise in them a
desire to do well in that profession to which they shall be destinated. From
Seven years, unto Fourteen, those that are intended to be given to the Church,
or to the affairs of Justice, or those of the State, should learn Latin, and
Greek, because in those Languages, they have the source of all the Doctrine
they will be obliged to profess: as likewise after Fourteen, unto One and
Twenty, they shall be taught Rhetorique, Philosophy, Theology, Law, or
Politics: which must be continued also, after that Age in the usual manner. It
is very necessary that Seminaries for Priests be erected in every Diocese, and
our Lords the Bishops ought to take all possible care in it. The young Persons,
that are intended for the Wars, may be taught Italian, Spanish, and High Dutch:
they that are designed for Trade, should know somewhat in those three
Languages: but such as are thought on for Commerce, in further distant
Countries, ought to Learn the Arabic, or the Sclavonian* or some other of the
general Tongues that are current in Asia, or in Africa, as the Latin is in
Europe. There must be public Professors for these Languages, as there are for
Latin, and Masters places endowed at the Public charge. After fourteen or
sixteen years of Age, the Youths should be disposed of unto places, where they
may learn the Art of Traffic. As for those that are destined to the Wars,
whether Gentlemen, or Plebeians, they should be sent at fifteen or sixteen
years unto Garrisons, and the skill of serving on Horseback or on Foot, there
taught them; and they exercised once a weak constantly; which would most
conveniently be done on Sundays and Holy Days. They shall be taught to handle
the Pike and the Musket, the use of the Sword, the Halbard, Partisan,
Broad-sword, and other Arms; they shall be put to Run, and Leap, and Wrestle.
The Lacedaemonians ordinarily exercised their young People; which was very
providently done of them. For Strength and Expertness is not attained but by
long and daily exercise. In the Garrisons shall be taught Fortification, the
Mathematics, Dancing, Vaulting, Ridiug; and it would do well, to take away
Academies and Masters of Exercise, from places not Garrisoned, that the Garrisons
may be the Academies, as I may term them, where these things are learnt. Yea,
to the end, that all sorts of Persons might betake themselves to the Garrisons,
it should be ordained, that no private Masters shall take any Apprentices, but
in Garrisoned places; and that no one keep a Shop, or exercise any Trade, in any
City of the Kingdom, without a Testimonial from the Governor, that he has
served his Apprentiship in a Garrison Town: as we see, that no Physicians, or
Advocates, are admitted to practice, but such as have studied in some
University.

Order must be given, that Masters cause their Lacquies to learn a Trade, and
that for this, they give them, after four years service, 200 Livres, and a suit
of Clothes: or if they serve less time, a sum proportionable after that rate.
Nor must it be suffered, that Lacquies have wages given them as is done;
because they are ill husbands, and lay up nothing. Their Reward-money must be
put in a Public purse, or into some Merchant's hands, who will be responsible
for it. The share of Lacquies that die, will serve for other Youths that shall
be chosen. This would prove an excellent means, for the having of Soldiers: For
the Apprentices would serve in their turn, on Military occasions: they would go
upon the Guard, etc. nor would this take them off from perfecting their skill
in the Calling they had chosen. It would too, be profitable, that poor Soldiers
have skill in one handicraft or other, and be made to work at it, whenever they
are not on the Guard; by this means, they would avoid idling, and get Money for
a subsistence.

The Parishes both in Town, and Country, might be obliged to set forth and
maintain each of them a Soldier or two in Garrison, giving also a sum for their
being taught a Trade at the same time. There would be Parishes able to maintain
a Man and half, others half a Man, the rest in proportion to the number of
communicants in each of them. So the King would have 50000 Men well-nigh in
Garrison, and a Nursery of Soldiers, without its costing Him a Quardecu; for
none must have pay, but old Soldiers: its by taking this course, that the Turks
raise their Janissaries, and they become their best Men, and most Warlike.

When the young Men have been a while in Garrison, that is, two or three years,
they shall be sent to the Army, if there be War on foot: and all recruits shall
be raised out of the Garrisons: by this means they will be raised without any
expense at all: for instance, if there need a recruit of 4000 Men, each of the
Governors shall be ordered to send, one an hundred, another two hundred: and
the Men being drawn out of the Garrisons, new supplies shall be put in, taken
out of the Parishes, which sent the former. Thus the Armies would be always
composed of none, but expert Soldiers; which is a matter of exceeding great
consequence. I will not prescribe, in what Towns, or in how many places, it is
fit to settle Garrisons; because this depends on the Kings Will and Pleasure:
and Towns, to be chosen for this purpose, need not be nominated; the most
commodious, and best situated are known.

As to those that should be destined for Seaservice, they might be taken out of
the same Garrisons; and should be taught principally Navigation: but it would be
better, to breed them up in the Ships themselves, that they might be accustomed
to the Sea. It is fit that they should understand all the practice of Mariners;
and also be Handicrafts men, as well as Soldiers: it would be very good, that
some of the number were Carpenters, or at least each of them somewhat skilled
in use of the Axe and Adice. If Soldiers both at Sea and on Land were
Artificers, their Captains, or others might cause them to work. They should be
paid for what they made, and the Person that employed them might fell their
work, either in gross or by retail: as Garments, Shoes, Cloth, Hatts, Gloves;
and this would prove hugely beneficial; all the Soldiers would find content in
it, and hardly one of them fall into debauch.

When the Youngsters have been some time in Garrison, and are not needed for
recruits, they should be sent home with their Discharge and Certificate.
Hereupon they may set up the Trade they have learned, or addict themselves to
Husbandry, as they should think most commodious for them. The Country Youth,
not chosen by the King's Commissioners for the Garrisons, should abide in their
Parishes, to learn the Art of Husbandry, and be exercised in it.

A like course, as is to be taken with young Men, should also be taken with
young Women. There must be School-Mistresses in every City, publicly paid,
who may teach them all kind of works: the Maids giving them too, something for
a reward. It would do well to use means, that Women, and even those of highest
rank, might count it a shame to be unskilful: work would notably fix their
thoughts, and busy them to excellent good purpose.

Of Women I had not yet spoken; nor will I say, of them, ought more: herein I
shall Imitate Lycurgus, and besides him Aristotle; who both conceived it not
possible, to give them any Rules, and that their temper was so imperious, that
they could not endure to be restrained by Law: this is more to be excused in
French Women than in others: it is their due to be Mistresses; since they may
Glory, upon better Title than the Lacedemonian Dames, that they give birth to
Men, who are capable of rendering themselves, by their Valor, Conquerors of all
the Earth

It seems to me a fault, that Maids should be suffered to Marry at Twelve, and
Males at Fourteen, at which Ages the too too indulgent Laws have fixed the
Puberty of the Sexes. For, as to Nature, it is not possible but persons of
those years only must extremely prejudice their Health by Marriage, and spend
their strength before they have attained it. It Is the making of young Trees
bear Fruit before the time: the Children are without doubt the less vigorous
for it. How can the Parents give them, what they as yet have not themselves?
Again, Morality and the Laws are concerned in the case: the truth is, when a
Girl is put so young into the possession of a Husband, she has the less of
bashfulness and Modesty; nor is Virtue so well secured for her. Besides, at
this age, neither Man nor Woman is of understanding to know their Duty: and
hence it comes, that the Marriages of persons so young are ordinarily attended
with no very sure Felicity and Success. Finally, how can the one or the other,
take care of the Affairs of an House, being altogether unexperienced? or duly
govern their Children, needing Government themselves, and having not, by
allowance of the Laws, power to dispose of any thing? So that it must be
ordained, they shall not be capable of making a valid contract of Marriage till
they have attained, Females, the age of Eighteen years complete, and Males of
Twenty.

CHAP. XIV.
1. How France should act with Foreign Princes, and First with the King of
Spain, and King of Portugal. 2. With the Pope, with Venice, with the Princes of
Italy. 3. With the Swisses, with England. 4. With the Emperor and Princes of
Germany. 5. With the Hollanders, the Crowns of Denmark, Sweden and Poland. 6.
With the Turks, and King of Persia. 7. With the Kings of the Coast of Barbary,
and the King of Morocco. 8. With all remote Princes; as the Emperor of the
Negroes, Prestor John, the Great Mogul. The other Kings of the Indies, of
China, and of Tartary.

HAving treated in the precedent Ceapters, of things Internal to the State: I
think it reasonable to speak of Externals and what course is to be taken in
them. For to promote the happiness of People, and govern them discreetly, it is
not enough, that you regulate their Lives, and their comportment at home, but
their ease and well-being must be secured against strangers abroad, and
principally against their Neighbors. Now Interest being the prime motive unto
all States, we ought to consider other Nations, either in quality of Friends,
or in that of Enemies; ever accounting of them, according to the advantage we
may receive from them, or the damage they may do us. As they on their part take
no thought of us, but in proportion to what they fear, or to what they hope for
from our Arms. Besides, to treat safely with Foreigners, it is necessary that
we know their Designs, their Strength, their Alliances, their Temper, and their
Country. Forasmuch then as Spain shareth with us, at this time, the Concerns of
all Europe; and there is not a Power in Christendom, but has Alliance with the
one or the other of these two Crowns, it is meet we examine in the first place,
what measures we are to observe with the Spaniards.

The Council of Spain proceeds with a great deal of slowness; but always with a
great deal of Evenness: and since the House of Austria put it in their head to
get the Dominion over all Europe: the said Council has continually steered the
same course. The end which these Statesmen have proposed to themselves, has
been Tyrannical and Unjust; and the means they have made use of to attain it,
bad, destrustive, and ill-adjusted, which the declining of their Affairs does
evidently demonstrate. Our Enemies are always Allies of theirs, either
covertly, or openly and declared; just in like manner, as they who choose the
King's Protection, and to be interessed with France, will be Enemies of Spain.

The Emperor is Leagued with the Catholic King by Consanguinity, and moreover,
by reasons of State. For We are cause of fear to the Empire on the North, and
toward Germany, as We are to Spain on the South, and toward Italy. Of all the
other Princes, the Duke of Bavaria, seems fastest knit to the House of Austria;
and the Pope would, perhaps, be of the Party, did not his Dignity, of being the
common Father of Christians, withhold Him; and if He, as a Temporal Prince, did
not also apprehend some Irruption on our part.

Spain is a Country yielding little increase; either for that the Ground is
barren; or because the Inhabitants neglect to cultivate it. The discovery of
the West Indies, and the expulsion of the Moors have dispeopled it. Flanders,
and the places in Italy are a charge to Spain, in time of War: and what is
raised there does scarce suffice to maintain the Armies and Garrisons.

Their Government is hard, and ill to be endured; because they are inflexibly
severe; and the Monks, (whose depravation is there at the highest pitch) and
Inquisitors, do under pretext of Religion, exercise incredible grievances. The
Spaniards are valiant for their Persons: but Men of Quality despise the
Military Profession, as heretofore the Carthaginians did: and the name of
Soldier is, in a manner, ignominious with them. They are Idlers, and prefer
Pleasure, and a Gallantry, before any thing, be it ever so important, or of
greatest consequence.

The King of Spain has little Money, and much expense to defray. The vanity of
the Viceroys and Governors of His places, does spend Him above measure. The
Spaniards are presumptuous, haughty, and provided there be Honor done them,
you may treat advantageously with them. Charles V. had reason to say, that the
Spaniards seem to be wise; but are not. Their Forces are not at all to be
feared; we ruined them in the late War; and the Affairs of Portugal have
hindered their recovering them. The Minority of their King, the Discontent of
Don John, and the pretensions of some Lords upon the particular Kingdoms, which
compose the Spanish Monarchy, augment its weakness. Sicily might easily make
Insurrection. The Neapolitans upon a pretext of Liberty, such a darling in
Italy, would set up for themselves, if they had succors; and perhaps a new Pope
would favor our designs there, if he were made to see, that it would be no
impossibility for him to make some person of his Family King of Naples, or join
that Kingdom to the State of the Church, of which he is possessed already.

If ever the Spaniards be attacked, it must be done with force, and all at
once, in Flanders, in Italy, in Spain it self, on the Sea, and on the Coast of
Portugal. This is the best method for the French. Such a general effort would
produce two effects. The First is, that the Spanish Partisans would be
astonished, having no Forces ready to make resistance. The Second, that all
their Enemies would resume Vigor, and might set on foot again their pretensions
against them. If a through Conquest be intended, we must not do as was done in
the last War: must not make it our business to take all their fortified places,
one after another, or to keep them when taken. But this is a matter fit to be
discoursed of by it self.

As for Portugal, it is a State, yet under age, and not thoroughly settled: to us,
a perpetual instrument for weakening the Spaniard. France has nothing to fear
on that side. It would do well, to convey covertly some Troops, or sums into
the Country: and above all, give secretly great hopes unto the French, that are
in service there, if they made any important enterprises upon Spain, which
would divert their Forces. It would, I say, do very well to order some Soldiers
thither, and 'twere to be wished, there were so many French in Portugal, that
the Partisans might not dare to make a Peace with Spain, for fear of having
those same French for Enemies. The Queen of Portugal, who is French, both by
Birth, and by Affection, may bear up this Interest; and She may be told, that
there is a necessity of it on Her part, and that Her Fortune depends upon it.

It must be accounted on in all Treating with the Spaniards, that they are
every whit as foolish as they seem to be.

The Pope, the Venetians, and all the Princes of Italy, are of one and the same
temper. The Italians are wise and circumspect: nor should we, but very seldom,
enter into Negotiation with them. To reduce them to our intentions, we must
work by downright force, they are weak, and (as I have said) Wise: they are
people for Pleasure; their Country is the beautifullest, and best in the World;
consequently they love it, and know their Interest; they are able to foresee,
and fear the ill that may betide them. The Pope will ever consider France, by
reason of the County of Avignon, of the consequences of the Concordat of 1618.
and because of the Jansenists.

The Venetians are weakened by their War with the Turk; the Dukes of Mantua, of
Modena, and of Florence, and the Genoese can do nothing that is considerable.
The Duke of Savoy must never separate from France. We have the entrance into
his Estates: and a War with us, but of 3 Months, would utterly ruin him: He may
be induced to hope, that he shall be reinstated in the Principality of Geneva.
If War be made in Italy, the Italians must not have time given them to look
about them. As they are the Wisest, so when inured to War, they are the bravest
upon Earth. In one word, they are the Masters of the Universe.

The Swisses are Mercenaries, who will always serve the King for his Money.

As for matter of the English, they have not any Friends: themselves be a sort
of People without Faith, without Religion, without Honesty, without any Justice
at all, of the greatest levity that can be, Cruel, Impatient, Gluttonous,
Proud, Audacious, Covetous, fit for Handy strokes, and a sudden execution; but
unable to carry on a War with judgment. Their Country is good enough for
sustenance of Life, but not rich enough to afford them means for issuing forth
and making any Conquest: accordingly, they never conquered any thing but
Ireland, whose Inhabitants are weak, and ill Soldiers. On the contrary, the
Romans conquered them; then the Danes, and the Normans; in such a manner too,
that their present Kings are the Heirs of a Conqueror. They hate one another,
and are in continual Division, either about Religion, or about the Government.
A War of France for three or four years upon them, would totally ruin them. So,
it seems reasonable that we should make no Peace with them, but upon conditions
of greatest advantage for us; unless the King think meet to defer the execution
of this Project to another time; or that His Majesty, pressed with the love He
has for His own People, do incline to prefer their ease, before so fair hopes.
One had need be a Monarch, to know what it is to love Subjects; as be a Father,
to know how Children are loved.

In fine, if we had a mind to ruin the English, we need but oblige them to keep
an Army on foot: and there is no fear that they should make any invasion upon
France; that would be their undoubted ruin, if they be not called in by some
Rebels. Now if they have an Army, they will infallibly make War upon one
another, and so ruin themselves. You must put them upon making great expenses;
and for this end, raise a jealousy in them for the Isles of Jersey and
Guernsey, of Wight and Man, for the Cinque Ports, and Ireland: and by that
means, oblige them to keep strong Garrisons in all those places: this will
create a belief in the people that the King forms great Projects against
their pretended Liberty; and while He is in Arms, His Subjects will hate Him.

They must be wrought to distrusts of one another, by writing Letters in Cipher
to some particular persons, and causing them to be intercepted. For (being
suspicious and imprudent) they will soon be persuaded, that the Letters were
seriously written. Some Forces should be landed in Ireland, and in other parts.
The Irish may be induced to revolt, as having a mortal hatred for the English.
The Scots also will not neglect to set themselves at liberty. Factions must be
raised, and the Sects favored against one another; especially the Catholics,
among whom, the Benedictine Monks in particular, should be secretly promised,
on the King of England's behalf (wherein it will be easy to deceive them) that
they shall be restored to all the Estates, which they once possessed in the
Island, according to the Monasticon there Printed. Upon this, the Monks will
move Heaven and Earth, and the Catholics declare themselves. The rumor, which
has already gone abroad, that the King of England is a Catholic, must be
fortified, and so all will fall into utter confusion, and the English Monarchy
be in case to be divided.

On the other hand, our League with the Hollanders should be renewed, and they
put into a belief, that we will give them all the Trade still: because they
have a through Knowledge of it, and are proper for it; whereas the French have
no inclination that way, and Nature cannot be forced. They must be told, that
now they are come to the happy time for advancing their affairs, and ruining
their Competitors in the Sovereignty of the Northen Seas. Beside these
particulars, if the King give Belle-Isle, or L'Isle Dieu, or the Isle of Ree,
to the Knights of Malta, as I have said before, these Knights will make
irreconcilable War upon the English, redemand the Commanderies of their Order,
and by their courses, and Piracies, oblige them to keep great Fleets at Sea;
which will ruin them, by ruining the profit of their Trade. Mean time, the
King shall increase His Strength at Sea; and then finding His Enemies weakened,
consummate their Depression, and Subversion.

It is not difficult, to make defense against any enterprises of the Emperor;
for He cannot make War upon France, though He would: such a War would be too
costly for Him; and and to make any progress in it, He must needs bring into
the Field excessive great Armies. But if He armed Him so potently, the Princes
of Germany would grow jealous of Him, and make Levies to oppose Him, and to
hinder His passage through their Territories: beside, His Hereditary Countries
would be disfurnish'd of Men, and so exposed to the inroads of the Turks: so
that there is no cause to apprehend any thing on the part of the Emperor. On
the contrary, He has intentions to give the King content; because He may
receive great succors from Him, in Wars with the Turk, as happened of late
Years.

The Princes of Germany, whether Catholics or Protestants, have an equal
interest to keep themselves in the King's Protection: for the reasons I noted
before in the Chapter of the Huguenots; so that they will always oppose the
Emperors growing greater, on the side of France: as it may be, they would
oppose the designs of the King; if He should carry His Arms too far up into
Germany. It Is the interest of lesser States, that the Kings their Neighbors be
equal in Power, that the one may maintain them against the others.

To conclude: the King has no Allies, whom He should so highly esteem, as the
Germans; there is not a braver Nation, a Nation more open, more honest. Their
Original is also ours; They have no Vices; are Just and Faithful: there is
among them an inexhaustible Seminary of good Soldiers: their generosity put
Alexander the Great into admiration for 'em; and wrought affection and
confidence in 'em, in the first Caesar's; who by committin(...) their Persons to
the virtue of these People entrusted them with the quiet of the Universe.

The Hollanders will never attempt any thing against France; but keep
themselves in our Alliance, as much as possibly they may. They are Rich, and
interessed as Merchants commonly are. If the King had relinquished them,
the(...) State would have sunk. (which yet by the rules of Policy, cannot last
long; Democracie(...) being subject to changes.) It would be expedient, that
the King do interpose in their Affairs and some division be raised among them.
We can hope for little from their Armies; and they would always be a charge,
and expense to us.

The King of Denmark is a Prince, whose State is but of small extent; His whole
Strength consists in the King's Protection, who upholds Him against the Suedes
his Enemies.

Sueden will never break off from the Interest of France. It Is a Country
unfertile except in Soldiers; but there being little Money in Sueden, and they
far of, they can of themselves make no considerable War: they are feared and
hated in Germany. So, we ought to consider them, as Instruments, which for our
Money, we may make use of, to avenge our Quarrels, either against the Emperor,
or the German Princes; or to divert the English and the Holland Forces, when
His Majesty makes any enterprise which pleases them not.

Poland and Muscovy are of almost no use to (...), except it be to serve us in
stopping the en(...)erprises of the Emperor. Furs may be had (...)om them; and
Cloth, and Silk-stuffs sent (...)hem.

The Friendship of the Turks is good for (...)rance, to be made use of on
occasion against (...)he Emperor; and that of the King of Persia, to (...)e
made use of against the Turks. The one and (...)he other may favor our
Commerce.

There must be no reliance upon the promises of the Kings of Tripoly, Tunis,
and Algier; they (...)re Pirates, that take a Pride in breaking their Words,
and have no Faith at all. Whenever (...)ccasion serves, War must be made upon
them, (...)nd they attacqued home to their own doors in (...)heir Harbors, but
with considerable Forces* They may be ruined in time, by hindering their courses
at Sea, and by causing the Tributary Princes to rise against them by Land: as I
have observed asore. Upon this, the King, as the Carthaginians did, might
employ the Numidian Troops, so much magnified by the Ancients.

The Emperor of Fez and Morocco is a Potent Prince, who is Alliance may be
useful to the King against the Spaniards, and for Commerce. He is a Mohammedan;
and I would not have too much trust put in His Oaths.

In fine, when occasions for it are offered, we must not fail to compliment the
African Kings, as the Emperors of the Negros, and of the Abyssins, then the
Great Mogol, and the other Kings of the Indies, of China, of Tartary and Japan*
letting them know by Presents, the Virtue, the Greatness and Magnificence of
the King.

The Conclusion.
Such are the Political Maxims, by which I have judged, that the Subjects of
this ( French) Monarchy might attain to the possession of a true, and stable
felicity; and so, the Heroic labors of the King be Crowned with immortal
Glory, and France enjoy in all its parts the highly beneficial Virtue of its
incomparable Monarch.

FINIS.
REFLECTIONS ON THE Fourth Chapter OF THE POLITICS OF FRANCE, Which Treats of
the CLERGY.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George, in Fleetstreet, 1691.

TO Monsieur P. H. Marquess of C.
SIR,
I Took so great satisfaction in the reading of those your Reflections upon the
Roman Clergy, that I have thought I could not better employ my time, than
illustrating them with a large Comment; and though sometimes I improvs upon
your judgment, and make bold to push on somewhat farther than you are pleased
to go, yet shall you not find that I have gloss'd upon your discourse, as some
Monks have done on the Bible, for I have faithfully confirmed your Opinion by
the History of our France, and by the wise sayings of the best Authors. And if
by their help I let you see that your Maxims carry you to much higher
enterprises than your Counsels aim at, this is not to Contradict, but to Assist
you, and per adventure to say for rou; what you would have been content to have
said your self. After having thus fought under your Banners, the interest of my
Party, which in your Fifth Chapter you are so hard upon, obliges me to engage
in their defense. And I know you are too generous, Sir, to take this ill. But I
bestow not above a Third part of this Discourse on that Subject, that you may
clearly perceive I have more than double the pleasure in following your steps,
than I find in opposing you. To return then to my chief design, which is, to
espouse your quarrel, and take your part against the Usurpations of Rome, I
will show you what more remains to be said on that occasion, there is a pretty
Book called An Examination of the Powers of Cardinal Chigi, then when he came
in the quality of Leg at to His Majesty. A Book furnished with invincible
Reasons, and a profound knowledge of Antiquity, especially for what concerns
our France. And from thence I acknowledge to have received some of the
Authorities that I allege. As in those two Chapters, where you speak against
two contrary Parties, you consider not Religion otherwise than as it affects
the Policy of France, I likewise have confined my self within the same bounds,
and have not examined this, or the other Religion, and the Professors, farther
than the State has or may have damage or benefit by them in Temporals. I shall
throughout this Discourse forbear to say what I now only mention at parting,
viz. That the Interest of God ought to be dearer to us than that of the State;
and that these two Interests accord so well, that where Truth and Piety Reign,
Peace, Justice, and the State can never fail to Flourish. God of his Goodness
grant such happy times to France, this is the Prayer of

Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, De L'Ormegeigny.

REFLECTIONS ON THE Fourth Chapter OF THE Politics of France, Which Treats of
the CLERGY.
FRance is much obliged to my Lord the Marquess of C. for having marked the
many Usurpations of the Court of Rome, upon the Rights of our Kings. He has
wisely observed, That the Churchmen have attempted, on several occasions, to
render themselves Masters of all the Temporal Jurisdiction. That their
obstinacy has proceeded so far, that making advantage of trouble some times,
they have forced our Kings to Declare in their Favor upon very unjust
Conditions, and to yield to them the Rights of Mortmain and Indemnity for the
Lands they possess. Whereby the State is so much the weaker as they grow in
strength, and that the conceit of these Privileges is so full in their Heads,
that to this day they can hardly acknowledge the King's Sovereignty. That the
multitude of Monks is an abuse of so sensible, that the King can dissemble it
no longer, and that it is high time seriously and effectually to apply some
remedy. That their blind subjection and dependence on the Pope's Will, makes a
Foreign Monarchy even in the very bosom of France. And that they seduce the
silly credulous People, which is a matter of pernicious consequence. That this
Policy is founded on the abusive and destructive Maxims of Rome, which are
merely Politic. That those particular Vows of Obedience to the Pope, and the
name of Religion in this case, is only a Bugg and vain pretense laid hold on by
the Court of Rome, for promoting their Temporal Power, and making their
Creatures in every corner. That the shiftings of the Monks, and their rambles
from one end of France to the other, serve only to debauch them with an
universal acquaintance. All these Observations are true and judicious. But the
fear that my Lord Marquess shows of offending the Court of Rome, or at least,
the Complement he had made, That it is the Glory of a King to Honor the Holy
See, hinders him from sounding the bottom of the Evil, and from presenting the
necessary remedy. For it may be said of the wholesome Rules that he prescribes
for reducing the Clergy to their Duty, and for preventing of Fraud in matters
of Benefices, that this comes to no more, than the paring a Man's Nails when
his Skull is broken, and ought to be trepanned. The great Honor, and the great
Interest of the King indeed, would be to think of a way, how he may roundly
shake off this infamous and tyrannical Yoke of the Roman Court, which my Lord
Marquess calls the Holy See. And deliver himself from this buzzard Superstition
which rides even our very Statesmen, viz. That there can be no Religion
Catholic, but in submitting to the Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Holy. See.

Is it because the Pope is the Vicar of Jesus Christ, His Majesty has a number
of Bishops within His Realm, who, if they understand, and do their duty, are
the Vicars of Jesus Christ? So that we need not travail over the Alps to seek
one. Instead then of providing a French Secretary of Conscience, who may make a
Bank in the Court of Rome, by which means we might know what Money passes from
France to Italy, which is the advice of Mouns. the Marquess, He should rather
break the Bank in France, and give order that no more Money pass out of France
into Italy; for this Bank is a continual Pump which draws away the fairest Cash
of France, which fattens a stranger with our Kingdoms Treasure, which carries
much away, but returns nothing.

I know all these Tributes and Respects are paid to the Pope, because he is
supposed to be the Head of the Church; and his Flatterers tell us, That the
Church can no more subsist without the Pope than the Body without the Head. But
that great Chancellor of the University of Paris, John Gerson was not of this
Opinion, for he writ a Book expressly De auferribilitate Papa ab Ecclesia. That
is to say, to prove that this same head might very well be quite taken away,
and the Church yet be never the worse, nor take any harm. The Cardinals have
sometimes continued more than two years before they could agree about their
Choice of a Pope. During all which time the Body of the Church was without a
Head. The Churches of France and Germany did not at all feel the want of it,
and matters went still on there as they were wont. Which puts me in mind of the
Man of Wood, that being mounted on Horseback, and coming under a Tree, a bough
struck off his head to the ground, yet the heart of Oak kept the Saddle, and
trotted on with the company nothing dismayed, for that the head was not
essential to the rest of the body.

It is too soft an expression to call the Pope an unprofitable Head of the
Church, he is absolutely pernicious to it. I pass by the Spirituals, suiting my
self herein with the humor of Mouns. the Marquess, who considers the Catholic
Religion little farther than as it makes for the interest of France. But what
greater mischief can the Pope do to the Church, than to render the Power of the
Church suspected to Sovereign Princes, as a pure politic device to invade
their Rights, grind their Subjects, and form even an Empire within their Empire.

The Marquess endeavors with great reason to make the King jealous of the
Popes Temporal Monarchy over his Subjects. He might with as good reason have
moved him to be jealous of that Spiritual Monarchy, which is in effect purely
Temporal. For he has well observed, That the name of Religion is a false
pretense used by the Court of Rome to advance his Temporal Power. And that the
Popes having begun with Letters of Recommendation to the Chapters, to have an
Eye on such an ones mirit to be chosen Bishop. Have after in process of time
turned these Letters Recommendatory to Bulls and Decrres to dispose of the
Bishoprics of France at their pleasure; which is a Tyranical invasion of the
Rights of the King, and of those of the Church.

Glaber, who lived in the times of Hugh Capet, relates lib. 3. cap. 4. how Pope
John sent a Cardinal into France to Found and Consecrate a Monastery within the
Diocese of Tours; and that the Prelates of France and Hugh Archbishop of Tours
opposed him, and said roundly, That the Bishop of Rome having a Diocese to
himself, ought not to meddle with the affairs of another Diocese, nor send his
Commands to their Bishops, who are his fellow Bishops and Colleagues.

The Doctors of the Sorbon in their Rescriptum published at the time of the
Appeal, concerning the abuse about the Breviary of Anjou, by the Bishop of
E^gers, and his Injunction to the Church of the Trinity, to use that of Rheims,
amongst other Propositions declare, That the other Bishops have the power of
Government and Ordination within their Diocese, as fully as the Bishop of Rome
has within his.

Therefore in the time of St. Cyprian, and even in St. Angustin's days, the
Popes did write Ad Coepiscopos Galliae and Collegas. Now Colleague imports
equality of Power.

And if the Bishops of Rome have not any power over the Bishops of France, they
can much less pretend to any over our Kings. Pope Leo VI. promised Lotharius,
did. 10. c. 9. can. 10. to obey his Edicts both at present and for the future.
Pope Pelagius to the like effect to Childebert, The Holy Scriptures, (says he)
command us to obey Kings, and to be subject to them.

The Popes were always humble Subjects of the Roman Emperors so long as that
Empire continued. And it is but the other day that they got free from the
Emperors of Germany* Onuphrius de varia Creatione Pontif l. 4. testifies, That
even then when they were looked upon as the Successors of St. Peter, their
Authority reached no farther, but only to maintain and defend the truth of the
Doctrines of Faith. And for the rest were wholly subject to the Emperors, who
ordered all things according to their wills, and were wont to create the Popes.

It is a notable Observation the Marquess has made, That the Tables were put
into the hands of Moses, and not into the hands of Aaron, and that it is the
part of Secular Princes, that the People be instructed in the Laws of God. He
was entrusted with the first Table as well as with the second, to teach us that
the care of the Service of God belongs as much to the Authority of the Prince,
as that of Justice and Civil Government.

Those Expressions of the Marquess, That Secular Princes are the Protectors of
the Church, of its Doctrine, and of its Canons, are intended by him in a more
liberal and ingenious sense, than they meant, from whom he takes them* For they
are the ordinary terms of those who make the King subject to the Pope, and who
own not the King for the Sovereign of the Church, but only for its Protector,
and to execute the Commands of his Holiness, and for that his Canons be
observed. This is the Style of my Lord Bishop of Montauban. Peter Bertier in
his Remonstrance made to the King in the City of Rheims, June 8th, 1654. where
after he had termed his Sovereign Power a true resemblance of the Deity, he
sinks it again not only below the Pope, but even below the Bishops, who are the
Kings subjects, saying, That the Bishops are the Head to govern, and the Mouth
of the Church to speak, but that the King is its arm, and its right hand to
execute its Decrees and Ordinances. This Scholar of the Jesuits speaks like his
Masters; for all the Jesuits harp on the same string, which Becanus in Pref. ad
Reg. Jac. Kings are only to execute the Popes Commands. What is the duty of
Kings (says he) in relation to the Church and to Religion? I will tell you in
one word; they ought to guard and defendit, not as Lords but as Servants, not
as Judges but as Executioners.

And why, I pray, has not the King the same Sovereignty in France, that the
Emperor Constantine, and the Emperor Charlemaigne enjoyed? under whom the
Canons of the Synods were none other than counsel and advice, till these
Emperors had examined and authorized them. Did not these Sovereigns altogether
call and dissolve those Synods of Bishops at pleasure? and wherefore shall our
Kings be robbed of that Power? Our great King who surpasses all his Predecessors
in Glory and Magnanimity, shall he suffer a stranger Bishop to snatch from his
Crown this essential Right, of governing the Church of his Kingdom, and He of a
King become a Sergeant to put in execution the Commands of that Bishop, and
those of the Bishops his Subjects.

The world is well changed since Pope Adrian in his Letters, inserted in the
second Council of Nice, expressed himself to the Emperor Constantine to this
effect, We beseech your Clemency with ardour of Spirit, and as though we were
present, we cast our selves at your knees, and lie at your feet, I with my
Brethren. Then it was that Popes kissed the Feet of Emperors, whereas now
Emperors kiss the Popes Toe.

In the Year 679. the Pope Agathon prayed the Emperor Constantine to discharge
the Tribute which the Bishops of Rome paid Ordinarily to the Emperor for their
Conservation. Very far from compelling the Emperors, the day of their
Conservation, to lay a sum of Money at the Popes feet for Tribute, as a token
of subjection, which afterward the Emperors of Germany have been obliged to do.

Gregory the First gave a good Example for our Popes at this day, how they
should demean themselves toward the Emperor, for he speaks thus to the
Emperor, l. 3. Ep. 6. I am the unworthy Servant of your pity. And in the same
Epistle, Whilst I speak thus before my Masters, what am I other than Dust and a
Worm. And l. 2. Ep. 61. I am subject to your Commands.

I might bring many Examples how anciently the Christian Emperors, and the
Kings of Italy created and deposed the Popes, commanding them, and deposing
them at their pleasure.

Not to go farther than our France, there we may see what Power our Kings of
the first Line exercised in the Government of the Church. The History of
Gregory of Tours may furnish us with many examples, l. 4. c. 5. King Glotharius
speaks thus to the Inhabitants of Tours, Have not I commanded that the Priest
Cato be made a Bishop? Why are my Commands slighted? and Chap. 18. Pascentius
is made Bishop of Paris, ex jussu Regis Chariberti, by the Command of King
Heribert. The same King being provoked, because Emerius had been turned out of
the Bishopric of Xaintes, caused him to be beaten, who came to signify to him
that deposition, and made him be drawn upon a Cart laden with Thorns, into
banishment, and restored Emerius to his place from whence he had been cast out,
l. 6. c. 27. Felix Bishop of Xaintes being deceased, Nonnichius Consobrinus
rege ordinante successit. His Cousin Nonnichius succeeded him by the King's
Order, C. 39. King Guntram created Sulpitius Bishop of Bourges, rejecting the
Presents offered him for promoting another, and saying, It is not our Custom to
sell the Priesthood for the price of Money, l. 8. c. 22. are these words, Then
the King commanded that Gundegesil be made a Bishop, which was done
accordingly. And C. 39. Evantius Bishop of Vienna died, and in his place was
substituted Vitus a Priest, the King choosing him.

In all these passages we find no mention of the Pope, nor of Annates, nor of
Letters of Investiture. For in those days the Bishops of Rome meddl'd not at
all with the Election of the Bishops of France. Above all is memorable the
Francique Synod, to be found in the Third Tome of the Councils of the Edition
of Cologne, Page 39. Where Carloman, who styles himself Duke and Prince of the
French, thus speaks, By the advice of my Priests, and of the chief of the
Realm, we have appointed Bishops for the Towns, and have set over them Boniface
Archbishop.

Pope Adrian the First, by a Council, made this Law to pass, That Charlemain
should have the Right and Power to choose the Pope, and to govern the Roman
See. Which Constitution is inserted in the Roman Decretal.

The Council of Mayence held under Charlemain, an. 813. did. 63. Can.
Hadrians, begins thus, To Charles August, Rector of the True Religion, and
Defendor of the Holy Church of God* And the Second Council of Mayence, under
Lewis the Debonnaire, to Lewis the most Sovereign Rector of the True Religion.
At this day these Titles would be counted wicked.

Now for all that Charlemain and Lewis the Debonnaire have advanced the Pope
out of measure, yet his Authority, even in Spirituals, was no better than
precarious, and suject to those Kings that were Emperors. For proof of this,
Hincmar relates l. 55. c. 20. That the Emperor Charlemain did convoke a general
Synod in France, whereby the worshipping of Images was condemned; and the
Second Council of Nice which defended them, was rejected as a false Synod, tho
the Pope had approved it. And tho at this Synod, convoked by Charlemain, the
Authority of the Pope was admitted. For the History of those times teaches us,
That Charlemain, who had advanced the Pope, made use of the Authority given
him, to his own advantage, even against the Pope himself, when he had a mind.
Insomuch that he was not content to make the Popes Opinion be condemned in this
Synod assembled (pro forma at least) by order of the Pope; but he sent to the
Pope a Book, which he writ against the Second Council of Nice, and against
Images, which we have still to this day.

After that Charlemain had raised the Pope, in giving him a good share of the
Country, which he had taken from the Lombards, the Popes began to be puffed up
extremely, and by little and little made themselves formidable, taking upon
them the Figure of Judges and Correctors of the Actions of Princes throughout
Christendom, by Excommunications, Interdictions, and finally, by the Deposition
of their Crowns. Now it is very remarkable, that whereas, by their imaginary
Arms they have laid at their feet the Emperors of Germany and and the Kings of
England, and brought their Estates into a miserable confusion, yet had they
never the like success against France, they never have been able to Depose our
Kings* never could prevail to have any Interdict received in their Kingdoms,
which so often as they attempted, they were mocked, their Officers beaten, and
their Partisans ruined. But alas, the Submission which Henry the Great made to
the Pope (the only Instance that we can be reproacht withal) is a cooling cast
in our way.

Under Lewis the Debonnaire was held at Paris a Council against Images, that is
to say, against the Pope who maintained them. Of which Council we have all the
Acts entire. And in the beginning of his Reign Claudius Bishop of Turin broke
down all the Images he could find within his Diocese, and listed himself
against the Bishop of Rome, who stood for their Adoration, and writ a Book
against Images, and the Pope durst not be angry, because this Bishop was
supported by the Authority of Lewis.

Great Troubles being stirred in France, Gregory the Fourth confederates with
the Sons of this Lewis, too Debonnaire, who had engaged in a wicked Conspiracy
against their own Father. Sigebert about an. 832. testifies, That Pope Gregory
came into France, and took part against the Emperor with his Sons. And the
Annals written at the same time, Bochel. Decret* Eccl. Gall. l. 2. tit. 16. and
the continuer of Aimoinus, a Religious of St. Benet, writes, That the
resolution of the French Bishops was, that they would by no means yield to his
Will, and that if he came to Excommunicate them, they would Excommunicate him
again.

After this, Pope Nicholas the First Excommunicated King Lotharius, (for in
those days Deposing was not talked on) to make him leave Waldrade, and take
again Thetherge his former Wife. Whereupon, the Articles drawn up by the
French, and which may be seen in Hinemar Archbishop of Bheims import, That the
Bishops hold that as the King ought not to be Excommunicated by his Bishops, so
can he not be judged by other Bishops: because he ought to be subject to the
Empire of God alone, who alone could establish him in his Kingdom. Then also,
the Clergy of France writ to the Pope Letters full of hard words, related by
Aventin in his Annals of Bavaria, insomuch as to call him Thief, Wolf, and
Tyrant.

The Popes growing in Insolence, Adrian II. took upon him to command King
Charles the Bald to leave the Kingdom of Lotharius entirely to his Son Lewis.
The same Hincmar, a Man of great Authority in his time, writ several Letters to
him, containing many Remonstrances on this occasion, and amongst* other
matters, informs him, That the Churchmen and the Seculars of the Realm
assembled at Rheims, have said, and say by way of reproach, That never was such
a Command sent from that See to any of our Predecessors.

He adds, That Bishops and Secular Lords used threatenings against the Pope,
which he dares not repeat. And for the King's part, see how little he valued
the Pope's Commands; amongst the Epistles of the said Hincmar, are to be found
the Letters of Charles the Bald to Pope Adrian, wherein, after having charged
him with Pride and Usurpation, he adds, What pit of Hell has vomited out this
preposterous Law? What Infernal Gulf has disgorg'd it from the black and dismal
Dungeons, quite contrary to the way that is set before us by the Holy
Scripture. And he forbids the Pope to send any more such Commands to him or to
his Bishops, unless he would be content to meet with contempt and dishonor.

Pope Urban excommunicated Philip the First, and set his Kingdom under an
Interdict. Innocent the Third did as much to Philip the August. But nether of
their Thunderbolts had any effect, and were only received with Mockery. Which
agrees with the relation of Mat. Paris, that after the Pope had declared to
Philip the August by the Cardinal D'Anagnia, that he would set his Land under
an Interdict, unless he would reconcile himself with the King of England; the
King answered, That he was not at all afraid of his Sentence, seeing that it
was not founded upon any just cause: adding moreover, that it belonged not to
the Church of Rome, to pronounce Sentence against the King of France, the which
Du Tillet, Clerk of the Parliament, tells us, was done by the advice of his
Barons.

But what was ever more memorable in History than the truly Royal Courage of
Philip the Fair an. 1302? Boniface VIII. that Monster of Pride, was irritated
against him, because he held Prisoner the Bishop of Pamiers, who had spoken
defamatory words against him: and moreover, for that he assumed to himself the
Collation of Benefices. The Pope then commands him to release the Bishop, and
writ him the following Letter.

Fear God, and keep his Commandments: We will that thou take notice, That thou
art subject to us in Spirituals and Temporals; that no Collation of Benefices
and Prebends belongs to thee; that if thou have the keeping of any that are
vacant, thou reserve the profits for the Successors; if thou go about to
make any such Collations, we Decree them void, and so far as in fact they are
executed, we revoke. Those who shall believe otherwise, we shall count
Heretics. A Legate came to Paris with these fine Letters, which were torn from
him by the King's People, and thrown into the fire by the Count of Artois. The
answer of Philip to the Pope was this:

Philip, by the Grace of God, King of the French, to Boniface, that calls
himself Sovereign Pontifex, wishes little health, or rather none at all. May
thy great sottishness know, That in Temporals we are subject unto none, that
the Collation of Churches and Prebends belongs to us by our right of Royalty;
and also to take to our selves the profits during the Vacancies. That the
Collations made by us, and to be made, shall be strong and good, and that by
virtue thereof we will defend those in possession courageously. Those who
believe otherwise we count Fools and Madmen,

The Pope thus provoked, Excommunicates the King, but no body durst publish the
Excommunication, nor be the bearer of it. Nevertheless the King assembles at
Paris, his Knights, Barons, and Prelates, and demanded of them, of whom they
held their Fiefs, and their Church-Temporalties. They answered, That they hold
them of the King, and not of the Pope, whom they accused of Heresy, Murder,
and of other Crimes. In the mean while, the Pope made it his business to stir
up Germany and the Low Countries against France. But the King sent into Italy,
William de Nogaret, who, assisted with the advice of Sciarra a Polander, took
the Pope at Anagnia, and having mounted him upon an hurdle, carried him
Prisoner to Rome, where he died of grief and anger. Observe, that this Pope who
thundered against Kings, had so little Power at Rome, and so little love of the
People, that not a Roman stirred a foot to deliver the Bishop of Rome, so
rudely treated even in Rome it self. For all this the King had immediately from
the Successors of Boniface rare Bulls, for abolishing the memory of all these
Transactions; as may be seen in the Extravaganta Meruit of Clement V. where
this King is praised as a Religious Prince, who had deserved well of the Holy
See. For the Popes are of the nature of Spaniards, who will lick their Masters
feet when they have soundly banged them.

In the Year 1408. Pope Benedict XIII. angry because Charles VI. had expressed
the exactions and pilferings of the Popes Court, which drained France, sends
into France a Bull of Excommunication against the King and his Princes. The
University of Paris Ordered, That these Bulls be torn in pieces, and that the
Pope Benedict, whom they called Peter de Luna, be declared Heretic and
Schismatic, and Disturber of the Peace. And these Bulls were torn by the
Sentence of the Court, June 16. 1408. and ten days after, the Court being
risen, at Eleven a Clock in the Morning, two Bullbearers, who had brought this
Excommunication, made their honorable Amends upon the stairs of the Palace,
and after were carried back to the Lovre in the same manner they had been
brought (being drawn on two Sledges, adorned with Coats of Painted Canvas, and
Miters of Paper on their heads) with the sound of Trumpets, and the public
Laughter. So little did they care for the Popes thunder. And what would they
have done, if these Bulls had brought the Sentence of Deposition against the
King? Charles de Moulin in his Treatise against the Perites Dates, relates a
pretty Sentence of the Court against the Pope under Charles VI.

From the same vigor of the French, to defend the Dignity of the Crown of their
Kings, are risen these customs which have been observed many Ages, that a
Legate of the Pope is not received in France, nor any Rescript, nor Command of
the Pope, without the Kings leave, and without that the Legate communicate his
Powers to the Kings Procurator-General, and that they be viewed and verified in
the Court of Parliament, who modifie and and restrain them to Masters that do
not derogate from the Rights of the King, the Liberties of the Church, nor the
Ordinances Royal. Against which ancient form Cardinal Balui being come into
France an. 1484. and there acting as a Legate without the Kings permission, the
Court, at the request of the Procurator-General, decreed a Commission for an
Information to be brought against him by two Counselors of the Court, and did
forbid him to use farther any Faculty or Legantine Power, on pain of being
declared Rebel.

An. 1510. the Gallican-Church being assembled at Tours, it was concluded, That
the King Lewis XII. might with a good Conscience despise the abusive Bulls and
unjust Censures of Pope Julius II. and might by Arms oppose his Usurpations,
though the Pope should go on to excommunicate, or to depose him. Which is more,
by a Council held at Pisa, he declared himself fallen from the Papacy, and
caused Money to be coined with this Inscription around it. Perdam nomen
Babylonis. There is some reason to believe he would have made good his word,
had he been 30 years younger. And we hope that God has reserved this Glory for
another Lewis in our days, who with the vigor of a flourishing Youth, has the
prudence of an old Cato; as also the courage and fortune of an Alexander.

When Lewis XII. and his Adherents were deposed, John D'Albert, King of
Navarre, was entangl'd with the same misfortune, whose Kingdom by this Pope
Julius II. was given to Ferdinand King of Arragon. And this is all the Right
the Spaniard has to that our great Kings Hereditary Kingdom.

In the Year 1561. on Friday 12th of December, Master John Tanquerel, a
Bachelor of Divinity, was condemned by a Sentence of the Court to make
confession publicly, that he had indiscreetly and rashly held this
Proposition; That the Pope is Vicar of Christ, having Power spiritual and
secular, and that he may deprive of their Dignities the Princes that rebel
against his Commands. And notwithstanding that Tanquerel protested, that he had
proposed this Doctrine aliter tantum and non juridice; that is to say, not for
affirming it as true, but as a Subject for dispute in the Schools, was he
compelled to make this acknowledgment.

During the Wars of the League an. 1591. were sent from Rome Bulls monitory of
Pope Gregory XIV. by the which King Henry the Great was declared incapable of
the Crown of France, as an Heretic, and a Relapser; and his Kingdom was
exposed to prey. Whereupon the Court of Parliament assembled at Tours, made
this Decree.

The Court having regard to the conclusions of the Kings Procurator-General,
have declared, and do declare the Bulls monitory given at Rome the first of
March 1591. null, abusive, damnable, full of impiety, and impostures, contrary
to the holy Decretals, Rights, Franchises, and Liberties of the
Gallican-Church. Do Order that the Copies sealed with the Seal of Marsilius
Landrianus, under-seal'd Septilius Lamprius, be torn by the Executioner of
High-Justice, and burnt in a Fire which shall be kindled for this occasion,
before the great Gate of the Palace, etc. which was executed August 5th of the
same year.

I verily believe that many good Freuch men read not these Examples with
pleasure, and reckon it no glory that the Pope has never set his foot on the
neck of a King of France, as Pope Alexander the Third did to the Emperor
Frederick, nor kicked off his Crown with his foot, as Celestine II. to the
Emperor Henry VI. nor brought our Kings to yield homage to the Pope for their
Kingdom, as other Kings have done, and do to this day. Without doubt they will
laugh at the just punishment which Boniface VIII. had for his Insolence from
the Officers of the generous King Philip the Fair, and to see how after this
treatment the Popes Successors of Boniface, did compliment him with a many
Commendations, and Apostolic Benedictions.

Without doubt also these good Frenchmen are well satisfied with the
pragmatick Sanctions whereby our Kings have repressed the Exactions of the
Court of Rome, and have appropriated the Collation of a number of Benefices;
and think we are well helped up in that the King, the Magistrates, and the
Sorbonne will own no other Superior to the King but God, for what concerns
Temporals.

But I pray to what end is all this briskness in our Kings, in our Parliaments,
and in the Sorbon against the Usurpations of the Pope in Temporals, but to
yield him the Spirituals, and to confirm his pretensions even in Temporals?
Grant him the Spiritual Power, and he will be Master of the Temporal without
contradiction, and he shall bring under his Jurisdiction all secular Causes
under the color of a Sacrament, of an Oath, of Charitable Uses, or of matters
of Conscience.

The Concords of our Kings with Rome, and their pragmatick Sanctions about the
Collations of Benefices, what have they come to? Is not this to come in for a
share with the Robbers, who had seized the Royalties, and by solemn Articles to
make them a Title, which they had no pretense to before their Invasions? And
what other do our Kings, in acknowledging the Spiritual Power of the Pope, but
own themselves his Subjects in Temporals? for the one hooks in the other of
necessity. The experience of six ages has proved this truth. It Is the voluntary
Subjection of Emperors and Kings to the Spiritual Power of the Pope, that has
given him the liberty to Excommunicate them, for this belongs to the Spiritual
Jurisdiction. And the very same Jurisdiction has authorized him to exempt their
Subjects from the Oath of Fidelity, for the keeping of an Oath is a duty of
Religion: so that if the Pope be obeyed by a discontented and factious People,
you see an Emperor or King is deposed by the Spiritual Jurisdiction: and the
Pope may spare the other Power that he pretends to over the Temporalties of
Kings, seeing that his Spiritual power all alone is sufficient to ruin the
poor Prince.

And if that the Christian Princes, that are of his Communion, own him for the
Vicar of Jesus Christ; let the Kings understand it in what sense they please,
he will make them know, whenever their weakness shall give him an opportunity,
that he takes himself for the Vicar of the Secular Power of Jesus Christ, as
well as of the Spiritual: And that to him, as to Christ whom he represents, all
Power is given in Heaven and on Earth. This is what the last Council of Lateran
attributes to him, and applies to him that Prophecy of Psalm 72. particular to
Jesus Christ. All Kings shall be prostrate before him, and all Nations shall
serve him

The Kings that prostrate themselves the most humbly before him, are those he
throws at his Feet. Witness the Treatment he gave our good King Henry the
Third, who Adored him: and yet he Thundered upon him, and persecuted him even
to death, and beyond death. For after he was Assassinated, in pursuance of his
Excommunication and Deposition, by his Creatures of the League, and
particularly of the House of Guise that he favored: He would not at all suffer
any Obits or Services to be made for him at Rome, as if he had a mind to have
him Damned, after he had caused him to be Murdered. Particularly he extolled,
in a Public Harangue, the execrable Parricide Jacob Clement, and compares his
Fact to the Mystery of the Incarnation of the Son of God.

The design of this persecution drawn out so at length against the King, the
Princes of the Blood, and against all the Kingdom, is to be seen in the Memoirs
of the Advocate David, intercepted at Lions, An. 1577. as he was upon his
return from Rome, where he had been Secretary to the Bishop of Paris, the
King's Ambassador with the Pope. This Bishop of Paris, a Creature of the Duke
of Guise, being at Rome, An. 1576. instead of serving the Interests of the King
his Master, who had sent him to make an excuse, by reason of the necessity of
the King's Affairs, for the Peace he had made with the Duke Alenzon his
Brother, and with the Princes of the Blood that were Protestants; He applied
himself wholly to the Interests of the Duke of Guise and the Pope, who had then
complotted together their devilish design of the League. For the Pope, whose
custom it is to build his Greatness upon the weakness of Kings, and the
troubles of their States, seeing the Royal-House declining, despised, and
drawing to an end, and France harassed with Civil Wars; was easily wrought upon
to favor the House of Guise, which aspired manifestly to the Crown by the
exclusion of the Princes of the Blood. So upon the whole matter, the Duke of
Guise, a Prince well made, and of high undertaking, powerful in Friends, loved
and adored by the People, promised to give him all the Sovereignty in France,
which he counts himself debarred of, by the pragmatick Sanctions, and by the
Liberties of the Gallicane-Church.

Then during the stay of this Ambassador at Rome, An. 1576. an Agreement was
drawn between the Pope and Duke of Guise, whereby the Pope Declares, That Hugh
Capet had seized the Crown of France, which of Right belonged to the House of
Charlemaign. That he and his Race had rendered the French refractory and
disobedient to the Holy See, by that damnable Error which they call the
Liberties of the Gallicane-Church, which is none other, (says he) but the
Doctrine of the Valdenses, Albigenses, the Poor of Lions, Lutherans and
Calvinists. That it is this Error which makes the Arms of the Kings of France,
in defense of the Holy Church, unfortunate, and that they never will prosper,
so long as the Crown shall continue in this Line.

In order thereunto, an opportunity was now offered by reason of the present
Divisions, to labor in good earnest the Restoration of the Crown to the true
Successors of Charlemaign who had always constantly obeyed the Commands of the
Holy See. And who had in effect showed themselves the lawful Heirs of the
Apostolic Benediction upon that Crown, though deprived of their Inheritance by
fraud and violence.

That it is plain, the Race of the Capets are wholly delivered over to a
reprobate Sense; some being possessed with a spirit of Mopishness, Stupid, and
of no Valor. Others rejected by God and Men for their Heresy, proscribed and
shut out from the Communion of the Holy Church. Whereas the Branches of
Charlemaign are fresh and flourishing, Lovers of Virtue, vigorous of Body and
in Mind, for the execution of high and laudable Enterprises. He goes on and
Prophesies for them, that as War bad been the means whereby they lost their
Degree, so Peace shall do them the service to restore them to their ancient
Heritage of the Kingdom, with the good Will, the Consent and the Choice of all
the People.

Afterward follows a Lesson of the Conclave, for the execution of this Design,
well worthy to be read. For it is the whole plot and project of the League,
which was exactly observed all along, even to the very last Act with the States
of Blois, when the Theater on a sudden fell upon the Actors Heads, and that
the Tragical death of two of the Principals broke the great design ready to be
accomplished; which was to shut the King in a Monastery, and the Queen in
another, and to put to death all the Princes of the Blood, to make way for
Monsieur the Duke of Guise, to whom immediately the Crown was to be given.

For the Conclusion of this Accord, his Holiness requires of the Duke of Guise,
that he shall cause to be acknowledged the power of the Holy See, by the States
of the Realm, without any restriction or modification: abolishing the
Privileges and the Liberties of the Gallican-Church, the which he shall
promise and swear to do before he take the Crown.

The Pope enraged to see his great design quashed, that he had labored and
pushed on with so much Artifice, by the execution made by the King upon the
persons of the Duke of Guise, and of the Cardinal his Brother, Excommunicates
and Deposes the King, who, for all that, lost not his Crown, till he lost his
Life; also, being assassinated by James Clement, a Dominican-Monk: who being
immediately killed by the King's Servants there present, had undoubtedly been
Canonized by his Holiness for his Heroic Act, if the business of the League
had prosper'd: for we have have seen and read with horror the Legend of St.
James Clement, Printed and Dispersed through France: and his execrable Paracide
has been defended as a just and meritorious Action by the Jesuit Guignard, who
has written a Book expressly on that Subject. Even Bellarmine condemns highly
those that killed the Monk who murdered his King, because, (says he) they
killed Sacratum virum, a Man consecrated, accounting this detestable Monk more
Sacred and more inviolable, than the Sacred Majesty of the King,

Henry the Great having inherited the Crown of Henry the Third, the Pope
prosecutes the League against him with a re-doubled Zeal. So that besides the
open War, there followed three several attempts upon his Person, by Villains
instructed, and posted in convenient places for their design by the Jesuits,
who for this reason, were banished out of France, and a Pyramid was erected
close by the Palace, with an Inscription which declared the cause of their
banishment.

Now, for all that His Majesty professed the Roman Catholic Religion, yet
would not the Pope of a long time receive him into the bosom of the Church,
because as yet his Party was but weak. But when his Holiness saw that the
Interests of the League declined, and that good Cities and whole Provinces
treated with the King, then the Holy Spirit suggested to him, that he might
receive into his fold of the Church this straying Sheep; out of fear, least
France, provoked too far, should, in the end, come to do what has been often
threatened, that is, to make a Patriarch of the Gallicane-Church.

And yet in this Reconciliation, the Pope made appear so much Pride and Rancor,
this great King could not but in the Person of his Ambassador, lying on the
Ground at the Pope's Feet, receive a bitter Cup of Repentance.

Never had a King of France made the Pope the like submission. The Pope has
taught our Kings a Lesson to take advantage in their turn of his Necessities,
to make him bend or break. And I am full of hope that our Great and Glorious
King will have a deep resentment of so great an Indignity done to His Heroic
Grandfather. Especially might His Majesty be pleased to consider, that the
Court of Rome, notwithstanding that Reconciliation, never pardoned him; keeping
near his Persons Confessors that conspired against his Life, causing Seditious
Sermons to be Preached in Paris, and censuring at Rome in full Consistory the
Sentence of the Court of Parliament against John Castle, executed for having
struck with a knife at this Great King, in order to cut his Throat. And this
censure was made at Rome four Months before that this excellent King was
killed, to prepare their Spirits for this execrable Assassination.

Thereupon, when Ravaillac, who performed what the other Martyrs of the Pope
had attempted, was examined, and asked why he undertook this detestable
Parricide, he answered, That there needed no more than to have heard the
Sermons preached in Paris the last Lent, to inform any body of the Motives; for
the rest that the King was preparing to make War against God, in that he would
make War against the Pope, and that the Pope is God. In short, one might find
in this Wretch the sparks of that fiery Zeal, and blind Devotion for His
Holiness, and the desperate Spirit of the League, which the Pope, by the means
of the Jesuits, industriously fomented in France, to produce this horrible and
dire Effect.

When it was represented to these Bigot Parricides, that the King having been
Excommunicated, was afterward Absolved and Reconciled to the Pope; they
answered, That his Conversion was feigned. And they who attempted against his
Person, before this Reconciliation, might shield themselves with the Canon
Excommunicatorum of Pope Urban, which speaks thus, We count them not Murderers,
who shall happen to kill any Excommunicated Persons, out of an Ardour of Zeal,
for the Catholic Church their Mother.

Observe then, that all they whom the Pope taxes for Heresy, they that Appeal
from the Pope to a future Council, and they that levy Taxes upon the Clergy,
are Excommunicated by the Bull De coena Domini, which the Pope pronounces every
Thursday absolutely: a many Kings and Princes are involved in this
Excommunication, and the Kings of France amongst the rest: no Heresy being
more Criminal at Rome, than the asserting of the Liberties of the
Gallicane-Church, and the not owning the Terrestrial Empire of his Holiness. It
concerns then those to make good provision for the securing of their Lives, who
are by this Canon exposed to all those who shall be pusht on to kill them by an
ardor of zeal for the Catholic Church.

He was much deceived, who thought that the Pope, and the Jesuits, his
Emissaries, take it very ill any should represent to the World, that by the
Doctrine, and by the Censures of Rome, Subjects are instructed to kill their
Kings, as often and as many as it shall please the Pope to Excommunicate; and
that the Murder of our two last Henry's ensued thereupon. I think the quite
contrary, they are well content that in laying to their charge these furious
Executions, which have plunged our France in a gulf of Miseries, we serve
their design, which is to scare our Kings and Princes, and render them tame
Slaves to the Court of Rome, by the fear of Excommunication, Deposition,
Rebellion, Knife and Poison.

But this is not to be feared save where the People are bigoted with a sottish
Zeal, and believe in the Pope, instead of believing in God, and obeying the
King. France at this time is pretty well purged of this Zeal. And by the Grace
of God, and the wise Conduct of His Majesty, there is no longer now any
ambitious Prince within the Kingdom to rob him of his Peoples Affection, or
that may dare to make any Alliance with the Pope, to tumble him from his
Throne, and share the Crown.

We have this good fortune, that we may set out to the life the ill aspect of
Rome upon our Kings, and that dangerous vigilance over France, without any
danger of abating the Courage of our Great King; but on the contrary, were his
truly Royal Courage capable of an increase, it would yet swell the higher, from
the consideration of the Evils that Rome has done, and will yet do to France,
if he do not heartily oppose the Usurpations she exercises, with impunity in
all the parts of his Kingdom.

The honest French men that have the Honor to be near his Person, might
represent to Him the danger of this Doctrine maintained by the Popelings of His
Kingdom, That Jesus Christ committed to St. Peter, as well the earthly as the
heavenly Empire, which are the very words of Pope Nicolas. Therefore Cardinal
Bellarmine, Chapter 27. against Barclay, holds absolutely, That the Pope may
dispose of all the Temporals of the World. I affirm (says he) with confidence,
That our Lord Jesus Christ, the time he was Mortal, might dispose of all
Temporal things, and deprive the Kings and the Princes of their Kingdoms and
Dominions, and that without doubt he has left the same Power to his Vicar, to
be employed, when he shall judge it necessary for the good of Souls.

The Pope Pius V. displays this Power with great Ostentation, in his Bull
against Queen Elizabeth of England; wherein after that he calls Himself Servant
of Servants, he declares, That God has established the Bishop of Rome Prince
over all Nations and Kingdoms, to take, destroy, disperse, consume, plant and
build, and in the Power hereof he does Anathemize, degrade, and depose this
Queen, absolves all her Subjects from the Oath of Fidelity that they had made
her, and forbids them absolutely to give her Obedience.

Gregory XIV. set out such another Bull against our Great Henry, declaring him
incapable of the Crown, and exposing His Kingdom to prey. But both this and the
other Bull were torn and cast into the fire by the hands of the Hangman.

Observe that the Pope exercises this Power over the Temporalties of Kings for
the good of Souls, and as a Spiritual Prince. So that our French Statesmen may
cease to have their Eyes wilfully sealed up by that distinction of Spiritual
power, which they allow him, and Temporal power that they deny him. For that it
is by virtue of the Spiritual Power, that he exercises the Temporal. See what
Cardinal Bellarmin says, De pont. Romans l. 5. c. 5. The Pope may change the
Kingdoms, take them from one, and give them to another, as a Sovereign
Spiritual Prince, when it shall be necessary for the good of Souls. And of this
necessity he shall be the only Judge, as the Sovereign Spiritual Prince. For
it is thus the Cardinal argues, Apol. pro Garnet p. 84. If the Church (that is
to say the Pope) had not the power to dispose of Temporal things, she would not
be perfect, and would want the Power that is necessary for the attaining her
end: for (says he) the wicked might entertain Heretics, and go scot-free, and
so Religion, be turned upside down. This reason charges imperfection on the
Church in the Apostles time, for that had no power over the Temporals.

These horrible Principles so strongly maintained by the Court of Rome, were of
fresh memory found so prejudicial, both to the safety of our Kings, and to the
Peace of France, that those* of the third State an. 1615. were moved to propose
to the General States an Article, containing the means to dispossess, the
people of that Opinion, that the King might be deposed by the Pope, and that by
the killing of Kings one might gain the Crown of Martyrdom.

Cardinal Du Perron, in the name of the Clergy, opposed this Article, and
employed all the strength of his Eloquence and Learning in two fair Speeches,
the one before the Nobility, the other before the third State, to persuade them
that our Kings may be deposed by the Pope, offering himself to suffer Martyrdom
in defense of this Truth. The Lords of the Nobility, to their great shame,
joined with the Clergy, for the putting their Kings Crown under the Miter of
the Pope, much degenerating from the virtue of their Ancestors, those French
Banons, by whose advice Philip the August declared to the Cardinal D'Anagnia,
the Popes Legate, that threatened him, that it did not at all belong to the
Church of Rome to pronounce Sentence against the King of France. But the third
State held firm to their Article that maintained the Dignity of their King, and
the safety of his Person; and could never be won by promises, nor affrighted by
threatenings to depart from it, showing themselves in this more noble than the
Nobility.

It is no wonder in this case that the third State showed more affection to
their King than the Clergy, seeing that the Clerks hold, That they are not the
King's Subjects; for in effect they acknowledge another Sovereign out of the
Kingdom. And who can think it strange if they labor to heighten that Monarchy
of which they make a Party? But that the Nobility, the Kings right arm, that
they should be so base to strike their Head, and lay it at the feet of an
Italian Bishop; this is that which after Ages will reflect upon with
astonishment and indignation, and which Historians shall blush to relate, and
be vexed that they cannot let pass in silence.

So the Nobility being joined with the Clergy, the Article of the third State
was censured and rejected. Whereupon the Pope writ Triumphant Letters to the
Clergy and the Nobility, who had been faithful to Him in this Cause, glorying
in His Victory, and exalting the Magnanimity of these genero^s Nobles. But in
truth, the Deputies of these generous Nobles deserved to have been degraded
from their Nobility, and they of the third State to have received their Titles.

The minority of the late King, and the easiness of the Queen Mother, rendered
them exposed to these Injuries, and apt to be circumvented; insomuch that this
Harangue made to the third State was printed, with the Privilege of the King,
and the Pope gained his point.

The false dealing of the Cardinal, who made this Speech, is remarkable;
namely, that he had a long time followed King Henry the Great, even then when
he was of a contrary Religion, and deposed by the Pope: and that a little
before, in an assembly held at the Jacobins in Paris, he had resisted the Popes
Nuncio, who would that this Doctrine of the Temporal Sovereignty of the Pope
might be held for an Article of Faith. But in these two Harangues, the Cardinal
made a kind of a Recantation, and pronounced himself his own condemnation.
Ungrateful wretch! to have thus abused the tender Age of the Son of his King,
and his great Benefactor: and to have basely betrayed the Rights of the King,
to oblige the Court of Rome.

But this may not seem so strange, if one consider, that he got the best part
of his preferment for certain Services of pleasure, that do not much bind the
Conscience of him that receives them, nor that of him who is recompensed for
them. And in truth, those diverting Services that he and Monsieur De la Ravenne
rendered to King Henry the Great, deserve that Posterity should erect for them
Statues crowned with Myrtle.

God be thanked that France now has a King vigorous both in Age and in Virtue,
who is the terror of Rome, having shown himself sensible of its Usurpations
upon France, beyond all his Predecessors; and of whom we have good occasion to
hope that he will shake off this Italian Yoke, and banish all Foreign
Jurisdiction out of his Kingdom.

We also ought to bless God, for that the French Nobility at this day is much
of a different temper from that which in the full States submitted the Crown
and life of their King to the Popes Tyranny 56 years ago. And that is ready to
cover their Fathers faults by generously assisting their King, to make Him the
only King within his Kingdom.

To effect this, above all things, those pretended Immunities and Exemptions
must be taken from the Clergy, which indeed are revolts from the Kings
Authority to that of the Popes. It Is in truth very reasonable, that they who
have the charge of Souls, should be discharged from many public Services, by
reason they are vowed and reserved to the Service of God: but however, not that
they and their Lands should no longer depend on the King, and be subject to
another Sovereign.

This is what was represented to King Henry the Great, by that illustrious
Personage Achilles de Harley, first President of his Court of Parliament at
Paris, in a Speech he made to him, to dissuade him from recalling the Jesuits,
he Remonstrates to him, That according to their Doctrine, he who has taken the
lowest Orders of the Church, could not be guilty of High Treason, whatever
Crime he committed, for that the Clergy are no longer the Kings Subjects, nor
belonging to his Jurisdiction. In such manner that the Churchmen (if one would
believe them) are exempt from Secular Powers, and may, without punishment,
attempt against Kings with their bloody-hands; and that this Doctrine they
maintain in their published Books, Thuanus l. 130. ad an. 1604.

To this effect, the Jesuit Emanuel Sa holds, That the Rebellion of a Clerk
against the Prince is not the Crime laesae Majestatis, because he is not a
Subject of the Prince. Words that have been left out in the Edition of Paris,
but remain in that of Cologne, and that of Antwerp.

Bellarmin, that has not been purged, says the same thing. He affirms, De Cl.
C. 28. That a Clerk cannot be punished by the Civil Judges, or in any wise
brought before the Judicial Seat of a Secular Magistrate. He likewise says,
That the Sovereign Pontifex having delivered the Clerks from the subjection of
Princes, Kings are no more the superiors of Clerks. The Pope then by his
reckoning is the King of Kings, if he can deliver whom he pleases from their
subjection due to their Princes by their birth, by making them Clerks; and it
will be in his Power not to leave in France any Subject to the King, if all his
Subjects will but accept of the meanest Orders.

This Body of the Clergy has its Judges and Officers apart, and Prisons apart.
Their Causes will not bide the Trial before the Kings Judges, but fly to the
Rota, or to the Consistory at Rome. There may be found an incredible number of
Persons in France, who, under the Title of the Clergy, have shaken off the Yoke
of the Kings Authority; and a third part of the Land of the Kingdom is in the
Church-mens hands, for which they will neither render Homage nor Service to the
King. And though the lots and vents, the quints, requints, and other Rights of
Lordship belong to the King; all these Rights are lost after that the moveable
goods are entered into the possession of the Clergy. The King also loses his
Rights D'Aubanir, of Confiscation, and of Deforence, the Clergy being a Body
that never dies, yet mortifies the Inheritances; new Donations falling to them
every day, but none goes from them. A famous Writer said pleasantly, That as
the Arms and Thighs dwindle when the Belly swells to excess; so in the Body of a
State the Nobility and People that are as the Arms and Legs of a Commonweal,
are impaired by the fatning of the Clergy.

I am of those who wish the Clergy may have those means, and that Dignity which
may lift them above Contempt and Oppression, and render them respected even of
Kings. But because I love them, I wish their Riches may not be so excessive, as
to create in Kings a jealousy, that may cause them to be taken away, as has
happened in England, and in other places.

It Is therefore a great imprudence of our Lords, the Clergy of France, who
possess the best part, and the fat of the Kingdom, enough to cause jealousy in
the Seculars, and the avarice of Sacrilege; to add, yet this unjust pretension
of immunity from all Charges, both for their persons and for their goods; and
defend themselves with the Popes Authority, which exempts them. Which, in
effect, is to tell the King, That they are another Kings Subjects, who has
Power to Command Him, to dispose of the Lands, under his Obedience, and to
limit his Authority over the Persons of the Native French.

If for this they allege a long Custom, we may say, That the Popes to settle
their Usurpations in France, have ever embroiled our Kings in Troubles, and
obliged them to think of somewhat else, besides the repelling the blind
encroachments of a stranger Kingdom that crept into their Realm; and that they
had to do with weak Princes, or such as had their hands full other ways. But
now that God has given France a King, wise, powerful, flourishing, and who has
leisure to have an Eye or all his Interests, will these Gentlemen expect that
he will suffer long that a third of his Kingdom lie unprofitable to him, and
even that it be reserved to fortify a Foreign Monarchy? and though natural
reason requires that they who live at ease should comfort those who fight for
their preservation; all this while that the Nobles and the third State oppose
the invasion of Strangers, all this while that the King is fortifying his
Frontiers, entertaining Garrisons, settling Officers both for the State and for
the War, Why do not the Churchmen, who are thereby maintained in the quiet
enjoyment of so great plenty, contribute one Mite toward the defraying of
public Charges? Why shall their increase be a diminution to the strength of
the King, who is kept waking for their repose and preservation?

Shall not the King who is so clear-sighted, see what an impoverishment it is
to his Kingdom, that France be tributary to a Stranger, under the Title of
Annates, Offerings, Dispensations, Absolutions, and Causes Matrimonial?

Against these Depredations, our ancient Kings had provided some remedy by the
pragmatick Sanctions, vexed to see the fairest Revenue of the Kingdom pass over
the Alps by a Religious spoil, and go into the Purses of those who laugh at our
simplicity.

But what reason is there that they who pay so willingly Tribute to the Pope,
should make so great difficulty in paying to the King? Is it not because they
believe they owe all to the Pope, and naught to the King? St. Paul teaches them
to pay Tribute to the Higher Powers, inasmuch as they are Ministess of God. And
St. Chrysostom commenting upon this Text, tells them who are these higher
Powers. If (says he) the Apostle has established this Law whilst the Princes
were Pagans, how much more ought this to be done under Princes that are
Believers? And he had said before, The Apostle commands this to all, even to
the Priests, Which is more, he adds, though thou art an Apostle, though thou
art an Evangelist, or a Prophet, or what ever else thou art. From St. Ambrose
we have the same Lesson in his Oration of delivering the Temples, If Tribute be
demanded, refuse it not, the Lands of the Church pay Tribute. Even Pope Urban
and the Roman Decretal say, That the Church pays Tribute of its exterior Goods.
Also, That Tribute must be paid to the Emperors, in acknowledgment of the Peace
and Repose, in which they ought to maintain and defend us.

The right of Kings and Truth must needs be very strong, that could draw from
the Pope and his Canonistical Doctors this acknowledgment. For the Canon Law
was not founded for any other end, but to supplant the Civil Laws, and
establish the Popes Jurisdiction throughout. This is a Body of Foreign Laws,
that have their Tribunal apart, and that depends on a Foreign Prince, and where
the King has nothing to do but look on; I mean till such time as he shall
please to take cognizance of so unreasonable an Usurpation. And forbid that any
Cause be judged in France by other Authority than His, and much less any Cause
commenced in France, be appealed to Rome. And, in truth, he is but a King by
halfs, till he alone possess all the Jurisdiction exercised within his Kingdom.

This is what Charles du Moulin said in an Epistle to Henry II. where he writes
freely against the Empire that the Pope has set up within our France, where the
Pope has Subjects that submit not to the Laws of the King, but to those of the
Pope, which are the Canon Law, and the Constitutions that come from Rome.

But (some may object) Would you have the King judge in Spirituals? I Answer,
That if the King ought not to be Judge, it does not follow that the Pope must.
The King has his Bishops that may and ought to judge of matters purely
Spiritual; but of naught without being authorized by the King: and there is no
need of an Authority out of the Kingdom for this.

I will say more, That the Ecclesiastical Government is a part of the Office of
a King. For so it was in the Kingdom of Israel. And who would believe that in
this Age, and in Spain, where the Inquisition Reigns, King Philip IV. assumed
to himself the Sovereign Power of Churches within his Dominions? For this
purpose he applied that excellent passage of Isodore, which is attributed also
to the Council of Paris, That the Secular Princes should know, that they ought
to give an account of the charge of the Church committed to them by Jesus
Christ; for whether that the Peace or the Discipline receive improvement by
believing Princes, or that they are impaired: He who committed the Church to
their Power, will demand an account.

O the excellent passage! O the Holy Lesson! God give all Christian Kings the
Grace so well to learn it, that they may never leave this Charge of the Church
which Jesus Christ has committed to them upon the hands of Strangers; and when
they have taken it into their own hands, to acquit themselves worthily, and
render a good account.

Alas! Alas! Have Kings Eyes to see their Rights, and have they no hands to
maintain them? Are they quick-sighted enough to perceive that the Government of
the Church is committed to them, and that they are to render an account to God;
and have they not the courage to rescue them from unjust and strange Hands that
snatch them away? Think they to acquit themselves of this great Account, of the
Government of the Church of their Kingdoms, by saying, That the Holy Father has
discharged them of it, when they have in their hands the power to discharge Him
from his Usurpations?

In Truth, they will never be in condition to Govern the Church committed to
them; they will never be but Kings by halfs, till they have banished from their
Territories this pretended Spiritual Jurisdiction, which destroys the Civil,
and which will draw under its Cognizance all sorts of Causes, there being none,
wherein there is not some matter of Conscience, or some kind of Transgression
of Gods Commandments, and that by consequence belongs not to the Jurisdiction
of the Pope, if He must be owned the Sovereign Spiritual Judge in France.

The Popes themselves inform our Kings of their Right to Govern the Church. Leo
IV. writing to Lewis and to Lotharius, did not he own that the Investiture of
the Bishop comes from the Emperor, and the Pope has only the Consecration? Did
not He beseech the Emperor to invest a person he had recommended? and does he
not acknowledge, that the Metropolitan dares not Consecrate him, without the
Emperors consent? And Pope John X. in his Epistle to Hereiman of Cologue, about
the business of Heldwin of Tongres; does he not observe, That the old Custom
has this force, that none ought to confer a Bishopric upon any Clerk, save the
King, to whom the Scepter has been given of God.

The Council held at Thionvil, under Lewis the Debonnair, An. 835. gives us
this good Maxim, That the Pope ought to be called Pope and Brother, not Father
and Pontifex: and that Lewis had more Power in the Government of the
Gallicane-Church, than the Bishop of Rome, as Agobard Bishop of Lions has it in
his Treatise of the Co^^^^ison of the Two Governments, related by Bossellus in
his Decretals.

Gregory Turonensis does furnish us with more than Ten Examples of the right of
Investiture belonging to our Kings before the Empire fell into their hands. In
the times of Clovis they held the Royal Right of the Investiture of Bishops.
They had also a Right which they called Regal, which was the Power of enjoying
vacant Bishoprics and Prebends, and the movables of Bishops dying without a
Will. And it is very easy to prove, that under the first Line of our Kings,
and a long while under the Second, the Kings of France were the Sovereigns as
well in Spirituals as in Temporals. And though they had lost their Sovereignty
about the end of the Second Line, and under the Third by their negligence, and
by the cunning of the Popes, watchful for their advantage; nevertheless an
infinite of Persons, in those times, both of the Clergy and of the Law, took
notice of, and Taxed the Usurpations of the Popes upon the Rights of our Kings.
Amongst others, Aegydius Romanus, Archbishop of Bourges, in the time of Philip
the Fair, this Archbishop, for the Reasons Registered in the Court of
Parliament, remonstrates, That the Gallicane-Church has that Right, and that
Liberty to provide for its occasions by Synods of the Bishops of the Country,
without that the Pope ought to meddle, unless by way of exhortation.

Cardinal D'Offat (Letter 90 to the King) shows, That the Pope ought not to
meddle at all with the Election of t^^ French Bishops, and this he proves by
the Ordinance of Orleans, An. 1560, and says, That since the Popes have
reserved to themselves the provision of Bishoprics, they have been very ill
served.

The excellent Archbishop of Paris, Peter de Marca, in his agreement of Empire
and the Priesthood, has wisely and boldly Remonstrated; That since the Pope
would hold the same Degree in France, that the Sovereign Sacrificer held in the
Synagogue, he ought not to pretend to more Authority in our France, than the
Sovereign Sacrificer had in the Kingdom of Israel, where he was the Kings
Subject: his Person, his Jurisdiction, the Affairs of the Church, the Order of
Ceremonies were within the Kings Jurisdiction: who deposed the Sacrificer, and
set another in his place, out of his pure and full Authority. God be praised
for that in these later times, where the Throne of iniquity, the Papal See is
so much adored, he has raised up such brave Assertors of our Christian Liberty,
which would bear up again, and for which we want only to shake off the Yoke.

What is alleged the most specious for the necessity of a Pope to superintend
the Christian Kingdom, is, that the Kings need an Arbiter of their Differences,
that may be generally respected, and whose Dignity and Sanctity may oblige them
to Submission and Veneration.

But if this general Arbiter, instead of making Peace amongst Princes, foment
their Differences, and embroil their Affairs, to fish in troubled Waters, they
shall do wisely to let him alone, and yet more wisely to rid themselves of him.

There Is no question but that when a general Peace is for the advantage of the
Pope, that then he will set himself seriously about it. But it rarely happens
otherwise, then that the good of one party shall be disadvantageous to the
Pope, and then it is ill trusting to his Arbitrament.

France has more reason to stand upon its guard than any other Nation, for the
Court of Rome has always sought its ruin: has favored its Enemies, or raised
them up anew. When the English made War against us, Rome abetted their quarrel,
and aided them with Spiritual Weapons. I cannot let pass the ridiculous
assistance sent to Henry V. of England, when he levied an Army to go into
France: this was a Ship laden with Consecrated Apples, which were distributed
to all who would List themselves for this War: and they listed themselves with
a good Will, having scrambl'd for the Apples with Greediness and Devotion, and
were well satisfied in Conscience of the Justice of this Expedition by these
Apples Apostolical.

The Pope employed more powerful means against us, when France was weak, and
the Spaniard powerful, whom he assisted with all his Forces Spiritual and
Temporal. What a strong League did he make to destroy both King and Kingdom?
What Evils did he heap on France? and after the injury done us, how much
praying did he require before he would be appeased?

Thomas Campanella speaks thus of this Judge of differences, Who shall
carefully read History, shall find that the Popes have made more Wars amongst
Christians, than they have quieted. Let France mark what he adds, So far have
the Popes been from opposing himself, Hispanis Imperiorum helluonibus, to the
Spainiards unsatiable devourers of Empire, that the Pontifical Authority has
lent pretenses to their Voracity: Witness Navarre and France in the times of
Henry III.

For this last hundred years, all the Popes (except Urban the VIII.) have
favored the Spaniard. And what reason can we have to expect better from them,
seeing that the greatest part of the Cardinals are born Subjects to Spain, in
the Principalities of Milan, of Naples, and of Sicily; and that the Court of
Rome is enclosed within these Principalities? Judge what confidence we can have
in such Arbiters.

France loses plainly both Money and Pains' sending Ambassadors to these
Gentlemen, courting them, and enriching them, when they are assembled for the
Election of a Pope. The fear they have of France's Power, may gain some
respect, but it is a respect without Friendship; and when France has gained it,
I do not see what France has gained.

They have reason to fear the King, knowing that this Great Prince is sensible
of their Usurpations; and they have no great reason to love his Subjects,
because they are no great purchasers of Indulgences. And the less the King
cares for them, the more will they fawn upon him; but we may assure our selves,
they employ all their strength, and set to work all their Art and Subtilty to
put a stop to his Progress, and to pull down his Greatness.

That agreement of the Pope with the Duke of Guise ought never to be forgotten.
What rancour did he testify against the Royal Line that Reigns at this day?
what Pains did he take to disinherit and destroy it? Into what combustion did
he cast the poor Kingdom, that he might have a King of his own Choice, who
might abolish the Liberties of the Gallican-Church, and make France a Fief of
the Court of Rome. Let us for our experience learn the truth of that Character
given by Aeneus Sylvius, who was afterward Pope Pius II. That there was never
any great Slaughter in Christendom, nor any great Calamity happened either of
Church or State, whereof the Bishops of Rome were not the Authors. Hist.
Austria. And as much is said by Machaivel in his History of Florence.

And if we consider that the great Evils done by the Pope to Kings, were done
under the color of com-promise; we shall find that it is the surest way to
decline his kindess, and to have naught to do with him; and that he always
comes better off that affronts him, than he that flatters him.

The Marquess after he has wisely considered, that the name of Religion is a
false pretext laid hold on by the Court of Rome, thereby to increase their
Temporal Power, and raise them Creatures every where, the abuses he would have
retrenched after the example of Charlemaign, and of many more great Kings.

But to compass this, it is not advisable to appear in it barefaced, for (says
he) That would be to bring upon us the Clamours and importunity of all the
Monks and their followers; this would be to bring Rome upon our back, which
might give us trouble.

I confess that no good can be acquired without trouble. But I cannot conceive
that it would be much trouble to deliver France from the Usurpations and the
Exactions of Rome. To forbid that there be in France no more Courts depending
on the Pope; nor Money carried from France to Rome, or any Cause removed
thither by Appeal. And that no provision of Benefices be received from thence.
This, in truth, would be to bring Rome on our backs; but not one Sword would be
drawn in the Cause either within the Kingdom or without. Should the Emperor do
the same within his Principalities, our King would not stir; nor would the
Emperor any more be concerned if the King should set back the Jurisdiction of
the Pope to beyond the Alps.

When King Henry VIII. of England did the same in his Kingdom, what Prince
undertook the quarrel against him: How easily would the People accustom
themselves to be free from the Papal Exactions: and how vain and idle were the
Attempts of the Popes Partisans in England to restore his Authority? that
Prince hacked and harassed what he had a mind to in the Ecclesiastic Estate,
and the clamours of the Monks, which the Marquess is afraid on, frighted not
him, though he treated them coursely.

Nor are we at all to fear least the Monks take up Arms, as the Chiefs of the
League forced them to do; which would serve only to make them be laughed at, and
gave a subject to the Painters for those antic and ridiculous Portracts that
they have left us. Or if any little broil should be raised by some of the
Bigots, how soon must it fall before a great King who is never without an Army.

Who shall read over all the Book of the Marquess, shall find that he proposes
Reformations in the State far more hand to be effected, than the banishing of
the Canon Law and Papal Jurisdiction out of the Kingdom. For he would perfectly
melt down the Justice and Policy, and cast them all anew. He has truly made it
appear, that he understands the Malady of the State, and yet his Projects to
remedy them cannot be put in execution, without bringing to ruin and despair
many active Spirits that live on their Prosessions, which is very dangerous to
attempt in a State. Whereas the expulsion of the Canon Law out of France, and
the reduction of all Causes thereon depending to the Civil Magistrate, and of
all persons acknowledging the Pope to the Obedience of the King, would not at
all be any dangerous Innovation. To discontent the regular Ecclesiastics that
are unactive, as bred up in the shade, and in contemplation, or in idleness,
can be no great danger: especially leaving them their Revenues, at least for
life.

I neither have the wit nor the presumption to give a model of what Orders
should be prescribed the Church after the Papal Jurisdiction is banished the
Kingdom. And I shall go no farther than to say, that I see no vigor in the
Roman Jurisdiction, and their Partisans in France, that may hinder the King
from cashiering them absolutely, and making himself Master at home. Even the
Excommunications and Interdicts that would follow, would strengthen him, being
of no other effect but to provoke the Parliaments, and to animate the People
against the Pope. The greatest part of the Clergy would submit to the King, and
would cast off all Foreign Domination: and the dissenting Clergy would be
inconsiderable, would be dispersed, and vanish before the Rays of the Authority
Royal.

And, I pray, a King of England, could he accomplish this Work, to free himself
from the Papal-Yoke, though carried thereunto more by passion than prudence?
And our Great King, so Vigorous, so Powerful, so Wise, shall not he dare to
undertake it, for fear of vexing the Pope and the Monks? Shall he be scared
with an imaginary Monarchy, that has neither force nor foundation, save in the
Opinion of those that fear it, and establish it by their sottish fear?

What is most considerable in this Example, is, That the Pope continues banished
out of England. For though restored by Queen Mary, and his Power owned for the
space of five years; Queen Elizabeth, and the Kings her Successors, found
themselves so much at ease in being delivered from the Roman-Yoke, and in being
acknowledged Supreme, under God, in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil; that they have maintained, and do yet maintain this
Authority essential to their Crown.

This Authority is no less essential to the Crown of our Great King; and it is
this that the good Prince, James King of England, represents to all Kings and
Princes of Christendom, in the Remonstrance he has made them, touching the
Rights of their Crowns. They have not hitherto been so happy to listen to it,
but let us hear what he says to them.

If you that are the most Powerful, come to consider in earnest with your
selves, that well-nigh a third of your People and of your Lands belong to the
Church; will not the Thoughts of so great a loss move you, which withdraws from
your Jurisdiction so many Men, and so much of your Lands in such manner, that
every where they plant Colonies and Provinces for the Pope? What Thorns and
Thistles suffer you to grow in the Country under your Subjection, so long as so
powerful a Faction flourishes and spreads over so much good Soil within your
Kingdoms, openly maintaining that they are exempt from your Power, and that
they are by no right subject to your Laws, and to your Judgments? insomuch,
that whereas formerly the Clerks desired no more but their Tiths, and lived
thereon content; at this day the Pope, chief of the Clerks, is not content with
less than a third part of your Subjects, and of your Lands. These words of a
King, our Neighbor, happily enjoying a Sovereignty independent of the Pope, of
which his Ancestor robbed this Robber an hundred and forty years ago, ought to
move in our Kings a virtuous Emulation to recover, and after to maintain the
Rights proper to their Crown. And the example of so flourishing a success ought
to encourage them to so just and so noble an Undertaking.

From this great and principal acquisition, that the King shall be the only
Sovereign in his Kingdom, other advantages will arise. These stranger Courts
being put down (that are the Mills whither every one brings, and where the
Moulture goes all to Rome, or to their Creatures) the Money they drain from the
Kings Subjects shall stay in France; and seeing that this employs a great
number of Officers, that only do harm to the State; when this Gate shall be
shut, the young Men will seek out other ways to make themselves valued by, and
the Arts and Commerce of the Kingdom will be more considerable.

We shall likewise save the Treasure, that is spent unprofitably in the
Embassies to Rome, and in courting the good Graces of the Cardinals at the
Elections of Popes, and in the Reception of Legates and Nuncio's; by all which
France does naught else but prosess and increase her Slavery, without the
return of the least advantage. For whatever Compliments, whatever Expense
France may make, yet the Catholic King is the Minion of Rome; and the Subjects
of Spain are the Chapmen that but most of their Wares, and that have most blind
Devotion for the Holy See. And in truth, seeing that the Politics of France
(by the Marquess) and Monfieur Silhon, and before them Cardinal D'Ossat, have
testified their little satisfaction with Rome, and published her Cheats, in so
far that as we know that Rome does not at all love us; in like manner Rome well
knows, that we care not for Her: and I cannot understand to what end serve all
our Civilities to the Court of Rome, but to puff them up the more, and provoke
the Gentlemen to laughter, who without doubt receive a wonderful pleasure in
seeing their professed Enemies come to kiss their feet.

It Is true, that so long as France suffers Rome to dispose of many Benefices,
we must always have occasion to deal with them; and as the Pope, to Preserve
his Credit, amuses the Princes with com-promises and treaties which he draws
out at length, deporting himself as the Judge of Differences, whereas he
creates more than he decides. So very often Princes contribute to his
Inclination by their delays, and in setting before his Council Board Affairs
that they have no intention should be concluded. And whatever their Inclination
be at the bottom, he is courted and caressed as the Arbiter, which pleases him
extremely. And why should it not please him to have at his Court the
Ambassadors of the Empire, of France, of Spain, of Poland, of Portugal, and
other Princes that bring him Authority by their difference, and bring gain to
his Court and his Citizens, by their Liberalities, and by their Expenses,
suitable to the Dignity of their Masters? The great Men and the Sages of
Council to His Majesty may, when they please, consider what good comes to our
Kings, by their keeping the Pope in this humor, of his being their Judge, and
in letting him enjoy his pretended Rights in France. And whether it is not
better, and a shorter way, for France to do its own business without him, and
to take from him what does not at all belong to him in our Kingdom, that we may
have no more to do with him.

The King has been pleased to declare, That he desired to reunite his Subjects
in their Religion. This so Christian and Royal Design cannot be executed, so
long as the Pope shall have any Power in France; for this Reunion cannot be
made, unless the Parties mutually yield some matters either in the Doctrine or
in the Discipline; it is certain that the Pope will never consent, at least not
to be owned the Vicar of Jesus Christ, that has all the Power which Jesus
Christ had upon Earth; and that on the other hand, the Protestants who have
quite another Opinion of him, and such an one as all know (though they make it
not an Article of their Faith) they can never submit to his Authority. But if
that France were not governed in Spirituals, save by the King and his Bishops,
an half of the way to this great Work were already over; it being most certain,
that most of the Points in difference are not maintained by the Theologians,
vowed to the Popes Service, farther than as they serve his Interests.

REFLECTIONS UPON THE Fifth Chapter OF THE Politics of France, Which Treats of
the HUGUENOTS.
I Have Treated my Lord, the Marquess of C. with all the Respect that was
possible for me in my Reflections upon his Chapter of the Clergy. I could not
do more to comply with him and serve him, than by approving his Judgment, and
confirming it with Authorities, adding only what he durst not venture, and (may
be) had a mind to say.

Upon his Chapter of the Huguenots I shall keep my self within the same
Respect. But I would hope from his Ingenuity, that after I have taken some
pains in commending and defending the judgment he has made on the Roman Clergy,
he in recompense would give me the liberty to oppose that which he has given,
upon those he calls Huguenots, and to complain of the Treatment he would have
dealt to them.

But because I take great delight in according with him as far as is possible,
I embrace the advice he gives at the entrance, That a King cannot have a more
noble Object of his care, than to preserve in his States the Religion he has
received from his Ancestors. For though this Proposition be not universally
true, I will understand it in his Senle, supposing that he means the True
Christian Religion. And it is that His Majesty he received of His Ancestors; the
which I presume he will not limit to two or three Descents of his next
Predecessors; but as he has drawn from three Stocks the lawful Succession of
our last Kings, and affirms, That they are Branches sprung from the same root,
he cannot take it ill that we go back to the First and Second Race, to find the
Religion that His Majesty has received of his Ancestors. Therefore as the Noble
Marquess in his Second Chapter, speaking of the pretended Exemptions of the
Clergy, appeals for that matter to the old Kings and Emperors, who owned no
such thing, and says, That the Clergy cannot take it amiss if His Majesty
reduce things to their Primitive state. In like manner the Marquess cannot take
it amiss, that Religion be reduced to its Primitive state, at least to the
state it was left in at the time when our Kings were Emperors. Now I have
showed in the foregoing Chapter, that the Emperor Charlemaign, one of His
Majesty's Ancestors, Convok'd a Synod, in which the Worship of Images was
condemned, and that he himself made a Book against the Second Council of Nice,
and against Images, which we have preserved to this day; and that under Lewis
the Mild, his Son, another Synod was held at Paris against Images, all the Acts
of which we have entire. This Doctrine is a principal Point of the Religion
that our Kings received from their Ancestors, and which we profess. And as much
may be said in point of the Holy Sacrament, of which so much noise is made at
this day, that we willingly refer our selves to what was believed in the times
of His Majesty's Ancestors.

I should stray from my Subject, should I enter upon Controversy; the Marquess
obliges me to stand upon another Guard, employing his Eloquence in treating us
as Rebels and Enemies of the State.

I am far from justifying the evil Actions of our Party. But since we are to
deal with Men of such a spirit, that display the Evil and suppress the Good,
that insult over us for Actions forced by the despair of a few, and protested
against by the greater Party; and that will not acknowledge the signal Services
we have done for the Crown, which ought never to have been forgotten, so long
as the Race of Henry the Great shall Sit upon the Throne. I think my self
obliged to represent truly what is most considerable in their condition, and in
their actions since the last return of the Purity of the Gospel into France.

I say the last return, because that it has been, and has flourisht there two
or three hundred years before, and the Professors, remained there skulking, and
yet in great numbers, after long and cruel Persecutions. For we dissemble not,
but own that this Holy Doctrine came to us, and was planted by the remains of
those poor Valdenses and Albigenses, the destruction of whom is ranked by the
noble Marquess, amongst the good Works of the first Rates. The Character that
Reinerius, their cruel Inquisitor, gave them, is very remarkable, and may
satisfy those who ask, where was our Religion before Luther, c. 4. Contra
Valdenses. This, says he, of all Sects, is the most pernicious, for three
Reasons. First, because of its long duration, for some say, that it has
continued since the time of Pope Sylvester; others hold, that it began even in
the Apostles time. Secondly, because of all Sects, this is the most general,
there scarce being any Country where this Sect has not taken root. In the Third
place, by reason that all contrary to other Sects that become abominable, by
the enormity of their Blasphemies against God, these People seem very Godly,
for they live justly before Men have a sound belief in all things, and of God,
and of all the Articles contained in the Apostles Creed: only this, They
Blaspheme against Rome. An admirable Testimony from the Pen of a Mortal Enemy,
that deserves to be Writ in Letters of Gold. Let us join hereunto that of good
King Lewis XII. the Father of the People; He was much importuned by those of
the Clergy, who prayed him to root out the Inhabitants of the Cabrieres, and of
Merindol in Provence, that were of this Profession, and some remainders of the
Albigenses. But this just King, before he would grant that bloody Request, would
see their Confession of Faith, which having read, He swore they were better
Christians than he and his People, and preserved them from the rage of their
Enemies. But these Enemies obtained what they desired of King Francis the
First, and made an horrible slaughter of those poor Christians.

If these Albigenses be Heretics, because they Blaspheme against Rome, Is not
the Marquess one, and all the Men of Politics in France, who declaim so
openly, and so generously against the Pope's Usurpations, that makes of
Religion a pretense thereby to invade the Rights of the King, and make himself
Universal Monarch of all the World?

These Gentlemen would abate much of the hatred they bear us; would they be
pleased to consider that the Pope and Roman Clergy hate us, for a Cause that is
common to us both. For it is not upon the account of any Controversies about
the Holy Sacrament, the Invocation of Saints, and the Prayers for the Dead; but
it is because we oppose boldly the Usurpations of Rome; it is because we
Blaspheme against Rome, as the Albigenses in Reinerius's days, That we are
called (as he calls us) A pernicious Sect. This is the great Heresy for which
we have been made Objects of the Public hatred, and for which the Devotion of
the People is made to consist in a bloody Zeal to burn us, and Massacre us.

In the Year 1520. the Light of the Gospel shined throughout all the parts of
France. And the Queen of Navarre, Sister of King Francis I. who was enlightened
therewith, was a great Rampire against the fury of the Roman Clergy, that
labored to extinguish this Holy Light by Persecution: However, she could not
hinder, but that much cruelty was exercised. But after her decease the
Persecution grew hot again, and continued during the Reign of Francis I. and
Henry II. For the space of Forty years, those that were converted, maintained
their Holy Profession, by a constancy in their Sufferings, in imitation of the
Christians of the Primitive Church. Notwithstanding this Vigor, many of the
Princes, and of the best Families of France, as the Princes of the Blood of the
House of Bourbon, embraced the Reformed Religion.

Under the Reign of Francis II. the Princes of the Blood, debarred of their
Rights by those of the House of Guise, the Queens Uncles, formed the design at
Ambois, to banish those from the King's Person, that held them at distance.
This attempt failing, was called a Crime of High Treason, and charged on them
of the Reformed Religion, though Renaudy the chief of the Plot, was a Roman
Catholic, and this Party was composed of Noblemen and Gentry of both the
Persuasions. Whosoever understands the Privileges of the Princes of the Blood in
France, will never accuse these Undertakers of the Rebellion. Thuanus testifies
in their Favor, Hist. l. 24. That not one of them was proved to have attempted
against the King, or against the Queen, but only against Strangers that
Governed all at Court in a Tyrannical way: For then the House of Guise was
still looked upon as a Stranger in France.

Francis II. being dead, his Successor Charles IX. being a Minor, the Princes
of the Blood had more Right than before to be admitted to the management of
Public Affairs, at least jointly with the Queen Mother. But when they saw
themselves excluded, and their Persons in danger, they Levied Forces for their
Preservation.

When the King came of Age, the Princes seeing Him much incensed against them,
and that He was of a dangerous and implacable Nature, they retired, and stood
upon their Guard. The several Affronts they received, and the frequent
Massacres, occasioned two or three little Wars.

To rid himself of them all at one blow, the King set his Sister for a bait, to
draw in and to destroy the whole Party of the Princes, giving her in Marriage
to the Prince of Navarre, who was afterward our Henry the Great. He and his
Cousin Germain the Prince of Conde were imprisoned, and the Principals of their
Party slain in their Beds, having Danced at a Ball the Evening before. Never
were Dancers at such a Wedding.

Pope Gregory XII. had a hand in this execrable Action, his Predecessor Pius V.
refused to consent to this Marriage, because (said he) the Prince of Navarre is
an Heretic. But when the Cardinal of Lorrain told his Successor Gregory XII.
that this Marriage was a trap to catch the Heretics, he then dispatched the
Dispensation, and encouraged the Design.

The Prince of Navarre having saved himself at Rochel, was immediately assisted
by a great Party that had escaped the Massacre, and the War broke out afresh.
Thereupon was formed that Faction of the League, to destroy the Princes of the
Blood, under the color of Religion, and particularly, to destroy the King
Henry III. as appeared afterward. During these long Troubles, what refuge
found the King of Navarre, whom God reserved for the Crown of France, but
amongst these of the Reformed Religion? These were they that aided, that
defended, and even nourisht him in his long and cruel Adversities.

And after, in the end, when the League had pulled off the Mask, and had driven
the King from Paris, and besieged him at Tours, came not they to his Relief
under their brave Chieftain, and did they not deliver him from the utmost
danger, though he had sent his Armies against them, to extirpate them?

I would gladly ask the Noble Marquess, Where were then the honest French? and
where were the Rebels? Would he find the honest French amongst the fiery
Zealots and Bigots of the League, Who have shed so much Blood to beat down this
dangerous Sect, as he is pleased to brand us? With your good leave, Noble
Marquess, which of the two is this dangerous Sect, that which teaches that the
Persons of Kings are inviolable, and that exposes their Lives to defend those
Kings that had persecuted them; or that which holds, That a King Excommunicated
by the Pope, may be justly killed by any body; and which out of zeal for
Religion, plunge their Bloody Hands into the Bowels of their Sovereign, as St.
Jacob Clement did, and as John Castrel and Peter Bar^iere attempted, and as
Ravaillac performed? Where is the Huguenot that ever offered any thing of this
Nature, during all the Persecutions of their Party? Or where is the Minister
that ever broacht such Doctrine to his Flock, to kill their King, which your
Spiritual Fathers have so often done? I would also ask the Marquess, Where he
finds that term of near fourscorce years spent in quelling this dengerous Sect,
which is the title he is pleased to give us? Would he take in to these 80
years, the 38 after the death of Francis II. till the Peace of Amiens, in which
time the Reformed Party were the constant, and the only support of the Great
Henry for near 30 years? Will he venture to say, That those Arms which defended
the hope of after Ages, and the fortune of France, were unjust?

Let him also say if he please, Whether by the zeal that has been to reduce the
Heretics to their duty, he means that Butchery of the St. Bartholomews, and
the Massacres in every Town of France, at that time and before, which are
reductions of a strange nature.

And because he may Object, That their defense of the Princes of the Blood was
only a pretense for the Huguenots taking up Arms, and their unjust resistance
against their Sovereign. It will suffice to answer, That their Arms were
necessary for the Preservation of that Great Prince, whom God reserved for the
blessing of France; and that when He came to the Crown, they were judged worthy
of a Reward. I would beseech also all indifferent persons to consider them
simply as men, that are neither Angels nor Devils, and to tell us, if they
think it strange that men, the Relics of Fires and Slaughters (which were the
only arguments employed for their Conversion for so many years) take the course
at length that Nature teaches them, to defend themselves against force with
force. This to take it at the worst, is all the Rebellion can be objected
against them in all that past Age, till the quiet settlement of Henry the Great.

But the good Providence of God has well cleared them from the necessity of
that excuse, having set them out an Employment so just, and so fortunate for
their Arms, that all who love, and who shall for future Ages love the
Prosperity of France, and the Greatness of the Royal Family, will have
perpetual reason to bless the timely succor of this Party, and to praise God,
who raised them for the everlasting good of the Kingdom.

Let us come to their condition, after that Henry the Great was established on
His Throne. The King being turned Roman Catholic, and seeing his Party of the
Reformed Religion discontent, and in trouble, as exposed afresh to what they
had before tried, gave them Places of Security for about twenty years.

This was the Groundwork of all their Miseries, and I am much inclined to
believe that this was procured for them by those who projected their ruin. For
their Enemies might well think, that a King that understands his Interest,
would not long sufler in the heart of his Kingdom places assigned for
Protection, against Himself in effect, and to make resistance, in case he kept
not all his promises. That these Places would be retreats for all discontented
Persons, and Incendiaries that would trouble the State. That Strangers seeing
in France a Party strengthened with Garrisons, and holding themselves in
perpetual defiance, would never leave bidding them to cock up, and fomenting
their discontents. That this thorn in the foot of France would always hinder it
from advancing; and after all, that this would be a kind of dangerous
Discipline in a State; to accustom Subjects to represent their Grievances with
Sword in Hand.

On the other hand, they might well foresee, that the Reformed being seized of
these places, would not quit them at the end of the term assigned, imagining
that the enjoyment of their Religion, of their Goods, and of their Lives,
depended all on their keeping of these Places; and that by their refusal, they
would oblige the King to win them by force; which would make them Criminals,
odious, and objects of the Justice and Vegeance of an incensed Master.

And even so it happened. For their term for holding these places being
expired, the King demands them again, and having at their instant request
prolonged their term for three or four years, at length wisely resolved to
force them; this gave occasion for the Assembly of Rochel, where most
imprudently, and contrary to their duty to God and the King, they resolved to
hold the Places by force; a resolution of despair ill-grounded. For though the
King showed himself favorable to his Subjects of the Religion, after he had
taken these Places by his Arms, he would have been yet more favorable to them,
had they rendered the Places humbly and peaceably at his demand.

When the Assembly of Rochel began, was held the National Synod of Alaix, in
which the famous Du Moulin was President. In that Country where many of these
Places of Security were, he applied himself seriously to consider the posture
of the Affairs of his Party, to sound their Inclinations, and to give them good
counsel. And he found that the greatest and the best part was disposed to
render their Places to the King, and did not at all approve of the proceedings
of the Assembly of Rochel, of which matter he thought himself obliged to inform
that Assembly; and having returned home, he writ them an excellent Letter, a
Copy whereof I have procured, which is as follows:

SIRS,
I Write not to you, to pour my Sorrows into your Bosoms, or entertain you with
my partcular Afflictions. I need no Consolation on that account, thinking my
self greatly Honored, that in the public Affliction of the Church, it pleases
God to set me the foremost. I should account my self very happy, if all the
Storm might fall on my Head. So that I might be the only Sufferer, and the
Church of God continue in Peace and Prosperity. One Care more pressing, has
moved me to write to you, and has forced Nature, which was ever averse from
meddling with Public Affairs, and acting beyond my Calling. For seeing the
Church generally in eminent danger, and upon the brink of a Precipice, it was
impossible for me to hold from speaking. Nor can I be silent in this urgent
necessity, without making my self guilty of insensibility, and of cruelty
toward the Church of God. And, I hope, in speaking my Thoughts about Public
Affairs, my Domestic Affliction will deliver me from jealousy in your
Opinion. And if I be not believed, at least I may be excused.

I confess indeed, it does not become me to give Counsel to an Assembly of
Persons, chosen out of all the Kingdom, to bear the weight of Public Affairs
in a time so full of difficulty; but I think it for your advantage to be
informed rightly what is the Opinion, and what the Disposition of our Churches,
from persons that have a particular knowledge of them.

The question then being, whether you ought to break up your Assembly, in
Obedience to His Majesty, or continue to hold together, in order to provide for
the Affairs of the Churches; I am bound to tell you, that it is the general
desire of our Churches, that it might please God we may continue in peace, by
obeying His Majesty. And that seeing the King resolved to make himself obeyed
by force of Arms, they assure themselves, that you will to your power endeavor
to avoid this Tempest, and rather yield to necessity, than engage them in a War
that will most certainly ruin the greatest part of our Churches, and will
plunge us in troubles, whereof we well see the beginning, but know not at all
the end. By obeying the King, you will take away their pretense, who incense
his Majesty to persecute us. And if we are to be persecuted, all they who fear
God, desire that this may be for the Profession of the Gospel, and that our
persecution may truly be the Cross of Christ. In a word, Sirs, I can assure
you, that the greatest and the best part of our Churches desire your Assembly
may break up, if it can be done with safety to your Persons: and even many of
the Roman Church, love that Public Peace are continually about us, praying and
exhorting us, that we may not, by throwing our selves down the Precipice,
involve them in our ruin.

On this occasion I need not represent to you the general consternation of our
poor Flocks, who cast their Eyes upon you as Persons that may procure their
quiet; and by yielding to necessity, may divert that storm so ready to break
upon their heads. Many already have forsaken the Conntry, many have quitted
their Religion, from whence you may judge what a distraction there will be,
should these troubles go on farther.

Nor need I more recommend to you, to have a tender care for the preservation
of our poor Churches, knowing that you will rather choose Death, than draw upon
you the reproach, that you have hastened on the persecution of the Church, and
destroyed that which the zeal of our Fathers had planted, and brought this
State into confusion.

I am not ignorant that many Reasons are alleged to persuade you to hold on
your Assembly. As that the King has permitted it; but for this permission you
have not any Warrant, nor any Declaration in Writing; without which, all
Promises are but Words in the Air. For Kings believe they have Power to forbid
what they have permitted, and to revoke what they have offered, when they judge
it expedient for the good of their Affairs. And there is none of you that
having sent his Servant any whither, or given him leave to go, does not think
you have power to call him back again. Above all, Sovereign Princes keep not
willingly their Promises, when they have been extorted from them.

There are also represented to you many Grievances and Controventions to the
Kings Edicts; which Complaints to our great sorrow, are but too true: yet,
without alleging that we our selves have given the occasion of many of these
Evils; the difficulty lies not in representing our Grievances, but in finding
redress. Consider then, whether the continuance of your Assembly may heal these
Maladies, whether your Session may put our Churches under shelter, provide
necessaries for a War where the Parties are so unequal, Levy Forces and make a
Fond for Payment; if all the good your Session is capable to produce, shall be
equivalent to the loss of so many Churches that lie naked, and exposed to the
wrath of their Enemies; whether when they are beaten down, you can raise them
again; whether in the manifest division that is amongst us, you have the power
to bring together all the scattered parts of this divided Body, which were it
well united, would yet be too weak to maintain it self on the Defensive.

Pardon me, Sirs, if I tell you, that you will not find all those of our
Religion disposed to obey your Resolutions; and that the fire being kindled all
about you, you will remain feeble Spectators of the ruin that you have made to
tumble upon your heads. Besides, you cannot be ignorant that many amongst us,
of the best quality, and most capable to defend us, condemn openly your
Actions, imagining and expressing that to suffer for this Cause, is not to
suffer for the Cause of God. These making no kind of resistance, and opening
the Gates of their places, and joining their Arms to those of the King, you may
easily gather what the loss will be, and what a weakening of your Party. How
many persons of our Nobility will forsake you, some by Treachery, others
through weakness? Even they that in an Assembly are the most vehement, and that
to appear zealous, are altogether for violent courses, are most commonly those
that revolt, and that betray their Brethren. They hurry our poor Churches into
the greatest danger, and there leave them, and run away after that they have
set the House on fire.

If a Fight, or the Siege of a Town should happen, whatever might be the event
of the Fight or Siege, it would prove a difficult thing to contain the People
animated against us, and to hinder them from falling upon our Churches, that
have neither Defense or Retreat. And whatever Orders the Magistrates of the
contrary Religion should give, it will be impossible for them to take effect.

I might also represent to you many Reasons arising from the State of our
Churches, both within and out of the Kingdom, to let you see that this
Commotion is altogether ill-timed*, and that it is to sail against Wind and
Tide. But you are wise enough to see and consider the posture of our
Neighbors, and from whence you may hope for succor, and whether amongst you
the Virtue and the good Agreement, and the Quality of your Chiefs is augmented
or diminished. Certainly this is not the time when the troubling of that Pool
will bring us a Cure. And it is plain, that if any thing can help us amidst so
much weakness, it must be the zeal of Religon, the which, in our Fathers time,
did support us, when we had less Strength and more Virtue. But in this cause
you will find that Zeal very cool, because the most part of our People believes
that this Evil might have been prevented, without making a breach in the
Conscience. Assure your selves, there will always be Divisions amongst us, when
we shall stir upon civil accounts, and not directly for the Cause of the Gospel.

Against all this, it is Objected, That our Enemies have resolved our ruin. That
they undermine us by little and little, and that we had better begin presently,
than attend longer.

It Is very true, he must want common Sense, that doubts of their ill will Mean
time, when I reflect on our several Losses, as that of Letoure, of Privas, and
of Bearn; I find that our selves have contributed thereto: and we are not at
all to wonder if our Enemies are not much in pain to set us right, and if they
join with us to undo us. But herein it does not follow, that we should throw
the Helve after the Hatchet, and set fire to our own House, because others are
resolved to burn it, or undertake to remedy particular Evils by means weak for
that end, but strong and effectual for the general ruin. God, who so often has
diverted the Counsels taken for our destruction, has not lost his Power,
neither has he changed his Will. We shall find that He is always the same, if
we have the Grace to wait His assistance, and do not cast our selves headlong,
through our impatience, and dash upon impossibilities.

Take this for certain, that though our Enemies seek our ruin, they will never
attempt it openly, and will lay hold on some other pretense, more plausible
than that of Religion, which we never ought to give them. If we contain our
selves in the Obedience that Subjects owe to their Sovereign, we shall see that
whilst our Enemies hope in vain, that we shall make our selves Criminals by
some Disobedience. God will cut them out some other work, and furnish us with
occasious to testify to his Majesty, that we are a Body profitable to his
State, and thereby put him in mind of the signal Services our Churches have
paid to the late King of Glorious Memory. But if we are so unfortunate, that
whilst we keep to our Duty, the Calamnies of our Enemies prevail; at the least,
we shall have this satisfaction, that we have been just on our side, and that
we have testified, that we love the peace of the State.

Notwithstanding all this, Sirs, you can, and you ought to give order for the
security of your Persons. For His Majesty and His Council having said often,
That if you will separate, He will leave to our Churches the enjoyment of
Peace, and of the benefit of his Edicts; it is not reasonable that your
separation should be made with danger to your Persons. And when you shall
require that you may separate with safety, I make no doubt but you will easily
obtain your desires, provided that you insist upon what is possible, and such
things as the misery of the Times, and the present necessity may admit. It
remains, that whilst you are together, you advise what ought to be done, in
case you may be oppressed, notwithstanding your separation. It concerns your
Prudence to give order, and is not my part to suggest.

If in proposing these things to you, I have slipped beyond the bounds of
discretion, impute it, if you please, to my zeal for the good and the
preservation of the Church. And if this my advice be rejected, as unworthy your
consideration, I shall have this comfort, that I have discharged my Conscience,
and retiring into a strange Country, I shall there finish the few days that
remain for me to live, lamenting the ruin of the Church, and the destruction of
the Temple; for the building of which, I have labored with more Courage and
Fidelity, than with Success. The Lord turn his Wrath from us, guide your
Assembly, and preserve your Persons.

I am, etc.


When this Letter was read in the Assembly, which did not at all approve it,
some arose immediately, went from the Assembly, and never returned more; And
all found in the end, that the Advertisements of this Holy Person were
Prophesies.

It appears then, that notwithstanding the great Temptations of Fear and
Despair, that moved this Assembly to resist the King, their resistance was
disavow'd by the best and the greatest Party of the Reformed Churches of
France, and that they were exhorted to obey the King by their Divines, who, in
matters of Conscience, are the representative Body of the Church, when they are
Solemnly Assembled. Now this was the Sense of the National Synod, of which this
eminent Person came from being the President. It Is then wrongfully that the
Noble Marquess taxes all our Party with Rebellion, when as our Theologians
declared themselves so strongly against it; the most of those that held these
Places of Security, opened their Gates to the King; and more than three Fourths
of his Subjects of the Reformed Religion kept in their Obedience.

I cannot omit, that in the greatest heat of those who resisted, there yet
remained many glances of Loyaly and Love for their King. I shall observe two:
At the Siege of Montaubon, the most obstinately defended of all the other
Sieges, the King and his Court passed before the Walls, from whence they were
shooting most furiously: but when the Besieged beheld his Majesty, they left
off shooting, and cried out with a great force, Long live the King.

The instance of Rochel is more remarkable, and it is very memorable. The
Rochellers besieged, implored the assistance of England, which was offered
them; but the Duke of Buckingham came late, so that the Rochellers after they
had eaten the Horses, were now eating their Saddles. In this great extremity
the Duke told their Deputies, that if they would deliver the Town to the King
of England, they should be assisted effectually. The Deputies refused, and the
Rochellers resolved to undergo all the rigours that their King, provoked, would
exercise upon them, rather than deliver the Town to a stranger. This just King
had notice thereof, and treated them the more mildly at the Surrender,
overcoming, like a Christian, evil with good.

The Noble Marquess does the quite contrary, for he studies to overcome good
with evil; displaying our Faults, with all the aggravation, and concealing our
Services. He says, That the spirit of the Huguenots is always ready for
revolts, for Confusion and Anarchy. That there will be more than an hundred
thousand men of the Kings Enemies in the bowels of his Kingdom, so long as
there shall be Huguenots in France; and that perhaps they wait only an occasion
to rise up in Arms. He pretends even to know their hearts, saying, That they
have in their hearts the same hatred they had; which are words flung out with
more animosity than reason.

For it is but ill Logic, that they are all Rebels, because about a six part of
their number took up Arms, in their defense, to keep some Places of safety; and
that because they have sinned they never have repented. If all they who have
been engaged in the Troubles of the State, within these last forty years, are
to be thought the Kings Enemies for ever; His Majesty would find few Persons in
his Kingdom whom he might trust; and now forty years are past since the War for
those Places of safety, was ended. When the Body is in a Fever, the good humors
are stirred as well as the bad, and all settle again when the Disease is over.
The same is in the Body of a State; it is subject to hot fits that inflame both
good and bad; but all grow cool and quiet in time, by the wisdom of the
Sovereign, and by the repentance of those that are honest good men. To upbraid
them as Rebels and Enemies, that took up Arms against their duty, and laid
them down again forty years ago; this is to violate the Laws of Amnesty,
without which no State could subsist. Kings being the Lieutenants of God, ought
to deal with their Subjects as God does with his. He forgives and forgets
offenses; and makes them faithful that were disobedient, through his Benefits.

The Protestants of Languedoc stayed not for the Kings Benefits, till they
testified their Fidelity, and their Oblivion of what they had suffered in the
reduction of the Places that they had held, than when their wounds were yet
bleeding. This was when the Duke of Montmorency in Longuedoc, where he was
Governor, made a Party against the King, hoping to find the Protestants, who
are in great numbers in that Province, ready for an Insurrection from the
resentment of their late Sufferings. But he found the quite contrary; for they
all joined as one man with the Kings Forces, and did him excellent Service in a
battle where the Duke was defeated and taken, and a Bishop with him. The old
Marshall De la Force, who had escaped the Massacre of St. Barth olomew, by
hiding himself under the Carcasses of his Brothers, whose Throats were cut, was
one of the Principal Commanders in this Action.

That Marquess confesses, That in the Wars at Paris, they put themselves in
Arms, and with great respect protested, that they were at the Kings Service;
and their Actions would have justified their Protestations, if His Majesty had
had occasion for their Service.

I will not loose time and pains in making Reflections upon the fourteen ways
he proposes to torment us, and make us weary of our Religion, of our Country,
and our Lives. Ways enough are found out, without his proposing. And now,
because the King, of late years, has had much to do with the Court of Rome, it
has been a part of the Policy of France, whilst they affront the Pope, at the
same time to treat us with some extraordinary Severity, to prevent the
suspicion of Heresy. We humble our selves under the powerful hand of God, and
under that of our Sovereign; confessing that we are justly chastis'd for our
sins. For the rest, we know in whom we have trusted, and shelter our selves
under the Hand that strikes us; assuring our selves, that it will protect us,
and that we shall find Jesus Christ our Redeemer, and his Spirit our Comforter,
both in this Life and in that which is to come.

As the Marquess is very exact in giving Instructions to ruin us, he does the
same toward the end of his Book for England; counting it a Nation that is good
for nothing but to be ruined. We cannot take the advantage of these
Instructions given against us, to defend our selves against them, for we are a
Body merely passive, exposed, and submitted to all that God and the King will
do with us. But for the English, when he has disobliged them by the most odious
Character that his Malice could furnish his Eloquence withal; He obliges them,
in publishing all those ways that must be taken to destroy them; for it is
likely, that being told of them, they will look to themselves. Mean time, his
Readers will say of him, that they who tell aforehand of their cunning, are not
very cunning.

Because that the noble Marquess terms us Rebels and Enemies of the State,
after the humble confession of our Faults, which I have neither cloak'd nor
dissembled; I will take the boldness to compare them with those of some of the
Gentlemen of the Roman Clergy, especially of the Jesuits and their Disciples:
and that they that are not pre-possest with passion may judge, whether to them
rather, or to us, belongs the title, Of Enemies of the State, Let us consider
the Actions and the Doctrine of the one and the other,

For the Actions, the horrible attempts against the Sacred Persons of our
Kings, by Ecclesiastics and Scholars of the Jesuits, and all the Enormities of
the League, to destroy our Kings, our Laws, and our Monarchy, and to transfer
it to a stranger; carry away without dispute the prize of Villainy, from those
who being possessed with a fear ill-grounded, have with Arms defended the Places
that were lent to them by Edict, for the security of their Religion, of their
Goods, and of their Lives. Add hereto, that they had their hearts big with the
sense of their incomparable Service to the Crown, and believed they well
deserved what these endeavored to keep.

And as for the Doctrine, these never read Lectures of Rebellion and Parricide.
And the resistance some of the Party made against the King, was condemned by
their Divines, whose writings are full of Lessons of Obedience, and of Fidelity
to their Sovereigns. Whereas those of the Jesuits, and their Disciples, teach
the people to cast off and kill their King, so often as it may please the Pope
to Excommucate him. France has felt the Effects of this Doctrine during the
long Wars of the League; and it was the Books and the Sermons that made the
Sword be drawn, and that sharpened the Daggers for the Murder of our Kings,
whilst the Protestants exposed their Lives for their Preservation.

Now I am content to let pass what is past, provided the same may be done to
us. Let us fix upon the present. Whom ought you to esteem the Enemies of the
State, those who subject the Crown of our Kings absolutely to the Papal Mitre,
and who acknowledge another Sovereign than the King; or they who own him their
only Sovereign, and maintain that his Crown depends not save on God alone?
What, in Conscience, is the true ground of the great hatred that is born us? is
it not for that, if we are to be believed, there would not in France be any
Frenchman that is not the Kings Subject, Causes Beneficial and Matrimonial
would not be carried to Rome, nor the Kingdom be Tributary under the shadow of
Annates, and the like Impositions.

And on this Subject, the Testimony of Cardinal Perron for us, in his Harangue
to the Third State, is very considerable; when he says, The Doctrine of the
Deposition of Kings, by the Pope, has been held in France until Calvin. Whereby
he tacitly acknowledges, That our Kings had been ill served before; and that
those he calls Heretics having brought to light the Holy Scripture, have made
the Right of Kings be known, which had been kept suppressed.

Shall they be said Friends of the State, who owning themselves Subjects of a
Stranger Sovereign, dare endeavor to make themselves Masters of all the
Temporal Jurisdiction? of which the Marquess complains loudly, and with good
cause; and of the great resistance they have made to maintain themselves in an
Usurpation so unreasonable. In this kind, those of the Church of the Reformed
Religion could never be accused, in the Towns where we have had some Power.

Our Religion is hated, because it combats the Pride, the Avarice, and the Usur
pations of the Court of Rome, and their Substitutes in the Kingdom; and because
we have shown to the World that sordid Bank of spiritual Graces they have
planted in the Church, and how they have drawn to themselves a Third of the
Lands of France, for fear of Purgatory, from silly People, mop'd with a blind
Devotion, and from Robbers and Extortioners, who have thought to make Peace
with God by letting these share in the booty.

It Is an advice very suitable to the Politics of France, to examine well the
Controversies that are most gainful to the Clergy, as this of Purgatory,
concerning which an old Poet said the Truth, in his way of Drollery.

But if it be so,
That no more Souls shall go
To old Purgatory,
Then the Pope will gain naught by the Story.
It would be wisely done to examine what necessity there is for so many
Begging-Fryers, that suck out the Blood and Marrow of devout People; and for so
many Markets of Pardons in honor of a number of Saints of a new Edition; and
for what design are made so many Controversies. And whether it would not be a
great Treasure for the Kings Subjects to Teach them to work out their
Salvation, and put their Consciences in quiet at a cheaper rate.

God, justly provoked, by the great Sins of France, gives us not yet the Grace
of that Gospel Truth, St. John, Chapter 8. Know the Truth, and the Truth will set
you free. And though it shines out so clear, to let us see the Usurpation of
the Popes upon the Temporals of the King, and upon the Spirituals of the
Church; yet see we not clearly enough to discover all the mystery of Iniquity,
and to resolve to shake off the Yoke.

For this great design, no other War need be made by the Pope, but only take
from him all Jurisdiction in France, all Annates, and all evocation of Causes
to Rome. This would hardly produce any other stirrs, but the complaints and
murmuring of them that are loosers. And the condition, truly Royal, that the
King at present is in, will sufficiently secure Him from Insurrections at home,
and Invasions from abroad. Or should any happen, behold, more than an hundred
thousand Huguenots, that the Noble Marquess has sound him, in the heart of his
State, whom he is pleased to call His Enemies, but who on all occasions, and on
this especially would do His Majesty a hearty and faithful Service.

The two main Interests of France, being to weaken the House of Austria, the
Princes of which enclose him on both sides; and to throw off the yoke of Rome,
which holds a Monarchy within the French Monarchy; it is easy to judge that
amongst the Kings Subjects, the Protestants are absolutely the most proper to
serve him on both these occasions. I know that amongst the Roman Catholics, as
well Ecclesiastics as Seculars, there are excellent Instruments to serve the
King in both these Interests. But there is need of great caution to well assure
him, by reason of the multitude of Jesuits Scholars, with whom these Fathers
have Industriously filled all Professions of the State and Church; and it is
for no other end that they have so many Colleges. They who have been too good
Scholars of these Masters, are contrary to both these Interests, being so great
Catholics, that they espouse the Interest of the Catholic King, to advance
that of his Holiness. But to find amongst the Protestants trusty Instruments
for both these accounts, he need not try them; they are fitted and formed, by
their Education, for these two Uses, so necessary to France.

The Marquess assures His Majesty, with good reason of the friendship of the
Protestant Princes of Germany, which they would never testify so freely, as in
serving him to ruin the Power of the Pope, who savours that of the House of
Austria. For thereby they would kill two Birds with one Stone. Not to mention
our other Neighbors, who have broken with Rome, and being disquieted by its
secret practices, will be ready to contribute to its destruction.

Who shall well consider the Scheme of the Affairs of Christendem, shall judge,
that all things invite His Majesty to shut out the Jurisdiction of Rome beyond
the Mountains; Right, Honor, Profit, Liberty, Facility, his Duty to his Crown,
to his Subjects, and to his Royal Posterity; and that many Aids smile upon him,
both within, and out of his Kingdom, for so fair and so just an Enterprise.

This is the warm desire of the honest Frenchmen. And none there are who
better deserve that Title, than they, who, with the most Indignation, resent
that their Kings should kiss the Feet of that Prelate, who ought of Right to
kiss their Feet, for having received his Principalities from Kings of France;
and who, in recompense of their good Deeds, have plotted, and plot continually
their ruin.

When the King shall have delivered Himself and his People, from this strange
yoke, he will find the enmity amongst his Subjects, for matter of Religon,
greatly diminisht; and the way open to a reunion. And were the difficulties
about the Doctrine overcome, the Protestants would not stick much at the
Discipline.

God, who is the Father of Kings, and the King of Glory, protect and strengthen
our Great King, to accomplsh the Designs that turn to the general good of His
Church, to the greatness, and to the respect of his Sacred Person, and to the
Peace and Prosperity of His State.

FINIS.

