AN ACCOUNT Of both the FLEETS: THEIR Number and Stations. With a perfect
NARRATIVE OF OCCURRENCES That have passed between them hitherto: In a LETTER
From Aboard the EDGAR.

London, Printed by A. P. in the Year, 1673.

A LETTER FROM THE FLEET.
Honored Sir,
I Am obliged somewhat by promise, but more by Friendship, to give you an
account both of my own, and the Fleets condition: But the former has so
necessary a dependence upon the latter, that to tell you it is well with me, when
it is so with the Fleet, would be as much a Tautology, as the contrary would be
a falsehood. Sir, you know I have ever lived p^entifully and cheerfully, blessed
be the company of such friends, (and amongst them particularly your self) as
have even set bounds to my wishes of any Happiness, beyond what I enjoyed: But
really, now I find a pleasure in my life, so much beyond whatsoever I could
have hoped for in it; that I should even grow a Coward for fear of losing it,
but that the very hazard proves the greatest part of that pleasure, I else
might fear the being dispossessed of. Sir, to be in the midst of the gallantest
Fleet that I Am sure, ever eyes beheld, to be under the Conduct of a Prince,
skilful to a Miracle, and Valiant. to Terror: To Engage in the behalf of the
best of Kings, against the worst of States: How great is the encouragement! --
Dear Sir, pardon me Loyalty guides my hand to write more than I designed,
though less than I think: Your own breast supplies you with such suggestions,
as would render what I can say move impertinent: And therefore to pursue my
design a little nearer, I must come to particulars, and give you an account of
what happned since our being off at Sea, and of these occurrences your Gazetts
furnish you with so true and speedy intelligence, that I suppose my relation
will, by that time it has the happiness of k^ssing your hands, lose the Name of
News: and (like Cider carried by Sea) decay in it is Spirit and become insiped:
However it is one part of the Service that I owe you to endeavor to serve you.

The last intelligence you had from my Cousin (...) as I remember, gave you a
full account of all transactions, till the third instant, at which time our
Fleet was about half a League from the middle ground, the Wind was (I can
hardly say it blew ( North-eastwardly, but it proved so very scant, that we
were forced to come to an Ankon: And about three in the afternoon we saw the
Dutch Fleet, in all, about Threescore and Six or Seven Sail, first at an
Anchor, but about Six a Clock they weighed and stood South-wardly, making way
(as near as we conjecture) toward the Long-sands.

On the morrow we found them lying at Anchor, between Orfordness, and
Hosley-Bay, having divided themselves into two Squadrons. We all flattered our
selves with the hopes of making up to them, and coming speedily to an
Engagement; but they took all imaginable care to stand off, and keep the
Weather-gage, continually shifting their Station by night, insomuch that they
never were at any certainty.

On the fifth instant we got to our Main-tops, but the Weather being somewhat
Hazy, we could not ken them; insomuch that his Highness Prince Rupert, thought
fit to send forth scouts every way, to try if he could discover them, one of
which in a short time returned with this advice, that the Enemy was Anchored in
the Gun-Fleet, whereupon the Prince immediately commanded us to Weigh, hoping
if possible to reach them that night, or however, early the next morning, but
the poor shifters smelt the danger, and instantly got them packing in a
lamentable hurry and stood Eastward, with all the sail they could make;
leaving behind them a small Dogger, which some of the scouts took, and brought
back to our Fleet. You could not have contained your self from Laughter, to
have seen what a scornful anger our Seamen expressed when they found themselves
frustrated in their hopes of an Engagement; One with threats, Another with
scorn, a third with revilings (such as were true enough) sufficiently
expressing their own Valor, and the enemies Cowardice, and Fear; which (a very
ingenious Gentleman) observing; Fellow ^ouldiers (says he in a smile) would you
not have the Boors, run for shelter, when they smell a Storm in the Wind?

On the Seventh Instant, we met with a small Oftender, who told us that he the
day before had passed through the whole Dutch Fleet, and that he believed they
had (small and great) Seventy two or three Sail; that he then left them
Anchoring on the Coast of Zealand, at a Place called Scone-Velt. He said that
they had not (at most) above forty five men of War; adding that he was called
aboard their Admiral, who had but five hundred and fifty men aboard her, and
yet they confessed her to be the best manned Frigot they had. He assured us
moreover that he was confident they would never engage us, if they could
possibly avoid it; for that their men expressed nothing but fear, nor their
ships, but Weakness. And now since they were got so far out of the way. his
Highness thought convenient to join as soon as possible with the French, of
which he was pleased to advertize Count d' Estrdes, Vice Admiral of France,
that so he might meet him in the Downs, where his Highness intends the General
Rendezvows, in order whereto we made all the sail we could and stood for Dover,
of which we came in sight a Friday Morning early, the Wind blowing fresh and
very fair, insomuch that we are in hopes of making the Downs this evening,
where you may expect we shall suddenly join with the French Fleet.

And now Sir, I am to beg your pardon, that I have been so tedious in
repeating, (for ought I know) stale ^ews. This I assure you is the truest
account I can give you of both the Fleets and though it be an Vnpollish'd one,
yet (like a Rough Diamond) it may deserve some value to be put on it, because
of it is Truth: I forbear to make any farther Apology, since what I have written
is in order to your Commands, though possibly not in answer to your
Expectation. Should there be any Engagement, there will lie one upon me (if I
live) to give you the first account of it I can, and the truest, both which are
debts incumbent upon my Zeal, and Integrity, to manifest my self.

SIR, Your Faithful Kinsman, and most Humble Servant, T.H.
May 11th. 1673.
FINIS.

