brothel scene Love not Lewd Women, for yo'ule find em worse
Than all that is Bad, attended with a Curse


The Miss DISPLAYED, With all Her WHEEDLING ARTS AND Circumventions.

In which HISTORICAL NARRATION are detected, Her Selfish Contrivances, Modest
Pretenses, and subtle Stratagems.

By the AUTHOR of the First Part of the English Rogue.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by the several Booksellers. 1675.

THE EPISTLE To the Reader.
Sensual satisfaction was the Midwife to Original Sin, and was the means to
bring it first into the World; And though it has brought so much misery, and
all manner of mischief on Mankind, yet M^n still huggs and embraces it, though
they are not ignorant, that by so doing, they seem to enjoy a (Fools) Paradise
here, and lose thereby a real Heaven hereafter. Fond, foolish Man, that do^st
inconsiderately make pleasures the Mark, which thy insatiate affections Aim at;
an^ when thou have given thy self that satisfaction, the effect of thy great
cost and labor will prove, Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. To make thee a
Proselyte to Continency, Consider what the Objects are, that too many Men too
often do at upon; and to be in the fashion, will have their dangerous Dalilah's
called Miss, forsooth, and do take pains to persuade themselves, that they are
chaste to all but them: appearing like a Merchant man, richly Laden, but by
boarding, proves a Fire-ship that infallibly blows up, wherever she comes.
Like a Watch from a Fireship she will turn her self to a Caterpillar, and
destroys many a hopeful young Gentleman's Health and Estate in the Blossom; and
when she turns Land-Syren^, she proves more dangerous then those in the Ocean;
for, he that falls into her hands runs a threefold hazard of Shipwracking, not
only his Fortune, but Soul and Body to boo^. To deterr the Reader from ever
having to do with these pernicious people, though seeming Angels of Light. I
could here produce ten thousand instances of what remediless evils have happened,
by the Society of l^wd and lascivious women; but since they are so many, that
Folio's cannot contain them, let this following Treatise suffie^, wherein is
described part of the life of a notorious Irish-English Whore; I could not
complete it, since she is yet living, and gone into France to learn Language,
and to add to her experience; and I fear upon her return, as she is young
enough, so assure your self she is so ingeniously subtle, that she will make
trial thereof to her best advantage; I solicitously wait her r^turn, and then
you shall hear more of her; in the mean time, give me leave to give a word of
Advice to honest Females, not yet vitiated, or debauched by the cunning
insinuations and vicious persuasions of the Huffing Crew.

Of all things, have a special care of being insensible of any good hereafter,
then what is to be had in this life, preferring the pleasures thereof, before
those that are yet invisible, yet eternal; if Heaven has been more kind to
you then others, in bestowing on you large Estates, you should not therefore be
the more Prodigal in your delights. You may safely sail with a gentle breez in
the Ocean of Pleasure; but let your Course be steered by Virtues Compass, and
then you need not fear splitting against the Rocks of Pride, Luxury and
Incontinence; If Vice (which comprehends the sins of Whoredom and Adultery) be
the Pilot of your fairly built and well-rigged Vessel, she will steer it a
quite contrary way ^o Virtues course, and so in stead of bringing her home to
him that built her, will infallibly run her upon the Quicksands of
destruction; which that your weakness and frailty may avoid, is the hearty
Prayer of him, who is an Admirer of the glorious female Sex, when virtuous.

R.H.

The Miss DISPLAYED, WITH ALL Her Wheedling Arts and Circumventions.
THIS true History of a late famous or infamous Whore, laying open her cunning
Contrivances. Intrigues, Cheats, Plots and Projects, either for pleasure or
profit, is made public to no other end then to the Reformation of Vice, which
is good men's wishes, and to the advancement of Virtue, which is the aim of all
honest affections; so that making my sum just with mine account, I doubt not
but I shall discharge my self to Posterity, and by one and the same Act give
all encouragement to Chastity, and will not put Modesty to the blush, though I
strip the Courtezan out of all her Finery, leaving her nakedly to be exposed to
the view of all, to the perpetual infamy of debautched Women. They only are
the subjects of my present Discourse, whom, though I shall severe and roughly
handle, yet in their dissection I will neither foul a finger of mine own, nor
offend the eye, nor ear of any modest Person. Neither do I herein design any
affront to the rest of that lovely loving Sex; those sweet, whom, if beautiful,
continent and virtuous, I ever honored in my thoughts, whilst my saucy arms,
in spite of me, would be familiar with their Persons. Mistake me not, I mean
not lasciviously, but lawfully; he that otherwise makes use of a Woman, abuses
himself and her too, and by so doing differs not from a Beast, but in form,
having the same brutish appetites: Men absolutely blind, and irrational, who
having Wives of their own, whose beauties might dispute for pre-eminence with
the choicest in a whole City, whose prudence and discretion, by any foolish
act, was never called in question; whose love to her Children, fidelity to her
Husband, and spotless honesty, white as Innocence her self, was a matchless
Pattern to all her Neighborhood; yet notwithstanding all these excellencies
which are possessed by a brave woman of their own, they must ramble abroad,
either invading other men's rights, or hazarding their healths amongst
Prostitutes, not regarding much the courseness of the face, so the Crack does
but humor him; and because they grow so numerous of late, that they swarm in
all places, (some making it a Trade, only others a Recreation) they will not
stick to scruple the honesty of the whole female Sex, and are so censorious to
all, that they will not swear for the honesty of their own Mothers; a Maid
cannot be so (they say) after eleven, and will justify that a Woman will fee
her Stallion well at fourscore. These are a sort of Cattle, whom wise men look
on as a shame to mankind, for their ingratitude to that Sex which was
instrumental in their Production, and tenderly careful of their Preservation;
and yet these Magi, these Misanthropes, whilst they accuse them, are more too
blame themselves, not only in lessning the real worth of that charming Piece of
excellency, called Woman, but by throwing their unjust opprobriums on her,
whilst they stand indicted themselves of a thousand errors, and unpardonable
fopperies; and these are wont to say, (to magnify their own Prerogative) that
Woman is an error, or imperfection in Nature; others imagine Woman to be born
into the World, only for the exercise of Man's Patience, and trial of his
Passions; others, for the affliction of Mankind, the Abridgement of his life,
and the Disannuller of his Contentment, the Debaser of his Grandeur, the
Murdress of his Valor, the decay of Courage, the Ruin of his Advancement, and
the Envy of his happiness. She doubles his afflictions, captivates his freedom,
obstructs all his noble Enterprises, drowns his fortune, disquiets his repose,
and involves him daily in a thousand inquietudes; Lastly, she is the Rise of
most quarrels, and the chief Incendiary of mischief and dissension.

It is incongruous to my present purpose, to vindicate them at this time from
these aspersions; only this I shall say, that doubtlesly there are good Women
in the World, but they are so few, by reason of the spreading Contagion of
their vicious inclinations, that thereby some are are induced to believe, that
it is only a supposed goodness, and as imaginary as a Circle in the Firmament.
Begging pardon for this digression, I shall leave the good and bad
promiscuously one amongst the other; only pick one out of the Flock (a scabbed
sheep) whom I shall anatomize, or cut in pieces, for the benefit of such, who
will take the pains to read a Lecture on her Carcass.

In Vlster in the Kingdom of Ireland, there lived an English Gentleman, whom
some misfortunes in his Native Country, had driven thither to seek some
shelter from the injury that did attend him. Here he had not lived long, ere
his own industry (improving that little he had) and symmetry of Parts, procured
him (with a handsome woman) a fortune not mean, and inconsiderable; she was all
Irish; for, her Relations out of a natural antipathy to their Conquerors, would
never suffer any of their Family to commix, or Match with any of English
Extraction; yet such was the Power of Love, that it broke down all oppositions
that were raised against it; nay, her Religion (which she should have prized
above every thing that is sublunary) she slighted for the sake of love, and
became a Protestant, because her Husband (so intended) was of that Persuasion.

He was a proper Man, accompanied with many inward excellencies, his hair of a
bright flaxen, which color the Irish love above any; so that such as are not
born with that happiness (as they account it, especially the Females) use Art
to bring their hair to that Complexion. The Estate he had purchased was not so
great that Ambition did assail him, nor so low that Contempt might follow him;
but Anchoring in a smooth low Tide, and a safe Harbor, made himself content
with things necessary; not but that his ability might permit a larger expense,
but that frugality did countermand it. His Wife, as she was suitable to his
quality by birth and education; so she was agreeable to his love and affection,
having comeliness enough to content an honest eye, but skin so white, as most
of that Country have, only that it is too often powdered with freckles that
it was sufficient to tempt a Carmelite; Cleanliness she had withal (which is a
Jewel in that Country rarely to be found,) what might be requisite for a chaste
Bed, or a frugal Table; and discretion at will to govern, and dispose all
things committed to her Stewardship.

That loving Correspondence between them gave them the Production of a
Daughter, who was called Cornelia; A Maid, in the time of her Innocence, and
Ignorance, so accomplished and accommodated with all the Ornament of Nature,
and Education, that she fat surpassed all those of her rank, and might without
the offense of Modesty, challenge equality with those which were accounted most
excellent, for her eye was a Magazin, or Arsenal of Loves choice Enchantments;
her Hair was like her Mothers, the comings of Apoll^'s Tresses, which for
quantity so Prodigally adorned her head, she could have spared half a dozen
Tours, to have supplied the deficient heads of some v^terane Ladies, without a
visible empair to Natures stock b^stowed upon her; a modest Cheek she had, rich
with bashfulness, and a face to generally clothed with beauty, and blushes,
that there was an infinite Promise of much virtue: her stature was but low, yet
composed with such true symmetry, and so agreeable with every other lineament,
through the whole Fabric of her body, that had Apelles beheld her, he would
have forsworn his Idol to have made her his Goddess. But to leave off all
further circumstance, let it suffice me to say she was truly handsome, exceeding
hopeful, and had not the Devil bin too malicious, she might have been exceeding
happy: but where the house is cleanest, there Man's Seducer endeavors to enter
soonest; and if the Guard of Virtue be idle, or unwatchful, Repentance may
follow, but it cannot prevent surprizal; and thus it fares with this our poor
Cornelia; for as Heaven had bestowed upon her all outward embellishments to
attract Virtue unto her, so had the corruption of her Nature, (whence flow all
vicious inclination,) married to those corporeal excellencies such a wicked
spirit, that all goodness became an utter stranger, and Modesty became an
Exile; in a little time, she grew so haughty, proud and disdainful, so averse
and impatient in the encountering any thing that opposed, or withstood her
roving fancy, and beloved cogitations, that she would yield to no other power
but her own, and acknowledge no God, but her own Will and Pleasure: and that
which laid the Basis of her future ruin was, she had from Men's Praises, Women's
Envy's, her Glasses plain dealing, or its Flatteries; her Parents tenderness,
her Friends carefulness, and her Associates amazedness, got such a true
knowledge of her handsomness, that she did not only believe it, and love it,
but, lost in self-admiration, beyond expression, doated on it: neither did this
foolishness of Philautie, or self-affection, so bind her to the admiration of
her own beauty, as a proud, yet not groundless conceit of the excellency of her
Wit, (above the Sphere of other Women's capacities) did bind, and slave her to
embrace to her self this Conclusion, That she only was excellent. To give her
her due, (besides those excellent natural parts she was endued withal) she had
acquired a competent knowledge in the Latin, so rhat she could speak it
volubly, nay, elegantly withal: sure she understood so much Greek too, as to
know what was (...)signifies, which may be taken, either for f^emina, or
confabulatio, which she understanding as a Woman, she would appropriate the
other sense to her self, talking. Surely, one tongue is enough for one Woman,
according to the Spanish Proverb, De Mula que haze him, y Muger que habla
Latin, guarte, take heed of a winching Mule, and a Latin Woman. This is true in
some sense, where there is not prudence to regulate, and moderate our words and
actions; in that cafe one tongue may be too much; but discretion does not
consist so much in speaking few words, as no superfluous, or impertinent ones,
which was Cornelia's praise, and her vainglory, which made her company
acceptable to all, whilst that of others, of her neighboring Sex, became
insupportable, because they only pratled.

Now she began to grow in hate with her Fathers house, having not that freedom
she proposed to her self, where she removed from the careful vigilance of a
Parents eye; and hereupon cries out on the Country as unpleasant, unhabitable,
obscure and dirty; that Housewifely Employments were sal^ish engagements; to
live with Parents is to lie with bondage; that all Commandmen^ are Curses, and
obedience only a figure of simplicity, and ignorance. She would often argue
with her Mothers servant (when in private, with whom she might be as bold as
she pleased,) after this marmer: What is Beauty, if not seen; what seen, if not
admired; what admired, if not desired; and what any, or all, if not enjoyed;
and where shall these be gathered? from the blossoms of Trees, from Stones and
Mountains, or the over flows of Fountains; or from Lakes, Loughs, Bogs, Woods;
or from a rabble of Skullogues; Patrick, Dermot, Mack-devil, etc? No, it is the
City that is the Sphere of Beauty; there are her Temples, there live her
Votaries, and there burns her Sacrifice; the Country is but a rotten Chest
that conceals holy Relics; let m^ live in the City, where, if I cannot
outshine all, or at least equal all, yet at worst I shall be hid in a handsome
Cabinet.

Upon these and the like resolutions, she threw her self into a deep
Melancholy; all meats were but course for her Diet, and though few Kingdoms in
the world have better flesh and fowl than Ireland, with plenty of every thing
that is Pallatable, yet she slighted whatever Nature indulgently provided for
her use: Sleep is too near a Kinsman to Death, she hated it: All rural company
seems rude, she loathed it: all their discourses are unpolisht, her ear would
not receive them; and to conclude, as an exanimated Carcass she walked with no
soul, and but half a Motion. Her Parents quickly perceived this Alteration, and
like skillful Physicians, labored to find out the cause to make the cure more
easy, speedy, and certain: But she thus had a lock'd-up-Soul in a Fort
impregnable; what through Disdain (the Handmaid of Pride it self, the Lord of
stubborn resolution) she became so impenitrable, that sooner might they bring
the Poles together, than separate her from one tittle of her private
resolution; so that finding her fixed, they forbore any further inquiry, only
observed all occasions, and all Circumstances, every passage, and every action
that might give light to those designs, on which she labored with such
Difficulty; at length finding her set one day in a private room (all alone, but
solitude, and her own perplexed thoughts) her Father, stealing within hearing,
might hear her utter these words. O Life, which has deceived so many, seduced
so many, blinded so many, thou art nothing at thy beginning; thy light is
nothing but a shadow, thou art but smoke at thy height; thou art sweet to
Fools, bitter to the Wise; who loves thee, knows thee not; who knows thee,
contemns thee; And here (with a deep sigh) she made a stop, when her Father
pressing upon her, demanded the cause of this quarrel between her and Life,
urging her with much ingratitude to condemn that, from which her self had
received so much Luster; applying her Beauty, Youth, Wit, and all her inward
and outward faculties as unrefellible arguments of infinite obligation to Life,
who had brought them into the World, and made them beloved of the World: But
she with a silent bashfulness (fuller of deceit than innocence) forbearing to
reply, gave him occasion to assail her with all the strength that Nature, Love,
and a Fathers Authority could summon up together, and did so urge her to
display, and lay open the Cabinet of her dearest Counsels, that she, unwilling
to lose so fair an opportunity, or to apparel her envious grief in the garment
of Obedience, with a seeming unwilling willingness did disburden her heart of
that grief, which so long had afflicted her: yet not without many Disguises and
subtle falls pretenses, as that she was not weary of the Country for its
solitude; that she was content to live there all her days, but that she had a
desire not to be continually a charge or encumbrance to her indulgent Parents;
that the City was more hopeful for her advancement; because the two Pillars of
Posterity, Honorable Marriage, and wealthy employment, had there a settled
residence, and threw away their favors blindfold like the Ghildren of Fortune.

There needed but small deliberation, when both parties did agree upon one
proposition: For he seemed to outstrip her in willingness, and as if their
thoughts had been cast in one Mould, an equal diligence made a preparation for
her speedy departure; the Mothers consent (though her only Darling, for her
Daughters good) was not wanting, so that all drawing by one link, without let
or hindrance, the Work was speedily effected and the Daughter was conveyed to
(...) Metrapolis, Dublin; where her Beauty would not let her lie long
concealed, but introduced her into the service of a Noble Lady, who in a little
time loved her so entirely, that she was never satisfied when she was out of
her sight and coveted not her service so much as her company; Nor was this Lady
to be blamed for her forward love and affection to her servant Cornelia, since
she had so many charms irresistible in her feature and behavior; her carriage
was so winning and agreeable, that not a menial, male or female in the whole
house, but was totally at her devotion; the greatness of her Ladies love made
her soon change the scene of her Apparel, and though it was Gentile enough
before, and well befitting her no mean Extraction; yet it was thought too mean
forso transcendent a Beauty.

This Lady seldom went any where, but Cornelia attended her, which proved very
advantageous to her admired beauty, in making the knowledge thereof spread
universally: and indeed, in a great City very populous, where Men and their
Minds (living as it were in a Burse of resort) were continually trucking for
new Commodities, it was impossible for this rich Jewel, which was without foyl,
should either stand gaping for a Chapman, or like an idle Apprentice, blowing
his fingers, or hands in his Pockets, cry, What lack you, Sir? This unclouded
beauty, like the Sun, gave light to a whole Hemisphere, and so shot her beams
through every corner of the City, that her Suitors were like Corisca's smocks,
infinite in number, many in good opinion, and but one at one time in
employment; At first with such severity she governed her Passions, which Reason
hindered from rising in Rebellion, that the strictest eye of Modesty could not
find fault with her Government; it may be she was the rather induced to this
Austerity, by beholding the Pictures of two famous Curtezans, which hung in her
Masters Gallery; the first, which was less fair but more fortunate, had in this
Inscription, Si non cast tamen caute, if not chastely yet cautiously; the
other, which was far beyond all for beauty, and inferior to none for misery,
had written over her, Nec cast nec caute, neither chastity nor caution; On
these two plain Songs, her resolution made sundry descants, but the close of
every strain was, That to sin wisely, was to sin safely; That after thoughts
were foolish, and had-I-wist, childish.

Many assaults were given to this lovely Fortress; some she withstood, to gain
an opinion of goodness, and they were great ones; some she durst not entertain,
for fear of after-repentance, and they were loose ones; some she held at a
distance, waiting for Preferment, and they were rich ones; and some she
scorned, and they were poor Fops, and frivolous persons. But at last observe,
the Devil himself fearing to lose so rich a Prize, which he knew would not come
to his Kingdom alone with her own lading, but with the spoils and triumphs of a
world of unfortunate creatures of both Sexes, he sent to assail her one
Ignatius, a fellow whom the Devi^ had so instructed, and adorned with all
deceivable qualities and enchantments of a seeming sanctity and goodness, that
Virtue her self could hardly have discovered him without the use of her divine
and most prying spectacles: he had what ever was excellent in a good promising
face, and a well-shaped body, which he made more glorious with gravity, and
good clothes without gaudery; he had an excellent smooth wheedling tongue, with
a wit prompt and ready, which he witnessed in his Discourses, being full of
whatever delight most suitable to the humor of a Woman; and that his pretended
Piety might not any way detriment his lascivious design; he was liberal without
Prodigality; his deportment was such, that he made a Conquest over a world of
poor deluded people (especially women) maintaining his Exchecquer; and when the
fire of lust was kindled in him by the Devils bellows, he was so full of
delicate petulance, and bewitching dalliance, that a cold half buried Anchorite
would have engendered a flame for his embers. This great General or Factor for
Hell came with his Legions of Enchantments to besiege this Redoute, or weak
Sconce, even at the time when there was a mutiny raised betwixt her and her
best Soldiers; for indeed Modesty was in disgrace, and accused for a Coward;
Chastity was scorned as a shadow, and no substance; Bashfulness was reputed
weak and childish; Honor a Chimaera, Good-Fame a Dream; and indeed all the
Virtues stood cashier as Enemies unto Pleasure; so that there was left none to
withstand this bold Assailant, but Frailty, a Canon La^, and a Penal Statute.

Against these he raised such a battery of pleasing petulant discourse, and
subtle insinuating Persuasions, that she stood amazed and staggering at the
first onset, and had like to have been surprised in this Rencounter, had not
fear of the Law, and a little love to good Report stepped betwixt her and the
enemy, and beat him back with these or the like Arguments. First, that her
Reputation was so dear and tender unto her, that she durst not give ear to his
libidinous insinuations; but he with a smile (wherein a good eye might have
discerned scorn) asked her what that thing was, so called, Reputation? She
replied, that it was the very Manna and Nepenthe of generous spirits, the
Goddess of great Courages, and the Triumph of all Noble Actions; and further
said, it was a thing so pure, so delicate and unspotted, that the least excess
did blemish it, any unjust action dishonor it, Indiscretion, Negligence or
Idleness will deface it; but Prostitution that will wh^lly ruinate it: This
Reputation is a good friend, and constant, that will go with, and follow any
good Action; but if once forsaker, no search, no inquisition, no Prayers or
tears can ever sinde it out. Believe it, Sir, (said she) there is no greater
misery then to outlive Reputation, nor greater folly then that which puts in
hazard and danger of misery. But he, to whom sophistical delusions, nay,
Atheistical Propositions, (if they might produce either profit or pleasure)
were more familiar and frequent then sound doctrine, or sincere Christian-like
expression, perceiving that all his Persuasions to downright whoring, would
take no effect, shifted the Scene of his Discourse into Proposals of Marriage.
Pausing a while, she told him, That Marriage was a business of too great a
consequence to be rashly undertaken; and that he had not known her long enough
to understand her humors and conditions, which are necessary to be known, lest
a Matrimonial Knot tie two Persons together, of such different tempers, that in
stead of a sweet harmony of affection, there is nothing but harsh, and
unpleasant discord between them all their life time. Besides, Sir, (said she) I
doubt you have some other end in this Proposal then Marriage, since you cannot
be ignorant of those many inconveniences, that daily, nay, hourly do attend it.
You have read, I question not, several books, which have inveighed bitterly
against marriage, particularly that Author, who writ of Love-melancholy, who
thus capitulates with him that is over-fond of marriage, to dissuade him from
it. Have thou means? thou will have then one to spend it. Have none? thy
Beggary is increased. Art in prosperity? Thy happiness is ended. Art in
Adversity? Like Jobs wife, she will aggravate thy misery, vex thy soul, and
make thy burden intolerable. Art at home? She will scold thee out of doors.
Art abroad? If thou art wise, keep thee so; she will parhaps graft horns in thy
absence, yet scould on thee coming home. Nothing gives more content then
solitariness, no solitariness like this of a single life. The Band of Marriage
is Adamantine, no hope of losing it, though ever so ill linck'd together. Thy
number increases, thou shall be devoured by thy Wives Relations. An unchaste
wife will cornute thee, and so thou shall b^ing up other folks Children instead
of thine own. Paul commends marriage, yet he prefers a single Life. Lastly, is
marriage Honorable, What an immortal Crown belongs to Virginity? To this the
crafty Smec (Ignatius) thus replied; Madam, you have cunningly produced what
that learned Author writes against marriage, without mentioning a word which he
speaks in praise of it, in an Anti-Parodia, quite opposite to every question,
in this manner Have thou means? Thou have one to keep and increase it. Have
thou none? Thou have one to help to get it Art in Prosperity? Thine happiness
is doubled. Art in adversity? She Will comfort, assist bear a part of thy b^rden,
to make it more tolerable. Art at home? She Will drive away melancholy. She
looks after thee going from home, wishes for thee in thine absence, and
joyfully welcomes thy return. There is nothing delightsome without society; no
society so sweet as Matrimony. The Band of Conjugall love is Adamantine, and
where true love is there is a Heaven on Earth, and here by this perpetuated.
The sweet company of Kindred increases, the number of Parents doubled, of
Brothers, Sisters, Nephews. Thou art made a father by a fair and happy issue.
Moses curses the barrenness of the womb, how much more a single life. If
Nature escape not punishment, surely thy Will will not avoid it. Thus, Madam,
are all your Objections answered, and if such happiness accrue to us men by
Matrimony, surely much more to women. Why will you then lie alone, and let your
youth, and best days fruitlesly pass away: Be not wayward, distrustful,
curious, and nice, but let us make trial of that blessed estate in which
dwells such sweet delight, and incomparable happiness. Tomorrow is Valentines
day, and, to speak in the Language of the Heathen, let us keep it Holy Day for
Cupid's sake, for Hymen's sake, and celebrate Venus Vigil with our Ancestors
for Company sake. Hold Sir, not so fast (replied Cornelia) had you alleged ten
thousand Arguments more to persuade me to marry, I should not alter my
condition for the p^esent; and though I had no reasonable grounds for my
aversion to a married life, yet I should not like it being so much out of
Fashion. He hearing that word concluded from thence, she had rather be a Miss
A-la-mode, than a slave to the idle humors of an Husband, and from hence
assured himself of a future conquest, and began to sing his own triumph; and to
make his conditions the more glorious, the assurance of her affections more
serious, and his lascivious pleasures of a Long-lived continuance, he highly
commended that exotic custom of having Adjutores tori, assistants to feeble
husbands, who were allowed of by the consent of the wife, to be made choice
before the day of Marriage; and though it be not allowed of as lawful among us,
yet you see, said he, how generally it is practiced privately, so that it is
become a byword, that he is no man, or she no beauty, if the one have not a
Miss and the other a Gallant, notwithstanding the one is possessed of a wife, and
the other of an Husband. After this, he discoursed her with the glorious lines,
and golden Legends, but not the miserable deaths and horrid disasters of diverse
famous and renowned Curtezans. Madam, said he, I need ^o inform you, that your
(...) is in^er our to none, since your own glass, and the report of all that
ever had the happiness to see you, fully assure you of that already; and it is
no Hyperbole to say, it is superior to Donna Olympia's an Italian Lady, and
yet hers was so much esteemed by Pope Innocent, that it made a total conquest
over that Holy Father, in so much that by that means, and yielding to his
desires, by becoming his Mistress, she became his Master, and disposed of all
Court-Affairs public and private; there being not the least business ordered
without her good liking, in part at least. For most frequently as he has been
treating with Cardinal Panzirolo about any particular, it has been heard come
from his Holiness's mouth; What will Donna Olympia say? Which makes it most
palpable, that he was afraid of displeasing her; and therefore that great
Cardinal, before he proposed any great business to the Pope, he commonly
Consulted Donna Olympi^, for fear he might otherwise contract the Odium of that
aspiring Lady. Nay, a Prince amongst the rest of the most considerable in
Europe, sent an extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, to whom after having given
him his most necessary Instructions, he gave in charge at his last farewell; If
by the application of our authority you can make no impression on the Pope,
endeavor to gain him by bribing his Miss Donna Olympia, to use her power,

Her excellent features (though failing of yours) with her compliance to his
desires, unpop'd him; the pleasure he had with her enervated his power; so that
there was no more talk in the Palace but of Donna Olympia; all letters are
delivered to her, the Memorials were no longer brought to the Pope, but to
Donna Olympia, who told him the contents of them; and had always this
Duplicate, fate voi, fate voi, as much as to say, Pray do you look after it.

By her sweet indulging of the Popes humor, a man could see nothing but
Presents still going up to the Vatican stairs; every two or three days you
should meet four Porters loaded with money. So great was the profit belonging
to this Papal Miss, that she had in a manner the sole command of the Datary;
Multitude of Benefices she sold, and received vast sums for Composition of
Lawsuits besides the sale of Offices; and by her instigation were many Taxes.
Imposts and Gabels laid upon the people: In short, such was her interest, that
she was Mistress over Court, Church, State and Pope, only for being the Popes
Miss; and it was thought, when she dyed, she left more than two millions of
C^owns in ready money, besides Land and Movables inestimable.

I could give you, said he, a thousand of these instances, how Persons of a low
fortune have raised themselv^ to the height of wealth and honor, only by
submitting to the humors of great men: But especially above the rest, and as
(...) History best agreeing and paralelling with her own fortunes, he insisted
much upon the life and fortunes of Lollea Paulina, the greatest Whore, and most
deceitful Bawd that ever Rome acknowledged; but here you must understand, that
this subtle Engineer played but the flattering Historian; for he only touched
at her felicities, but either forgot or leaped over her miseries, which were
infinite: He showed how she was born in the City of Fano in Italy, of good but
mean Parentage, how after her fathers decease, necessity compelled her to look
out sharply for a place of shelter, having no other Attendants then a divine
beauty, an unparalled Personage, a boundless and undaunted courage. Here
Hipolito the great Cardinal of Est, and brother to the Duke of Ferrara,
beholding her, fell in love with her, bought her at an infinite price, and
maintained her above the rank of the greatest Princes: Insomuch, that at an
Enterview of Ambassadors before the Pope in Mount Angelo, (being by
torch-light) she came among the Ladies, so covered over with Diamonds, and the
richest Jewels, that excepting her face, (which the Sun it self was not able to
darken) there could nothing be discerned but a moving flame of most glorious
fire, and those that had skill did value her at more then a Million.

It is not to be expressed, with what greediness of spirit, and wonderful
delight Cornelia's ears, drunk in these stories and such like, of which he was
no Niggard, since this Age does every where so plentifully abound therewith;
and she was the more pleased with them, being infinitely covetous, but not in
that nature avaricious, to heap up treasure only to look upon, but as a
discreet Prodigal, to fill her Pockets; placing her delight in fine Clothes,
high spending, Treats, Plays, Balls, guilt Coaches, rich Hangings, with
Lodgings furnished richly and most splendidly; all manner of wasteful delights
were to her such dear Companions, that rather then lose them, she would lay
both life and soul in a pawn for their ransom; nay, she was such a true Admirer
of pleasure, that if at any time a melancholy thought did chance to seiz her,
she was observed to start from the seat she sat on, and force her self into a
pleasant humor; and if she found no agreeable diversion at home, she would
travel through the whole City but she would find it out; Nor could she belong
in search for it, since Dublin is a place of as much jollity and mirth as any
City in the three Kingdoms, saving England's Metropol^; and setting aside
beating the Watch idle breaking of Glass. Windows in Morning-Rambles, and
killing naked men for no other cause then to gain the dis-reputation of a
desperate Man; I believe Dublin has as many witty Frolicking H^^k in her as
any other City, sworn servants to Madam Venus, and as true Bucchanalians as
ever helped to raise the Price of Wines.

Cornelia's humor Ignatius quickly perceived, and finding her spirits take
fire at his words, he again pursued his former subject, and showed her how
Paulina, having nothing but the Revenue of a beauteous countenance, and a
well-proportion'd body, was three times the greatest and most respected Lady of
all Rome; and here he paused, for had he followed the truth of the Story, it
would have discovered, that she was three times also the poorest most dejected,
basest, most miserable and despised creature, that Rome or the World had ever
reserved for memory; nay* so exceeding hateful was her condition, and so
infinite her contempt, that she gave her body in Prostitution to the common
Hangman for one meal to satisfy her hunger, and in the end died without pity,
and was buried without ceremony: Had he amplified any thing on this text, he
had marred his own Market, and made a Proselite in stead of a Prostitute; but
they were whites beyond his aim: confusion was only within the reach of his
Arrow, and that he hit; for his words did so well please her, and his rich
Promises so assure her, that (not without some reluctance, she gave him an
assignation, and that their Contract might be neither obstructed nor suspected
she would not presently resign her self up to his embraces, but desired him to
have a little patience, and time would produce a convenient opportunity,
wherein they might enjoy each other uncontroulably.

Every day, nay, every hour offered them an occasion to discourse, for he lived
in this Ladies house in the nature of a Chaplain, not to read Common Prayer to
her, that was an abomination to this Lady-Saint, but to say Grace, till the
Guests in their hearts cursed him, for letting the meat be cold; and to pray at
night the whole Family asleep; this was a precious man in the eye of the Lady,
though not of the Knight; for she loved him for the workings of the Spirit, and
he hated him therefore; and because he would be even with his Lady, this Knight
had had some Conference with Cornelia, and being an honest blunt Gentleman, he
went not about to preach her into a Compliance, with a tedious story of
I-know-not-what, but told her his meaning in plain English; and to that end
told her, that very speedily he would invent a way to effect his design, but
did not acquaint her in what manner he would do it; One day, when his Lady and
Cornelia took Coach to take benefit of the Air he took the opportunity to get
the Key of Cornelia's Chamber Door, and got another made by it, before her
return, and was so eager in the Prosecution of his Amor, that he resolved that
very night to put his stratagem in practice, which was the very night Ign^tius
and Cornelia had completed to lie together, and that she might not be
interrupted by her Lady (who frequently did call her unto her at midnight, when
she ailed any thing; and for that purpose that she might be within call she
lodged her the very next Chamber to hers) I say, to prevent interruption, told
Ignatius, that she would feign an indisposition upon her return from taking the
Air, and so she should have the privilege of going to bed betimes, and he of
coming the sooner unto her.

This double plot took not its desired effects; for the Knight caused his Lady
to go to bed with him, an hour and a half sooner than they were wont, and that
he might lull her to sleep the sooner, he gave her in a glass of wine, a very
small quantity of Opium, which so successfully wrought upon her, that as she was
as desirous as himself to go to bed, so she soon fell asleep; the Knight, by
her snoring finding that she was fast enough stole out of bed, and being in
haste, forgot to shut his own door, being so eager to open Cornelia's, which he
did without making the least noise.

In the mean time, Ignatius in his shirt forsook his own bed, to enjoy of that
of Cornelia; but mischief on it, as he was groaping in the dark he found a door
open, and entering love, though blind, and he in obscurity, soon directed him to
the bed, and quickly found the way into it; but expected not to find Cornelia
in that careless posture, as if she valued not the loss of a thing she seemed
so highly to esteem, being troubled to find her asleep, he pulld her by the arm
again and again, but could not awake her; tried to wake her by kisses; and now
the virtue of the Opium was evaporated, so that waking she spoke somewhat
angerly, saying, prithee, what is the matter, Dear, that thou will not let me
sleep quietly? indeed you were a naughty man to wake me. What Is this, said
Ignatius? Why, sure my Cornelia is not distracted; Is not this the night you
appointed me, wherein we should commence our happiness?

The Lady, not knowing what to say or think, cried out, Lord Husband, what is
the matter you talk after this manner? this is enough alone to create a
jealousy in me: Why should you talk thus of Cornelia; I am your wife, whom
legally you are bound to love, and have not injured hitherto that love you owe
me.

It is true, said he, and dearest Madam grant me your pardon, and I Will confess
the truth. I have injured that love you hitherto have shown me, by affecting
any other but your self, and therein I have blackned my Conscience blacker than
that Hypocritical coat I use to wear, by breaking those many thousand promises
I made you to be faithful: I am Ignatius and this night I should have enjoyed
by agreement Cornelia, but I find I mistook her Chamber.

This discovery so nettled the Lady, that she knew not what to say or do, to
find her friend false, could not but trouble her; but to think what was become
of her husband troubled her more; not knowing what to conclude on, she in a
rage bid him be gone and see her face no more, so seeing that there was no
remedy, he was even content to sneak away to his own Chamber; being gone, the
Lady a rose and locked her Chamber door; and going to bed again, her thoughts
were seriously employed about her husband, that he was gone a Catter-Wouling,
she questioned not; neither did she doubt he was gone to any other person but
Cornelia, but whether to stay within her own Chamber and wait her husbands
return, or in a rage go to Cornelia, and revenge her self on the Whore her
servant, and the Adulterer her husband, she could not presently determine:
Whilst she was in this consultation, her husband came to the door, but finding
it shut, he was at his wits ends; for now he knew he was discovered, and it was
but a folly to go about to palliate his crime, since it was so palpable,
wherefore he knocked at the door, his Lady within, as seemingly not knowing who
was without, ask't, who was there. By reason of the coldness of the night, and
the thinness of his clothing (being in his shirt) his teeth so chattered, that
he could not in the return of his answer be understood. The Lady knew well
enough who it was, and therefore to punish his Concupiscence, she thought it
requisite to let him stand without, and instead of a sheet, make him do penance
in his own shirt. Prithee, dearest wife, said he let me in, am half starved
with cold. What saucy Jack is that, said she that calls me wife there, what
bold impudent Scoundrell; my husband's here in bed with me; sirrah, you were
best be gone, ^'le raise the house upon you else; nay, good dear Honey, don't do
so, quoth he, let me not be a reproach to my servants, whose tittle tattle, it
may be, abroad will engage all the riming tatter-Demallion crew of the Town, to
write Lampoons upon me, and my reputation will he rackt, nay drawn, hanged and
quartered by a parcel of Ballads, composed of ill tuned non sense, if this
nights action be discovered.

The Lady could be no longer cruel, and fearing what damage her husband might
sustain, she arose and let him in; but poor Gentleman his condition was but
little bettered; for he did but leap, as I may say, out of a cold grave into a
Purgatory; heated by a woman's flaming passion. I shall not trouble you with
those bitter taunts, and sharp invectives, she then uttered, you may imagine
they were not a few. There is nothing more certainly discovers the perpetual
notion in a woman's tongue, than her jealousy or the knowledge of her husband's
infidelity. In short he endeavored to lesson his own error, by telling her of
hers; which he said he should in a little time have told her to some purpose,
whither this accident had happened or no; and therefore desiring her silence, and
requesting a pardon on both sides, for each others infirmity, with
protestations never to do the like, and promises the next day to remove those
persons who had occasoned all this disorder, in their family affections they
sealed the bargain, -- which made them the more desirous of their natural rest.

Ignatius, that precious, deforming, Nonconforming, dissembling Holderforth
slept not, nor could he close his eyes that whole night, his thoughts were so
busied about this strange adventure; and whilst he was ready to tare his flesh
for very vexation, to think how he had irrecoverably lost that fair
opportunity, of enjoying the fair Cornelia; when he considered how highly he
had disobliged his Lady Miss, who loved him but too well, and cherisht him too
much, he was then desperately resolved to hang himself. Whilst thus ruminating
his misfortune, a servant came and told him that he must rise immediately, and
come to his Master; this started Ignatius, and the fear of what the event of
this message might be, put him upon a hundred projects, and guilt would have
winged him for a flight, had not a little remaining reason prompted him to
stay; whereupon dressing himself, not without a universal trepidation, he
appeared before the Knight, who taking him aside, in few words told him that he
was an ungreateful Raskal, to repay those kindnesses he had received, by
debauching and abusing his wife, that were it not more in respect of kindness
to himself, than mercy to him, he would cut his Throat; however he told him, he
should not escape circumcising, since he believed he would make a better Jew
than a Christian; and immediately hereupon he stepped within him, and with that
dexterity threw him on his back, that the others Amazedness, by this sudden
surprise, gave the Knight time enough to draw a Razor, with which he did cut
off his Foreskin. But this was not all his punishment, he was immediately
turned out of doors, with menaces to this purpose, that if ever he revealed
what he had done, and who it was that dealt with him thus, and the cause
wherefore; he should certainly dye for it, wherever he met him.

Whilst the Knight was thus severely handling the Man; the Mistress was taking
to task her woman, who had not the patience to capitulate with her, who had
shared with her in her enjoyments, forgetting the quality of her Lady-ship, was
as furious as an incensed Fish-woman at Billings-Gate, using her tongue all the
while she was managing her hands upon a face so pure, so fair, that Cruelty her
self at sight thereof, would forbear to do it any harm or prejudice; yet this
enraged Lady persisted, and had not only embrued it in blood, hut had tore off
her Head-clothes, and was dragging her by the hair, just as the Knight came in,
who imagined the Tragedy would not end in his part. His late revenge was now
turned into grief and sorrow, to see the fair, and his beloved Cornelia thus
used, yet durst not seem over hasty in rescuing her out of the hands of her
cruel^ Mystriss; hut by degrees he so ordered the matter, that by holding his
wife, he gave Cornelia the opportunity to escape; who took to her own Chamber
as a Sanctuary, and there locked her se^ in, and rectified that disorder the
Lady^ had put her in. She had now some little time to consider what was best to
b^ done; she saw there was no thoughts (...) staying there any longer, where
for^ packing up no more then what she could easily carry with her, she watch^
her opportunity, and marched off,

St. Patrick's Close was the place where she first repaired to, having there an
acquaintance, who very lovingly entertained her, and lodged in one of the best
Rooms of the house, This Gentle woman had been wanton her self, and was now a
private Bawd, and therefore could the better advise her friend in the whole
course of her vicious practice, and so crafty and subtle she was, it was to no
purpose to endeavor to hide any thing from her, wherefore Cornelia told her the
true History of her Misfortunes how her Master had enjoyed her, and how her
Mystriss had abused her for it; that she believed that her Master loved her
still very well, but knew not whether she was gone. Hold, hold, (quoth
Polyandria) give me leave to call her by that feigned name, since what is
proper to her she may be ashamed to own. Does not your Master know whither you
are gone? He loves you without doubt, and how shall he extend his love if he be
ignorant of your abode? He must be therefore acquainted therewith, and that
very privately for fear of discovery; let me see -- I think I had best to
undertake the work, as being long enough experienced in such affairs; but d' ye
hear me, quoth this Reverend Matron (whom Cornelia suspected not to be, what
she soon found she was, and was therefore at first troubled at her coming
thither) I say, quoth she, you must be ruled by me if I undertake your
business; you are very young, and want wholesome instruction, you shall not want
it as long as you are under my roof: the greatness of your beauty may be the
ruin, instead of the rise, of your fortunes, if it be not House-wiv'd to the
best advantage, etc.

Polyandria was informed by Cornelia, that the Knight did frequently drink,
when he was in the City, at the Clobe near the Castle, and in the Suburbs at
the Nags-Head in Oxman-town; this was Intelligence sufficient for her purpose;
for going to the first, she found him alone, expecting company to come to him:
glad of this opportnnity, she gave him to understand, that there was an ancient
Gentlewoman below would speak with him; he wondering who it should be, in haste
comes to her; and she (to free him quickly from that amazement he was involved
in at the fight of this veterane female stranger) took him aside, and
whispering said, Sir, it is necessary I he short in a business of this nature;
Cornelia lies at such an house, etc. she languishes for none but you, and none
but you can give her ease.

The Knight, like a man transported, was ready for joy to have hugged the old
Matron for her welcome Message; but considering how inconvenient it was to talk
so publicly, he dismissed her, and promised to be there as soon as she, and he
was as good as his word, for he left his company immediately, for, though a
short, yet more ravishing enjoyment.

Love soon conveyed him to the place where Cornelia lay, and was there received
by her, not as a loose Prostitute does her Lecher, but as a deluded Maid does
her long absent Lover, with silence, sighs and blushes; whereas he, raptured at
the fight of her he now so dearly loved, made all the outward demonstrations of
vigorous and sincere affection; Polyandria minded every passage and expression,
and was no less joyful then they, in that she could by what she saw, promise
her self no small advantage.

As an earnest penny of this Knights affection, he first gave Cornelia twenty
Guinny's, and then promised Polyandria that he would pay for her Diet, Lodging,
and what other Necessaries she wanted; for such fair Promises as these
Polyandria thought her self obliged to withdraw, and leave them alone, which
the Knight interpreting to his best advantage, made use of that time to renew
his former enjoyment, and to assure his Miss, that her constancy should be
gratified with such an annuity as should Gentilely maintain her, but it should
revert if ever she admitted a Competitor.

Cornelia left behind her all her Gowns but what she then wore, and carried off
only some of her best linen, and some Jewels she had given her by some that
had hopes to have tempted her that way, which had she stayed, undoubtedly had
taken effect. Being thus but thinly, though finely, garb'd; the good old
Gentlewoman that took upon her to be her Tutoress, thought fit to put her into
a Garb, not only fashionable, but rich and costly, as far as that money would
go: 'twas the first fruits of the Knights second enjoyment of Cornelia, who at
his next coming, seeing her so good an Hous-wife as to lay out her money in
clothes, gave her as much more, which was disposed of to make the splendid
furniture of her delicate body exact and complete.

Frequent were the visits of this Knight, and as he allowed his Miss an annual
Pension, so he bestowed costly Presents, of which contributions Polyandria
would not be denied her Dividend. Cornelia observing this, and how her benefits
were much empair'd by the avarice of this Strepo-grana, began to consider, that
she had wit and under standing enough to manage her own affairs, and needed not
the auxiliary counsels and instructions of Polyandria, nor ^^^ught her self
obliged to the unnecessary and impertinent trouble of Books, when her chief
study was to read men, i.e. glance in their faces, and suck the honey out of
their Pockets, wherefore she resolved to trust to her self, wisely measuring
her hopes and advantage, by the sure Standard of her beauty, well-weighing that
by an oversupple compliance with her Grandam Tutoress, she should unadvisedly
prostitute that to an old woman (whose respects to her were as uncertain as her
tail) which she might at her choice and liberty bestow upon any young Gallant,
her lucky stars, and bewitching eyes, might offer, notwithstanding, her vows
and protestations to her Knight made to the contrary, and the hazard of losing
her annual allowance. But lest she should discover her design of inconstancy,
she demeaned her self to Polyandria with such a reservedness, that might rather
be construed an innate severity, and reverence of her self, derived from her
fathers Gentile strain (which indeed wholly makes a Gentleman, that should live
not according to the fashion, but the virtuous mode of his Mind, and reckon
Virtue his only Nobility;) then any shy averseness or indisposition to her
veterane Governess, that might at pleasure overruled her with bawdy
experiences, and pocky Probatum's. In whose affection (if you can believe that
Crocodile tears may be limbeck'd into compassion) she seemed to have gained
exceedingly.

Notwithstanding all which tenderness, set off with all the endearments her
Guardian thirty years practice, in the mysteries of her Art, could suggest unto
her. Cornelia kept within her self, after a long contest, wherein she plainly
told her, it was sufficient she was largely recompensed, for Diet, Lodging, and
other necessaries, and therefore told her it was unconscionable to expect,
besides all these benefits, an Excise or Income from her bodily Exercise. She
took up this Resolution so firmly, that she could not be won from her main
strength to wit, a purpose of reserving her growing fortunes wholly to her
self. And herein the young Gentlewoman did (something above her years) very
prudently forecast what a slavery she should bring her self to; if her
Patroness once came to an absolute Sovereignty over her affections, or by
imperiousness, or forcible insinuation, make her self Secretary of State to all
her thoughts, which would have rendered her only a Cipher, and serve to multiply
the incomes and revenues of her Guardian; a Rock upon which many featured and
well formed females have split, and undone themselves for ever: For Argier
slavery is not so intolerable, as the unreasonable and unconscionable usage of
these Beldams. A Baudy-House, or the Community of two or three Bauds, and their
well affected people the Wenches, is as like our late Commonwealth as may be,
where all should share alike, and the emoluments should be equally universally
distributed, but in effect it all comes into private hands, no regard being had
to those that drudge for it, and sweat not with their brows for their daily
provision.

Just as Cornelia in a great measure had got the mastery over her Mistress, she
perceived she was with Child, which very much disordered her thoughts, and was
the occasion of her sudden Pensiveness, and Melancholy. Polyandria taking more
than ordinary notice thereof, was very inquisitive to know the cause; but
Cornelia, thinking it might tend to her prejudice, concealed it as long as she
could; but in a little time it discovered it self, by various symptoms and
appearances; this Venerable Matron perceiving the cause of her unwonted
sadness, came one day to her with a countenance more Cheerful than usual and
said, Come Daughter, be not thus troubled in your thoughts the grief that thus
internally afflicts you will in a short time be in your arms, and then all will
be well again, in the mean time, be of good cheer, the father is able to
maintain the Bantling, and we will make him pay dearly for the pains he shall
put you to, in bringing his stolen delights into the world.

Cornelia was now constrein'd to tell the truth, confessing she was with child,
and had concealed it some ten weeks: that, that was indiscretion, quoth the
Mother, this should have been revealed sooner; however, it is well enough, the
father shall know of it at his next comeing, and as she spoke the word, in came
the Knight, who had formerly taken notice of Cornelia's melancholy, and
severely checked her for it, and now finding her in the same moody posture,
blamed her as before.

This gave Polyandria occasion to discourse him after this manner, Sir, I am
not ignorant of what familiarity has past between you, before she came to my
house and since; and it is no wonder, if a Person so young, plump and tender as
she is, meet with a Person like your self, middle-aged, strong and lusty,
should conceive with child, since there have been made so many endeavors
between you to that end and purpose. Now Sir, if she be sad and melancholy her
eat, blame her not, since she now fears a general Publication of her shame and
infamy, and that her reputation will be for ever ruined; besides, having never
tried man before you, and hearing how variable they are in their affections,
she is fearful after this you may desert her.

If that be all the cause of thy discontented countenance, said he, be
cheerful and assure thy self, Cornelia, prove but constant still, and this
will cause my love daily to increase; and to divert her, entertained her with
pleasant discourse, caressed her Affectionately, treated her in her own Chamber
most sumptuously, and taking his leave of her, left her Fifty broad pieces,
till his return, for he was going into the County of Tipperary.

In his absence, Polyandria consulted nothing more than where and how she
should lie in, what costly things to be bought, and where the Child should be
Nursed, and all with the greatest privacy. For her delivery she judgd her own
house as convenient as any other, but that she must then pretend that she is a
Gentlewoman whose husband is gone for England, about some urgent affair, and
that would spoil her design after she was brought to bed, for she intended that
she should pass for a Maid, till she was detected to the contrary, wherefore
she pitched upon an obscure place, and agreed with the people, (payin'g down
twenty pounds ready money) they should keep the Child, and never more return it
to the Parent; this they greedily yielded to, since they nor their frye-fathers
never saw such a sum of Arraget Saffenagh (English money) before in their
lifetime.

The time of Childbearing drawing on, the Knight was consulted about the
charge, how necessary it was for her to remove into the Country, how expensive
her lying in would be, having been so tenderly and Gentilely educated, and that
it would be altogether expedient, to provide for the Child for his lifetime;
and lest any thing should miscarry by negligence, or for want of prudent
management she would accompany Cornelia, and stay with her till her up-rising,
though it would considerably prejudice her business at home, since she must
leave all to the guidance of her servants, and so she might without any great
damage, for as yet she kept no pubick house, having lived but a little while in
that place, having furnished her house very gallantly for the entertainment of
Lodgers to begin with.

All these Items for charge of one lyng in, made the Knight scratch where it
did not itch; but seeing there was a necessity that things must be carried
privately and that the way propounded could not but be very chargeable, he
ordered them two hundred pounds, to defray all expenses, a great part whereof
Cornelia, notwithstanding her former conquest, could not keep from Polyandria.

Being safely delivered, and secretly too, without prejudice to her honor, they
returned with triumph to Dublin, where burroughing again, Co^nelia appeard then
after the purification of her body, a thousand times more fair and lovely, than
formerly, if it were possible; she sweetly Bloomed, ready to Bud to the first
Golden Rays that should dart on her; and her glad and greedy Foster-mother,
was almost made young again, with the hopes her lovely and enchanting Pupil
did promise her. But part of her hopes were quickly dash't, by the
discontinuance of the Knights visits, which were not so frequent as formerly,
more cold or indifferent, and not half so beneficial. It seems he was cloyd
with this delicate bit, (sweetest meats are most subject to surfeit) and was
wearied with his annual charge, and diurnal expenses, which caused his life to
be so vexed and discontented, that he saw there was no remedy for his grief but
a positive resolution to abandon this Lady Errant, and be content with his
domestic Recreations, and that he might have a pretext to acquit himself of
his Obligation, to allow his Miss a considerable annuity in case of constancy,
he charged her one day (seemingly in a great rage and passion) with disloialty,
and breach of promise, and as in his expressions, he became discourteous, and
uncivil, so his actions were rude and boisterous; in so much that
Mother-Damuable was forced to fly for it, to save her a sound kicking, whilst
he in the mean time compelled very unhandsomely Cornelia to deliver up to him a
paper, he had signed for the payment of the annuity aforesaid, and going down
the stairs, he vowed he would never see her more.

Poor Cornelia was so amazed at this sudden causeless change, that she was in a
manner senseless, and seemed to be converted into a well-fram'd white marble
Statue, and as that moody stone drops tears sometimes, when Heaven seems to
look angrily, so she for the loss of that for which she had an equal
estimation, had her eyes deluged in tears, whilst her heart O're-charg'd with
sighs, threatened a breaking every minute. As she was in this pitiful posture,
in came the old Gentlewoman, limping and cursing all the way she came, a pox on
him cried she, he a Knight if he had been a Gentleman, he would have scorned to
have done as he did; to frighten a poor old woman in this manner. -- May an
Hospital convert him, h^ bath been the cause of the breaking of my bones and
almost my neck, -- for a Pla^ne on him, I fled from his fury, the first pa^r of
stairs I got down w^ll enough, but coming to the Cellar stairs, thinking to
have hid my self from the Ra^ all in the Cole-hole, I stumbled on the Mastiff
Dog, and tumbleing over him topsy turvy down the stairs, I butted down the
Ferkin of Ale, which we keep for our own use, and had like to have dash't my
brains out against the Hogshead. -- See the vanity of the female Sex, their
levity and mutability, like a shower in April, the Sun shine out clear, and yet
so rain it would have wet one to the skin; Cornelia at this pleasant report of
her mothers disaster, fell out into so loud a fit of laughter, that Polyandria
thought her Daughter was distracted, and so continued laughing, till the old
one put a stop to it, by saying, it is well that you can sust^in so great a loss
as this of your friend, as to be so little concerned is to laugh at the
mischief that befell me for your sake partly; these words were delivered with
so much gravity, attended with a Countenance severe, that they stopped the career
of Cornelias mirth, and reminded her of her tottering condition, thus will a
cloud o're-cast the face of Luna, and then she is totally obscured, and in a
trice b^ing blown over, sh^shines as bright as ever, and as at Boe peep, seems
to sport with her inconstancy a fit Emblem for the female S^x; thus Cornelia
reassuming her former sadness, appeared the most discontented Perion now, that
was the merriest but one minute past; and now lest her sadness should take
real rooting, Polyandria began to comfort her, telling her there was no such
scarcity of men that she should despair of having his place supplied, every
whit as advantagiously, since the sam b^a^ty that had that efficacy over him
was so far from being empair'd, that it was much improved, that there was
enough gotten by the former to maintain them till another came, and that if it
should not happen to be speedily, she had contrived a plot how to hook some
more money out of the Knights Pocket, which should largely gratify both their
necessities and revenge. This pleased Cornelia so well, that drying up her
tears, she frankly told her Mother, that as she had wiped off all appearances
of sorrow from her face, so she had a desire to wash off with wine what might
casually stick to her heart; it was mutually agreed, and over the Glass she
consults in what place this bright Star shall appear, in what Horizon she
should next shoot her killing beams, for they concluded it not safe to stay
longer there, since Cornelia's Lady had some inkling where she was.

Cornelia as yet was but a Novice in the Politics of Queen Venus; and fearing
lest the greenness of her experience should cause the miscarriage of her
Enterprises, for the present the thought it convenient to leave the guidance of
her Affairs to her Governess Polyandria, who was resolved, the first thing she
acted should be some trick that should give her satisfaction and revenge upon
the Knight that had abused them; and in this manner she plotted it: She had an
acquaintance at the Folly (so called) at Lazie-hill, butting over against
Rings-End, who was one of the craftiest Queans of all those Ori^ntal Parts
adjacent to the City; her Governess for Cunning was very famous, in so much
that she became Tutoress-Universal to City and Suburbs, both to Privateers, and
public Prostitutes: to these she laid open the whole matter, being her
confidents, and omitted no particular of the prec^eding story. A business of
thi^ weight required more assistance to advise what was best to be done,
wherefore some of the sage aged counsel thereabouts were sent for, who having
heard all that was done and said before, a general silence was proclaimed, and
before any thing should pass, it was ordered that two dozen of Cans should be
brought in, with a quart of burnt Brandy, Pipes, and Tobacco; and because some
of them were Irish (who were admitted rather for their inexpressible impudence
than intelligence) some Snuff was sent for, who dote so much on a Clock^t'a
Sneezing, that they will not omit it in their very prayers, making each Snuff a
silent Parenthesis in their very devotions.

The Cans went briskly about, nor was the Brandy so neglected, as to stand and
cool, the room was filled with Smoke and the clacking nois of their tongues was
so great, that the poor Sneezing Cnram-a-C^rees that sat below, could neither
be seen, heard nor understood.

Silence again Proclaimed, Polyandria undertook to speak to this purpose,
(several circumstances I shall omit for brevity sake) that whereas her daughter
Cornelia, servant to a Knight, had been got with child by him, and that having
given her but a small recompense for all her pains, only providing for the
Child for life, and allotting her an inconsiderable sum of about 200 li. she
thought it reasonable to make him sensible of his niggardly unworthiness, by
forcing him to a more liberal contribution. To this end (said she) here is a
daughter of ours that broke her leg, much about the time mine broke hers; she
must be the Instrument to do my business, by carrying her own child to the
Knight, pretending to be Nurse to Cornelia, and that having received nothing of
her promised Salary, let her threaten to leave the Child at his Gate; and that
his Lady should not suspect any thing, this Woman was ordered to wait near the
house with Polyandria, to show her which was the man. In less then four hours
she spoke with the Knight, and so cunningly carried the business, that he
verily believed all she said to be true; and that he might not raise the
leastsuspicion in his Lady's breast that he kept a Bastard; and to be sure for
the future of not being served so again, he appointed her to meet him at
Kilmanam a mile out of the City, the next day, where he would endeavor to make
her satisfaction; Mrs. Craftsby you may be sure was punctually there at the
time appointed neither was Polyandria far off from her; the Knight came
accordingly with some friends he durst trust, who after they had bandied the
business to and fro, it was concluded, that she should have an hundred pounds
to take him off clearly from keeping the child, with this Proviso, that her
Husband would enter into Bond for Performance of the Agreement: I Sir, said
she, with all my heart, I will send for him; and going out seemingly for a
Messenger, she stepped to Polyandria, and told her what was required, and
therefore told her she must immediately go into Saint Francis street, and at
such a sign lodged her Gallant, giving her Instructions what to do, that is, to
acknowledge her for his Wife, and enter into Bond upon the Premises.

This was done in an instant, and all things b^ing concluded and agreed upon.
Polyandria appeared, and told the Knight plainly, that though he had stopped the
mouths of others, yet hers was not sufficiently stopped, and that if he did not
open his purse, she would open her mouth so wide, that his Lady should hear
what would not tend neither to his quiet nor Reputation; and know Sir, this is
a plot of my own contrving, and I have more of them, this is not your natural
Child, though a Bastard, as well as yours. The Knight hearing this, made
presently diligent search for the Cheating Nurse, but she was not to be found,
for having received her money, the same Coach that brought her Gallant and
Polyandria, carried her and her Bully back again; leaving this projecting
Matron to shift for herself.

You cannot imagine what a heat our Knight was in, he walked up and down like a
man bereft of his senses, and sometimes in his rage would offer to beat the old
Gentlewoman; but his friends hindered him from that as an act ignoble; not being
able to use his hands, he was resolved his tongue should not be idle, which
tumbled out nothing but the basest expressions intermixed with menaces; as that
he would indite her for a Cheat, Baud, and what not; and that he would procure
a riding in state.

To all these worst of names, and dreadful threats, Polyandria only laughed,
and bid him do his worst, advising him withal, to have a care how he farther
provoked her, lest in a very short time he should dearly repent of it.

The Knight's friends observing the impudence and subtilty of this long
experienced Matron, advised him by all means to make a speedy end with her,
cunningly instructing him to offer her so much money, on condition she and her
adopted daughter would sign an Instrument, wherein they should acknowledge that
it was a Lie, and a mere invention of their own to get money, by causing
Cornelia to lay a Bastard to his charge, which was none of his.

Polyandria paused a while, and found that this was nothing but a mere trick of
theirs, to make them acknowledge under their own Hands that they are Cheats,
which would be a sure evidence against them, and make them liable to the
punishment of the Law; but considering this would not injure them much if they
had something under his hand to bear them harmless upon this confession; she
made this proposition, that if the Knight would give her and Cornelia, a bond
of a Thousand po^nds, to be paid to them, or either of them, their Executors,
Administrators, o^ Assigns, if either of them should sustain any di^ge, by
Indictment or otherwise, by reason of the Confession aforesaid that they would
put their hands to such an Instrument. The Knight and his friend, seeing their
policy defeated, and that there was no d^aling with this woman, in any thing
that concerned her Sex, consented to her motion, and whilst the writings were
drawing, Polyandria by general agreement was dispatched to bring thither
Cornelia, who, poor Girl, was all b^bl^bber'd for the long absence of her
mother, but was soonoverjoy'd to hear (as they rid in the Coach) how admi^ably
their p^ots did hit, and how successful they were like to prove.

Just as they arrived at the house, the writings were Finished, but the Devil a
bit would either of them seal, till she had old over, and secured the money,
which was one hundred and fifty pounds: and having interchangably set their
hands, Polyandria and Cornelia stood not upon Complem^nts, but taking Coach
(hardly taking leave they galloped away for Dublin and through the City to the
to the Folly; where they found the Counsel afoersaid sitting, expecting the
return of Polyandria, who for joy at the success of the Counterfeit Nurse, they
were all got maudling drunk; but Polyandria coming in at that juncture, added
to their merriment, that she had escaped the hands of the Knight, and his
dainty Squires, who (as they feared) would look them up in some Enchanted
Castle. She had not been long among them (concealing what she had received by
this other project) before she told them gravely and gratefully, that the
Inventer deserved a reward, and the Labourer her hire; to be short, pretending
business, said she it was my plot, therefore I will have fifty pound of the
hundred; for Nurses assistance, she shall have twenty pound, and the other
twenty shall be divided equally amongst you, for your counsel equally I say,
that there may be no quarrel and dissension among the Prosessors of our sacul^y
of Sister-hood met together.

This Proposal was generally liked, and each taking her share, as it was
agreed upon, Polyandria took her leave of them, taking her precious charge with
her. resolving with her self to change her habitation with all expedition,
finding therein many Inconveniences; as first the rooms lay too contiguous to
each other, without winding Meanders, and multiplicity of doors; no variety of
Stair-cases, and but one avenue to the house, which was the Fore-door, there
were no Salliports but one, and never a Postern for an escape, if need should
require. etc. These and many other weighty Considerations moved her to aspeedy
removal, but whether near the Court, into the City, or Country, she could not
well determine.

She had a months mind to have tried an old Lord, but she feared his state was
diminished with his strength, the first deterred her, and she well knew the
latter would never please her curious young Cornelia, whose Second Maidenhead
she would sacrifice in an equal flame of youthfulness, where a large
contribution and donations might supply and feed the fire.

Such a Match, or a Westminster-wedding, she could easily, and in a short time
doubted not but to find in the City; to which place the old Gypsy was the more
inclinable; for that she had been so long, and so well versed and insighted in
the fashions and humors thereof; but she feared her Darling was too raw and
tender, to endure so many importunities, and thrusts of so many Suitors, as
Cornelia would attract, whom it was impossible to conceal long from same and
report, with what competence she had to support the luster of so great a beauty.

She concluded therefore to retire for a while with her Jewel into the Country,
in that privacy the better to confirm and ground her yet not well experienced
Disciple, withal to give her a taste of the Country simplicity, that would
rarely set off her other accomplishments, and be a masqne, or disguise, to what
ever subtilty, or designs her employment might put her upon: but herein
Polyandria came short of her measure; for she that had at first so great an
aversion to the Country, must now have a greater, since she had so freely
tasted of those City-delights, the Country is incapable of enjoying; however
Cornelia for a short stay, to gratify the request of her Governess, did
willingly Condescend.

Cornelia coming into the Country, and being lodgd in a place within four miles
of Kilkenny (a Place the Baud pitched upon for Convenience, for there is not a
purer Air throughout the Kingdom than thereabout) in a little time after she
had been there, either through some inward discontent, for the loss of her
Knight (who, though she was mutable, and whorish enough, could not but be
troubled when she thought on him, who had cropped her Virgin Flower, or through
change of the Air, she began to abate of that Orient Vermillion in her Cheeks;
and when all the Flowers were in their Prime, she only droopt, and flagg'd the
head, as if the Rival pride of the Gardens, had put down and vanquished her
before matchless, and incomparable beauty.

They Lodged at a Widows house under pretense of Summering, where they had all
the Conveniences that health required, and their Landlady a good debonair
woman, and who was infinitely taken with Mistress Cornelia, and more than
Polyandria liked or approved of; but she was more discontented at the sick
symptom of her Daughter (for now she called her by no other name) the decay of
whose Complexion, or least empairment of her beauty, was as gloomy to her
thoughts, as the decay of the Universe at the Suns losing his light; for to the
Wash-boul, or some infected Hot-house, to kindle the Bavins, she must betake
her self, if the Empire of Cornelia's eyes should waine or be Eclipsed; but
Venus was loath to cast off an old trusty Pensioner, and besoaght her Brother
Apoll; neither did she forget to address her self to Priapus, to cure pretty
lovely Cornelia, and send her an honest Aesculapius.

Polyandria hearing of a famed Quacking Doctor (that ran out of England to
settle in Ireland, where his mean extraction, and baser education was not
known) living in Kilkenny, in all have she hy's to him with an Urinal, and with
such anxiety and grief of mind, that it would have melted a Kitchin-stuff tub,
to have seen the poor old Hagg trot, that her face looked like an
Hogs-Countenance in sowce, her eyes sunk as low altogether; or like a dark
Lauthorn in a rainy night, betwixt ambling and trotting, she got to the
Doctors, and up stairs she bustled, to the great offense of the Waspish ^uack,
who at the same time handling such another Patient as Cornelia, What Is the
matter, quoth this mighty Doctor? With a low Courtesy, answered Polyandria, I
have brought you a Maids, water and't shall please your Worship, desiring your
Advice, for I am an undone old Woman if my Daughter iniscarry. What (said he) a
Maid and miscarry, come not to me with your bawdy inaladies, and away hurles
the Vrinal into the Chimney without any further enquiry.

Polyandria looked like the picture of ill luck, and could have found in her
heart to have embroidered his great wide Jowls with her nail; but in a cruel
rage and indignation she flew out of the Chamber, ^sing and railing on him,
calling him an hundred bungling, cobling, rascally. Empyricks, (for it seems he
had formerly exercised himself with St. Hugh's bones) wishing him no other
Patients then such as were infected with the Plague, Poverty and Pox incurable.

She was now in a peck of troubles, and in such a h at, for she had no leisure
to cool her self, that she was almost sweltred; never was there a sultred fat
Hostefs in R^m Alley in Trinity-Tearm, nor Pig-Roaster in Rartholome^ Fair,
could complain so justly: but what added misery to her vexation, she could not
tell to whom (...) impart hers and Cornelia's condition; 'twas bootless to
think of another Doctor without a Urinal, for she could give no account or
signs of the Distemper; As she was walking in the street, musing with her
self, she met with an old acquaintance who was come down too upon some notable
design, a Gossip that had with some success practiced Physic, and was, to
complete her skill, Mother-Midnight: This Doctress hearing all that Polyandria
spoke freely said no more then what Friar Bacon's du^ servant thought not worth
notice to his Master, T^ne is; intimating, That if her former enjoyments were
not repeated and renewed she would absolutely fall into some desperate
distemper, which might deprive her of her life. Let us leave these two Matrons
pecking at one another in Brandy, white Anniseed and Ale, talking of their
Adventures while they are drunk, and fall a tearing one another Head-gear, and
return to fair languishing Cornelia, who by the pleasant conversation of her
Landlady, and the desired absence of Polyandria, had already advanced to such a
degree of Sanity, as to have her mind perfectly well and her body in some
measure subservient to it.

The Widow-woman, who could see as far into a Millstone as another, taking
Cornelia by the hand, desired her to walk into the Garden with her, which for
the beauty site, and variety of it, was one of the best thereabouts; here
note, that this widow was little less honester in her body (as we use to say)
then Polyandria had been heretofore, but of a far more noble and ingenious
soul; but the decay of nature by age, had now in a manner extinguished all
youthful desires in themselves, yet still took delight to encourage them in
others. This made her deal heartily and freely with Cornelia, and after a
demurr or two, which this under-feeling of a Persons condition, not well
acquainted with her, put upon the freedom of her discourse, she began in this
manner.

Madam, To divert something of that untoward disease which hangs upon you, I
will without further enquiry into the cause, or putting you to the expense of a
blush, tell you a good story, which has good credit here, and the example of
it may be of very good use to you hereafter; as I suppose, the relation of it
may be pleasant at this present; pardon the tedi^sness of an old woman's
Relation, which is intended only for your diversion; for I profess, I do hate
melancholy my self, although length of years incline me to it; but more
abominably I detest it in the Juni^ of our Sex whom Nature (where she has been
pro^use of her excellencies) has decreed to the fruition of the most delightful
part of life; and when I consider those transcendent perfections you are
adorned with, I cannot but wish to you all those joys and pleasures my younger
years and j^veniled sires, ever longed after (not imagining she had already
tasted thosesw ets, which formerly bewitched her the remembrance whereof put her
upon a yawn^nst ad of a pause. Cornelia heard now a^sh thought the second part
of Polyandria to the same rune, but to less disadvantage; for she rec^oned all
her Avis^ments would be free-cost and partake of the free Air she breathed in,
and was exceeding desirous to have a full knowledge of this pleasant and
profitable story she was going to relate, and there with dropped her a most
obliging courtesy, requesting her, since she had vouchsafed so much favor to
her, in the demonstration of her undeserved kindness, she would give her the
satisfaction of her promise.

You may understand then quoth Polyandria, that an honest Collier, or one who
got his living by carrying Kilk^nny coals up and down the Country, had a young
Daughter, this Girl was proud, though seemingly modest, she would not let an
English Bumpkin, no^ an Irish Skullogne, though the first had never so many
Ribbands in his hat, and the latter never so much Snuff and U^q^ebaugh about
him, she would let neither of them touch her with a Hop-^ole but there was a
young Gentleman of a large estate living near, who by intelligence had smelt
her out, and was resolved to carry her at any rate, for she was extraordinary
handsome, and that she knew right well, which made her stand somewhat the more
upon her Pantables, especially when she considered that Carbonero her Father,
though he had a sooty face, he had white money; which by length of time, and
great labor he had raked together.

This young Gallant employed a Gentleman that waited on him in his Chamber, who
after many good-morrows to her Parents, by selling him a Wood or Cops (for he
sometimes made Charcoal) and under such pretenses got acquaintance with the
Daughter, and with rich unusual Presents had quickly won her, so that upon all
opportunities she could find, she gave her friend his desired satisfaction; but
by the way let me tell you, he was so ingenious to himself as to serve his own
turn first, by promising Marriage, if she was got with child by either of them;
the proposal she looked upon so reasonable, by reason of the present benefit she
had received, and future advantage she expected, that she consented the
Articles should be sealed between them.

This wash^r first step into the World, and it Dislocated all the ligam^nts of
her Virtue and Honesty; and to help the matter, she had worms in her B^lly,
with over-gre^dy eating of Apple-pye, and that medicine of Marriage was not so
easy to come by, as Wormseed and Alloes. She was Complemented by the Squire in
the words of the Spanish-Curat^, Even as you please, either for a Husband or a
Friend, and like Master like Man, all Promises were forgot, having obtained
that by them, which after trial they found not worth the Performance of them.
So this young Gentlewoman was forced to kiss the Plough-Tail, and long for a
Wake, or a Fair to put off her great Belly, and in a short time her pleasant
Compliance, and her witty dispatches, whither fortune helped her to a
broad-shouldred Yeoman in a neighboring Village; and she proved the Arrantest
Whore, in all this part of the Country.

Now I speak not this in the dishonor of her, nor any way in reflection to your
self, little Lady (said the widow) for I know it is the frailty of our Sex, but
to give you a warning, to avoid the error that she committed. It is
indispensable solly, for a beauty fresh as a Rose, to suffer it self to be
cropped, and wither in the hand of a wanton Hot-spur, witho^t soundly pricking
his fingers for his feeling; such tender Buds should be worn in the bosom for
ornament, the inward and most close affections, and though now and then sense
were gratified, yet always a chariness should be used to it, and a value ^tupon
it, that might preserveit. But super-excellent faces, without the help of the
Looking glass of good fortune, s^ldome discover that blemish, while sorrow and
repentance have wrinkled and furrowed their foreheads, or impudence and
prostitution have brazened them.

This is a lesson, pretty Heart, I would have you excellently well read in, and
I press it, not so much out of any fear I have of you, as in humanity to your
worth; though I suppose your Mother, that reverend Matron Polyandria, has
anticipated this council; and now I think on it, I marvel what is become of her.

You need not question, said Cornelia, but she will be here quickly; for her
tender care to me is so great, that she would not lie one night from me, to be
a sharer in the King of Spain's Indies: and now I must give you thanks, not
only for the relation of this pleasant story, but for the good counsel, you so
seriously and friendly give me, though to deal ingeniously with you (since I
perceive you have so well acquainted your self with my condition) I have no
other Sampler, nor ever set my eyes to any other work, but Cupids Love-knots.

However, I should take it as a very great happiness, if my sojourning here
procure your friendship, which I hope you will show in being co-adjutant to a
weak and imbecile Maiden, if ought otherwise than a prosperous course my Fates
shall appoint me. As she was proceeding with her Complement, in came
Polyandria, and stopped the residue, who stunk so loathsomely of Mandungus, Ale.
and strong waters, that Cornelia was forced to keep the Weather-gage of her,
and answer with but half a face to her drunken discourse; Polyandria observing
how careless her Daughters deportment was toward her, in a passion cried out,
Is this all the thanks I have for my Labor? Nay, be sick and full in too, if
you will: I thought to have told you some good news, but let that pass; Why
Mother, replied Cornelia, are you so displeased? I was taken with a sudden
qualm, and those sits you know I have been lately troubled with and therefore
be not offended but let me hear how matters go.

Why. there is a young Gentleman, says she, that will be here to morrow, and
therefore I would desire you to cloth your face with your best looks, and wear
again your Rosy Vermilion color, for these Lillies in your cheeks will hardly
admit those blushes which your Virgin modesty did wear, as snares for such as
this young Paris. For all other things I hope you are well enough provided; and
I am loath you should be beholden to Paint or Art, to ill ustrate and grace your
first view and appearance: and to whether appetite, nothing was talked of, but
what savoured of too mnch petulancy, and wanntonness.

Such discourse were for the most part the entertainment of Cornelia's second
loathed rural life, who considering only to what her Mother and Tutoress (not
bountiful Nature) had designed her, applied her self wholly to the
Cyprian-Language and Customs. She had lived a Nuns life she thought in that
Age, which by the Laws of Venus, was scarce past adolescency, and yettook her
Virginity for a work of Supererogation.

But now the time was come, wherein she was to be Manumitted from the slavery
of her unsatisfied desires, whose restless importunities had so long vexed her.

Lust is a Gangrene, and having once poisoned a member, never leaves spreading
till the whole body be Confounded; she has now broken one Link in the Golden
Chain of Chastity, and she cares not if all the rest be molten with confusion;
hence it comes that she entertains more Devils, variety is pleasant; one Ship
yields small custom, great Navies sill large Treasures, and by this means she
thought her revenews would flow in such full Tides, that false Pleasure made
her believe there would never come an Ebbing.

But to proceed, you may imagine this night was one of the longest she ever yet
counted, from the disappointed assignation she gave that puling precious Saint
Ignatious, that was to present the morning and her Gallant together.

As soon therefore as Aurora with her flattering smiles had saluted her
windows, she leapt out of bed, from the side of that Sepulcher (whose corrupt
unsavory stench had tainted this sweet morsel of flesh) and before Polyandria
had recovered her Crapula; and into the Garden she went to sacrifice unto Flora.

According to appointment, and by that time, that usefully ill piece of
Antiquity had more then snackt to herself her customary share of Bob, and was
upon her Trotters, A Gentleman and his Footboy alighted at the door, and was
so hasty of admitance, that Cornelia could scarce recover her Chamber, to
attire her self in her most splendid dress, of which she had good store of her
late Gallants providing. In the entering, this Gentleman was desired to walk in
the Garden, and that immediately, Mistress Cornelia should wait upon him, which
accordingly he did, and after half an hours space, his fair unknown Mistress
entered, and with a winning, or rather commanding aspect, and most obliging
deportment, presented her self at the descent of the Garden steps, to which our
young Lover, to prevent her further coming, and that such a venerable beauty
might keep due state, with all expedition hastened.

Having Admired and Complemented her with an elegant Address, and saluted both
mouth and hand, he began his Commendatory Discourse with his own ravishments,
telling her, her Perfections ought not, nor could not, without extreme
boldness, be meddled with.

In short, that he intended himself a servant to her, but his ambition was too
high, and had failed him; for her excellencies had so captivated him, that he
could be no other than her Slave; to which Cornelia was no way wanting for
answer, nor did she like other weak women dissemble her sentiments of his true
praises, nor extenuate, much less, deny her beauty, but with a generous
confidence told him, that he had taken some pains to extol that which her own
pride and her glass could flatter sufficiently, that she conceived the felicity
of a Beauty con^sted not in Encomiums, or in Fame, which are but perfumed Air
and Wind, Artificial Trophies of Natures Conquests, which she needed not.

She looked now to our enamored Gallant so wantonly, as that he thought it was
a Cupidian challenge, though she left off without inferring; That use was that
only, that gave the right value and esteem to beauty; yet the imperiousness of
her eyes over-awed his liberty of questioning her meaning, or to entreat her to
proceed.

This first smart Rencounter almost puzzled the young Gentleman; for his
intention was to marry a Fortune as well as a Face, and that brought him
thither, but such pertinent, home and uncircumstanced discourse would put him
off from any enquiry into her estate, and withal he might chance to marry
Fortune Pluraliter; for such a sprightly Girl could not but be suspicions.

Neither could he handsomely retreat without some devoir, that might be
construed to a Love-visit, and to render an account of his days Proceedings to
Polyandria's Factors, (for you must know she trotted, not so far to dusty it
away only, but to settle a correspondence, that might contribute assistance to
her dangerous designs) to attempt her, he considered it was both unmannerly
and dangerous; And on the other hand, it was a Cowbaby trick to say nor do
nothing to the purpose, and betwixt these two extremes he was engaged, and
there was no Medium.

The way he dis-^ngaged himself out of this Labyrinth, was thus, After he had
warded some other dangerous flings, which Cornelia's wit had brandished about
him, to invite her to Kilkenny for a Treatment, which would either open his way
to a more familiar a quaintance with her, or else give him an honest civil
Congee, and this was as much as crasty Cornelia expected, for she found this
Gentleman not for her Pallat, and therefore to give him no breathing-time, or
respite of another day, she most kindly accepted of his court^sie, and if he
would please to take a small repast there, while she should put her self in a
convenient posture to wait upon him, she and her Mother would attend him to
Kilkenny.

Done and done, and the widow their Landlady must go for Company; and soon
after away they went, and coming into Town, he planted them in a Tavern, the
most noted on all that side of the Country for good wine, and noble
entertainment, to which place this Gentleman had sent for some of his
acquaintance; in the mean while the woman drunk something freely, and the
rather to disguise the open-heartednes^ of Cornelia, who was this day to begin
and set up a new.

Presently in came a crowd of Gentlemen, whom the young Esquire had sent for,
and now Cornelia might pick and choose her Lover.

Such a flight of Butterflies (the gaudy Birds of Summer) as they did delight
Cornelia's eyes, so they pretended hot weather, a scorcht Harvest, and early
but smutcht and rotten fruit. Such Pracoce, and soon ripe gear, being either
first seiz^d on by such Locusts and the beauty and sapidness defaced and
exhausted, or else wanting its due heat to concoct its crudities, (the just
temperature of discretion) presently putrifies and corrupts.

These Gallants kept a huge buzzing about Cornelia; and with a deal of soft
courtship, by turns, did light on her lips, about which they wantoned off and
on, till they were most damnably drunk with the juice that pearl'd on the
brinks of them; nor did she refuse, or pettishly or unwillingly afford them the
pleasure, nor with any particular or kinder aspect to one more than another,
entertain their caresses; whomsoever notwithstanding her fancy did best and
chiefest commend to her affection: only some greater and freer familiarity she
manifested to that Gentleman that invited her from her Country Lodging to
Kilkenny, which she might do the better from their supposed acquaintance, and
Polyandria was observed to be very open hearted to that Person, between whom
Cornelia was afraid there was some compact and bargain, that might tend to the
forestalling of her market.

In the mean while, the wine went merrily off, with a thousand healths to
Mistress Cornelia, and her servant, and his happy fortunes extolled to the Sky,
that had any interest in her breast, nothing but admiration, and such like
Hyperboles, from the one Youngster to the other, vying who should best and with
most Rhetoric set off her excellencies and perfections.

To all which grandezzas of Complements; and liberal Elogies, Cornelia made no
other return but in bewitching Language of her eyes, which (like the beauty of
a good Picture) looked with the same aspect on them all, and that too with a
smileing and serene brow. Every one fancied himself to be the Person whom she
would peculiarly admit for her servant, and was the rather loath to obtrude his
respects upon her in public before his Comerades, least he should offend her
that was resolved to serve them all.

Now the Wine and her incomparable Beauty had intoxicated them all, so that
from admiring and kissing they began to amend their Pace, and gave a more then
decent liberty, while by struggling she disengages her self, and being free,
cries, Fie, Gentlemen, are ye not ashamed?

By this time Polyandria was laid a sleep, in a great groaning Chair, and her
Landlady out of pure kindness to bear her company, sitting in another Chair
next to her, snoar'd as bad as Hogs-Nor^ons-Organs; now Cornelia was to stand
upon her own Legs, and defend her self as well as she could, kisses flew about
with such smacks, you would have taken them for Crackers fired with her eyes,
that sparkled with vehement burning desires; and to such a pass was her ardency
grown that it impetuously spread it self to all.

These Gallants had by this time good assurance, that Helena was as they would
have her; but it is impossible she could serve them altogether, and he that
could claim the first share in her, her first visitant was grown very
Squeamish, from the impulse of those honorable thoughts he brought with him to
her at his first Address; not but that he was glad he had missed a snare, (if
he had married such a dissolute Female,) and withal, he was assured in himself,
that his interest in her would be as great, if not greater then the rest, and
that without any more expense or cost then what fell to the Club. Procul jam
culmin^ fumant, the Evening now came riding Post into their Horizon, so that it
was high time for Cornelia to bethink her self of her Lodgement, which she (for
all the freedom given and received between them,) thought not honorable to
acquaint them with, (for all her favors were clear of any engagement upon her)
or to obtrude her self upon their Harbinging, while she was consulting with her
self what was best to be done, seeing her self involved in so great an
extremity, as hitherto she had e^countred, being in a strange place where she
had no acquaintance; and being bereft withal of the assistance of her Governess
and Landlady, whose eyesight, was extinguished by excess of Liquor; I say,
while she was in this Profound study, one of the briskest of the whole Company,
taking her aside, told her in a low voice, That it was later then she imagined,
and that it was impossible for hereto go home that night, without extrem^
danger, affrighting her with the supposition of meeting Tories by the way, and
therefore humbly entreated her to be his Guest at his Lodging (for he was only
an Attendant on the Court) and that for the smoother carrying on the business,
she should go by the name of ish Cousin newly come to Town.

Cornelia, as she was young, credulous, and little experienced in the humors
of men, so she was desirous above all things to be freed from the slavery she
groaned under of an insufferable Governess, who never prompted the young one to
enjoy herself, but when the Beldam did design to increase her own profit by
that means; this made Cornelia the more forward to express a seeming consent in
the return of her thanks to this her Confident; his Comrades being acquainted
with the Proposal of her Lodging, gain-say'd it not, bieng very well acquainted
in the same house, by a constant converse with their Lodger, contenting
themseives with future hopes of kindness; And it was agreed, that they should
all for the lesser suspicion honor their friend and his Cozen to his Lodging:
withal Cornelia designed to give Polyandria and her Landlady the slip, and
leave the two Sleepers to shift for themselves, and to make her self free from
any further Government of her Tutores^; so calling for a reckoning, and
Commending the care of the Old drousy Siners to the Drawers, they paid and
departed.

To omit all the lewd practices of this witty wanton Cornelia, which she
exercised in this Lodging, do but cast your eye back, and think what a
wretched condition Polyandria was in when she awaked, raving and tearing, like
a She-Bear robbed of her only Cub, and engaged in a mortal fray with her
Landlady whom she charged with the Spiriting away this young White-Devil,
beautiful Cornelia, and although she denied it with many vows and
protestations, yet this would not any ways qualify the enraged passion of our
furious Matron, nay, what ever she alleged in her own defense was so
ineffectuall, that instead of lessning the others anger, it rather added
thereunto, so that since words would not do, the feud grew to that height,
that to it they went tooth and nail, so that it may be conjectured the dispute
was both sharp and bloody, and might have proved fatal, but that the Mystriss
of the house stepped in between them, and parted them, for that great love and
esteem she ever had for their venerable occupation; and to reunite their
friendship, invited them to lie in her house that night, which accordingly they
did; and the next morning she treated them very Gentilely during their little
stay; for Polyandria, being impatient for the loss of her Cornelia, would not
be detained from making all the speedy enquiry she could after her Daughter,
who now was on the Ramble, and that she might the better do it, dismissed her
Landlady, sending her home, while she hunts hotly through the Town in quest of
this out-lying Deer.

All her pains, though she was indefatigable in her search, availed nothing;
for Cornelia, fearing she should be discovered if she stirred abroad, kept
close within, not only prompted thereunto by that which she enjoyed, but more
encouraged thereunto by large Presents, liberally bestowed upon her,
conditionally for some time she would stay within. For some short time she
yielded to their Proposals, but they growing weary of this, acquainted other
Tumblers what Game they lately had found out, who coming in afresh were greedy,
and by their eagerness had like to have spoiled all, for these Blood Hounds
opened so wide, that they noised every where, and by this unlucky means
Polyandria came to know where her lost daughter did inhabit; Cornelia had
knowledge of her di^covery, and to prevent her falling into the hands of her
former Governess, she singles out one of her Admirers, (whom the thought most
feasible for her purpose) and in a private Conference tells him how the
multiplicity of her Visitants had betray'^ her being and actions to the
knowledge of her Mother, that should she stay a day longer, she should
inevitably fall into her hands, from whence no Redemption could be expected,
and therefore persuaded him, if he had any love for her, that he would think of
some expedient, whereby they might secretly and speedily remove from thence to
Dublin.

The Gentleman overjoyed to think himself so much her Favorite beyond the
rest, expressed in his face and gestures all the symptoms of the greatest
satisfaction; and being eager to put her Proposals in practice, trifled away no
time in vain and empty Complements, but taking his leave of her, assured her he
would return immediately, and gratify her expectations.

In the interim, Polyandria hearing where her beloved Daughter was, come in
such haste, that her overheated moisture had laid her Waste-coat under water.
So furious was her Knock at door, that Cornelia and her Gallants were very much
startled at it; she knowing her self to be principally concerned, peeps out at
window, and seeing that it was the good Gentlewoman her Mother, that had thus
put them into a fright, she whipped down stairs, and before the Maid could get to
the door to open it, Cornelia met her, and charging her to deny that she was
within, but that she would be within by and by, she slipped into the Garden,
through which there was a passage out into the Highway, and withal enjoined the
Maid to tell that Gentleman that was gone to contrive a way for her escape,
that she attended him in the Garden.

Whilst Polyandria was longingly expecting the return of Cornelia, this
Gentleman entering the house, was informed where Cornelia was, who hastening to
her, immediately conveyed her through the Garden-door to an Inn where his Horse
stood, and having with more then ordinary expedition provided Necessaries for
their journey mounted and directed their course for Dublin, leaving the rest of
the Gallants behind, with the aged and experienced Matron, to procure them
other Necessaries to supply the place of Cornelia,

Coming to Dublin, they for the present settled themselves in St.
Francis-street, where this Gallant briskly prosecuted his business as long as
his money lasted; but finding his amorous Appetite satiated, and his stock
wasted, he gave her the liberty to be a free Trader, which indeed he could not
help, for in that small time they sojourned together, she had privately
contracted a considerable acquaintance, which very much advanced her interest
both in money and apparel.

How to work with her hands she knew not, yet was well acquainted with the way
to the Theater, the Rendezvous of Gallants of both Sexes, and the Place of
amorous Intrigues; there she knew how to plant her self to the best advantage,
and how to pick and choose the self admiring Fops; Having first consulted her
Glass, with the help of Art, to make her appear as lovely as was possible; but
certainly, that Beauty is most perfect where the Face graceth the Apparel, and
not the Apparel the Face, for none will deny, that the Truth of Nature exceeds
the falsehood of all Artificial Beauty; so incomparable was hers, that through
the natural whiteness and smoothness of her Front, Neck, and plump Breasts, a
man might with wonderful delight perceive the azure of her Veins, circling
about in their several Meanders; the splendour of her eyes made her Beholders
dim-sighted, their radiant influence being so strong and penetrating; and to
complete her excellency, the rare symmetry of every part of her body was so
charming and magnetical, that it was impossible to look on and not be attracted
to her.

As Play Houses were her Chapels of Ease, so she had several public Walks, in
which she subtly contrived a way to make her self known; nor did she refuse to
be courted and treated by the Gallants that frequented those places, provided
they were the more noble and civiler sort of amorous Combatants. Rings-End she
had little reason to slight, by reason of the excellency of the Air, and
Prospect into the Ocean; nor could she think her time ill spent in a Coach, for
a miles riding thither over the Strand, if for nothing else then for those
delicate large Pole-beg Oisters, which are there plentifully to be had, so
large an overgrown mouth would hardly contain the moiety of one of them; nor
could she choose, but now and then for variety, resort to Chappel-Izard, or to
Santry, (Inland Towns not far remote.) None ever enjoyed her company once, but
they were impatient till they were in it again; for to gain her self esteem and
credit, she showed her self (seemingly) modest, yet very merry and facetious;
and to say the truth, Wit she had rather too much, by which she gained an
absolute power over her Lovers Persons and Purses.

In this unchaste progress she took an essay or taste of all degrees,
professions and conditions, from the Noble to the Gentile, from the Camp to the
City, her Fars had heard all Languages that were charming, her Purse had
received all Coins that were tempting, and had not her Fortune been ever more
favorable then her affections a her body had been confounded.

Whilst Cornelia was endeavoring to work her self into a general esteem, (as
she had in a little time indifferently well done it) and had thereby collected
a considerable sum together, Polyandria found her out, which raised a different
passion in them both, for the one could not be so glad as the other was
sorrowful, the one having found the staff of her life, (as she vainly did
imagine) while the other from that minute concluded her self to be the most
miserable creature living.

It will not import much to my present purpose, to relate the variety of talk
this first interview did produce; you may conjecture that Polyandria was not
meally mo^th'd, whilst poor Cornelia knew not what excuse to make for her self;
In short, after a storm of words were blown over, they drank themselves
friends, and concluded once more to cohabit in one habitation, which they
agreed should be an Ordinary for flesh; and for the better entertainment of
their Guests, they thought it not irrequisite to vend such Liquid^ (...) were
not sold by every vulgar person, (...) only such Wines as were most desired by
the Gentry.

Polyandria had no sooner settled her self in this resolution, and sealed it
before Hell and her own evil Conscience, but presently she puts in execution;
and that she might frame all accommodations suitable to her design, she
immediately made search for a better house then what she had before, for that
wanted elbow-room, she must have many Meanders, and many Passages, many Holes
and many Hides Deeds of darkness do ever require many dark corners.

At last, she chanced to light upon an house near an Old Castle, commodiously
placed, both for her homebred Customers and foreign Visitants, as well for the
Hawk or Buzzard that flies by day, as for the Owl or Bat that flutters in the
night, that she could not wish for a place of better convenience. The Sea was
on the one side, which though its billows did not beat against the walls, yet
any Ship of never so great a burden might safely ride at Anchor. On the other
side, it had some small or slight Intrenchments, which though they were but
weak and assailable, yet the Sea upon all assaults did grant her both Munition
and Provision. And that a good name might Patronize her many evil actions, she
caused it to be called, THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.

By Contract she got possession of this house, and her Purse being well filled,
and wide open, emptied it self for Ornament and Furniture. There wanted nothing
for state, nothing for Magnificence, nothing for delight, nothing for beauty,
and nothing for necessity; howsoever, some bones that lodged in it were rotten
and unwholesom, yet the Monument it self was stately and splendid, she wanted
nothing now but living Furniture, and that she divided into two stations.

The first were two Bulleys, appointed at night for her black Guards, the
second a parcel of lusty Queans, to supply Offices according to their quality.
The first of these she saved from the Gallows by ransoming their forfeited
lives, and the last she picktup out of several Bawdy-houses, having had not
time as yet to keep any of her own dragging up: for these there needed not much
search or enquiry, since Sin is found in every corner, and these Creatures,
plying a wealthy Fair, will thrust themselves into the Devils arms, beyond
Hope, beyond Redemption.

There was not a Ship that brought in any Person fit for her turn, from any
part of Wales, or England, but she had Pieces of Eight, of greater weight to
exchange for it, Not any young or tender Pullet, that came fluttering out of
the Country, whether English or Irish, of they were plump and bandsome, but she
had speedy intelligence thereof, and quickly found out a way to insinuate into
their Company, and diving into their present condition, she by that means knew
how to steer her course to her best advantage, and by pretending to do them
kindnesses by helping them to advantageous services, she served her own turn
first, and by her flatteries and large pretenses made them her absolute
Creatures. In short, she had variety of Charms to entice the simple, Money to
bewitch the Needy, Splendid habiliments, and other gaudy Ornaments for the
proud and Ambitious, Ease for Idleness, Pleasure for wantons, and indeed any
thing, or all things, to keep her Commonwealth from falling.

Being thus generally accommodated, and her Mart, or Fair proclaimed, she need
not doubt the want of Customers, every man has a penny for a New Tavern.

She had wound her self into so good a credit among some young Wine Merchants,
this added much to the gaining her a vast Custom, and as the Wine did in part
attract them, so when drawn in, it was no eas^e matter for them to get out
quickly, so powerful were the charms of those beautiful Inchanteresses therein
plying or inhabiting: She had no sooner discovered her public and private
Profession, but that her Visitants came tumbling in so fast for entertainment,
that her Kitchen was like Mongibel, ever flaming; her Hall, like Augeus stable,
ever stinking with broken meat; her Dining Room, like Babel, a mixture of
nothing but confused noises; and her inward and private Lodgings, like Hell it
self, where damned or wicked creatures, by bathing themselves in lust as souls
infernal, lie pickled up in Sulphur; Thus she continued her debautcheries for a
long season, boasting her self in the strength of her wickedness, and not
grieving for any thing more, then that she could be no more wicked.

Carnelia was the chiefest Jewel in her whole Cabinet, whom she exposed not to
common view, but reserved her for her best Customers, such as valued not the
expense of their money in the prosecution of their pleasure; one where of being
a very ingenious man, though sensual, after his enjoyment of Cornelia, wrote
these lines upon her.

'Twas Summertime, the sweltry time o'th day,
When on a Bed to ease my Limbs I lay;
The Curtains thin were round about me drawn,
Which formed a twilight like the day at dawn;
Thus as I lay, and thought no one was near,
I looked and saw my loved Cornelia there;
All thoughts of sleep were on a sudden gone,
As Mists that vanish at the sight of the Sun;
Thirsty of bliss, into her arms I flew,
And drank up Kisses as the Sun does dew;
She struggling, seemed to dispute the Field,
But strugled so, as though she strove to yield.
Heat of resistance had enoreas'd her fire,
Her weak defense was turned to strong desire;
Locked in each others Arms, by Passion led,
Insensibly she dropped upon the bed.
I Will say no more, now you may think the rest,
Good the beginning was, the end was best.
The abuses in Baudy-houses are so generally known, that I need not here relate
the several tricks and straragems Polyandria used to augment her profit, nor
what devices she found out to assist Cornelia, in the attracting such company
to the house, that may dearly pay her for her own wantonness. But though they
lived thus splendidly and pleasant, yet there were Judgments registered above,
and shame and disgraces preserved below, and when either the one or the other
falls, Woe to the Offender; Judgment may forbear, and Justice seem to sleep, but
neith^r will pardon; it is only to raise the Arm higher, that the Thunder may
fall with the greater fury.

And now the noise of these offenses awakened A^thority, and that joining with
Piety, both send forth their Ministers to dissipate or apprehend them. At
first, Polyandria played the Rebel, and withstood their Summons; but finding
her self environed on ^ll sides, and that neither Sea nor Land afforded her
safety; however unwilling, yet with a seeming willingness, she yielded up her
self and the bandy Utensils of her Enchanted Castle into the hands of Mercy.

Upon Examination, being found guilty of various villainies, besides the too
customary common sin of uncleanness; her Ruffians were sent to the Black-Dog;
the Females whom this crafty Bawd had divelishly seduced, were sent over to the
house of Repentant Hemp-beating Strumpets, commonly known by the name of
Bridewel, near Oxman-Town; but Polyandria and Cornelia, who were the chief
Authors and Framers of all this iniquity, were sent to a Prison, much like one
of of our Compters, there to remain till their cause was heard, and due
punishment put in Execution.

All this, as it was decreed, so it was performed, and each one went to their
several place of Sadness; but Polyandria, although she ran in a superlative way
of wickedness, yet did she not want friends, neither was the without her daily
Visitants, for the love they bore Cornelia, for there is a Correspondency even
among the worst; Birds of a black Hellish color will flock together.

She had Counsels of all manner of Creatures, ^uirks to avoid Statutes,
Quillits to defraud Judgments, and Demurres to protract and put off the days of
her Trial; She wanted no Advocates to plead for Compassion to blanch her
Offenses, and make her black Sins white ones; there needed no tears, she
commanded more Crocodiles than Nilus, and was not in the least Slack-handed in
her bribery.

All these, and a world of others, being put up togeth^ in a b^dle, and put in
the seal against her intolerable mi^hiefs, w^ ^o light and ^m^ah able, that
but di^ a^ and di^gra^, she could find no Comfort^. (...) thus hard beset, she
now (...) to call into her the st^th of a woman wit, and concludes in h^, that
a^ the (...) deceived the first woman with his slattery, he may (^am (...),
give some relief with his ^bti^ry; and ind^d her cause wa^o foul, that there
was no hope but in strat^m, and to that co^^se she only bends her study, and
in this sort she effects it.

Some few days before her trial, there came to visit Polyandria for Cornelsa's
sa^, a Gentleman of very grave and good de^tm^nt, one that had in his looks and
behavior both rever^nce and Autho^ity h^saluted the old One by the nam^ of
^ister; and the younger by that of Niece, who with much h^mility, and a river
of w^ll Commanded t^ars blushing that she could not blush faster, re^rn'd his
Sal^tations with the name of an Uncle; b^t casting down her countenance she
seem^d to be ashamed to look upon him; Whilst he on the other side endeavored
to give her comfort, but so mixed with severe and bitter council, that the
standers by might perceive he came neither to flatter nor^d ject her; these
Complement finished they f^ll to private discourses; those ended according to
the custom of these places, and the use of such Visitants, he call for B^ Ale,
Wine, and other Liq^d that the ho^^^ affo^ded, there is no spare of ^ost; his
Cobs flew about as if they had been purpo^ly winged for such a motion the
Keeper care^es, and ^d sts it away briskly his servants sup^ly thing wanting,
and no man near them but has busy employment.

After this conflictend^d, and the Gentleman preparing so (...) ture, he
bestowed on the (...) p^ivately something that was worth his acceptance; nor
were his servants ^nrewarded; nay as if h^ had been confined himself to express
the largness of his soul, he b^stow'd a large ga^nish on the poorer sort of
Prisoners.

Descending the stair^, ^e took his absolute leave of Pol^, begging leave of
her, that his Niece should attend him as far as the limits of the House will
give her sufferance, and so she accompanied to the very Gate, where talking a
little while, he at length proposes to the Keeper that he has a great desire
to drink one bottle or two more at a Tavern, but a little way from the Prison;
and that if he would favor him so far as to let his Niece go and participate
with them, he should think himself infinitely engaged.

The Keeper imediately expressed much willingness to attend him, saying further,
that Cornelia's offense was neither Felony nor Treason, neither is she liable
to Bond nor Execution, and therefore my self will be her Guardian, and she
shall wait upon you; and so together they went all three to the Tavern; the
Uncle called for Pottle upon Pottle, and to avoid idleness, the glass never
stood still, which the greedy Keeper tossed off so often, that one would have
thought he had an Aetna in his belly, and that he endeavored to quench the
flames thereof by drinking.

Several Healths having past round, the Gentleman and ^the Keeper fell into a
serious discourse, not minding any thing but their own expressions: Cornelia
taking especial notice hereof, rises from the Table; and as if the Wine had
stirred in her some Office of secret occasion, steals out of doors, and knowing
that at the very entrance of the backdoor stood a Sanctuary for the
distressed, looking back, and seeing her Argus more and more enchanted with
Mercury, like light Salmacis, having her heels at liberty, away she runs, and
finding the door of her Refuge wide open, like a poor affrighted Dove, shot
from the Talons of an eager Faulcon, in she enters for safety; to the first
Brother she meets she falls on her knees, and having taught her eyes to weep at
her own pleasure she delivers him so pitiful a story of her misfortune, that
had he been as cold as a Carthusian, yet it would have moved in him a flame of
infinite Compassion; wherefore taking her up, and being as all his Order are,
faithful and helpful to woman's afflictions, he promised her all relief, all
safety; which done, he conveyed her through the dark corners and intricate
passages of that Cloister, whether he showed her his own Cell or no, it is
uncertain; but it is an apparent truth, that he never forsook her till he had
placed her in that safety, which her self desired.

By this time the grave old Gentleman, and the Keeper having tired themselves
with needless Complements, began to give their tongues a little ease, that
their eyes with more liberty might look about them.

The Uncle perceiving that his work was effected, pretended his time was fully
expired, and that his departure must be speedy. The Keeper, supposing his
Prisoner was with the Mistress of the House, conducteth him to the door, and
there took his have, expecting speedily such another advantageous meeting;
after this he called for his charge, but she i^ missing, and by a general and
strickt search through the whole House, she was no where to be found.

It will be to no purpose to trouble your ears with the Keepers amazement.
Fury, Fretting, Damning, Sinking, etc. Let it fusti^e, C^li^^ is gone, her
escape is known, but the place where in she has absconded her self, is a
Secret yet that is unreveal'd; here she lay hid like the Minataure in the
Labyrinth, and although her Person lay concealed, yet her mind was full of
action, and busily employed in a thousand several Cogitations. Sti^ abroad she
durst not, for fear of being detected; and her amorons Visitants, as formerly,
she could not with safety admit of, for fear of being discovered by their
means; wherefore she looked on nothing more expedient for her future
preservation, than to set her laboring acquaintance on work to sue, if not for
a pardon, yet at least for some fair and reasonable composition, and having the
experience of others misfortunes in things of this nature, she knew no way so
safe or speedy as that of Bribes; wherefore like a Prodigal, she s^arters with
her hands what moneys they never wrought for, and would not ^urfer any man to
be employed for her, but he should have profit before he under took her
business; neither must she undertake any mean instrument to prosecute her
designs, especially at this time, wherein arose the Whores greatest Persecution
in Dublin, from St. P^ clearing the Kingdom of all venomous Creature, to the
establishing a New-More-Fields upon St. Stephens Green. For such was the
extraordinary zeal of the chief Magistrate of the City, that though he was an
Annual Lord, yet it put him on the Office of a Skavinger, to cleanse the
streets of menstruousraggs, filthy lusts, and whorish impurities; to that end,
he had more than a complete Regiment of Informers, whose sole business was to
inspect Baudyhouses, and to register the names of the Offenders, who were
immediately seized by Warrants, and confined; whose numbers were so great, that
in that dreadful year all the Common Prisons in or about the City, were crammed
with them.

In the end, Cornelia's Project proved prosperous; And upon good security, that
she would lead a new life, and be a true Penitent for crimes past, her Peace
was made but at so dear and high prized conditions, that looking into the
remainder of her money, she sound so little, that did she not speedily study
for a supply, she could not reasonably from thence expect subsistence.

Session; being now at hand, Polyandr^, with a whole Herd of the
Baudy-Sisterhood, were brought to the Bar, where their lives and conversations
were found so lewd, and notorio^sly wicked, that the Sentence which past upon
them, was, that they should be Carted through the City.

Polyandria led the Van, being the most experienced crafty Bawd of them all,
whose sufferings were somewhat greater than the rest and although she had her
brains almost beaten out with rotten eggs, yet such was the indefatigable
Pains-taking of the Communalty, that by continually pouring on her their dirt
she seemed to be in pickle for the Devil and was going to Hell for a token.
After this, at the Towns-end, she (by command) was saluted by a Firz-bush, and
so dismissed; but what became of her afterward was unknown to most, though some
confidently affirm she was drowned in her passage to West-Chester.

This Persecution grew so hot, that the Whores for fear fled out of Dublin, and
such as durst stay behind were forced to play the Hypocrites, having no other
way left to blind the eyes of Justice. Whoring grew now so out of fashion,
through fear of punishment, that Cornelia had nothing to do, which rendered her
condition very miserable and indigent. These afflictions every one thought to
be Adamants, powerful enough to attract her soul to Heavenly Meditations; but
the effect proved quite contrary (...) ^er carried the Devils Balm in her
bosom, and could anoint over every disafter of Fortune; with, What will be
shall be; She often perused this Adage; Things past cure, past care, and
whether it were Envy or Fury, or both, she became in a manner desperate.

After some small time thus spent in Languishment, looking at no mark, but the
old one, (for she could with the least trouble hit it) she labors all her
Spirit, all her imaginations, puts her Friends, Flat^erers and Companions to
the Test leaves no way no means ^nessayd how she might set up again, and
advance her former Trade.

It was not long ere she had renewed her trade, and by running over her former
practices, she made a shift to cram her baggs pretty well again. Among the rest
of her Gallants, she used to frequent with a most affectionate Dotard, an old
fellow that for fear of Taxes, etc. Had betaken himself to the privacy of a
Lodger. something near Cornelia's Lodgings, and made it his business to enquire
o^ther Fortune and Reputation, where he met with an Answer that had laya Ledger
there ever since Cornelia came to the House, That she was an Orphan well
descended, allied to such a Gentleman, and was a most modest virtuous Lady;
This and his own conceit of her, led him into the snare.

Hereupon he forthwith addressed himself to her, having prepared his way by the
Landlady his good Neighbor, who omitted not to commend him, his Baggs, Parts,
and Aldermans abilities, which Cornelia well approved of by a slight and
careless laughter at the story.

But yet it would hardly down with her, although she foresaw the necessity of
being married, until the advice, and importunate counsels of her Voluptuary
Friends had persuaded her to it (and the old Fop never came to visit, but he
saw one of her Cozens, Townsmen, or the like, in her Company;) For they told
her that the cold Dew gave the sweetness to Flowers, and that Catarrhs, and
Rheums were the irrigations and moisture that would still keep her blooming,
while the violent heat of youth would soon wither her, as, ^tha considering her
own intemperancy and immoderateness, she could find no better expedient than
one, whose weakness of body and mind would afford her liberty, whereas should
she marry a young one, as he could not satisfy her, so also would a raging
jealousy, and a sour usage discount her portion.

Now the Match went on amain, and Cornelia well satisfied with a pregnant
Reason one of them had given her, in Reverence to his Age, professed her self
bis Handmaid, and gave him assurance of her most entire affections, which so
blinded this old Fribbling Sink-Kater, that without any more ado, and with all
the privacy that could be, as if he had got a most inestimable Jewel, they were
presently married; and the old Bridegroom, and the young Bride, were the
lovingest Couple, as ever eyes and looks beheld.

Now Horn-Fair began, such a concourse of Chapmen followed her, as was hardly
ever seen before, all forsooth to honor the Espousals of Cornelia, and to see
the Bridal-bed, the old man still inventing new ways of Courtship, and
Entertainment for these his friends, whilst her whole time was taken up in
studying how to make them welcome.

This Trade continued till the young Gentlewoman came within Ken of her nine
months time, and a swelling in her belly to an usual bulk at five months time,
signified a forward inchoation of the Marriage-Rites; and it was souniversally
taken notice of, that at last the old Chance himself had so much sagacity, as
to suspect some body had been tempering there before which he could not longer
dissemble; but one night in bed told her of it.

Cornelia began first moderately to refute his jealousy, and protested her
innocence and spotless Chastity; but the old man growing somewhat wayward and
testy, she fell downright a railing on him, telling him, that she would
acquaint her friends with his Language, whose Honor would oblige them to call
him to a strickt account of that scandalous imputation; It is true (said she) I
was told of this before, but my indiscreet affection to such a Worm-eaten Slave
has overborn my felicity, which I might have enjoyed with a Noble young
person, who has Courted me with the greatest passion; but since it is as it
is, I would have you know that you have not married a Fool, telling him
further, that she would take a severe revenge of that his affront done to her
Honor, and unblemisht reputation, and mounted this disgrace to such a height,
that she swore she would never bed again with him, till he had made Reparation.

The next Morning her usual Visitants came to give them the Good Morrow, and
found her and her old Husband quite out of T^ but her especially so dogged and
so discomposed, that they feared she had vowed Penitence, and would loure such
Sinners ought of her sight, when to save the fear of such a thought, she
presently tells the story, and with all aggravation either female wit or malice
could invent, reports his usage of her.

In the interim, the old Gentleman slips out of doors, to avoid the storms he
feared from these friends of his wife, who presently, upon notice of his
absence, falls to the old Game, with all the mirth and jollity imaginable; but
however, she did not wholly forget her husbands words, which she knew a little
longer time would manifest to be true. So she resolved whatever befell, to make
the feud irreconcilable, and in order to that to leave him. But before she did
this, it was advised that two of her pretended Cousens, should go and
expostulate the case with Gaffer Gray beard, and give him a Juniper Lesson in
some public place, to make Cornelia's departure from him, just and honorable.

This Counsel was well followed, and her husband well told of the insufferable
wrong he had done their Kinswoman, but gave him no such hint as leaving him,
for now was she packing up her best Movables, Jewels, and Plate, with a good
sum of moneys, and withal, stretching her husbands credit for more (where
ever she knew any thing could be raised) and thus viis and modis, she had
amassed together near the value of a thousand pounds.

So with two of her intimate and confiding friends, she that afternoon departed
from Dublin, and went to Tredath, twenty miles from thence remote, where like
the only Beauty, the only Gallant of that place, she was admired by all, but
kept at a distance from any thing further, by her Paramours, who were very
strict in observing her, and very careful of her slipping.

The forlorn Elder at Home, missing his Wife, and seeing his Trunk^ and
Cabin^ts broke open, was almost ready to hang himself. He was ashamed to make
any loud Complaint, for who would pity him? What to do he knew not and before
he could well recollect himself, people were knocking at door for money for the
wares she had taken up that day, and had appointed them to bring their B^lls of
Parcels that night.

These Dons, and Undons, had quite cured my Gentleman of his longing (which
Cornelia would by no means gratify, she was so Squeamish and coy to his
embraees) and made him scratch where it needed not; and to sum up his
miseries, his Wives Relations, as they called themselves, were Ubiquitaries,
and in his unlucky Mansion he was sure never to see them again; and which was
worse than all, after his young wise had thus liberally taken her pleasure, and
was gone incognito to Droghedaugh, new Stratagems were set on foot by the
policy of her Privado'^, to make the Viellago bear the charge, and cost of
their sport.

To which end they advised with a Lawyer (that was to go snip with them) to set
a foot her Claim for Alimony, and accordingly drew up a Bill in Chancery, and
Suppaelig;na'd the old man to answer; in which Bill there wanted not such
invectives, as their Plot (and the modesty and severity of the Law could
suffer) did require, especially they exagitated, and urged strange things unto
him.

After much trouble, and many vexatious Orders which her Agents had the
opportunity, and pleasure of procuring him; and no end except of a good one,
either in Hope or View.

At length he makes an Overture of a Treaty, which with much ado was
Condescended to, but with such stiff obstinate terms on her side (which for a
weight to her lightness, were managed by learned Counsel) that it was as bad as
holding the the Wolf by the ear.

But the desire of quiet prevailed, which he purchased at the rate of five
hundred pounds ready money, to be paid down, with a condition of two hundred
pounds more to be paid by way of Legacy, if he died before her, and Releases
good in Law to be given each other. Shortly after this agreement, this old
fellow broke his heart, and died, and left Cornelia a most triumphant, rich,
and eminent Whore through the whole Kingdom.

Flusht with this gre^ success, and tumbling in money, she began to
Circumscribe the familiarity of her former deportment, and taking state upon
her, would admit but few into her society, and such only who had either wealth,
or honor, or both.

After the manner of a splendid debauchee, she lived several years in Ireland,
scorning to be confined to the narrow limits of any one City, though the
Metropolis thereof; and therefore she gave her self the liberty of roving to
and fro the Country. Her Reputation being worn almost Thread-bear, and moneys
coming in too slowly, to gratify her enlarged expectations, she resolved to
leave her native Country, and try her fortunes elsewhere, and concluded no
place so requisite for that purpose, as the famous City of London.

She need not wait long in the expectation of a fair wind for England, since
Southerly and West Winds are there so srequent; but left she should be troubled
with an expensive Male-Attendant, converting what goods she had into ready
money, she privately, and without acquainting any of her friends with her
departure, stole aboard, and having a prosperous gale, arrived in twenty four
hours at a place called Nessen, within eight miles of Chester, and having layn
there one night, went thither, and took Coach for London, where being arrived,
she found the splendor of that unparalleled new-built-City, so far exceeding
all report, that she esteemed it her Terrestrial Heaven, and doubted not to
enjoy a happiness agreeably lasting.

The Exchanges were her Marts for fashions, whither she repaired, and was
supplied with what she best fancied, she visited the Kings and Dakes Theaters
by turns there, to expose to public view her rich and fashionable Ornaments
and Habiliments.

All places of Gentile resort she frequented in or about the City, and in a
little time became as familiar acquainted with Epsom, and Tunbridge, that few
of their Visitants knew more of the humors which attend them than did
Cornelia, and was as much crowded with the visits of Gallants.

At London she had gained the reputation of a matchless Beauty, and indeed her
features were so excellent, the greatest Critic in handsome faces knew not
where to take away, or what to add; in short, she was a Book without an Errata;
neither did ever such a perfect Impression come from Natures Press: By these
irresistible Charms she won more hearts than a new Drammatick Poet gains
praises, and was burdened by their importunate, and some impertinent visits,
that she resolved to seclude her from that vexatious trouble, by dedicating her
time and pleasure to one only that would maintain her Gentilely.

Such a Person (sit as she thought for her purpose) she soon found out, but she
found her de^gns soon frustrated by her Gallant inconstancy, and looking on
this as the fa^lt or error of few men, so the first relinquishing her, she
resolved to go on in her wickedness and debaucheries, and had so many, till her
own woeful experience did largely inform her, that as Astra^ had forsook the
Earth, so sidelity and constancy to a woman had left mankind. Wherefore she
resolved to be a Miss to o^ nolon^er, but to any one that would b^ (...) allant
and, by ass^ming this freedom procured her self vast numbers of friends and
acquaintance.

But in the end, looking back into her self, and observing into what a crasie
and rotten Bark she had shipped her self, on a rough and tempestuous Sea, where
insinite diseases lay gaping to swallow her up, the rigor of the Laws ready to
devour her, Sham^ and Beggary striving to overtake her, and at last the Curse
of all Curses, to make her last Will on a Dunghill, or at best in an Hospit
all, Pandora's Boxes of most distempers; this did so perplex her, that being
cloyed with such lewdness, and sin a^weary of her, as she was weary of sinning,
she began to turn over the lease of her wickedness, and though she had no
thought of Amendment, yet she resolved to take a new course, for the safety of
her health and Person.

As she had formerly been a be witching Whore, she knew no reason, but that she
might practice the Art of a deceiving Bawd, making others sins maintain her
own; resolving not to venture herself again singly on the Surges, but to
traffic by Factors.

As a Pattern for this her wicked and destractive purpose, she made a severe
inspection into the Platform of her mother Polyandria's Bawdy Commonwealth; but
finding many faults in her government, and having seen the woeful Consequences
of that Matrons foul and villainous Miscarriages, she thought it requisi^ to
regulate that form, and to frame to her self new Laws of severer condition, and
therefore would have Taxes and Gatherings of an higher and more prositable
Nature; all her Riot was in the shape or with the shadow of Frugality; her
Instruments shall be fair and handsome, yet but few in number; for whensupplies
are wanting, she knew how to fetch them from places of fair Reputation; she
made Choice of such for her ordinary servants that were comely and industrious,
that when extremity should fall upon her, with her disguises, she may make them
appear like glorious D^mi-Angels. In short, that old Commonwealth, wherein she
drew her first experience, and the beneficial nowledg of most humors, she
turn^d topsy-turvy, and made (...) new one so strong and permanent, as she
thought, that it should be to all the Impudent an everlasting President.

Upon these Resolutions she thought her work was half finished, till looking
better, and more strictly into her design, she found the Basis, and groundwork
whereon she was to build the foundation of her proceedings, was yet to find
out, though not beyond her reach and ability, and that was a Convenient House,
standing in a Convenient Place, for the exercises of her deeds of darkness; an
house so impregnable, that when all shall be vanquished, it shall stand in
defiance; and that she might attain to so great a safety, she ranged through
every part, and promising place of the City: half tired with her search, she is
at length informed of a place sit for her purpose, being very Commodiously
planted for all accommodations. It was without the Walls of the City, bordering
upon one of the most eminent pleasant Walks that do belong thereunto, and not
far distant from that famous, or rather infamous place, which had like to have
been defaced, nay, utterly ruined by the giddy many Headed-Multitude.

This Fort or Citadel, which she had chosen for her Mansion, was so fortified,
and invyroned with all manner of Fortifications, that had impregnable Rhodes
taken thence it is Pattern, neither the Turks wealth, nor the Traitors Wit could
ever have betrayed it; for e're any Foe could approach this, he must march a
long way, and so narrow, that but two could march a breast, and at last no
entrance at the Port, unless they were known to be friends by a word given out
for that purpose.

Within this Citadel, were Bullworks, Orchards, Gardens, Base-Courts, and
inferior Offices, every one being capable of maintaining a several fight, and
every fight able for many hours to play with a rabble Army; and should she be
overpowered with multitude of men, she had several Posterns to permit her
escape in great necessity.

For the better and securer management of this famous infamous House of
Hospitality, she thought it Convenient to prepare Men, and Munition for
defense, as for Household-Ornaments, those she intended to increase according
to the plenty of her incomes. Her desires were so great, that her have in the
execution could not be little, she would not lose a minute, but according to
the Proverb, turned every stone, and making Hay while the Sun shined, she had
all things befitting this her new design. And that which made her more
confident in this work, she was inwardly acquainted with a fellow whose face
looked no less furious than a Lions, when Hunger prompts him to hunt after
prey, to this great Monster both in shape and condition, she gave the charge of
her gate.

These whom she entertained in the house she placed in their true equipage,
gave them their several charges, read them the Orders of the House,
proclaiming a strict penalty for the breach of every condition; this done, she
hung forth her Flagg for Custom, proclaims her preparations, and invited all
wealthy Chapmen to a general entertainment.

As greedy Eagles prey on dead Carcasses, Crows and Ravens feed on Carrion, or
hungry dogs tear and devour the Entrails of stinking beasts, so abundance came
(sinful Creatures of all qualities) to be undone by her, only the empty Purse
expulsed, and could get no admittance, nay, a reasonable stock many times
perished in the Midway, and could not get to the end of his purpose, her Taxes
and Customs were so many, and so mighty; for her Cerber us at the first Port
had a double Impost, one for the Gate, and another for the word he must deliver
at the inner entrance, or else he was to proceed no further; nay as I have been
informed there were those who had Fees for the Hall, for the Dining Room, and
the With-Drawing-Chamber, the rest which were peculiar to the Bawd her self
(beauty blown Cornelia) report, has affirmed they were infinite,

All her entertainments ( Proteus like) were full of variety and changes, and
she would ever suit them to the nature of him that was entertained; if he were
a man of worth and respect, he was respectively used, hating Over-reckonings
and sold her Winesas good as most commonly sold, at little more than the rate
of Taverns; if other wise, besides the expense of his money a Hat, Cloak, or
Sword were forfeited for his rude behavior, with a good beating many times to
boot.

These Mill dews could not choose but breed her a World of Honey, and true it
was, that her baggs were so many, and so massy that she had searce Trunks
enough to contain them. This wealth made her proud, and Pride renewed her
former curiosity, she will not now live at so low a rate as lately she has
done; but as she has plenty of money, so she will have plenty of Attendants;
and hereupon she instantly Contracted, and hired several Retainers, but more
especially an able Chyrurgion, who was a Batchelour, for whom she had more than
a common kindness, and loving him so well, persuaded him to lodge in her house,
that he might oversee, and be continually ready to offer his assistance to
those whose infected bodies stood in need of his medicament^ But this Sunshine
must not continue long without some clouds, for now a crew of those disobliged
Queans, whom she had cast off, with the accusations of those whom she had
either abused or robbed, with the detestable enormities which spring from such
wicked Examples, came all with one voice before the Throne of Justice, not
only appealing for satisfaction, but secretly accusing with suspicion of
Murder. The Complaint was received, approved, and pitied, and presently the
City-Marshall, with other Officers, were dispatched for her apprehension.

It being spread a broad what these Officers of Justice were going about, they
were followed by a great number of the younger fort, who hoopt and hollowed
strangely, thinking now they were going to the best of Pastimes. Coming near
the place, the Corporal or Constable with a stout band of Halberdiers and
Bill-men beleaguered this Fortress; and though the whole Body of the Rabble
drew up in Battalia, she hung out her Flagg of defiance, and bids them enter at
their peril; they which were fortified with double Armor, a good cause, and
lawful Authority, scorning to be out-brav'd, prepare for an assault; she on
the other side with her Devil incarnate, and she-Faries stand to receiv'^m.
Never was combat for the time so dreadful as between these Assailants and
Defenders: the first Scene in the first Act of the Mock Tempest, or Enchanted
Castle represents not half the noise, horror, and confusion they were involved
in; what with Bar up the Doors, Bar up the Doors; another crying, Lets make all
fast enough, and then let them roar the Devils head off. Oaths and Curses were
the Materials of the fiery Rain, which poured down upon the Affailants heads,
whilst they cry out for Jourdans full of water, to quench the flame of the
enraged vulgar; but all to little purpose, for at length like a Sea they break
in upon them, and overwhelme the Castle. Cornelia, the governess thereof, was
the first Person seized; in the mean time her Man-Devil made his escape through
one of the Posterns, her gaudy Crew were likewise laid hold on, and whilst they
were carrying before a Justice, the Rabble endeavored to pull down the house,
but finding they could not easily do it, defaced it as much as they could,
spoiling a great deal of good Goods, and so left it to those Menials, left to
take careof it for the benefit of their Mystress, who with her hopeful
Daughters, being examined before a Justice, were found guilty of Crimes
innumerable, and therefore justly committed the Mother to Newgate, and her
Children to Bridewell; whose tender delicate backs, were there severely lasht,
and afterward dismissed; but Cornelia was forced to suffer Confinement till her
Trial at the Sessions House in the Old Baily, where, I know not by what means,
she found so much favor as to be acquitted of her Indictment, and had her
liberty granted her. Having her freedom, the first thing she did was to remove
her goods from her former house, and dismissing her servant^, she resolved to
lie private for a while, till she could find some expedient to renew her
Occupation.

Cornelia, finding she could not presently satisfy her Expectations, in taking
a House that may fitly suit with her purpose, resolved she would not live idly
(sat^us est male ager^, quam nihil ager,) and therefore was willing to play at
small Game rather than sit out. To this end, she joined in Partnership with a
famous Bawd of her acquaintance in Whetstones Park, with whom she lived
peaceably above a Twelvemonth, with little disturbances from Justices, being
in see with some of their Clerks.

Though Bawds and Whores are a sort of Cattle that can agree well enough
against the common enemy, that is, to Rook and Cheat those that are Rogues and
Fools that go among them; yet it is well known to all verss'd in those
Mysteries, that there have been continual feuds, and sometimes Civil Wars among
themselves, about sharing the wages of iniquity.

Now Cornelia, she was looked upon as the chief Oracle of the Park whither
resorted continually the Do: for Advice in case of extremity, and was esteemed
the most famous that ever the Sun did look upon, for her skill in that wicked
Profession.

Cornelia, finding (by woeful experience) that the meretricious reputation of
the Park, fell much to decay, by the decrease of the famous Patroness thereof
Nab C -- and for want of prudent Conduct in her infamous Successors, she left
that place as too inglorious for her to inhabit in, by her subtle Inquisition,
with advice of her cunning friends, (Professors in the same wicked Occupation)
she removed to a Place as difficult to find out as the Head of Nilus, where
now, as being not much antiquated, she re-assumes the Name of Miss, and acts
accordingly; and so endeavors by becoming Gallantry, to make her self a Help
meet for any wealthy Prodigal, who will not be out of fashion to marry an
honest woman; Or if he be contrary to the idle opinion of the looser Persons of
this wicked Age, she knows how to benefit herself, by being a little
side-Pillow, to render the Yoke of Matrimony more easy, and proves an
excellent convenience for such, who have more money then wit, who spend their
estates upon her to her profit, and their own misery, and bring themselves by
that means to the Stool of Repentance, which for ought I know, if the Person be
truly penitent for his sins past, he may do well.

Nature (as I have told you before) gave her an incomparable countenance,
furnished with the best of Creatures; neither was her stock of confidence,
(which some call convenient boldness) deficient, which she, by prudent
management has now improved into impudence, though at some times, when she
has a design on foot that is prositable, she will seem more modest then a
bashful blushing Maiden.

Though she is wicked enough of all conscience, yet I never could hear that she
was so base and low-spirited, as to sally abroad in the night, to pick up
drunken Fellows, and in a Tavern, whilst he was ever-busily employed, pick out
the straggling Guinny's in his Pocket, or anything else that is valuable; she
has found out a far safer way, which she calls commendable, by persuading her
Gallant to this opinion, That the blood cannot be always kept in a full Tide,
without extraordinary Treats and high feeding; by such like subtle
insinuations, she has persuaded many to keep her in a better equipage then
they have done their wives; having costly Clothes, Rooms hung with the greatest
Gallantry, and the variety of servants, male and female, to attend her, whom
she has taught to call her, Madam, that she may be looked on as a Person of
quality: In short, by long experience, she has arrived to so great a knowledge
in this Profession, that there was never any subtle Whorish Invention yet
invented, of what she is ignorant, and knows how to improve them best to the
Accomplishment of her desires; either as a rambling Dinah, Trading or Coaching
the streets, a Jael standing at the door, a Jezabel looking out of the window,
or as an insatiate Messalina.

When the Appetites of her Gallants begin to be cloyed, their Purses exhausted,
or their Eyes enlightened, and thereupon withdraw, she soon finds out some other
Fool to bubble, with whom, for security sake, she will not Trade without a
Pension per week, or sometimes an Annuity for life; and having Plurality of
Gallants, commands what moneys she pleases, which she expends as Profusely, for
now the Gallantty of her high spirit will not stoop to the mean Arts of
Frugality and good Housewifery,

She is now Arrived to a great height of unexpected glory, her Boys are in
Livery, her House splendidly furnished, and rarely stirs abroad without Sedan
or Coach, she glitters in the Boxes of the Play Houses, she draws all eyes
after her wherever she comes, to the amazement of virtuous Women, and
encouragement of the Vicious, who delight only in Finery, costly Treats,
Dancing, Singing, Balls, Masks, Masquerades, Plays, Frolicks, Rambles,
Assignations, and all manner of Idleness, in imitation of such a thriving
Example.

I hear she is gone to Paris in company of one of her Gallants, to the intent,
by her language and deportment she may pass for an Outlandish Miss: As you like
this present Narrative, on her Return you may hear more of her Life and
Conversation.

FINIS.

