A Copy of a Letter Written the third of September 1651. by John Hedworth of
Harraton in the County of Durham Esquire, unto John Dodgson Constable at
Harraton, John Lax a Leader of Coals there, Steven Pattason a Stathe-man there,
Ralph Hinderson a Leader of Coals there, Robert Vickars Overman there, Thomas
Rutlas a Digger of Coals there; and to all other Workmen whatever, that belong
either to the Colepits, Stathes, or Keels of Harraton Colliery.
Neighbors all,
Though I have never but dealt Neighbourly with you all; yet diverse of you have
dealt otherwise with me: and yet before I take that course against you that
both nature, Law, and reason will afford me: I cannot but hereby under my hand
acquaint you, That per advice upon Saturday last was 7 days, being the 23 of
August 1651. I went to James Liddall your Steward or Overseer, and in the
presence of Richard Lilburn Esquire; Lieut. Col. John Lilburn his son; and Mr.
Richard Gray my brother in Law; And told him, That Sir John Hedworth deceased,
my Father, was Lord, Owner and Proprietor of the Manor of Harraton, and all
the Colemines thereunto belonging; which were now Legally and justly descended
unto, or upon me, as his Eldest Son and Heir: and being of late fully attained
to the age of 21 years, I could not in silence suffer my self any longer to be
deprived of my Right and Inheritance by will and power. And therefore I told
him that he as Steward, set workmen at work upon my Cole-mines, against my will
and mind; and it must be under the pretense of a Lease belonging to Mr. Josiah
Primate, or to Mr. Thomas Wray; but whether of them had the most right to the
said Lease, it was not much material to me now. But sure I was, that by both
their leases (under one of which the (I am sure) present possessors claims)
there is a rent reserved of 40 s per week to be paid to the said Sr. John
Hedworth my father, or his heirs, for their Housekeeping, in case there be so
many Coals wrought as amounts to so much money; with a clause of Re-entry upon
the said Colliery for the said Sir John Hedworth and his Heirs, in case of
non-payment of the said 40 shillings a week rent. And I further told him, I was
therefore in a fair and friendly way come unto him with these my friends, as
may witnesses, to demand of him my said 40 shillings rent for the last week,
and forty shillings per week for all the rest of the weeks arrear, ever since
his Master Sir Arthur Hesilrig, or any other of his Masters wrought them: And
in case immediate payment thereof was not made, I would make a formal seizure
of the said Cole-mines, and discharge all Persons whatsoever from working
thereof. And in case they would not cease, I would do my best (as by Law,
equity, and Reason I might) to sink the Keel, and break the Ginns that should
endeavor to work and carry away my Coals, seeing my Tenants could have no
Legal fair proceedings, either from Sir Arthur, or the Commissioners above;
and therefore as a Civil man, desired him to go to his Master Sir Arthur
Haslerig, or to Major Tolhurst, or whom else he pleased, and acquaint them with
so much, that so in a fair way I might have paid unto me without delay my said
Rent, and all the Arrears thereof since they wrought my Colliery, which is now
about two years: And he taking his horse that day, and riding off the ground;
At night the same day I repaired again to the said James Liddall your Steward,
accompanied with my Uncle, Master Ralph Rocksby, and my Brother Master Richard
Gray, and demanded his answer; which was, That he had been with Major Tolhurst,
who had authorized him to tell me, That he would pay me no Rent at all, but
that I must seek it where I could get it; and being denied my own, the
aforesaid Saturday night, I discharged all the workmen I could meet with, and
commanded them at their perils to cease to meddle in any kind with my
Cole-mines, without my express leave and consent.

And carrying a tender regard to the peace and welfare of my Native Country,
now invaded by robbers and strangers. And for avoiding as much as in me lay the
just occasion of raising any tumults that might seem to have the face of my
advantage to our public enemies (the aforesaid invadors) I was as sparing as
could be in doing of that which was necessary for me to do, in order for
regaining my own right and just inheritance, which has bin by force and
violence taken from me and my Tenants, and to this day as unjustly detained
from us both, without the least shadow or color of Law or Justice (as my true
friend and Counselor Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburn has fully proved in his
Epistle to four of the Commissioners for Compounding, sitting at Haberdashers
Hall at London, dated the 30 of July 1651, a Printed Coppie of which I herewith
send you for your serious perusal) and therefore with an Hatchet, I only cut
two of the Ropes that drew up the water; and the next day being Sunday, came
five men in the habit of Country men (and so calling themselves) with great
Cudgels in their hands, pretending they came to keep the States right; but yet
afterward the aforesaid Liddal, your chief Steward, and one Richard Gillary,
another of your inferior Stewards, or Overseers, told me, and some of my
friends, that they were Soldiers, and of the said Major Tolhurst own Company.
And further, the said Liddall told me, in the presence of my aforesaid Uncle
and Brother, That the said Major Tolhurst told him, that I must not strive with
him for the Colliery, unless I could bring thirty thousand men by force to take
it from him. And upon Monday after, being the 25 of August 1651, Ralph
Hinderson, Stephen Pattason, and others, were leading of my Coals, which by my
authority were discharged from leading thereof by my Father in Law Master
George Gray; and did all accordingly cease; but there being since an addition
of six Soldiers armed with Pistols and Swords, said to be of the said Major
Tolhursts own Company; but yet produced no Commission under any man's hand (but
absolutely denying that they have any such) but only act by the verbal (and
unwarrantable) order of the said Major, a man that has no power nor authority
at all to command them hither: And yet like men subject to no Law, Rule or
Government; by their wills, Swords and Pistols, they assume unto themselves a
power to set a Guard upon my Colepits both night and day (after I am violently
robbed of almost threescore head of my Cattle, and a great part of my Land of
Inheritance by Sir Arthur Haslerig and the Commissioners of Sequestration) and
threaten, beat, most shamefully abuse, nail up the doors, force quarters from,
and compel several of my friends and neighbors to yoke in their Horses and
Oxen into Wains and Carts, and to lead my Coals; nay, and have come to my self,
and have commanded, and violently hindered me to lead my own Corn, and would
produce unto me no written Commission or Order they had from any man so to do,
although I earnestly demanded it of them: Upon which I yesterday, being the
second of September present, repaired to Durham to Colonel Francis Wren, and
Master Thomas Dallivel, Commissioners for Sequestration for this County, and in
the presence of my said Father Gray, and his Son Master George Gray, acquainted
them herewith, and desired to know of them if the said Soldiers had their Order
for coming to the said Harraton, and using me as they do; and they both
averred they had none of theirs, nor they never heard any thing of it, until I
told them. In which regard, I have no other ground at all, but to look upon the
said pretended Soldiers (as a company of desolate persons, sturdy rogues,
thieves, and robbers) and as such most fit by the Civil Magistrate to be
apprehended, and clapped in Goal, there to be kept until they receive a Trial
for their lives, which I shall endeavor to do, to the utmost that Law will
enable me; but in the interim I desire you at your perils (unless they produce
you a Legal and written Commission, or order under some Hand or Hands legally
authorized thereunto, to Quarter upon you, and command you as they do) That you
no longer entertain them upon my ground, which Order I am sure of it must be
under two of the Commissioners hands of Sequestration, none else in this County
having any power to pretend to send Soldiers to me, by violence to keep my
estate from me, being neither Papist nor Delinquent; and I am sure of it, Sir
Arthur Haslerig at most is but one Commissioner (if that) and his Major
Tolhurst none at all. And therefore his written Warrant is no ways to be obeyed
by you; who are no way under his Jurisdiction, Put however, what written
Warrant is sent unto you from any hand whatever, I desire to see it, and to
take a Coppie of it. And I further advise you upon sight hereof, for your own
safety, That you repair to Sir Arthur Haselrig himself, and acquaint him with
all passages, and desire to know whether he will justify that he has given a
written Order to his Soldiers to come to Harraton, and to do as they do; and if
he say no: then do you desire him to send for them as prisoners, and severely
punish them according to Law and Justice, and all those that have so
unwarrantably sent them: And also that you repair to Major Tolhurst, and tell
him what is done, and know of him whether he sent them, or no, and will justify
it; and in default of satisfaction from him, repair to the said Comissioners,
and demand of them their pleasure in the thing, as also their Order to command
them away. And I further warn you; and every of you, without a written Order
from some Legal Magistrate or other; meddle nor make not with (upon any
verbal command from any power whatsoever) to digg any more of my Coals in
Harraton Colliery, to draw them, or any water out of my Pits, to throw them on
the banks, lead them to the Water side, or any other places whatsoever, to
carry any of them away by Keels, Lyters, Waines, Carts, or any other means
whatsoever, at your utmost peril of being apprehended by me, according to Law,
as Thieves and Robbers of me, of my goods and Chattels: And having all other
extremities exercised toward you, that the Law will afford me to inflict upon
you, or any of you.

And this I send you on purpose to forewarn you of your own danger, and to
leave you without the least excuse, both before God and man.

And in the presence of those whose names as witnesses are hereunto Subscribed,
I set my Hand at my own House at Harraton this third day of September 1651.
John Hedworth.
Witness
Richard Lilburn John Lilburn George Gray Ralph Gray.



