THE SPIRIT OF THE QUAKERS TRIED, According to that discovery it has made of
it self in their great Prophet, and Patriarch George Fox, In his Book Titled,
The great MYSTERY of the great WHORE, etc.

In an Epistle to the said QUAKERS, but especially to the honest hearted
amongst them.

Wherein the whole Evidence (except a very few things) does consist of matters
of fact in about 50 Instances obvious to every one's eyes, who can but read
English and compare one writing with another.

ALSO The Judgment and Sentence is pronounced by GEORGE FOX himself against
himself and party in the persons of his Adversaries.

By a Lover of Truth and Men.

For by thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall he
condemned.

Matt. 12.37. Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee.

Luc. 19.22. London, Printed for Maurice Atkins. 1672.

THE SPIRIT OF THE QUAKERS TRIED, According to the discovery it has made of it
self in their great Prophet, and Patriarch GEORGE FOX, in his Book Titled, The
great Mystery the great Whore, etc.
Beloved friends,
I Have of long time with much grief and sorrow of heart beheld and considered
your persons and principles; for whilst some of you excel in many things which
are in themselves good and laudable, you do by the circumstances wherein you
stand, and by other practices and Doctrines render your selves very
dishonorable and dangerous to Christian Religion. I am ready to acknowledge in
you a great deal of Temperance and moderation in the use of meat, drink,
apparel and other pleasures and ornaments; but I wish your insobriety, pride
and Arrogance in a high conceit of your selves and contempt of others, foolish
boastings and braggings were not as conspicuous: you are just and punctual in
bargaining; but are you free from making a prey upon your Neighbor's credit,
and taking up a slander against him? You say you have put away malice, envy and
hatred: but where shall we find more bitterness, reviling and reproachful
speeches than in your writings and discourses? You love the Brotherhood well
and are kind toward them: but you disown and condemn all, how virtuous and
devout soever, if in these times of the shining of your light, they subject not
themselves to the yoke of your conduct. You talk much of Christ the light: but
you seem at least to deny his person. Your affections are much on things in
Heaven within you: but not on things above, where Christ sits on the right
hand of God. You are much to be commended for your courage and patience: but
highly to be discommended for your superstition and gross ignorance, whereby
you expose your selves in great part to those labors and hardships you
undergo. Thus I could in many particulars set your vices and defects against
your virtues and seize: but it is not my design at this time to take a
full view of you. And indeed I have found it very fruitless to deal with you by
way of reason and Scripture; for your leading men have so ordered the matter,
that you will not give ear to the most demonstrative arguments that are against
you; and you accept of the weakest reason imaginable on your side. And the
reason is evident; for whilst you look upon your selves as lead by an
infallible spirit, (though it be indeed nothing but the fancy of George Fox, or
some other of your Teachers) you must needs reject the clearest light that God
has given to men or Angels, when it opposes your sentiments. And you are ready
with your answers of This is the wisdom of the world; This is natural
understanding that knows not the things of God; the knowledge from the letter
or tradition, and the like. If we will not be put off so, but tell you, we by
your own confession have the light within as well as you, and that light tells
us thus, and thus contrary to what you assert; O then you tell us, alas! you
have the light, but you have not been obedient to it; you are not come to plain
language; you are still in the customs of the world, respect of persons; etc.
and therefore you are not to be heeded. Thus you prove your selves to be in the
truth, and us to be in error, not by divine reason and holy Scripture, but by
the high opinion you have of yourselves, and your low opinion of others.

I will not therefore now deal with you so much by arguments drawn from reason
or Scripture, and depending purely upon the understanding and mind; but by such
arguments whose evidence depends mostly upon the outward senses. And I hope,
though you will not allow us to judge whether a mental proposition be true or
false, sense or nonsense; yet you will not deny us capable of determining
concerning matters of fact, that are before our eyes. That is to say; if you
will but allow us competent witnesses to prove that George Fox killed a man,
supposing we have seen him at noon day thrust him through the heart with a
sword; or, if not that, you will grant that we can read English or Greek, that
is, not understand English or Greek, but know A. from B. and sound them when we
find them together A B. and know that A B. is not Co, and the like: then upon
these concessions, we will undertake to prove that George Fox is a false
Prophet, a liar or Impostor. But if you will not allow us competent witnesses
against George Fox either in matters of reason or sense, then we beg but this
favor of you that you will please to believe your own eyes; and if you will
not do that, I hope you will excuse us from ever believing any thing that you
say or affirm, and from ever speaking or writing to you any more. But as for
those of you that have in the simplicity of their hearts by good words and fair
appearances been induced to walk in your path, (for to such chiefly do I
address my self) I make no question but they will see themselves mistaken. For
their sincerity will oblige them to give their own consciences some satisfying
account why they take George Fox for a true Prophet, and his Doctrine for
infallible as he pretends it is: but it will be impossible for them to give
themselves any such account against the evidence of their senses. As for those
of you that are much affected with, and have a good share in the glory and
honor which accrue unto them from this singular way of knowing all things, and
being better than all other men, I may say of you as Abraham to the rich man,
neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

But it is time for me now to begin to make good what I have undertaken, to
wit, To prove to your senses that George Fox (who is not only a great
Patriarch, but also in highest esteem among you) is a false Prophet, liar or
Impostor. And thus I go about it. If George Fox in matters of concernment not
only to men's bodies and estates but also to their souls and eternal estates,
affirm that to be true which to your own eyes is manifestly false, or that to
be false which is true, then he is what I have said: But G.F. does so oftener
than once, twice or thrice. Again, if G.F. does belly not an ordinary person, a
mortal man or Prince, but God Almighty, our Lord Jesus and the Holy Ghost, then
he is much more guilty. Moreover, if he deal thus not only through sloth or
pride or carelessness, but also through design and purpose, then he is an
Impostor with a witness. Lastly, if he does that which he judges and condemns
in others, and much more than that, then he is much more guilty of that
condemnation. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that
judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou
that judge do the same things. Romans 2.1.

I suppose you will not require it of me to bring proof that George Fox
prosesseth himself and is esteemed by you for a Prophet, seeing your principle
does not allow any to be of the ministry but him or her that has an immediate
revelation, or a Prophet: besides Solomon Eccles, In his Book called. The
Quakers Challenge, thus. Stand up Muggleton the sorcerer, whose mouth is full
of Cursing. Lies and Blasphemy; who call st thy last Book, A looking Glass for
George Fox, whose name thou are not worthy to take into thy mouth who is a
Prophet indeed, and has been faithful in the Lords business from the
beg^nning: It was said of Christ, That he was in the world, and the world was
made by him, and the world knew him not: So it may ^o said of this true
Prophet, whom John said, he war not; but thou will feel this Prophet one day as
heavy as a millstone upon thee, and although the world know him not, yet he is
known.
no mean man, has born so great a testimony to him, that even John Penniman has
impeacht it of Blasphemy. And G. Fox himself in his Book, entitled, The great
Mystery of the great Whore, (which I shall animadvert upon,) says, p. 82. How
can ye be ministers of the spirit, and not the Letter, if ye be not infallible?
And how can they but delude people that are not infallible, etc? p. 72. And
again, Is it not blasphemy for you to speak, and preach (sure there is the same
reason of writing) that which ye have not received from heaven? Here we see we
are to expect nothing from George Fox but what is infallible, otherwise he is a
Deceiver and a Blasphemer. And that we may be confident he will not impose,
upon us as others do, he tells us, p. 50. of that Book, You run into all
Absurdities that give your meaning to Scriptures. Will not this man be far from
falsifying Scripture, who will not so much as give his meaning to them? We
shall see that afterward.

But first I must show you how severe he is in taking notice of his Adversaries
misciting or defective citing of Scripture: For misciting Scripture see p. 7.
Where he brings in his Adversary saying, Whosoever says, he has no sin,
deceives himself, and he says, He perverteth the Scripture of John -- He
wrongs John's words, and puts He for We. I know not whether this change makes
any alteration in the sense; but it is fit we should be exact in these matters.
He charges his Adversary with perverting the Scripture upon the same account,
p. 37. and how often besides I know not. Nay, so wonderfully punctual is he in
the citing of Scripture that he will not have the pronoun Ye expressed, where
of necessity it must be understood: Seep: 188. And Christ did not say, destroy
ye this Temple, thou perverts his words. Methinks he is more nice than wise at
this turn. Now for defective citations see p. 75. and 29. They are both to the
same purpose. He cites the Priests saying, And the Holy Scripture is able to
make men wise unto salvation. He answers among other things; That ever the
ministers of Newcastle should say, that the Scriptures are able to make men
wise unto salvation, and leave out faith. It is to be acknowledged a defective
citation: but in the mean time (that I may note it by the way) neither does the
putting in of Faith make it full, except he add also which is in Christ Jesus.
(See 2 Timothy 3.15.) For there may be faith which is not in Christ; hence Christ
says, ( Joh. 14.1.) Ye believe in God, believe also in me. But George did not
care for that. Again, under the head of Scriptures corrupted by the Translators
he reckons Romans 1.19. where In the Greek Lat. and Eng. Copies (says he) it is
(speaking of the Gentiles) that which is known of God is manifest in them, or
made known in them, though some dare say, and do say, among them. The like
corruption he finds in 11 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are
perfect, in the Greek (says he) it is, in them that are perfect (...). And yet
it is doubful whether that is good English, though it is good Greek. He might
have spared the Translators such a small fault: but indeed among about 22.
places of Scripture there vindicated by this Grecian (with whom nothing is more
common than false English construction, and oftentimes nonsense,) from the
Translators corruption, 12 or 13. of them depend upon the rendering of this
particle (...) in. But this observation tended to the credit of their beloved
Doctrine of The light within. Once more for the credit of right citing
Scripture. In p. 64. he corrects his Adversary, for not speaking proper like
Scripture. And (says he) there is a proof to thee that the Quakers are sent of
God, who speak to thee of the Scriptures right as they are. I hope then he will
give us leave to conclude, they are not sent of God, if it be apparent they do
otherwise.

And now to the trial. 1. The first Scripture which I shall pitch upon as
misrecited, (in his language perverted and corrupted) shall be that in Joh.
1.9. the very foundation of all his Doctrine, which he repeats to nauseating,
often times Thrice, sometimes Four times in one paragraph. Thrice he has it or
a great part of it in 8. lines p. 21. And he cites it almost as often wrong as
right. The Scripture runs thus in our Translation: That was the true light
which lights every man that comes into the world. In the Greek it is coming,
(not that comes) and so if may refer to light as well as to man: but George
Fox p. 9. has it thus: And John said, Every man that comes into the world is
enlightened. And p. 10. which every man that comes into the world being
enlightened, that through it he might believe. And p. 24. which every man that
comes into the world is enlightened withal. See also p. 11.15. with 20 or 40
more. But now has he observed that exactness which he requires in others? may
there be no difference between lights and enlightneth? and must every man of
necessity be enlightened, because the light lights him? If there were no
difference, yet he is faulty according to his own law, for he has changed both
the phrase and the tense or time. But there is great difference in that case;
for example in another word, Romans 2.4. -- non knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance: but we cannot say that impenitent hearts of whom
the Apostle speaks, are led to repentance, for God is said sometimes to do
that, which is not effected, because he does all that is fit on his part for
the effecting it. So our Lord Christ says Matt. 5.15. Neither do men light a
candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick: and it gives light to
all that are in the house. And yet if a man shut his eyes or have very sore
eyes he shall not be enlightened. See also Luke 11.33, and 36.

2. The next shall be the 7th verse of the same Joh. 1. which he has relation
to in p. 13. (or else I know not where to find it,) where he answers thus:
Contrary to John's doctrine and Christ's, who says, The light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, is the true light, that men
through the light might believe; and in p. 10. cited but now, that through it
he might believe; notwithstanding if you take the pains to read it, you will
find it thus: that all men through him might believe; and read that and the
former verse, and you will perceive that him refers to John Baptist and not to
the light, as George Fox would have it. So that he does not only change the
word, but brings in thereby a diverse sense of his own. See p. 28. and many
other places.

3. The Third shall be that in 2 Cor. 4.6. which he cites almost as often as that
of Joh. 1.9. but seldom right as it is, but thus or the like: p. 11. Ans. When
as Paul said, that the light which shined in their hearts to give the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. If it be nonsense I cannot
help it. p. 21. he says -- which was the work of the true Apostles to bring
people to the light within, that shined in their hearts, to give, etc. See p.
41, 59. and 20. places more to the same purpose. Only in p. 59. when he had
cited the Scripture after his wonted false manner, attributing that to the
light, which the Text attributes to God, he says, Mark! he says, the light is
that which gives the knowledge, etc. What a strange degree of confidence must
this man be arrived at, that he should abuse his Reader with falsity and bid
him Mark it too! For the Apostle Paul has it thus: For God who commanded the
light to shine out of darkness has shined in our hearts to [give] the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ. But if he had
recited it right, it would then have appeared, not only that God is the giver
of light, and the light a gift, but also, that it is the light of knowledge,
and created; for God commanded the light to shine out of darkness by creating
it. See Genesis 1.3, 4. But George Fox likes none of these Doctrines, therefore it
was his Interest to pervert the Text. And because that Text Col. 3.10. seems to
have been corrupted by him upon the same account, that shall be

4. The next. And have put on the new man which is renewed in knowledge after
the image of him that created him. So says Paul; but George Fox ( p. 220.)
puts them in stead of him; and so the Saints must be the Antecedent to Them,
whereas the new man is the Antecedent to Him, and shows that the new man is
created, which George Fox is not willing to allow; for p. 10. he corrects his
Adversary for saying, The light is a creature; and I take it, he means by the
light and the new man the same thing. However this is, the alteration is
manifest of the words, and of the sense by reason thereof.

5. The fifth Scripture shall be that of Deuteronomy. 30.14. where I complain of
defect, p. 10. for there he makes mention indeed of the words of the 12th and
13th verses, but in the same Character with his own words, but then he changes
his Character, whereby he intimates that he cites the very Text, and says, But
the word is night in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 30. Moses says, But the word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it. To say
The word is nigh thee in thy heart, agrees pretty well with his Doctrine of the
light within: but to say, The word is in thy mouth and in thy heart, argues
that word there spoken of is indeed such a word as is wont to be in ones mouth,
that is, a word spoken; and that our Author G. F. is not willing to
acknowledge. So he says, p. 47. The word of faith is within, Romans 10. This is
manifest, that in citing this Scripture he leaves out of the middle that which
seems against him, and takes the former part and the latter part that seem to
be on his side. Compare this with what he condemns in his Adversaries. Now
because it follows immediately in the same paragraph of his Books, p. 10. that
Text in

6. Luke chapter 24. v. 5, 6. shall be the sixth Scripture wherein his
prevarication appears notorious. For he brings in the Priest saying, Christ was
not in his Disciples, when he said, I am the light of the world. And G.F.
corrects him by Christ, who says, I in you and you in me. Then he brings in
the Priest saying, They that will came to Justification must go to Christ's
grave without, etc. And answers him by citing Deuteronomy. 30. as I have said. And
then it follows. And the Angel said unto them that went to the grave without,
Why seek ye the living among the dead, he is risen; now the Angel's words run
thus: Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. So
G. F. leaves out, He is not here, out of the middle of the citation, for that
would have overthrown his opinion of Christ within and not without: for the
Angels would not say truth in saying, He is not here, if he was indeed there,
even within those that sought him.

7. The Seventh Scripture follows in the same paragraph. (So he has abused 3.
Texts of Scripture in 6. lines.) For it follows, after, He is risen, and the
Saints sits with him in heavenly places. (We must take no notice of the failure
in Syntax, for that is frequent.) Now Paul says Ephesians. 2.6. -- and made us sit
together in heavenly [places] in Christ Jesus. Now there may be a different
sense of sitting with Christ, and sitting in him; for when an Ambassador from
any State is honorably entertained and seated, the people of that State may be
said to be honorably entertained and to sit in him, because he represents
them; but scarcely to sit with him. But whether there be any difference or no
in the phrases, it is certain that G. F. charge the Translators with
corruption for putting with for in. See p. 373. Jud. 14. The reciting of this
Scripture in this manner is so frequent with him, that though he use it perhaps
20 times or more, yet not once (I think) as it is in Scripture. And here give
me leave to complain of him, that he deals like a deceitful Chapman, that would
not have his wares tried whether they be good or no, for he hides the
Touchstone, by using some words of Scripture putting them in a different
character, and saying, The Scripture says, or Christ says, or the Apostle
says, etc. but he names seldom the Book or Chapter, more seldom the verse;
(though he clamor upon his Adversaries for Chapter and verse,) and so he
imposes upon his Reader for Scripture what is no where to be found. These; as
I have in several particulars made it evident before your eyes, and shall in
many more.

8. The next shall be that in Joh. 17.5. which he often uses and always
abuses as far as I remember. Christ's words are these. And now O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the world was. But G. F. thus, p. 13. -- Christ who was glorified with
the Father before the world began. You will say perhaps his words and Christ's
are the same in sense: but does God give G. Fox his infallible spirit to
correct his son Christ's words? Can he speak better than Christ, or are these
two manners of speaking so much the same that they cannot be taken in a diverse
sense? Nay, Does not G. Fox take his phrase in a diverse sense from what Christ
intended by his? For it is manifest that Jesus prayed now to be glorified with
the glory, wherewith he was not at this time glorified when he spoke these
words; for who will pray for that which he enjoys? But God was glorious before
the world was, and could not possibly want it at this time, so as to pray for
it; therefore Jesus intends by the glory which he had with the Father before
the world was, the glory which the Father had given him in his decree before
the world was; but he had it not yet in possession. So Paul speaks of the grace
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began, (2 Timothy 1.9.) before
they had any actual Being; which should come unto them, and be brought unto
them at the revelation of Jesus Christ. See 1 Pet. 1.10, 13. And the Evangelist
tells us expressly Joh. 7.39. -- Jesus was not yet glorified, But it is evident
enough that G.F. means by his phrase to possess his Reader with an opinion that
that which he calls Christ, (which is not Jesus the Son of man) was actually
glorified before the world began. And this brings to my mind another phrase of
his, which he uses diverse times, 8. at least, as if it were Scripture, but is
so far from being Scripture that it will be very difficult for any man to make
less than a gross absurdity of it. And therefore I can scarce get leave of my
self to refer it to any phrase of holy Writ.

9. It runs thus p. 66. -- and so to the word Christ Jesus: him by whom the
world was made before it was made. Strange! that the world should be made
before it was made! I would fain know of him what that world was which was made
before it was made: but I despair of Information. But what can you or any man
that has not abandoned both his understanding and sense say in vindication of
this Prophet? Can you match this saying in the most impertinent Author, Papist
or Protestant?

10. A Tenth Scripture is that of Jude verse. 10. and 19. But what they know
naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. The 19. v.
thus. These be they that separate themselves, sensual, having not the spirit.
But how does our George read it? p. 2. and 196. And the Apostle says, What
they knew who are separate from the spirit, they knew naturally as brute
beasts, Jud. 10.19. Judge now whether Jude say as he says! But what is the
difference in sense? Jude speaks of notoriously ungodly men, who corrupted
themselves in natural things, as Sodom and Gomorrah; G.F. speaks of all men
whatsoever besides those that are inspired: Jude says, these men separate
themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit; and G. says, They are separate
from the spirit, and they that are such, what they know they know naturally as
bruit beasts. But what may be the design in rendering it thus? you may see he
opposes this Text to his Adversary asserting, that there is an infallible
Judgment which may be made from the Scripture without the spirit: and this Text
would not serve his purpose without thus corrupting it. Besides he cannot
endure that men should be said to know by nature any thing that is good,
therefore he takes this course to disparage all such knowledge. But you may
remember that I am not bound to give a reason why he perverts a Text, I am only
to show you that he does so.

11. Next I bring you to Romans 2.15. which he is pleased to cite: the passage is
this in his Book, p. II. Priest The Scripture plainly denies that conscience
can justify, though it may condemn. Answ. Which is contrary to plain Scripture,
where the Apostle says, Romans 2.15. Their consciences either accusing or
excusing? Who would think that G. Fox should have either so little wit or
conscience as to write in this manner? for the Scripture words are these; --
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while
accusing, or else excusing one another. The truth is, G. Fox was willing to
have this works of accusing and excusing attributed to the light, and therefore
he says by and by, And the light condemns which you call conscience: but
because it served his turn to attribute it to conscience, he did. Besides, the
Quakers used to say, they were out of the thoughts and the imaginations; and
upon that account it was not fit for him to recite the Scripture right, sure I
am he does it wrong.

12. Let us see now what he says of the Apostle James, for it would be strange
if he should escape without abuse. p. 2. He makes the Priest say, He that can
bridle his tongue is not a perfect man. Answ. Which is contrary to the Apostle
James, who says he is, and so thou art out of James's Doctrine. But where
James says so, I am to seek, if he cannot produce it, he belies the Apostle.
He says indeed Chapter 3.2. -- in many things we offend all. If any man offend not
in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. It
may be questioned whether every man that can bridle his tongue, does also not
offend in word. The same Apostle says, Chapter 1.26. If any man among you seem to
be religious and bridleth not his tongue but deceives his own heart. this
man's religion is vain. But I dare not say, that every one that offends in
word, his religion is vain.

13. G. Fox answers his Adversary thus: p. 9. Corrected by the Apostle, who
says, he works all in us and for us. I do not remember where the Apostle has
those words, I doubt G. Fox is fallible and herein mistaken. I Will count him so,
till I can find them. And I must say the like of that passage of his p. 15.
Priest, There is nothing in man to be spoken to but man. Answ. How then
ministered the Apostle to the spirit? I cannot find where the Apostle is said to
minister to the spirit.

14. The next I will note is in p. 9. thus: Priest. The Quakers are deceived
because they say, Christ is within them, kept down by something within them.
Ans. Corrected by the Apostle who says to the Saints, Christ is in you the
hope of glory, and he was pressed down as a Cart with sheaves. It Is manifest that
Christ is the Antecedent to He: but where is that spoken of Christ? The Prophet
Amos (not the Apostle) says in the name of the Lord, Chapter 2. v. 13. Behold, I
am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves. But it is
referred to the Lord or Jehovah that brought them out of the land of Egypt, v.
10. and not to Christ. But our Prophet George will not allow the Father and the
Son to be distinct, but all one, (See p. 99.)and therefore frequently referrs
that to Christ which is spoken only of God the Father.

15. So he does with that Text, 1 Cor. 15.28. which he does us the favor to
cite, Chap. and verse, and to put the words in Scripture Character too: for
thus he says, p. 343. The promise is to the seed, the seed is Christ, and
Christ all and in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. He Is very unhappy both in reciting words
and Texts, for the Apostle says thus: And when all things shall be subdued
unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all
things under him, that God(not Christ)may be all in all. He could not have done
a greater Injury to the Holy Spirit's words than thus to put Christ for God,
for it mades them altogether absurd; but whither will not the love of a false
opinion drive men?

16. Thus where the Scripture says -- and the word was God, G.F. says, p.
350. and 61. God is the word, Jo. 1.1. I would gladly know of you, my friends,
Whether the infallible spirit that leads G.F. into all truth, does not also
bring things to his remembrance? if it did at the time he wrote this, then he
sailed through wilful disobedience; if it did not, then G. F. is not
infallible, for here either his memory or his will failed him. And this he is
chargeable with, though we should suppose there were no difference in the
sense: but I conceive there is a difference; for though the Scripture says,
And the word was made [or was] flesh, yet no considerate man will say, Flesh is
the word, neither is it in it self true.

17. It seems to proceed from the same bitter root in him, that he perverts the
sense by so cutting short that Scripture. Romans 1.16. saying p. 160. -- And
immortality, not come to the light, through the power of God which is the
Gospel. And p. 4. And the Apostle says, It [the Gospel] is the power of God;
whereas the Apostle says indeed, I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for
it is the power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes, etc. which
is far another thing than to say simply, The Gospel is the power of God: for
what may not a man make of Scripture, if he will take to himself this kind of
license? Then may we say of the like phrase, 1 Cor. 1.18. The preaching of the
cross is foolishness; and foolishness is the power of God: for the preaching of
the cross is both.

18. And if it had not been for the confounding of the person of the Son with
the Father, I see no reason why he should say, p. 119. His father and he is
greater then all. For Christ says, Joh 10.29. My Father which gave them me
[speaking of the sheep] is greater then all. What would you say of your
Adversary that should deal thus with your writings, as G. Fox deals with Holy
Scriptures?

19. And he that dares thus to add and insert another person into the Text as
he has done in that now named, what marvel is it that he adds the name of a
person at all adventures, whether it be right or wrong? Thus does he p. 134. --
and so deny Christ the Lord that bought them. He had heard (it is like)formerly
that Text (2 Pet. 2.1.) so rendered by some or other, and therefore it must be
so, though Peter says only -- denying the Lord that bought them; which may
agree as well to God the Father, as to Christ his Son.

20. The two last Scriptures we noted, we found addition in them; here we have
substraction; which thought it might be pardoned in another man that appears
not to have any design in it, or that condemns not severely the like in
others, yet in him it cannot. If he will quote Scripture why not as it lies
plainly? especially when brevity does not constrain him to do otherwise? Thus
when he says p. 165 Christ is come, to whom every knee must how, and tongue
confess to the glory of God; why does he neither add the father to the term
God, nor insert, that Jesus Christ is Lord, as the Apostle does both? for he
says, And that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
glory of God the Father. But how the truth of this Scripture can consist with
their Doctrine that say, the Father and the Son are all one, I cannot conceive.

21. The 21th Scripture which he has notoriously and impudently added to, is
that in John, Chapter 15. v. 25. which according to John runs thus: But when the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, [even] the spirit
of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. But
according to George thus: Christ, says he, is in the Father, and the Father is
in him, and he will send them the spirit of truth the Comforter, that proceeds
from the Father and the Son. Now that it may appear most evidently that he
quotes this as Scripture and Christ's own words, I will produce a passage out
of the Epistle to G. Whitehead's Divinity of Christ subscribed by G.F. and John
Stubbs, where he uses the words in the letter of Scripture, saying also, The
Scripture says; and challenges his adversaries to give him Scripture in plain
words; Thus it is read.

But we do charge Danson, and his Brethren to make this good by Scripture in
plain words; -- For the Scripture says, The Father is in the Son, and the Son
is in the Father, and the holy Ghost proceeds from them. I beseech you friends,
consider what spirit lead G. F. when he wrote these words! What! Call and
clamor upon his Antagonist for Scripture in plain words, and then pretend to
give Reader Scripture and falsify it! Can you produce an Author that ever wrote
so inconsiderately? If this be not a plain addition to the words of Christ, I
pray tell me what is? It is now (says Daille of the right use of the Fathers)
the space of some Ages past, since the Eastern Church accused the Western of
having added [Pilioque, and the Son] in the Article (of the Nicene Creed)
touching the procession of the Holy Ghost. But the Pope and his Council were
never so impudent as to make that addition to the Scripture, as G. Fox has
done. See how upon occasion of an Inference (not asserting it to be the words
of Scripture) G. Whitehead pronounces the curse upon his Adversary John Newman
(Christ ascended, etc. p. 21, 22.) J. N. from Rev. 1.7. Those that pierced him
in his body of flesh, shall see that body visibly come again. G. W.'s Answ.
These are not the words of Scripture, but added; although to add or diminish be
forbidden under a penalty, Rev. 22.18, 19. Yet this man's presumption leads him
to incur that. What would G. W. have said to him if he had done a G. Fox has
done? Well! there is a righteous God that judges the heart, and tries the
reins, and is no respecter of persons. It Is true he does not quote the Chapter and
verse; but more to blame he, for if he had, we could soon have seen his
forgery, whereas now perhaps not one of a Thousand (that has read his Book) has
discovere it. Or if he can tell us where those words of his are to be found in
Scripture, he shall escape the Curse for addition to it, till then it lies upon
him.

22. The 22th instance of his negligence and fallibility in quoting Scripture
may be that place p. 71. of his Book, where he says, -- and Paul declares
himself ( take Paul's own words) not of Man, nor by man, but by the will of
God: now this citation might have passed current for Scripture though it is no
where found in this form, (for all I know) but that he so confidently calls
them Paul's own words, which is false, if they be not found together, and not
only apart.

23. The 23th this, p. 68. speaking of the Churches or Temples wherein God is
worshipped by some; says he, Is God worshipped in Temples made with hands? Is
not be worshipped in the spirit and in the truth? the different letter wherein
he puts it, intimates that he would have us take it for Scripture; and there
are some words like his in Joh. 4. and Acts 17. but in neither of those places
are either the same words or the same sense: but it is sufficient against him
that there are not the same words.

24. The 24th Scripture perverted is Joh. 7.38. He that believes on me, (says
Christ,) as the Scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of
living water: where his belly is plainly spoken of him that believes, but G.
Fox applies it to the light, Christ, saying p. 130. -- and believing in the
light Christ, out of whose belly flowed rivers of living matter. The light, the
light must be magnified by G. F. and the Scripture must be wrested to that
purpose, come on it what will!

25. The 25th instance of his fallibility or deceitfulness in the use of
Scripture is taken from p. 27. where he makes the Priest say, A true Church is
guilty of Injury. G. F. Answ. Contrary to the Scriptures, where the Apostle
says, the Church is the pillar and ground of truth, without spot or wrinkle or
blemish or any such thing. The Apostle says indeed Ephesians. 5.25 27 -- Christ also
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, -- that he might present it to
himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing. He
says, That it might and should, not that it is, as our G. reperesents it.

26. So he abuses us with a defective quotation of the 30th verse of the same
Ephesians. 5. which he has both in the 11. and 12th pages in the same manner, as in
diverse other places. The 11 p. thus: Priest. They are no Christians that does
not hold Christ absent from his Church, but Antichrists. (By the way, I believe
he wrongs his Adversaries in making them speak bad English.) Answ. Which is
contrary to the Scriptures, which say, they are flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone, and they are as nigh together as husband and wife. But the Apostle
thus: For we are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones. If he had
not left out the former clause, we are members of his body, the latter clause
which he takes, would not so well have served his purpose, and also have been
more easily understood: for we know it is ordinary for a member of a Body, or
for the head it self of a Body, which is an assembly, (as the word Ecclesia
(here rendered Church) signifies) to be in one Country, when the Body or
Society is at a far distance in another. But this was not so discoverable in
the Allegory of flesh and bones alone.

27. The 27th place shall show that our Author's memofulness or negligence as
fallible, rather more fallible than that of other men; which is a great
reflection upon his infallible spirit. Thus p. 152. he says, And the Apostle
said, the deep things of God was revealed by the spirit of God, (It Is a small
matter with him to make the Apostle speak bad English.) But the Apostle
speaks neither so nor so: but -- God has revealed them unto us by his
spirit, for the spirit searches all things, yea, the deep things of God: 1
Cor. 2.10. And v. 11. the Apostle says, But the natural man receives not the
things of the spirit of God: but G. Fox thus, p. 39. The natural man receives
not the things that be of God: he leaves out spirit, though for ought he knows,
there may be a vast difference between the things of God, and the things of the
spirit of God, as there is a vast difference between blasphemy against God,
which may be forgiven; and the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, which shall
not be forgiven unto men. Mat. 12.31.

28. And if G. F. were a man capable either of rendering or understanding
reason, I would ask him, why in using those words of Paul, Romans 14.9. he puts
in the term God in stead of Lord; for thus he says p. 99. -- who [Christ] both
died, and rose again, that he might be God both of the dead, and the living.
But the Apostle says, For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived
that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. So p. 17. Let the word of
God dwell in you richly: The Apostle has Christ. Col. 3.16. But this savours
of his willingness to have no distinction between God and Christ. For he says,
p. 142. Christ is not distinct from the Father.

29. And p. 160. by the Character he writes in, he gives us these words for
Seripture -- and so who is in Christ is a new creature; And old things pass
away. But the A postle says 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore if any man be in Christ he
is a new creature: old things are past away, behold, all things are become new.
The Apostle speaks of the new creation as a thing done; G. F. as a thing a
doing and not done; for that agreed better with his design in tha place.

30. But we have not yet done with the 2nd Epistle to the Corinthians where Chapter
2. v. 16. the Apostle says, To the one [that perish] we are the Savor of
death unto death; and to the other [the saved] the Savor of life unto life.
But G. F. (I suppose as he had heard it sometimes from some Priest) applies it
to the word, thus: For the word it self is immediate, for it is the Savor of
death to the death, and of life to the life; Thus when it is for the honor of
his phrase, the word must be put for the Apostles and Preachers of it.

31. The Apostle Paul 2 Timothy 3. prophesying of the wicked ones that should come
in the last days, says, p. 6. of this sort are they which creeps into houses,
and lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts, ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. But G. F. that
he may lay load upon all those Preachers that are not Quakers, says of suoh as
have got the good wonds, etc. who are reprobates concerning the faith, which
crept into houses before the Apostles decease; which have kept people always
learning, but never able to come to the know ledge of the truth, led away with
dibers lusts. Now the Apostle does not attribute to these false Teachers,
(which yet were bad enough) that they kept people always learning, etc. but
they led captive such as were so. He should give him without wrong to the holy
spirit in the holy Apostle.

32. And that our Prophet G. may seem to have some color for disparaging the
other Ministers upon the account of their humance learning, he says p. 70. So
all your tools ye have wrought withal since the Apostasy, has been taken out
of the stops of humane learning which is earthly; this proves ye are Apostates,
and the spirits gone out into the world. And Luke says, the tongues of the
Hebrew, Greek and Latin was set up a top of Christ by Pitale who crucified
him. But where Luke says so, he leaves us to ghess. I have found indeed that
Luke says Chapter 23.38. And a super scription also was written over him in
letters of Greek, and Latin and Hebrew; but I could never yet find Luke
saying, The tongues of the Hebrew, Greek and Latin was set up a top of Christ.
This came out of George's own brain, that is not over fraught with those
tongues I dare warrant you: but yet he will undertake to correct the
Translatours; and he never does it with greater advantage than in the rendering
of that passage of the Apostle to the.

33. Colossians, Chapter 1. v. 23. which we read thus: If ye continue in the faith
grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel, which
ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is under heaven:
The use of this last clause in G. Fox is this: p. 41. Priest. He dare boldly
assert that the Gospel is not first made known by the seeing within, but by
hearing tidings without, etc. G. Fox's Answ. Contrary to that which they call
their original, which says, the Gospel is preached in every creature. That
which is to my purpose chiefly is, that puts is for was; that it may be
accommodate to his Doctrine of the Gospel in these days and all days of the
world preached within them that never heard or saw a tittle of the Gospel
either by word or writing. Thus when our Lord said unto his Disciples ( Mar.
16.15.) Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, (in
is not there;) he bade them do that which was done already, and was always done
ever since there were men in the world. And them it would have been hand for
the Apostle Paul, to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named. Romans 15.20.
It seems G. F's Gospel of Christ is preached, where Christ is not named. This
excellent use does G. Fox make of his skill in the Orginal as they call it. But
more of that afterward.

34. But is it not pretty? that whilst G. F. charges the Translators with
corrupting the Scripture because they render en to in English and sometimes
with or among; that yet himself, when they have translated it in, should change
it into within; (as he changed it into with, which I observed before upon Ephesians.
2.) Thus p. 105. Now the Scriptures cannot lead into all truth, but it
testifies of that that does so. And if Christ be not within people; they are
reprobates: The Apostle and the Translators say; know you not your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? 2. Cor. 15.5. But G.
thinks he may boldly and to the Scripture when he does not alter the sense,
though he reproves it very sharply in others. As if in you could admit of no
other sense but within you. Let us see then whether the words of Christ will
always admit that sense. Mat. 20.26, 27. But it shall not be so within you, but
whosoever will be great within you, let him be your minister, and whosoever
will be chief within you, let him be your servant. Here if G. please to consult
that which they call the Greek, he will sind it en by min in you, and then we
must read it as I have done. And is not that excellent sense? let the impartial
judge. The like fault is G. F. guilty of in relation to 1 John 2.27. where the
Apostle speaks of the anointing which -- abides in you: but G. p. 79. -- the
Apostles brought the Saints then to the anointing within them: and a little
below in the same page, no one knows the eye of the soul, but who comes to the
light within.

35. But that charge will not lie against him for the term within in Luke
17.21. because he finds it in the Text: but it is rare with him to use any. Text
and not abuse it, therefore in stead of The kingdom of God, as it is in the
Text, he makes it go for the kingdom of heaven, p. 64. But that is a small
matter, and might be passed by, but he will not leave it so, for his
Adversaries do often press him with the many Scriptures, which speak of
Christ's being in Heaven, and consequently absent from the Saints on earth as
far as heaven is from earth: this Text now must be pressed for his service at
this turn, and must prove that Heaven is within men: Therefore he said p. 101.
And the Scriptures does witness heaven within. Is not this fair dealing, first
to change the Kingdom of God into he Kingdom of heaven, and then to leave out
Kingdom too, and put Heaven for the whole phrase? Who needs ever want Scripture
for any thing he has a mind to say, if he may abuse the words of Christ after
this manner? But if he or any of you think you can produce a Text that favors
him more than this, I will recall what I have writ on this points if not, pray
take notice of the grossest forgery.

Here I might bring in his uncouth use of those words in Isai. 8.20. as another
Instance: but because it is not very clear, that be quotes them for the, very
words of Isaiah I will only propose it, Isaiah says; To the law; ard^^^ke
testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. But G.F. thus p. 75. For Isaiah -- bid them come to the law and
the testimony; and you that do not speak according to that rule, it is because
you hate the light in you. Isaiah says, There is no light in them. G. says,
you hate the light in you. One would have though he should have had so much
respect to Scripture words, as not to have said the quite contrary to them.

36. The 36th Instance of perverting Scripture shall be that in p. 280. where
he has this passage; -- which [Scriptures] says, that the Holy Ghost moved in
them that gave forth Scriptures, which led them into all truth, and did not
say, the Holy Ghost moved in the Scriptures; but said The letter was dead, and
did not give life. But I am to seek for that Scripture. I find indeed the
Apostle Paul (speaking of Moses's ministration, not of the writings of the new
Covenant,) says 2 Cor. 3.6. -- the letter kills, but the spirit gives life:
but I think there is difference enough between The letter kills, and The
letter is dead; for who will fear to be killed by that which is dead? for that
which kills must have some activity, life or power; that which is dead has
none: and the letter and spirit are not opposed as the one dead, the other
living, but as the one killing, the other enlivening. This I say to show what a
perverse sense, and how contrary to the Scripture he has brought in, by
altering the words.

37. And as if he scorned to quote Scripture right, he says p. 170. And I will
slay you with the sword, the words of my mouth, says the Lamb, which words I
cannot find in Scripture, much less spoken by the Lamb: I find these words Rev.
2.16. -- and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth and Rev. 19.21.
-- the sword-which proceeded out of his mouth: but not the other. Here is false
quotation, but I know not what bad sense; therefore it is with him a small
fault, though it would be a great one in his Adversaries.

38. But my 38th Instance will discover both his forgery and vanity
sufficiently. For p. 98. he introduces his Adversary charging the Quakers,
that they publicly deny the resurrection of the dead body: to which among
other things he answers; Christ -- is the resurrection and the life both, and
thy dead body shall live with my dead body: this is Scripture, and they that
said the resurrection was past in the days of the Apostles, overthrew the faith
of some. In the first place I would know of any man what pertinency there is in
this quotation of those words that seem to be taken out of Isai. 26.19. Can any
man be more certain by it than he was before, of the Quakers acknowledging or
denying the resurrection of the dead body? or can any man tell by it, what the
Prophet Isaiah means by those words? which are not neither the same with G.
F's, but thus: Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise. So that besides the forgery, there is the greatest vanity and lightness
that I remember ever to have seen in citing of Scripture. As if he would
upbraid his adversaries with their respect to Scripture, This is Scripture! He
might as well have quoted, Abraham begot Isaac, and have concluded, This is
Scripture.

39. And whence it is, except from his carelessness and height, I know not,
that p. 279. he read thus in a Scripture letter: Ans. If Christ be not in you,
the body is dead; in contradiction to the Scripture which says (Romans 8.10. And
if Christ be in you the body is dead -- But if it must be imputed to the
Printer; so he may be excused: but till that appear, not.

40. And if he were not delighted with adding or detracting from Scripture at
his pleasure, why should he not quote Christ's words as they are, Mat. 5.37.
But let your communication be yea, yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than
these comes of evil? But G.F. thus, p. 178. He [Christ] says, in all your
communication let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay; for whatsoever is
contrary is evil. Why not here as he has it afterward, whatsoever is more, is
evil? except it were that he would confound his Reader, and so make him believe
that the Quakers are very obedient to Christ's command and perfect men, though
they in their communication call God to witness, and assert things in the
presence of God, and the like phrases, which other Christians take to be Oaths,
and dare not use them in that manner: at least they are more than yea and nay,
which Christ says, comes of evil: but G. only, whatsoever is contrary is
evil; as if all that is more must needs be contrary.

41. And where to find that clause which he gives us for Scripture p. 250. I
know not. He brings in the Priest saying, Sin is in the Saints for their
humiliation. His Ans. Contrary to the Scripture which says, Christ is their
humiliation. And this he has diverse times as I remember: but I take it for
Scripture of his own making.

42. There he makes Scripture, here he marr's it most egregiously. For p. 47.
he says; And says the Apostle, God is in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself; where he puts is for was. (Sec 2 Cor. 5.) the present for the past
time. For you must know that their opinion is, as one of their great Authors
expresses it, that God was in Christ reconciling men to himself ever since the
fall in all ages, both before and since Christ suffered in the outward; and
consequently the verb was does not signify any thing past but what is also now
present and ever will be, as it always was. By this means it may as truly be
said, that God is in G.F. reconciling the world to himself, as that god was in
Jesus, reconciling, etc. forasmuch, as Christ is (so they would) as truly and
properly (perhaps equally; See p. 67.) in G.F. as he was in Jesus. But he has
not yet done abusing this Scripture, for p. 250. he says, God can do what he
will, who was in Christ reconciling himself to the world. Is not this a large
liberty that he takes, to say the quite contrary to Scripture and to his own
friends? for says that Author of theirs, -- the Scripture says not, When we
were enemies God was reconciled to us; but -- when we were enemies we were
reconciled to God. But may not G. F. say what him pleases? for he speaks by an
infallible spirit.

43 p. 100. He introduces the Priest saying: Nor is it an essential
in-dwelling of the divine nature in Gods people,etc.

His Answ. Does not the Apostle say, the divine nature the Saints was made
partekers of? But where does any Apostle say so? Peter says, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Whereby are given to us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these
you might be partakers of the divine nature, he does not say, They were [was]
made partakers of the divine nature, but They might be, which may relate to the
time to come after the day of Judgment, and not to the present time. Hewever he
affirms that which is false concerning the Apostle.

44. The 44th. Instance shall be that in Heb 10.26, 27. which he quotes thus,
p. 339. And be that sins after he has received the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, Heb. 10.27. But
the Scripture says, For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the
knowledge of the truth, etc. where it is evident enough that the stress of this
Text lies in the term wilfully which G. F. is plesed to leave quite out; for so
it agrees better with his Doctrine of perfection; and the Scripture must be
made to speak to his mind, though it be false or nonsense. To let pass other
differences between him and the Text.

45. The next Instance is rather of his ignorance and idleness in the use of
Scripture than of his corrupting it by misrecital; for p. 337. against his
Adversary, that salth, that they and the Papists and Jesuits do agree all
together that the Scripture is the word of God, etc. he says -- the Minisrers
of the word calls the Scripture a Declaration, as ye may read Luke 1. and ye do
not agree with them that set forth the Acts, that called it a Treatise, Acts 1.
-- and ye do not agree with John. Rev. 22 who says, the words; nor with Moses,
nor God, who spoke all these words, Exodus 20. In the beginning was the word,
and the word is God, and the word lives and abides for ever: but the
Scripture is words, and the Scripture cannot be broken. p. 337. I suppose he
has this distinction between the word and words above 20 times in his Book. But
if he would have looked upon his Greek Testament, (wherein he pretends to such
skill, that he often corrects the Translators) he might have found that that
very word which they translate Treatise, Act. 1.1. is (...) Logon, which is the
same which in Jo. 1.1. is translated Word, so that that very Text which he
produces against the Scripture it is being called word is a plain Text for it:
and the. Translators might justly and with great reason have translated thus:
The former word have I made, etc. and then Scripture would have been called in
English word, as it is in Greek So he says p. 68. they [the Scripture] are not
called the written word but words; and yet his Greek Testament (if he have one)
which I much doubt) would have informed him that Scripture is called the word
written, 1 Cor. 15.54. where the English read -- the saying that is written;
but in Greek it is (...) ho logos ho gegrammenos; the word written: So that his
distinction. that he cracks so much of is come to nothing. But we have little
reason to expect that he that is so intolerably unfaithful in quoting the
English, should any way help it by the Greek, which I shall show that (for all
his arrogant pretenses) he does not at all understand.

46. The A postle Paul 1 Cor. 14.31. For ye may all prophecy one by one, that
all may, learn and all may be comforted. But G. F. -- practice and Doctrine of
the Apostles in the true church which said, let all speak one by one. Thus he
changes prophesy into speak, as if all speaking were prophesying.

47. The 47th particular shall be that of-womens speaking in the Church, which
the Apostle disallows in the same 14th Chapterv. 34, 35. in as plain and express
words as can well be spoken, saying, Let your women keep silence in the
Chruches, for it is not permitted unto them to speak; but they are commanded to
be under obedience, as also says the Law. And if they will learn any thing,
let them ask their bus bands at home: for it is a shame for women to speak in
the Church. Here if the Apostle do not command silence to women by sex, in
those cases wherein he allows men by sex to speak, I understand nothing tht's
written. But G. F.p. 386. (speaking of the woman that is forbid to speak in the
Church) says -- now the woman here has a Husband to ask at home, and not
usurp authority over the man, but Christ in the male as in the female, who
redeems from under the Law, and makes free from the Law, that man may speak,
etc. Here we may perceive, he allows women as well as men to speak in the
Church, and indeed your practice shows that women are not in any case excluded
from speaking, where it is permitted to men. Also we may perceive that by the
husband that is to be asked at home he means Christ. Now if we may take liberty
to expound Scripture after this manner, I count it utterly impossible to prove
any truth by Scripture: and then we may as well deny Scripture as affirm it. It
will be a nose of wax that may be turned which way we please. I do not in this
particular charge G. F. with misrecital of, adding or diminishing from
Scripture words, because he neither quotes the place, nor puts the words in
Scripture Character, as he does in the other instances: but the exposition
which he gives of it is so gross and absurd, that it may well be reckoned among
his abuses of Scripture. Besides it seems to be built upon a mis-reading of
Husband for Husbands, because Christ, who is but one, is made the Husbands that
must be asked at home. So one of your Authors says, But what husbands have
widows to learn of but Christ? And was not Christ the Husband of Philips 4
danghters? And may not they that learn of their husbands speak then?

48. The 48th Instance of his abusing Scripture shall be that great doctrine of
yours of not calling men Master, and thus he says, p. 43. Priest. Why may they
not be called Master? Answ. It is his master that teaches him to be called of
men Master, that is gone out of the truth; but Christ said' Be not of men
called Master, and woe be to them that are, Matt. 23. Thus for G. Where I
observe first, that he puts in here of men into the Text, as he does in 20 more
places besides. But then 2dly, I do not find Christ ( Matt. 23.) saying, woe be
to them that are called Master; that seems to be added by G. F. True indeed
Christ says: But be not ye called Rabbi; for one is your master, even Christ,
and all ye are brethren. And call no man your Father upon the earth: for one is
your father, which is in Heaven. Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your
Mester, even Christ. Now I will take the liberty to argue a little: because the
Text seems to be so plain on your side. An first let me tell you that you your
selves do restrain this Text from universally excluding all men from being
called Master, whilst you allow your servants to call you masters, and your
children to call you Fathers. If your servants may call you our Masters or my
master, because you are their masters; (which exception is not in the Text:)
why may not another man call you masters, because you have servants, and are
masters? When I call a man master, I do not call him so because he is my
master, (perhaps he is my servant,) but because he has a servant and is a
master. Now does Christ forbid that any man should be called master, if indeed
he be a master? The Apostles, that understood Christ's precept as well as G. F.
call the Colossians, Masters, Co. 4.1. and Fathers, Col. 3.21. Also the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 6.9, and 4. And Stephen a man full of faith and power says to
the Council of the Jews, Men, brethren, and Fathers, Act. 7.2. They were not
his Fathers, but they were Fathers, and therefore he calls them so. And why may
I not as well call him, Master, that is not my Master, as call him servant,
that is not my servant? 2. Let me tell you that there are diverse words in the
Greek Testament which are by our Translators rendered Master, which not
withstanding have different meanings and acceptations. Thus we find (...), all
rendered Master. But that which is used by Christ in this Text, Mat. 23.10. is
(...), Katheegeetees, which signifies (as the learned tell us) a leader of the
way or a Guide: but as for the word (...), Kyrios, which the Apostle Paul
uses, when he writes to the Colossians and Ephesians, and is translated in
Scripture sometimes Master, sometimes Sir, most often Lord, we find that the
Apostles both singularly and plurally suffered themselves to be called by it.
Thus in the singular number the Greeks that came up to worship at the Feast,
desired Philip saying, Kyrie, Sir, we would see Jesus. Joh. 12.21. And in the
plural number the Jayler came trembling, and fell down before Paul and Silas,
and brought them out and said, Kyrioi, Sirs, [or Masters,] what must I do to be
saved? if Sirs or Masters had been a term offensive to the Apostles, would the
Jayler in this case have called them so? or if they had disallowed it, would
not the holy writer have intimated so much unto us? especially considering that
Christ's precept is given to his Disciples, Be not ye called Masters, whereby
they seem to be obliged to reprove those that do so. But the example of that
good Convert Mary Magdalene is in this case beyond all exception, and proves
that Holy persons used to call Master, not only those that were known, but
strangers, and that they no precept of Christ in so doing; except we will say
(which I abhor to think) that Jesus himself suffered her in his presence to
sin without reproving her: for she supposing him to be the Gardener, says unto
him, Kyrie, Sir or Master, if you have born him hence, etc. For in her
intention, she called a stranger, and him no great person, a Gardener, Master;
and that in the presence and hearing of her Lord and Master Jesus Christ.

Having made it manifest to your senses by a multitude of instances, that G. F.
is not that true prophet you take him for; but the most notorious perverter of
Scripture that any of you can name unto me, I hope you will give some
attendance to what I have argued upon this point; though it be somewhat more
than I undertook.

49. In the next place I do not find those words in Scripture which he uses
for Scripture p. 249. when he says, -- God justified [Job] and said, Job did
not sin with his mouth: the Scripture says, In all this did not Job sin with
his lips: but that is far from not finning at all with his mouth; for a man may
in this cafe keep himself from sinning with his mouth, and in that case be
guilty of sin.

The 50th and last instance shall be that in the latter end of his Book,
wherein his Ignorance, Arrogance and Imposture do manifestly appear. Marvel not
that I speak so plainly, for the matter is very plain: His Ignorance and
Arrogance appear in that he pretends to understand Greek, and to correct the
Translators, when he does not understand it in the least: his Imposture, in
that he labors to persuade his Reader of that which is notoriously false. Thus
it is p. 373 under the title of Several Scriptures corrupted by the Translators,

He says, Cor. 15.31. "In our English copies it is, I protest by your
rejoicing, etc. Now I protest is added, for there is nothing for it in the
Greek, (...) So far G.F. Now that he is ignorant of the Greek tongue is
manifest, in that he should have given us that Greek which the Translators
render I protest by your rejoicing, that so it might have appeared, there was
nothing for I protest: but in stead of that he gives us the Greek Kath emeran
apothnesco, which signifies I die daily. And the reason of his mistake seems
clearly to have been this: The verse in Greek begins with those words that he
has set down, but in English it begins with I protest by your rejoicing, and he
did not understand so much Greek as to distinguish the one clause from the
other. And then the falsity will appear to any man that has but read his Greek
Grammar, and will apply it to this case, for that which they render I protest
by your rejoicing, is n Greek (...), ne ten humeteran cauchesin, where the
particle ne is rendered I protest by, for humeteran cauchesin is your
rejoicing. Now my Greek Grammar (which is the common one, and Printed 1629, and
made I suppose long before G. F. was born,) says that (...) ma, and (...) ne
are Adverbs of swearing. And Scapula's Lexicon says, (...)is a particle of
granting and affirming and with an oath. The Grammar gives for example, (...),
ita est per Jovem, so it is by Jupiter. Neither may any one excuse him by
saying, that ne signifies by and not I protest, for ne being a particle that
imports swearing, and by is sometimes used when there is no swearning, it seems
to have been necessary for the Translators, to put in I protest, or some other
word equivalent, or else they had not fully expressed the full Import of the
Apostles words. But whether they have translated well or ill, it is certain that
ne is in the Text, which they have so translated, and therefore it is false that
there is nothing in the Text for, I protest. This puts me in mind of what he
says p. 117. -- it is no where said that the Apostle swore: as if every one
that swears must say I swear by God, or the like, or else he does not swear:
that would be a notable way to excuse many thoustands of Oaths that are sworn
by profane men every day. Now I would not have you think that I can produce no
more Instances of this man's failure in quoting Scripture, for I can more, and
yet I suppose I have not read above half that Book whence I have collected
these. For in truth it is a burden to me to read so many Tautologies and
Repetitions, so much nonsense and bad English, so many Contradictions and
Absurdities, etc. If you produce any man that has wrote a Book this 500 years,
wherein you can find so many or half so many false quotations of Scripture as I
have showed you in G.F.'s Book, you will somewhat lessen then wonder, and make
it appear that he is not an unparalled perverter of Scripture, but still one
of the greatest that the world ever saw. Surely those that are ingenuous among
you will blush when you read what I have written; for you are not concerned in
him only as one of your party, but as one and the chief one of your Ministers
and leaders, and not only so, but as in one that was of the first, if not the
very first that came forth in your spirit and way, one of greatest authority
among you, so great that some of you are offended to behold it; one that writes
in your behalf, and professes to give answer in this one Book to above one
hundred Books and papers of your Adversaries. So that his faults are in some
degree imputable to you, especially if being warned, you do not declare against
them, and disown both him and them.

Neither are these things that I object against him matters whose proof and
evidence depend upon any curious arguments or even logical Demonstrations, but
upon the Demonstration of sense; for the Question is, How read thou? Does
the Scripture, God, Christ, the Apostles and divinely inspired writers say
those words, that G.F. charges them with? If not, as I have showed to your eyes
they do not, then I have proved what I undertook, viz. that G. Fox is not only,
not infallible, but a false prophet, a liar or Impostor, and that in matters
which concern the most holy God and his Son, and the holy Apostles and writers.
If I have proved also to your eyes, that he passes severe censures upon others
for far less crimes than himself is guilty of in the same kind; then ought ye
to condemn him out of his own mouth. Moreover if according to your principle,
(which forbids all swearing,) those of you that affirm falsely are to be reputed
as perjured persons, then G. F. is highly liable to be so reputed. And if ye
being now called as his Peers, and as it were a numerous Jury to try and judge
the cause of G. F. whether he be guilty or not guilty of those crimes which I
have set before your eyes, if ye (I say) shall not find and declare him guilty,
why shall not you also be accounted for perjured persons? The evidence is not
only as clear, as that Twice two are four; (for G. F. has denied as plain a
proposition as that, namely, that twice one are not two, but all one,) but as
clear as that one Egg is not two Eggs, a Horse not a Cow, or that THE is not
AND, etc.

And now that I have brought such undeniable evidence against him in obvious
matters of fact, I will take the boldness to tell you, that it is manifest also
to any common understanding, that F. G. neither knows the meaning of the words
he writes, nor considers them; to such a high conceit of himself is he arrived.
Who that either knew or cared what he said, would have given out for Scripture
such a plain absurdity as that in the 9th Instance -- by whom the world was
made, before it was made? Suppose he had reference to that in Joh. 1.3. -- and
without him was not any thing made that was made. Would any man but he have
rendered it as he has done? What Sottishness? what pride and folly would not
you impute to another that should so do? If he had known the meaning of the
word infallible, would he have said How can they but delude people that are not
infallible? As if there were no difference between, To fail, and, To be not
infallible. Who but he would have said it was contrary to Christ's words, to
say, That the Son of Mary, God man, is absent from his Church? Who that knew
what he said, would have urged, that Bunyan is deceived, who said he [Christ]
is Distinct from the Saints, p. 16, and p. 293. that the Son is not distinct
from the Father? Who that knew the meaning of words would contend against him
that said, The soul is not infinite in it self, but a creature, and have
asserted that it is -- infinite it self, -- inmortal and infinite. p. 29. and
p. 68. Is not that [the Soul] of his being? and p. 90. Is not the soul without
beginning coming from God, etc. and p. 273. -- it is not horrid blasphemy to
say the soul is a part of God, for it came out of him, etc. Who that knew what
he said, or whereof he affirmed would have reasoned thus, ( p. 325.) If the
seed of Israel be men, then by thy account the seed of Israel is the seed of
the serpent, for they are men? His Adversary charge him that he professed
equality with God: and he answers as if he did grant that some do witness
equality with God, only he did not say it of G. Fox. See p. 127. If he had
known the sense of the word carnal, would he have said of the Bells, p. 30. If
they be not carnal, then they are spiritual? Who but G. F. would have said, It
was contrary to the Apostle's Doctrine to assert, The Enjoyment of immortality
is not till they have put off the body? p. 40. And p. 55. he says, -- They
that are not worshipping him [Christ] in them, are worshipping men, Devils or
Angels. But he never play's the Critic with greater glory than when he meets
with the word humane spoken of Christ's nature, for then he answers, where does
the Scripture speak of humane, the word humane? where is it written? tell us
that we may search for it. Now we do not deny that Christ according to the
flesh was of Abraham, but not the word humane. And Christ's nature is not
humane, which is earthly, for that is the first Adam. And he is so pleased with
this Criticism, that he has it over and over, again and again. O learned
Observation! and yet we find the word (...) anthropinos (which all our Lexicons
and Dictionaries tell us signifies in Latin humanus, humane,) no less than
Seven times in the Epistles of the New Testament, and once ( James 3.7.) it is
joined with (...) nature, humane nature, and 1 Cor. 2.4. it is rendered man's,
which indeed is the plain English of it, for humane is rather Latin. What is
then the humane nature of Christ, but the man's nature of the man Christ Jesus?
And if Christ be indeed a man, must he not of necessity have the nature of a
man, or a humane nature? Behold! This man never betrays his folly more, than
when he pretends most to learning. Thus you may see that your difference from
others is grounded much upon words and phrases misunderstood. If G. F. had
understood Greek, (as he highly pretends) or Latin, nay or good English, he
would never have run into many of those absurdities he is guilty of.

Now I should conclude and leave what I have written to your serious
consideration; and I doubt not but it will have a diverse reception among you.
For there are some among you (as I hear) that are already grieved at G. F. and
thinks he takes too much upon him. There are others, I persuade my self, that
have so high an opinion of the Doctrine of the Light, your great Fundamental,
and conceive they are so certain of that, and have found so much benefit
thereby, that they are ready to say, Though an Angel from heaven should preach
any other Doctrine than that which G. F. has preached and they received, they
could not give ear to it. To such I say. First, that the evidence I have
brought of G. F. his failing and falsity is as clear and full as if I had
brought miracles to confirm it; for the evidence of miracles depends upon the
certainty of our faculties and senses, and such certainty we have in this case.
2ndly, I appeal to the light in every one of you, whether he is not guilty
himself, in a much higher degree, of such things as he condemns in others.
3dly, I desire you to consider, that this principle of the light in every man,
which you so much boast in, is the principle of all Protestants, however you
have entertained it under new names, as that which you were not aware of
before; and have extended it farther than it will reach. 1. That it is the
principle of all Protestants is evident from the dissent from the Church of
Rome; the Church of R. pretended to be the infallible guide of all men in
matters of Religion: No, says the Protestant, Every man is to judge for
himself, to be satisfied in his own mind, to try the spirits whether they be of
God, to prove all things and hold fast that which is good, and not to pin his
faith upon any man or Church's sleeve. And that they may so do, God has (say
they) endued every man with such a light of common and certain principles
written in every man's heart, that if a prophet should come and give them a sign
or a wonder to draw them away from the observance of that light and those
principles, they ought not to hearken to the words of that prophet (See Deuteronomy.
13.1, 2, 3.) Moreover they say that God has promised his holy spirit to them
that humbly implore it in the obedience of that light which God has already
afforded. To this purpose they quote those words of Christ, If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, etc. Joh. 7.17.
2ly, That you have entertained it under new names, appears from the contention
between you and others, whether God have given this light to men by nature,
consequently whether it is a natural, light or a divine light, etc. to which
purpose your adversaries quote Romans 2.14, 15. For when the Gentiles that have
not the law do by nature the things contained in the law, these having not the
law are a law unto themselves, which show the work of the law written in their
hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean
while accusing or else excusing one another. You urgo Joh. 1.9. to prove it is
a divine light, which Christ the true light lights every man withal, that
comes into the world. Is not the difference now between you and others about
words and names? for whether God has given it unto men by nature or not, it is
of God in respect of it is proceeding from God and tending to him; for God is as
truly the Author of the good gifts that come unto men by nature as of other
gifts; and what reason can there be, why that should not be said to be natural,
which agrees to every Individual of the same kind, as you say the light does?
for G. F. says p. 20. -- a blind man and an Infant is enlightened with the
light of Christ -- and where there is life in an Infant there is light. And the
Apostel says -- The Gentiles do by nature, etc. and -- are a law to
themselves. Thus and eminent preacher in a great Assembly of late upon that
Text. And so far the Quakers are in the right, if they understand themselves,
and mean no more by it, when they say that every man has light within him,
than this; That every man has naturally the notions of good and evil within
him, which in plain cases of good and evil, right and wrong, will tell him what
he ought to do, and what he ought to avoid, by which he ought to be directed,
and that his conscience will acquit and excuse him if he do the one, and accuse
and condemn him if he do the other. Thus far he. And this helps me to show in
the 3rd place that you extend the Doctrine of the light in every man farthor
than you ought; for it is not to be extended to all cased whatsoever, as if
every man that attends to the light in him; did certainly know what is good,
what is evil, right or wrong in every case, for many cases are every
difficult, and even good men do commontly differ in their Judgment concerning
their. So we see that among the Saints at Rome, to whom Paul wrote, One (faith
he) believes that he may eat all things: another who is weak, eats herbs.
One man esteems one dya above another: another esteems every day alike.
Romans 14.2, 5. And the Apostle does not condemn them for judging thus diversely,
but teaches them how to behave themselves under this diversity. And I appeal
to the Conscience of very one of you who has not enslaved his Judgment to the
Judgment of your Ministers and Elders, whether in diverse cases which come
before in your Judicatories, you are not of another mind before you hear the
Judgment of those your Elders, and sometimes afterward also? and whether you do
verily believe that in all cases that have been decided by you, every
particular person would have been of the same mind being alone, as the Society
was of in their determination? Nay do you not sometimes find your selves
aggrieved at the Judgment of men? and are you not forced sometimes to set up
the Judgment of a part or of the Elder, against the Judgment of another part of
the people? If you are; then how is the light in every one of you extended to
every particular case? or is the light contrary to it self in this and that man
or number of men? And where is the Infallibility you speak of in particular
persons, in all cases? If you consider this well, I am persuaded you will
perceive that the light in every man, (especially in those whose Judgments have
been prepossed with false notions, (as many of you have been before you were
Quakers) does not teach him all things whatsoever, but all things that are
necessary for him to know in order to a holy trust in God, and sincere
obedience in the general course of his life. Besides, Does not the light in
every man teach him to make use of such helps and assistances, as God has
afforded him? And does not the Apostle Paul say -- whatsoever things were
written aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope? Romans 15.4. And the Apostle John --
These [things] are written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his name, Joh 20. 31.
Now supposing the light in every man would teach him every particular thing, it
is always to be understood, if he be obedients to what he knows and diligent in
the use of those means God has afforded him, of which we find the holy
Scriptures are very great means: and perhaps he has been negligent in the use
of these; indeed who can think any less of you, who have suffered a Book to be
set out in your names about 12 years ago, wherein I have showed you about
fifty false quorations, (not only false Interpretations or meanings) besides
nonsense and other faults, and yet I am apt to think, that scarce one in 500
of you that have read that Book, have observed any such falsities. And must we
believe that God will still give you a light actually teaching you all things
whatever, how negligent soever you have been or are in the following of that he
has given you? Must God be bound with his divine light and Inspiration to
supply the defects of you Idleness and pride? For when other men count it great
mercy and favor in God, that he is pleased through the vilest means that may
be, and through their earnest Study and diligence to grant them the knowledge
of his will, inlightning their minds by his holy Spirit; you must have it, like
the Angels that always behold his face, by immediate Revelation, and without
labor and Industry.

So now my friends, I deny not that there is a light in every man, which he is
obliged under pain of the displeasure of the Almighty diligently to eye and
follow; that so doing it will lead him by degrees into all necessary truth, and
at length to eternal life. I deny not but some of you have received and done
much good by following this light: but I must say again, and that with great
sorrow of heart, that your preachers, especially G. F. have greatly mistaken
both the Teachings of and the Obedience to the Lights that your zeal been in
great part, not according to knowledge; that you lay great snares in your onw
way, by binding your selves to those things, to which God has not bound you;
that in stead of worshipping God in spirit and truth, you require the
observation of ceremonies, things in themselves neither good nor evil; such are
your not putting off the hat in Salutations, not saying you but thou to a
single person, not calling him Master that is a Master, and the like, which
your negative precepts no man in the world is one jot the better for, and your
are the worse. But above all, your allegorical way of interpreting Scripture
tends utterly to make it void and of no use, and consequently to the ruin and
overthrow of all Christian Religion.

Now I doubt not but there will be found among you more then one Solomon
Eccles, whose blood will boil within him and stir him up to the vindication of
this great Prophet: and I can easily persuade my self that there is scarce any
one, of you, that at least has at any time wrote any thing in your cause, but
he or she will think him or herself as soon they read the Title Page, able to
give a confuting answer to all that can be said against so worthy a person: but
I should think that as none of you is so able, so none should be more provoked
to defend him than your late Apologist William Pen, who from Jenner's relation
did observe, that the only blasphemy was against G. Fox, in speaking evilly of
the Lord's servant. (p. 170. of that Apol.) If he be moved to engage in it, I
only beg of him that he would first be satisfied in his own conscience and
light concerning that underta king: and if he can do that, I shall ever after
have a better opinion of the Popish writers that engage in defense of
Transubstantiation.

Here I easily foresee, one substantial Objection against me and Defense of
George will be, that I was ashamed of my name, and durst not subscribe it to
the charge. Now I am almost ready to grant the last part of the Objection, for
I have some fear upon me on that acount, and my reasons for it are such as
these. 1. There are some of your writers, that make it a great part of their
answers to Books, the reproaching of the Author, and they are very Rhetorical
in that point, and truly I desire rather a pertinent answer, and am not willing
to put into your hands an occasion for an impertinent one. If you had my name,
then it must be considered what party I am of, whether an Episcopalian,
Prechyterian, Independent, etc. and accordingly all that is odious or so
reputed either in the Doctrine or practice of the whole party or any particular
person thereof must all be raked up against me, and serve for a very plausible
Answer. Or if I should chance to be an old man of sixty six, like your
Adversary Jenner; that would help, (as it does against him) to render me doting
at every turn, and be matter for a good part of an eighteen pence Apology. Or
if I have been a Brasier heretofore, or a Tailor, the world must be made to
know what a pitiful mean fellow I am, and must be told my name with Tinker or
Tailor at the end one. [See the Apol. p. 2.] But if this will not be enough,
you have a way that will serve you effectually to disgrace any man living, so
far as it is in your power; and that is by suggesting (as G. Whitehead against
Mr. Danson ( Divinity of Christ, p. 49.) that he was given to Gaming, Bowls,
and Nine-pins) any crime whatsoever; and when the suggestion is proved to be
false, if it so fall out unhappily, you may come off as he, by saying, you did
but quaere whether it was so or no; you did not positively affirm it. Will
these things encourage any man to put his name into your hands, that can keep
it out? Judge ye! Besides, I known not what disadvantage it will be to you,
not to know my name, for what I have written will be as true without it as with
it. I confess that perhaps you will lose some of that sweetness of Revenge you
would take in lustily bespattering me, and that I am not willing to gratify you
with. I thank God through Jesus Christ I have a full testimony in my own
Conscience both touching the causes and Inducements of my present writing, viz.
my hearty love and affection to Truth and your persons, (for whom I have
longtime daily prayed God who is light, to lead you into the true light, and
the acknowledgment of the Mystery which was hid from Ages and Generations:) and
also touching my faithfulness and Intergrity in the collection and Citations
and Observations I have made: so that whoever of you have a true discerning of
spirits, which you lay so great a claim to, I am sure ye must justify me in
what I have done, and receive it as that which I was moved to, in the general,
by the light of God and Christ in my heart. But however you receive it or judge
of it, he that justifies me is the Lord, to whom I commit my self and it,
still praying for you, for I am

Your affectionate Friend.

FINIS.
The courteous Reader may be pleased to take notice that the words relating to
Scripture in the Citations out of G. Fox, should have been Printed in a
different Character as they are in Go F's Book: such are these, p. 6.1.7. l.
12. p. 7. l. 21.14. p. 8. l. 12.13.24.25.27. p. 9. l. 15.17. them. l. 30. p.
10. l. 20.29. p. 11. l. 25.26. p. 12. l. (...). p. 13. l. 16.27. p. 14. l.
21.26. the Spirit. l. 32. 82.

ERRATA
Page, 7. l. 33. non, read, not. p. 11. l. 18. r. found there p. 13. l. (...).
for, I am only to, 1. It Is enough that l. p. 31, l. 12, for. 1, far, p. 38. l.
25.1 think.


