A SALUTATION FROM THE BREATHINGS of the LIFE, TO THE FAITHFUL IN THE KINGDOM
AND PATIENCE OF Jesus Christ, THROUGH JOSEPH HELLING.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Black-Spread-Eagle in Martins le
Grand.

Brethren and Sisters, Grace, Mercy and Peace, be Multiplied in you all, Amen
LAmbs of the Fold, in the Love of the Shepherd, I greet you all, and my Soul
is poured out toward you, that are in the Birthright, and Heir-ship of Life,
unto which the Arm of the Lord has gathered us to inherit, and sit together in
Heavenly Places, and to show forth his praises; he has put it into our hearts
to do his Will, to stand up for his Truth, and to bear our Testimony against
Antichrist; even we, who were neither Prophets, nor Prophets Sons, has the
Lord by his Spirit sent forth to confound the Wisdom of the Wise; yea, he has
raised his Truth in the Hearts of thousands, the Preacher of Glad Tidings, even
the Gospel of Peace, by which many are brought to bear a Faithful Testimony
against deceit; he has gathered us, and saved us, and nursed us in his Bosom,
and fed us with the Milk of his Word; He has opened us, and Illuminated us,
and Led us, and Armed us; yea, he has trained us in the Word of Patience, and
clothed us with the Armor of Light, and taught us the Postures of War; He
has given us Patience, Courage, Manhood, Boldness and Ability to endure
hitherto; He has overturned and tumbled the Earth, Heaps upon Heaps; He has
Rejected Councellers, the Potent and Learned, the Noble and Ignoble, Professors
and Profane, even he has Bolted up their Way, and Strangled their
Conceptions, and Broken their Images, and divided them, and made a way for us,
and covered our heads in the day of Battle, and fought for us by the secret
Motions of his Power, in the Hearts of our Enemies: And now for his Truths
Sake, he has provided his Furnace and Fining-Pot, to try all those Mettles
that had such a pleasant sound, even the great swelling words of Vanity: them
that have, and do say, They are Jews, Christians, and true Believers and
Worshippers, even all that are contrary to the Furnace (viz.) the Lords
Refining Fire, must feel its Flame, or see the Terror of it, and so in the
Fearfulness give up their Power, and Bow to the Image of the Beast. But the
resolved in sincerity, that are given up freely to him that has called to
Righteousness, they shall be saved, and their Salvation the Heathen shall
Admire; Stand up therefore ye counted for the Slaughter, Has our Captain
forsaken us? Has the Trumpet left sounding? Is the Alarm ceased? Is the Earth
at Peace, and the Beast still? Does not the Lion roar, his Proclamation even
unto Babylon that great City? Is the Agreement made between Light and Darkness,
and the Unity confirmed between the Temple of God, and that of Idols? Is the
Peace made? (then my Friends) What means this pursuit? What means this
Preparation for War, against the Lamb and his Army? Is not the noise of the
Chariots of Egypt, and the strength of the Philistians come up against
Mount-Sion, with their choicest Snares? Have not they pitched their Tents
against Jerusalem (the beloved City?) Are they not many? Is not the Sea before
and Mountains on each side? And are not all hopes, besides what stands in God,
utterly gone? Oh! is it, Time now to Buy and Sell, to Plant and Build, and
Marry and give in Marriage in the worldly Part, Care and Desire. Give up, Give
up, Let not your Hearts dwell contracted to the Old Man.

Arise, Come forth and meet the Bridegroom, that you may feel and behold his
strength, who is able to subject all things unto himself, and subdue all
things under you; Feel that love that is stronger than Death, and Crueller than
the Grave; then I know your Hearts will not fail you in this Day of Trial,
neither shall fear seize upon your Spirits.

O Lambs, feed upon your Pasture; and ye Virgins, dwell in your proper
Habitations, that your rest may be in the Hope of Glory; For great is the Peace
of Sions Flock; (Notwithstanding Tribulation in the World,) With You I have a
Portion, with which I am content, and truly willing to do the will of my God,
and your God, whose blessed presence fills all our Hearts; the Streams of his
love flow unto (and into) us, to the glading of all the City, although it be
Besieged, and the Camp be very great, and the Bullwark strong, and their Hopes
flourishing round about it; yet the shout of a King is in the midst of it,
strong are our Arms, pollished are our Arrows, skillful are our Archers, and
full of courage are our Men of War, whose Weapons are not Carnal, but
Spiritual, and Mighty against the Beast and false Prophet.

O now let us wait to enjoy his presence; Wait for Milk ye Babes; March on in
the Word of Patience ye Young Men; Sit upon the Thrones ye Ancients, in the
House and Family of God; Retain your judgment in Righteousness; wax full in
Council; strengthen the weak; Thresh not without skill; bruise not the Seed;
Plow light Furrows; Oppress not the Yoaked; Carry in your Arms; use Diligence
ye opened to pour out your Oil, that the fatness of the House may refresh them
that are ready to faint, that the Family may be Gladed; Cherish one another;
Keep in the fellowship of Light and Life. Tribulated Remnant, gather your
selves together, sit down in the Spirit of Supplication; be not daunted; walk
not as cast down and forsaken; Let not the Serpent see the Appearance of
complaining in you: The Night will over, The Storm will vanish, (take not your
flight in this Winter,) the Sun appears through this Tempest; Joy is
approaching, and Truth shall sing in the Nations over deceit: And those that
overcome shall be filled with Triumphant praises for ever: Oh! let me prevail,
let my Cry come to the Crier in you, for Valor and Courage in the Patience and
Faith of Saints; for yet a little while, and the Assirians shall fly, and the
Walls of their Cities shall fall, and great shall be their fall; yet a little
while, and ye shall Rejoice over her, ye Holy Prophets and Apostles, ye shall
Rejoice over her that was strongly builded with Blood and with Iniquity; yet a
little while and the Instruments of Music shall not be heard in Her, nor any
Crafts-Man or Merchant Rejoicing in Her: Nay, the voice of the Bridgroom, and
of the Bride, shall be heard no more at all in Her, they shall be Redeemed out
of Her, and shall not partake of her Plagues; even the Bridegroom and the Bride
shall Rejoice together without the Walls of that City, and great shall be the
Joy of the Nations, and Glorious shall be the Crown of Life, and Honorable the
Scepter of Righteousness throughout the World.

Therefore dear Family of God, let not in the Reason of Flesh and Blood least
thy Beauty be Marred, and thy Beautiful Garment Spotted, and thy Glory Defaced;
Oh! thou Daughter of Zion; Oh! keep thy Espousal, Defile not thy Bed, neither
for Fear, nor Love; be single-Hearted, the Lord is with thee of a Truth; What!
has he Led thee, and Fenced thee, and broken the Teeth of the Lions, and
hurled the Pot-sherds on heaps, and bound up all Fallen Wisdom as in a Faggot,
and burned it as Dross before thee, and will he now leave thee for a prey to
the Spoyler? What! will the Shepherd leave his Lambs encamped with Wolves? or,
will a Father leave his Children crying in the Mire? shall they cry for Bread,
and Help, and will he shut his Bowels, and turn his Back, and leave them to
the Mercylesse, even to the Devouring Furnace of the Wicked? I tell you nay;
but our God will ease him of his Enemies, and avenge him of his Adversaries,
and certainly save to the uttermost, those that endure to the End, and will set
them in the Honorable places, to Reign in his Truth over all: Oh! blessed are
the Simple, whose hearts are upright, whose minds are not clogged with Wisdom
from below, in which the Sensual Reason stands, that darkeneth the Eye of the
mind, and leads to strike hands with Deceit; for such as join with Deceit
shall be ashamed, when as the Faithful through Trial come forth purer than
Gold; then shall the Fig-leafe Garment not Hide; nay, the Brambles that has
caught them shall not shelter them that seek to fly the Cross: Up, Arise, put
on Courage, stand singly, let the Heathen do what they will, so far as their
will is permitted, let them fill up the Measure of their Fathers, and ye must
fill up the measure of your Fathers: Remember with what you are Entrusted;
delay not Improvement; the work is not hard to the Diligent, to the Willing
Minded, but to the sluggard; and Rags shall not cloth him, so as to cover him
from the Wrath of the Lamb, nor shall that Garment be admitted to enter, so as
to dwell in the Brides Chamber.

I am filled, suffer me I pray you, to in treat you, (though you know it) let
every one dwell in the Nobility of the Truth, which is not afraid of the sons
of men, neither Dismayed at their Revilings. Lie down, lie down, let Sion be
plowed like a Field, let Haman boast a season, let him build his Gallows; Rest
ye in the hope of your Glory, and wait you upon him who is Mighty, upon whom
help is laid; Fear not the Wrath of man: I say, abide in that love that casts
it out, and brings into the Confidence, that nothing is able to separate from.
Oh! let not things present, nor things to come, separate any one of you that
make mention of his Name; but dwell together in Unity with the Lord, and one
with another; and the God of peace be with your spirits, Amen.

Thou Mighty God of Power, give Patience to thy Worms to Endure, Lead them,
Preserve them, Encourage them that lie at thy Footstool; Raise them up, Fight
their Battle, Plead their Cause, Speak Comfortably to thy People, show thy
Presence to thy Afflicted; Remove the Yoke of Oppression, when it is thy will;
and until then, and for ever, we rest in Hope, Waiting and Crying in the
Breathings of thy Life, until thy Sion be made the Glory of the whole Earth;
thy Will be done, into which Lord God Receive our Spirits, and in it bundle up
our Life and Love, even in the Fellowship of thy Light, Grace and Spirit, Amen.

From the Common Goal in Northampton, the 10 day of the 2 Month, 1661. Joseph
Helling.

THE END.

