FONS SALUTIS, OR THE Fountain of Health OPENED: In the Wonderful Efficacy, and
almost incredible Virtue of true Oil, which is made of Sulphur Vive, set on
fire, and called commonly, Oil of Sulphur per Campanam.

Faithfully Collected out of the writings of the most excelling Philosopher,
and unparalleled Physician of this last age, John Baptist Van Helmont, lately
deceased; and confirmed by the experience of

Thomas Moulson, Operator in Chemistry. and Med. Land.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Coe, and are to be sold at Thomas Moulson's House,
in Tenter Ally in Little Moor-Fields, at the sign of the Golden Key.

To the Reader.
TO let you know I have not spent all my days in speculative notions only, I
have appeared in this Publication to have some practical experience also; yet
this is neither Inducement, nor is there any Obligation as I am cautious of
lies upon me to enforce it, but only one; and that is, pura lex Charitatis; the
undefiled Law of Love, as one Christian, and every one ought to exercise
toward another, in assisting one another in every gradual motion, tending to
the benefit one of another; and as one Tree yields not all kinds of fruit, but
every one several, gratefully yielding the more various contentment applicable
to every use; so by the Divine Providence, my Talent being bestowed on me this
way, lest I should hide it in a Napkin, and incur the deserved sentence of the
barren Fig Tree, I freely make it Communicable to the good and salubrity of
all, and shall always be studious thereof, while I am,

Thomas Moulson.
From the Golden Key in Tenter-Alley, in Little Morefields. July 20th, 1665.
FONS SALUTIS.
The Wonderful efficacy, and almost incredible Virtue of true Oil which is made
of Sulphur Vive, set on fire and called commonly Oil of Sulphur per Campanam.

Of this most noble Liquor, and not vulgar Medicine, the excelling Philosopher
Helmont writes thus in his Excellent Discourse concerning the Tree of Life.

IN the year 1600 a certain man belonging to the Camp, whose office was to keep
account of the provision of Victuals, which was made for the Army, being
charged with a numerous Family of small Children, unable to shift for
themselves, himself being then 58 years of age, was very sensible of the great
care and burden which lay upon him to provide for them while he lived, and
concluded that should he dye, they must be enforced to beg their bread from
door to door, whereupon he came (says Helmont) and desired of me something for
the preservation of his Life; I then (being a young man) pittyed his sad
condition, and thus thought with my self, the fume of burning Sulphur, is by
experience found powerfully effectual to preserve Wines from corruption; Then I
collecting my thoughts, concluded that the acid Liquor or Oil, which is made of
Sulphur Vive, set on fire, does of necessity contain in it self this fume,
yea, and the whole odor of the Sulphur in as much as it is indeed nothing else
but the very Sulphurous fume imbibed or drunk up in its mercurial Salt, and so
becomes a condensed Liquor. Then I thought with my self, our blood being (to
us) no other then as it were the Wine of our Life, that being preserved, if it
prolong not the life, at least, it will keep it sound from those many Diseases
which proceed originally from corruption, by which means the life being sound
and free from diseases, and defended from pains and grief, might be in some
sort spun out to a further length then otherwise; upon which meditated
resolution, I gave him a Viol glass with a small quantity of this Oil,
distilled from Sulphur Vive burning, and taught him (moreover) how to make it
as he should afterward need it; I advised him of this Liquor, he should take
two drops before each Meal in a small draught of beer, and not ordinarily to
exceed that Dose, nor to intermit the use of it, taking for granted that two
drops of that Oil contained a large quantity of the fume of Sulphur. The man
took my advice, and at this day in the year 1641. he is lusty and in good
health, walks the streets at Brussels without complaint, and is likely longer
to live; and that which is most remarkable, in this whole space of forty one
years he was not so much as ill, so as to keep his bed, yea, although (when of
a great age) in the depth; of Winter, he broke his Leg near to his anclebone,
by a fall upon the Ice, yet with the use of this Oil he recovered, without the
least Symptom of a Fever; and although in his old age, Poverty had reduced him
to great straits and hardship, and made him feel much want of things necessary
for the comfort and convenience of life; yet he lives healthy and sound, though
spare and lean.

The old man's name is John Mass, who waited upon Rithovius, Bishop of Ypre in
his Chamber, when the Earls of Thorn and Egmont were beheaded by the Duke of
Alva, and he was then twenty five years of age; so that now he is complete 99
years of age, healthy, and lusty, and still continues the use of that Liquor
daily.

Thus far Helmont, which relation, as it is most remarkable, so it gives the
Philosophical reason of his Advice, on which it was grounded: And elsewhere the
same Author relates, how by this Liquor he cured many dangerous deplorable
Fevers, which by other Physicians had been given over for desperate.

And in other places he commends it as a peerless remedy, to assuage the
insatiable thirst which accompanies most Fevers.

^^so which relation and testimony, of this most learned Physician, and
excelling Philosopher, I shall add my own experience.

I find it a sure Preservative against corruption, not only in living
creatures, but even in dead Flest, Beer, Wine, Ale, etc. a recoverer of dying
Beer, and Wines that are decayed, a cure for Beer when sick and ropeing; flesh
by this means may be preserved so ncorruptible, as no imbalming in the world
can go beyond it, for the keeping of a dead Carkase, nor Salting, come near its
efficacy, as to the conserving Meat, or Fowls, or Fish, which by this means
are not only kept from corruption, but made a mumial Balsom, which is it self
a Preservative from curruption, of such as shall eat thereof; which being a
curious rarity, and too costly for to be made a vulgar experiment, I shall pass
it over, and come to those uses which are most Beneficial and Desirable.

It is an excellent cleanser of the Teeth, being scoured with it, they will
become as white as the purest Ivory, and the mouth being washed with this Oil,
dropped in water or white Wine, so as to make it only of the sharpness of
Vinegar; it prevents the growing of that yellow scale, which usually adheres to
the Teeth, and is the forerunner of their putrefaction; it prevents their
rottenness for future, and stops it (being begun) from going further; takes
away the pain of the Teeth, diverts Rhumas, and is a lure help for the
strongest savor of the Breath, making it very sweet.

In a word, There is not a more desirable thing can be found, for such who
would have clean or found Teeth, or sweet breath, or to be free from Rheums;
for which use, let the water be made, by dropping this Oil into it, as sharp as
vinegar, as I said before.

Against a tickling Cough and Hoarsness, it is an excellent Remedy; not only
taken two or three drops twice or thrice a day inwardly, in the usual drink one
uses before each meal, but also by gargling the Throat with it; and (so used)
it is excellent against swelled Throats-Squinances, Wenns, Swellings or Knobs
like Kernels in the flesh, all inflammations in the mouth, whether it be the
Vuula extended by an afflux of humors vulgarly said to be the falling of the
Palate, or inflammations of other Muscles, causing the Almonds of the ears to
swell, which compress the Weasand, and consequently cause extreme dolor.

It is excellent also against the Headache, and to divert Rheums from the eyes,
to wash the Temples therewith; likewise to take away Tetters, Morphew, Itch, or
Scabs: This dropped in water is a pleasant, safe, and effectual Remedy.

Besides which Outward application, it is an amicable Balsom to the Internal
parts. And Internally taken, preventing corruption, rooting out the seeds
thereof, though never so deeply concealed in the body, and by that means it
opens inveterate Obstructions, eradicating old Pains, and preventing
otherwise usual relapses into Stranguretical, Colical, or Arthritical pains.

It is Abstersive, cleansing all excrementitious settlings in the Mesaraick, or
Mesenterial Vessels, and so cutting off the Original Sourse, and taking away
the cause of putrifactive corruption, which is the productive beginner of very
many diseases.

On this account it lengthens the life, and frees the body from many pains and
evils, to which otherwise it would be subject.

It is a pleasant Remedy, having only a little sharpness, which to the Palate
is most grateful, and yet this accidity is contra-distinct from that accidity,
that is the forerunner of putrefaction, which it kills and destroys, as the
accidity of the spirit of Vitriol, is destroyed by the fixed Acrimony of its
own Caput mortu^m; or that of Vinegar, by the touch of C^russe or Minium.

Preternatural heat and thirst in Fevers, is no way allayed so speedily and
easily, as by this; nor is there any thing that for a constant continuance may
be more safely and profitably taken. Spirit of Salt (such as the Noble Helmont
speaks of) alone may be joined with this, for its safety, and continual use
with profit; especially in the Stone, in the Bladder, and gravel in the
Kidneys, and other distempers in the Reins, as heat and sharpness of Urin.

Likewise it is a most effectual preservative against all Corruption, and
indeed there is no remedy more prevalent then this against contagious Fevers,
small Pox, and Measels: It is also a most sovereign Antidote and Remedy against
the Plague or Pestilence, being a singular preserver of the body against all
contagion and putrefaction whatsoever.

Also it wonderfully prevails against all diseases coming of putrefaction,
cold or wind; against all Fevers and Agues, the Quotidian, Tertian, and
Quartin; as also the foul disease, Wounds, and Ulcers; the several defect; and
infirmities of the Brain, Mouth, Teeth, Liver, Stomach, Spleen, Matrix,
Bladder, Entralls, and Arteries. And outwardly applied, it helps Fistulaes,
Ulcers of the mouth, and Gangrenes.

Now as this is so Noble a Medecin, so there is none in the world more basely
adulterated and counterfeited; therefore it behooveth all persons that shall
make use thereof, to be well satisfied first of the ingenuity, honesty, and
ability of the Artist, before they presume to make use of it.

Now as to its goodness, and great care taken in its preparation, I could have
had many both honest and learned Attestators, who have had the experience of it
upon several of their Patients, and still daily use it in their practice with
good success.

Those now, who know not by sad experience the difficulty of gaining credit to
truths of this kind, might well suppose enough had already been expressed to
persuade at least a Trial of so noble a medicine, if not a fair and clear
acceptance, but so great a prejudice against new discoveries, remains upon
the minds of the most by abuse of Deceivers; that what has been said in its
behalf will hardly prevail for such a reliance upon its use, as its virtues
really deserves; therefore to silence all opposers, and to obtain its cheerful
embracement; take here the sure testimony of some instances of its happy
Victories and successes in diverse remarkable cases and conflicts; wherein
though the Operator of it has much to say for daily benefits to himself and
relations (too numerous to recount) yet knowing, who ever duly weighs the other
instances, will easily conclude, it must needs have been most serviceable,
where it has been most employed: I refer you wholly to its other performances
and cures elsewhere.

The first of which shall be of a Gentlewoman about twenty years of age, that
by much weakness, sickness, and an empty dry Cough, having withal past
through the whole course of Physic, and even hopeless of recovery, being
recommended to the use of this Oil (by one who had received much good by it)
using of it about three months continually day by day according to former
directions, recovered beyond expectation, and still is resolved to continue the
use of it.

The second shall be of an Ancient, weak woman, fallen into a tedious fit of
sickness, Feverish, and so fluft in her breast, as she was even breathless,
much means of Physic by council of Physicians she had used, but left helpless
of all.

She hearing of my Oil, sent for an ounce, I sent it with directions how to use
it, and a while after that, another; and so after that another, by the use
whereof, continually a little and a little, she became hearty and well again;
but near upon a Twelve-moneth after fell sick again, and then timely betaking
her self to the same Remedy, she with somewhat a less quantity recovered: and
again, about a year after that falling ill again, by the very same means
again recovered and continued well for about twelve or fourteen months, as
well as her years considered could be expected.

3. The third I shall instance, is of a young man which for a long time had an
Ague and a Fevour, and had used all the means that he could possible, and all
in vain, in so much that he was past hope of recovery, but at last was adivsed
by a Physician to use the Oil of Sulphur according to the direction that is in
this book, the man took his advise, and in a short time his Ague and Fever left
him, and he restored to his former strength.

4. The fourth experiment is of a man of middle age, who had been along time
under an extreme sickness, with a great pain in his stomach and bowels, and had
used much means with advice in Physic, but still became worse and worse; a
friend of his who had made use of my Oil, recommended its use unto him, as
what was likely to do him good; so he sent for two ounces of my Oil, with
directions, how to use it, which I readily sent him, and before it was half
taken, he sent me word he had received so much benefit by it, that he would
never be without it.

5. A fifth instance, is, of a Woman about the age of thirty, which was very
often troubled with pain in her Teeth, by reason they were so much wasted and
corrupted, and her gums ulcerated: I advised her to make use of my Oil of
Sulphur, and gave her directions how to use it, and in a short time it scaled
her teeth, and made them as white as Ivory, and also perfectly cured the Ulcers
in her mouth, which gave great content to the party.

6. A sixth proof hereof, is, of a Girl about ten years old, in an extreme
Fever, with thirst, shortness of breath, Cough, with tough phlegm, and vehement
pains in her side, yet in this sad condition found no releif, like to what she
had by continual use of my Oil of Sulphur day and night, for it cooled and
quenched her thirst, stayed her Cough, ripened her phlegm, removed her pains,
and she recovered without bleeding, which every one that saw her thought
impossible.

7. One for many years troubled with a very stinking breath, and continual
Headache, by reason of Vapors ascending from putrified Lungs; by often using
this Oil in the distilled water or decoction of Egrimony, and in common drink,
in a short time recovered to perfect health, and all ill scents of the breath
totally seized.

8. A man aged 60 and odd years, who for a long time had labored under the
great pain of the Tysick, and difficulty of breathing, so that he could not
lie down, but always slept upright in a Chair for fear of stopping his breath;
he was directed to me, and by a few days use thereof, it so opened the
passages, that he breathed perfectly, and the Tysick or or wheesing troubled
him no more.

9. A Gentlewoman in the Country being very much troubled with Rising of the
Lights, so that every night she feared dying in her sleep, was by providence of
a friend, who had good testimony of my oil, directed to send to me for some of
it; I sent her two ounces which she daily using, according to my directions,
soon became very well to her great comfort.

10. In the Pleurisy, and all pains and Stiches in the Sides, it has
wonderful effects; one violently taken with pain in the side, ready to stop his
breath, sent to me for an ounce, which I immediately furnished him with, and
following the directions how to use it, was perfectly healed in 24 hours, when
nothing but death was expected.

11. A Child of three years old, suddenly surprised with Convulsion-fits, in
thrice taking hereof was well, and the fits came no more.

12. A Gentlewoman violently oppressed with the Pangs of the ascension of the
Matrix, using this Oil in Aqua partheine, was in a few times taking perfectly
cured.

13. One grievously vexed with Belchings and loathing of meat, having a
depraved and lost Appetite by a foul stomach, was by taking hereof, in a few
days brought to a good appetite; all belchings and risings of the Stomach
ceased, without vomiting or purging.

14. A man having by cold got a grievous Horseness, Cough, and Sorenest of his
throat and stomach, so that he could swallow no meat; by taking hereof in his
drink and broth, in six days was cured.

15. One much troubled with griping in the guts, being that distemper vulgarly
called the Plague in the guts and having his bowels grievously excoriated, sent
to me for some of my Oil of Sulphur, after all other means were tried in vain;
which I directed him to take, two or three drops at a time in Plantane-water,
and gave him present ease.

16. One who was much troubled with scalding Urin, and pissing by drops, with
much pain and anguish; by taking hereof according to my directions found ease
in one night, and by a little use, a perfect cure.

17. A woman grievously laboring with shortness of breath, filthy scents
arising to her mouth, from her lower parts inwardly, often ascertions and
grievous pangs in her Matrix; after much misery, and wasting both of body and
Purse upon Physicians, Providence directed her to me, and by use hereof,
according as I prescribed, found a remedy beyond hopes or expectation.

18. A young man, after some Venerial Combats, having some Pustulaes and
Pruritus about his Penis, scrotum, and between the Glans and Preputium, so that
he could not rest* nor sit still ini quiet; by using this in a proper vehicle I
gave him, in a few hours gave ease, and put a speedy period to his distemper,
freeing him from the worst of fears, the amputation of that most affected
member.

19. One us^ing to make bloody water, especially if he did but a little walk or
exercise himself and not without some dolor; in a few weeks use hereof, was
quite eased, and made urine clear and freely.

20. The Author has also a most excellent sweating Medicine, which does
powerfully drive forth all pestilential infection, and by this means presorves
the heart and brain, and also the natural spirits from the malignity of the
PLAGUE. It most pleasantly frees the bodies of men, women, and children from all
impurities of the blood, casting forth all manner of Fevers. Not one that has
taken this Medicine in time, bua God has blessed it with the success of cure,
or in some where nature has been weak, and not able to throw out (her enemy)
the poisonous matter, with two or three (at most) times taking of this
Medicine, it has both forced out, and broken the swolling in the Groynes, and
(other emunctuaries) the Arm-holes being but continued to five or six takings,
it infallibly clears the blood, wherein all diseases take their beginning; so
upon this account I can do no less then wish all that regard their health, to
the use of this most admirable and unequallized Medicine in these contagious
times.

21. Many more examples of rare and wonderful Cures herewith by me performed I
could assert, but I hope Semel dictum sapienti sat est. I Will name but one more,
and conclude; which is of a Woman so grievously troubled with worms, both great
and small, that she endured grievous pains in her belly, and continually voided
very small worms in her Excrement: by a little use hereof, was well to her
singular comfort.

To prevent any Sophistication, or deceit in any of my Medicines by
counterfeits, they shall be always sealed up with this Coat of Arms, as is in
the Tittle Page.

Postscript.
THose who desire this so pleasant, so efficatious and profitable a remedy, let
the Reader be informed, That at Tho. Moulson's house in Tenter-Alley in little
Moor-fields, at the sign of the Kolden-Key, this Oil is to be had, truly and
faithfully made without any addition; made only of the Sulphur it self.

And likewise you may have at the same place, Spirit of Salt, prepared after
the best way, or any Chemical Salts, Oils, and Spirits.

Besides which Oil or Spirit of Sulphur, several other admirable and effectual
Medicinal secrets, not only for Preservation against all contagious and
infectious diseases, but approved for the certain, safe, and speedy cure of
most, if not all diseases; as has been proved by many hundred Patients
(adjudged rather incurable, or desperately dangerous by other Physicians,) are
here to be had, being the more then ordinary Secrets and Preparations, of
THOMAS MOULSON, Operator in Chemistry, and Licensed Physician.

From my House in Tenter-Alley, at the sign of the GOLDEN KEY, in Little
MOOR-FIELDS, July 20th. 1665.

THO. MOULSON.

(...)

