A New Book OF LOYAL English Martyrs AND CONFESSORS, Who have endured the Pains
and Terrors of Death, Arraignment, Banishment, and Imprisonment, for the
Maintenance of the Just and Legal Government of these Kingdoms, Both in CHURCH
and STATE.

By James Heath, Gent.

Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous shall be had in Everlasting Remembrance.

LONDON, Printed for R. H. and are to be Sold by Simon Miller at the Star in
St. Paul's Churchyard.

A List of the Martyrs contained in this Volume.
THomas Earl of Strafford Proto-Martyr. M. Yeomans of Bristol, Mart. M. Bowcher
of Bristol Martyr. M. Tompkins of London Mart M. Chaloner of Lon. Martyr. M.
Kniveton, Martyr. William Laud L. Archbishop of Canterbury, Martyr. Sr.
Charles Lucas, Martyr. Sr. George Lisle, Martyr. Major Pitcher, Martyr. Our
Dread Sovereign KING CHARLES the First, the Glorious Martyr. Arthur L. Capel,
Martyr. Henry Earl of Holland, Mart. M. Beaumont, Minister, Mart. Major
Morris, Martyr: Cornet Blackburne, Martyr. Col. Eusebius Andrews, Mart: S.
Henry Hide, Martyr. M. Benson, Martyr. Capt. Brown Bushel, Martyr. M. Love,
Ministe, Martyr: Capt. Gibbons, Martyr. James, Earl of Darbie, Mart. S. Tim.
Fetherston Haugh, Martyr. Col. Benbow, Martyr. Col. John Gerrard, Martyr. M.
Vowel, Martyr. Col. Penruddock, Martyr. Col. Grove, Martyr: Sr. Henry
Slingsbi^, Martyr: Dr. Huit, Martyr: Col. Ashton, Martyr: M. John Bettelie,
Martyr. M. (...) Martyr*
ENGLANDS NEW BOOK of Loyal Martyrs; Being a perfect Account of all those Loyal
Persons that suffered the pains and Terrors of Death; By color of any
Sentence, during the Late^ Rebellion.
The Introduction.
NO sooner was the Marian Persecution ceased, and the Flames thereof
extinguished (in which, so many of the most able and faithful Assertors, as
well as weaker Professors of the Protestant Religion, were sacrificed to the
Rage and Pride of Romes Revenge) by the most happy and auspicious Assumption of
Queen Elizabeth, of Famous Memory, to this Crown and Kingdom, whose Blessed
Influences enlivened those dying Embers of the Reformation to a most bright
Profession; but a strange and a new kind of Fire, like a subterraneous
Conflagration, as indiscernably, as irresistably smothered and kindled in the
minds of some Factious Persons, pretending to a more holy and severer
Discipline of Life, until the Eruption of it, in the times of Arthington and
Hacket, (the last of which, deservedly suffered in the gainsaying of Corah) and
persecuted this but just escaped Church (like Virtue betwixt two Extremes)
afresh.

The Pretense of those men was a Reformation of that which so lately had been
reformed, taxing it of retaining the Faeces and Dregs of Romish Superstition,
as being but superficially and slightly purified of those gross corruptions
which yet their own e^es had observed to have passed through more then 70 times
7 fires in that hot Martyrdom.

This Male-contented Opinion and Humor, was first vented in secret whispering
and murmuring against the Government, which amounted in short time after, to
several Conventicles and Meetings of the dissatisfied Brethren, as they were
humbly pleased to term themselves, into sundry Invectives and public
Expostulations with the Queen, her Councils and Parliaments, so that the Party
grew so formidable, that particular Laws were made against them, and the
aforesaid Hacket thereupon executed.

For a while after this Justice, the Faction slunk into Corners, and hid
themselves in the Dens and Retreats of their own shame, till the Coming in of
King James, toward whom they assumed, out of some confidence of his present
advancement to this Crown, to obtrude the same irreverend Postulata,
complaining among other things, chiefly of the Common Prayer, and of the
extraordinary Power of Bishops, in restrayning the Violence and Fury of their
Libelling and pragmatical Books and Lectures, whose main Design and aim was the
same with the Accomplices of Corah, Ye Sons of Levi take too much upon you, when
their Conspiracy was to take all; a Truth most lamentably confirmed in these
out Late Reforming Times.

For from that Conference that King vouchsafed their impertinencies, at
Hampton Court (where his Learning had the good Fortune of reducing and
reclaiming one of their most able, but ingenuou Champions, by name, D.
Reynolds) they never desisted from underminining the Policy and Government of
the Kingdom. Nor was that wise King unsensible of their Serpentine ways and
Proceedings, but yet was loath to discover such a fear of them, as might render
them confident and bold, to attempt any thing. You may see in his Character of
them by the name of Puritan in his (...) to Prince Henry, what he thought of
them.

The Lenity and good Nature of his Son and Successor, Charles the Martyr,
afforded them the Advantages they had long expected and waited for. It is
incredible what a number of Proselytes they had gained by their cross grained
Sanctity, into how many Families they had insinuated themselves in so short a
time; so that now they had gained almost an equal Voice in the Parliament,
where, without Petitions or Supplications, intermixed with some doubtful
Menacings (their ordinary style, and continued to this day) they brought about
their long projected Device of Rebellion and Sac^edge.

Omne malum ex Aquilone; the wind that first tempested the Calm and Serenity of
a long Series and Tract of Peace, which this Nation had enjoyed, was conjured
up by these evil Spirits out of the North, from Scotland, which had never been
freed from such tumultuous Boutefews in the Clergy, (since their Reformation)
as our Zealots here; but the prize of a Sedition (Church Lands) was not
competent enough there to the hazard (as for the share the Ministers might
expect) as to engage and embroyl them, without some Assurances and
Augmentations from abroad, to which, how industriously and passionately many of
our beginning Reformists in this Kingdom, consented and contracted, 'twil be
impertinent to re^eat here, being so fully cleared by subsequent Proofs of
mutual Assistance, by several Treaties, by the Covenant, by advance of Money
and joint Counsels.

Indeed the Scotch Nobility were mainly concerned: for by an Act of Revocation,
passed in that Kings Reign, the Church Lands were to revert again to the right
Proprietors, which the Nobility were then possessed of, and though the King
afterward out of some prudent Considerations, had indulged them a longer
tenure, yet, as there is no security safe enough to a covetous mind, they could
not rely on that Favor; so that the Scotch Rebels fought for that they had
sacrilegiously got, and the English Rebel for what sacrilegiously he should get.

The Event of that unlucky War, or rather Preparations to it, soon inflated and
pust up the Nonconformist in England, the Quarrel (as the Grave Lecturers
deceived, and imposed on the people) being thought to be the same, against
Bishops, against the Liturgy, against Ceremonies, and such like; but it was
clearly against the Bishops-Lands, against Loyalty and Obedience, and against
the indispensable duties of a good Conscience, things more indifferent to these
strict Disciplinarians, then a Reverend Decency in holy Performances;

Their way being thus made (the unsearchable Providence of God) all hands were
set to work to demolish and throw down that goodly structure and Fabric of
Government, under which this Nation had so long flourished upon the Support and
B^sis of the Three Estates, The King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. To the
Ruin of all which, these New Modellers proceeded in this Method, most
prophetically foretold, by that incomparable M. Hooker, Hook. Eccles. Pol. Lib.
8. init.
under the Emblem of a stately and well-spreaded Tree, consisting chiefly of 3
great Boughs, to all which, it seemed not at first expedient to offer the Edge
of the Axe at once, but rather to single them, and strike at the weakest first,
making show that the Lop of that one, Dolus Intervalla scelerum poscebat. Tacit.
shall draw the more abundance of Sap to the other two, that thereby they may
the better prosper. This was put in practice by our Deformers, and the Bishops
first designed to the Fatal Stroke, the weighty Fall of whom, was sure to draw
down the other two, with any the least touch, together with them.

For a Parliament being called in Nov. 1640, with as much Clamor, as
Impudence, did these Factious Incendiaries of the Puritan Party, affront and
assault the Members of both Houses, thrusting their Demands into the Two
Houses, under the Title of Petitions, being backed with armed Force and
Violence; several tumultuous Rabbles came swarming down to Westminster, by the
Kings Gates at White Hall, others in Boats and Barges, armed likewise, by
water; obtruding their unknown Caprichio's and conceits upon the Parliament,
many of whom, were so far from checking or resisting so dangerous a Torrent,
which had overflowed the Banks of either Modesty, Loyalty or Christianity, that
they rather abetted, sided with, and countenanced those treasonable Attempts,
nor did these Tumults cease, till the King was forced to abandon his own House,
to save Himself, His Honor and Conscience.

But before they began this great Enterprise upon a whole Order so rooted and
settled by the Laws, their Dignities and Revenues, so reverenced and esteemed
for their individual Persons and Worth, by all men of Wisdom and Honor, so
supported and defended by the King and his Authority (which at first they durst
not grapple with) his chief Ministers of State, his Judges, and for the
greatest part of the Nobility; they cast about how to effect their Tragical
Intentions and Designs, another more cruel, but plausible way; and indeed
otherwise then so, they could not possibly, or at least probably, have
accomplished their Mischiefs.

Therefore they began with the Terrible Outcries of Justice, of calling
Delinquents and the Kings evil Counselors (words of course with Traitors) to
condign punishment. Many there were whom they had put down in their black List
for such, and many violent Speec^es were made by the Faction in the House of
Commons concerning them, that what they wanted in the matter and substance of
the Charge or guilt, they might make up in the number and quality of those whom
they pretended to be guilty. Diverse of them, to avoid the popular Fury, knowing
themselves to be marked out by the chief of the Faction, for Ruin, and withal,
that the grearness of their places could not consist without some little
Offenses, which their enemies had opportunity to aggravate, withdrew
themselves, out of a wise confideration of the prevalency and overbearing power
of those men. But some, whose Honor and Innocence could endure no such
Eclipses, and betwixt whose greatness and Verrue, they scorned the Vulgar and
hopeless peop^es Oblequy should so interpose, as to darken and obscure their
Glory and Luster, stood still in their Orbs and Stations, and shone with the
same brightness of Integrity.

The pretended Crime was a dutiful Observation of the Fifth Commandment, which
lay in the way to their designed absoluteness; the Faction was engaged against
all Power or Authority but that of their own Wills, and could allow no render
Consciences to the Second Table, which having profaned in the first and most
important Command, they easily contravened and abrogated the rest, in
murdering, plundering, and adulterating the Affections, perjuring and
insa^iably covering the Goods and Lives of their Fellow Subjects, who may
deservedly be canonized for Martyrs, for Confessing and Maintaining to their
death, so precious and so commanded a Duty of Loyal Obedience.

Amongst the first of these, was the Earl of Sirafford, a Person, whom the
Faction knew to be a firm Friend to the Bishops, and a great Lover of that
Sacred Function and Order, one that had manifested that Affection to them, in
his Administration of the Government of Ireland; a wise, yea the wisest Subject
in the Kingdom, who stood as a Bulwark and Defense against all Invasions, Plots
and Conspiracies, against either Church or State, and without whose Removal,
they well knew, they should effect nothing.

The King had summoned this very Parliament by his Advice, concurring with
others of his Council, having called him out of Ireland, sometime before, to
assist him in the War, against the aforesaid Rebellious Scots, as L^Gen. to his
Army, then upon the Borders; from whence he was no sooner come to London, and
at the opening of the Parliament, taken his Place in the House of Lords, but a
Charge of High Treason was exhibited against him by the Commons, and thereupon
he was committed to the Black Rod, and from thence to the Tower of London.

This was the first Parliament wherein the Faction was predominant; not that
their particular number made them so, but they closed with all Interests, that
were any way offended at the Government; and some well-meaning men there were
too, that were led by the Nose by these (forsooth) good Patriots; but having by
these means got the Vote of the Commons in their own management, they resolved,
no^ to abate the least Ace of that Power.

The King in the beginning of the Parliament, to remove all Distrust and
Jealousy of him, had granted them whatever they had demanded, had signed the
Bill for a Triennial Parliament, had En^cted, that he would not dissolve this,
without the Consent of the Lords and Commons themselves; so that there rested
nothing of the Kings part, which Reasonable men could desire, for him more to
grant, or they to ask; therefore he took it very unkindly, that in the midst of
these Favors and Grants, they should so unhansomly affront him, in challenging
his Prime Minister of State, in so high a manner. But they were resolved to
pass the Limits of all Duty and Obedience, and having the King so engaged, as
beforesaid, and necessitated also for Money, to put and impose any thing upon
him, though never so disagreeable to his honor and Conscience, nay to common
Reason.

To this purpose, after the Charge was exhibited, the Faction in the House, and
their Agents and Partisans in the City (who had their Correspondents also in
the Country, as appeared afterward by several Petitions brought out of diverse
Counties of England) drew down a confused R^bble of Apprentices, Seamen, and
others, intermingled with so me of the leading Grandees, who were to instruct
this many-headed Monster, what they should cry out for, or what they should do
upon any emergency, who coming to Westminster Hall, made a violent cry for
Justice against Strafford, which continued so many days together, till at
last, not seeing the business go on, with that disparch they wished, and being
informed by their Members of the Faction in the House, that the Bill of
Attainder stuck with the Lords, and that they refused to pass it, they
proceeded to that Impudence, as to stop the Lords Coaches as they went to the
House, and threaten them if they would not consent to his Condemnation, to
hinder them from entering into the House, and that they would turn them back;
withal, they posted up the Names of those Lords, who would not consent to this
cruel and barbarous way of proceeding against the said Earl, calling them
Straffordians, and enemies of their Country, with this menacing Subscription,
This, and more shall be done unto them, etc.

If this had been merely the Rage of the Multitude, the Fate of this worthy and
Noble Person had been something the less lamentable, by how much injuries of
violence are less terrible and imputable then those of Deliberation; but here
was the bloody hand of the Puritan Preacher, most apparently concerned, who now
thought to wreak himself of all those Silencings had been put upon their
Seditious Mouths, by this cry for blood, which no Horseleech ever more greedily
sucked; so by these Prophets the Word was put into the mouth of the multitude.

Many Enemies, and those the ablest Lawyers of the Kingdom, and Eloquent
Orators also, this Noble Earl was combated with, against whom nevertheless,
he most rationally, politely, and learnedly, without any the least Passion
(confidence, or Fear, being alike distant from them both, but in an even and
excellent temper of mind) so well defended himself, that his Peers could not
find where to fasten his Charge; which because of the extraordinary manage of
it, and that he is the Protomartyr, take a view of in this short Account.

An Account of the Life, Trial, and Death of that Loyal PROTO-MARTYR, THOMAS,
Earl of Strafford, Lord Deputy of Ireland, Beheaded, May 12. 1641.
What was tauntingly said by the French, concerning this great and prudent
Statesman, that the English were mad, having but one wise Head, to cut it off,
was Truth enough, and too sadly experienced: All Essaies of describing those
great Abilities, and comprehensiveness of his mind, are therefore unfeasable,
because none but himself could pourtraict them to any Appearance or Semblance
of that Life and Quickness which manifested it self, even in that unsearchable
and profound depth of his Counsels and Actions; so that he has left nothing
transmittible to our Imitation, but his Loyalty; wherein we and his Enemies
agree in this, that we have nothing else to lay hold on, his other
superexcellent qualities being above our and their reach and understanding. The
Reason undoubtedly why he was assaulted, with the new Engine of accumulative
and constructive Tre^son.

He has for his honor and glory a most illustrious character given him by
King Charles of blessed memory, in his (...) in these words, -- I look upon my
Lord of Strafford, as a Gentleman whose abilities might make a Prince rather
afraid than ashamed to employ him in the greatest affairs of State, etc. so
that all that can be added to his memory and renown by any other pen, will be
but a superfluous labor; but because that good Prince only considered him in
his setting, wherein he was as unhappily concernd, as he was happily in the
raising of him, it is thought requisi^e to take a farther view of him, and
deduce him from his Ancestry, to whom he has contributed more honor, than he
received from them.

He was born in Yorkshire, of the illustrious Family of the Wentworths, and
educated according to the greatness of his Family, which had brought forth
many famous men. As soon as he came of age he was chosen a Parliament Man,
where he presently gained the reputation of a Statesman, and good Patriot, by
stickling against the Prerogative, which mist not the Courts observation. By
King Charles the First, out of honor to his merit and great parts, he was made
B^ron Wentworth of Raby, and soon after other Titles were conferred on him,
together with places of trust, which he discharged to the Kings great content,
the services he received from him ballancing his favors bestowed on him, which
he never abused, but continued to his death a most prudent Counselor, Loyal
Subject, and faithful Friend, being taken into the Kings bosom and most retired
secrets.

Soon after he was created Earl of Strafford, he was made also Lord Lieutenant
of Ireland, in which Government he exceeded in policy and good Laws, and
careful management in advancing the Kings revenue and ascertaining it for the
future, all that went before him. He did also take care for the Church,
established the Protestant Religion, countenanced learned men, and preferred
them, and settled a constant revenue for them in that Kingdom, of which prudent
and pious action the now Clergy there do reap the fruit.

Some offenses were taken at him, by the Irish, whom he kept in a very hard but
orderly subjection, suppressing their outlaws and Tories, and reducing them to
a perfect entire obedience to the Kings Authority and the Laws. Unless the
strings be wound up hard, we cannot look for good Music: he repressed and beat
down the insolent Lordings of the great ones over the Commons, whom he sweetened
and arctized into the English from their wild and barbarous Customs, which
caused him no great Love from the Irish Nobility, who understood the design was
by such artifices to take from them the absolute power they had over their poor
Vassals and Tenants, when they should find the difference between the English
Manners and Laws, and those of their own Country. Herein notwithstanding the
great opposition he me^ in the obstinacy and indocibility and prejudice of that
opinionated Nation he made a good procedure, and no doubt, had he continued
longer in the Government, and those times had not fallen out, which soon put
all into a confusion, had obtained his end.

The Scotch War breaking out first, as aforesaid, he was called out of Ireland
to assist the King with his Counsel in those Exigencies which had so
unpreparedly surprised him; to which work, like a Noble Friend, he set his
head, his hands, and his purse, advancing by subscription (which the rest of
the Nobility followed, according to their estate) twenty thousand pounds, with
which aid, and the large supply of the Clergy, who granted the King four
shillings in the pound for six years together, which was effected by his
influence; that King raised that Army against the Scots.

The Earl of Strafford was sick at the Defeat given the English at Newburne,
under my Lord Conway, whereupon, an overture was made by other Lords then about
the King for a Peace with the Scots, which soon after taking effect, the King
returned to Westminster, where he had summoned his Parliament according to the
advice of this Lord, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, both whom they rendered
odious to the People, upon the very account of being Enemies to Parliaments.

The very first thing of consequence done at the first Sessions, was a charge
exhibited by the House of Commons against this Earl, which consisted of 28.
Articles of high Treason, Feb.16. 1640. The substance of them all was, That he
had endeavored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Governments of the Realms
of England and Ireland; that he had done ill Offices betwixt the King and the
Scots, and betwixt the King and his Subjects of this Kingdom; that he had
advised the King to bring up the Army out of the North, and overawe the
Parliament, and that he had informed his Majesty that he had an Army of 10000
men in Ireland ready to be transported for the same Service.

His Trial thereupon April 13. ensued, which was done with all solemnity, a
Court being made for the purpose, with seats for both Houses, and a Canopy for
the King, with a Terrasse before it; The Earl of Arundel was Lord High Steward;
his Accusers were Pym, St. John's, Whitlock, Sr. Walter Earls, Sergeant Glyn,
Maynard, Stroud, Mr. Seldom, Hambden, etc. The Lieutenant warded all their
blows, defending himself bravely and learnedly, so that there was no hopes of
prevailing against his innocence by the Law, before the Lords that were his
Judges.

But the implacable fury of the House of Commons, since chey could effect
nothing this way, put them upon another, which was to draw up a Bill of
Attaindor and present it to the Lords, whereby the matter of Fact was declared
to have been sufficiently proved, and then as to Law that he had incurred the
censure of Treason, the Lords stumbled at this way of proceeding, as a path
leading to their own destruction, it being a course unsuitable to the practice
and state of the Kingdom, and their own safety, and against Common Justice. To
this it was replied by the Commons, that if the Lords would not join with them
in this way, they feared a rupture might follow, for that the People would not
be satisfied without Justice done upon the Earl, as the Author of all their
grievances.

The Lords stood for a while to their first determination, and heard the Earl
by his Council at their Bar as to matter of Law; this made the House of Commons
(though the King in a set speech to them, had cleared the Earl, from any design
of Treason or consulting to any arbitrary Government, nor could he concur to
punish him as a Traitor) the more eager. Whereupon the Londoners came down in
Tumults, crying Justice, and threatening the Lords as aforesaid, so that at last
the said Bill, ushered in by a Protestation, passed the whole House of Commons
nemine contradicente, but the Lord Darby and one or two more; and presently
after the House of Lords, where were present 45, 26 against him, and 19 for
him, most of his friends absenting themselves for fear of the multitude.
Immediately the Kings assent was required to the Bill, who consulted with the
Bishops, who, all but the Bishop of London, now his Grace of Canterbury (and
who as the King observed in his Book, fared the best of all) advised him
against it, but that which most swayed the King, to sign it, which he bitterly
afterward repented, was a Letter of the Earls to his Majesty, which being too
long here to insert, I shall only give you that Passage wherein he desires his
Majesty to pass the Bill.

And therefore in few words, as I put my self wholly upon the Honor and
Justice of my Peers, so clearly as to beseech your Majesty might please to have
spared that Declaration of yours, on Saturday last, and entirely to have left
me to their Lordships, so now to set your Majesty's Conscience, etc. at
liberty, I do most humbly beseech you, for the preventing of such mischief as
may happen by your refusal to pass the Bill, by this means to remove praised be
God, I cannot say this accursed, but I confess this unfortunate thing forth of
the way toward that blessed agreement, which God I trust shall for ever
establish betwixt you and your Subjects.

Sir, my consent herein shall more acquit you to God than all the World can do
besides; to a willing man there is no injury done, etc.

I have also here inserted for their excellency and elegancy, these two
following Speeches, the first at Westminster Hall to the Lords at the
conclusion of his Trial, the other at the Scaffold, which are as follow.

MY Lords! There yet remains another Treason, that I should be guilty of; the
endeavoring to subvert the fundamental Laws of the Land, that they should now
be Treason together, that is not Treason in any one part of Treason
accumulative, that so when all will not do, it is woven up with others, it
should seem very strange.

Under favor, my Lords, I do not concieve that there is either Statute Law,
nor Common Law, that does declare the endeavoring to subvert the fundamental
Laws, to be high Treason.

For neither Statute Law, nor Common Law written, that ever I could here of,
declares it so.

And yet I have been diligent to enquire, (as I believe you think it does
concern me to do.)

It is hard to be questioned for life and honor upon a Law that cannot be
shown.

There is a Rule which I have learned from Sir Edward Cook, De non
aparentitibus and non existentibus eadem ratio: (Jesu) where has this fire
lain all this while, so many hundred of years, without any smoke to discover
it, till it thus burst out to consume me and my children; extreme hard in my
opinion, that punishment should precede promulgation of Law! punishment by a
Law subsequent to the Acts done.

Take it into your considerations: for certainly it is now better to be under
no Law at all, but the will of men, than to conform our selves under the
protection of a Law, as we think, and then be punished for a crime that does
precede the Law: what man can be safe, if that be once admitted?

My Lords, it is hard in another respect, that there should be no token set
upon this offense, by which we should know it, no admonition by which we should
be aware of it.

If a man pass down the Thames in a Boat, and it be split upon an Anchor, and
no booy be ser, as a token that there is an Anchor there, that party that ows
the Anchor, by the Maritine Laws shall give satisfaction for the damage done;
but if it were marked out, I must come upon my own peril.

Now where is a mark upon this crime? Where is the token, this is high Treason.

If it be under water, and not above water, no humane providence can avail nor
prevent my destruction.

Lay aside all humane wisdom, and let us rest upon Divine Revelation, if you
will condemn before you forewarn the danger.

Oh my Lords! may your Lordships be pleased to give that regard unto the
Peerage of England, as never to suffer our selves to be put on those nice
points, upon such contractive interpretations; and these are where Laws are not
clear, or known. If there must be a trial of wits, I do humbly beseech you, the
subject and matter may be somewhat else than the lives and honors of Peers.

My Lords, we find that the primitive times, in the progression of the plain
Doctrine of the Apostles, they brought the Books of curious Arts, and burned
them. And so likewise, as I do conceive, it will be wisdom and providence in
your Lordships, for your Posterity and the whole Kingdom, to cast from you,
into the fire, these bloody and most mysterious Volumes of Constructive and
Arbitrary Treason; and to betake your selves to the plain Letters of the Law
and Statute, that tells us where the crime is, and by telling what is, and
what is not, shows us how to avoid it. And let us not be ambitious, to be more
wise and learned in the killing Arts, than our Forefathers were.

It is now full two hundred and forty years since ever any man was touched for
this alleged crime (to this height) before my self; we have lived happily to
our selves at home, and we have lived gloriously to the World abroad.

Let us rest contented with that our Fathers left us, and not awaken those
sleepy Lions to our own destructions; by raking up a few musty Records that
have lain so many Ages by the walls, quite forgotten and neglected.

May your Lordships be nobly pleased, to add this to those other misfortunes
befallen me for my sins, not for my Treasons, that a president should be
derived from me of that disadvantage (as this will be in the consequent to the
whole Kingdom) I beseech you seriously to consider it, and let not my
particular Cause be looked upon as you do; though you wound me in my interest
in the Commonwealth, and therefore those Gentlemen say, that they speak for the
Commonwealth, yet in this particular I indeed speak for it, and the
inconveniences and mischiefs that will heavily fall upon us: for as it is in
the first of Henry the Fourth, no man will after know what to do, or say for
fear.

Do not put, my Lords, so great difficulties upon the Ministers of State, that
men of wisdom, honor and virtue, may not with cheerfulness and safety be
employed for the Public, if you weigh and measure them by grains and scruples,
the public affairs of the Kingdom will be laid wast, and no man will meddle
with them, that has honors, issues, or any fortunes to lose.

My Lords, I have now troubled you longer than I should have done, were it not
for the interest of those dear pledges a Saint in Heaven left me; I should be
loath, my Lords, (there he stopped.)

What I forfeit for my self it is nothing, but that my indiscretion should
forfeit for my child, it even wounds me deep to the very Soul.

You will pardon my infirmity, something I should have said, but I am not
able, (and sighed) therefore let it pass.

And now, my Lords, I have been, by the blessing of Almighty God, taught, that
the afflictions of this life present, are not to be compared to the eternal
weight of that glory that shall be revealed to us hereafter.

And so, my Lords, even so with tranquillity of mind I do submit my self freely
and clearly to your Lordships judgments, and whether that Righteous judgment
shall be to life or death.

The Earl of Straffords Speech on the Scaffold, immediately before his Execution
on Tower Hill, May 12, 1641.
My L. Primate of Ireland,
IT is my very great comfort that I have your Lordship by me this day, in
regard I have been known to you these many years, and I do thank God, and your
Lordship for it that you are here; I should be very glad to obtain so much
silence, as to be heard a few words, but I doubt I shall not, the noise is so
great. My Lords, I am come hither by the good will and pleasure of Almighty
God, to pay that last Debt I owe to sin, which is death, and by the Blessing of
that God, to rise again through the Merits of Jesus Christ, to Righteousness
and Life Eternal. [Here he was a little interrupted.]

My Lords, I am come hither to submit to that Judgment which has passed
against me; I do it with a very quiet and contented mind, I thank God I do
freely forgive all the world, a forgiveness that is not spoken from the teeth
outward (as they say) but from the very heart, I speak it in the presence of
Almighty God, before whom I stand, that there is not a displeasing thought
arising in me toward any man living. I thank God I can say it, and truly too,
my Conscience bearing me witness, that in all my employment, since I had the
honor to serve his Majesty, I never had any thing in the purpose of my heart,
but what tended to the joint and individual prosperity of King and People;
although it has been my ill fortune to be mis-construed.

I am not the first that has suffered in this kind, it is the common portion
of us all, while we are in this life, to err, righteous Judgment we must wait
for in another place, for here we are very subject to be mis-judged one of
another: There is one thing that I desire to free my self of, and I am very
confident (speaking it now with so much cheerfulness) that I shall obtain your
Christian Charity in the belief of it. I was so far from being against
Parliaments, that I did always think the Parliaments of England were the most
happy Constitutions that any Kingdom or Nation lived under, and the best means
under God to make the King and People happy.

For my Death, I here acquit all the world, and beseech the God of Heaven
heartily to forgive them that contrived it, though in the Intentions and
Purposes of my heart I am not guilty of what I die for: And my Lord Primate, it
is a great comfort for me, that his Majesty conceives me not meriting so severe
and heavy a punishment as is the utmost Execution of this Sentence; I do
infinitely rejoice in this Mercy of his, and I beseech God return it into his
own bosom, that he may find mercy when he stands most in need of it.

I wish this Kingdom all the Prosperity and Happiness in the world, I did it
living, and now dying it is my wish; I do most humbly recommend this to every
one who hears me, and desire they would say their hands upon their hearts, and
consider seriously whether the beginning of the happiness and Reformation of a
Kingdom should be written in Letters of Blood: consider this when you are at
your homes, and let me be never so unhappy, as that the last drop of my Blood
should rise up in Judgment against any one of you, but I fear you are in a
wrong way.

My Lords, I have but one word m^re, and with that I shall end. I prosesse that
I die a true and obedient Son to the Church of England, wherein I was born, and
in which I was bred. Peace and Prosperity be ever to it.

It has been objected (if it were an Objection worth the answering) that I
have been inclined to Popery, but I say truly from my heart, that from the time
that I was one and twenty years of age, to this present, going now upon forty
nine; I never had in my heart to doubt of this Religion of the Church of
England: Nor ever had any man the boldness to suggest any such thing to me, to
the best of my Remembrance: and so being reconciled by the Merits of Jesus
Christ my Savior, into whose bosom I hope, I shall shortly be gathered, to
those Eternal happinesses which shall never have end: I desire heartily the
forgiveness of every man, for any rash or unadvised words, or anything done
amiss: And so my Lords and Gentlemen, Farewell: Farewell all the things of this
world.

I desire that you would be silent, and join with me in Prayer, and I trust in
God we shall all meet and live eternally in heaven, there to receive the
Accomplishment of all happiness, where every Tear shall be wiped away from our
eyes, and every sad thought from our hearts; and so, God bless this Kingdom,
and Jesus have mercy on my Soul.

Then turning himself about, he saluted all the Noblemen; and took a solemn
leave of all considerable Persons upon the Scaffold, giving them his Hand.

After that, he said, Gentlemen, I would say my Prayers, and entreat you all to
pray with me, and for me; then his Chaplain laid the Book of Common Prayer upon
the Chair before him, as he kneeled down, on which he prayed almost a quarter of
an hour, and then as long or longer without the Book, and concluded with the
Lords Prayer.

Standing up he espies his Brother, Sir George Wentworth, and calls him to him,
saying, Brother, we must part, remember me to my Sister, and to my Wife, and
carry my Blessing to my Son, and charge him that he fear God, and continue an
obedient Son to the Church of England, and warn him that he bears no private
grudg or revenge toward any man concerning me: and bid him beware that he
meddle not with Church Livings, for that will prove a Moth and canker to him in
his Estate, and wish him to content himself to be a Servant to his Country, not
aiming at higher preferments.

Aliter] To his Son Mr. Wentworth he commends himself, and gives him charge to
serve his God, to submit to his King with all Faith and Allegiance in things
temporal, to the Church in things Spiritual, charge him again and again, as
he will answer it to him in Heaven, never to meddle with the Patrimony of the
Church, for if he did, it would be a Canker to eat up the rest of his Estate.

Carry my blessing also to my Daughter Anne and Arabella, charge them to serve
and fear God, and he will bless them; not forgetting my little Infant, who yet
knows neither good nor evil, and cannot speak for it self, God speak for it and
bless it; now said he, I have nigh done, one stroke will make my Wife
husbandlesse, my dear children fatherless, and my poor Servants masterlesse,
and will separate me from my dear Brother, and all my Friends. But let God be
to you, and them all in all.

After this, going to take off his Doubler, and to make himself unready, he
said, I thank God I am not afraid of death, nor daunted with any discouragement
rising from any fears, but do as cheerfully put off my Doublet at this time, as
ever I did, when I went to bed; then he put off the Doublet, wound up his hair
with his hands, and put on a white Cap.

Then he called, where is the man that is to do this last Office? (meaning the
Executioner) call him to me: when he came and asked him forgiveness, he told
him he forgave him and all the world: then kneeling down by the Block, he went
to Prayer again himself, the Primate of Ireland kneeling on the one side, and
the Minister on the other: To the which Minister, after Prayer, he turned
himself, having done Prayer, and spoke some few words softly, having his hands
lifted up, and closed with the Ministers hands.

Then bowing himself to lay his Head upon the Block, he told the Executioner,
that he would first lay down his Head to try the fitness of the Block, and
take it up again before he would lay it down for good and all: And so he did;
and before he laid it down again, he told the Executioner, that he would give
him warning when to strike by stretching forth his hands: And presently laying
down his Neck upon the Block, and stretching forth his Hands, the Executioner
struck off his Head at one blow, and taking it up in his hand, showed it to all
the People, and said, God save the King.

His Body was afterward embalmed; and appointed to be carried into Yorkshire,
there to be buried among his Ancestors.

He lift these three Instructions for his Son in Writing.

First, That he should continue still to be brought up under those governors,
to whom he had committed him; as being the best he could pick out of all those
within his knowledge, and that he should not change them, unless they were
weary of him; that he should rather want himself, then they should want any
thing they could desire.

Secondly, He charge him as he would answer it at the last day, not to put
himself upon any public Employments till he was Thirty years of age at least:
And then if his Prince should call him to Public Service, he should carefully
undertake it, to restifie his Obedience, and withal to be faithful and sincere
to his Master, though he should come to the same end that himself did.

Thirdly, That he should never lay any hand upon any thing that belonged to the
Church: He foresaw that Ruin was like to come upon the Revenues of the Church,
and that perhaps they might be shared amongst the Nobility and Gentry. But if
his Son meddled with any of it, he wished the Curse of God might follow him and
all them, to the destruction of the most Apostolical Church upon Earth.

Epitaph on the Earl of Strafford.
HEre lies Wise, and Valiant Dust,
Huddled up 'twixt Fit and Just.
STRAFFORD, who was hurried hence,
'Twixt Treason and Convenience.
He spent his time here in a Mist;
A Papist, yet a Calvinist.
His Princes nearest Joy and Grief,
He had, yet wanted all Relief.
The Prop and Ruin of the State;
The Peoples violent Love and Hate:
One in Extremes loved, and abhorred,
Riddles lie here; or in a word,
Here lies Blood; and let it lie
Speechless still, and never cry.
The Life and Death of that Great Prelate and Martyr, the most Reverend William
Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and Primate of all England, Beheaded,
January 10. 1644.
THE Fate of this Learned and Magnificent Prelate first and signally verified
that Presage of King James, No Bishop, no King, he being the Usher to that
miserable calamity, which in the same manner and method, the same way of death,
befell that most Blessed Prince; for that Prophetic Saying was to be
accomplished in every Point, not only of Regiment, but in the concerns of
natural Life, like Hippocrates his Twins, to live and die together.

His Originals were from an honest and well-reputed Parentage, of good esteem
and credit in the Town of Reading, the place of his Nativity; his Father a
Clothier, his Mother of the Family of the Souths, of a gentile extraction, by
which side, Sir John Robinson is related to him; The Estate they had, was such,
as neither so low, to cloud or obscure his promising natural Endowments, or so
advanced as to serene them, and show them to the world in that Pomp and Luster,
to which at some distances they exerted themselves, and by degrees mounted to
the top and (...) of Ecclesiastical Promotion and Dignity in this Kingdom.

From his Seed-place and Nursery of Reading, he was transplanted to St. John's
College in Oxford, where he gave present signs of his Future Glory, being
observed by all men, as the Ornament of the House, and whole University. He
continued here, having passed through all the Honorable Employments of his
College, till his worth could be no longer concealed; and much beholding was
he to that his Modesty of Nature, which so long hid him from public
employment, and gave him time and opportunity of laying in that Stock and
Provision of all kind of Learning, which his unwearied diligence did so freely
spend in the several Places and Provinces he so wisely discharged, being
Chaplain first to the Earl of Devonshire, and Proctor of his University. From
Bachelor of Divinity, he proceeded Doctor, became Chaplain to Dr. Neat, then
Bishop of Rochester; afterward translated to York, who preferred him to King
James, who made him Prebend of Bugden and Westminster, Dean of Gloucester, and
Archdeacon of Huntington, and lastly, President of his own College.

Soon after he was made Bishop of St. David's, by the same bountiful Master, but
King Charles finding his great abilities, took him into more especial favor,
giving him the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, made him Dean of his Chapel, and
one of his Privy Council, then Bishop of London and Chancellor of Oxford, and
in conclusion, Archbishop of Canterbury.

Dr. Abbots (his Predecessor in that See) Remisseness and Indifferency
concerning the ceremonies used in the Church of England, was the cause that the
Gangren of Nonconformity was so far spread, that it was no less trouble, then
it raised Envy and Obloquy against him, to strive to enjoin and take order for
the strict Observation of the said Rites, being every where called Innovations.
By this means Episcopal Government was by many traduced, many Books and Libels
printed against them, wherein this Prelate was sure to bear the greatest
burden, the chief of those Writers were Bastwick, Burton, and Mr. Pryn, who
were afterward sentenced in the Star Chamber, and suffered in the Pillory.

But that which mainly, and chiefly helped forward his ruin, was his
recommending or enjoying the use of the English Liturgy in the Scotch Church,
which was received there with so much exasperation, that it mightily promoted
the Wars then in intention and designment by the Faction in that Kingdom.

Soon after Libels were thrown about, full of sedition, and railing, and
scurrilous jeers against him, which were seconded, with a Tumult and rabble of
Londoners assaulting his House at Lambeth, for which one of the chief Thomas
Bensted, was hanged in St. Georges Fields in Southwark.

He was falsely by such People reported for a Papist, whereas what stronger
proof can be brought for his firmness in the Protestant Religion, than that
Book of his against Fisher the Jesuit, which like a Hammer has beaten all the
Romish Arguments into pieces, an unanswerable Work, and of which, they will
never clear themselves, brag and vapor what they please. As to his Religion
this will suffice; for the morality and integrity, constant tenor of life, let
him be judged by his Diary, published in part by Mr. Prin. He had little
intermission of his pen or intention of mind against the Roman Faction,
whatsoever his Enemies have reported of him to the contrary, having before his
eyes, as his main aim, the glory and prosperity of this Church, in the right
and solemn Worship of God.

He first began the reedifying of that ruinous and decayed Cathedral of St.
Paul's London, toward the charge whereof, he expended great sums of money out
of his own purse, and this was reckoned to him as Superstition, though in the
account of sober and wife men, it was a noble zeal to Gods House. The
North-door of that Church he repaired wholly with his own money, the Workmen
not knowing whence their wages came.

In sum, for these joint Graces and Virtues, Piety, Learning, magnificence,
prudence, and humility, he is hardly to be paralled by any of his Predecessors;
many have had one or two of them, but wanted the other, in him they were a
bright constellation, whose luster made this Church glorious, to the envy and
wonder of the Nations about us.

But the time of Gods visitation being come, for the unfruitfulnesse,
negligence and unthankfulness of the Clergy, a generation of men were raised
up as scourges, to inflict the Divine Judgments. For in the beginning of our
dissentions, as soon as the business of the Earl of Strafford was over, the
mad multitude fell a raving and crying no Bishops, no Bishops. In the beginning
of the year 1641, and the latter end of 1640, this Reverend Prelate was
committed from the Black Rod to the Tower, whither not long after ten more of
that sacred Order, were sent after him; He continued in the Tower four years,
before any charge was brought against him, though he all along petitioned and
desired the Parliament he might come to his trya^, which could not be obtained
till the year 1644, a full account whereof, 2s also of his death we have here
subjoyned.

It would trouble Plutarch, (if he were alive,) to find out a fit Parallel with
whom to match him. All therefore I shall do at the present time, (and it is the
last public Office I shall do him) is, to lay down the story of his death and
sufferings, together with a view of those plots and practices which were set on
foot, to pluck a few years from a weak old man, and bring him to an unnatural
calamitous end. For though that maxim in Philosophy is most true and certain;
that corruption est in instanti, that death comes to us in a moment, or in the
twinkling of an eye, as the Scriptures phrase is; yet are there many previous
dispositions which make way unto it; all which are comprehended in the name of
death. And in that latitude of expression do we take the word, in laying down
the story of his death before you; which being writ out of an honest zeal to
truth, and a sincere affection to his name and memory, shall either be approved
of, or at least excused.

It was the practice and position of the ancient Donatists, (the Predecessors
and Progenitors of the modern Puritan) occidere quemcun^ qui contra eos
fecerit; to kill and make away whoever durst oppose their doings, or was
conceived to be an hindrance to their growing faction. And by this Card their
followers in these Kingdoms have been steered of late, imprisoning and
destroying all who have stood against them. It is long since they entertained
such desperate purposes against the life and person of the Lord Archbishop,
threatnig his death in scattered Libels, tellig him that his life was sought
for, that neither God nor man could endure so vile a Counselor to live any
longer. This was about the end of March 1629, and was the Prologue to those
libels, full of threats and scandals, which year by year exasperated and
inflamed the People, till they had made them ripe for mischief, and readily
prepared to execute whatever their grand Directors should suggest unto them.
Saint Paul did never fight more frequent and more terrible combats with the
beasts of Ephesus, for the promotion of the Gospel, then he with these
untractable and fiery spirits, who most seditiously opposed his religious
purposes of settling unity and uniformity in this Church of England. And in this
state things stood till the year, 1640, in which not only many factious and
seditious People in and about the City of London, made an assault by night on
his House at Lambeth, with an intent to murder him, had they found him there:
but the whole faction of the Scots declared in a Remonstrance to the English
Nation, that one of the chief causes which induced them to invade this Realm,
was to remove him from his Majesty, and bring him to the punishment which he
had deserved. The manner of their coming hit her, and the great entertainment
given them by the faction here, showed plainly that they were not like to be
sent away without their Errand: and makes it evident that his ruin was
resolved on in their secret Councils, before the Parliament was called, or that
they had declared so much by their will revealed.

The Parliament had not long continued, but he is named for an Incendiary by
the Scottish Commissioners, and thereupon accused of Treason by the House of
Commons. And although no particular Charge was brought against him, but only a
bare promise to prepare it in convenient time; yet was he presently committed
to the custody of the Gentleman Usher, and by him kept in durance till the end
of February, (being full ten weeks; about which time his Charge was brought
unto the Lords, but in generals only, and longer time required for particular
instances. And yet upon this Lydsord law, by which they used to hang men first,
and endite them afterward,) was he committed to the Tower, being followed
almost all the way by the R^scal multitude, who barbarously pursued him with
reproaches and clamours to the very gates; and there detained, contrary to all
Law and Justice, almost four years longer. This was the first great breach
which was made by Parliament in the liberties of the English Subject; (save
that their like proceedings with the Earl of Strafford, was a preparative unto
it;) and was indeed the very gap, at which the slavery and oppression, under
which this miserable Nation has for many years pined and languished, did break
in. What right could meaner persons look for, when as so great a Peer was
doomed to so long imprisonment, without being called to his Answer?

But yet the malice of his Enemies was not so contented. For though some of the
more moderate (or rather the less violent) Lords, who did not pierce into the
depth of the design, gave out that they intended only to remove him from his
Majesty's ear, and to deprive him of his Archbishopric, (which resolution
notwithstanding being taken up before any charge was brought against him, was
as unjust though not so cruel, as the others:) yet they showed only by this
Ovonture, that they did reckon without their Hosts, and might be of the Court,
perchance, but not of the Counsel. The leading and predominant party thought of
nothing less, then that he should escape with life, or go off with liberty
Only perhaps they might conceive some wicked hopes, that either the
tediousness of his restraint, or the indignity; and affronts which, day by
day, were offered to him, would have broken his heart, not formerly accustomed
to the like oppressions. And then like Pilate in the Gospel they had called for
water, and washed their hands before the multitude, and said, that they were
innocent of the blood of that righteous person: thinking that by such wretched
figgleaves, they could not only hide their wickedness, and deceive poor men;
but that God also might be mocked, and his Allseeing eye deluded, to which all
hearts lie open, all desires are known, and from which no secrets can be
hidden. To this end not content to immute him up within the walls of the Tower,
they robb him of his menial servants, restrain him to two only of his number,
and those not to have conserence with any others, but in the presence of his
Warder: and in conclusion make him a close Prisoner, not suffering him to go
out of his lodging to refresh himself, but in the company of his Keeper. And
all this while they vex his Soul continually with scandalous and infamous
Papers, and set up factious and seditious Preachers to inveigh against him in
the Pulpit to his very face; so to expose him to the scorn both of boys and
women, who many times stood up and turned toward him, to observe his
countenance, to see if any alteration did appear therein. And to the same
ungodly end, did they divest him of his Archiepiscopal and Episcopal
jurisdiction, conferring it on his inferior and subordinate Officers;
sequester his rents under pretense of maintenance for the Kings younger
Children (as if his Majesty's Revenues which they had invaded, were not
sufficient for that purpose,) convert his House at Lambeth into a Prison, and
confiscate all his coals and fuel to the use of their Jailer; deprive him of
his right of Patronage, and take into their own hands the disposing of all his
Benefices; seize upon all his goods and books which they found at Lambeth; and
in conclusion, rifle him of his notes and papers, not only such as were of
ordinary use and observation, but such as did concern him in the way of his
just defense. In which they did not any thing from the first to the last, but
in a proud defiance to the Laws of the Land, which they most impudently
violated in all these particulars: and more than so, they had proceeded step by
step, to this height of tyranny a whole year almost, before they had digested
their general charge into particular Accusations; or ever called him to his
Answer in due form of Law.

5. But God had given him such a measure both of strength and patience, that
these afflictions, though most great and irksome, did make no more impressions
on him, than an Arrow on a rock of Adamant. For at his first commitment he
besought his God, (as Master Pryn observes out of his Manual of devotions) to
give him full patience, proportionable comfort, and contentment with whatsoever
he should send; and he was heard in that he prayed for. For notwithstanding
that he had fed so long on the bread of carfulness, and drank the water of
affliction: yet, as the Scripture tells us of the four Hebrew children, his
countenance appeared fairer and fatter in flesh, than any of those who ate
their portion of the Kings me at, or drank of his wine. And he was wont to say
to his private friends, that, he thanked God, he never found more sweet
contentment in his greatest liberty, than in the time of that restraint. And
certainly it was no wonder that it should be so, he being conscious to himself
of no other crimes, which drew that fatal storm upon him, than a religious zeal
to the honor of God, the happiness of the King, and the preservation of the
Church in her peace and patrimony, as he professed at his death before all the
People. So that despairing of success in the way intended, his Enemies fell
upon another, but more desperate course, which was to ship him for New England,
and make him subject to the insolences of Wels and Peter's, two notorious
Schismatics. But this being put to the question in the House of Commons, was
rejected by the major part: not out of pity to his age, or consideration of his
quality, nor in respect unto the Laws so often violated; but to preserve him
yet a while, as a stale or property, wherewith to cheat the Citizens of some
further sums, and to invite the Scots to a new invasion, when their occasion so
required. For it was little doubted by discerning men, but that the Scots, who
made their first invasion on a probable hope of sequestring the Lord
Archbishop and the Earl of Strafford from His Majesty's Counsels; and sped it
so well in their design, that they were recompensed already with the death of
the one, would easily be tempted to a second journey, upon assurance to be
glutted with the blood of the other.

6. And this appears more plain and evident, in that about the coming on of the
Scots, which was in the midst of January 1643. they did again revive the
business, which had long lain dormant; causing the Articles, which they had
framed in maintenance of their former Accusation, to be put in Print about that
time, as is apparent by the Test of John Brown their Clerk, dated the 17 of
that month. And as the Scots advanced or slackned in their marches Southward,
so did they either quicken or retard the work: till hearing of the great
successes which they had in Yorkshire, they gave command to Master Pryn to
prosecute the charge against him, and bring him to his long expected trial; as
he reports it of himself, who, having rifled him of his Papers, and thereby
robbed him of those helps, which he had purposely reserved for his just
defense; and having personal quarrels of his own to revenge upon him, was
thought to be the fittest blood-hound in the whole kennel, to pursue the scent.
And now there was no talk but of quick dispatch. When hatred does accuse, and
malice prosecute, and prejudice and prepossession sit upon the Bench, God help
the innocent; There Is nothing but a miracle can preserve him then. And so it
proved in the event. They called him after to the Bar, both before and after,
caused a strict inquisition to be made into all his actions: they winnowed him
like wheat, and sifted him to the very bran, (which was you know the Devils
office;) they had against him all advantages of power and malice, and witnesses
at hand upon all occasions: but still they found his answers and his
resolutions of so good a temper, his innocence and integrity of so bright a
die, that as they knew not how to dismiss him with credit, so neither could
they find a way to condemn him with Justice. And though their Consciences could
tell them, that he had done nothing which deserved either death or bonds; yet
either to reward or oblige the Scots, who would not think themselves secure
while his head was on, they were resolved to bring him to a speedy end. Only
they did desire, if possible, to lay the Odium of the murder upon the common
People. And therefore Sergeant Wild in a speech against him, having aggravated
his supposed offenses to the highest pitch, concluded thus, that he was guilty
of so many and nototious treasons, so evidently destructive to the
Commonwealth, that he marvelled the People did not tear him in pieces as he
passed between his barge, and the Parliament Houses. Which barbarous and bloody
project, when it would not take, and that though many of the Rabble did desire
his death, yet none would be the executioner; they then employed some of their
most malicious and most active instruments, to go from door to door, and from
man to man, to get hands against him; and so petition those to hasten his
condemnation, which must, forsooth, be forced to their own desires: (whereof,
and of the Magistrates standing still, and suffering them to proceed without
any check, he gave them a memento in his dying Speech.) This being obtained,
the business was pursued with such heat and violence, that by the beginning of
November, it was made ready for a Sentence; which some conceived would have
been given in the Kings Bench, and that their proofs (such as they were) being
fully ripened, he should have been put over to a Middlesex Jury. But they were
only some poor Ignorants which conceived so of it. The leading members of the
plot thought of no such matter; and to say truth, it did concern them highly
not to go that way. For though there was no question to be made at all, but
that they could have packed a Jury to have found the Bill; yet by a clause in
the Attainder of the Earl of Strafford they had bound the Judges not to declare
their facts for Treason in the time to come, for which they had condemned and
executed that Heroic Peer. And therefore it was done with great care and
caution to proceed by Ordinance, and vote him guilty first in the House of
Commons; in which being parties, witnesses, and Judges too, they were assured
to pass it as they would themselves, which was done accordingly, about the 20
of November.

But yet the business was not done, for the Lords stuck at it. Some of which
having not extinguished all the sparks of honor, did by the light thereof
discover the injustice of so foul a practice; together with the danger might
befall themselves, if once disfavoured by the Grandees of that potent Faction. A
thing so stomacked by the Commons, that after some evaporations of their heat
and passion, which broke out into open threats, they presently drew, and sent
up an Ordinance to the Lords, tending to dispossess them of all power and
command in their Armies. But fearing this device was too weak to hold, they
fall upon another and a likelier project, which was to bring the Lords to sit
in the Commons House; where they were sure they should be inconsiderable both
for power and number. And to effect the same with more speed and certainty,
they had recourse to their old Arts, drew down Sir David Watkins with his
general muster of subscriptions, and put a petition in his hands, to be rendered
by him to the Houses, that is, themselves: wherein it was required among other
things, that they would vigorously proceed unto the punishment of all
Delinquents; and that for the more quick dispatch of the public businesses of
the State, the Lords would please to vote and sit together with the Commons. On
such uncertain terms, such a ticklish Tenure do they now hold their place and
power in Parliament; who so officiously complied with the House of Commons, in
depriving the Bishops of their Votes and the Churches birthright. And this was
it which helped them in that time of need. For by this (though stale and
common) Stratagem did they prevail so far upon some weak spirits, that the
Earls of Kent, Pembroke, Salisbury, and Bullingbrooke, the Lords North, Gray of
Wark and Brews, (a Scotchman, but an English Baron, and generally called the
Earl of Elgin) resolved to yield unto the current of so strong a stream: and
thought they had made a gaining voyage, if by delivering the Lord Archbishop
to the Peoples fury, they might preserve themselves in the Peoples favor. And
we know well, both who it was, and what end he came to, who though he knew that
the accused party was delivered him out of envy only, and that he found no evil
he was guilty of; yet being wearied with the clamours and the Crucifiges of the
common people, and fearing that some tumult would be made about it, delivered
him unto his enemies to be put to death. And for those other Lords who withdrew
themselves, and neither durst condemn nor protect the innocent; (though far the
major part, as it is reported) it is not easy to determine, whether their
consciences were more tender, their Collusion grosser, or their courage weaker.
All I shall say is only this, that Claudius Lysias in the Acts, had been as
guilty of Saint Paul's death, as any of the forty who had vowed to kill him; if
upon notice of the Plot which was laid to murder him, he had brought him down
unto the people, or not conveied him with a strong guard to the Court of Felix.
The journies end must needs be foul, which such lewd and crooked ways do
conduct unto. And it is worth your observation, that the same day, the fourth
of January, in which they passed this bloody Ordinance, (as if therein they
would cry quittance with his Sacred Majesty, who on the same accused the six
guilt Members) they passed another for establishing their new Directory; which
in effect was nothing but a total abolition of the Common Prayer Book: and
thereby showed unto the World, how little hopes they had of settling their new
form of Worship, if the foundation of it were not laid in blood.

The Bill being thus dispatched in the House of Lords, (if still they may be
called Lords, which are so over-loaded by the Common People) there wanted yet
the Kings Assent to give life to it: which they so far contemned, (they had
more reason to despair of it) that they never sought it. They had screwed up
their Ordinances to so high a pitch, that never Act of Parliament was of more
authority: and having found the Subjects so obedient, as to yield unto them in
matters which concerned them in their goods and liberties; it was but one step
more to make trial of them, whether they would submit their lives to the
selfsame tyranny: And this they made the first experiment in this kind, both of
their own power, and the peoples patience; he being the first man, as himself
noted in his Speech (which words are purposely omitted in Hindes Copy of it;)
that was ever put to death by Ordinance in Parliament; but was not the last, as
we have too sadly experienced. Certain it is, that by that Ordinance they then
made themselves the absolute Master of the Subjects lives, and left them
nothing that they could call their own, but ruin and destruction. Just as it
was observed by our Gracious Sovereign, upon occasion of the Ordinance for the
20th part, that the same power which robbed the Subject of the twentieth part
of their Estates, had by that only made a claim and entitled it self to the
other nineteen, when soever it should be thought expedient to hasten on the
general ruin. In which His Majesty proved but too true a Prophet. And though
perhaps some of the people were well pleased with this bloody Ordinance, and
ran with joy to see it put in execution: yet all wise men did look upon it as
the last groan or gasp of our dying liberty. And let both them and those who
passed it, be assured of this, that they who did so gladly sell the blood of
their fellow Subjects, seldom want Chapmen for their own in an open Market.

And here, as it was once observed, that the predominant Party of the United
Provinces, to bring about their ends in the death of Barnovelt, subverted all
those fundamental Laws of the Belgic liberty; for maintenance whereof they
took up Arms against Philip the Second, so would I know which of those
Fundamental Laws of the English Government have not been violated by these men
in their whole proceedings; for preservation of which Laws (or rather under
color of such preservation) they did bewitch the people unto that Rebellion:
It is a Fundamental Law of the English Government, and the first Article in the
Magna Charta, that the Church of England shall be free, and shall have her
whole Rights and Privileges inviolable: yet to make way unto the condemnation
of this innocent man, and other the like wicked and ungodly ends, the Bishops
must be Voted out of their place in Parliament, which most of them had held far
longer in their Predecessors, than any of our noble families in their
Progenitors. And if the Lords refuse to give way unto it (as at first they did)
the people must come down to the House in multitudes, and cry, No Bishops, no
Bishops, at the Parliament doors, till by the terror of their tumults they
extort it from them. It is a Fundamental Law of the English liberty, that no
Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned without cause shown, or be detained
without being brought unto his Answer in due form of Law: yet here we saw a
Freeman imprisoned ten whole weeks together, before any Charge was brought
against him; and kept in prison three years more, before his general Accusation
was by them reduced into particulars; and for a year almost detained close
prisoner, without being brought unto his answer, as the Law requires. It is a
Fundamental Law of the English Government, that no man be disseised of his
Freehold or Liberties, but by the known Laws of the Land: yet here was a man
disseised of his Rents and Lands, spoiled of his Goods, deprived of his
jurisdiction, divested of his Right and Patronage; and all this done, when he
was so far from being convicted by the Laws of the Land, that no particular
charge was so much as thought of. It is a Fundamental Law of the English
Liberty, that no man shall be condemned, or put to death, but by lawful
judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, i. e. in the ordinary way of
a legal trial: and sure an Ordinance of both Houses, without the Royal Assent,
is no part of the Law of England, nor held an ordinary way of trial for the
English subject, or ever reckoned to be such in the former times. And finally,
it is a Fundamental Law in the English Government, that if any other case (than
those recited in the Statute of King Edward 3.) which is supposed to be
Treason, do happen before any of his Majesty's Justices, the Justices shall
tarry without giving judgment, till the cause be shown and declared before the
King, and His Parliament, whether it ought to be judged Treason or not: yet
here we had a new found Treason, never known before, nor declared such by any
of His Majesty's Justices, nor ever brought to be considered of by the King and
His Parliament, but only voted to be such by some of those few Members which
remained at Westminster, who were resolved to have it so for their private
ends. Put all which has been said together, and then tell me truly, if there
by any difference (for I see not any) between the ancient Roman slaves and the
once Freeborn Subjects of the English Nation, whose lives and liberties, whose
goods and fortunes depend on the mere pleasure of their mighty Masters.

But to return unto our Story, the passing of the Ordinance being made known
unto him, he neither entertained the news with a Stoical Apathy, nor wailed his
Fate with weak and womanish Lamentations (to which Extremes most men are
carried in this case) but heard it with so even and so smooth a temper, as
showed he neither was afraid to live, nor ashamed to die. The time between the
Sentence and the Execution, he spent in Prayers and applications to the Lord
his God; having obtained, though not without some difficulty, a Chaplain of his
own, to attend upon him, and to assist him in the work of his preparation:
though little preparation needed to receive that Blow, which could not but be
welcome, because long expected. For so well was he studied in the Art of dying
(especially in the last and strictest part of his Imprisonment) that by
continual Fasting, Watching, Prayers, and such like Acts of Christian
Humiliation, his flesh was rarefied into Spirit, and the whole man so fitted
for eternal Glories, that he was more then half in heaven, before death brought
his bloody (but triumphant) Chariot to convey him thither. He that had been so
long a Confessor, could not but think it a release of miseries to be made a
Martyr. And as it is recorded of Alexander the great, that the night before his
best and greatest Battle with Darius the Persian, he fell into so sound a
sleep, that his Princes hardly could awake him when the Morning came; so is is
certified of this great Prelate, that on the Evening before his Passover, the
night before the dismal combat betwixt him and death, after he had refreshed
his spirits with a moderate Supper, he betook himself unto his rest, and slept
very soundly, till the time came, in which his Servants were appointed to
attend his Rising, a most assured sign of a Soul prepared. The fatal morning
being come, he first applied himself to his private Prayers, and so continued,
till Penington, and other of their public Officers came to conduct him to the
Scaffold: which he ascended with so brave a courage, such a cheerful
countenance, as if he had mounted rather to behold a triumph, then to be made a
Sacrifice, and came not there to die, but to be translated. And to say Truth,
it was no Scaffold, but a Throne, a Throne whereon he shortly was to receive a
Crown, even the most glorious Crown of Martyrdom. And though some rude, uncivil
people reviled him, as he passed along, with opprobrious Language, as loath to
let him go to the Grave in peace, it never discomposed his thoughts, nor
disturbed his patience. For he had profited so well in the School of Christ,
that when he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed his cause to him that judges righteously. And as he did not
fear the Frowns, so neither did he cover the applause of the vulgar Herd, and
therefore rather chose to read what he had to speak unto the People, then to
affect the Ostentation either of memory or wit in that dreadful Agony; whether
with greater Magnanimity or Prudence, I can hardly say. As for the matter of
his Speech, besides what did concern himself and his own purgation, his great
care was to clear His Majesty, and the Church of England from any inclination
unto Popery; (with a persivasion of the which, the Authors of our then
miseries, had abused the People, and made them take up Arms against their
Sovereign.) approving himself a faithful Servant to the last. By means whereof,
as it is said of Samson, in the Book of Judges, that the men which he slew at
his death, were more then they which he slew in his Life: so may it be affirmed
of this famous Prelate, that he gave a greater blow unto the enemies of God and
the King at the hour of his Death, then he had given them in his whole life
before; But this you will more clearly see by the Speech it self, which
follows here, according to the best and most perfect Copies.

The Speech of the L. Archbishop of Canterbury, spoken at his Death, upon the
Scaffold on the Tower Hill, Jan. 10. 1644.
Good People,
THis is an uncomfortable time to preach, yet I shall begin with a Text of
Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with patience that Race which is set before
us, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our Faith, who for the Joy
that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the Throne of God.

I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked to Jesus the Author and
Finisher of my Faith, he best knows: I am now come to the end of my Race, and
here I find the Cross, a death of shame, but the shame must be despised, or no
coming to the right hand of God; Jesus despised the shame for me, and God
forbid but I should despise the shame for him: I am going apace (as you see)
toward the Red Sea; and my feet are now upon the very Brink of it; an
Argument, I hope, that God is bringing me into the Land of Promise, for that
was the way through which he led his People: But before they came to it, he
instituted a Passover for them, a Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sour
herbs; I shall obey, and labor to digest the sour herbs, as well as the Lamb.
And I shall remember it is the Lords Passover; I shall not think of the herbs,
nor be angry with the hand which gathers them; but look up only to him who
instituted that, and governs these; For men can have no more power over me,
then what is given them from above. I am not in love with this passage through
the Red Sea, for I have the weakness and infirmities of flesh and blood
plentifully in me: and I have prayed with my Savior, ut transiret Calix iste,
that this Cup of Red Wine might pass from me: But if not, Gods will (not mine)
be done, and I shall most willingly drink of this Cup, as deep, as he pleases,
and enter into this Sea, yea and pass through it, in the way that he shall
lead me.

But I would have it remembered (good people) that when Gods Servants were in
this boisterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which persecuted them
(and did in a manner drive them into that Sea) were drowned in the same waters,
while they were in pursuit of them: I know my God whom I serve, is as able to
deliver me from this Sea of Blood, as he was to deliver the Three Children from
the Furnace; and (I most humbly thank my Savior for it) my Resolution is now,
as theirs was then: They would not worship the Image the King had set up, nor
will I the Imaginations which the people are setting up; nor will I forsake the
Temple and the Truth of God, to follow the bleating of Jeroboams Calf, in Dan
and Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled (God
of his mercy open their eyes, that they may see the right way) for at this day
the Blind lead the Blind, and if they go on, both will certainly fall into the
Ditch. For my self, I am (and I acknowledge it in all humility) a most grievous
sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed, and I cannot doubt, but that God
has Mercy in store for me (a poor Penitent) as well as for other sinners; I
have now upon this sad occasion, ransacked every Corner of my heart, yet (and I
thank God) I have not found (among the many) any one sin which deserves death
by any known Law of this Kingdom: And yet hereby I charge nothing upon my
Judges; for if they proceed upon Proof (by valuable Witnesses) I, or any other
Innocent, may be justly condemned: And (I thank God) though the weight of the
Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within, as ever I was in my life. And
though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever died by
an Ordinance of Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way,
though not by this means; For Elphegus was hurried away, and lost his Head by
the Danes; and Simon Sudbury in the Fury of Wat Tyler and his Fellows: Before
these, St. John Baptist had his Head danced off by a Lewd Woman, and St.
Cyprian Archbishop of Carthage, submitted his Head to a persecuting Sword. Many
examples (great and good) and they teach me Patience: For I hope my Cause in
Heaven will look of another Dye, then the color that is put upon it here. And
some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in
their several generations, but also that my Charge (as foul as it is made) looks
like that of the Jews against St. Paul, (Acts 25.3.) For he was accused for the
Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion: And like that of S. Stephen, ( Acts 6.14.)
for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Religion, the holy
place and the Temple ( v. 13.) But you will say, do I then compare my self with
the Integrity of St. Paul, and St. Stephen? No, far be that from me; I only
raise a Comfort to my self, that these great Saints and Servants of God were
laid at in their times, as I am now. And it is memorable, that S. Paul, who
helped on this Accusation against S. Stephen, did after fall under the very
same himself. Yea, but here is a great Clamor, that I would have brought in
Popery: I shall answer that more fully by and by: In the mean time, you know
what the Pharisees said against Christ himself, If we let him alone, all men
will believe in him, and venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and take
away both our Place and the Nation. Here was a causeless Cry against Christ
that the Romans will come: And see how just the Judgment of God was; they
crucified Christ, for fear lest the Romans should come, and his death was it,
which brought in the Romans upon them; God punishing them with that which they
most feared: And I pray God this Clamor of venient Romani, (of which I have
given no cause) help not to bring them in; for the Pope never had such a
Harvest in England since the Reformation, as he has now upon the Sects and
Divisions that are amongst us. In the mean time, by honor and dishonor, by
good and evil report, as a Deceiver, and yet true, am I passing through this
world, 2 Cor. 6.8. -- Some Particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of.

And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our Gracious Sovereign,
He has been much traduced for bringing in of Popery; but on my Conscience, (of
which I shall give God a very present account) I know Him to be as free from
this Charge, as any man living: and I hold him to be as sound a Protestant
(according to the Religion by Law established) as any man in this Kingdom; and
that he will venture his Life as far and as freely for it; and I think I do, or
should know, both His affection to Religion, and His Grounds for it, as fully
as any man in England.

The second Particular is concerning this great and Populous City, (which God
bless.) Here has been of late, a fashion taken up, to gather hands, and then
to go to the Great Court of this Kingdom (the Parliament) and clamor for
Justice, as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come, (which
are unknown to the many) could not, or would not do Justice, but at their
appointment. A way, which may endanger many an Innocent man, and pluck his
blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also: And this has
been lately practiced against my self; [the Magistrate standing still, and
suffering them openly to proceed from Parish to Parish without check;] God
forgive the setters of this (with all my heart I beg it) but many well meaning
People are caught by it. In St. Stephens case, when nothing else would serve,
they stirred up the people against him; and Herod went the same way, when he
had killed St. James, yet he would not venture upon St. Peter, till he found how
the other pleased the people. But take heed of having your hands full of blood,
for there is a time (best known to himself) when God (above other sins) makes
Inquisition for blood, and when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist tells
us, That God remembers (but that is not all) He remembers and forgets not the
Complaint of the Poor, that is, whose blood is shed by oppression, verse. 9.
take heed of this, It Is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, but then especially, when he is making Inquisition for blood; And (with my
Prayers to avert it) I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophecy
that is expressed, Jer. 26.15.

The third particular is the poor Church of England. It has flourished and
been a shelter to other neighboring Churches, when storms have driven upon
them. But, alas, now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whether, or
how it shall get out: and (which is worse than a storm from without) its become
like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own body, and at every
cleft profaneness and irreligion is entering in, while as Prosper speaks (in
his second Book De vit a contemptu, cap. 4.) Men that introduce profaneness
are cloaked over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary Religion:
for we have lost the Substance, and dwell too much in Opinion, and that Church
which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruin, is fallen into danger by
her own.

The last particular (for I am not willing to be too long) is my self: I was
born and baptized in the bosom of the Church of England established by Law; in
that profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to dye: This is
no time to dissemble with God, least of all in matter of Religion, and
therefore I desire it may be remembered. I have always lived in the Protestant
Religion, established in England, and in that I come now to dye. What Clamours
and Slanders I have endured for laboring to keep a Uniformity in the external
service of God, according to the Doctrine and Discipline of this Church, all
men know, and I have abundantly felt.

Now at last I am accused of High Treason in Parliament: a Crime which my Soul
ever abhorred; this Treason was charged to consist of these two parts, An
endeavor to subvert the Laws of the Land, and alike Endeavor to overthrow the
true Protestant Religion Established by Law. Besides my answers to the several
Charges, I protested my Innocence in both Houses. It was said, Prisoners
Protestations at the Bar must not be taken. I can bring no witness of my
heart, and the intentions thereof, therefore I must come to my Protestation not
at the Bar, but my Protestation at this hour, and instant of my death; in which
I hope all men will be such charitable Christians, as not to think I would dye
and dissemble, being instantly to give God an account for the truth of it: I do
therefore in the presence of God, and his holy Angels take it upon my death,
That I never endeavored the subversion either of Law or Religion: and I desire
you all to remember this Protest of mine for my Innocence, in these, and from
all Tre^sons, whatsoever. I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to
Parliaments: No, I understand them and the benefit that comes by them too well
to be so: But I did mislike the misgovernment of some Parliaments many ways,
and I had good reason for it: For Corruption optimi est pessima, there is no
corruption in the World so bad, as that which is of the best thing in it self;
for the better the thing is in nature, the worse it is corrupted. And that
being the highest Court, over which no other have Jurisdiction, when it is
misinformed or mis-governed, the Subject is left without all remedy. But I
have done, I forgive all the World, all and every of those bitter Enemies which
have persecuted me, and humbly desire to be forgiven of God first, and then of
every man, whether I have offended him or not, if he do but conceive that I
have. Lord do thou forgive me, and I beg forgiveness of him. And so I heartily
desire you to join in Prayer with me.

Oeternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches
and fullness of all thy mercies look upon me; but not till thou have nailed my
sins to the Cross of Christ, not till thou have bathed me in the blood of
Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ: that so the
punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to
try me to the utmost, I humbly beseech thee, give me now in this great instant,
full Patience, proportionable Comfort, and a heart ready to dye for thy Honor,
the Kings happiness, and this Churches preservation. And my zeal to these (far
from arrogance be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty excepted, and all
incidents thereto,) which is yet known to me in this particular, for which I
now come to suffer; I say in this particular of Treason; but otherwise my sins
are many and great: Lord pardon them all, and those especially (what ever they
are) which have drawn down this present Judgment upon me: and when thou have
given me strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and
carry me through death that I may look upon it in what visage soever it shall
appear to me, Amen. And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood, in
this more than miserable Kingdom, (I shall desire that I may pray for the
people too, as well as for my self) O Lord, I beseech thee, give grace of
repentance to all Blood thirsty people; but if they will not repent, O Lord,
confound all their devises, Defeat and Frustrate all their designs and
endeavors upon them, which are or shall be contrary to the Glory of thy great
Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and
His Posterity after Him in their just Rights and Privileges, the Honor and
Conservation of Parliaments in their just power, the Preservation of this poor
Church in her Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this
distracted and distressed People under their ancient Laws, and in their native
Liberties. And when thou have done all this in mere mercy for them, O Lord,
fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with Religious dutiful-obedience to
thee and thy Commandments all their days: So Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen, and
receive my Soul into thy Bosom, Amen.

Our Father which art, etc.

The Speech and Prayers being ended, he gave the Paper which he red unto Dr.
Stern his Chaplain, now Lord Bishop of Carlisle, desiring him to show it his
other Chaplains, that they might know how he departed out of this World, and so
prayed God to show his mercies and blessings on them. And noting how one Hind
had employed himself in taking a Copy of his Speech as it came from his mouth;
he desired him not to do him wrong in publishing a false or imperfect Copy,
Which as Hind promised him to be ^areful of, calling for punishment from above
if he should do otherwise, so has he reasonably well performed his promise: he
next applied himself to the fatal Block, as to the Haven of his rest. But
finding the way full of people, who had placed themselves upon the Theater to
behold the Tragedy, he desired he might have room to dye, beseeching them to
let him have an end of his miseries, which he had endured very long. All which
he did with so serene and calm a mind, as if he had been rather taking order
for another man's funeral, then making way unto his own. Being come near the
Block, he put off his doublet, and used some words to this effect. Gods will be
done, I am willing to go out of this World, no man can be more willing to send
me out of it. And seeing through the chinks of the boards that some people were
got under the Scaffold, about the very place where the Block was seated, he
called on the Officers for some dust to stop them, or to remove the people
thence, saying it was no part of his desires, that his blood should fall upon
the heads of the People. Never did man put off mortality with a braver courage,
not look upon his bloody and malicious Enemies with more Christian charity. And
thus far he was gone in his way toward Paradise with such a Primitive
magnanimity, as equalled, if not exceeded the example of ancient Martyrs.

Then he turned toward his Executioner and gave him money, saying, without the
least distemper or change of countenance, here, honest friend, God forgive
thee, and do thy office upon me with mercy, and having given a sign when the
blow should come, he kneeled down upon his knees, and prayed as follows.

The Lord Archbishops Prayer, as he kneeled by the Block.
LOrd, I am coming as fast as I can, I know I must pass through the shadow of
death, before I can come to see thee. But it is but umbra mortis, a mere shadow
of death, a little darkness upon nature; but thou by thy merits and passion
have broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord receive my Soul, and have mercy
upon me, and bless this Kingdom with Peace and Plenty, and with brotherly love
and charity, that there may not be this effusion of Christian blood amongst
them, for Jesus Christ 's sake, if it be thy will. Then laying his head upon
the Block, and praying silently to himself, he said aloud, Lord receive my
Soul, which was the signal given to the Executioner, who very dexterously did
his office, and took it off at a blow, his Soul ascending on the wings of
Angels into Abraham's bosom, and leaving his Body on the Scaffold, to the care
of men, after he had lived 71 years, 13 weeks, and 4 days, which was interd in
Alhollows Barkin Church, with the decent Ceremonies of the Church of England.

On the Archbishop of Canterbury.
I Need no muse to give my passion vent,
He brews his tears that studies to lament.
Verse chymically weeps; that pious rain
Distilled with Art, is but the sweat o'th brain,
Who ever sob'd in numbers? can a groan
Be quaver'd out by soft division?
It Is true, for common formal Ellegies,
Not Bushels Wells can match a Poets eyes
In wanton waterworks: h^e'l turn his tears
From a Geneva Jig up to the Spears,
But when he mourns at distance, weeps aloof.
Now that the Conduit-head is our own roof,
Now that the fate is public we may call
It Britains Vespers, Englands Funeral.
Who has a Pensil to express the Saint,
Put he has eyes too, washing off the paint?
There is no learning but what tears surround
Like to Seths Pillars in the Deluge drowned.
There is no Church, Religion is grown
From much of late, that she is increast to none;
Like an Hydropick body full of Rheumes,
First swells into a bubble, then consumes.
The Law is dead, or cast into atrance,
And by a Law dough-bak't, an Ordinance.
The Lyturgie, whose doom was voted next,
Died as a Comment upon Him the Text.
There nothing lives, life is, since he is gone,
But a Nocturnal Lucubration.
Thus have you seen Deaths Inventory read
In the sum total -- Canterburies dead.
A sight would make a Pagan to baptize
Himself a Convert in his bleeding eyes.
Would thaw the rabble that fierce beast of ours,
(That which Agena- like weeps and devours)
Tears that flow brackish from their Souls within
Not to repent, but pickle up their sin.
Mean time no squallid grief his look defiles,
He guilds his sadder fate with noble smiles.
Thus the worlds eye with reconciled streams
Shines in his showers, as if he wept his beams.
How could success such villainies applaud?
The State in Strafford fell, the Church in Laud:
The twins of public rage adjudg'd to dye,
For Treasons they should act by Prophecy.
The facts were done before the Laws were made,
The trump turned up after the game was played.
Be dull great spirits and forbear to climb,
For worth is sin and eminence a crime;
No Churchman can be innocent and high,
It Is height makes Grantham steeple stand awry.
Master Robert Yeomans and Master George Bowcher, Citizens of Bristol, murdered
there, May 30, 1643.
THere were few cities in the Kingdom, for all the Artifices and popular cheats
of those at Westminster, who had debauched a great number of the Kings good
Subjects, wherein his Majesty's Cause had not an equal share in the Affection
and Opinion of the Inhabitants; if in some places it went less, in others it
was paramount, as the Difference was visible, in the neighboring Cities of
Gloucester and Bristol. In the last whereof, we shall present you with a very
sad and deplorable example of Loyalty and cruelty, in the persons of Mr.
Yeomans and Mr. Bowcher, intending it as a sweet Ointment to embasm their
Funerals; that though with their Savior (the Ignominy of whose Cross
sanctified even the death of that accursed Tree) in their death they were
numbered among the Transgressors, yet (Loyalty being their Epitaph) they may
make their Graves amongst the Honorable.

When the Long Parliament first sat, these two Gentlemen, with the rest of the
Kingdom, rejoiced to see that day, and stood at gaze, as greedily as any,
expecting what acts of Bounty, what Relief of Grievances the King would through
their hands convey unto his Subjects. And while they kept in the Sphere of
their Duty and Allegiance, were as forward to applaud them as any, but after
the Publication of the Remonstrance, wherein the Parliament so abominably
slandered the Kings Government, which was the Groundwork of the Rebellion, and
the Critical time being come, in which men must either declare themselves,
either for, or against their Sovereign, though the City was deeply leavened
with disloyal Principles, yet these Gentlemen, and the major Part of the
Citizens, of whom they were chief, were the Kings most faithful Subjects. They
were men of good esteem, plentiful estates, known Integrity, and true Children
of the Church of England, who seeing the miserable condition of those places
where the Rebels bore sway, and beginning to be sensible of the same Bondage
under Col. Essex, entered into a Consultation, how to put the City of Bristol
into the Kings Possession and Protection. To this purpose, they dispatched an
Agent to the Court, to inform the King, that he had many good Subjects in
Bristol, and withal, to signify their desire to deliver up his own City to
himself, if he would send some of his Forces thither, to take it: The
Inducements and Reasons of this Design, were these;

First, Conscience to God, not to resist the King, knowing they that do, shall
receive unto themselves Damnation. Detesting that abominable Sect of the
Hothamites, those State-Hereticks, who accounted it their duty to keep the
Kings Towns for the Kings use, by shutting the Gates against the Kings Person.

Secondly, the frequent Affronts given to His Majesty by scandalous and
disloyal Speeches on all Occasions belched out against him, by Protestations,
Declarations, Messages, Contempt of his Gracious Offers, before the Face of his
Messengers, as to instance in Sr. Baynham Throckmorton, whom the King sent to
Bristol, requiring the Mayor and Aldermen, not to give admittance to any of the
Parliament Forces, promising, that he himself would not impose any on them,
together with tender of the promise of his Favor; yet did the Mayor and
Sheriff, two Boutefews in that City, send 4 Pieces of Ordnance at that very
instant to Marleborough, to be employed against the King.

Lastly, Out of regard to their own security, and to quit themselves of (those
Oppressions and Grievances under which they suffered, and these were many; 1.
The often repeated Taxations and Loans of Money unto the King and Parliament,
as they were pleased to twist them upon the thredbare Security of the public
Faith, the illegal exactions employed for repairing the Castle, building of
Forts, and maintaining a Garrison against the King. 2. By urging upon them new
and treasonable Votes and Protestations, if not fully in words, yet in the use
and interpretation of them, directly opposite to the Oath of Allegiance, the
Oath of every Citizen, when made a Freeman, with a paticular Engagement, to
resist Prince Rupert, the Lord General, the Earl of Forth and Brainford, the
Lord Marquess Hertford, the Earl of Newcastle, Sr. Ralph-Hopton, and their
Forces. 3. By their disarming all such as were any way suspected to bear duty
and Affection to his Majesty, unless they would take the aforesaid
Protestations. 4. The perpetual Scorn and Obloquy to which they were exposed,
being reproached every day, as they passed the streets, with the names of
Malignants and Papists. 5. The General Contempt and Profanation of Gods holy
Worship and Service, tearing the Common Prayer Book, etc. Lastly, Because upon
the Point, they were confined to Bristol, not daring to go out of the City; for
in all places where the Commands and Ordinances of the Two Houses prevailed,
they had given a List of the Names of those that durst appear for the King, to
the end, that if any of them came thither, they might be apprehended, and sent
Prisoners to Taunton, Barkley Castle, as Delis^quents to the Parliament.

It was no wonder therefore, that a City thus robbed of its Wealth and Liberty,
groaning under an insupportable Yoke of Bondage and Tyranny, should endeavor,
by restoring the King to his Rights, to restore themselves to their former
Freedom. Upon these Motives therefore they engaged in a Loyal Confederacy, to
deliver the City from its Captivity, into his Majesty's Protection, if
possible, without any bloodshed, as afterward by their Examination appeared.

It Is therefore true, that these two Gentlemen with their Associates, had an
Intention to cast out the Rebels, and to secure Bristol for the King, and to
seize the Governor, and some of the Chief Rebels, but not to kill them; and to
that end, a Commission was got, and sent to Mr. Yeomans, to raise Forces, and
constitute Commanders for the Kings Service; whereupon a Protestation was drawn
by Mr. Bowcher, to be taken by all the Partakers in this business, which fully
expressed their Intentions in this undertaking; which being in general Terms, for
the Assistance and Defense of the King, against all Forces raised without his
Command, need not here be inserted.

After Communication of Counsels, and many Messages interchanged between Oxford
and Bristol, drawing to the Design, some of the Parliament Officers under Co^.
Essex, who loathed and condemned themselves for being in their Service, in was
resolved, that upon Monday, Mar. 7. 1642. Prince Rupert with a Party of the
Kings Forces, should face the City on Durdan-Down, distant not a full Mile from
the City, while they within, should possess and make good Froom Gate and
Newgate, seize the Court of Guards, open the Gates, and give the Signal
thereof, for the Kings Forces to make their Approach, by Ringing of St. John's
and St. Michaels Bells. Accordingly, Prince Rupert came, expecting the Signal by
Five of the Clock in the morning, and the Ports to be opened, but the
Combination was discovered, and these two Gentlemen, with others, apprehended,
there being found several Armed men with them in their Houses, which being
signified to the Prince, he marched presently away.

Having them thus in their power, they clap Irons upon them, tie them Head and
Feet together, make them close Prisoners, deprive them of all Comfort to be
administered by their Wives, Children, or Friends, and used them with that
Barbarousness and Inhumanity as is not imaginable could be practiced by one
Christian upon another; and after 11 weeks hard Imprisonment, frequent
Examination, barbarous insulting over them, especially by Nathaniel Fiennes,
they were brought to their Trial at a Council of War, where, upon the Articles
exhibited against them, by Advocate Walker, they were condemned to die; but
first Mr. Yeomans received this Judgment.

The Judgment upon Robert Yeomans.
Upon due Consideration of the Articles exhibited on May the 8th. by Clement
Walker, Esquire, Advocate to this Council of War against Robert Yeomans, and
others, the late conspirators in this City, and upon due hearing of the
Answers, and defense of the said Robert, to the several Articles, and also upon
Proofs and Examination before them taken upon Oath; It is unanimously adjudged
by this Court, That the said Robert Yeomans is guilty of Traiterous
Intelligence and correspondency with the Enemy, and of a traiterous and wicked
conspiracy, to betray this Town into the hands of the Enemy, and thereupon this
Court does adjudge and pass Sentence of death upon him, as a Traitor and
Conspirator, and accordingly does order, That the said Robert Yeomans shall be
returned to the place of his former Imprisonment, and from thence be brought
before the main Court of Guard, there to be hanged by the Neck till he die.

Mr. Robert Yeomans being thus most unjustly condemned, May the 8th. in the
same Month, Mr. George Bowcher was convened before them, where were present,
and sitting in Council 3 or 4 mean rascally Fellows, one of whom, by name
Robert Baugh, a Sheep-skin-Dresser, who in times of peace durst not come near
Mr. Yeomans, but uncovered, at a distance, as his duty was, now plucked off Mr.
Yeomans Hat (he being brought before them again) commanding him to stand bare
before him; the Articles were the same which were exhibited before against Mr.
Yeomans, and are now not material to be inserted; but upon the matter of them
drawn out of his own Confession, or deposition of others, at the Lady Rogers
her House, he received the like Sentence of Condemnation.

When the News of this came to Court, though many men did not think that their
bold Insolency would so far dare as to put the Sentence in execution, yet at
last considering, that they were not in the hands of honorable Enemies, but
Rebel Sectaries, under such a Governor, the General of his Majesty's Forces
resolved to write unto Fiennes, and that by way of Threat, that by the menace
of the like punishment on the Prisoners with him, he might deter them from
their intended Cruelty on the Kings good Subjects there. The Letter was this:

I Having been informed, that lately at a Court of War, you have condemned to
death Robert Yeomans, late Sheriff of the City of Bristol, who has his
Majesty's Commission for raising a Regiment for his Service, William Yeomans,
his Brother, George Bowcher, and Edward Dacres, all for expressing their
Loyalty to his Majesty, and endeavoring his Service, according to their
Allegiance, and that you intend to proceed speedily against diverse others in
the like manner, do therefore signify unto you, that I intend speedily to put
M. George, Mr. Stevens, Capt. Huntley, and others taken in Rebellion against
his Majesty at Cyrencester, into the same condition; do further advertize you,
that if you offer by that unjust Judgment to execute any of them you have so
condemned, that these now in custody here, especially those men aforespecified,
must expect no Favor or Mercy. Directed to the Commander in Chief, and Council
of War in the City of Bristol.

Forth.


Fiennes having received this Letter by a Drum, and knowing the great advantage
they had by the Meanness and Baseness of the Prisoners in the Kings hands, put
in the Balance with those of the Kings in their hands, while Earls, Barons and
the Flower of the Nobility were exposed to Tinkers and Cobblers, returned a most
petulant and saucy Letter; which for the Irreverence and baseness of it, we
will not daign to insert.

Whereupon, the King pitying the distress of those his Loyal Subjects, and
perceiving, no Reason or Justice could prevail with Fiennes (his Bowels
yearning over his worst Subjects) put him upon a pious consideration of those
that were to suffer for him, which by a Trumpeter, in his Royal Letter he
expressed to the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs of Bristol, in these words;

CHARLES R.

TRusty and Beloved, We greet you well: Whereas We are informed, that by the
Power and Authority of certain Factious and Rebellious Persons in that Our City
of Bristol, diverse of Our good Subjects (as namely, Robert Yeomans, George
Bowcher, William Yeomans, Edward Dacres, and others) of that Our City are
imprisoned, for preserving their Duty and Loyalty to us, and for refusing to
join in, or assist this Horrid and odious Rebellion against Us, and that the
said wicked and traiterous Persons have presumed to condemn the said Innocent
men to die, and upon such their Sentence, notoriously against the Laws of God
and man, they intend to execute and murder our said Subjects. We have thought
fit, to signify to you, the Mayor, Aldermen, Sheriffs, and the rest of the
Body of Our Common Council of that Our City, That if you suffer this Horrid and
Execrable Murder to be committed upon the Persons aforesaid, and thereby call
the Judgment of God, and bring perpetual Infamy upon that Our City; We shall
look upon it as the most barbarous and Inhumane Act, that has yet been
committed against Us, and upon you, as the most desperate Betrayers of Us, and
of the Lives and Liberties of your Fellow Subjects. And We do therefore Will
and Command you, not to suffer any Violence to be done upon the Persons
aforesaid; but that if any such be attempted against them, that you raise all
the Power and Strength of that Our City for their Rescue. And to that purpose,
We Command all Our Good Subjects of that Our City, to aid and assist you, upon
their Allegiance, and as they hope for any Grace or Favor at Our Hands. And
that you and they kill and slay all such who shall attempt or endeavor to take
away the Lives of Our said Subjects. And for so doing, this shall be your
Warrant. And hereof, you may not fail at your utmost Peril.

Given at Our Court of Oxford, May 29. 1643. To Our Trusty and Well-Beloved,
the Mayor, Aldermen Sheriffs, and Common Council of Our City of Bristol.

This Letter arrived at Bristol, the very day of the Execution of these
Gentlemen: but Fiennes either imagining or knowing of such a thing, kept the
Gates shut all the day, so that none could come in or out, and when the Murder
was perpetrated, and the Messenger admitted, contrary to the Law of Arms and
Nations, he was sent to Prison, where he continued a long time.

What could a Gracious Prince do more? but having not Power to compel, what he
could not persuade, they persisted in their bloody Purposes. For after Sentence
of Death passed on them, they pursued them with Threats, and used no other
Language to them, but death and Hanging, often menacing what they could but
once inflict: So that every hour they expected death. Having thus languished
some days under these bloody Insultations, being frequently deprived of their
necessary Comforts, by the Guards that stood at the Prison doors, for no other
purpose. If Execution had not been hastened, Famine would have prevented their
public despite. For Mr. Yeomans, whom of the Two, they most hated, being
laden with Irons, and stifled with the Nastiness of the Dungeon, wasted, and
consumed through want of Food, but filled with the scornful Reproofs of the
Proud, by reproaches, and such like rancorous Language, was ready to die that
Morning of his Execution: For being a man of a magnanimous Spirit, a large
Soul, and of great employments, was more sensible of Indignities, so that
fitting by his Wife that Morning, and leaning on her Breast, he fell into a
swoon, and probably had then departed, but that the shrieks and outcries of his
Wife recalled him to a more Glorious Death, that so Posterity might read his
Name with Mr. Bowchers, not in the Catalogue of Confessors, but enrolled in the
Noble Army of Martyrs.

The time of their Execution was concealed, for fear the City should oppose so
bloody a Fact; but when the Fatal day was come, Fiennes drew his Forces into
the Marish, the common place where they make their Musters, and then suddenly
caused the Gates to be shut, and drew Horse and Foot into every street of the
City, to awe the Citizens, and to suppress Insurrections, which the Indignity
and affront offered to two of their most eminent Fellow-Citizens, whose Crime
was nothing else but Loyalty, might incite them to; especially if they should
consider, that an Issue of Blood was that day opened, that might in the end
prove fatal to them, and involve them in the same condition, if they should see
those Persons led to the slaughter, and they stand like Sheep, and not oppose
it; for if Fiennes and his Bloodhounds should for any other Virtue, as well as
Loyalty pass the same Sentence on any of them, who should defend them, who
having refused the Kings Protection, are grown so tame, as not to venture their
Lives for themselves.

All things being thus made secure, the Prisoners are brought from the Castle,
to the Main Court of Guard, being saluted all the way thither, by the people,
who pressed with hazard enough to see and take leave of these Martyrs, who
would have asserted their Liberty; they likewise returned hearty thanks for
their dangerous Expressions of their Affections, it being a sin next to
Malignancy, to own them, or pray for them.

To fit themselves for their ends, they desired they might have the assistance
of Mr. Toogood, and Mr. Standfast, two Orthodox and pious Ministers of that
City, to sweeten the Cup they were ready to drink, but this Christian Request
was most unchristianly denied them, and two Ministers of the Faction designed
for their miserable Comforters.

When they were at the foot of the Ladder to that Tree which was presently to
bear fruit to Eternal Life, it was observed by some of the Murderers, that knew
the knack of it, that the Halters were either too long or short, or some fault,
which made the Executioner go and take them off, whereupon the People that were
Spectators of this bloody Tragedy, that stood at a distance, and knew not the
reason of their so doing, conceiving, that Fiennes had sent a Reprieve,
suddenly expressed their Joy, by loud Acclamations; but the deathsman making
his Fatal Instruments fast again, and the Guards continuing still upon the
place; as if they were thunderstruck, they stood still astonished, and soon
changed their Joy into Tears and Lamentations.

Being thus ready to be offered up as a Sacrifice to the implacable rage and
malice of Fiennes and his fellow-Rebels; Mr. Robert Yeomans first ascended the
Ladder, thence to reach his Crown of Martyrdom; but before he went up, he took
care, after the example of our Savior, to recommend his wife to his father in
Law, Mr. Yeomans, in this address, that he had left him a Legacy, his Wife
then great with child, and eight small children, the Eldest not able to put on
his own Clothes, and so after many Embraces, left him, and set forward on his
way to Heaven.

Being thus seated in that place of shame and disgrace (as it is in its own
nature, where the Cause does not change the accursed Tree into a Theater of
Honor) and seeing himself made a Spectacle to that City, wherein he had lived
in plenty and Honor, being Sheriff but the Year before, which Office he
discharged with as much Magnificence and Bounty as any of his Predecessors. And
from that Prospect, taking a view of many friends that could not well look
through their Tears to see him again; seeing also others (of a far different
temper, that rejoiced in his sufferings, amongst which, was Robert Baugh, one
of the aforesaid Council of War, in a most devilish cruelty) stand jeering and
mocking at him to his face, here flesh and blood interposed, which transported
him to an Expostulation, bordering between Indignation and Submission, saying,
Good God, what have I done to be here? but instantly sorry that humane Frailty
should extort any thing from him unbeseeming the Justice of his Cause, or the
hardness of Christian resolution, silencing the Suggestions, of such evil
Counselors, he composed himself to speak to the People.

Being weakened by long and many Sufferings, he was not able to speak much, or
loud, only as to clear himself from the imputation of an intent to have
massacred all that adhered to the Parliament: Laying his Hand upon his Breast,
and fixing his eyes on Heaven, the Habitation of the God of Truth, he made a
solemn Protestation of his Innocence from any such thought, and withal,
professed a firm persuasion of the Justice of that cause for which he suffered;
adding, that if he had more Lives, he would sacrifice them all to his Sovereign
in that way.

While he was thus speaking, Major Hercules Langrish (since dead in Goal, and
extreme want, having before betrayed his Master, the King, in discovering his
Majesty's Coming to the House of Commons, to demand the 5 Members, who by that
means had time to shift away) and Clifton call upon the Executioner to hasten
his work, they interrupted Mr. Yeomans also, and goaded him in the thighs with
their Halberts, bidding him to make an end; for they were yet afraid of his
rescue, whereupon, he desired the Witnesses of his suffering to sing with him
the 130 Psalm, which he sung with great Devotion and Fervency; knowing that he
should be presently translated out of Bochim, the valley of Tears, into that
triumphant Quire, where with Angels he should sing Hallelujah for evermore.
Having finished the Psalm, and his Prayers, and desired God not to charge his
Blood on that City, and having prayed for his Persecuters, charging his friends
not to harbor any revengeful Thoughts against them, and in the close of all,
beginning to defend his cause, as words which would leave the deepest
impression, this Langrish and Clifton caused him to be thrown off the Ladder,
hardly affording him time to recommend his soul unto God. Being thrown off, and
his Brother M. Haggat staying his Body that swung with the fall, this Clifton
gave the said Mr. Haggat such a Blow with his Cane, that almost struck him to
the ground. Oh the barbarous Inhumanity of these Villains!

After Mr. Yeomans was thus executed, without any resistance of the Citizens,
there being no danger of Opposition, they wade on in Blood, commanding Mr.
Bowcher to ascend the Ladder. He had written what he had intended to speak,
being very large, exhorting those who had set their hands to this Plow, meaning
the defense of the Kings cause, not to be too hasty, (as terrified with their
Sufferings) to take them off, and words to such purpose, describing the
Schismatics, according to the Character of them, drawn by the Pensil of the
Holy Ghost, in Scripture phrase, in which he was excellently well read, being
confessed by his very enemies, to be a very Religious man; instancing in that
remarkable place of S. Jude, Proud, Boasters, Heady, Unstable, etc. But it was
not permitted him to speak all out, by those men who knew themselves so much
concerned; at last pressed on to the acceleration of his end by those who were
swift to shed blood, he desired to sing Psalm. 16. which being ended, he began
to recommend himself to God by pathetical Prayers and Ejaculations, wherein he
was interrupted, by a Factious Levite, one Rosewel, who called him Hypocrite
and Apostate, reviling him, that after so strict a conversation and so much
time spent in the Profession of Religion, he should render all suspected for
hypocrisy, by so obstinate perseverance in Rebellion against the Parliament.
This shook not the constancy of this Resolved Martyr, who held up with St.
Bernard, Scutum Conscientiae contra Gladium Linguae, the Buckler of a good
Conscience against the Blows of a malicious Tongue, and so sustaining himself
with that comfortable Promise of our Savior, Blessed are you when men shall
revile you, etc. he yielded himself to the will and desire of his Murderers.
The Factious Priest in his very fall from the Ladder, pursuing him with the
same odious Names of Hypocrite and Apostate, thereby, if possible, to disturb
the Peace of his Soul, in the moment of his Death; a devilish Practice in
extending Malice even to the Endeavors of a second Death.

These two Glorious Martyrs now lying under the Altar, having thus through
their Ignominious deaths, in a Glorious cause, and with a pure Conscience
rendered their Souls to God, the sad Spectators smite their Breasts, and return.
Never was there so general a Face of sorrow, such bitter lamentations heard in
that City, as on that day. Their Bodies taken down, were both carried to Mr.
Yeomans his House, Father in Law to the Martyr. In the Evening, M. Bowchers
Body was conveyed to his own House, a sad Spectacle to his poor Widow, and
seven Orphans, and at night both were interred, Mr. Yeomans at Christ-Church,
Mr. Bowchers at St. Warburghs, their Funerals being attended by those Orthodox
Ministers the Persecution had left, and by most of the honest well-affected
Citizens, though they knew that they could not express this Piety to the dead,
but to the hazard of losing their Liberties, and plundering their Estates.

This most horrid Fact, no History, no not that of the Anabaptists in Germany,
comes near, so that, it is miserably and cruelly beholding to a Parallel in the
same Kingdom, the deplorable Butchery of Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner in
London, which soon after followed; as it does here, in order of time.

Mr. Tompkins and Mr. Challoner Condemned by a sentence of a Court Martial, and
executed in London, July 5* 1643.
THe rebellious faction having sacrificed those Gentlemen to the Moloch of
their disloyal cruelty, under the vizor of a blessed Reformation in one of the
chiefest Cities in the West, thereby to strike terror in the minds of all men,
who should dare to be honest, and be according to their duty faithful to their
Sovereign, to which in spite of all their specious pretenses, they saw the
wisest and sobrest part of the Nation very much inclined, and to give more
flagitious authority to their illegal and salvage proceedings, by perpetrating
the same violences in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, before the faces of all the
English Courts of Judicature, thereby to amuse the weaker and unintelligent
sort of people, upon whom their main design was bottomed, as if they had the
Law clearly on their side in that horrid rebellion, proceeded further in the
same manner against these two Martyrs, the cause of whose Deaths, take as
follows, being upon the same account with their preceding fellow sufferers.

After that the Faction had waded so far in their disloyalty against the King,
as to levy a War against him, had seized most of his Magazines, Cities, and
places of Defense, had possessed themselves of all his Ships, and therewith
infested those places, which stood for him, had defied and bid him battle,
wherein his Sacred Person was alike endangered with the meanest of his Rebels,
in which it pleased God, so to assist the King, that those at Westminster found
themselves deceived in the Kings strength; he suddenly after Edg-hill fight
marching up to Branford near London, and putting the Members and the tumultuous
Cititzens into a deserved consternation and confusion; and yet amidst all these
terrors of War, had offered them terms of Peace, laying aside the great
advantages his Majesty might promise himself from the state of affairs, in
which his successes had placed him, yet notwithstanding all his repeated
proposals for an accommodation, nothing could be effected, with those men whose
ears were deaf to the charms of Peace, though never so prudent and rational, as
being widely distant from those ends and designs, which they had laid in the
War, being the spoil of three Kingdoms. When I say, these Gentlemen perceived
into what a miserable condition the whole Nation (reflecting tenderly also upon
bleeding Ireland) was like speedily to be reduced, by the dissembled
covetousness, rebellious obstinacy, implacable malice and devilish cunning and
subtilty of their popular cheats upon the multitude; then did several worthy
Citizens endeavor to interpose and obviate those growing mischiefs, which they
did foresee would inevitably fall upon this Church and State.

First of all therefore, they addressed themselves by way of Petition, earnestly
sueing to the two Houses, that they would vouchsafe to hear their Sovereign,
and not preclude or prejudice, the way to an agreement by a resolute fixednesse
in those courses which they humbly showed, could not but be dreadful and
destructive to the Public. A Petition to this effect, with many thousand hands
and hearts was accordingly tendered, whereunto they received a slight answer,
that the Houses would do what in their wisdom they thought fit, and that the
Petitioners were, as their duty was, to acquiesse and rest in their Counsels
and determinations, which should provide without their direction, for the
safety of the Kingdom.

From this Answer to this purport and effect they soon well perceived, what the
temper of those men was, and that their first whimsie, that dark cloud of
jealousies and fears, was big with a tempestuous storm, impending over the
lives and estates of the King and his good Subjects. They saw a seditious and
pragmatical person continued Lord Mayor, 1. Pennington.
against the Kings express command for two years together, who by his Warrants
and Officers did plunder, vex and imprison all men but suspected of duty
toward the King, so that none of them could promise themselves security for a
night. They saw several messengers sent to the City by the King most shamefully
abused, imprisoned and threatened with Death, which was afterward rigorously
executed. No man, at their Common Halls and Councils, durst assume the due
freedom and liberty of speech, to declare his mind concerning the grievances
and troubles of the time, in order to the removal of them by an amicable
composure, but straight he was apprehended, and committed to some Goal or
other, whereof their cruelty had so much occasion, that many noble Houses, the
honor and beauty of the City (a shame and grief to see) were converted
thereinto. Nor fared it better with the Houses of God, which were stripped and
despoiled of all their Ornaments, and the impertinencies of mad zealotry, in
seditions and railing invectives against the Government established in their
room. They saw that goodly and beautiful Fabric, which was the Honor of the
City, Cheapside Cross demolished, nor could it be told, how far this rage and
violence might proceed, to the overturning and confounding all things sacred
and civil. But that which most feelingly affected them, was the perishing and
ruin of Gods living Temples; many, nay most of his faithful Ministers of the
Orthodox Clergy, being driven out of their Livings, and reduced to a morsel of
bread. Many other the like compassionate matters there were, which kindled in
the minds of these Gentlemen, but because they fall in; and agree with what we
have related in the Martyrdom of those two Citizens at Bristol I shall here
omit them.

Upon these Motives an Association was entered into, by a great many worthy
Citizens, since reason could not work upon the stubborn minds of the Faction,
to reduce them by other means, that was by putting the City into the Kings
hands. To this design some Parliament Members were privy, but none personally
engaged, but Mr. Edmund Waller (who hardly escaped with life, was put out of
the House, and fined ten thousand pound) who undertook the manage of it, as to
their parts, and also to make some of the Lords assistant and favorable to the
Enterprise.

Therefore having digested the order and method of their proceedings, they
procured a Commission from the King, directed to several Citizens and persons
of quality, and amongst them to these two Gentlemen, whereby power and
authority was given them, to levy, list, arm, and train, what number of men
they should find requisite and convenient for the Service; and to appoint whom
they should confide in for Officers and Commanders. This Commission was
conveyed to London (as the report went) by the right Honorable the Lady
Aubigney deceased, Mother to his Grace, Charles Duke of Richmond and Lenox, and
by her delivered to some of the persons aforesaid.

Upon receipt thereof, several meetings and conferences were held, in order to
the promoting the said Commission, which was chiefly prosecuted by these two
Loyal Persons, who made such progress therein, that they had brought the
business into some form; when through the zealous hasting of the work (to the
countenancing whereof the power and authority of some of the Parliament Lords
then sitting at Westminster was needful and to be expected) which could not be
without some bustle by the Spies and Emissaries of the Parliament, and through
the inconstancy and treachery, or unhappy discourse of some other engaged
persons, the whole affair came to be discovered, and thereupon several
Citizens, the said Mr. Waller, with these two Gentlemen were apprehended, and
committed Mr. Waller to the Tower, the other to Newgate, whence after several
times examination to find out the design, and all the parties concerned in it,
by confession and confrontation, they were a while after brought to their Trial
before a Court Martial ( London being then a Garrison) at Guild Hall, and there
sentenced to be hanged, which was performed the fifth of July 1643.

To show and point at the hainousness of this crime of Loyalty, they were
ordered to be executed near their own doors, as more shameful and dreadful to
the Prisoners, to be hung in the eyes and before the face of their Neighbors,
but their Barbaritie mist its aim, for they were not a whit daunted, neither at
the manner or place of Execution, the worst befell the sorrowful Inhabitants
thereabouts, who had these two Gentlemen in very great esteem, and who were
deluged in tears at so miserable a Spectacle. Mr. Tompkins finished his
Martyrdom in Holborn, Mr. Challoner against the Old Exchange in Cornhil; They
both maintained their Cause to their last Breath, justifying their intentions,
in the business they suffered, for to be lawful and honest, especially Mr.
Tompkins, who said little, but very resolutely; beseeching God to prosper the
King, and bless him in his Armies and Councils, desiring the Spectators not to
be offended or deterred from their obedience to him by his suffering, which he
said, he looked upon as the greatest glory in the World; and so commending his
Soul to God, he finished his race, and is now certainly in everlasting bliss.
Mr. Challoner at his Execution spoke little (being not suffered to have any of
the sober pious Clergy with him; but haunted by that stage Divine Hugh Peter's)
who after he had prayed with him, Mr. Challoner spoke as follows.

Gentlemen, I do from my heart forgive you and all the World, desiring you and
all the World to forgive me also; and after some small time he Religiously
commended his Soul into the hands of Almighty God, as unto a Faithful Creator.

Master Daniel Kniveton Executed against the Old Exchange in Cornhil, November
27. 1643.
THis loyal Person was formerly a Haberdasher in Fleetstreet, and at the
removal of the King, left the City of London, and betook himself to the Service
of his Majesty, by whom he was employed in the quality of a Messenger.

On this Employment he was sent to London, his Errand was to signify the Kings
pleasure, that the Term of Michaelmass, should be prorogued, the reason was
because the Parliament had caused a new Broad Seal to be made, and issued out
Writs and other Processes by virtue of the same, contrary to his Majesty's
Royal Authority, and beyond all the reaches or precedents of any former
Rebellion.

With this message, being a Citizen of the place, he was entrusted, and as
bound by his allegiance and duty, delivered it according to the tenor of his
instructions: whereupon, contrary to the universal custom and honorable
practice of all Nations, which gives security and free liberty of passage to
all such persons, he was apprehended and committed in order to his Trial by a
Court of War; those Barbarous Tyrannical Statesmen, not daring to hazard their
authority and the justice of the matter to the decision of the Common Law of
England.

To this Sanguinous Tribunal, no truly Loyal Person ever was brought, who was
within the reach of their griping talents, that ever escaped with his skin; so
aptly might that Fable of the Fox to the Lion be (rather) unmoralized --
Vestigia cerno.
Omnia te advorsum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.


It was in vain to move either their Honor, Conscience or Duty, or to plead
ones own, their ambiguous salvo's and reserves to themselves, and their forward
facing of others out of reason by their Janus-like cause, which was for and
against the King, like the Basilisk, killed all whom it directly aspected, or
were brought before them.

This Gentlem^ns fare was huddled up at Essex House, before a Council of War
held there, on the walls whereof any man then might have red the Event. The
grand pill^r, raiser and support of that unnatural War, being proprietor
thereof, and at that present, personally inhabiting it, who was just come from
Newbery first Fight, where as yet he had left himself unrevenged.

Without any more ado therefore, but a setting Mr. Kniveton at their Bar, as
the mark and aim of all their impotent malice; he was condemned to be hanged as
a Spy, for maintaining and managing intelligence with, and from the Enemy
(that was the King whom they said they fought for) but on what Article of War,
I never could tell, and I presume the Reader can hardly imagine.

Little respit was afforded for the time of Execution, for the Faction were
enraged that any man should presume to tell them, that it was Treason to
counterfeit the Kings Seal, and if such continual Messages, upon every of their
actions should be brought and declared, it might in time open the eyes of the
people to understand the Law, and leave them in conclusion to its Justice, and
their due demerit.

He was brought therefore on the day he suffered, as aforesaid, on foot from
Newgate, being accompanied with Mr. Benson a Bookseller his acquaintance in
Fleetstreet, to a Gibbet erected over against the Exchange, where he may most
properly be said to have Sealed his Cause with his Blood, being sent of another
Message to Heaven, where his Bliss and Happiness shall have no Term.

Captain Burleigh Martyred at Westminster, February 10. 1647.
THe Execution of this Person was the absurdity of Law, the contradiction of
Magna Charta, the infringment and violation of Nature, and if it could be
strained higher, than an affront and Rebellion against the supreme power of the
Universe, it would pass with a lesser ignominy than the merit of this Cause
will afford it.

That men tied by their allegiance, by several Oaths of Fealty, by the benefit
of their protection and advantages they received under the Government of so
excellent a Prince, were to be dispensed, nay must be discharged from that Duty
and Obedience they ought him, and that the Parliament as they had subdued their
Lawful King, might give Law to him, propound their own insolent terms and
demands, and rigidly insist on them, secure his Person under pretense of
public safety, administer the Kingdom themselves, sequester and seize their
Estates who resisted them; in these violent and unheard of outrages; all this I
say, might be (as otherwise it could not be helped, as the sad state of the
miseries of the Kingdom then was) with some kind of patience endured; but to
see and hear, to be upon the place, where so many undutiful unchristian
contempts, after the Votes of Non Address, were put upon the King, in that
place which he had chosen for his refuge and Sanctuary. I can hardly allow any
man in this case the glory of Martyrdom, whose frame and temper had but the
least ingredients of natural (not to pride it in loyal) compassion, if he durst
do that, which bravery and courage prompted him to, the Law and his obedience
required, and God commanded.

Yet I do not the less wonder, and stand amazed at this butchery, upon several
considerations, which though they be of different respects, yet do center
universally in this, that they will make the murder of this person prodigiously
infamous to all persons concerned in it.

First, not to meddle with the Laws, whose Divine stamp was most treasonably
defaced in this act, we will consider this attempt of Captain Burleighs, in the
invariable latitude of common humanity.

His pretended crime was the beating of a Drum in the Isle of Wight (upon the
news the Islanders had received, that the Parliament had rejected the King upon
their Votes of Non address, and had resolved to settle the Kingdom without
him) when his Majesty was confined a close Prisoner to Carisbrook Castle. This
was misconstrued according to the left handed learning of those times for
Treason, whereas had there been any sympathetical Music in those Drums, they
would have made a noise and Alarm of themselves, borrowed from those groans and
sighs the captive Prince made to his more compassionate walls, who burst to
give vent and echo to those doleful notes.

And could men not allow that soft and tender-heartedness to men, to
Christians, to Subjects, to a Subject too well reputed and esteemed of in his
Island as a good and honest man, one who out of conscience and integrity, and
for no other sinister end whatsoever, had faithfully served his Sovereign
abroad, that is, had crossed the Sea to do his devoir, and there having we^ried
himself and his fortunes, had retired to his home, as a shelter against his
hard pursuing destiny, where in privacy he thought to shroud himself. No, he
finds death in the place of it; first he is chiefly concerned in the public
sorrow and distress of his Sovereign, those breaths of grief soon pierce his
ears, and those Royal lamentations heightened by a generous Spirit, quickly
transport and possess him, and by this most laudable and glorious action, which
signified only a courage to rescue what villainy had captivated, and hindered
their wicked attempts no farther, then by affording a brave and imitable
example of Loyal magnanimity to all true Subjects, in all exigencies and
dangers of their Princes, be becomes a sacrifice to their Moloch of Anarchycal
Tyranny.

We will view him in the next consideration, as his case stood in direct
opposition to that of Major Rolfe, then an Officer in the Army, and of very
great trust and intimacy with Cromwell, who was tried at the same time and
Assizes, by the same Commission, Judges and Jury; and then certainly nothing
can appear more flagitious and hainously arbitrary than this Gentleman's
condemnation. Contraria juxta se posit a magis elucescunt, contraries opposed
one to another, make each of them appear the clearer, and so will it prove in
the memory of this Noble Person, which will hereby appear in a most venerable
splendour.

Rolfes Crime was this, he was accused by one Mr. Osborne and another gentleman
then attending on the King in the Isle of Wight, where this Rolfe had a Charge,
to have cons^ired the death of the King, and that particularly, by
assassinating him with a Brace of Pistols; the time and place of this Regicide
also proved. This Information was first made to the House of Lords, and avowed
by the said two Gentlemen; whereupon, Rolfe being apprehended in Bishopsgate
(where he had like to have been torn in pieces by the multitude of people, had
it not been for their very strong Guards they sent for him) was carried in a
Sedan, to the Gate House, whence he was sent against the Assizes, to
Winchester, where, at his Arraignment, the whole matter was punctually proved
against him, yet for all that, both by Judges and Jury, the then Lord Chief
Baron, and some packt desperate Wretches of that County, he was, to the wonder
and astonishment of all the world, acquitted and freed, and soon after set at
Liberty.

Next followed the Indictment and Arraignment of this our Martyr, which was
laid for levying war against the King, to which, he duly and of Right and
Conscience, pleaded Not guilty. The matter of Fact which was proved against
him, was, that he had beaten up Drums in the Isle of Wight, to raise men for to
assist the King against the Parliament; such a Contradiction in it self, that
had but Reason and Loyalty been at market, there had been no such desperate
Chapmen in the Country; for without more ado, these wretched Fellows bring him
in guilty of High Treason, and the Judge gave Sentence accordingly; which was
presently after executed.

We will consider Thirdly, that this manner of Trial was never offered before,
to the Subjects of this Kingdom; those men they murdered upon the Score of
Loyalty during the war, were either taken away by their Illegal Ordinances, or
Courts Marshal, and Councils of war, they not daring to refer their case to the
decision of the Law, but here as soon as they had reduced the King, they thought
it an easy work to reduce the Laws, and though his Majesty would not comply
with their unlimited demands, they would bend the Law to their Lusts, and most
absolute will and Tyranny, so that he is the first, who suffered as a Martyr of
the English Freedom.

Intercessions were made on all hands for his Life, his poor wife even drowned
in tears, imploring their mercy, but there was no Relenting or Compassion to be
found among those men. So Feb. 10. being come, the day of his blessed Exchange,
he full of Christian Resolution and Comfort, with Earnest Prayers to God, for
the King and Kingdoms Restoration to their former and lasting Happiness,
willingly resigned his Spirit to God; sealing his Glorious Cause, with his last
Breath and Blood.

Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot to death at Colchester, by a
Council of War, upon the Rendition of the same Town.
THese Gemini of Valor and Honor, as well as exact Loyalty, I could not well
divide in this Martyrology, being so joined in their deaths, honorable Burial,
and Funerals, and being both of them so equally eminent in their Generation,
for all true worth and Virtue.

Sr. Charles Lucas was descended of a very Ancient and Illustrious Family; he
who knows not the Name of Lucas, knows nothing of Gentility; but if this Noble
Person had derived no Honor from his Ancestors, yet his own purchased Glory,
and the Relative Merits of his two Famous Brethren, the Lord Lucas, and Sir
Gervas, formerly Governor of Belvoyr Castle (in which three, Nature and
Education had summed up a Perfection) will without any other Additaments,
transmit him to Posterity as a worthy and English Hero.

He was a Person assisted with a resolute Spirit, of an active disposition, and
a surable discretion to manage it; strict and severe in his Commands, without
any pride or surliness, free in his Rewards to persons of Desert and Quality;
in his Society, and with his Friends, he was affable, and pleasant; in his
Charge serious and vigilant; remiss in nothing that might any way improve or
expedite his Dispatch in the Affairs of War, as he is well charactered by a
good Pen.

We will therefore view him only in the Camp, in which he gloriously lived and
died, excusing his Learning and other rare Endowments from the imputation of
Crime, and lay all the Load of his miserable Fate, aggravated by the Name of an
enemy to the Kingdom, upon his Loyal carriage, and magnanimity, abstracted from
all other Considerations.

In the beginning of the Tumults and Preparations for War in Scotland, against
their Native and pious Pr. he raised a Troop of Horse in London, and like an
Expert and Resolute Commander, behaved himself in that uncertain Service, being
a professed Enemy to the Insolences and Rebellious Designs of that Nation.

That Broyl ceasing, through the great condescentions of the King, to the
unreasonable Demands of that Kingdom, which kindled the Combustions in this,
the King being necessitated to take up Arms, to defend his Person, and the
Authority of the Laws against the like Rebellion at home, Sr. Charles readily
engaged on his Sovereigns side against the pretended 2 Houses. The first place
where he signally showed his Valor in that just Cause (omitting Exployts of
less concernment, as not to our purpose) was at Auburn Chase, and Newberry
Field, where the first memorable Battle was fought; here Sr. Charles Lucas,
with many other Gallant Gentlemen, behaved themselves with undanted courage and
Resolution, which so far engaged him in that dangerous Business, the fight
being obstinately maintained, that he received some desperate wounds that fatal
day; but the Blood he lost there, was but an Earnest or prognostic stillations
and drops of that mass of Blood which was afterward to flow out with his Life,
for the same Cause.

His next Appearance to the terror of his Enemies, his Valor having gained him
a frighting name amongst them, was in his deserting of Cawood Castle, assaulted
by the Parliaments Forces, whence with good conduct, and as true Courage, he
forced his way through their Quarters, to such places as he thought convenient,
and came at last in safety to York.

His Bravery in charging at Marston Moor, and enduring the Brunt of his
Enemies, when the Fortune of that day declined on the Kings side, as it then
challenged the Praise of all men, so it deserves everlasting Remembrance.

His discreet and military Management of the Affairs at Newark, where he
manifested himself an absolute Soldier, both in Discipline of war, and
personal Action, to the great satisfaction of the Governor and Garrison, which
always consisted of Gallant and truly Noble Persons, merits a Record to serve
as an Example to Future Times.

His brave and successeful Attempt in his March from Berkly Castle, with part
of his Regiment, betwixt Slymbridge and Beverston Castle, upon Col. Masseys
Garrisons, together with his incomparable Gallantry in the pursuit of his
Design at Tedbury, was work for noble Imitation.

But all these Particulars signify nothing to his Heroic Magnanimity in
defense of the Town of Colchester, beleaguered by a potent and victorious Army;
This was as the Corollary, the summing up of all his Achievements in the times
and circumvallations of which place, we shall confine and circumscribe all his
Glories.

After that the Parliament, by the success of their unlawful Arms had reduced
the King, his Friends, Armies, Towns, and Forts into their power, it was hoped
by all men, that now they would appear, what they had so long fallaciously
pretended themselves, the Assertors of the public Pe^ce and Liberty, in order
whereunto, no other Expedient was visible, then by complying with their
reiterated Protestations of Loyal Obedience to the King, in a present and
speedy Resumption of him to the Exercise of his Royal Authority, his Majesty
having, and being willing to grant all that in Honor, Justice and Conscience,
could be expected from him: But contrary thereunto, they Voted to settle the
Kingdom without him (as impossible, as to have day without the Light of the
Sun, and so experimented in the dark Confusions that followed those Traiterous
Resolves) which, so much discontented the Generality of the People, who were
now, for the most part undeceived, of those principles which had been cunningly
spread amongst them, of the Kings Averseness to hearken to his Parliaments,
that after several fruitless Petitions for a Composure, and Treaty with the
King, from several Counties, in the delivery whereof to the Houses, some of the
Petitioners, as of Surry, were killed, and wounded, and sent home otherwise
unanswered; they resolved to try another way, and have Recourse to Arms. Col.
Langhorn, Powel, and Poyer rise in Wales, the Scots enter England; but that
which most alarmed the two Houses, was the Kentish Business, which looked full
of Terror, the whole County unanimously declaring for a speedy Closure with
the King, and had formed to that purpose, a very considerable Army, made up
with a numerous Company of Volunteers, from London, under the command of the
Earl of Norwich; against these therefore, General Fairfax himself was sent,
with 6000 men, as requiring his Presence; who was valiantly opposed at
Maidstone, by part of the Kentish Army, but they being not relieved by their
Body at Rochester, were for the most part cut off, and the Town gained;
whereupon, the Earl of Norwich, with 3000 men, marched hastily to Black heath,
and from thence, ferryed and swam over the greatest part of his Army into Essex
side, and quartered at Bow and Stratford.

Being there, he met with this Noble Hero Sr. Charles Lucas, and other eminent
Persons of Honor and Quality, as, the Lord Capel, Lord Loughborough, with a
complete Body of resolved men, with whom, after they had skirmished with some
Parliament Horse at Mile-end, they marched to Chelmsford, where they seized the
Committee; and thence, to Colchester, a Town defenseless, and inconsiderable,
as was generally supposed, both by the Enemy, and the Adjacent Parts of the
Country, either to receive by a provisional way of Relief any great Force into
it, or by reason of the untenable Condition of it, to hold out any time, if
they should venture to take up or stay there. Yet so constantly courageous,
vigilant, and incredibly industrious, were these Loyally disposed Gentlemen, as
this Town, which by reason of the inpreparation of Necessaries, could not
probably hold out against so potent and terrible an Enemy, the space of one
week; continued 3 Months, in a most resolute Defiance and resistance of a
Victorious Army glutted with such variety of Conquests, and supplied with such
fresh and continual Recruits, to accomplish those unjust Triumphs and Trophies,
which they had begun to rear upon the Ruins of the whole Kingdom: But at
length after many stout Endeavors, in Sallies, Eruptions, and perpetual
Firings gallantly performed, the Loyal Garrison having eaten up all their
Horses, the Dogs and Cats, and whatsoever (though most reluctant to Nature,
being sweetened with Prunes, and some other Fruit and Spice, whereof some store
was found in the Town at their Coming) could afford them nourishment; was
compelled to come to a Capitulation (though it was bravely resolved the night
before, to attempt breaking through, which was not unfeasable) by which it was
concluded, the Town should be surrendered upon these hard conditions, the
Officers at Mercy, and the Soldiery upon Quarter for Life.

The Reason of these hard Conditions, and their standing out so long, which
occasioned them, was threefold. The first was, That not only the County wherein
they were besieged, but most of the Counties in England had engaged themselves,
that they would join with, and Assist them in the business; but all those
Mountains of Promise came to nothing, an inconsiderable Party appearing about
Saffron Walden, being routed by Major Sparrow. The Second, and which seemed
more probable, was the hopes they had from London, a great many Persons of
Quality, and known Royalists therein, having listed themselves under the Earl
of Holland, who had with him in that Action, the Duke of Buckingham, the Earl
of Peterborough, the Lord Francis Villers, and others; these appeared at
Kingston, in a formidable manner, but were presently suppressed by Sr. Michael
Livesey, and the aforesaid Lord Francis, bringing up the Rear, was there
killed, refusing the Quarter offered from Rebels, the Earl of Holland fled to
St. Neats in Bedfordshire, where his Quarters were beaten up, by Col. Scroops
Regiment of Horse, where Col. Dalbeir was slain; and himself taken Prisoner,
and carried to Warwick Castle. The third and chiefest Reason, which induced
them to the continuance of the Siege, was their daily Expectation of the
Advance of the Scotch Army, then entered England, and to whom were joined a
number of Gallant Persons, who had appeared for the King, throughout the War,
Commanded by Sr. Marmaduke, now Lord Langdale. Over this Kirk-Army, Duke
Hamilton was made General, a Person suspected of all hands, and of whom, and
his success, his Majesty, it is said, very much desponded, when first he had
notice of his Commanding in Chief. And so it fell out; for, at Preston in
Lancashire, Lieut. Genesis Cromwell met with this Army, and with 1^000 men, totally
defeated them; so that Hamilton was forced to fly, and was taken by the Lord
Gray of Grooby, at Uttoxeter in Staffordshire, and brought Prisoner to London,
where, as Earl of Cambridge, he was afterward for this business beheaded. But
I venture not to Canonize him a Martyr.

Colchester being thus defeated of all hopes of Relief, rendered it self to the
Victors, and 5 hours after the Surrender, according to a Decree of a Council of
War, ensued the death of these two Noble Persons, being destined by them to be
shot (...) a military Execution. The only Reason why they were picked out from
among the rest, was nothing else, but their superlative Courage, and their
fixedness of Duty toward the King, in whose Cause and Defense, they assured
themselves, they would never be wanting, as long as their Breath would last,
were the Difficulties and Dangers of doing it, never so greats, and so many. An
Honorable Enemy would have scorned so unwarrantable and impotent revenge, and
for which, the Names of some Persons will stink for ever.

But never was the Message of Death entertained by any with more Magnanimity,
and undaunted Resolution and Bravery of mind, both the Roman, and Christian
confidence striving to Excellency in this harsh Encounter with an unexpected
Death: Sr. Charles was the first by designation, to be sacrificed to their
Cruelty, who having retired himself a while, to offer up his last Prayers to
God, commending his Soul into his hands, presented himself to his Executioners,
and tearing open his Doublet, exposed his naked Breast, saying aloud, Now
Rebels do your worst; and so by their murdering Bullets was dispatched in the
place.

Sr. George Lisle was appointed to be next in this Tragedy, of whom, take this
brief Account: He was extracted from a Gentile Family in Surrey, and from the
beginning of the Troubles, had strenuously and courageously assisted the King:
The most remarkable place (saving this of his Death) where his great Spirit,
and military experience most manifested it self, was at the second Newberry
Battle, where he made good his ground, being Col. of a Regiment of Foot,
against several Charges both of Horse and Foot, of the Enemy, who did all they
could, to drive him from some Advantages, which, could they have obtained, by
subduing that handful of men, might have facilitated their way to Victory. This
he sustained, with an Invincible Resolution, animating his Soldiers, and
leading them on without any Supplies or Reserves, several times, and for the
more Encouragement, took off his own Doubler, and charged in his Shirt, bidding
them, come on once more for the King, then for the Prince, then for the Duke,
till such time as night came, and quitted him from his hot Service and Enemies
together. This noble Action was taken notice of by the K. and acknowledged so
at Court, which rendered him deservedly famous among the Swordmen of his own
Party, and as dreadful to the other, so that having him in their hands, by this
Surrender, they resolved, to be thus cowardly and basely rid of him.

It being, as was said before, his turn to die; seeing and beholding that sad
Spectacle, the dead Body of his dearest Friend, he fell upon it, and kissed it,
as if he meant to breath into it another Soul; and with a free and full, yet
true Relation of his Virtues, and Endowments, he did often repeat these words,
In how short a moment has a brave Spirit expired! well, this Priority was due
to thee, but I shall not be long behind thee, my Death which is now at hand,
shall restore thee to me.

After this, standing up, and taking five Pieces of Gold out of his Pocket, he
gave one to his Executioners, and the other four he sent to four Friends in
London, and then addressing himself to the standers by, he said, Oh, how many
do I see here about me, whose Lives I have saved in hot blood, and now must
mine be taken away most barbarously in cold blood! Sure the like was never
heard of among the Goths and Vandals, or the very Barbarians, in any Age. After
which words, some short Ejaculations, and some few Invocations upon the name of
Jesus, as he stood in an unconquerable Resolution of mind, and in an Heroic
Posture, he was also dispatched by the same hands.

Thus these 2 stars of the first Magnitude, for valourous Loyalty, were put out
and extinguished, by the malice of their Enemies; but though they shine not
here, in that splendour, which their desired Lives would have appeared in, yet
they shine in a full Luster, in that Region of Glory, whither the Violence of
their Enemies transplanted them.

Most certain it is, that upon the Ground where Sr. Charles Lucas fell when he
was shor, there has grown no grass, where the Print of his Body was, it
remaining still bare, though it be green round about; an indignation of the
unreasonable, unjust, and cruel usage of so brave a person; and if the Earth be
punished, that groaned at their untimely end, how much more heavy will their
punishment be, that contrived, and rejoiced at it?

Since the Restitution of his Majesty, the corpse of these Worthies have been
taken up, and with all due Magnificence, attended by the Gentry thereabouts,
and the Mayor, and other principal persons of Colchester, interred in the
Repositories of the Right Honorable Family of the Lucas's, with a Funeral
Oration, and other requisite Solemnities, the deserved Honor to their precious
memory.

Major Pitcher shot to death in St. Paul's Churchyard, London, December 29.
1648.
THis Gentleman nor his Ancestry being known unto me, I will not presume to
trace him, but as the fruitfulness of Nile answers for its original Springs;
so the Loyalty and gallantry of this person may satisfy our inquisition after
his birth and descent, till his relations will do him the honor, and us the
happiness and pleasure of a full account.

His Death was too lamentably public, but the cause for which he died was not
generally known, wherefore we will pay these justs and dues to his memory in a
brief narative, of the latter part of his honorable life.

In the year 1648, when Major General Langhorne, Colonel Poyer, and Powel,
took up Arms in Wales for the King, this Gentleman out of his Sense of the
Kings and Kingdoms misery, the ruin and sacrilege daily committed on the
Church, freely engaged with the said persons for the restoration of the Laws,
and his Sovereign. But it pleased God not to succeed that enterprise; so that
at St. Fagon's that Loyal Army of Welsh men was defeated by the Parliament
Forces, under Colonel Horton, from whence the remains of that field betook
themselves to Pembroke Town, which being well fortified and provided, held the
Army now recruited with Forces, under Cromwell a three-months Siege, but seeing
no hopes of relief, after a hard defense made, the Garrison rendered themselves
upon Articles, the main whereof, and to our purpose, were, that the three
Colonels above named, should be at mercy, all other Officers to depart the
Kingdom for three years, not to return before, upon pain of death, and the
private Soldiers to go home, engaging not to bear Arms against the Parliament.

In the Article of departing the Kingdom, this valarous Gentleman was concernd,
who seeing the distracted estate of the Kingdom, and how odious the Faction at
Westminster were to the generality of the people, concluded that there might be
some occasion of further service, and that it was base and ungenerous to desert
his Prince at those times of exigence which called for, and required every man's
helping and assisting hand.

Being therefore in London upon the same design (in defiance of those forced
Articles, which contrary to all Law, banished a Subject from his Country, for
doing his duty, and would expose him to the mercy of other Climates for his
affection to his own) he was betrayed and apprehended, and presently after
condemned by a Council of War, for contrarying the said Capitulation, and as a
preparatory Offering to that great Sacrifice of the King, which followed in the
next month; he was shot to death against St. Faith's Door, a good and suitable
prop to such constant Loyalty, which he resolutely maintained to his last, and
so bravely exposed himself to their bullets.

Colonel Poyer shot to death in Covent Garden.
I Cannot deny this Gentleman a room in this Martyrology (those that came the
eleventh hour, shall find entertainment) though he was formerly for the
Parliament, especially because he was mainly concernd in this aforesaid
business of Pembroke. He rendered at mercy, and by order of a Council of War
drew lots with the other two for his life, which fell upon him, and thereupon
he was shot, as aforesaid.

The execrable and horrid Murder of our late Martyred Sovereign King Charles
the First, of ever blessed memory.
I Intend not to write the History of this Pious Prince, so excellently and
curiously drawn by himself, and those who have traced his memorials and
remains, not taking a far prospect of him, which was fair, and beautiful, and
pleasant in the beginning of his Reign, but viewing nearer at hand, the black
and dismal cloud, which wrapped up and enveloped his setting glories, now by
Divine Justice and favor risen again to their full and radiant luster.

We shall retrospect no further than the beginning of the Scotch War, at which
time the Symptoms of a general Rebellion first appeared. For what the Scots
covertly employed in their undutiful Papers, Declarations and Remonstrances, was
soon after avowedly insisted on, by the prevailing Faction of the long
Parliament. The King was loaded with an heavy imputation of being led by evil
Counselors, that their design was to introduce Popery, to erect an arbitrary
Government, as in the business of Ship Money, Patents, and Monopolies. That he
declined Parliaments as the boundaries of his unlimited Prerogative, to the
great burden and oppression of his Subjects. No sooner therefore had he
composed the Scotch War, but to take away and remove all jealousy and distrust
of him in his People (though all along his Reign he had found some popular
leading Grandees to be the untractable and unsatisfiable Enemies of his
Kingdoms Peace) he summoned his last, the long Parliament in November 1640,
which by a gracious Act of his, was not to be dissolved or prorogued without
their own consent; and if that should so determine, a Bill also was signed by
him for a T^iennial or perpetual Parliament, that so his Subjects might rest
confident and assured in the due manage and administration of the Government.

But these favors gave the Faction no other satisfaction, then that they saw
they might presume to add other demands; and by how much more gracious his
Majesty was to them, they judged they might be the more impudent toward him;
in which they failed not a tittle, dasiring, as their only safety from the
danger of the Prerogative, the Militia in their own disposal, the only defense,
and the unseparable right of his Crown.

To attain this, they most insolently by their partisans in the City, tumult
him at his Court at White Hall, from which to avoid both the danger and
dishonor that rebel rout threatened, he was compelled to withdraw, to see if by
his absence that rage and madness might be allayed, and the two Houses set at
freedom, which by his presence was the more enflamed, and the Privilege of
Parliament prostituted to the licentious and mad frenzy of the multitude.

But this afforded them their desired advantage, from hence they calumniate the
King, that since he could not dissolve the Parliament, he would invalidate
their Authority, and render them useless and unserviceable to those great
ends, for which they were called, by refusing to concur with them, and
departing from that his great Council. With these and such like suggestions
they so filled the minds of men, who were predisposed, by some former
discontents, and who had their Authority (through some disuse of it) in great
reverence, that every where, but especially in London, parties were framed,
intelligencies and correspondencies held; Diverse Petitions presented in the
pursuit of these designs to the Parliament, offering to stand by them with
their lives and fortunes, to the attainment of those ends held forth in their
Declarations and Resolves, which in conclusion were summed up in that unhappy
Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom, by the Lords and Commons remaining at
Westminster; diverse of both Houses, either out of fear of the rabble, or
conscience of their duty, absenting themseves, and retired home, or followed
the King's Fortune, who having traversed some ground about London from one of
his Royal Palaces to another, in hope the distemper would abate, and the People
return to their reason and obedience together; at last finding his hopes
frustrated, by more unreasonable demands, every message to him from the two
Houses came burdened with, he resolved to go for York, and secure his Magazine
at Hull. But Sr. John Hotham being newly sent thither by the Parliament,
refused the Kings admittance into that Town, unless himself, with some few of
his retinue would please to enter; the King passionately complained of this to
the Parliament, but with as little redress, as his demand of Justice against
the Authors of the Tumults, this was the Inrroduction to those after violences
of his Royal Person and Authority.

For the Parliament forthwith raised an Army, under the command of the Earl of
Essex, and the County of York humbly professed themselves to the Service of his
Majesty; whereupon August the 22, 1642. he set up his Standard at Nottingham,
whence, after he had marched into Shrewsbury, and having raised a considerable
Army thereabouts, was on his way to London, he was overtaken by the Earl of
Essex, at a place called Edge Hill, where ensued a fierce Fight, with equal
loss on both sides, October 23, 1642. where God was pleased to cover the Kings
head in the day of Battle, and permit him to fall by their execrable hands, in
the time of Peace, to which he so often solicitously woo^d them. In their
Generals Commission, they had tied him up with a limitation, the preservation
of the Kings Person, but left their bullets at random. A subtle time-serving
distinction between the Cannon and the Axe, which afterward they traitorously
lifted up against his Anointed and sacred Head.

The Parliament, to strengthen their Cause, treat with the Scots, and for the
better mutual assurance, and to difference their abettors and fautors from the
Kings Liege People, as well as to lay a bait for all sacrilegious and covetous
minded men, to invite them to supplies of money in this rebellion, enter into a
Solemn League and Covenant, the main design whereof, was the utter extirpation
(as previous and necessary to the Kings destruction) of Episcopacy, and the
established Government of the Church of England; Popery being added also for
the greater color of this engagement, against which the King issued forth his
Royal Proclamation, laying open the mischievous design thereof, being resolved
to maintain the Religion, so long and so happily professed, and sealed by the
blood of so many Martyrs, in this Kingdom, to which glory and Crown far above
all his other Diadems, this Defender of the Faith, was through so many future
hazards to aspire.

And the better to clear his innocence from those malicious aspersions, it
suffered under (though the Sun at noonday never was brighter or clearer than
his entire profession of the Protestant Religion) of his being in heart a
Papist, his Majesty being at Christ-Church in Oxford, in 1643, and prepared to
receive the Sacrament from the hands of the Lord Archbishop of Armagh, used
these public expressions just before the receiving of the blessed Elements.

My Lord,
I Espy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare to the World the
resolution I now do make. I have to the utmost of my power prepared my Soul to
become a worthy receiver, and so may I receive comfort, by the blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the establishment of the true Protestant Religion, as
it stood in its beauty in the happy days of Queen Elizabeth, without any
connivance of Popery. I bless God, that in the midst of these public
distractions, I have still liberty to communicate, and may this Sacrament be my
damnation, if my heart do not join with my lips in this Protestation.

But even this most sacred asseveration, and then, which nothing can more
oblige belief and confidence, was by these profaners of all holy things,
rejected and slighted, and measured by their own perjurious Oaths and
Covenants; wherefore the King, to undeceive the Foreign Reformed Churches (since
he could not convince his own Subjects) with whom their Emissaries had
tampered, and insinuated the same detestable falsehood, and who seemed to be
otherwise affected to this their noble Defender, than their duty required in
those his times of affliction, published a Declaration in Latin, and sent it
abroad, the tenor whereof being of main concernment to our purpose, is in
English as follows.

CHARLES by the special Providence of Almighty God, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To all those who profess the true
reformed Protestant Religion, of what Nation, condition and degree soever they
be, to whom this present Declaration shall come, Greeting. Whereas we are given
to understand, that many false Rumors, and scandalous Letters, are spread up
and down amongst the Reformed Churches in Foreign parts, by the politic, or
rather the pernicious industry of some ill affected persons, that we have an
inclination to recede from that Orthodox Religion, which we were born,
baptized, and bred in, and which we have firmly professed and practiced through
the whole course of our life to this moment; and that we intend to give way to
the introduction and public exercise of Popery again in our Dominions, which
conjecture, or rather most detestable calumny, being grounded upon no
imaginable foundation, has raised these horrid Tumults, and more than
barbarous Wars throughout these flourishing Islands, under pretext of a kind of
Reformation, which would not prove only incongruous, but incompatible with the
Fundamental Laws and Government of this our Kingdom; We desire that the whole
Christian World should take notice, and rest assured, that we never entertained
in our imagination the least thought to attempt such a thing, or to depart a
jot from that Holy Religion, which, when we received the Crown and Scepter of
this Kingdom, we took a most solemn Sacramental Oath to profess and protect.
Nor does our most constant practice, and daily visible presence in the exercise
of this sole Riligion, with so many asseverations in the head of our Armies,
and the public attestation of our Lords, with the circumspection used in the
education of our Royal Offspring, besides diverse other undeniable Arguments
only demonstrate this, but also that happy alliance of marriage we contracted
between our eldest Daughter, and the illustrious Prince of Aurange, most
clearly confirms the reality of our Intentions herein; By which nuptial
engagement it appears further, that our endeavors are not only to make a bare
profession thereof in our own Dominions, but to enlarge and corroborate it
abroad, as much as lies in our power. This most Holy Religion with the
Hierarchy and Liturgy thereof, we solemnly protest, that by the help of
Almighty God, we will endeavor to our utmost power and last period of our
life, to keep entire and immovable, and will be careful according to our Duty
to Heaven, and the tenor of the aforesaid most sacred Oath at our Coronation,
that all our Ecclesiastics in their several stations and incumbencies shall
preach and practice the same.

This came very seasonably into the World, as to the Protestant part of it, who
never imagined or thought Subjects of their persuasion, would take up Arms, or
resist without some grievous alteration in Religion, though they condemn it in
any case whatsoever, and therefore the Protestant States abroad did wholly
decline their owning of them, though they did nothing positively for the Kings
assistance, which by this means he could not rationally promise to himself from
the Catholic Princes, who would not engage without some great advantages for
his Popish Subjects, against which his Majesty was so religiously resolved,
though he were most dutifully and cordially served by them throughout the War.

To resume our narrative, the Kingdom was all in a flame, the Sectaries every
where finding Friends to their specious Cause, and having the City of London
for their inexhaustible Magazine, and supplies of men, money, and Arms. Diverse
fields were fought, in the chief whereof the King himself was personally
present, with various success, till the year 1645, where at Naseby he received
that fatal overthrow, which ushered in so many succeeding calamities, most
unworthy of his great virtues and piety.

I cannot but observe, before I come to repeat the perpetration of all their
complicated mischief in his murder, how gradually his enemies forsook their
allegiance; and how the paint of their religious and loyal pretenses wore off
by time, which will leave their fair-faced impiety indelible. First, their
General must go fight with the Kings Army, and rescue him from his evil
Counselors, but preserve his Person; this Riddle was resolved in my Lord
Fairfaxes Commission (when they had so far engaged their partakers, that there
was no way of receding from those dangerous courses) where there was not such a
word, but kill and slay without exception. During the War all their importunate
desires were, that he would be graciously pleased to disband his Army, and
return to his most dutiful Subjects at Westminster, afterward toward the
expiration of the War, when he urged what they had so vehemently obtested, they
were most ungraciously displeased at the proposal; and so proceeded in
conclusion to that height of impiety, as Tacitus speaks of another cursed
caytiffe, Ferox scelerum quia prima provenerant, their success in one
wickedness provoking them to more.

For the King being every where worsted and besieged in his Chief Garrison, the
University of Oxford, was advised, and resolved to cast himself upon the Scotch
Army, then lying at the Siege of Newark: The News of his Departure from Oxford,
was no sooner known to the Parliament, but supposing he would come to London,
and rely upon the Affections of the City, (who were reclaimed from those wild
Exorbitancies, by having emptied those veins of Wealth which were expended in
the War, and at last found themselves never the nearer those things they fought
for, but were every day affronted, both by the Parliament and Army) therefore
they caused it to be proclaimed, that it should be Treason for any to harbor
the Kings Person (which makes every place of his Residence a Court, and a kind
of Sanctuary) and thereupon, the Lord Mayors House was searched, as for a
Malefactor. Oh unheard of Impudence of Subjects to their Sovereign!

But they were quickly eased of this fear, by an Express from their
Commissioners in the Scotch Army, that he was arrived there: This put them upon
new Counsels; so they agree, if they could not get him out of their hands by
Treaty, to obtain him by purchase, as our Savior was sold before by his own.
And very satirical, if true (as it is reported to be) was that Saying of
Monsieur Bellieure, the French Ambassador (who came to the King, then at
Newcastle) upon his dismissing the Convoy that brought him into the Parliament
Quarters, having a half Crown in his hand, he asked one of the Soldiers, how
much it was that Judas sold our Savior for, who replying 30 Pieces of Silver,
just so much, says he, take among you, for selling your Lord and Master, and
therewith gave him the half Crown; in conclusion, for 200000 Pounds the King
was bargained for, and brought by the Order of the Parliament, who sent
Commissioners to attend him to Holmby, one of his own Houses, where he was so
strictly guarded, that none of his Friends, nor his Servants, but who must
pass the Allowance of the Two Houses, were permitted to wait upon him, and
they were very few, and inconsiderable besides.

Being thus locked up, and waiting the Pleasure of the Parliaments Consideration
of him, who minded him no more, then as if he had been one of their Fellow
Subjects, he was in the night time hurried away from thence, by Cornet Joyce,
June 4. 1647. to Childersley, thence, to New Market, thence, to Royston, to
Hatfield, to Windsor, to Cavesham, to Maydenhead, to Latimer, to Stoke, to
Oatlands, to Sion House, and lastly, to Hampton Court, being forced to shift
his Abode at the pleasure of the Army, who near his Person, with feigned
Overtures of Loyalty, and as in order to his Safety and Service, kept always
their Head Quarters, when the Design was merely by his Presence with them (of
so great Reverence and Concernment are, and ought to be Princes, though
devoyded of all Power, both in Rebels and Subjects esteem, as the King himself
excellently in his (...) observed in this juncture) to counterbuffe and balance
the unlimited usurped Power of the Parliament, and to show them that they might
not expect to be absolute or masterless, as long as Interest and the Sword
could serve them.

Thus was the King driven about, having no place to rest his Head in, which
presented it not with diversity of sad thoughts and cares, till for some time,
the space of three Months, he remained, and was continued at Hampton Court, in
some show of Regality. During which time, several Contracts and Disputes arose
between the Parliament and Army, who then appeared as the Kings Friends, but in
truth were no such matter, but used his Name (as the Parliament did, in the
beginning of the War) to shroud their Traiterous designs against him, and to
strengthen the weak beginning of their Future projected Attempts, as the
Parliament afterward in their declination, to bring up themselves, and that
Respect, Veneration and esteem they had so wretchedly forfeited, the King
serving only as the Beam, to the Scales and Balances of each Faction and Party,
which, for a while went up and down, counterpoysing each other, till at last
the heavy and sad weight of the Armies Faithlesseness, and unparalled
disloyalty, and Rebellion, brought him down to his Grave.

For the King having staid at Hampton Court, about the time before specified,
debating the Propositions of the Parliament, who were instantly and uncessantly
called upon by the People, for a speedy Composure and Compliance with his
Majesty, the Grandees of the Army thought it high time to obviate the happy
Opportunities of a Settlement, which they saw all good men so desirous of, by
the Kings Residence any longer near the City of London, with whom they had
lately had a Bickering, and through which, they had insolently in triumph
marched, to the Affront and Regret of the Citizens, the Grugde whereof, they
well knew, was yet fresh and recent, and wanted but the Advantage of the Kings
Person and Presence.

Therefore with devilish Policy, by an Instrument and Engine of their own, Col.
Whaley, they give the King, a kindly (forsooth) Notice and Information, of an
attempt and Assassinate intended against his Person, if he should venture to
stay any time longer at this his Manor, and therefore out of Duty and
Affection, earnestly wished and obtested his Majesty, to consult and provide for
his safety elsewhere.

This sudden news, weighed with its probable Circumstances, and the passionate
manner of the Discovery, and the King being in the custody of a most perdite
sort of men, begot a Resolution of speedily withdrawing himself from the
Danger. Alas, how many Vexations and Miseries did this good Prince pass, in his
way and progress to more! These men that resolve to murder him publicly, make
this impudent Essay of his Courage and Patience, by a counterfeited Parricide
to be perpetrated privately.

By this Achitophel, the King is wrought out of this secure and advantageous
Mansion, and by a swift flight, in company with Two of his Servants, recovered
the Isle of Wight, where Col. Hammond (Brother to the most Loyal, and Reverend
Dr. Hammond, and whose Father was one of the Physicians to Prince Henry, and
therefore the rather confided in) was Governor for the Parliament. At his
Departure from Hampton Court, he left behind him a Paper; which for its sad and
pensive matter, but yet (as himself in a Cloud) reflected with Majestic Rays
of pietcing Elegance, wherewith the Spirit of that good Prince was
over-burdened and distressed) I have thought fit to insert.

The Kings Letter left behind him at Hampton Court, in his Flight to the Isle
of Wight.
C. R.

LIberty being that which in all times has been, but especially now is the
common Theme and Desire of all men, common reason shows, that Kings less then
any should endure Captivity. And yet, I call God and the World to witness, with
what patience I have endured a tedious restraint; which so long as I had any
hopes, that this sort of my Suffering might conduce to the peace of my
Kingdoms, or the hindering of more effusion of Blood, I did willingly undergo;
but now finding by too certain proofs, that this my continued Patience would
not only turn to my personal ruin, but likewise be of much more prejudice,
then furtherance to the public good; I thought I was bound, as well by natural
as political Obligations, to seek my safety, by retiring my self for some time,
from the public view both of my Friends and Enemies: And I appeal to all
indifferent men to judge, if I have not just cause to free my self from the
hands of those who change their Principles with their condition; and who are
not ashamed openly to intend the destruction of the Nobility, taking away their
negative voice; and with whom the Levellers Doctrine is rather countenanced
then punished: And as for their Intentions to my person, their changing, and
putting more strict Guards upon me, with the discharging most of all those
Servants of mine, who formerly they willingly admitted to wait upon me, does
sufficiently declare. Nor would I have this Retirement misse-interpreted; for I
shall earnestly and uncessantly endeavor the settling of a safe and
well-grounded Peace, wherever I am, or shall be, and that as much as may be
without the effusion of more Christian Blood; for which, how many times have I
desired, pressed to be heard, and yet no ear given to me? And can any reasonable
man think, that according to the ordinary course of Affairs, there can be a
settled Peace without it? Or that God will bless those, who refuse to hear their
own King? Surely no, Nay, I must further add, that, (besides what concerns my
self) unless all other chief Interests have not only a hearing, but likewise
just satisfaction given unto them, (to wit, the Presbyterians, Independants,
Army, those who have adhered to me, and even the Scots; I say there cannot (I
speak not of Miracles, it being, in my Opinion, a sinful Presumption, in such
cases, te expect or trust to them) be a safe or lasting Peace.

Now as I cannot deny, but that my personal security is the urgent cause of
this my Retirement; so I take God to witness, that the public Peace is no less
before my eyes: and I can find no better way to express this my Profession (I
know not what a wiser may do) than by desiring and urging that all chief
Interests may be heard, to the end each may have just satisfaction: As for
example, the Army (for therest, though necessary, yet I suppose are not
difficult to content) ought (in my judgment) to enjoy the Liberty of their
Consciences, have an Act of Oblivion or Indemnity (which should extend to all
the rest of my Subjects) and that all their Arrears should be speedily and duly
paid; which I will undertake to do, so I may be heard, and that I be not
hindered from using such lawful and honest means as I shall choose. To conclude,
let me be heard with Freedom, Honor and Safety, and I shall instantly break
through this Cloud of Retirement, and show myself really to be Pater Patria.

Hampton Court, November. 11. 1647.
For the Speaker of the House of Peers, pro tempore, etc.

He was no sooner come into the Isle of Wight but Hammond gave notice thereof
to the Parl. who were now overawed by the Army Eleven of their Members being
impeached of High Treason, as they called it, for their Loyalty and Affection
to his Majesty, many not daring to appear in the House, Cromwell and his
Faction, Jan. 30. the black Forerunner of that his day of Martyrdom, the next
Year ensuing, voted those destructive and cruel Resolves of no more Addresses,
which were published with a Preface, in these words, being the hinges on which
the sad Revolutions succeeding, so direfully turned.

The Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, after many Addresses to his
Majesty, for the preventing and ending of this unnatural War, raised by him,
against the Parliament and Kingdom, having lately sent four Bills to his
Majesty, which did contain only matter of Safety and Security to the Parliament
and Kingdom, referring the Composure of other Differences to a Personal Treaty
with his Majesty, and having received an absolute Negative, do hold themselves
obliged to use their utmost Endeavors, speedily to settle the present
Government in such a way as may bring the greatest security to this Kingdom, in
the enjoyment of the Laws and Liberties thereof; and in order thereunto, that
the Houses may receive no Delay or Interruptions in so great and necessary a
work, they have taken their Resolution, and passed these Votes following;

Resolved by the Lords and Commons Assembled in Parliament, That no Application
or Address be made to the King, by any Person whatsoever, without leave of both
Houses.

Resolved, That the Person or Persons, that shall make Breach of this Order,
shall incur the Penalty of High Treason.

Resolved, That the Lords and Commons do declare, that they will receive no
more any Message from the King.

Resolved, That no Person whatsoever do presume to receive or bring any Message
from the King to both, or either of the Houses of Parliament, or any other.

I shall not descant on the unparalelled unreasonableness of these Votes, but
reflect only on that story of Ahashuerus, recorded in Esther, to whom, no
person of what degree soever durst approach or address himself, without he held
forth his Golden Scepter; whereas here were Subjects, ye^ Christian Subjects,
holding their Sovereign off at the Swords point, denying him Access to them,
and debarting him Converse with any Persons, but the Instruments and Officers
of their barbarous disloyalty.

Upon these Votes, the Army close with the Parliament, declaring that they
would live and die with them in the pursuit of their Resolutions; and now this
Pious recluse Prince, all humane hopes failing, being shut up a Prisoner, and
none of his friends admitted to come near him, betakes himself to the Divine
Assistance, spends his sad hours in meditation and devotion, which heightened
and perfected in him that Christian Courage and resolution, with which, he so
nobly triumphed over the utmost malice of his Enemies. This sweetened and
alleviated those sorrows and unspeakable distresses he went through; this
afforded him a Calmness and Serenity of mind, amidst the Storms and Tempests of
his impetuous and angry Fate; this made him infinitely more to prize the Cross
then the crown; witness those most incomparable soliloquies (which the Prison
walls ecchoed to Heaven) such were these, I care not to be reckoned among the
unfortunate, so I be not in the black List of sacrilegious Princes. Again, As I
have leisure, so have I cause, more then enough to meditate and prepare for my
death; for I know that there are but a few steps between the Prisons and the
Graves of Princes. But so great and excellent is his variety of divine
Consolation and Instruction, that I will not lose the Reader in my Maze of
Collections, but refer him wholly to the Original, particularly, to what he
has written concerning this very Subject.

But it may be a Question, whether their reiterated Proposals, which contained
always the same unjust and unconscionable Demands, even to nauseate any man of
Reason or Honor, were not more regretful and troublesome to him, then this
public Sullenness, and dumb Solennity of laying him aside, Sure we may be,
while that Spirit thus possessed the Houses, his confinement and restraint was
enlarged into an Heavenly Oratory, wherein he maintained a constant Intercourse
with the Divine Majesty, who soon after revived his Cause, and though it gave
him not Victory in the Field, yet made him Conqueror over the Affections and
Prejudices of many his seduced Subjects.

For the Loyal Party ceased not still to assert, what they had maintained by
Arms, and the Irregular Illegal Proceedings of the Parliament and Army every
day undeceived numbers, who first adhered to them. Petitions upon Petitions are
presented to the houses for a Personal Treaty with the King, for the disbanding
the Army, and for removal of all other grievances. Major General Langhorn,
Colonel Poyer, and Powel, active men formerly for the Parliament, declare
themselves for Him; several Towns, together with the greatest part of the Navy
return to their obedience. The Scots with a numerous Army, whereto joined Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, with a considerable party of English, entered by Berwick.
The Kentish men rise in a body of 10000 men, part of which afterward was
beleaguered in Colchester. The Prince, his now Majesty, came into the Downs
with a Fleet of War well equipped, so that the King appeared almost as
formidable as at any time during the War. But through the unsearchable
providence of God, who had ordered a more happy and glorious Crown for him,
free from those cares and discontents, which in all probability would have
attended his Reign here under the management an administration of his Subjects,
which was to be the price of his and his Kingdoms Peace; all those endeavors
and Martial Enterprises succeeded not, but in the middle of the year 1648. all
things except the fleet were reduced again under the Parliaments power and
command.

These dangers however learnt them this wisdom, that it was not safe to trifle
longer, and rely wholly on the Army, the people being generally averse to them,
wherefore it was concluded by them to null those former Votes of Non Address,
and to make application to his Majesty, which was performed by the Earl of
Middlesex and two Commoners, who acquainted the King with the desires of the
Parliament, whereupon a Treaty was agreed on, to be held in the Isle of Wight,
whereto five of the House of Peers, and ten Commoners were appointed, the King
declared to be in full liberty, and to signify to the two Houses what place in
that Island he would particullarize for the Treaty. Here attended him also such
persons he sent for, and were of use to him in the management thereof.
September the 18. it began at Newport in the said Isle, where the King, valuing
the peace of his Subjects above all concernments of his own, except his
indispensable obligations of honor and conscience, condescended so far, and
with reason so prevaild upon the Commissioners, that they came to some near
conclusion, the rest being referred to the Parliament. The Treaty ended the
27th of November, and on the fifth of December the House of Commons voted the
Kings concessions satisfactory, whereon to ground the settlement of the
Kingdom: Hitherto the bright side of that cloud presented it self, which with
Funeral black soon overcast the three Kingdoms.

For the Army, upon notice of the likely forwardness of the Treity, desired by
all good men, who were sensible of the wicked contrivances and machinations of
Cromwell and his Accomplices, drew up a large Remonstrance, which was agreed on
at Windsor, and presented it to the Parliament, wherein they desired that the
King might be tried by the Laws, and brought to (their) Justice, and all
further Treaty with him to be forborne; and forthwith divided themselves, the
main body to London, to overcome the Houses, and the rest to seize the King,
and take him into their custody.

But before that, the General gave order, by his Letters, to Colonel Hammond
to render up his command to Colonel Eures, who was to take charge of the King,
but the Parliament countermanded all those orders, and voted the Kings person
to reside still in that Island.

Whereupon, the very day the Treaty ended, of which they had as sure
intelligence as the Houses, they put on their Pharisaical vizor of piety, and
kept a Fast by themselves, to seek for (that they never found) a blessing in
their Counsels, which were in spite of an Oracle to the contrary, to murder
and destroy, sacrilegiously, and rebelliously to seize on the goods and Estates
of the King, the Clergy, and all Loyal Subjects.

The effect of their Prayers showed to whom they were directed, for immediately
and violently, as if acted by Satanical impulses, (while the House was
considering and debating the Kings condescentions, and were but just come to a
resolution of acknowledging the Kings Grace and favor in his condescentions in
the aforesaid Treaty, as may be seen at large in Mr. Prins Speech to his
eternalhonour;) they fall upon the Parliament December 6, 1648. seclude above
140 Members, drive away through fear of their exorbitancies many others, and
pack up a Juncto of the remaining Members, to serve their own designs and
cruel, ignorant Ambition.

Herein how observable is it, that God suffered not the Kings most righteous
Cause, to pass unevidenced and justified by its adversaries, that how gloomy
soever it were in rising and in its course, yet it should set in glory, and
have some kind of acknowledgment, though wrapped up in the ambiguous obscure
words of that Treaty from its very Enemies, who having their eyes opened,
would, when too late, have found the way to our and their common Peace: and
greater Testimony cannot be given.

The King, as was partly said before, was now delivered into the hands of
Colonel Ewers, Hammond ingratefully as disloyally betraying the bountiful
Patron and cherisher of his family, and contrary also to the orders of
Parliament, into the hands of the Army; who conveyed him out of the Isle of
Wight to Hurst Castle, where they first began their barbarous and ruder
incivilities.

From Hurst Castle the King was conveyed to Winchester, where the poor loyal
Inhabitants, according to custom, or to hold up the reputation of that Majesty,
which those fellows so scornfully and spitefully abused, caused the bells to be
rung; the Mayor, and his Brethren the Aldermen going out of Town to meet the
King, being in the midst of a Troop of Horse in the miry way, would have
presented him the keys of that his City, with the usual ceremony, but they were
soon put from their duty, thrown in the dirt, and beaten for their affection,
December 21.

From thence he was conveyed next day to Farnam, with the same Military Guards,
and thence to Windsor, where they locked him up, and kept as strickt and
severe, as inhumane Guards upon him, intruding upon his devotions, upbraiding
him with his condition, and most irreverently and impudently profaning his
Person within his hearing.

He continued here until he had kept his last Christmas, but so privately, in
the most retired rooms of that Castle, that no person, but of their appointment
to look to him, was suffered to come near him, till after that the Army had
furbisht out a new House of Commons, and prepared the design against his Sacred
and most precious Life, he was conveyed by Colonel Harrison, sitting covered
in the Coach with him, (though by Divine vengeance now bare-headed upon
Westminster Hall) with a strong Guard of Horse to his Palace at St. James's,
and there lodged by order from their Juncto at Westminster, there to wait the
direful preparations for his Trial, advanced into some kind of method, and
lickt into some ravenous form already.

But what words shall we now use, what expiating sense to express innocence,
and without some taint of guilt, the slagiciousness of this villainy, we are
about to relate? what exaggerations of crimes to signify and declare this
Accumulative Treason, a term first invented and created by the Authors of this
mischief, to weary and overburden that noble Earl of Strafford with his
precious and most useful life, and now accomplished? That baneful Prophetical
Oracle being without all doubt (and as the immediate direction of God to Fulfill
the Measure of the sins of this Nation) riddled in this most detestable
wickedness.

Herein we may behold at one view, all the miseries and confusions that befell
the three Kingdoms, from the commencement of our troubles, whose large
circumference and ambient circles of jealousies and fears centred in this fatal
business.

That which Caligula most bloodily wished, that the City of Rome (that extended
to the Empire of the World) had but one neck, these cruel and impious persons
had the unhappy enjoyment of, for with this Royal Martyr fell the glory and
honor of these Nations, the people whereof, as if the blow had reached their
neck too, stoopt and hung down their heads, as ashamed and afraid to lift up
their guilty faces toward angry Heaven.

Never were there so many sorrowful and dejected looks, so many sad and
oppressed hearts, as at this deplorable occasion. Every man presaged his
private ruin from this of the Public, except those, whose aims were upon it,
and who had designed to themselves, the profit of this Maxim, Kill and take
Possession.

Nay, it seemed so barbarous, even to those persons who had instrumentally
served to the grand design, which they thought reached not to this extent, that
the Presbiteryan Ministers in and about London, avowedly remonstrated against
it, and subscribed their names, laying the sin and impiety of any prosedure
against the King at their door, declaring the mischief that would inevitably
follow thereupon; all which they enforced and urged also from their Covenant.

While thus we would clear our selves, and particular men from this horrid
bloodguiltinesse, how shall we wipe off the stain from the Protestant Religion;
it being the impious doctrine of the Church of Rome, That Princes by the Popes
Authority may be deposed and murdered. Foraign Churches of our profession,
have suffered much under this imputation, by the Papists themselves upon this
score, and therefore we will not omit this vindication here, worthy to be
written upon all our Churches, being this Royal Martyrs words, in his advice to
our Sovereign, That he should not be alienated from the Religion established,
through any of the injuries and reproaches thrown upon him in this Rebellion,
for they were not Protestants that did them.

Indeed they lack names and terms for themselves, and those monstrous facts
they perpetrated, nor Turk nor Jew nor infidel will reach them, such was the
incomparable innocence, sanctity and virtue of this Prince (and Heaven would
have none but perfect Sacrifices) I refer the Reader therefore to that which
shows them best, that which themselves dared to publish in this matter, which
in short is this.

There were three grand Interests that centred and combined in this fatal
business, The first was that of Oliver Cromwell, whose often dreamt-of
Sovereignty, egged and provoked his ambition, now propt with the power of the
sword, put him upon desperate invasion of his Sovereigns Crown and Life. The
second, was that of the Republicans or Commonwealth men, whose great tempting
sin to this facinorous act and main ingredient was coverousness, having
designed to themselves the Kings Revenue, and the Churches Patrimony. The third
was the Fifth Monarchy Heresy, in whom mad ambition, and pride, and insatiable
appetite of wealth and riches were at strise for superiority, or else so well
blended and mixed, that it was hardly discernable which made the fairest show in
their political and pious claim of worldly power.

These three Factions thus agreed, hoping when the accursed deed was done to
overreach one another, and attain their particular ends, conspired together,
and by their joint Counsels after they had turned out the Parliament, and
erected a select Juncto, by their directions to these men, who were all parties
concerned in the share of the Spoil. A thing called an Act of Parliament having
the Authority of some 50 Commons, some whereof were also dissenters, (the
generality of them being new elected Members by Writ of Parliament in the room
of those at Oxford) passed that House to bring the King to Trial, having
therein appointed a High Court of Justice, consisting of some 80 persons, all
interessed Grandees, to be the Court before which the King should be charged of
Diverse Crimes, which I abhor to relate.

This High Court of Justice, the monster of English Judicature, according to
the power given by the said Act, having assembled first in the Painted Chamber,
in order to set and braze their countenances, by staring in one another faces,
then swelled with Devilish guilt and malice, came in formality with their
impudent President to their pretended Court, erected at the further end of
Westminster Hall, where the King soon after was brought and placed in his chair
against the face of these effront Rebels. There they exhibited the charge,
which the King refused to answer to, or acknowledge that rout for any kind of
Authority, which he persisted in all the four times he was convened before
them, and in conclusion (as before they had resolved) by color of a judicial
proceeding, was most traitorously sentenced to be beheaded, to the astonishment
and unspeakable grief of his three Kingdoms, and the horror and shame of the
Christian World. I have thus transiently past over this unpleasant business,
because it is so lamentably known, and published at large, in the black
Tribunal, to which I reser the amazed Reader.

His Majesty's Reasons against the pretended Jurisdiction of the High Court of
Injustice, which he intended to have delivered in writing on Monday, Jan. 22.
1648. but was not permitted.
HAving already made My protestations, not only against the illegallity of this
pretended Court, but also that no Earthly power can justly call Me (who am your
KING) in question as a Delinquent; I would not any more open My mouth upon his
occasion, more than to refer My self to what I have spoken, were I alone in
this case alone concerned. But the duty I owe to God in the preservation of the
true liberty of My People, will not suffer Me at this time to be silent: For
how can any freeborn Subject of England call Life, or any thing he possesses
his own; if power without Right daily make new, and abrogate the old
fundamental Law of the Land? which I now take to be the present case. Wherefore
when I came hither, I expected, that you would have endeavored to have
satisfied Me concerning those grounds which hinder Me to answer to your
pretended Impeachment; but since I see that nothing I can say will move you to
it (though Negatives are not so naturally proved as Affirmatives) yet I will
show you the Reason why I am confident you cannot judge Me, nor indeed the
meanest man in England; for, I will not (like you) without showing a reason,
seek to impose a belief upon My Subjects.

Hereabout I was stopped, and not suffered to speak any more concerning reasons.
There is no proceeding just against any man, but what is warranted either by
Gods Laws, or the municipal Laws of the Country where he lives. Now I am most
confident, that this days proceeding cannot be warranted by Gods Law, for on
the contrary, the authority of obedience unto Kings is clearly warranted and
strictly commanded both in the Old and New Testament; which if denied, I am
ready instantly to prove: and for the Question now in hand, there it is said,
That where the word of a King is, there is power, and who may say unto him,
what do thou? Eccles. 8.4. Then for the Laws of this Land, I am no less
confident, that no learned Lawyer will affirm, that an impeachment can lie
against the King, they all going in His Name; and one of their Maxims is, That
the King can do no wrong. Besides the Law, upon which you ground your
proceedings, must either be old or new: if old, show it; if new, tell what
Authority warranted by the fundamental Laws of the Land has made it, and when.
But how the House of Commons can erect a Court of Judicature, which was never
one it self (as is well known to all Lawyers) I leave to God and the World to
judge: And it were full as strange that they should pretend to make Laws
without King or Lords-House, to any that have heard speak of the Laws of
England.

And admitting, but not granting, that the People of Englands Commission could
grant your pretended power, I see nothing you can show for that; for certaintly
you never asked the question of the tenth man of the Kingdom, and in this way
you manifestly wrong even the poorest Ploughman, if you demand not his free
consent; nor can you pretend any color for this your pretended Commission
without the consent at least of the major part of every man in England, of
whatsoever quality or condition, which I am sure you never went about to seek;
so far are you from having it. Thus you see that I speak not for My own right
alone, as I am your KING, but also for the true liberty of all My Subjects,
which consists not in sharing the power of Government, but in living under such
Laws, such a Government as may give themselves the best assurance of their
lives and propriety of their goods. Nor in this must or do I forget the
Privileges of both Houses of Parliament, which this days proceeding does not
only violate, but likewise occasion the greatest breach of their public Faith,
that (I believe) ever was heard of, with which I am far from charging the two
Houses: for all the pretended crimes laid against Me, bear date long before
this late Treaty at Newport, in which I having concluded as much as in Me lay,
and hopefully expecting the two Houses agreement thereunto, I was suddenly
surprised, and hurried from thence as a Prisoner, upon which, I account I am
against My will brought hither, where since I am come I cannot but to My power
defend the ancient Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom, together with My own
just right; Than for any thing I can see the higher House is totally excluded.
And for the House of Commons it is too well known, that the major part of them
are detained or deterred from sitting, so as if I had no other, this were
sufficient for me to protest against the lawfulness of your pretended Court.
Besides all this, the Peace of the Kingdom is not the least in my thoughts, and
what hopes of settlement is there, so long as Power reigns without rule of Law,
changing the whole frame of that Government under which this Kingdom has
flourished for many hundred years, (nor will I say what will fall out in case
this lawless unjust proceeding against me do go on) and believe it, the Commons
of England will not thank you for this change, for they will remember how happy
they have been of late years under the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, the King my
Father, and My Self, until the beginning of these unhappy Troubles, and will
have cause to doubt, that they shall never be so happy under any new. And by
this time it will be too sensibly evident, that the Arms I took up, were only
to defend the Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, against those who have supposed
My power has totally changed the ancient Government.

Thus having showed you briefly the Reasons, why I cannot submit to your
pretended Authority without violating the trust which I have from God, for the
welfare and liberty of my People; I expect from you either clear Reasons to
convince my judgment, showing me that I am in an Error (and then truly I will
readily answer) or that you will withdraw your proceedings.

This I intended to speak in Westminster Hall on Monday, 22 January; but
against Reason was hindered.

After that horrid Sentence his Majesty was hurried from their Bar; As he
passed down the stairs, the common Soldiers (laying aside all Reverence to
Sovereignty) scoffed at him, casting the smoke of their stinking Tobacco in his
face (no Smell more offensive to him) and flinging their foul pipes at his
fee^; But one more insolent than the rest, defiled his venerable Face with his
spittle, for his Majestry was observed with much patience to wipe it off with
his Handkerchief, and as he passed, hearing them cry out Justice, Justice, Poor
Souls (said he) for a piece of money, they would do so for their Commanders.
That Night being Saturday January 27. the King lodged at White Hall; that
evening a Member of the Army acquainted the Committee with the desires of the
King, that seeing they had passed Sentence of Death upon him, and the time of
his Execution might be nigh, that he might see his Children, and receive the
Sacrament, and that Dr. Juxon Bishop of London, might be admitted to pray with
him in his private Chamber; both which were granted.

The next day, being Sunday, January 28. the King was attended by his Guard, to
St. James's where the Bishop of London preached privately before him, his Text
was in Romans 2.16. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of all men, by
Jesus Christ according to my Gospel.

Monday Jan. 29. His Children were permitted to come to him, where passed this
following Discourse, as it was set down in writing by his Daughter the Lady
Elizabeth, (which Lady Elizabeth some months after, being confined to
Carisbrook-Castle in the Isle of Wight, died there with grief for the
sufferings of her Dear Father.)

A true Relation of the Kings Speech to the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of
Gloucester, the Day before his Death.
HIs Children being come to meet Him, He first gave his Blessing to the Lady
Elizabeth, and bad her remember to tell her Brother James, when ever she should
see him, that it was his Fathers last desire, that be should no more look upon
Charles as his eldest Brother only, but be obedient unto him as his Sovereign;
and that they should love one another, and forgive their Fathers Enemies. Then
said the King to her, Sweetheart, you will forget this: No (said she) I shall
never forget it whilst I live; and pouring forth abundance of tears, promised
Him to write down the particulars.

Then the King taking the Duke of Gloucester upon his knee, said, Sweetheart,
now they will cut off thy Fathers head (upon which words the Child looking very
steadfastly on him) Mark Child what I say, They will cut off my head, and
perhaps make thee a King: But mark what I say, you must not be a King, so long
as your Brothers Charles and James do live; for they will cut off your Brothers
heads (when they can catch them) and cut off thy head too at last: and
therefore I charge you do not be made a King by them. At which the Child
sighing said, I will be torn in pieces first: which falling so unexpectedly
from one so young, it made the King rejoice exceedingly.

Another Relation from the Lady Elizabeth's own Hand.
What the King said to me, Jan. 29. 1648. being the last time I had the
happiness to see Him, He told me, He was glad I was come, and although He had
not time to say much, yet somewhat He had to say to me, which He had not to
another, or leave in Writing, because He feared their Cruelty was such, as that
they would not have permitted Him to write to me. He wished me not to grieve
and torment my self for Him, for that would be a Glorious death that He should
die, it being for the Laws and Liberties of this Land, and for maintaining the
true Protestant Religion. He bid me read Bish. Andrews Sermons, Hookers
Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bish. Lauds Book against Fisher, which would ground
me against Popery. He told me, He had forgiven all His Enemies, and hoped God
would forgive them also; and commanded us, and all the rest of my Brothers and
Sisters, to forgive them. He bid me tell my Mother, that His thoughts never
strayed from Her, and that His Love should be the same to the last. Withal, He
commanded me and my Brother to be obedient to her, and bid me send His Blessing
to the rest of my Brothers and Sisters, with commendation to all His Friends.
So after he had given me His Blessing, I took my leave.

Further, He commanded us all to forgive those People, but never to trust them;
for they had been most false to Him, and to those that gave them power; and He
feared also to their own Souls: and desired me not to grieve for Him, for he
should die a Martyr, and that He doubted not, but the Lord would settle his
Throne upon His Son, and that we should be all happier then we could have
expected to have been, if He had lived; with many other things, which at
present, I cannot remember.

Elizabeth.

Tuesday, Jan. 30. (The Fatal Day) He was about 10 of the Clock brought from
his Palace at St. James's to Whitehal, marched on foot, (guarded with a
Regiment of foot Soldiers) through the Park, with their Colors flying, and
Drums beating, his private Guard of Partisans about him, D. Juxon Bishop of
London on one side, and Col. Tomlinson on the other, both bareheaded, bidding
them go faster, saying, That he now went before them to strive for an Heavenly
Crown, with less solitude, then he had of tentimes bid his Soldiers to fight
for an earthly Diadem. Being come to the end of the Park, he ascends the
stairs, leading to the long Gallery in Whitehal, and so into the
Cabinet-Chamber, where he formerly used to lodge; there his Majesty with the
Bishop of London, continued for some time in Devotion, and received the Blessed
Sacrament from the hand of the said Bishop; at which time, he read for the
second Lesson, the 27th. Chapter of S. Matthews Gospel, which contained the
History of the Death and Passion of our Blessed Savior, the Communion ended,
his Majesty thanked the Bishop for selecting so seasonable and comfortable a
Portion of Scripture. The Bishop modestly replied, no thanks was due to him,
for it was the Chapter appointed by the Rubric of the Church for the second
Morning Lesson for that day, being Jan. 30. Here the King continued at his
Devotion, refusing to dine, only about twelve of the Clock, he eat a a Bit of
Bread, and drank a Glass of Claret; from thence, about one a Clock he was
accompanied by Dr. Juxon and Col. Tomlinson, and other Officers, formerly
appointed to attend him, and the private Guard of Partisans, with Musketeers on
each side, through the Banqueting House; adjoining to which, the Scaffold was
erected, between VVhitehal Gate, and the Gate leading into the Gallery from S.
James's: The Scaffold was hung round with Black, the Floor covered with black
Bays, and the Axe and Block laid in the middle of the Scaffold. There were
diverse Companies of Foot of Col. Prides Regiment, and several Troops of Horse
placed on the one side of the Scaffold toward Kings-street, and on the other
side, toward Charing Cross, and the multitudes of people that came to be
Spectators very great. The King being come upon the Scaffold, it was expected
he would say somewhat to the People, the which he did.

His Majesty being come upon the Scaffold, looked very earnestly upon the
Block, and asked Col. Hacker if there were no higher: and then spoke thus
(directing his Speech chiefly to Col. Thomlinson.)
King.
I Shall be very little heard of any body here, I shall therefore speak a word
unto you here: indeed I could hold my peace very well, if I did not think that
holding my peace would make some men think, that I did submit to the guilt, as
well as to the punishment, but I think it is my duty to God first, and to my
Country, for to clear my self, both as an honest man, a good King, and a good
Christian. I shall begin first with my Innocence. In troth, I think it not very
needful for me to insist long upon this, for all the world knows that I never
did begin a war with the two Houses of Parliament, and I call God to witness,
to whom I must shortly make an Account, That I never did intend for to incroach
upon their Privileges, they began upon me, it is the Militia they began upon,
they confessed that the Militia was mine, but they thought it fit for to have it
from me: and to be short, if any body will look to the Dates of Commissions, of
their Commissions and mine, and likewise to the Declarations, will see clearly,
that they began these unhappy Troubles, not I: so that as the guilt of these
Enormous crimes that are laid against me, I hope in God, that God will clear me
of, I will not, I am in Charity, God forbid that I should lay it upon the Two
Houses of Parliament, there is no necessity of either, I hope they are free of
this guilt: for I do believe that ill Instruments between them and me, has been
the chief Cause of all this bloodshed: so that by way of speaking, as I find my
self clear of this, I hope (and pray God) that they may too: yet for all this,
God forbid that I should be so ill a Christian, as not to say that Gods
Judgments are just upon me: Many times he does pay Justice by unjust Sentence,
that is ordinary. I will only say this, that an unjust Sentence * that I
sufferred to take effect, Strafford.
is punished now by an unjust Sentence upon me, this I have said, to show you
that I am an Innocent man.

Now for to show you that I am a good Christian, I hope there is Pointing to
Dr. Juxon.
a good man that will bear me witness, That I have forgiven all the world, and
even those in particular that have been the chief causers of my death; who they
are, God knows, I do not desire to know, I pray God forgive them. But this is
not all, my Charity must go further, I wish that they may repent, for indeed
they have committed a great sin in that particular. I pray God with St.
Stephen, that this be not laid to their Charge, nay, not only so, but that they
may take the right way to the peace of the Kingdom; for my Charity commands me,
not only to forgive particular men, but my Charity commands me to endeavor to
the last gasp the Peace of the Kingdom. Turning to some Gentlemen that wrote.
So(Sir)I wish with all my soul (and I do hope there is some here will carry it
further)that they may endeavor the Peace of the Kingdom.

Now (Sirs) I must show you both how you are out of the way, and will put you
in the way: first, you are out of the way, for certainly all the way you ever
have had yet, as I could find by anything, is in the way of Conquest: certainly
this is an ill way: for Conquest (Sir) in my opinion is never just, except
there be a good just Cause, either for matter of Wrong, or just Title, and then
if you go beyond it, the first quarrel that you have to it, is it that makes it
unjust at the end, that was just at first: But if it be only matter of
Conquest, then it is a great Robbery, as a Pirat said to Alexander, that he was
the great Robber, he was but a Petty Robber: And so, Sir, I do think the way
that you are in, is much out of the way. Now, Sir, for to put you in one way,
believe it, you will never do right, nor God will never prosper you, until you
give God his due, the King his due (that is, my Successors) and the People
their due: I am as much for them, as any of you: You must give God his due, by
regulating rightly his Church (according to his Scriptures) which is now out of
order: For to set you in a way particularly, now I cannot, but only this, A
National Synod, freely called, freely debating among themselves, must settle
this: when that every Opinion is freely and clearly heard.

For the King, indeed I will not (then turning to a Gentleman that touched the
Ax) said, Hurt not the Axe, that may hurt me Meaning, if he did blunt the edge.
For the King, the Laws of the Land will clearly instruct you for that,
therefore, because it concerns my own particular, I only give you a touch of it.

For the People, and truly I desire their Liberty and Freedom as much as any
body whosoever, but I must tell you, that their Liberty and Freedom consists in
having of Government, those Laws by which their Life and their Goods may be
most their own. It is not for having share in Government (Sir) that is nothing
pertaining to them; A Subject and a Sovereign are clean different things, and
therefore until they do that, I mean, That you do put the people in that
Liberty as I say, certainly they will never enjoy themselves.

Sir, it was for this that now I am come here: If I would have given way to
an-Arbitrary way, for to have all Laws changed according to the power of the
Sword, I needed not to have come here, and therefore I tell you (and I pray God
it be not laid to your Charge) that I am the Martyr of the People.

In Troth Sirs, I shall not hold you much longer, for I will only say this to
you, that in truth I could have desired some little time longer, because I
would have put this that I have said in a little more Order, and a little
better digested then I have done, and therefore I hope you will excuse me.

I have delivered my Conscience, I pray God that you do take those courses that
are best for the good of the Kingdom, and your own Salvations.

Dr. Juxon. Will Your Majesty, though it may be very well known your Majesty's
Affections to Religion, yet it may be expected that you should say somewhat for
the worlds satisfaction.

King.
I thank you very heartily my Lord, for that I had almost forgotten it. In Troth
Sirs, My Conscience in Religion I think is very well known to all the world,
and therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian; according to
the Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left me by my Father;
and this honest man Pointing to Dr. Juxon.
I think will witness it. Then turning to the Officers, said, Sirs, excuse me
for this same, I have a good Cause, and I have a Gracious God, I will say no
more. Then turning to Col. Hacker, he said, Take care they do not put me to
pain. and Sir, this, and it please you. But then a Gentleman coming near the
Axe, the King said, Take heed of the Axe, pray take heed of the Axe. Then the
King speaking to the Executioner, said, I shall say but very short Prayers, and
when I thrust out my hands, --

Then the King called to Dr. Juxon for his Nightcap, and having put it on, he
said to the Executioner, Does my hair trouble you? who desired him to put it
all under his Cap, which the King did accordingly, by the help of the
Executioner, and the Bishop: then the King turning to Doctor Juxon, said, I
have a good Cause, and a Gracious God on my side.

D. Juxon. There is but one stage more, this Stage is turbulent and troublesome,
it is a short one: But you may consider, it will soon carry you a very great
way: it will carry you from Earth to Heaven; and there you shall find a great
deal of cordial Joy and Comfort.

King. I go from a corruptible to an incorruptible Crown; where no disturbance
can be, no disturbance in the world.

Dr. Juxon. You are exchanged from a Temporal, to an Eternal Crown, a good
Exchange.

The King then said to the Executioner, Is my Hair well? Then the King took off
his Cloak and his George, giving his George to Dr. Juxon, saying, Remember It
is thought, to give it to the Prince.
.

Then the King put off his Doublet, and being in his Wastcoat, put his Cloak on
again, then looking upon the Block, said to the Executioner, You must set it
fast.

Executioner. It is fast, Sir.

King. When I put my hands out this way, stretching them out, then --

After that, having said two or three words, (as he stood) to himself, with
hands and Eyes lift up, immediately stooping down, laid his Neck upon the Block:
and the Executioner again putting his hair under his Cap, the King said
(thinking he had been going to strike) stay for the sign.

Executioner. Yes, I will and it please your Majesty.

And after a very little Pause, the King stretching forth his Hands, the
Executioner at one blow severed his Head from his Body, the head being off, the
Executioner held it up, and showed it to the People; which done, it was with
the Body, put in a Coffin covered with black Velvet for that purpose, and
conveyed into his Lodgings there: And from thence it was carried to his House
at St. James's, where his Body was embalmed, and put in a Coffin of Lead, laid
there a Fortnight to be seen by the people; and on the Wednesday seven-night
after, his Corpse embalmed and coffined in Lead, was delivered chiefly to the
care of four of his Servants, viz. Mr. Herbert, Captain Anthony Mildmay, his
Sewers; Captain Preston, and John Joyner, formerly cook to his Majesty; they
attended with others, clothed in Mourning Suits and Cloaks, accompanied the
Hearse that night to Windsor, and placed it in that which was formerly the Kings
Bedchamber; next day it was removed into the Deans Hall; which Room was hanged
with Black, and made dark, with Lights burning round the Hearse; in which it
remained till Three in the Afternoon, about which time came the Duke of Lenox,
the Marquess of Hertford, the Marquess of Dorchester, the Earl of Lindsey,
having obtained an Order from the Parliament, for the Decent Interment of the
King their Royal Master, provided the Expense thereof exceeded not five hundred
Pounds; at their coming into the Castle, they showed their Order of Parliament
to Col. Which^ott Governor of the Castle, desiring the Interment might be in
St. Georges Chapel, and by the Form in the Common Prayer Book of the Church of
England; this Request was by the Governor denied, saying it was improbable,
that the Parliament would permit the use of what they had so solemnly
abolished, and therein destroy their own Act. To which the Lords replied, there
is a difference betwixt destroying their own Act, and dispensing with it, and
that no power so binds its own Hands, as to disable it self in some cases: all
could not prevail, the Governor persisting in the Negative. The Lords betook
themselves to the search of a convenient place, for the Burial of the Corpse,
the which, after some pains taken therein, they discover a Vault in the middle
of the Quire, wherein, as is probably conjectured, lies the Body of King Henry
the Eighth, and his Beloved Wife the Lady Jane Seamor, both in Coffins of Lead;
in this Vault there being room for one more, they resolve to interre the Body
of the King, the which was accordingly brought to the place, born by the
Officers of the Garrison, the four Corners of the Velvet Pall born up by the
aforesaid four Lords, the pious Bishop of London following next, and other
Persons of Quality, the body was committed to the Earth with Sighs and Tears,
especially of the Reverend Bishop, to be denied to do the last duty and Service
to his Dear and Royal Master; the Velvet Pall being cast into the Vault, was
laid over the Body: upon the Coffin was these words set, KING CHARLES, 1648.

I cannot let pass this Horrid Act of treason, without letting the world know
of the Damnable hypocrisy of that Arch Traitor Oliver Cromwell: The Day
assigned for Murdering of the King being come, the Council of War sat, which
then managed all. A Letter without name was addressed to the Council, to
represent to them by Reasons Conscience of and Prudence, the formidable
Consequence of so strange and execrable an Execution, Cromwell seemed to be much
touched at it (which caused some then present, to suspect, that he had a hand in
procuring it) and proposed it to the consideration of the Council, many of
which, began to relent, and lean toward Compassion; Cromwell observing it, made
a Turn toward the Door, and sent one of his Confidents to those to whom the
Execution was committed, to command them to dispatch the business; then
returning to the Council Table, made a large discourse, showing the
Inconvenience of this Execution, and advised them so to secure the Person of
the King, that he might neither do, nor receive hurt; which Discourse was
seconded by others, and reassumed by himself, with a great many words to
lengthen out the time, until one briskly entering into the Chamber, told them,
Gentlemen, you may cease to consult, the Work is done, the King is executed;
upon which, Cromwell fell down upon his Knees with great Devotion, and made an
Eloquent Prayer, giving Glory to God, and acknowledging his Divine Justice.

A Letter (worthy Perusal) written by King Charles, to his Son the Prince, from
Newport in the Isle of Wight, Dated, Nov. 29. 1648.
Son,
BY what has been said, you may see how long We have labored in the search of
Peace. Do not you be discouraged to tread those ways in all those worthy means
to restore your self to your Right; but prefer the way of Peace: show the
Greatness of your mind, rather to conquer your Enemies by pardoning them, then
by punishing. If you saw how unmanly and unchristianly this implacable
disposition is in our ill-willers, you would avoid that Spirit. Censure Us not,
for having parted with too much of Our own Right; the Price was great, the
Commodity was Security to Us, Peace to Our People. And We are confident another
Parliam. would remember how useful a Kings Power is to a Peoples Liberty. Of
how much We have divested Our self, that We and they might meet again in a due
Parliamentary way, to agree the bounds for Prince and People. And in this give
belief to our Experience, never to affect more Greatness or Prerogative, then
what is really and intrinsecally for the good of your Subjects (not
satisfaction of Favorites.) And if you thus use it, you will never want means
to be a Father to all, and a bountiful Prince to any you would be
extraordinarily Gracious unto. You may perceive all men trust their Treasure
where it returns them Interest; and if Princes, like the Sea, receive and repay
all the fresh streams and Rivers trust them with; they will not grudge, but
pride themselves to make them up an Ocean. These Considerations may make you a
great Prince, as your Father is now a low one; and your state may be so much
the more established, as mine has been shaken. For Subjects have learnt (We
dare say) that Victories over their Princes, are but Triumphs over themselves,
and so will be more unwilling to hearken to Changes hereafter. The English
Nation are a sober People, however at present under some Infatuation. We know
not but this may be the last time We may speak to you, or the world publicly;
We are sensible into what hand We are fallen, and yet We bless God, We have those
inward Refreshments, that the malice of Our Enemies cannot perturb. We have
learnt to own our self, by retiring into Our self, and therefore can the better
digest what befalls Us, not doubting but God can restrain our Enemies malice,
and turn their fierceness into his Praise. To conclude, if God give you
success, use it humbly and far from Revenge: If he restore you to your Right
upon hard conditions, whatever you promise, keep.

Those men which have forced Laws which they were bound to observe, will find
their Triumphs full of Troubles. Do not think any thing in this world worth
obtaining by foul and unjust Means. You are the Son of our Love: and as We
direct you to what we have recommended to you, so we assure you, We do not more
affectionately pray for you (to whom We are a Natural Parent) then We do, that
the ancient Glory and Renown of this Nation, be not buried in Irreligion and
Phanatick humor; And that all Our Subjects (to whom We are a Politic Parent)
may have such sober Thoughts, as to seek their peace; in the Orthodox
Profession of the Christian Religion, as it was established since the
Reformation in this Kingdom, and not in new Revelations: And that the ancient
Laws, with the Interpretation according to known practices, may once again be
an hedge about them, that you may in due time govern, and they be governed, as
in the fear of the Lord.

C. R.

The Lord Capel beheaded March 9. 1949. in the Palace yard, Westminster.
THis Noble Lord, Noble in his Life, nobler in his Death and Memory, noblest in
his Posterity, who fill the trumpet of Fame, that summons all men to render
them their deserved honors, though he was not like some of our foregoing
Martyrs, viz. Sr. Charles Lucas, and Sr. George Lisle, murdered in the instant
of the rendition of Colchester, having quarter for life given him by the
General, yet did not long survive their hard fate, being brought with more
solemnity (more perfidiousness) though alike glory to his Death, which he
suffered with a Christian and (no Roman but Colchester) Spirit and resolution.

He was no great Captain, nor ever undertook such a charge, serving without any
signal command in his Majesty's Armies, though no doubt sufficient thereto, yet
he is no less to be eternized for his endeavors, his courage, constancy and
faithful adherence to the King, when deserted by a great part of the Nobility,
parting with, and hazarding a great and ample Estate, which was sequestered from
him, and in conclusion laying down his life, so that he may justly be styled,
one of the Worthies of the English Nobility, and his name ever to be honorably
mentioned, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 112.6. The Righteous shall
be in everlasting remembrance.

He was Son and Heir to Sr. Arthur Capel of Hadham Hall in Herefordshire, a
Gentleman of Great Estate, and who loved and followed the old mode of our
Nation, kept a Noble and bountiful House, and showed forth his Faith by his
charity, extending it in such abundant manner to the poor, that he was bread to
the hungry, drink to the thirsty, eyes to the blind, and legs the the same, so
that he might justly be styled Great Almoner to the King of Heaven.

As this diffusive charity and bounty spread it self abroad, no less did his
Relative love and Paternal affection bestow it self on this his Son, whom he
most liberally educated, to a perfection in Learning, as his rich expressions
and elegant style in his Book Printed after his death, and in other letters do
best evidence.

Sr. Arthur dying, as this Noble Lord inherited his Estate, so did he his
Virtues, his pious bounty appearing so conspicuous, that some envious persons,
who hate good works in others, because they will do none themselves, have
maliciously traduced him as inclining to Popery. But as such aspersions amongst
persons of understanding, signify nothing more than the speakers malice, so
wrought it in others a deserved commendation of this Noble Person, especially
in those times (and our own are worse) when Charity lay bedridden, and Faith only
and such hungry notions were talked of, whereas his Faith appeared by his works.

From the degree of Knight the ancient Dignity of his Family, now advanced to
the Earldom of Essex, he was made Baron Capel, of Hadham, a little before the
time the Earl of Strafford received his Trial, which in this brave Lords
conscientious Judgment of himself, was his original condemnation in foro coeli.

During the Rebellion and those differences between the King and Parliament, he
constantly and faithfully adhered to his Majesty, contributing both in purse
and person to his aid and assistance, being appointed in that time for his
eminent wisdom and prudence Counselor to the Prince by the King his Father,
whom he abandoned not till the disbanding of my Lord Hopton's Army in Cornwall,
from whence his Highness took shipping to Scilly, giving my Lord an honorable,
but sorrowful dismission and conge to return home and attend, (though his
heroical mind spurred him on to pursue) his most unworthy fate.

For at his coming home upon those Articles, having scarce warmed himself there
after his long absence from thence, but some hopes appearing of the King's
restoration to his former Authority, by the coming in of Duke Hamilton with a
potent Army, as also by the Welsh Insurrection, and the rising of several
Counties, who declared for the same purpose, he with a select number of his
friends, acquaintance, and servants, joined himself with the Lord Goring, Sr.
Charles Lucas, and others, who with a considerable Army were then in Essex, and
after a long Siege were forced to surrender their Garrison of Colchester.

In the Articles of that rendition, this right noble Lord was included, and had
quarter given him for life, though it was afterward unhansomly unsaid again by
him that gave it, who left him, after his Parol given, to a High Court of
Justice; upon this surrender he was committed to the Tower, where whilst he
remained, he endeavored to escape, which he well effected; but crossing the
water, through some discourse he let fall, Jones the Waterman, conceiving what
he was, upon his landing discovered him, had him retaken, and committed again
in order to his Trial.

In the middle of March 1648, he was brought before the said High Court of
Justice, where he said enough in reason and justice to have cleared himself,
insisting upon his Privilege as a Peer, and claiming the benefit of the Laws,
which owned no such arbitrary Power as this, against the life of any Subject,
especially a Noble Man, and in sum denied their Jurisdiction, and pleaded his
quarter given him as abovesaid, but nothing would avail, they proceeded to
Judgment, and with Duke Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, and Sr.
John Owen, sentenced him to be beheaded, which was executed accordingly on the
ninth of March.

We will now take a view of him after the tmie of his Condemnation, when he was
to encounter and look Death in the face. He always kept a very cheerful and
well composed temper of mind, which proceeded from true Christian Principles,
he would often say, it was the good God he served, and the good cause he had
served for, that made him not to fear Death, adding, that he never had the
temptation of so much as a thought to check him for his engagement in this
quarrel, for he took it for his Crown and glory, and wished he had a greater
ability, and better fortune to engage in it.

The afternoon before his suffering, he was a great while in private with a
Minister, where bewailing, with that sense which became a true, and not
despairing penitent, the sins of his life past, the greatest he could remember,
was his voting my Lord of Straffords death, which though, as he said, he did
without any malice at all, yet he confessed it to be a very great sin, and that
he had done it out of a base fear (his own words) of a prevailing party, of
which he had very often and very heartily repented, and was confident of Gods
pardon for it. Then he desired to receive the Blessed Sacrament before he dyed.
After this (being afraid of some danger to the Minister that attended him, for
that work of Love) and some Conference in order to his preparation, both for
his provision and his voyage, the Sacrament and his death, he desired to go to
Prayers, which being performed, he returned to his private devotions.

The next morning being the day of his death, he desired the Minister, who was
with him before, to hear, and join with him in Prayers, which he did, for half
an hour in an excellent method, very apt Expressions, and most strong, hearty
and passionate affections; First confessing and bewailing his sins with strong
cries and tears, then humbly and most earnestly desiring Gods mercy through the
Merits of Christ alone. Secondly, For his dear Lady and Children with some
passion, but for her especially with most ardent affections, recommending them
to the Divine Providence with great confidence and affurance, and desiring for
them rather the blessings of a better life than of this. Thirdly, For the King,
Church and Kingdom. And Lastly, For his Enemies, with almost the same ardour
and affection.

After Prayer ended, my Lord of Norwich and Sr. John Owen being sent for, the
Minister read the whole Office of the Church for Good Friday, and then after a
short Homily for the occasion, he received the Sacrament again, in which action
he behaved himself with great Humility, Zeal and Devotion.

Being demanded after the receiving thereof how he found himself, he replied
very much better, stronger and cheerfuller for that heavenly repast, and that
he doubted not to walk like a Christian through the vale of death in the
strength of it. But he was to have an Agony before his Passion, and that was
the parting with his Wife, eldest Son, now Earl of Essex, his Son in Law, two
of his Uncles, and Sr. T.C. especially his parting with his dearest Lady, which
indeed was the saddest spectacle that could be. In which occasion, as he could
not choose but show and confess a little of humane frailty, yet even then, he
did not forget both to comfort and counsel her, and the rest of his friends;
particularly in blessing the yuong Lord, he commanded him never to revenge his
death, though it should be in his power, the like he said unto his Lady. He
told his Son he would leave him a Legacy out of David's Psalms, and that was
this, Lord lead me in a plain path. For Boy (says he) I would have you a plain
honest man, and hate dissimulation.

After this was past, with much ado his Wife and the rest of his Friends were
persuaded to begone, and then being all alone with the Minister, he said,
Doctor, the hardest part of my work in this World is now past, meaning the
parting with his Wife. Then he desired the said Minister to pray preparatively
for his death, that in the last action he might so behave himself, as might be
most for Gods Glory, for the indearing of his dead Masters memory, and his
present Masters service, and that he might avoid the doing or saying of any
thing, which might savor either of ambition or vanity. This being done, he was
conveyed with the other two Lords, who suffered with him to Sr. Robert Cottons,
where the Minister staid with him till he was called to the Scaffold, whither
the Guard of Soldiers permitted him not to come, so that my Lord took leave of
him there.

The same day he died, he wrote this following Letter to his Wife.

My dearest Life;
MY Eternal life is in Christ Jesus: my wordly considerations in the highest
degree thou have deserved, let me live long here in thy dear memory, to the
comfort of my Family, our dear Children, whom God out of mercy in Christ has
bestowed upon us. I beseech thee take care of thy health, sorrow not, afflict
not thy self too much; God will be unto thee better than an Husband, and to my
Children better than a Father: I am sure he is able to be so: I am confident he
is graciously pleased to be so. God be with thee, my most virtuous Wife. God
multiply many Comforts to thee and my Children, which is the fervent Prayer of

Thy, etc.


He has also left behind him an excellent Book of Meditations, and some other
Miscellaneous things, especially an Exhertation to stir up the hearts and
endeavors of men to have saved the precious life of the King, etc. which being
to be had, will need no other Commendation.

When the other two Lords were beheaded, he was brought last to the Scaffold,
where he spoke as follows.

His Lordship in the way to the Scaffold, put of his hat to the People on both
sides, looking very austerely about him: And being come upon the Scaffold,
Lieut. Colonel Beecher said to him, Sir, Is your Chaplain here? CAPEL. No, I
have taken my leave of him: and perceiving some of his Servants to weep, he
said, Gentlemen, refrain your salves, refrain your selves; and turning to
Lieut. Col. Beecher, he said, what? did the Lords speak with their hats off, or
no?

Col. Beech. With their Hats off: And then coming to the front of the Scaffold,
he said, I shall hardly be understood here, I think, and then began his Speech
as follows.

Capel. The conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the
cause of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say
to you: When I made an address to them (which was the last) I told them with
much sincerity, that I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be
partakers of his inestimable and boundless mercies in Jesus Christ; and truly I
still pray that Prayer; and I beseech the God of Heaven forgive any injury they
have done to me, from my Soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian. But it is necessary I should tell
you somewhat more, that I am a Protestant: And truly, I am a Protestant, and
very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it was
established in England by the Thirty nine Articles; a blessed way of
profession, and such an one as truly, I never knew none so good. I am so far
from being a Papist, which some body have (truly) very unworthily at some time
charged me withal, that truly, I profess to you, that though I love Good
Works, and commend Good Works, yet I hold they have nothing at all to do in the
matter of Salvation; my Anchorhold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave
himself for me; that is that that I rest upon.

And truly something I shall say to you as a Citizen of the whole World, and in
that consideration I am here condemned to die, truly contrary to the Law that
governs all the World, that is, the Law of the Sword: I had the protection of
that for my life, and the honor of it, but truly I will not trouble you much
with that, because in another place I have spoken very largely and liberally
about it. I believe you will hear by other means what Arguments I used in that
case: But truly, that, that is stranger, you that are Englishmen, behold here
an Englishman here before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to die
by any Law of England, not by any Law of England; nay, shall I tell you more?
(which is strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws of England that I know of.
And truly I will tell you, in the matter of the civil part of my death, and the
Cause that I have maintained, I die (I take it.) for maintaining the fifth
Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which enjoins reverence and obedience to
Parents: All Divines on all hands, though they contradict one another in many
several opinions, yet all Divines on all hands do acknowledge, that here is
intended Magistracy and Order; and certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and
that Order underwhich I have lived, which I was bound to obey: and truly, I do
say very confidently, that I do die here for keeping, for obeying that fifth
Commandment given by God himself, and written with his own finger. And now,
Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, that I cannot imitate a
better, nor a greater ingenuity than his, that said of himself, For suffering
an unjust judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by an unjust
judgment. Truly, Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men that are
concerned in it, may take the occasion of it, of humble repentance to God
Almighty for it, I do here profess to you, that I did give my Vote to that Bill
against the Earl of Strafford; I doubt not but God Almighty has washed that
away with a more precious blood, the Blood of his own Son, and my dear Savior
Jesus Christ; and I hope he will wash it away from all those that are guilty of
it: truly, this I may say, I had not the least part nor degree of malice in
doing of it; but I must confess again to Gods glory, and the accusation of mine
own frailty, and the frailty of my Nature, that truly it was unworthy
Cowardice, not to resist so great a torrent as carried that business at that
time. And truly, this I think I am most guilty of, of not courage enough in it,
but malice I had none; but whatsoever it was, GOD I am sure has pardoned it,
has given me the assurance of it, that Christ Jesus his Blood has washed it
away; and truly, I do from my Soul wish, that all men that have any stain by
it, may seriously repent, and receive a remission and pardon from God for it.
And now, Gentlemen, we have had an occasion by this intimation to remember his
Majesty, our KING, that last was; and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it,
but truly I must needs say, that in my opinion, that have had time to consider
all the images of all the greatest and vertuousest Princes in the World; and
truly, in my opinion, there was not a more virtuous, and more sufficient Prince
known in the World, than our gracious King CHARLES that died last: God Almighty
preserve our King that now is, his Son; God send him more fortunate and longer
days; God Almighty so assist him, that he may exceed both the virtues and
sufficiencies of his Father: For certainly, I that have been a Counselor to
him, and have lived long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily
enough made, for he was young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, or
sixteen years of age) those years I was with him, truly, I never saw greater
hopes of virtue in any young person than in him; great judgment, great
understanding, great apprehension, much honor in his nature, and truly a very
perfect Englishman in his inclination; and I pray God restore him to this
Kingdom, and unite the Kingdoms one unto another, and send a great happiness
both to you and to him, that he may long live and Reign among you, and that
that Family may Reign till thy Kingdom come, that is, while all temporal power
is consummated: I beseech God of his mercy give much happiness to this your
King, and to you, that in it shall be his Subjects, by the Grace of Jesus
Christ.

Truly I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer, of his infinite and inestimable Grace
and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give
them as much mercy as their hearts can wish; and truly, for my part, I will not
accuse any one of them of malice, truly I will not; nay I will not think there
was any malice in them: what other ends there is I know not, nor will I
examine; but let it be what it will, from my very Soul I forgive them every
one. And so the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
Commands, to His Majesty, that this Kingdom may be an happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be an happy King in so good and so obedient a
people. God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom, God
Almighty preserve you all.

Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, which is the Gentleman? which is the man? Answer was made, He
is coming; He then said, Stay, I must pull off my Doublet first, and my
Wastcoat: and then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel
said, O friend! prithee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the
Lord Capel said, I forgive thee from my Soul, and not only forgive thee, but I
shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is five pound
for thee; and truly, for my clothes, and those things, if there be any thing
due to you for it, you shall be fully recompensed: but I desire my bedy may not
be stripped here, and no body to take notice of my body but my own Servants.
Look you Friend, this I shall defire of you, that when I lie down, you would
give me a time for a particular short Prayer.

Lieu. Col. Beecher. Make your own sign my Lord.

Capel. Stay a little: Which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the
Executioner;) Stay, I think I should lay my hands forward that way pointing (
fore-right) and answer being made, Yes; he stood still a little while, and then
said, God Almighty bless all this people, God Almighty slench this blood, God
Almighty stench, stench, stench this issue of blood; this will not do the
business, God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one
of his Servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my Wife;
but I must desire thee and beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, to be
contented and fully satisfied: and then speaking to his Servants, he said, God
keep you; and Gentlemen, let me now do a business quickly, privately, and pray
let me have your prayers at the moment of death, that God would receive my
Soul.

L. Col. Beecher. I wish it.

Capel. Pray at the moment of striking join your Prayers, but make no noise
(turning to his Servants) it is inconvenient at this time.

Servant. My Lord put on your cap.

Capel. Should I, what will that do me good? Stay a little, it is well as it is
now. As he was putting up his hair.

And then turning to the Executioner, he said, honest man, I have forgiven
thee, therefore strike boldly; from my Soul I do it.

Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prithee be contented, be
quiet, good Mr. -- be quiet.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well; you are ready when I am ready,
are you not? and stretching out his hands, he said, Then pray stand off
Gentlemen. Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People,
Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of
you, That you would all join in Prayers with me, That God would mercifully
receive my Soul, and that for his alone mercies in Christ Jesus. God Almighty
keep you all.

Execut. My Lord shall I put up your hair?

Capel. I, I, prithee do; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes,
he said, O God, I do with a perfect and willing heart submit to thy will: O
God! I do most willingly humble my self: and then kneeling down, said, I will
try first how I can Lie; and laying his head upon the Block, said, Am I well
now?

Execut. Yes.

And then as he lay with both his hand, stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lie both my hands out, when I lift up my hands thus [ lifting
up his right hand] then you may strike.

And then after he had said a short Prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and
the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was taken up
by his Servants, and put (with his body) into a coffin.

I Shall omit Duke Hamilton, not only because of another Nation, though a Peer
of this, but because, it is in question, whether he suffered not for obeying
the commands of the Scotch Parliament and Kirk, who sent him as General in that
Expedition, and that the Kings Interest was but collateral. Let him therefore
rest in his honorable grave, while we softly and reverently pass over it to
that of the Earl of Holland.

Henry Earl of Holland beheaded on the Scaffold in the Palace-yard at
Westminster, at the same time.
THis Lord in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, was his
special favorite and peculiar friend; so that after that assassinate upon the
Duke of Buckingham, he was made Chancellor of the University of Cambridge,
having been newly before from Baron Rich of Kensington, raised to the Honor of
the Earldom of Holland, and sent Colleague with the Earl of Carlisle in that
splendid Embassy into France, about the marriage of the Queen Mother.

Notwithstanding all these favors so freely conferred on him, so uncertain,
variable and unobligeable are the minds of men (for I cannot impute his siding
with the Parliament to have been from any disgust or dislike he received from
the King) especially when Religion becomes the bone of contention; he was one
of those Lords that remained at London, and made up a House of Peers, although
he never took up Arms, Command or Employment against his good Master and
Sovereign.

About the middle of the War sceing how unreasonably the Parliament persisted
in carrying on the War, being so often fruitlesly courted by the King to an
accommodation, he and the Earl of Bedford forsook their part and quarrel, and
escaped to the King at Oxford, where finding not that kind and favorable
reception they expected, being looked on shily by the Court there, especially
this Lord, he privately departed to London again, having left a fair account of
himself to the King.

But when the War was ended, and the Parliament had refused to treat with his
Majesty, and so to settle the Kingdom, he then took up Arms in earnest in the
Kings behalf, being real and cordial on this his last undertaking, and engaged
with him the Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Peterborough, Lord Francis Villers,
and Lord Peter, who with a gallant company of men rendezvouz'd at Kingston,
where immediately Sr. Michael Livesey set upon them, and routed them. The Earl
fled to St. Neets in Bedfordshire, where in his Quarters he was taken by
Colonel Scroop's Regiment of Horse, where Colonel Dolbier was killed, and by
order of the Parliament sent Prisoner to Warwick Castle.

He continued there for the space of six months in pretty good health, both of
body and mind, but as soon as he heard of the murder of the King, his heart
failed him, and sickness seized on him, so that he never dawed day afterward,
nor could endure to stir out of his chamber, lamenting the loss of his gracious
Master, and providing for his own violent dissolution the same way, which being
condemned by the same High Court of Justice, with my Lord Capel and Duke
Hamilton, he suffered on the same Scaffold.

His Lordships Speech on the Scaffold, immediately before his Death, March 9.
1649.
Holland.
IT is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here. Which way must I speak?
And then being directed to the Front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over the
Rayls) said; I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me to
this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my Breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has ever
been faithful to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred,
in the which I have lived, and in the which, by Gods Grace and Mercy I shall
die. I have not lived according to that Education I had in that Family where I
was born and bred. I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive it is
very much his pleasure to bring me to this place, for the sins that I have
committed. The cause that has brought me hither, I believe, by many has been
much mistaken. They have conceived that I have had ill Designs to the State,
and to the Kingdom; Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment of
God, not but I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had no extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. For those Actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been ever very faithful to the Public, and very particularly to
Parliaments. My Affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them.
The dispositions of Affairs now have put things in another posture then they
were when I was engaged with the Parliament. I have never gone off from those
Principles that ever I have professed; I have lived in them, and by Gods Grace
will die in them. There may be Alterations and Changes that may carry them
further then I thought reasonable, and, truly there I left them: But there has
been nothing that I have said, or done, or professed, either by Covenant or
Declaration, which has not been very constant and very clear, upon the
Principles that I ever have gone upon; which was to serve the King, the
Parliament, Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Commonwealth,
and to seek the Peace of the Kingdom; That made me think it no improper time,
being pressed out by Accidents and Circumstances, to seek the Peace of the
Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was something then in
Agitation, but nothing agreed on, for sending Propositions to the King, that
was the furthest aim that I had, and truly beyond that I had no Intention, none
at all. And God be praised, although my Blood comes to be shed here, there was
I think scarce a drop of Blood shed in that Action that I was engaged in. For
the present Affairs as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them; and truly
they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of
them; and therefore I must make use of Prayers, rather then of my Opinion;
which are, That God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that he
would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has bin happily
governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons; a Government that I
conceive it has flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring
not rather a Prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, then the contrary. I look
upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my Conscience directs me to it, to
desire, that if God be pleased, that these people may look upon them with that
Affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not
through blood, nor through disorder, admitted again into that power, and to
that glory, that God in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my
soul for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the Blood which is
here spilt, may even be the last that may fall among us; and truly I should lay
down my Life with as much Cheerfulness as ever person did, if I conceived that
there would be no more Blood follow us; for a State or Affairs that are built
upon Blood, is a Foundation for the most part that does not prosper.

After the Blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to the
Parliament, I do wish with all my heart, happiness and a blessing to all those
that have been Authors in this business; and truly, that have been Authors in
this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them, but I pray
heartily and really for them, as God will forgive my sins, so I desire God may
forgive them.

I have a particular Relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge, and truly I
must here, since it is the last of my Prayers, pray to God that that University
may go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to
plant those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the souls of
the people may receive a great benefit, and a great advantage by them, and (I
hope) God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I have
found from them Looking toward Mr. Bolton.
I have said what Religion I have been bred in, what Religion I have been born
in, what Religion I have practiced, I began with it, and I must end with it. I
told you that my Actions and my Life have not been agreeable to my Breeding. I
have told you likewise that the Family where I was bred, has been an exemplary
Family (I may say so, I hope, without Vanity) of much affection to Religion,
and of much faithfulness to this Kingdom, and to this State, I have endeavored
to do those Actions that became an honest man, and a good Englishman, and which
became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige those that have been in
trouble, those that have been in Persecution, and truly I find a great Reward
of it; for I have found their Prayers and their kindness now in this distress,
and in this condition, and I think it a great reward, and I pray God reward
them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to
give me faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal Life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the Mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side-rayl, he prayed for a good space of time; after which, Mr.
Bolton said,

My Lord, now look upon him whom you have trusted. My Lord, I hope that here is
your last Prayer, there will no more Prayers remain, but Praises; and I hope
that after this day is over, there will a day begin that shall never have end;
and I look upon this (my Lord) the Morning of it, the Morning of that day. My
Lord, You know where your Fullness lies, where your riches lie, where is your
only Rock to anchor on; you know there is fullness in Christ: If the Lord comes
not in with fullness of Comfort to you, yet resolve to wait upon him while you
live, and to trust in him when you die; and then say, I will die here, I will
perish at thy feet, I will be found dead at the feet of Jesus Christ.
Certainly, he that came to seek and save lost sinners, will not reject lost
sinners when they come to seek him; He that entreats us to come, will not
slight us when we come to entreat him. My Lord, there is enough there, and fix
your heart there, and fix your eyes there, that eye of Faith, and that eye of
Hope; exercise these Grace; now, there will be no exercise hereafter. As your
Lordship said, here take an end of Faith, and take an end of Hope, and take a
Farewell of Repentance, and all these; and welcome God, and welcome Christ, and
welcome Glory, and welcome Happiness to all Eternity; and so it will be an
happy passage then, if it be a passage here from misery to happiness. And
though it be but a sad way, yet, if it will bring you into the presence of Joy,
although it be a Valley of Tears, although it be a shadow of death, yet if God
will please to bring you, and make it a passage to that happiness, welcome
Lord. And I doubt not, but God will give you an heart to taste some sweetness
and Love in this bitter Potion, and to see something of Mercy and Goodness to
you, and show you some sign and token of good, so that your soul may see that
which we have had already experience of (blessed be God for it) many
Experiences, many Expressions, not only in words, nor tears; God has not left
us without much Comfort and evidence, and I hope (my Lord) you that have given
so many Evidences to us, I hope you want none your self, but that the Lord will
be pleased to support you, and bear up your Spirit, and if there want Evidence,
there is Reliance, my security lies not in my knowing that I shall come to
Heaven, and come to Glory, but in my resting and relying upon him; when the
Anchor of Faith is thrown out, there may be shakings and tossings, but there is
Safety; nothing shall interrupt Safety, although something may interrupt
Security: my safety is sure, although I apprehend it not: and what if I go to
God in the dark? What if I come to him, as Nicodemus did, staggering in the
night? It is a night of trouble, a night of darkness, though I come trembling
and staggering in this night, yet I shall be sure to find comfort and fixedness
in him. And the Lord of Heaven be the strength, stay and support of your soul,
and the Lord furnish you with all those Graces which may carry you into the
besom of the Lord Jesus, that when you expire this life, you may be able to
expire it into him, in whom you may begin to live to all Eternity; and that is
my humble Prayer.

Holland. M. Bolton, God has given me long time in this world; he has carried
me through many great accidents of fortune, he has at last brought me down
into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a dis-affection
to this State, to this Parliament, that (as I said before) I did believe no
body in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that cause; I
look upon it as a great Judgment of God for my sins. And truly, Sir, since that
the death is violent, I am the less troubled with it, because of those violent
deaths that I have seen before; principally my Savior, that has showed us the
way, how, and in what manner he has done it, and for what cause, I am the more
comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not long since the King my Master
passed in the same man^er; and truly I hope that his purposes and intentions
were such, as a man may not be ashamed, not only to follow him in the way that
was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his putposes, if God had given
him life. I have often disputed with him concerning many things of this kind,
and I conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge, and better
understanding (if God had spared him life) might have made him a Pr. very happy
toward himself and this Kingdom. I have seen and known that those blessed souls
in Heaven have passed thither by the gate of sorrow, and many by the gate of
violence; and since it is Gods pleasure to dispose me this way, I submit my
soul to him, with all comfort, and with all hope, that he has made this my
end, and this my conclusion, that though I be low in death, yet nevertheless
this lowness shall raise me to the highest glory for ever.

Truly, I have non said much in public to the People, concerning the
particular Actions that I conceive I have done by my Counsels in this Kingdom,
I conceive they are well known, it were something of vanity (methinks) to take
notice of them here: I Will rather die with them, with the comfort of them in my
own bosom, and that I never intended in this Action, or any action that ever I
did in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any creature that
lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my Profession before of it,
how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that was looked upon
to be no little notorious in opposition to some liberties they have conceived
then to be taken; and truly, there was some mark upon me, as if I had some
taint of it, even throughout my whole ways that I have taken: every body knows
what my Affections have been to many that have suffered, to many that have been
in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to relieve them, I endeavored to
oblige them, I thought I was tied so by my Conscience, I thought it by my
Charity, and truly, very much by my Breeding; God has now brought me to the
last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I can adhere unto, is
this, That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great Savior; that as he has
given me here a Fortune to come publicly in a show of shame in the way of this
suffering (truly I underst and it not to be so) I understand it to be a Glory;
a glory, when I consider who has gone before me, and a glory, when I consider
I had no end in it, but what I conceive to be the Service of God, the King, and
the Kingdom, and therefore my heart is not charged much with any thing in that
particular, since I conceive God will accept of the intention, whatsoever the
Action seems to be. I am going to die, and the Lord receive my Soul; I have no
Reliance, but upon Christ: For my self, I do acknowledge, that I am the
unworthiest of sinners, my Life has been a vanity, and a continued sin, and
God may justly bring me to this end, for the sins I have committed against him,
and were there nothing else but the iniquities that I have committed in the way
of my Life, I look upon this as a great Justice of God, to bring me to this
Suffering, and to bring me to this Punishment; and those hands that have been
most active in it, if any such there has been; I pray God forgive them; I pray
God there may not be many such Trophies of their Victories, but that this may
be (as I said before) the last show, that this People shall see, of the Blood
of persons of Condition, of Persons of Honor: I might say something of the way
of our Trial, which certainly has been as extraordinary, as any thing I think
has ever been seen in this Kingdom; but because that I would not seem as if I
made some complaint, I will not so much as mention it, because no body shall
believe I repine at their Actions, that I repine at my Fortune; it is the will
of God, it is the hand of God, under whom I fall; I take it entirely from him,
I submit my self to him, I shall desire to roll my self into the Arms of my
blessed Savior, and when I come to this Pointing to the Block.
place, when I bow down my self there, I hope God will raise me up; and when I
bid farewell, as I must now to Hope and to Faith, that Love will abide; I know
nothing to accompany the Soul out of this world, but Love; and I hope that Love
will bring me to the fountain of glory in Heaven, through the Arms, Mediation,
and the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord help my
Unbelief.

Hodges. The Lord make over unto you the Righteousness of his own Son, it is
that Treasury that he has bestowed upon you; and the Lord show you the light
of his countenance, and fill you full with his Joy and Kindness. O my dear
Lord, the Lord of Heaven and Earth be with you, and the Lord of Heaven and
Earth bring you to that Safety.

Holland. I shall make as much have as I can to come to that Glory, and the
Lord of Heaven and Earth take my Soul; I look upon my self entirely in him, and
hope to find Mercy through him, I expect it, and through that Fountain that is
opened for sin and for uncleanness, my soul must receive it; for did I rest in
any thing else, I have nothing but sin and Corruption in me, I have nothing but
that, which in stead of being carried up into the Arms of God, and of Glory, I
have nothing but may throw me down into Hell.

Bolton. But my Lord, when you are clothed with the Righteousness of another,
you will appear Glorious, though now sinful in your self; The Apostle says, I
desire not to be found in my own Righteousness, and when you are clothed with
another, the Lord will own you, and I shall say but thus much: Doubt not that
ever God will deny Salvation to sinners, that come to him, when the end of all
his death and sufferings was the Salvation of sinners, when as, I say, the
whole end, and the whole Design, and the great work, that God had to do in the
world, by the death of Christ, wherein he laid out all his Counsels, and
infinite wisdom, and goodness, beyond which, there was a non ultra in Gods
thoughts, when this was the great design, and great end, the salvation of poor
sinners, that poor souls should come over to him, and live; certainly, when
sinners come, he will not reject, he will not refuse: And, my Lord, do but
think of this, the greatest work that ever was done in the world, was the blood
of Christ that was shed, never any thing like it: And this Blood of Christ that
was shed, was shed for them that come, if not for them, for none, it was in
vain else: You see the Devils they are out of capacity of good by it, the
Angels they have no need of it, wicked men will not come, and there are but few
that come over, but a few that come over, and should he deny them, there were
no end nor fruit of the Blond and Sufferings of the Lord Jesus: and had your
Lordship been with Christ in that bloody Agony, when he was in that bloody
sweat, sweating drops of Blood, if you had asked him, Lord, what art thou now a
doing, art thou not now reconciling an angry God and me together, art thou not
pacifying the wrath of God? art thou not interposing thy self between the
Justice of God and my soul? Would he not have said, Yea? and surely then he
mill not deny it now. My Lord, his Passions are over, his Compassions still
remain, and the larger and greater, because he is gone up into an higher place,
that he may throw down more abundance of his mercy and grace upon you, and, my
Lord, think of that infinite love, that abundance of riches in Christ: I am
lost, I am empty, I have nothing, I am poor, I am sinful; be it so, as bad as
God will make me, and as vile as I possibly can conceive my self, I am willing
to be: but when I have said all, the more I advance that Riches, and honor
that Grace of God. And why should I doubt, when by this, he puts me into a
capacity, into a disposition for him to show me Mercy, that by this I may the
better advance the riches of his Grace, and say, grace, grace, to the Lord to
all Eternity, that God should own such a Creature that deserves nothing; and
the less I deserve, the more conspi^uous is his Grace: And this is certain, the
riches of his Grace he throws amongst men, that the Glory of his Grace might
be given to himself; if we can give him but the Glory of his Grace, we shall
never doubt to partake of the riches of it; and that Fullness, My Lord, that
fullness be your Comfort, that fullness of Mercy, that fullness of love, that
fullness of righteousness and power be now your riches, and your only stay, and
the Lord interpose himself between God and you, as your Faith has endeavored
to interpose him between God and your soul; so I doubt not there he stands (my
Lord) to plead for you, and when you are not able to do any thing your self,
yet lie down at the feet of him that is a merciful Savior, and knows what you
would desire, and wait upon him while you live, trust in him when you die,
^here is riches enough, and mercy enough, if he open not, yet die at his door,
say there I Will die, there is Mercy enough.

Holland. And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope
he will raise me to an eternal glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely,
from whom only I can expect Mercy: into his Arms I commend my Spirit, into his
bleeding Arms, that when I leave this bleeding body, that must lie upon this
place, he will receive that Soul that arises out of it, and receive it into
his eternal mercy, through the Merits, through the worthiness, through the
Mediation of Christ, that has purchased it with his own most precious Blood.

Bolton. My Lord, though you conclude here, I hope you begin above, and though
you put an end here, I hope there will never be an end of the Mercy and
goodness of God, and if this be the Morning of Eternity, if this be the rise of
Glory, if God pleases to throw you down here, to raise you up for ever, say,
Welcome Lord, welcome that death that shall make way for life, and welcome any
condition that shall throw me down here, to bring me into the possession of
Jesus Christ.

Hodges. My Lord, if you have made a Deed of Gift of your self to Jesus Christ,
to be found only in him, I am confident you shall stand at the day of Christ,
my dear Lord, we shall meet in happiness.

Holland. Christ Jesus receive my soul, my soul hungers and thirsts after him,
clouds are gathering, and I trust in God through all my heaviness, and I hope
through all impediments, he will settle my Interest in him, and throw off all
the claim that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry my soul in
despite of all the calumnies, and all that the Devil, and Satan can invent,
will carry it into eternal mercy, there to receive the blessedness of his
Presence to all Eternity.

Hodges. My Lord, it was his own by creation, it is his own now by Redemption
and purchase; and it is likewise his own by resignation: O my Lord, look
therefore up to the lamb of God, that sits at the right hand of God, to take
away the sins of the world, O that lamb of God!

Holland. That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul: And that Lamb of
God that sits upon the Throne to judge those 24 that fall down before him, I
hope he will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with mercy that fall
down before him, and that adore him, that only trusts upon his Mercy, for his
compassion; and that as he has purchased me, he would lay his claim unto me
now, and receive me.

Bolton. My Lord, think of this, there is no condemnation to them who are in
Christ; who is it that can condemn? it is Christ that justifies: and therefore
look now upon this, (My Lord,) upon this Christ, upon this Christ that
justifies: Hell, Death, Sin, Satan; nothing shall be able to condemn, it is
Christ that justifies you.

Holland. Indeed if Christ justify, no body can condemn, and I trust in God,
in his justification, though there is a confusion here without us, and though
there are wonders and staring that now disquiet, yet I trust that I shall be
carried into that mercy, that God will receive my Soul.

Bolton. I doubt not my Lord, but as you are a Spectacle of Pity here, so you
are on Object of Gods mercy above.

Holland. Then the Earl of Holland looking over among the People, pointing to a
Soldier, said, This honest man took me a Prisoner, you little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions: and
espying Captain Watson on horseback, putting off his hat, said to him, God be
with you Sir, God reward you Sir.

Bolton. My Lord, throw your self into the arms of mercy, and say, there I will
Anchor, and there I will die, he is a Savior for us in all conditions, whither
should we go? he has the words of eternal life: and upon him do you rest, wait
while you live, and even trust in Death.

Holland. Here must now be my Anchor, a great storm makes me find my Anchor;
and but in storms no body trusts to his Anchor; and therefore I must trust upon
my Anchor ( Upon that God, said Mr. Bolton, Upon whom your Anchor trusts) ye^,
God I hope, will Anchor my Soul fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I die not with
that clearness and heir inesse that you speak of, truly, I will trust in God,
though he kill me, I will rely upon him, and in the Mercy of my Savior.

Bolton. There is mercy enough, my Lord, and to spare, you shall not need to
doubt; they shall never go begging to another door (my Lord) that come to him.
Then the Earl of Holland speaking to Mr. Hodges, said, I pray God reward you
for all your kindness, and pray as you have done, instruct my Family, that they
may serve God with faithfulness and holiness, with more diligence, than truly I
have been careful to press them unto: you have the charge of the same place,
you may do much for them, and I recommend them to your kindness, and the
goodness of your Conscience.

Dr. Sibbald standing upon the Scaffold, in his passage to Col. Beecher
expressed himself thus to his Lordship.

Dr. Sibbald. The Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon you, and you
shall be safe.

Holland. Then the Earl of Holland embraced Lieutenant Col. Beecher, and took
his leave of him: After which he came to Mr. Bolton, and having embraced him,
and returned him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his Soul,
desiring God to reward him, and return his love into his bosom. Mr. Bolton said
to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity; the Lord
reveal and discover himself to you; and make your death the passage unto
eternal life --

Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, here, my friend,
let my Clothes and my Body alone, there is Ten pounds for thee, that is better
than my Clothes, I am sure of it.

Executioner. Will your Lordship please to give me a Sign when I shall strike?
And then his Lordship, said you have room enough here, have you not? and the
Executioner said, Yes.

Bolton. The Lord be your strength, there is riches in him; The Lord of Heaven
impart himself to you, he is able to save to the utter most: We cannot fall so
low as to fall below the everlasting Arms of God; and therefore the Lord be a
support and stay to you in your low condition, that he will be pleased to make
this an advantage to that life and glory that will make amends for all.

Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, do
you hear me, if you take up my head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to
his Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow; and to
another, God be with thee, thou art an honest man: and then said, Stay, I will
kneel down, and ask God forgiveness; and then prayed for a pretty space, with
seeming earnestness.

Bolton. The Lord grant you may find life in death.

Holland. Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him,) and then going to
the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you all, and God
deliver you from any such accident as may bring you to any such death as is
violent, either by War, or by these accidents, but that there may be Peace
among you, and you may find that these accidents that have happened to us, may
be the last that may happen in this Kingdom; it is that I desire, it is that I
beg of God, next the saving of my Soul: I pray God give all happiness to this
Kingdom, to this People, and this Nation: and then turning to the Executioner,
said, How must I lie? I know not.

Executioner. Lie down flat upon your belly: and then having laid himself down,
he said, must I lie closer?

Execut. Yes, and backwarder.

Holland. I will tell you when you shall strike; and then as he lay, seemed to
pray with much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said,
where is the man? and seeing the executioner by him, he said, stay while I give
the sign; and presently after stretching out his hand, and the executioner
being not fully ready, he said, now, now, and just as the words were coming out
of his mouth, the executioner at one blow severed his head from his body.

The Execution of Mr. Beaumont, a Minister at Pontfract, 15 Feb. 1648. and the
like done afterward to Major Morris, and Coronet Michael Blackburn, at York,
23. August, 1649.
FOR the everlasting memory, and the obliging Ruins of this Town and Castle,
together with the memory of these Persons, we must repeat from the beginning,
and tell the world how far, and how much beyond all other Fortresses and
places, this Garrison continued for the King; and was valiantly defended,
prudently maintained, courageously and bravely rescued and freed; and in
conclusion, made its own glorious Sepulcher and Monument.

This place, infamous formerly for the death of King Richard the second, for
the Execution of Richard Woodvile Earl of Rivers, and the rest of those unhappy
relations to the Wife of Edward the 4th. has now redeemed it self by the price
current of Loyal Blood, and is consecrated in its demolitions and ruins to the
veneration of an Altar, whereon so many acceptable sacrifices to Heaven have
been laid and offered.

Not to summon the Genius of that place to an account, we will derive the
cruelty of those sanguinary perpetrations upon the lives of these men from
asstrange and hidden Notions. Nothing but most unexpiable malice contracted
from the hardened guilt of rebellion, could have violenced the insolent Victor
into so much inhumanity and baseness, nay, barbarous and detestable cruelty;
but some fierce and most compulsive Engines of merciless Tyranny and Ambition,
who in this noble and most loyal Garrison reared, and displayed their complete
Conquest.

In the defense hereof many noble persons were concerned at several times, as
the advantages and difficulties of that place successively required; many brave
exploits and attempts were often performed to the honor of themselves, and the
terrou^ of their Enemies, partic ularly in that memorable business of Col.
Rainsborough, who quartering ten miles from the Leager ( Pontefract being then
besieged by Sir Edward Rhodes, and other County Forces:) and being ordered to
command in chief, and finish that piece of service, was by a resolute small
party of Horse, who sallied from thence in spite of the Besiegers, killed in
his Inn, having first refused quarter, and fell as an expiatory victime to the
slaughter, and murder of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, shot to death
a little while before at Colchester.

Among the rest of such gallant Spirits related to that Garrison this Mr.
Beaumont, a Minister of the Orthodox Protestant Religion, was much noted for
his loyal, resolute and constant adherence, and maintenance of the Royal Cause.
This his loyalty was employed as well without as within that Garrison; being by
the venerable respect to this Order (not so rudely profaned then in those parts
of the Nation) more freely permitted, and unsuspectedly suffered to entertain,
and harbor and transact with all manner of men according to the unbounded and
unlimited use of his Function: but neither his heart, nor his house were open
to any but faithful Subjects, with such, of whom upon the surprizal of
Pontefract the third of July 1648. by Major Morris and others, this Gentleman
held correspondency.

All this time every good man put to his helping hand to the restoring of the
King; and this being an Important Service, making the Royal Interest
considerable in the North, much care was taken by the well-affected people
adjacent thereto for a supply of that place with all manner of provision of
Arms and sustenance.

The care whereof Mr. Beaumont resointely took upon himself, and before any
formal siege, the Parliament-Forces being otherwise employed, had several
recourses thereto, maintained a strict intelligence, was often out upon Parties
with them, and had regulated and stated the Contribution from the places
thereabouts, which was either freely paid, or as courageously forced, till
after the defeat of Duke Hamilton at Preston in Lancashire, they were wholly
surrounded, and blocked up.

This distress of his Friends further obliged him to their assistance, so far
was the danger from detering of him, therefore he adventured in his own person
to go and see in what condition they were, and to take a view of the likeliest
means of relief, and give an account of the Enemies strength, and advantages,
or weakness, and most attemptible place of their Lines and entrenchment.

But in this design he was surprised and taken, and immediately brought before
a Council of War, who enraged at the death of Rainsborough, and insolenced by
their late many Victories, and Fleshed with the carnage and blood of so many
preceding Sacrifices, especially that of the King's, they made no bones of him,
but condemned him to the Gibbet with such fury and have, that they would scarce
afford him time to recommend himself from their merciless Bar to the merciful
and just Tribunal of Heaven, which would ere long judge righteously in his
cause between his Enemies and himself.

He was not long in preparation for his dissolution, having as well learned as
taught the necessity of Death; improved to him into an easy suffering, and
undergoing of it by the glory of his cause, so that he quietly submitted to
their Sentence; and with Christian resolution, owning his actions in order to
his duty, laid down his life the day and year aforesaid, and will therefore
deservedly among the rest of his glorious Company be had in precious and
everlasting remembrance.

Not long afterward followed the rendition of Pontefract-Castle, surprised as
aforesaid by Col. Morris; they had stood it out to extremity, there being no
place in England for the King besides, and therefore were forced to accept of
very hard Conditions: which were, that six of the garrison, whom they should
choose, should be left at discretion. The reason of this calling out this Number
was a resolution to Sacrifice them to the ghost of the said Rainsborough, being
assured, that those that performed that exploit were then in the Castle, and
might be discovered upon view.

Among those, or rather for those this Gentleman was taken, being the Governor
of the place, and with Cornet Michael Blackbourn, and the others brought to the
City of York, and committed to that Goal until the Summer-Assizes held there by
Baron Thorp for that County, when an Indictment of Treason was brought against
them for levying War against the Parliament; and thereupon found guilty by a
packed Jury and after Sentence of being hanged, drawn, and quartered, they were
executed the day and year aforesaid, the rigor of dismembring them being only
abated. At their death they spoke as follows.

The Speech of Col. John Morris, Governor of Pontefract- Castle, at the place
of his Execution at York, August 23. 1649.
WHen he was brought out of prison, looking upon the Sledge that was there set
for him, lifting up his eyes to Heaven, knocking upon his breast, he said, I am
as willing to go to my death, as to put off my doublet to go to bed; I despise
the shame as well as the Cross; I know I am going to a joyful place: with many
like expressions,

When the Post met him about St. James Church, that was sent to the Parliament
to mediate for a reprieve; and told him he could not prevailin it, he said,
Sir, I pray God reward you for your pains, I hope, and am well assured to find
a better pardon then any they can give; my hope is not in man, but in the
living God:

At the place of Execution he made this profession of his faith, his breeding,
his cause he had fought in.

Gentlemen, First I was bred up in the true Protestant Religion, having my
education and breeding from that honorable House my dear Lord and Master
Strafford, which place I dare boldly say, was as well governed and ruled as
ever any yet was before it; I much doubt, better then any will be after it,
unless it please God to put a period to these distracted times: this Faith and
Religion, I say, I have been bred in, and I thank God, I have hitherto lived
in, without the least wavering, and now I am resolved by Gods assistance to die
in.

These pains are nothing, if compared to those dolors and pains, which Jesus
Christ our Savior has suffered for us; when in a bloody-Sweat he endured the
Wrath of God, the pain of Hell, and the cursed and shameful death which was due
to our sins; therefore I praise the Lord that I am not plagued with far more
grievous punishment, that the like has befallen others, who undoubtedly are
most glorious and blessed Saints with Christ in Heaven. It is the Lords
affliction, and who will not take any affliction in good part when it comes
from the hand of God? And what? shall we receive good from the hands of God,
and not receive evil? And though I desire, as I am carnal, that this Cup may
depart from me, yet not my will, but thy will be done. Death brings unto the
godly an end of sinning, and of all miseries due unto sin: so that after death
there shall be no more sorrow, nor cry, nor pain, for God shall wipe away all
tears from our eyes; by Death our souls shall be delivered from thraldom; and
this corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality.

Therefore blessed are they that are delivered out of so vile a world, and
freed from such a body of bondage and corruption; the soul shall enjoy
immediate Communion with God in evetlasting bliss and glory; it takes us from
the miseries of this world, and society of sinners, to the City of the living
God, the celestial Jerusalem.

I bless God I am thought worthy to suffer for his Name, and for so good a
cause; and if I had a thousand lives, I would willingly lay them down for the
cause of my King, the Lords Anointed; the Scripture commands us to fear God and
honor the King, to be subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake;
whether to the King as supreme, or to to those that are in authority under him.
I have been always faithful to my Trust: and, though I have been most basely
accused for betraying Leverpool; yet I take God to witness, it is a most false
aspersion, for I was then sick in my bed, and knew not of the delivering of it,
till the Officers and Soldiers had done it without my consent, and then I was
carried prisoner to Sir John Meldrum; afterward I came down into the Country,
and seeing I could not live quietly at home, I was persuaded by Colonel Forbes,
Colonel Overton, Lieut-Colonel Fairfax, whom I took for my good friends, to
march in their Troops: which I did, but with intention still to do my King the
best service when occasion was, and so I did; and I pray God to turn the hearts
of all the Soldiers to their lawful. Sovereign, that this Land may enjoy
Peace, which till then it will never do: and though thou kill me, yet will I
put my trust in thee; wherefore I trust in God he will not fail me nor forsake
me. Then he took his Bible and read diverse Psalms fit for his own occasion and
consolation, and then put up diverse prayers, some publicly, and some
privately; the public was this which follows:

His Prayer.
WElcome blessed hour, the period of my Pilgrimage, the term of my Bondage, the
end of my cares, the close of my sins, the bound of my travels, the Goal of my
race, and the haven of my hopes; I have fought a long fight in much weakness; I
have finished my course, though in great faintness; and the Crown of my joy is,
that through the strength of thy grace, I have both kept the true faith, and
have fought for my King, the Lora's Anointed's cause without any wavering; for
which, and in which I die; I do willingly resign my flesh, I despise the World,
and I defy the Devil, who has no part nor share in me. And now what is my
hope? my hope Lord Jesu is even in thee: for I know that thou my Redeemer
live, and that thou will immediately receive my soul and raise up my body
also at the last day, and I shall see thee in my flesh with these eyes, and
none other. And now, O Lord, let thy Spirit of comfort help mine infirmities,
and make supplication for me with sighs, and groans that cannot be expressed; I
submit my self wholly to thy will; I commit my soul to thee as my faithful
Redeemer, who have bought it with thy most precious blood. I confess to all the
world, I know no name under heaven by which I may be saved, but thine my Jesu,
my Savior; I renounce all confidence in any merits save thine; I thank fully
acknowledge all thy blessings; I unfeignedly bewail all my sins: I steadfastly
believe all thy promises: I heartily forgive all my Enemies: I willingly leave
all my Friends; I utterly loath all earthly comforts, and I entirely long for
thy coming. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The private were to himself, his Hat being before his eyes. After this, he put
up diverse short Ejaculations: As, I know my Redeemer lives; Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit, for thou have redeemed it; O God, thou God of truth;
Lord Jesus receive my spirit, and many of the like: and so he yielded to Death.

The Speech of Coronet Michael Blackbourn, immediately before his death, August
23. 1649.
It is expected I should say something^ and indeed it is my desire to say
something, and but a little.

I Am not a Gentleman by birth, but my Parents are of an honest quality and
condition. I was brought up in the Protestant Religion, and in that Religion I
have lived, and in that I now die. I have some five or six years since engaged
in this War, wherein I had no other end or intention but to do my King true and
faithful service, according to my duty and the dictate of my Conscience. I have
not done so much service as I desired, but I have been always faithful to him,
and wish I could have done him more; and for his Son the King that now is, I
wonder any man of this Kingdom should have the boldness or impudence to life up
his hand against him, to keep him from his Crown whereof he is Heir apparent,
and has as good right and title to it by his Birthright, as any man living
has of his Inheritance or Possession: I pray God bless him, forgive all my
En^mies, and Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

Dr. Levens executed at the Old Exchange, London, the 18. of July 1650.
THis learned Gentleman was descended of an ancient family in Oxfordshire,
whose chief seat and residence was near Botley, within a mile of the
Universitie. His education was truly generous, his profession the Civil Law,
wherein he was graduated a Doctor, and in which he was excellently known before
these Wars.

But when these uncivil broils began, he laid aside the practice of that Law,
which was not only silenced, by the depression, and annihilation of the
Hierarchy, in whose Courts it is most generally used, but also despaired of for
any future resuscitation during the Troubles; and he took himself to the
service of his Sovereign, then most unlawfully and uncivilly assaulted and
affronted by the Members at Westminster.

He continued most part of the War in the Gar^ison at Oxford, and his own
adjacent dwelling, till such time as the surrender of the said City into the
hands of the Parliament, where he had the same terms, and was concluded in the
Articles of that Capitulation; which being forced to accept, and lay down his
arms, he again resumed his wonted studies.

From these he was again avocated by those monstrous and horrid actions of
those times, which indulged not any man his private concerns in the danger and
trouble of the public, nor could he forsake, or desert his first cause with
its fortune, and serve the times by a base and abject indifferency.

He had to the infinite distraction of his mind, and trouble of his soul, seen
the barbarous Regicide perpetrated upon the life of his Sovereign; the Royal
Family renounced and banished, all the friends thereof in most eminent danger
to be destroyed, and undone for adhehering to them, and the Laws in the late
War, the Church and State renversed, and a sad confusion and ruin of the
Kingdom (unless obviated by Providence, and means therewith used) to be
impendent and unavoidable.

Upon these and the like considerations, this Gentleman, very considerable in
his numerous acquaintance, prudence and integrity, became engaged for the Son
our present Sovereign, as before for his Royal Father; several consultations,
and private meetings were held by him, and others, in order to this service, to
which purpose he also received Commissions from the King, then in France, for
several Officers of these Forces designed to be raised, and other Instructions,
as the affair proceeded.

The Commonwealth, as it was then called, was in its infancy, which made its
politic Guardians very cautious, and jealous of attempts upon it; the Kings
interest was no whit the less formidable, because his person was beyond the
Sea, the just indignation, and noble anger of his Subjects being ready to boil
over upon any sudden motion; they had also so oppressed the generality of the
people with grievous and insupportable Taxes, that they might well fear and
suspect some more forcible and prosperous enterprise against them, by how much
their imp^eties, and high provocations had further incensed both heaven and
earth.

Therefore they employed their Emissaries and Spies to give them intelligence,
if any such designs were on foot, and so to countermine all plots against them.
Their sagacious industry in this soon answered their expectation: for these
flies prying up and down, engaging in all companies, assimulating themselves to
their complexion, opinion, and study, light at last upon some glimpses of this
business, which they followed so close, that at last they made a perfect and
full discovery of the main business, and that this Doctor Levens was the chief
Agitator and manager thereof, in whose breast the Cabal was principally lodged
and entrusted, and upon whose apprehension they might be informed and satisfied
in every circumstance.

An Order was thereupon made by the Council of State, and a Warrant signed by
Bradshaw the President to seize, and bring him before them, and to search his
Chamber, and break up his Trunks for papers, he then being at London, the place
most expedient for the design, which accordingly was done, a file or two of
Musketeers guarding, and securing the house, where the said Papers were, among
which there were blank Commissions signed by the King to the purport aforesaid,
were found with him, and carried to the Council, who thereupon ordered him to
be proceeded against as a spy, and referred him to a Council of War.

Accordingly he was soon afterward tried by a Court Martial, where he did not
excuse himself, or extenuate his fault, but very modestly and handsomely
acknowledged their allegations against him, and the justice of his cause, of
which he told them he was no way ashamed, but, if it must be so, would
willingly lay down his life in the owning of it. He told them moreover, that he
was bound indispensably by the Laws of God and this Kingdom, to do what he did,
and so referred himself to them. They very earnestly pressed him to reveal the
other parties engaged with him, and gave him some fallacious hopes of life, if
he would freely declare them, but those offers prevailed not with him, being
resolved to suffer and take all upon himself, rather then to ruin others, whom
they could not fasten upon without his discovery.

So the Court proceeded to Sentence, which was, that he should be hanged over
against the Exchange in Cornhill, in Exchange time, which after some little
preparation was executed, he being brought in a Coach from the Mews, with the
Executioner vizarded with him, and a Troop of Horse to guard him to the said
place, where the Sheriffs received him into their charge. After he alighted,
and some words passed between them concerning the said discovery, he told them
they should not expect it, and desired them to forbear any further trouble to
that purpose, and so ascended that ladder, which reached unto heaven, wherein
he prayed very fervently for the King, and the Church, and commended his soul
into the hands of the Redeemer, and so concluded his last breath, which at the
falling of his body mounted his soul to heaven, in whose blissful mansions he
nows sings Hallelujah for ever.

Colonel Eusebius Andrews beheaded on Tower Hill, August 22. 1650.
THis Gentleman, a most sincere and religious Protestant, being by profession a
Counselor of Gray's Inn, and who during the War had followed the Kings fortune
out of Conscience of his obedience, and duty, was most wickedly trapand by the
said Council of State and their Officers to his lamentable death; a Narative of
the whole take as follows.

On Monday the 24 of March, 1649. Colonel Andrews was taken prisoner at
Graves-end by Major Parker, and by a Troop of Horse that night conveyed to
the George in Kings-street Westminster. The next day he was convented before
the President Bradshaw, Sir Henry Mildmay, and Thomas Scot; three members of
the said Council delegated by them for the taking of the Examination of him,
and of Sir Henry Chichley, Doctor Henry Edwards, and Mr. Clark, casually found
in the same Inn with Mr. Andrews.

These Gentlemen examined him so punctually to every action and circumstance,
that had passed on his part since he took up Arms, and especially since the
render of Worcester, and his return from thence to London, and also concerning
his several Lodgings, Names, Acquaintances, Removes, Abodes in the Country,
correspondencies by Letters, and interests in places, and persons, as if they
had kept a Diary for him. Which considered, and that Sir John Gell Baroner,
Major Bernard, Captain Smith, Captain Benson, and Capt. Ashley (with whom he
had the last and most questionable correspondency) were all in custody; he
found himself to be betrayed, but could not at present guess by whom: but well
saw, that he had better be fair in his Confession, then to deny what he saw by
the perfectness of his Examiners would be proved against him by the discovery
of those formerly secured, and examined before his coming up, and so resolved
to bear the worst, and not so much to shame himself, or the matter, as to deny
things evident, or easily proveable, but rather to cast himself upon God; and
come off as well as he could with a truth in his mouth.

In his Answers he would have been circumstantial, but was kept close to the
Question, At his departure he desired he might set down his own Narrative
according to his own sense, which was granted him to prepare, and to send, or
bring them as there was opportunity. And, having totally, and as much as in him
lay excused his fellow prisoners as to any thing related to his Delinquency, he
was with them committed to the Gate House.

Wednesday following he was re-convented and re-examined; and on Friday again
convented, and delivered in his Narrative to the Lord President, and by him
without further words returned. On Saturday he was re-called, and then as at
all times before used and treated with civility, being only much pressed to
discover some great Persons his supposed Confederates; their aim being, as he
supposed, at Sir Guy Palms, Sir John Curson, and Sir Thomas Whitmore, etc. But
it was a great blessing in his unhappiness, that it was not cumulative, nor
fatal to any of his friends and familiars, who yet knew nothing of the reason
of his imprisonment, more then by common same.

On Sunday next he was called out of his bed, and by two Messengers, his
keeper, and his man, brought into a Boat at Kings-bridge Westminster, and
thence carried to the Tower, The Warrant which was read at the Lieutenants
house, imported, That he was committed close prisoner for high Treason, in
endeavoring to subvert the present Government, to be kept till delivered by
Law.

He was designed for a Prison-lodging by Col. West the Lieutenant; but upon
notice of his quality he was put into the custody of Mr. Slaidon, one of the
Warders in his house, equally convenient with the best. At his first coming to
the Tower he had but two shillings in his Purse, and supposing he should be
provided for at the States-charges, he sent to the Lieutenant to know what he
would order for him; who returned, that if he had money he might have what he
would, but at his provision nothing.

His keeper was upon his delivery to his charge commanded to keep him safe, and
if he escaped threatened to be hanged, and a Sentinel set immediately at his
door; and that day two Gentlewomen, coming to see him, were all imprisoned in
the Round-house, and next day carried to the Council of State, and strictly
examined.

His Waterman that week brought him some money, for which, and some
affectionate words spoken of him, he was brought before the President,
examined, rebuked, and dismissed, and a Sentinel set at Mr. Andrew's window
that he might not speak to any without.

His Case was this:

His Engagement for his late Majesty began in 1642. and continued until the
surrender of Worcester 1645. He compounded not for his Delinquency, not having
a considerable, and not willing to own an inconsiderable Estate. He took
neither Protestation, Solemn League and Covenant, Negative Oath, nor subscribed
Engagement.

At his return to London to a private practice in his Calling for his necessary
support; John Bernard, sometimes a Major under him, by reason of his good
parts, and sober demeanor, being in his good opinion frequently visited him,
and imparted to him such Occurrences, as he met abroad in discourse, and did
intimate the discontents of the Levellers and Agitators, and the proceedings of
a certain Committee of Officers, to which he was Clerk, upon a printed charge
against some of the Parliament for oppression, etc. By such discoveries he at
last obtruded on the Colonel the acquaintance of one Capt. Helmes, who soon
after brought with him one Benson, who pretended to have served under Sir John
Gell, who frequently produced Letters, transcripts of Letters (with the
copying, whereof he pretended to be entrusted by Mr. Rushworth) which appeared
to purport matters of State, to be delivered to Mr. Bushel to be sent
Beyond Sea.

These two insinuated what interest they had in the Reformadoes, and the
advantage would be done by them for the Royal Party, and magnified Sir John
Gells interest in his Country; and his regret and reluctancie for what he had
done for the Parliament. Barnard then propounded that a design formerly in the
War laid by him for the taking of the Isle of Ely might by the said assistance,
and Sir John's aid be revived and executed, but this project failed.

In December 1649. Helmes brought the Col. instructions to draw up a Petition
for Sir John Gell for his Arreares: this procured a meeting, where Sir John
took notice of his ill requital for his Services, and desired to be represented
to his new Majesty as his Loyal Subject for the future, and no more passed.

There coming out soon after an Act, commanding Cavaliers to depart the City of
London, being in treaty about transplanting himself into Sir Edward Plowdens
Plantation in New- Album; He was again visited by Major Barnard and Benson, who
gave him notice of a c^nsiderable design laid, and friends and money to back it;
and that he should have 200 pound, and power to draw more by bills of Exchange,
if I would go over and promote the said design with the Prince, and then in
general terms acquainted him that it was an easy matter, the Cavaliers going
out of Town, by correspondence in all Counties, to surprise uhe Horse of the
Army in their several Quarters; the Col. answer was, that if the money were
ready, he would entertain the motion.

Next day after they came again, and told him that the Gentlemen of Kent,
Buckingham and Dorset, would presently be near the Town, and would join in an
Engagement, and raise money; that Sir John Gell would engage likewise, and might
easily bring in his Friends Sir Andrew Knevela, Sir Guy Palms, Mr.
Fieqherbert, etc. and therefore desired the Colonel to draw an Engagement
(which he did in a loose Paper, according to the sense they instructed him) and
to move Sir John Gell in the business, but pressed not the Coll. then to join
in the same.

Accordingly he spoke with Sir John, who refused to join, or meddle in the
design, not daring to trust Benson, but renewed his desire to the Col. if he
went over to possess the King with a good opinion of him. This answer did not
altogether unsatisfie Barnards, who appointed^the same few days after a meeting
at the Yhree-crane-Tavern in the Savoy, for a meeting where should be present
the Gentlemen of the aforesaid Counties, but they met not, only Barnard and
B^nson, and one Capt. Ashley. Barnard produced Letters that the Kentish
Gentlemen were come to Rochester, and would come, but within 12 miles of
London, that night he durst go no further that day for fear of Col. Blunt; and
that they did the money, and had sent for him with a Guide to bring him to them,
so he departed to take Horse, while the other two pressed him again to get Sir
John Gell to seal an Engagement which Benson had engrossed; which he refused,
and told them, he was able to satisfy any body of Sir John Gel's reality,
though not actually engaged. That same night comes a Messenger unknown to him
from Barnard, highly blaming the Col. and Sir John Gell of backwardness in
withholding their hands from the Engagement, and that thereupon his Kentish
friends would proceed no further; as this Smith the Messenger took upon him to
be informed from them; but the Col. insisting, that Sir John was not to be
urged further. This Smith, and Ashley departed^, and promised to pay the money
the next night at the Pals-graves-heads.

But failing of their promise, and the next day the Colonel according to the
Act being to depart the Town. Ashley delivered him that night a Letter from
Barnard, pressing him to subscribe the Engagement which Benson engrossed, and
that done he would go the next^day with him to Graves-end, where the Kentish
Gentlemen should not fail to mee^ him.

Being come to Graves-end alone, Barnard, as Benson pretended being at
Tattenham Court with the Bucking ham shire Gentlemen, there were none of the
Kentish Gentlemen come thither: but two days after comes Barnard and Smith with
a Letter from Benson, intimating, that if Sir John Gell would not engage with
those whose names were subscribed, they would go over to the King and spoil his
Reputation, and the Colonels both there; and that he had Letters from Sir John
to produce which should make him repent his refusal, and therefore desired Col:
Andrews to write to Sir John Gell, which he did, laying the Case before him; so
they parted from the Colonel agreeing, if they got Sir John's Seal to come down
to Gravesend, and so to Rochester for the money, and performance of the
Confederacy, or else to let the business fall, and return the Col. his Seal
and Engagement. And while the poor betrayed Gentleman was in this suspense, he
was seized at his Inn in Gravesend by a party of Horse, and brought prisoner to
London. This Narrative of his own was postilled with this Address to the three
that examined him.

My Lords,
IN this Narrative, you will see a believing Nature wrought upon by treacherous
men: such, who cannot be true to any, while false to Parties: The pretended
Design vanished, as never being more then a Phantasme, and not worth the regard,
the real Design effected so far, as they had power and opportunity; that is, to
bring the Game into the Foil, and there leave them entangled, to be made a
Quarry. You will find me passively Astive, being prompted and enticed by their
insinuation, and not once, but hearkening to them. It lies in your Lordships
power to cut me off, by extending whereof you can arrive at no honor amongst
men: and possibly by an Act of Lenity you may do an Office acceptable to God,
Cujus fiat volunt as modo in mina mea; Whosoever shall be present at my Trial,
or, into whose hands this Narratiue shall fall, will easily conclude with me,
Quo^ vult perdi Deus hos prius Dementat.

Eusebius. Andrews.


Shortly after he was called again, and was confronted with Sir John Gell; and
avowed what he did neither directly deny, nor was troubled that he did aver.
And then declared to Bradshaw, that he looked upon Sir John Gell as upon
himself, a betrayed man, and so was dismissed that time.

The noble Colonel, understanding those Gentlemen taken with him were in
restraint, writ to Sir Henry Mildmay concerning them in these words:

Honored Sir,
The past Nobleness I am sensible at your hands, as civilly treating me when
before the State, though a great Delinquent, gave me this encouragement, and
you the trouble of this Address. It is no small increase of my proper
misfortune, that I see such who were taken with me as Companions to my Person,
to share so deep in the punishment, as do those Gentlemen, Mr. Edwards, and Mr.
Clark: persons so free from the guilt of my evil, that I am confident they
cannot give account for what cause I am deservedly a prisoner, though it were
made the price of their liberty. I am an humble Suitor to you, that you would
take them into your favorable consideration, and mediate their enlargement;
and, that you would not let them have a worse place in your thoughts, for that
they are recommended to your Favor by, etc.

The Colonel several times took upon him to aver to the Council of State, that
they had Spies upon him for some years, and particularly that infamous fellow
Barnard, which Bradshaw denied not, but justified the State, by the practice of
all Governments, to set Watches upon persons of ill affection to them.

Being in this condition, he was advised to Petition the Tyrannical Council,
which according to some of their own Directions, was this,

To the Right Honorable, the Lord President, and Council of State.
The Humble Petition, etc.
Shows,

THat your Petitioner is deeply sensible, and humbly acknowledges, that for
his high Delinquency against the State, he is become forfeited to their
Justice. -- That he has not in the least prevaricated with your Lordships in
the confession of his proper faults and follies, nor has kept ought reserved
concerning himself, or any person, or they which may satisfy your Lordships,
and more secure the State; and is not hopeless to be looked upon as capable of
your present favor, and future mercy, which he now, and shall always implore.

That his present deserved Condition is made more uncomfortable by his wants,
and the exclusion of his Friends and Relations, without a supply, in which,
life it self becomes a punishment.

Your Petitioner casting himself at your Lordships feet, humbly prays, That his
being prosecuted before the High Court of Justice, may be suspended; that by
your order his past, and future charges of necessaries may be discharged while
he remains your prisoner; That his Friends and Kinrea may have recourse to him,
and that he may have the freedom of his Pen. And, in case your Petitioner shall
be found in the l^ast to misapply these favors; he shall, adjudge himself
worthy of a total deprivation of them, and your future goodness toward him.

And Your, etc.


These were seconded with several other Petitions, especially one to the
Parliament, and backed with Letters to the Speaker, and the Lieutenant of the
Tower, in referrence to maintenance, and freedom of persons coming to him,
which with great difficulty, and by express order too of the Council, was
hardly obtained by a Gentlewoman of quality his friend.

Having endured a tedious imprisonment of sixteen weeks, having nothing altered
from those cruel Statesmen; he was at last in the Month of August brought to
his trial before a High Court of Justice, against whose Jurisdiction, and
Authority he learnedly, and bravely spoke, and a; large denied their power of
trying and condemning any Freeman of England; their Erection being contrary to
all the Laws of the Kingdom; the beginning of his first argument from not
pleading to his Charge, was this:

My Lords, and you Gentlemen, Members of this Honorable Court.
I Have, as becomes me, been attentive to the Charge which has been read
against me. It appears in that dress, that it is put alreadly (though I presume
it shall be clad in other Apparel by Mr. Attourny, so specious and great, as
that my friends (if I have any here) begin to fear, the indifferent to doubt,
and the partial to defire, and join in my condemnation, my self (I hope I am
not partial to my self) believe, that it will be no more then the Mountains
labor, and when it shall come to be opened, will prove inane aliquod, like the
Apples of Sodom, that, however they take the first sense, the eye, as this the
ear, do rather foul the fingers that touch them, then satisfy the appetite in
expectation upon them. My Lord, I am at an unusual Bar, engaged in a great
Cause of a far, and extendible Concernment; my fee is life, and my duty is
self-preservation; which in it self were less considerable, if by a president
of my suffering, the Consequence would not prove mischievously Epidemical.

I do not refuse to plead to the Charge, but humbly crave leave to offer my
Reasons for the suspending of my Plea. And if I be importunate, yet within the
bounds of civility, I beg Your pardon, that I may have a free, full, and
uninterrupted hearing.

He proceeded with admirable Elegance and strength of Argument, and Reason
throughout his Trial: But that bloody Court, and cruel Attorney Genesis Prideaux
overruled them all: telling him, that the Court was not at leisure to take
notice of those Law-Cases, but of his Confession; that he had an affection to
it though nothing acted, and that was sufficient Treason, and for that
affection he deserved Death; and thereupon the Court pronounced sentence
against him, that he should be beheaded. Thus was the Birthright of a Freeman
of England denied by wicked Murderers, whose will was their only Law.

Between Sentence and Execution he received a preparatory Letter to Death from
a Dear friend, to which he returned this answer.

Friend, Your words sent to me were such, and so seasonable, that I have given
them the same entertainment, as becomes me to afford to Apples of Gold, and
Pictures of silver; and if I be after my decollation dissected, you may find
them in my heart, where you always have had a Mansion.

If fear were absolutely a necessary passion by which to denote a man, I must
as yet be accounted among some other Species of Animality. The fear of Isaac
has banished all other dreadings. I look upon Death as upon that Rod in the
hand of God, with which he would not have corrected me if less correction would
have served turn; and which he does now exercise upon me, because he is
resolved not to let me be less then a Son beloved; and I am content to bear the
stripes, and kiss the Instrument. I am sorry that my Rod is bound together with
the sin of my Betrayer, and wish him Repentance, that when the Rod comes to be
burned, he suffer not in the flame.

I am proud, and covetous to be released from the double imprisonment I lie
under, of the flesh and bones, and am ready for the opportunity to make an
escape, though in a fiery Chariot. All things betwixt God and me are removed
from my sight; and I see him clearly without reflection on my Judges, and
Accusers: and submit cheerfully to His fatherly Dispensation, and Judgment.

My Judges have done me no wrong; they have a Law for their Warrant, and my
confession for their Evidence; neither have capacity to be Chancellors in
matters of life; Let them go free, and the Lawmakers? and inforcers of it, for
their errors in constituting them, before the padling in blood grow too
customary to be thought a sin worthy their confession, or sorrow, which I
desire for the fakes of their souls, and the lives of the oppressed, and in
indeed prescribed Free Christians of the Nation.

The God of all goodness has in mercy ^hoked upon me, directed, counseled me,
comforted, and sanctified my afflictito me; and I am ready to fall into his
merciful Hands, as soon as the heavy hand of the Executioner shall have given a
Nune Dimitis to

Yours, etc. E. A.


ABout the same time he made his Will, a taste whereof take in these few
following lines. -- If it be the unalterable and uncontrolable Will of God,
that I Eusebius Andrews, Esquire shall for my manifold and high Provocations of his
Divine Majesty be shipwrackt by that storm which impendeth over my head, I
most humbly and cheerfully submit unto such his good will and pleasure, and
forgive, etc. and desire, that my body may be privately interred in the Parish
Church of Alhallows Bark. in London, as near as may be to the Reverend
Archbishop of Canterbury, there with him to expect a joyful resurrection. I
beseech God to bless my daughter Mavilda Andrews, and to supply to her, what by
my improvidence, and the accidents of the late tempestuous times, as in my
being taken away became deficient; and that he would preserve her from want and
dishonor, and from being by any evil Counsel, or example, led aside into the
foul errors of this Nation in matters concerning her souls health, etc.

Here he gave her, and the whole world, an account of his faith, which was
equally distant from Popery, Presbytery, and Independency, all which he
charactered, professing himself a true son of this Church, as governed by
Episcopacy, and conluded thus; I desire such, who approve my profession, to
cover my faults in their charity, and to let me be sweet in their memory. As
for the rest, I wish them a seasonable repentance, but set no price either upon
their opinion or report, Vivat Rex, currat Lex, floreat Grex; fiat voluntas Des
modo in mina mea.

He was shortly after beheaded, and enrolled into the noble army of Martyrs in
Heaven, the day and year abovesaid.

Barnard, his accuser and betrayer was hanged four years after at Tyburn, for
robbing Colonel Winthorps house at Westminster; so did God avenge the blood of
this Royal and pious person, by signal testimony of his unjust and merciless
prosecution.

The Speech of Col. Eusebius Andrews immediately before his Execution on the
Scaffold on Tower Hill, on Thursday August 22. 1650. being attended on by Dr.
Swaddling.
AS soon as he came upon the Scaffold, kissing the block, he said, I hope there
is no more but this block between me and heaven; and to the Lieutenant of the
Tower he said, I hope I shall neither tire in my way, nor go out of it. After
he had been a good while upon the Scaffold, turning to the rail, he speaks to
the people as follows; Christian Gentlemen and people, Your business hither
to day is to see a sad spectacle, a man to be in a moment unmanned, and cut off
in the prime of his years, taken from further opportunities of doing good
either to himself, his friends, the Commonwealth, or especially to God; it
seldom happens but upon very good cause. And though truly, if my general known
course of life were but inquired into, I may modestly say there is such a moral
of honesty upon it, as some may be so saucy as to expostulate why this great
judgment is fallen upon me; but know, I am able to give them and my self an
answer, and out of this breast am able to give a better account of my Judgment
and Execution then my Judges themselves, or you are able to give; It is Gods
wrath upon me for sins long unrepented of, many Judgments withstood, and
mercies slighted; therefore God has whipped me by his severe rod of
correction, that he might not lose me: I pray join with me in prayer, that it
may not be a fruitless rod, that when by this rod I have laid down my life, by
this staff I may be comforted, and received into glory. I am very confident by
what I have heard since my sentence, there is more exception made against
proceedings against me then I even made. My tryers had a Law, and the value of
that Law is indisputable, and for me to make a question of it, I should shame
my self and my discretion. In the strictness of that Law something is done by
me, that is applicable to some clause therein, by which I stand condemnable:
the means whereby I was brought under that interpretation of that which was in
my self intended maliciously, being testimony given (by persons whom I pity) so
false, yet so positive, that I cannot condemn my Judges for passing sentence
against me, according to legal Justice; for equity lies in higher breasts.

As for my Accusers, or rather betrayers, I pity, and am sorry for them, they
have committed Judas his crime, but I wish and pray for them Peter's tears, that
by Peter's repentance they may escape Judas his punishment; and I wish other
people so happy, they may be taken up betimes before they have drunk up more
blood of Christian men, possibly less deserving then my self.

It is true, there have been several addresses made for mercy, and I will put
the obstruction of it upon nothing more then upon my own sin, and seeing God
sees it fit, (having not glorified him in my life) I might do it in my death;
which I am contented to do. I profess in the face of God, particular malice to
any one of State or Parliament, to do them a bodily in jury I had none.

For the Cause in which I had long waded, I must needs say, my engagement or
continuance in it has laid no scruple upon my Conscience, it was in principles
of Law; the knowledge whereof I profess, and on principles of Religion, my
Judgment satisfied, and Conscience rectified, that I have pursued those ways
which I bless God I find no blackness upon my Conscience, nor have I put it
into the bed-roll of my sins.

I will not presume to decide controversies; I desire God to honor himself in
prospering that side that has right with it, and that you may enjoy peace and
plenty; when I shall enjoy peace and plenty, beyond all you possess here; in
my conversation in the world, I do not know where I have an enemy with cause,
or that there is such a person whom I have to regret; but if there be any whom
I cannot recollect under the notion of Christian men, I pardon them, as freely
as if I had named them by name, I freely forgive them, being in free peace with
all the world, as I desire God for Christ's sake, to be at peace with me. For
the business of death, it is a sad sentence in it self, if men consult with
flesh and blood: But truly without boasting, I say it, or if I do boast, I
boast in the Lord, I have not to this minute, had one consultation with the
flesh about the blow of the Axe, or one thought of the Axe, more then as my
passport to glory.

I take it for an honor, and I owe thankfulness to those under whose power I
am, that they have sent me hither to a place, however of punishment, yet of
some honor to die a death, somewhat worthy of my blood, answerable to my birth
and qualification, and this courtesy of theirs has much helped toward the
pacification of my mind.

I shall desire God that those Gentlemen in that sad bed-rol to be tried by the
High Court of Justice, that they may find that really there than is nominal in
the Act; an High Court of Justice, a Court of high Justice, high in its
righteousness, though not in its severity. Father forgive them, and forgive me
as I forgive them.

I desire you now that you would pray for me, and not give over praying till
the hour of death, not till the moment of death, for the hour is come already;
that as I have a great load of sins, so I may have the wings of your prayers,
to help those Angels that are to convey my soul to Heaven, and I doubt not, but
I shall see my Savior, my gallant Master the King of England, and another
Master whom I much honored; my Lord Capel, hoping this day to see my Christ in
the presence of the Father, the King in the presence of him, my Lord Capel in
the presence of them all, and my self there to rejoice with all other Saints
and Angels for evermore.

Doctor Swaddling (he being upon the Scaffold) spoke as follows unto the
Colonel.

You have this morning in the presence of a few, given some account of your
Religion, and under general notions or words, have given an account of your
faith, charity, and repentance.

To those on the Scaffold: if you please to hear the same questions asked here,
you shall, that it may be a general testimoney to you all, that he died in the
favor of God.

To the Colonel. Now, Sir, I being to deal with you; do you acknowledge that
this stroke that you are to suffer, is a just punishment laid upon you by God
for your former sins?

Col. Andrews. I dare not only deny it, but dare not but confess it; I have no
opportunity of glorifying God more, then by taking shame to my self, and I have
a reason of the Justice of God in my own bosom; which I have put to your bosom.

Doctor. You acknowledge that you deserve more then this stroke of the Axe, and
that a far greater misery is due to you, even the pains and Torments of Hell
that the damned there endure.

Col. I know it is due in righteous Judgment; but I know again, I have a
satisfaction made by my Elder-brother Christ Jesus; and then I say it is not
due, ^is due from me, but quitted by his Righteousness.

Doct. Do you believe to be saved by that Mediator, and none other?

Col. By that, and that only; renouncing all secondary causes whatsoever.

Doct. Are you truly, and unfeignedly sorry before God, as you appear to us,
for all those sins that have brought you hither?

Col. I am sorry, and can never be sorrowful enough, and am sorry I can be no
more sorry.

Doct. If God should by a Miracle (not to put you to a vain hope) but, if God
should as he did to Ezekiah, renew your days: what life do you resolve to lead
hereafter?

Col. It is a question of great length, and requires a great time to answer.
Men in such straits would promise great things, but I would first call some
friends to limit how far I should make a Vow, that I might (...) make a rash
one, and to offer the Sacrifice of Fools; but a Vow I would make, and by Gods
help endeavor to keep it.

Doct. Do you wish health and happiness upon all lawful Authorities, and
Government (...)

Col. I do prize all obedience to lawful Government, and the adventuring
against them is sinful; and I do not justify my self, whatever my judgment
be; for my thus adventuring against the present Government; I leave it to God
to judge whether it be righteous: if it be, it must stand.

Doct. Are you now in love, and charity with all men? Do you freely forgive
them?

Col. With all the World freely, and the Lord forgive them, and forgive me, as
I freely forgive them.

Doct. You have for some late years laid down your Gown, and took up the Sword,
and you were a man of Note in those parts where you had your residence. I have
nothing to accuse you for want of diligence in hindering the doing of injuries:
yet possibly there might be some wrong done by your Officers, or those under
you to some particular men: If you had your Estate in your hands, would you
make restitution?

Col. The wrongs themselves you bring to my mind are not great, nor many; some
things of no great moment, but such as they are, my desire is to make
restitution, but have not wherewithal.

Doct. If you had ability, would you likewise leave a legacy of thankfulness to
Almighty God, something to his poor Servants: to his lame Members, to his deaf
Members, to his dumb Members?

Col. My will has always been better then my ability that way.

Doct. Sir, I shall trouble you very little further; I thank you for all those
heavenly Colloquies I have enjoyed by being in your Company these three days
and truly I am very sorry I must part with so heavenly an Associate. We have
known one another heretofore, but never so Christian-like before; I have rather
been a Scholar to learn from you, then an Instructor; I wish this Stage wherein
you are made a Spactacle to God, Angels, and the World, may be a School to all
about you; for though I will not diminish your sins, nor shall I conceal, nor
hypocrize my own, for they are great ones betwixt God and my self, yet I think
there is few here have a lighter load upon them then you have; if we consider
things well, and I only wish them your Repentance, and that measure of Faith
which God has given you, and that measure of Courage you have attained from
God, and that constant perseverance God has crowned you with hitherto.

Col. His Name be praised.

Here the Doctor prayed with him almost a quarter of an hour: after which the
Col. turning himself again to the people, spoke as follows:

One thing more I desire to be clear in. There lies a common imputation upon
the Cavaliers, that they are Papists; and under that Name we are made odious to
those of the contrary opinion: I am not a Papist, but renounce the Pope with
all his dependencies? when the distractions in RELIGION first sprang up, I
might have been thought apt to turn from this Church to the Roman, but was
utterly unsatisfied in their Doctrine, in point of Faith, and very much as to
their Discipline. The Religion which I profess, is that which passes under the
name of Protestant; though that be rather a name of distinction, then properly
essential to Religion. But the Religion which was found out in the Reformation,
purged from all the errors of Rome in the Reign of Edward the sixth, practiced
in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles, that blessed
Prince deceased; that Religion before it was defaced, I am of, which I take to
be Christ's Catholic, though not the Roman Catholic Religion: in the
profession and practice whereof, I will live and die; that for my Religion.
Then he turned himself unto the Executioner; I have no reason to quarrel with
thee; thou art not the hand that throws the stone; I am not of such an Estate
to be liberal, but there is three pound for thee, which is all I have. Now tell
me what I lack? Execut. Your hair's to be turned up. Col. Show me how to fit my
self upon the block. After which his doublet being off, and hair turned up, he
turned again to the people, and prayed a good while: Before he laid down upon
the Block, he spoke again to the people, viz.

There is not one face that looks upon me, though many faces, and perhaps
different from me in opinion and practice, but (methinks) has something of
pity in it; and, may that mercy which is in your hearts fall into your own
bosoms, when you have need of it; and may you never find such blocks of sin to
stand in the way of your mercy, as I have met with. I beseech you join with me
in prayer. Then he prayed (leaning on the Scaffold) with an audible Voice for
about a quarter of an hour; having done, he had some private conference with
Doctor Swaddling; Then taking his leave of his Friends, Sheriffs, and
Acquaintance, saluting them all with a courteous valediction, he prepared
himself for the Block, kneeling down, said, let me try the Block, which he did;
after casting his eyes up, and fixed them very intentively upon Heaven; he
said, when I say, Lord Jesus receive me, Executioner do thine Office; then
kissing the Ax he laid down, and with as much undaunted, yet Christian courage,
as possible as could be in man, did he expose his throat to the fatal Ax. his
life to the Executioner, and commended his Soul into the Hands of a faithful
and merciful Creator, through the meritorious passion of a gracious Redeemer:
saying the forementioned words, his head was smitten off at one blow.

Sir Henry Hide, beheaded over against the Exchance, March 4. 1650.
AFter this Rebellion had assumed its various shapes, put all by, and made up
with its several interests, till it had quite outed the manner of true
Religion, when there was no Law left but the arbitrary Will and Powers of the
Grandees at Westminster: no man can wonder at this Turkish Example in the sad
fate of this Honorable Person.

The truth is, he was the noble Brother to that excellently prudent Statesman,
the Right Honorable Earl of Clarendel, Lord Chancellor of England. But we must
detract from this Martyrs merit, if we involve it in his Brothers, whose
capacious influence upon the Councels and affairs of this Nation, has rescued
all honest and loyal men from the brinks of misery and ruin ten thousand times
worse then Death.

It is a sad Subject to Comment on, especially because we may repeat nothing
here, but what has been most favorably, and that at his honorable Relations
importunity quite forgiven, though I hope that pardon extends not beyond the
Memory of the sufferer, whatever it reaches to in the Oblivion of the Actor.

He was sent, as he avowedly declared at his death as a Messenger only from our
Sovereign King Charles the second, soon after the murder of his Royal Father
to the Grand Seignior; that Office he aptly himself termed an Internuncio,
which to his and the Kindomes Enemies sounded worse then the jealousy of
Popery.

I make use of that term to discover the occasion of this his fate; since it
has its diversity of Names according to the customs and Languages of Nations,
as Envoy, etc. in the French, but throughout the World barbarous or civil,
unless by sinister and bribed Artifices, the very name of such persons were
feared, and had in public Veneration.

He was bred a Merchant, who traded to the Levant; and who by experience had
gained, not only a considerable Estate therewith, but also a Repute and
Estimation amongst the Turkish Company; who, considering him as an intelligent
Person in the business and management of that Traffic and intercourse, made
and constituted him their Consul at the Morea; which place, with what integrity
he discharged, and how discreetly and advantagiously for the benefit of the
said Company, he went through and performed, we need not offer to the Test,
since so universally approved.

For the convenience therefore of that concerning which the King had them at
the Port, this Gentleman was pitch upon and sent thither, but what he would
have transacted there, if not opposed, is not to be ascertained; only thus far
we may be assured, that there was little of public matter therein, especially
of prejudice to this Nation, or that Commerce in particular, as was most falsely
and scandalously noised by his Enemies, as may appear by a little instance.
For, near the same time, the Right Honorable the Lord Wentworth, being sent
Ambassador from the King to the Emperor of Russia, to acquaint him with the
horrid murder of our Sovereign his Royal Father; and to desire some assistance
from him in order to the reducing of his Revolted Kingdoms; whereunto the
Emperor frankly offered, besides what he would disburse of his own, the whole
Estates, Goods, Merchandises of the English residing in his Dominions; my Lord
utterly refused the motion, acquainting the Emperor, that the King never had
harbored any displeasure against his Merchant Subjects, of whose loyalty and
affection to him he was very well satisfied, though it was out of their power
and ability to serve him.

So that it was a groundless and unreasonable calumny framed on purpose to
render him odious to the people: that his design and errand to Constantinople
was upon the Merchants there in relation to their Estates, and that he was sent
in the room of Sir Thomas Bendish, to be his Majesty's Leiger there for that
purpose; a scandal which obliquely hit Sir Henry to the taking away his life,
but was doubly aimed at his Majesty, whom they would render to his Subjects (as
they in their Traitorous Papers had called him) an Enemy to the Commonwealth.

At his going to Constantinople, several Messages past betwixt him and Sir
Thomas Bendish, in order to his audience, which usually is prepared by the
Resident there, which his mistakes and jealousy was a long time delayed, and
at last frustrated. The Vizier being wrought upon to betray him, and to send
him away for England by the Ships then bound thither from Smyrna, in one
whereof (contrary to his Designation, and reinfect with some of Sir Thomas
Bendishe^ men, who sided with him in obedience to the Kings Authority) he
arrived at London, and was presently committed to the Tower, where he past his
Examination.

I shall omit any further account, but refer the Reader to that Apology or
Defense, which Sir Thomas Bendish lately published, in excuse of himself, and
to free and clear his Reputation, charged with the guilt of this Martyrs death,
and more especially to what Sir Henry himself said: a view whereof you have in
the subsequent leaves.

After some while imprisonment, he was brought before the High Court of
Justice, and heard in defense of his life, wherein he would have used, and
desired to speak in the Italian Language, being through long disuse of his
Mother Tongue not so ready and expressive, as that important matter required he
should be; which request, by the folly and madness of his Judges was imputed
to him as an affected pride and vanity. In conclusion, by a Power entrusted and
lodged in that High Court of Justice, by Authority of Parliament, he was
sentenced to be beheaded, and the place and day assigned for the Execution.

The main incentive to this villainy was without doubt the nearness of his
Honorable Brother to the King, at whom this blow glanced; if also they did not
remember and reckon their two presumptuous Emissaries, and Agents, Dorislaws
and Achtan into the score.

However it was, Sir Henry nothing dismayed at this outrage against his Life and
Honor, quietly submitted to his doom; and at his death, though accompanied
thereto with many diseases and Infirmities, courageously asserted his Cause,
owned his Master the King; and cleared them both from any Aspersions, and so
rendered his Soul to God.

Sir Henry Hide's speech on the Scaffold near the Exchange, immediately before
his Execution, March 4. 1650.
REader, Take notice, that this Speech following is published in those very
words that the Gentleman delivered them; and though there be some abrupt
breakings off, and other expressions not so smooth as might have been, yet I
could not with henesty alter a word, and therefore have I tied my self to his
own expressions, that I may neither abuse the world, or the dying man, or my
self.

THe Gentleman came in a Coach to the Scaffold, attended by the Lieutenant of
the Tower, and the Sheriffs of London, and also in his company one of his
servants, and Dr. Hide.

I Am come to put in practice the Christian Profession; Sir Hen. Hide.
and as I owe a death to nature and sin, now I pay it upon the score of grace.

Dr. Hide. Blessed be God that has enabled you to it: God has and will enable
you.

Sir H. Hide. Looking round on the People, he said, A populous City, God bless
it, and grant they may live to his Grace. Then turning to his Man, he said,
John, I pray now, though I have not been a good Master to you, be you a good
Servant, and accompany me with your prayers, and help me both in body and mind
John; Have you my things about you John?

Then staying for his Servants, they being not on the Scaffold, he said, I had
rather have my Servants then strangers.

Then the Lieutenant of the Tower coming to him, he said, pray Sir rejoice with
me: I thank Almighty God I am brought hither to suffer for him.

Lieut. of the Tower. I am glad you are so comforted: Gods Will be fulfilled in
all things.

Sir H. Hide. If God call me to him, and I glorify him, it is well: I seek
only the company of your Christian Prayers.

Lieut. of the Tower. I shall not be wanting in that, God willing.

Then the Surgeon coming (but not his Kinsman who was called for) he said,
My kinsman is of no use, you may be useful about my body. I hope Mr. Sheriff,
that you will give order I may have a little more room here.

Sheriff. Yes, yes, Sir.

Sir H. Hide. And likewise for liberty of speech, and that it shall please you
(for I am not acquainted with the forms here of England) that I may speak my
own sense (I am now going into the presence of Almighty God) a very little,
without any disturbance.

Sheriff. Why Sir, you shall.

Sir. H. Hide. John, where is my Coffin?

John. It is here Sir.

Sheriff. Sir, it seems these men cannot be found.

Sir H. Hide. But if Mr. Barret could be found. After some stay, Mr. Barret
being not found, the Sheriff spoke to him, saying.

Sheriff. You have your liberty, you know your time.

Sir H. Hide. Where is the place of standing, that way or this way? pointing
toward the Exchange and the Poultery.)

Sheriff. Which way you please: you may stand which way you will, but that way
you must lie (pointing toward the Exchange.)

Sir H. Hide. I am indifferent: it is not the way to heaven where a man stands.

One brought word to him that there was no help to be had.

Sir H. Hide. That is no hinderance to my felicity.

Dr. Hide. God enable you that you may find that joy and comfort, which is due
to the glory of his holy Name; he will not forsake you that have put your trust
in him.

Sir H. Hide. I will open my heart and my mouth with thanksgiving (if this
Gentleman please to give way.)

Then turning toward the Poultery, he put off his Hat, and said, Glory be to
God on high, on Earth Peace, good will to men.

CHristian People, I come hither to die; I am brought hither to die; and that I
may die Christian-like, I humbly beseech your Christian Prayers, that by the
benefit of them my passage may be the more easy: Yet because men in that
condition, which it has pleased God to reduce me, carry more credit to their
Speeches: In the discharge of my Duty toward God, I shall use a few words. and
so dispatch.

I pray all of you join with me to praise this Almighty God, to whom I desire
to render all hearty thanks; as for all his mercies, so in particular for this,
That he has brought me hither: That whereas I owe a duty to Sin and to Nature,
I can pay it upon the account of Grace. And because it is fit to render an
account of the hope that is in me, I shall tell you, to the praise of Almighty
God, That I have been born and bred up in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, I have no negative Religion, believing to be saved by the only merits
of my Savior Jesus Christ, ( putting off his Hat) and whatsoever else is
professed in the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of England, authorized by
Law, humbly beseeching Almighty God to restore unto this Church her Peace,
Prosperity and Patrimony, whereof I have been an obedient and a loving (however
an unworthy) Son. And now both my Hope being confident, and my Faith perfected,
there remains only Christian Charity; Charity we carry into heaven, Charity
on Earth, and that I leave, beseeching all whomsoever I have offended (whether
I have or no) to forgive me, as I from the bottom of my heart do them
whomsoever; blessing Almighty God for the happy advantage he takes to bring me
nearer to heaven; blessing Almighty God, that he has given me this advantage,
as he has been merciful, to me before the foundation of the world in my
Savior; so that now he has in mercy honored me with suffering for his Name,
in obedience to his Commandment.

On this day seven night I was summoned before that Justice, which condemned me
on Friday last, praised be Almighty God, that by this way he has brought me
the nearer to himself ( putting off his hat) My Charge I presume is public, as
my punishment is visible: if there have been any thing in the management of my
part being unskilful, having discontinued my own Country many years, I shall
beseech the Christian charity of all you my beloved Countrymen, to impute it
unto the right part, the ignorance that is in this skilful way of managing: It
was objected unto me there, that I had a vanity of delighting in strange
Tongues. I was best skilled in the Italian (but free from that vanity, I thank
Almighty God) and therefore I would in defense of my life (if it had been the
Custom here, or the Judges favor) have used that Language.

It was objected, That I did not so freely as a thorow-paced Cavalier, own my
Master: I was told since I came into England (for other skill I have not in
your Laws) that a legal Denial in Law might be tolerable; I hope I did not
exceed the bounds of that in any thing, for God forbid that I should be ashamed
of serving so good, so pious, so just a Master ( putting off his hat) for that
I therein rejoice, and I humbly beseech Almighty God to fill my heart and my
tongue, and all that hear me this day with thankfulness for it.

As to the business, that another construction had been made and believed here,
then what was there, the righteous God knows it; if any weakness was in the
management, that was mine: I was sent to serve and protect, not to in jure any:
and as God acquits me of the intention in matter of Fact, as having done any
manner of evil that way, however here understood, blessed be his holy Name, (
putting off his hat) so those Gentlemen of the Turkey Company, if they would
seriously consider, for they know it very well, the impossibility of my doing
them any manner of harm. Whereas that of the Embassy objected against me, that
my Master never honored me with all, I was never worthy of it, I was his
Messenger, an Internuncia for the conservation only of his good Subjects, of
all the Merchants, until such time as he could confirm that Gentleman now
Resident, or to send any other, and they themselves know that there was
impossibility in me (as I bless God there was an innocence in me) unto any such
intention to do them any harm; for my Masters Commands were point blank the
contrary; I was only sent for their good: as I never owned the Title, so the
very Letters themselves speaking no other: I never did so much as think of any
manner of Address unto the Grand Seigniour, but gave him the Letter from my
Master; the rest of the English Nation that were there present, may, when they
please, assert so much. This I would insert, That those Gentlemen, as they have
been losers by the miscarriages of others, may now have no breach of their
charity with me; but if it be, as it seems it is now in this Country, a Sin to
be Loyal, I hope my God has forgiven that, when it is upon harmless
employment, not invading any, according to his just Masters Order; for indeed I
have bin alwais bred up in that Religion; my Allegiance has been incorporated
into my Religion, and I have thought it a great part of the service due from me
to Almighty God, to serve the King ( putting off his Hat.) I need not make any
Apology for any thing in relation to the present things in England, for were I
(as I spoke before my Judges) as evil, as my Sentence has made me black, it
were impossible for me to have prejudiced any body in England, or to England
belonging in that employment; but I bless God for his infinite mercy in Jesus
Christ ( putting off his Hat) who has brought me home to him here in this way,
it was the best Physic for the curing of my Soul, and those that have done it,
have no more power then that of my body. I leave nothing behind me, but that I
am willing to part withal, all that I am going to is desirable: And that you
may all know that Almighty God has totally wrought in me a total Denial of my
self; and that there is that perfect Reformation of me within, and of my own
corruption, by the blessed assistance of his holy Spirit; I desire Almighty God
in the abundance of the bowels of his mercy in Jesus Christ, not only to
forgive every Enemy, (if any such be in the World, here, or wheresoever) but to
bring him into his Bosom so much good and particular comfort, as he may at any
time, whether the Cause were just or unjust, have wished me any manner of evil;
for I take him to be the happy instrument of bringing me to Heaven. It is
tedious, but I have an inward comfort, I bless Almighty God; (pray Gentlemen
give me leave, speaking to some that pressed upon him) I should never do it, but
to give satisfaction to all charitable hearts. I have been troublesome.

Sheriff. You have your liberty to speak more, if you please.

Sir Henry Hide. But as to that part, Master Sheriff, that did concern the
Denial (as it was affirmed by Master Attorney General) of my Masters
employment. Truly landing at Whitehall, I told that Council, there was just
Commissions to an old Officer by the blessing of God, I have by me; and I have
other good things that God has blessed me withal, more then all the good
Christians in the World, that are not the Grand Seigniour's Slaves: And we that
are Merchants abroad, we allow our selves any sufferance that may conduce to
our own safety, enlargement of Trade, or preservation of what is ours. Why I
had by the grace of my gracious Master a confirmation of my old Commission of
Consulage in Greece: But as to the Embassy, no more then my Credential Letters
did speak, nor no more then that I attempted; an Internuncio they call it in
those places, which is a Messenger between the one and the other KING: They
both unhappily died of several Deaths, and both violent too. And it is a Custom
not unknown to you, Master Sheriff, and other Gentlemen that practice in the
World, that Princes of course, for the continuance of Amity, do send Messengers
where there is Peace, that the transaction of those public expressiens of
reciprocal Affection may be performed; but for Embassy, God forbid I should
own it, I never had it; however, they have used it as the happy means to bring
me to God this day. I beseech God in the Bowels of my Savior, to forgive those
people that have done it; I owe them no harm, so God pay them home with all the
good of this, and an everlasting life.

As for power, I have been long absent here in England, I meddle with none:
Sufficient to me is Gods grace to to the salvation of my soul.

I have been always fearful of offending Almighty God, according to the grace
he has given me, but to learn new Religion, and new Ways, (that I must say
Mr. Sheriff to you, and all others that hear me, I cannot dispense with my
Conscience to give offense to Almighty God. I am now (if it may be with your
permission, Master Sheriff) to pour out my soul to Almighty God in two or three
words (the place is straightened) if I knew wherein to give any satisfaction to
any thing whatsoever, wherein I have offended or no, I am here in the fear of
God to do it. I forgive them with all my soul, and my forgiveness is clear, as
I am now going to receive happiness at the hands of my Savior: But if I
thought it were satisfaction to Sir Thomas Bendish, and all the Company, or any
who think they have offended me, I am come Mr. Sheriff, to pay that Obedience
willingly, that Debt I owe to Nature, to pay it upon the score of a Subject,
because Conscience within me, tells me not, that for the intentions of serving
my Prince, that I could deserve such a Death, though ten thousand times more
other ways.

Dr. Hide. There was some suspicion that you might impart the way you were upon
to some of those servants that were with you.

Sir Henry Hide. I humbly thank you for remembering me of it, and if any be here
of the Turkey Company this day, or any Friend of theirs, I shall desire them
from a dying Man, to take this Truth; That neither my Brother, my innocent
Brother that this is with me, not other Gentlemen with me in my Company, have
contributed any thing to their disturbance; it was my own business, whatsoever
has been done, that has been to evil, or loss, though I deny both of them in
my intentions: I come not here to accuse any man, not excuse my self, but I
praise God for all his deliverances; yet I know I shall do God a great deal of
Service, and them a great deal of Justice, in not involving any of my Company
in any thing of mischief. I cannot answer Objections: I find a man may be in
Turkey, or in any place, all the World over, where they will give that Language
which they hold fitting; but this is beneath me. Blessed be Almighty God, that
has called me to the knowledge of him; and this ready Obedience which I pray,
and mercifully accepting of my Savior, and patient death: And I beseech you
all, whatsoever you are, that you will accompany me with your Prayers, whereby
my Soul may be assisted within me, in that passage to my Savior whether I am
going. I am weak of body, I have discontinued long from the Kingdom; I am
unacquainted with new Forms, I have desired to serve God according to his
Commandments after the old way: I have begged mercy of God for all my offenses
to him, and have had my pardon sealed from Heaven by the blood of my Savior; I
beg pardon of all whosoever, whether I have offended them, or no; I truly for
give them, and have besought Almighty God to pour his blessings upon them. I
accuse no man; I find fault nor quarrel with no man, neither with the persons
that were the occasions, they were but instruments; neither (...) the persons
condemning; I accept thankfully the Sentence of Death upon my self; and I
beseech Almighty God, that I may be the last that may suffer upon this score,
or upon any other.

Master Sheriff. If there be any thing wherein I can give any other
satisfaction to any Christian whatsoever, in any kind, as I spoke in general. I
bless God Almighty from my own Heart, now so assisted by the special Operation,
and Motions, and Dictates of the Holy Ghost. If I can know any thing, wherein,
or how to be now in my dying (not having served God so well in my life)
serviceable to the Church of God, of Christ, and the full satisfaction of any
whatsoever, I am here ready; I am unacquainted, but in my ecstasies to Heaven,
there is that glory I am going to. I beseech Almighty God, that he will give
me grace to bless his holy Name; as for all, as for Jesus Christ, and in him
all things, so particularly for this, that he has thought me worthy to bring
me hither for my faithfulness to my Master, that is the most pious and most
just Prince in all the World. My Master has suffered bitterly in England; and
if there be any failing in his service, the fault is only mine. God knows, I
have done nothing in the business, but by the instance of the Merchants; I
delivered my Letters, and there they lie: To other things I am a stranger. I
hope that God will give me the grace of perseverance in that Christian
Religion, in that loyalty to my Prince; in that love to all the World: that
now (being to give up my account to him, that) I may with comfort be received
into the Arms of his Mercy.

If there be any thing, Master Sheriff, that I may give satisfaction in, I am
ready to do it according to the poor talent I have. I will receive my
punishment in the way God has prepared for me (...) nie ways I have been
taken up. Truly I am bound to all that see me, and many thousands more since I
came into England, not an uncivil look; (we had strange Reports aborad) not an
uncivil look from any: God repay them all, and return them from the Throne of
his grace into their own Bosoms. And God in particular bless that honorable
Lady; who was the occasion of the coming of my Lords Grace of Armagh, with the
Confirmation of those glorious and eternal Messages of Comfort which now I am
going to enjoy: being thankful to all those that know me, and know me not, for
since I am come hither, whereas I might have received prejudice in respect to
my Loyalty (which is not the way, now) I have from them all received
courtesy, the Lord repay them. I thank God I am otherwise bred, and my
Allegiance has been incorporated, embodred into my Religion; and besides the
great desires of other Gentlemen, that I might go out of the World; but that
the World might see that the Grace of God has had a perfect Reformation in me,
and a willing and thankful submission to his Will, therefore I repent me not of
it; but I beseech Almighty God to bless and prosper all people whatsoever that
to this Kingdom belong. As my Speech is imperfect, so is my health. I have
forced my self in this Discourse to give that satisfaction which I could. And I
beseech you Mr. Sheriff, if you can hear of any Gentlemen that are wronged,
what I offer here, I am to answer it, and I beseech you join with me in your
Christian prayers, that I may have a passage whether I am now going to give an
account: not only of every deed, but of every word.

Then turning to his Man, he said,

Sir H. Hide. John, which is the Executioner?

The Executioner being brought to him, he said,

Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I have no quarrel with you, you are the welcome
instrument, do your work, only let me set the place, that I may fit my self,
for I have an infirm body.

Sheriff. You shall when you have prayed; if you please to pray first.

Sir H. Hide. I desire to see the Block, I can pray afterward. Here Mr.
Executioner is that money that is left; here is four pounds for you.

Then being showed the Block, he kissed it, saying,

Sir H. Hide. It is unworthie for me to put my head where my Masters was;
blessed be God, blessed be his holy Name ( putting off his Hat) I have an
infirmity in my body, but God has enabled me inwardly. Pray Mr. Sheriff let
me have a little more room.

Sheriff. Go to prayer, and we will clear the room.

Sir H. Hide. I have (I thank Almighty God) done those Christian Offices
belonging to me at home, I am come hither only to die.

Then kneeling down, he said the Lords Prayer.

Then having prayed a short space, he stood up, and turning to the Executioner,
said.

Sir H. Hide. Honest Friend, I pray give me direction what I am to do, and do
your Office: you will cure all diseases presently; pray direct me.

Then the Executioner going to spread the Scarff over the Block, he said,

Sir H. Hide. Put it not on now, but by and by.

D. Hide. God Almighty strengthen you.

Sir H. Hide. God reward you all.

Then the Executioner going to put up his hair under his Satin Cap, he thought
he had been taking of it off; whereupon he said,

Sir H. Hide. Must I have my black Cap off? it is very cold; all these diseases
will be cured, the Lord be thanked.

Then going to lie down, his Man not helping him, he said,

Sir H. Hide. John, Help me a little, I pray: Did not I tell you I could
neither rise nor fall? Lay me down, and lift me up again, John.

Then rising again upon his knees, he spoke to the Executioner, having the Ax
in his hand.

Sir H. Hide. Pray Sir, give me the Ax.

And then taking the Ax in his hand, he kissed it, and returned it to the
Executioner again, saying,

Sir H. Hide. I will only say, Lord Jesus receive my Soul, and when I lift up
my right hand, do your work.

And then lying down again, after a little space he lift up his right hand, and
the Executioner at one stroke severed his head from his body.

Mr. Benson Executed, October. 7. at London 1650.
THis person was engaged and trapan'd into the same unfortunate business with
Colonel Andrews, on purpose by his means to draw in also Sir John Gell, of whom
before, he having been a servant and retainer to the said Knight many years
before. He had also born office, and had a command under him during the time
Sir John served the Parliament, and numbered himself afterward amongst these,
who being uncommissioned, were generally known by the name of Reformadoes.

Upon these accounts he became obnoxious to them, especially of the men at
Westminster, who by their instruments searching into his discontents, soon
worked him into the Plot. A capacious design it was, which comprehended and
included all interests, Cavalier, Presbyterian, and Leveller, together with
those formerly cashiered Officers under Essex, and which had it taken its
wicked intended effect, would have made them appear so cunning and terrible, so
disheartened and terrified all men against opposing, or endeavoring against the
tyranny, that their new Commonwealth would have been a solitude or wilderness,
where like beasts, not men, we should have been afraid one of another.

Col. Andrews at his taking, was of opinion that this person was of the gang
that betrayed him, but in appeared to the contrary, for Barnard had clearly
possessed him with the reality and feasibleness. of the design, into which he was
so rationally as he thought, and upon such sure grounds engaged, such and such
great persons being nominated as principal therein, that not only it was his
belief, but his confidence, on which he had raised great hopes of advantage to
himself, that this meritorious piece of service would take effect.

Nay, so certain was he, that in the last trick put upon Colonel Andrews in
reserence to the drawing in of Sir John Gell, which was a menace, that if the
Colonel did not procure Sir John's hand and seal, the Confederates would
themselves go over to the King in Holland, and give such an account of the
affair to his Majesty, as should tend little to the crediand honor of them
both; that Mr. Benson was inveigled in the head he should be the man entrusted
with the delivery thereof, and receive the designed money for the Colonel to
defray the management of that service. This conceit was so rooted in him, that
he quitted it not till he was really surprised and in custody.

Nay, when there, so strong was his fancy, and so set upon the issue of this
business, that he complained to himself of the Colonel, through whose
backwardness and slow procedure therein, he thought it only miscarried, not yet
dreaming that he was made the stalkingly-horse to his as well as their
destruction.

It was imagined that they would have contented themselves with that
industrious service he did them, by so exactly realizing their counterfeit
plot, as a bird set to chirp others, by his merry note, into the snare; but no
such matter, having mist the great ones they would be sure of the small, to
give some satisfaction to their unsatiable thi^st of blood, and in order to
some accomplishment of their design, sacrifice one of a sort, and interest to
their policy and Government, and him they marked out for a Reformado, of whom
by their claim of arrears due to them for service, there was some danger, and
this was the most speedy and easy way of paying them.

At his Execution he spoke very little, saving of his regret, that he had ever
served such Masters; wished prosperity to the King and Kingdom, and so was
thrown off the ladder, a spectacle more of their shame then his own.

Captain Brown-Bushel beheaded on Tower Hill, April 29. 1651.
NOw their hand was in, all went to the stake; The High Court of Justice,
proceeded in their blood-bound track, and their huntsmen rowzed their game. An
old sault which had been remedied long ago, was brought into play again, that
these journey men Butchers might not want work, for the preparation whereof
they had so often adjourned about this time their terrible Session.

Captain Brown-Bushel was the next criminal for his Loyalty, being secured in
the Guard at White Hall in 1648. and from custody to custody till this time,
when he was brought from the Tower to his Trial. The objected offense made up
into a Charge of high Treason, was his delivering of Scarborough, where he had
some kind of Command from the Parliament to the King, being himself a sea
soldier, and then a Captain of a man of War.

He was a very expert and valiant person, well esteemed of by all seamen, as
he was well reputed by all honest and loyal people for this his last service,
being not inconsiderable for his fortune. At the revolt of the Fleet to their
due obedience under Sir William Butten to the Prince in the Downs, this
Gentleman was in London: the War being finished, and like to renew again, where
he lay waiting his opportunity of doing further service to his Majesty.

The rancour of that business festred in the minds of the party at Westminster,
so that not having any of those Commanders and Captains, who were actively
diligent in that business in their hands, they resolved to wreak their fury
and displeasure upon this Gentleman, and to quit scores with him for the
trespasses and fractures of others.

He had lain so long under restraint, that he was hard put to it for sustenance
and necessaries of life, his poor wife running twice a day from Coven Garden to
the Tower, to bring and provide his daily meat, besides a hundred jaunts to the
Parliament and Council of State with Petitions to obtain his liberty, or at
leastwise get him blotted out of that roll, wherein the just number of those
who were to be tried at that high Court, was before ascertained.

But all availed nothing, they had designed more for the slaughter then they or
their Engines could bring into the snare, and therefore be must die for number,
that whatever else they wanted, they might not fail in that, so that after some
adjournments of the Court, as before is specified, they called him to the Bar,
and for that crime aforesaid condemned him, he in vain obtesting and imploring
their favor, as in a matter wherein the State and their cause had received
little prejudice or disadvantage, but seeing their severity could not be
mitigated by words, he frankly told them he was not afraid to die for his
cause, and composed himself for his sentence, which was pronounced against him
after some aggravations of his fact with more then usual acerbity.

Much stir there was made for a reprieve for him by his wife, and friends of
hers, then in Authority, but reason of State, as they told her, prevailed
against all pleas and arguments for mercy, though she was flattered but the day
he died, he should be reprieved and finally pardoned, which glad tidings the
poor overjoyed woman carried him about noon to the Tower, where they were merry
and solacing together, in which pleasantness of mind about two a clock she left
him, and at four came the Warrant for his present Execution (a most devilish
cruelty) which, as is supposed, for fear of the seamen, by whom he was well
beloved, was executed at six of the clock the night aforesaid, upon the ground
under the Scaffold, where he fearlesly and Christianly suffered, and resigned
his soul into the hands of his Creator.

Mr. Love, and Mr. Gibbons, beheaded on Towerhill, August 20. 1651.
I Know some scruple will be made against these persons, as Presbyterians and
sufferers upon another account then of the fifth Commandment, as having their
own, and the Kings interest interwoven with it: but all things considered,
without much reconcilement of the different opinions; in this case we may
venture to Register, and enroll them in this Martyrologie.

For without all doubt, the bottom of their design was the Kings Restoration
and however it was clogged with Salves and Conditions for themselves and their
Party (which abates something of the luster, though not of the worth of this
Crown) yet the main was Loyalty, which they hoped to vindicate and evince to
the World, who had hard thoughts of them in the matter of the Kings Death in
the previous Method thereunto.

This Confederation was therefore begun just upon the conclusion of that horrid
murder, that what they could not remedy in that, they might compensate in
this, and by a timely application to his present Majesty; redeem themselves
into his good opinion and favor, forfeited by their former averseness to
their duty toward him.

To this purpose, most of the eminent Ministers of that way in London, had
several meetings and Conferences: in consultation and debate of the manner of
their proceeding in this Affair. Among them Mr. Love appeared to be most active
and stirring, whether out of Conscience of some unwarrantable, undutifull
demeanor toward the King du^ing the War, I take not upon me to determine. The
rest were Mr. Jenkins, Mr^ Robinson, Doctor Drake, Mr. Watson, and others. Of
the Lay-part Captain Titus, Mr. Potter, an Apothecary in Blackfriars, Mr.
Gibbons, and some else.

These held intelligence both with the King and the Parliament of Scotland,
then not agreed, but in expectation of a Treaty, which was the first thing
endeavored by these men here to be promoted, and with desired Effect Concluded.

Their chief meeting place was Mr. Love's, where their intelligence was
communicated, Letters read, and advice given upon the several Emergencies of
that Business; which proceeded so far, that the King and his Subjects of
Scotland, having ended the Treaty, and his Majesty arrived in Scotland,
whether Cromwell with the English Army was also advanced, and had worsted the
Kirks Army at Dunbar; They concluded of raising an Army in this Kingdom to
the assistance of that Nation, and the recovery of this from the slavery and
Tyranny it suffered under.

This passed through so many hands, engaged in it, and was so publicly owned,
that the Council of State had very early notice of the whole Design, so that
they dained most part of the while in the Net; information being given of every
days proceedings, and of what additions or accesses of persons to the Design:
which soon after, when they had let it run as far, as without danger they might
trust it, they drew the Curtain, and apprehended most of the aforesaid persons,
and brought them to Trial before a High Court of Justice, which was yet
standing, and had not yet put off their blood-died Robes, in expectation of
this Grand Contrivance, which should make them farther work.

Mr. Love being one of the chief, was first Tried, afterward some others, who
recanted, and humbly besought the Parliaments mercy, as Mr. Jenkins and Potter,
but Mr. Love's submission (such as it was, for they required Confession and
discovery too) came too late, and to no purpose; so that he, and this Ms.
Gibbons a Tailor, was condemned by that High Court for the same business, lost
their Heads on Tower Hill, as aforesaid.

The Earl of Derby, beheaded at Bolton in Lancashire, October. 15. 1651.
WHosoever shall look upon the sad History of this Princely person must be
armed against all humanity; if he condole not this miserable Traggedie: every
circumstance whereof is a Scene of sorrow, which alike moves indignation and
compassion.

If we deduce him from his glorious originals, we see him descended from a most
ancient and illustrious Family, in which Loyalty was one of the Gentilitions
in herent virtues, derived in the succession of those Heroes, who to this day
adorned the noble name of Stanley, so memorated and famed in our Annals,
especially in the Reign of Henry the 7th. direct Ancrestor to his present
Majesty.

The signal Services done at that time to this Crown and Kingdom, both by
Victory and Advice in the blessed union of the Houses of York and Lancaster;
were so placed, that they seem to have directed only the imitation of their
most Honorable Posterity, without the affectation of any thing but duty. For
those Heroic actions have been ever since as Spurs and Incentives to the same
Grandeurs of Loyalty, manifested in all occasions and Affairs of the Crown
through the whole current of Succession.

But this Noble Earl, whose unworthie Fate we now deplore, came nearest that
great Pattern; the Times, concurring with the activity of his mind, afforded
him the advantage of employing and exercising that stock of Prudence and
Valor, which had so long been treasured up in the loins of his Princely
Progenitors; and yet to the scandal and reproach of that Age, rewarding all his
Honorable Attchievements with a most lamented Catastrophy.

If we also consider therefore his great and personal merit and obligations
upon this Kingdom, we shall find his Services, not to come short of those of
his Ancestors, (though clogged with the burdensome glory of giving a Crown) in
designment and attempt; however they failed of their most probable effects.

But to mitigate the Envy of his Fate to innocent Posterity, I will not
presume with so rude a Pen to write their Monument, and at large relate them.
He that has heard of a Latham-House, and Marston-Moor (as I suppose all men
have) will easily confess his glories, which shone brightly in the Sphere of
all Military worth to the setting of Charles his Wain.

In those gloomy and black days, he withdrew himself to a shelter in his
Royalty of the Isle of Man, awaiting a new opportunity of serving his present
Majesty, which not long after offered it self, and was with all readiness of
duty encertained by him.

For the King having resolved ( Cromwell being gotten into Fife in Scotland) to
pass into England over Sterling-bridge by the advantage of three days march,
gave present intimation thereof to the Earl, who in order to some other design
had some forces in readiness: with these according to his instructions upon the
Kings advance that way he landed, in Lancashire where his Interest and Power
lay, and joined with his Majesty, who leaving him some forces to aid and
assist him in his new Levies, against the Parliaments Forces then marching
thitherward to suppress them, marched directly for Worcester.

As soon as the King was departed, Col. Lilburn was upon him, and at Wiggon in
that County, with thrice his number fell upon the Earls small party, not
amounting to above 600 men, and after a sharp encounter (which favorably
promised Victory at the first, but through want of Reserves failed the Earl in
conclusion,) put him to the rout, where a many gallant Noble men and Gentry
were slain and taken: as my Lord Widdrington and others, and the Earl himself
hardly escaping to the King at Worcester, being in the way forced to shelter at
Boscolet, the receptacle afterward by my Lords direction of the King himself;
who being worsted at Worcester by the Rebels under Gromwel, (where his Majesty
and his Nobilite discharged the place of brave Captains and Warriors,
particularly, this undaunted Earl not yet wearied with his ill fortune) was
constrained to abandon that City, and betake himself to a swift flight, in
Company with this faithful Lord, and other Honorable Persons.

At White-Ladies, whither by the direction of the Earl the King was guided; he
took his leave of his Majesty, having first taken care of his security, where
also he himself might have found a subterfuge, but that he would not hazard his
Majesty's safty, by a divided care of his Guardians for two, and that number
though but so small might not betray him.

At his departure he fell on his knees and wept, and then conjured the Pendants
to be faithfully careful of his Majesty's person, dearer to him then ten
thousand lives; and so betook himself again to flight in company of the same
retinue, who made after the road the Scotch horse they had taken under David
Leshly.

At Newport in Shropshire they overtook them, but with the same Col. Lilburn at
their heels, who fell into the Town, and after a short dispute, dispersed and
took most of the party, among the principal whereof was this Noble and
unfortunate Earl, the Earl of Landerdale, Lord Sinclare, and others, the Duke
of Buckingham strangely making his escape.

Becoming thus the prey of those barbarous rebels, he was a while detained
there till at last Orders came for his removal to Chester, where shortly after
he was convented, by instructions of them at Westminster, where the Earl
desired to be heard in person, before a Council of War, all of them base and
mechanic fellows, and of no great Command in their army, a barbarous shame,
that the Honor of so great a personage, in a Country, where he was so well
esteemed, reputed and reverenced, both for his own superlative virtues of
liberality and bounty, and the continued obligements of his Ancestry, should be
so violenced and profaned by a rascally sort of men, who assumed to themselves,
and arrogated the power of life and death upon a Peer of such magnitude and
veneration; an indignity worse by far then those outrages committed and
perpetrated by Jack Cade, and Wat Tyler, and the rest of those rabbles, who in
their mad fury did suchlike pranks, whereas here th^s murder was countenanced
by a color of Law Martial, and done in the form and process thereof, but in
this he imitated his dearly beloved Sovereign, who was reviled, contemned, and
mocked in the same manner at their irreverent High Court of Justice, which no
question did much sweeten that bitter Cup, which by the triumphant malice and
revenge of his enemies, was given him b^im full to drink.

But that which chiefly conduced to the quiet and composure of his spirit, was
the lense and acknowledgement of Gods determination and good pleasure in the
disposing of him, and bringing into that sad condition, which he meekly and
humbly underwent, submitting to that hand which so afflicted him; And
questionless great was that heavenly support which God ministered unto him, many
the alterations of those contumelies intended against him, as we may see in the
time, and in his way to his Execution, of which I shall say no more, but only
insert an omission in the black cribunal, and which I had from unquestionable
credit, that the soldiers themselves, who were upon the Scaffold, could not
refrain from weeping, but shed rears abundantly, and that this other passage
also, that having laid down his head, and given the sign, the Executioner being
not ready, he lift up his head again, and with a soul-piercing accent said to
the Headsman, Thou have done me a great deal of wrong, thus to disturb and
delay my bliss; and then submitted it to the fatal stroke, and was received
into glory.

A true Copy of the Speech of the Right Honorable James Earl of Derby, upon
the Scaffold at Bolton in Lancashire, together with his Deportment and Prayer
before his death, on Wednesday the 15. day of October, 1651.
THe Earl of Derby (according to the order of the Court-Marshal held at
Chester, by which he was sentenced to die at Bolton in Lancashire) was brought
to that Town with a Guard of Horse and Foot of Col. Jones's, commanded by one
Southley, who received his Order from Col. Robert Ducke^field, betwixt 12 and 1
of the clock on Wednesday the 15 of October, the people weeping, praying, and
bewailing him all the way from the Prison at Chester, to the place of his death.

He was brought to a House in the Town near the Cross, where the Scaffold was
raised: and as he passed by, said, [ VENIO DOMINE] I am prepared to fulfill thy
will, O my God: this Scaffold must be my Cross: Blessed Savior, I take it up
willingly, and follow thee.] From thence going into a Chamber with some Friends
and servants, he was advertised by the Commander in Chief, that he had till
three a clock allowed him to prepare for death, for indeed the Scaffold was not
ready: the people of the Town and Country generally refusing to carry so much
as a plank, or strike a nail, or to lend any assistance to that work, their cry
being generally in the streets: O sad day, O woeful day! shall the good Earl of
Derby die here? Many sad losses have we had in this War, but none like unto
this; for now the Ancient Honor of our Country must suffer here: And to add to
his trouble, most of the Timber that built the Scaffold, was of the ruins of
Latham-House; but nothing could alter his Lordships resolution and courage: for
with a steadfast composed countenancy, and a cheerful, he called the company
which were present to prayers with him, wherein he showed admirable servence,
and a kind of humble importunity with Almighty God, that he would pardon his
sins, be merciful to his Soul; and be gracious to this Land, in restoring the
King, Laws and Liberty; and that he would be a Husband to his Wife, a Father to
his Children, and a Friend to all those that suffered by his Loss, or that had
been Friends to him.

Rising from prayer, he sat down with a very pleasant countenance; and assured
the standers by, that God had heard his prayers, which the blessed Spirit of
God witnessed unto him, in the present Comforts he now felt in his Soul. Then
he entered into a discourse of his life, and beseecht God to forgive him the
days and time he had mis-pent; and said, it was his Comfort, that although he
had not walked so circumspectly as he ought to have done, yet he ever had a
sense of his sins, and a tender respect to all the Services, Servants and
Ordinances of his God; and that he knew God had mercy for him, that he had
strengthened and comforred him against all the terrors of death.

After these, and some other words to this purpose, he desired his Friends and
the people by to pray with him again; which when he had ended, rising from his
knees, he appeared fully satisfied of a gracious return to his prayers, and
never after showed any sadness in his countenance.

His next business was with his Son the Lord Strange, whom he publicly
charged to be dutiful to his sad Mother, affectionate to his distressed
Brothers and Sisters, and studious of the Peace of his Country: But especially
(said he) Son, I charge you upon my blessing, and upon the Blessings you expect
from God, to be ever dutiful to your distressed Mother, ever obedient to her
Commands, and ever tender how you in any thing grieve or offend her: She is a
Person well known to the most eminent Personages of England, France, Germany
and Holland, noted for Piety, Prudence, and all Honorable Virtues; and
certainly the more you are obedient to here the more you will increase in
favor with God and Man.

Then desired to be private in the room himself; where he was observed to be
about half an hour upon his knees with frequent interjections of groans and
sighs before his God. Then when he called the company in again, his eyes
witnessed to us, that he had abundantly mixed Tears with his Prayers; he told
us that he was very willing to leave the World, bering assured by the Testimony
of Gods Spiit, that he should be carried from Troube, to Rest and Peace, from
Sorrow to Joy, from Life to Death, and that Death had no other bitterness in it
to him, but that it took him from his dear Wife and Children; whom he humbly
commended to the Protection and Providence of a better Husband, and a better
Father; and that he did not doubt, but that the General, and they who sat in
the Seat of Authority, would make provision for them, hoping that his death
might satisfy all those who sought his life, whom he freely forgave, and
desired God to do the like. Then calling for his Son, he took his leave of him,
and blessed him; which indeed would have grieved any ones heart (though never
so hardened) to see the parting of him now with his Son, and with his two
Daughters, the Lady Katherine, and the Lady Amely Stanley, upon the Road
betwixt Chester and Bolton the day before.

This ended, he called the Officer, and told him he was ready. In his way to
the Scaffold, the people prayed, and wept, and cried aloud; to whom his
Lordship with a cheerful countenance, and courteous humbleness said, Good
people, I thank you, and I beseech you still pray for me, and our blessed God
return your prayers back into your own bosoms: The God of Mercies bless you,
the Son of God establish you in righteousness, and the Holy Ghost fill you
with all comforts. -- Coming near the Scaffold, he looked up and said, God I
thank thee, I am not afraid to go up here, though I am to dye there; there are
but these few steps to my Eternity: Then kissing the Ladder, he went up and
saluted the people: he walked a turn or two upon the Scaffold then went to the
East End of the Scaffold, and pulled off his Hat again and saluted the people
with a cheerful countenance, said -- I am come by the will of my heavenly
Father to dye in this place; and I thank God I do with all willingness and
readiness submit to his most blessed will.

It Is a place I desired to see when I was last in the Country, both for the
mutual Obligations that have been betwixt this Town and my Family, as also for
your particular respects to me, whom I have understood to be ready to clear me
from that ^oul imputation, That I was a man of blood; and that particularly, I
killed one Bootle here in cold blood; I doubt not but there are here many men
present, both that day this Town was taken, and diverse other times during this
War, that can justi^ie I preserved many lives, but I know there is not any one
present, that can lay the blood of any man whatsoever to my charge, unless
what might casually happen in the fury and heat of a Battle; and why I die in
this Town, I know not, unless it be to persuade the Nation that I fall as a
Sacrifice for that blood, which some said I shed here, from which I am
acquitted before you, and from which I had also cleared my self before my Grand
Judges at Westminster, had they pleased to hear me, before they had destroyed
me; that (...) ^ing hastily brought up among (...) by some that I ho^e God has
fo^gi^ and too readily drunk in by others, whom I pray God to forgive. As for
my Crime (as some are pleased to term it) which was objected against me by the
Council of War (for Bootle's death, was never mentioned against me there, that
being only secretly used to raise a prejudice against me in the judgments of
such as old not know me) my Crime (I say) though I hope it deserves a far
better Name, was, That I came into my own Country with my own lawful King; I
came in obedience to his Majesty's call whom both by the Laws of God, and the
Laws of this Land, I conceived my self obliged to obey; and according to the
Protestation I took in Parliament in the time of that blessed Prince his
Father; so, if it be my Crime, I here confess it again before God, Angels, and
Men, That I love Monarchy as the best Government, and I die with Love and
Honor: and for the Love and Honor I bear to my Master that now is, Charles
the Second of that Name, whom I my self in this Country proclaimed King; the
Lord bless and preserve him, and incline the hearts of those that have power in
this Nation, to accept him to his Fathers Throne with Honor and Peace, for
certainly, as I believe, this Nations will never be well contented, never
thoroughly happy without a King; so I believe also, that King Charles the
Second, our now lawful King, were he a stranger to this Crown, were the most
fit, and most accomplished Prince that this day lives, to take the Government of
this People; his admirable Piety, Virtue, Justice, great Valor and Discretion,
far above so few years, does now make him in all places he comes highly
beloved, and will hereafter make him honorable among all Nations: and I wish
the people of this Nation so much happiness (when my eyes are closed) that he
may peaceably be received to the enjoyment of his just Right, and then they
shall never want their just Rights, which till then, they will always want.

As for my being in Arms in the beginning of this War, I profess here in the
presence of my God, before whom in a few minutes I must make an account for
this profession, I only fought for peace, and settling the late King my Master
in his just Rights, and the maintenance of the laws of this Land, and that I
had no other design, intent or purpose for my then taking up Arms: and for this
last engagement. I profess here again in the presence of the same God, that I
did it for the restoring of my lawful Sovereign into that Throne, out of which
his Father was most unchristianly and barbarously taken, by the most unjust
sentence of a pretended Court of Justice, and himself against Law and all
Justice kept out and disposest of; and this was all my reason. For as for
estate and quality, I wanted not a sufficient competency, neither was I ever
ambitious to enlarge either for by the favor of my Kings Predecessors, my
family was raised to a condition well known in this Country; and now it is as
well known, that by his enemies I am adjudged to die, and that by new and
monstrous Laws, as making me an enemy to my Country; as fighting for my
Country, as a Traitor to the Laws, for endeavoring to preserve Laws: But, Oh!
God give me grace to consider him who suffered such contradictions of sinners,
and O my God, assert the King to his Fathers Throne, assert the Laws to their
former honor, and restore thy own Religion in its purity, that all these
shadows and false pretenses of Religion may vanish away, and our childrens
posterities may serve thee in Spirit and in Truth.

Good friends, I die for the At which words King and Laws, a Trooper said
aloud, we will neither have King, Lord, nor Laws; and upon a sudden the
soldiers being either surprised with fear at a strange noise that was heard,
or else falling into mutiny, presently fell into a tumult, riding up and down
the streets, cutting and slashing the people, some being killed and many
wounded; his Lordship looking upon this sad^ spectacle, said thus, Gentlemen it
troubles me more then my own death, that others are burt, and (I fear) die for
me; I beseech you stay your hands, I fly not, you pursue not me, and here are
none to pursue you. But being interrupted in his speech, and not permitted to
go on further, (for which the Officers were much troubled) he turned aside to
his servant, and gave him the speech into his hand, saying, I will speak to my
God who I know will bear me, and when I am dead, let the world know what I
would have said. Here his Lordship was (...) errupted; but it was as follows,
in his own copy under his own band.
King, the Laws of the land, and the Protestant Religion maintained in the
Church of England, all which as I was ready to maintain with my life, so I
cheerfully suffer for them; in this welcome death.

I am sentenced to death by a Council of War, after quarter for life, and
assurance for honorable and safe usage by Captain Edge. I had reason to have
expected the Council would have justified my Plea, which has been Ancient,
Honorable, Sacred and Vnviolable, until this time that I am made the first
suffering Precedent; for 1 dare affirm it, that never Gentleman before in any
Christian Nation was adjudged to death by a Council of War after quarter given;
I am the first, and I pray God I may be the last Precedent in this ca^e: I must
die, and I thank God I am ready for it; Death would now be my choice, had I the
whole world in competition with it. I leave nothing behind me which I much care
for, but my King, my Wife, my Children, my Friends, whom I trust (the
never-failing mercies of my God will provide for: I beseech God show mercy to
those, who neither had mercy nor justice for me: My blessed Savior taught him
by his example and command, both to pray for my enemies, and to forgive my
enemies: I forgive them freely, even those that contrived my ruin, and pursued
to death; I thank God never persinally offended them to my knowledge in my
life, and let me not offend against them at my death; I forgive them freely,
and pray God for Christ's sake to forgive them also.

Of my Faith and Religion, I shall not (hope)need to say much, herein I hope my
enemies (if now I have any) will speak for me. I profess my faith to be in God
only, from whom I look for my salvation through the precious merits and
sufferings of my blessed Savior, Jesus Christ which merits and sufferings are
applied to my soul, by the bles^ed spirit of comfort, the Spirit of God, by
whom I am assured in my own Soul, that my God is reconciled unto me in Jesus
Christ my blessed Redeemer.

I die a dutiful son the Church of England, as it was established in that
blessed Prince my late Masters Reign, which all my of learning and temperance
will acknowledge to be the most pure, and agreeable to the Word of God, and
primitive Government of any Church within 12. or 1300. years since Christ, and
which (to my great comfort) I left established in the Isle of Man; God preserve
it there, and restore it to this Nation.

And O blessed God; I magnify thy Name, that thou gave me the happiness and
mercy to be born in a Christian Nation, and in a Nation where thy truth was
professed in purity: With honor to thy Name, and comfort to thy people, I
ascribe the comforts of the Holy Spirit which I feel in my bosom, to the
Ministry of thy Word and Sacraments conveyed unto me in thy Church, and made
effectual by the operation of the same blessed Spirit. In this faith, good
people, I have lived, and in this I die: pray for me, I beseech you, and the
God of mercies hear your prayers and my prayers, for mine and your salvation.

Presently after the tumult was over, Here his Lordship began to speak again.
his Lordship called for the Headsman, and asked to see the Axe, and taking it
in his hand, said, Friend, I will not hurt it, and I am sure it cannot hurt me;
and then kissing it, said, Methinks this is as a Wedding Ring, which is as a
sign I am to leave all the World, and eternally to be married to my Savior.
Then putting his hand in his pocket, said to the Headsman, Here Friend, take
these two pieces, all that I have, thou must be my Priest, I pray thee do thy
work well and effectually; Then handling the rough furred coat the Headsman had
on, This (says he) will be troublesome to thee; I pray thee put it off, and do
it as willingly as I put off this garment of my flesh, that is now so heavy for
my soul; then some of the standers by bid the Heads-man kneel, and ask his
Lordship pardon; but he did not, but was surly and crabbed: but his Lordship
said, Friend, I give thee the pardon thou will not ask, and God forgive thee
also: Then turning up his eyes to heaven, said aloud, How long Lord? how long?
then gently passing over the Scaffold, and seeing one of his Chaplains on
horseback among the people, Good Sir (said he) pray for me, and the Lord return
your prayers into your own bosom, and I pray remember me kindly to your
Brother, and God remember him for his love to me and mine.

Then turning toward his Coffin, Thou art (said he) my bridal Chamber, in thee
I shall rest without a guard, and sleep without soldiers.

Then looking toward the block, he asked if all were ready, That (said he)
methinks is very low, and yet there is but one step betwixt that and heaven;
then turning his eyes to the people he saluted them, and desired again their
prayers; then said, I see your tears, and hear your sighs and groans, and
prayers: the God of heaven hear and grant your supplications for me, and mine
for you, and the Mediation of Christ Jesus for us all.

Here his Lordship caused the block to be turned, that he might look upon the
Church, saying, Whilst I am here, I will look toward thy holy Sanctuary, and I
know that within a few minutes, I shall behold thee my God and King in thy
Sanctuary above, under the shadow of thy wings shall be my rest till this
calamity be overpast; then he pulled off his blew garter, and sent it to his
Son, and pulling off his doublet, with a very religious cheerfulness, he said,
I come, Lord Jesus, and O come thou quickly, that I may be with thee for ever:
upon this he said, Pray tell me how must I lie, I have been called a bloody
man, yet truly I never yet had that severe curiosity to see any put to death
in peace; then laying himself down on the block, after a few minutes he rose
again, and caused the block to be a little removed; then said to the Headsman,
Friend, remember what I said to thee: and be no more afraid to strike then I to
die; and when I put up my hand, do thy work; so looking round about his friends
and the people, he said, The Lord bless you all, and once more pray for me and
with me; at which words he kneeled down, and prayed privately within himself,
with great sighings, about half a quarter of an hour, concluding with the Lords
Prayer, then rising up again, he said, (smilingly) My soul is now at rest, and
so shall my body be immediately. The Lord bless my King, and restore him to his
right in this Kingdom, and the Lord bless this Kingdom, and restore them to
their rights in their King, that he and they may join hand in hand to settle
truth and peace; and the Lord bless this County, and this Town, and this
People. The Lord comfort my sad wife and children, and reward all my friends
with peace and happiness, both here and hereafter; and the Lord forgive them
who were the cause and authors of this my sad end and unjust death, for so it
is as to mankind; though before God I deserve much worse, but I hope my sins
are all bathed in the blood of Jesus Christ. So laying his neck upon the block,
and his arms stretched out, he said these words.

Blessed be Gods glorious Name for ever and ever. Let the whole Earth be filled
with his glory. Amen, Amen. At which words, he gave the Headsman the sign; but
he either not observing it, or not being ready, stayed too long, so that his
Lordship rose up again; saying, Why do you keep me from my Savior? what have I
done that I die not, and that I may live with him? Once more I will ^ay my self
down in peace, and so take my everlasting rest. Then saying, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, he stretched out his arms, and gave the sign, repeating the same
words:

Blessed be Gods glorious Name for ever and ever. Let the whole earth be filled
with his glory. Amen, Amen.

Then lifting up his hand, the Executioner did his work at one blow, all the
people weeping and crying, and giving all expressions of grief and lamentation.

When the corpse were carried off the Scaffold, they carried them to a house in
the Town, where was thrown into his Coffin in a piece of paper these two lines.

Upon James, Earl of Derby.
Bounty, Wit, Courage, all (here) in one lie dead.
A Stanleys hand, Veres heart, and Cecil's head.
The sentence of the Council of War.
Resolved by the Court upon the Question,

That James Earl of Derby is guilty of the breach of the Act of the 12. of
August 1651. last past, entitled, An Act prohibiting correspondence with
Charles Stuart or his party, and so of High Treason against the Commonwealth
of England, and is therefore worthy of death.

Resolved by the Court.
That the said James Earl of Derby, is a traitor to the Commonwealth of
Eagland, and an abettor, encourager and assister of the declared Traitors and
enemies thereof, and shall be put to death by severing his head from his body,
at the Market place in the Town of Bolton in Lancashire, upon Wednesday the
15. day of this instant October, about the hour of one of the Clock the same
day.

Sir Timothy Feverston Haugh, beheaded at Chester, October. 22. 1651.
HAving nothing but the History of the War for my direction to this Gentleman's
memory, I will confine my self within the compass of that discovery, and
venture not to derive him any further, hoping his honorable Relations, will
for their own, as well as his sake be pleased to vouchsafe a full and perfect
account of him hereafter to the embalming his fame to Posterity.

He was engaged in the unhappy Defeat at Wiggan with theafore said noble Earl,
to whose assistance, whether he came with the King, and was left by him there
with those small Forces could be spared, or that he voluntarily joined, or came
from the Isle of Man with that Party I cannot determine; this is for certain,
he was taken prisoner at that unlucky overthrow in Lancashire, and secured
afterward till the Grand Business was over at Worcester.

Upon the coming back of the Forces assigned to Cheshire for their stationary
Quarters, and the bringing of the Earl of Derby thither, they were both
imprisoned at Chester: and after the Trial and Condemnation of the Earl of
Derby, was likewise brought before the said Court Martial; and as no better
was, or could be expected by him or any other person, had likewise the said
Sentence, only differing in time and place.

He behaved himself at his Death courageously and Christianly; telling those
Monsters of men the foulness of their faults: and confidently averring, that
the Justice of God would at last overtake them, if they timely returned not to
their duty; and after some few prayers, and among them one for the Kings
preservation, which yet was in doubt, he resigned his Soul to God, and has
added one to the glorious Company of Martyrs.

Colonel Benbow shot no death at Shrewsbury, October. 1651.
I Must confess my self at a loss here but though I could receive nothing else
but his Name; yet to that there is so much due on this account of Martyrdom
that I durst not omit him, putting hereby an occasion into the hands of this
Gentleman's Relations, to rescue his, and perpetuate their Name to after Ages.

I conceive him to be one of those loyal Gentlemen, who came in with the Earl
of Shrewsbury, then Lord Talbot, or Colonel Howard, my Lord Howard of Esericks
Son to the King at Worcester; and, who for his former Services done the King in
the War before, was obnoxious to their malice.

Most certain it was, he was taken notice of, and observed to be very active in
that Engagement at Worcester, in the flight from whence he was taken, though
most of the other English escaped by the favor and concealment of the Country;
(nor did ever the Scots find civiller usage after a Defeat) save those who
through their glorious valor fell, and escaped the better way to Heaven.

After he was taken he was conveighto Shrewsbury, a place which the King from
Worcester had summoned by a Letter to Colonel Mackworth the Governor, which
Royal Command they thought fit to question with loyal Blood: as they pretended
to expiate the storming of Bolton by Prince Rupert with the murder of the Earl
of Derby.

Whatever the reasons of their proceedings there against him might be, I cannot
ascertain; thus much from all hands we have, that he went not less in his
death then in his life, maintaining his Religion to God, his Duty to the King,
and his Innocence to the World, to the last minute of his breath: which found
several ways to expire by their Bullets, and to ascend with his Soul to Heaven
with a Quinque Domine, etc.

Colonel John Gerhard, and Mr. Vowel, the one beheaded at Tower Hill, and the
other hanged at Charing-Crosse, July 10. 1654.
OLiver Cromwell, that Monster of English production, had but newly invaded the
Magistracy over these Nations, when, as the Hydra before him had done; he
commenced his Tyrannical Regiment with a Sacrifice of Loyal blood, which all
along cemented the frame of his five years Usurpation, as the Walls of Babylon
were said to be mortar'd.

A cursed Rule it was among those State-Innovators, that there was no surer way
of establishing their Tyranny, and bring their Models to any sound constituon,
but by profusely letting blood, especially in the Plurisie of so many dangers,
which their evil and abominable actions did daily threaten them.

This they termed Preventional Cure; for suspecting all hands to be about their
ears, they resolved to be before hand with some: that the terror of the
Example, being contrary to all reason, Justice and Law, and a perfect avowing
of their Tyranny, might reach to every man, that who with the sense of so
apparent danger and destruction out of which, once engaged, there was no rescue
or deliverance but by death, might be stupefied into a degenerous fear, and
abject servility of mind, to endure whatever their insupportable Domination
should load upon them.

To this purpose His Engines were emptied at once upon all sorts of men, though
finding it impossible to engage or set any of the Nobility who had a small taste
of what usage they might expect by the Death of 4 eminent Lords: they at Last
confined themselves to the middle rank of the people, Gentry and Citizens, and
of those, not the puny and weak, but the resolute, learned and courageous,
whose blood being of price and value might be of some religsh to them,
howsoever bitter and abominable soever to all the World besides, being the
thing they intended.

A High Court of Justice is therefore erected by the novel Authority of a
Prorector, and to keep even pace, with the setting of it up, diverse persons are
apprehonded and Committed; amongst others this Noble Gentleman, Colonel John
Gerhard, his Brother Mr. Charles Gerhard, Brothers to the Honorable Sir
Gilbert Gerhard; Mr. Vowel a Schoolmaster of the Free School at Islington, Mr.
Somerset Fox, and others; these were brought before that Bar of the High Court,
where bloody Lisle was then President.

Their Crime was an offense counted in one of those forty two Articles of the
Instrument of Government, which Oliver swore to at Westminster Hall at his
first seizure of the Government, being a design against the Life of that
Usurper. This was feizible to the belief of all men, for few there were that
owed him not that kindness, and therefore the color of Truth was enough, and
only requisite to blanch out the deformities and odiousness of the illegal
proceedings and other barbarous dress of mischief and villainy.

But these Gentlemen were no way concerned in any such design, save only as
they were prompted, and had some transient suggestions which they never
entertained by some trapanning words to that purpose, which had their danger
not recalled to their memory, had been utterly forgot by them, though made
records against them by those who were hired deeply to swear against them, what
they had by the by, but whispered to them. See more in Mr. Gerhards Speech.

But to strengthen and second this Device, and to six their plot upon them,
they do not only rely on their Witnesses for evidence, but with promise of
life and pardon to one of the pretended Accomplices in the business, they
undermine his integrity, and blow up the lives of the other. They tell him they
can sufficiently prove it, and that the only way to save himself is by a free
Confession and desiring the clemency of the Court; thereupon Mr. Somerset Fox
acknowledges the pretended Crime, and referred himself to them for mercy, and
Mr. Gerhard the younger, being not above the age of nineteen years gives some
such like Testimony against his own Brother, being not of that mature
resolution to withstand the fear of Death, which menaced himself; whereupon
this Noble Colonel was condemned by the said pretended Court for Treason in
conspiring the death of Cromwell, which he undauntedly (having made a very
excellent Defense against the supposed Fact, and at last denied their
Authority) and very cheerfully received.

Mr. Vowel was the next, against whom they had suborned a blind Minister, one
that had been fed and sustained by the charity of this Martyr. The frequent
converse this man used with him, gave Cromwell's Spies a fit opportunity of
effecting their projected Design upon him; for seeing the indigence and
necessity of that blind, wretched man, they forthwith closed with him, and with
great promises of Pensions and such like proditory Reward, drew the unwary man
into the guilt of a most shameful Treachery.

For having sounded the mind of his Benefactor and good Friend in reference to
the Fines, and particularly about the Protectors Usurpation, by which the
Commonwealth being now reduced to a kind of Monarchical Government, and the
people discerning thereby the Cheats put upon them by the Reformation; it was
not to be doubted, but if the Tyrant were removed, or otherwise laid aside,
the Royal interest would be gladly embraced, and without any difficulty
reassumed to its Authority; he caught hold of some words by way of discourse,
which as the judgment and inclination of Mr. Vowel led him, were something to
the purpose of their Design.

These words were presently taken hold of, and upon this blind man's
Examinations more enlarged, with several Circumstances inserted, which their
Instruments had furnished them with out of their strict watch and observation
of all his Company, Ways and Actions, which at his Trial were instanced, and
the Examinations produced to prove them.

At the recitals whereof, the blind man, whether pricked in conscience for his
detestible ingratitude, or some present courage infused into him for to
evidence the oppressed innocence of the prisoner at Bar, who had a sad and
numerous Family at home, denied and disowned the sad Examination, and the words
or Narrative therein set down to be his, but that he was abused thereby, and so
persisted, to the great confusion and puzzle of the Court, till such time as
Frontlesse Lisle averred it was his voluntary Act, and that it appeared he had
been since tampered withal, and that the Court would take no notice of such
prevarication.

So this proceeded to Sentence against him, which was, that for his Treason,
etc. he should be hanged, and so was removed to prison again.

On the 10th. day of July, 1654. Colonel Gerhard was brought to the Scaffold on
Tower Hill, where immediately after Don Pantaleon Sa the Portugal Ambassadors
Brother (for a Riot committed at the new Exchange in London, where this
unfortunate Gentleman valiantly opposed him, and his assistance to the hazard
of his life) was executed. They both agreed in this fatal determination of
their lives, though not in the manner of parting with them, the Portugal with
some kind of reluctance; this with the bravest and most Christian willingness
imaginable, which he manifested in his dying gesture and words, subjoyned
hereunto,

Mr. Vowel, on the 10th. day of July was likewise brought to Charing-Crosse,
where he was readier for his death then that for him; the Gibbet being not
fixed he was conveyed to the Charing Cross Tavern, where he like a true
Christian Soldier behaved himself, (having before prepared himself for his
departure) freely discoursing of the Kings indubitable and unconquerable Right
to his Crowns; and that though for a time it might be suppressed, yet most
certainly God in his righteous Judgment would not long delay his vindication
to the Mind and confusion of his rebellious Enemies; and that they could take
no speedier course to bring it down upon their heads then by murdering his
Subjects; and that though it were a sad infliction on him in regard of his
distressed Family, yet he doubted not but it would prove to his everlasting
glory, and a better support of his Relations then he could provide for them.
[And I hope his words with the latter part thereof be as happily verified as in
the former]

Being called again to his Execution, he took leave of a number of people, who
pressed in to comfort him, and to pray God to strengthen him; whom with like
gracious and Christian expressions he cheerfully thanked. At the Gibbet there
was no Ladder set, not any for that purpose brought: so retrograde and averse
had Providence disposed of things to the most abominable murder, as if it had
indignitated its detestation thereof; nor could any be procured from the
Neighbors thereabouts, or any other place, all men denying to be the least
accessory to that infamous business; thereupon a Joyn-stoo was fought from the
Mews, and upon that he was put; that by how many degrees he was nearer the
Earth at his fall by so many degres he might be higher in glory in He^ven at
his ascending, by an equal parallel.

Having devoutly prayed for himself, the King, Church and Kingdom, and for the
consummation of this life into bliss, he addressed some few words to the people
(which were too harsh for the ears of the Soldiers, to whom they were
principally directed) but was soon silenced, and not suffered to speak out the
remainder. Then after a short permission of some few Ejaculations wherewith he
recommended his departing Soul to God, the stool was drawn from under him, and
so he quietly past hence to a glorious state of Immortality.

Major Henshaw, now Major of the City Regiment of Horse, was said to be
concerned in this business. Much discourse there was then about him, but he
timely withdrew himself beyond the Sea, and escaped that storm that would have
overwhelmed him, and now honorably survives to reap the fruit and reconpence
of those Services he has done his King and Country.

Nothing can better express the noble gallantry and Christian bravery of these
two men, then what is left behind of their own recorded by some of their
worthy and intimate Friends, to whom I should have rendered the obligation, if I
could have had a perfect account from them, which so nearly concerns my design
as it does their deceased Friends, Memory and Honor. I do therefore willingly
refer the Reader to what follows, extracted from such Copies as are true and
Authentic, where he may be more fully satisfied.

The Speech and manner of putting to death Col. John Gerhard, who was beheadon
Tower-hil, July 10. 1654.
IT was thought needle sse by the friends of Col. Gerhard, to declare any thing
concerning his sufferings unto the World, more then in their sight, had not the
sacrilegious malice of the last weekly Pamphlet thrown some stains upon his
name, and so incensed them to a vindication as pious as his death was. It Is
most certain, that there can no blots stick upon true honor, which such weak
fellows endeavor against it: These are cursed beasts, but their horns are
short; sepulchral dogs! that scrape up graves, and violate the dead, and are
fierce and ravenous, but yet dogs still. And all worthy people will call their
railing, praise, and what they intend a barking infamy the greatest merit. Yet
because every understanding is not of the same brightness, and those putrid
libels may by ill chance fall into some innocent hand hereafter (and yet sure
such vermin should not be endured long) therefore let wise and good men pardon
him that has undertaken this justice for that Gentleman, and be pleased to
read this sad story, not for their satisfaction sake, but their sorrows: It may
dry up a friendly tear perhaps, and still a murmuring groan to see the comely
posture of his passion, how well all was carried by him, and how honorably,
and the honest circumstances may not improbably take off from the sadness: Why
should I grieve that death which had such a living glory in it? Or dishonor
that blood with feeble tears, which was shed so like the holy Martyrs? All that
knew this person cannot but witness his generous resolution, and whether his
great courage fell less then it self (as that viper hisseth) or did not rather
rise greater now, when the Christian was twisted with the Gentlemen, let this
faithful relation witness. In which, though all terms and syllables may not be
exactly the same, yet if there be a material falsehood, or a wilful flattery,
may his neck that wrote it feel a viler destiny then axes or halters. Amicus
Gerardus, sed magis amica veritas.

From the first day of his imprisonment he foresaw the heavy sentence hovering
upon him, and therefore gave all diligence to secure himself against it; that
however he underwent a temporal condemnation, he might escape an eternal. But
after that sad doom was pronounced then he bestirred himself amain, and made
double have for heaven, it was for his life, and therefore he would loose no
minute, but the same night gave directions to a dear friend for a Minister
(whom he knew to have long honored his family) to be brought unto him early
next morning; and it pleased Authority to gratify him in this great desire, so
that an order was sent freely for the quiet admission of any such person to
him. With this spiritual friend he spent some hours every day in prayer, and
other ghostly refreshments, which (God be praised) were not without sweet
effect and impressions upon his soul. There were some other Ministers of great
observation for gravity and godliness, who visited him, and who I am confident
will put their seal to this truth with me, that they found him meek, humble,
modest, penitent, comforted, not far from the Kingdom of God, if not already in
it: but I have good hope he was in possession, and so had he, through grace.
Upon the morning (which was the last he must see till that of the Resurrection)
he submitted to some wholesome orders of the Church, and received her comforts
by them. That done, he proceeded to the (highest enjoyment of grace that can be
administered upon earth) the holy Communion, whereof with his brother Sir
Gilbert G^rhard he was a partaker, with as much reverence, zeal, thankfulness,
holy sorrows, and holy joys, as a devout soul could evidence. He wept as if he
would have washed his Saviors wounds, which his faith presented in his tears;
and yet he said he was admirably ravished with all inward peace and comfort in
his own conscience. This passed, he had now no^ing to do but to die, which he
expected that morning very speedily; But by the pleasure of Authority, both the
time and the place of his execution was altered, so that he was to wait a
little longer, until evening for his release. Many friends and persons of
Honor came to take their last leave of him, who can gladly witness his
undisturbednesse and civil cheerfulness to every one of them. His brother
tarryed continually with him^ and though some eruptions of passion could not be
restrain d^now and then, where nature was so much concerned, yet they were
generally pleasant, and at last parted (about half an hour before he was led
forth to death) with as much calmnesse and placednesse, as if they had been to
meet again anon sase and unhurt as they had done formerly. So have I seen a
windy and stormy day concluding in stilness and Sunshine, as if weary and
desiting to rest without any breath of trouble, The Minister only waiting on
him to the last; and about five a clock enters the Lieut. of the Tower, and the
Sheriff of London: Two sure friends, that will not leave him as long as he has
life remaining in him: They told him a sour message, that they were come to
conduct him to his death's blow: He replied they were very welcome, and
received them so fearlesse and untroubled, that the Sheriff told the Minister,
He was sorry to see him so ukfit for that condition; but (under favor) he
mistook his condition, That which he accounted fitness to die, our
Pamphlet-monger would have called flagging and cowardice. So a hard thing it is
to satisfy all curiosities, even with our blood, and nothing more ingenious
then to carry this bitter cup even, when so many misconstructions shake it. At
his lodging he desired the Sheriff that he would permit the Minister and three
others that were his friends and servants to go upon the Scaffold with him,
which as it was seasonable wisdom in him to desire, so was it a fortunate
kindness from them that granted it, else it may be their testimony might have
been wanting to his injured reputation. He took leave particularly on the
Household where he was as a prisoner, and was so clearly collected in every
thing he did, that he went out of his way into the kitchen to bid his Lanlady
farewell, giving thanks for her respects during his bonds, which he said he
should die in to her. As he passed by the Guards in the Tower, he gave them
money twice, and told them; he should trouble them no longer, being on his
remove to better Guards. He walked along to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, showing
a great deal both of humility and respect to the people, who generally lamented
him, and prayed for him. As he went he was bare-headed for the most part,
carrying his hat in his hand; and sometimes resting it in a careless bravery
on his left side. When he came to (or rather leaped upon the Scaffold) for he
was so far from flagging when to tread that Tragical stage, that many observed
how sprightfully he seemed to skip up the steps to it, as if he had gone to
dance there rather then to die) his grim executioner presented himself to him,
to whom with a cheerful smile he said, Welcome honest friend: And desiring to
see his Ax, he took it into his hands, and kissing it, with a pretty glance of
his eye (which was a natural loveliness in him) toward the Minister, he said,
This will do the deed I warrant it. The Scaffold was very much crowded with
people; yet as well as he could he made some turns to and sro upon it, with a
paper (which he had taken out of his pocket) in his hand, wherein it seems he
had prepared some heads of a speech which he intended to have delivered: but
the Sheriff and Lieutenant told him, if he spoke any thing it must be very
brief, and that they must not suffer him to speak any thing that was seditious;
Well Gentlemen (said he) your will be done; but (God be praised) I never yet
had to do with any thing that was seditious! I would fain have spoken something
to clear my self to the world, according to the custom, if it might have been,
But come Sir, says he, turning to the Minister, Let you and I speak to him
that will give us leave: and so kneeling down together in a corner of the
stage, the Minister prayed with him a short time, which done they stood up
again. Then turning himself to the people, and putting off his hat, he told
them, That he was not permitted to speak a few words according to his
intention, yet he doubted not but what he would have said would come to their
eyes, though it must not come to their ears: But this I desire all to take
notice of, and this he spoke (with a double vehemence) that I die a faithful
subject and servant to King Charles the second, whom I pray God to bless and
r^store to his rights; and had I ten thousand thousand lives, I would gladly
lay them all down thus for his service. Here he was interrupted, and the
Sheriff wished him rather to confess what he knew concerning the horrid Plot he
was condemned for: He answered, That he had confessed all that he knew
concerning any Plot, that he thought they knew more of the Plot that condemned
him, then he did; but he heartily forgave them. The Minister told him it was
well done to forgive and pardon those that persecute us: That was an act of
true Christian love, but as his case stood, love was not enough; He ought to
deal in this business (upon which his life lay) with all candor and sincerity,
not concealing any thing of that nature as was charged against him, as far as
he might glorisie God, and serve the public good. Upon which lifting up his
eyes toward heaven, and laying his hand upon his breast, Oh Sir, says he, if
there had been any such thing in this breast, would I not have revealed it
before this time! I protest in the sight of Almighty God, I know no more of any
such design, but only what I have often acknowledged, that it was motioxed to
me by Major Henshaw, ( who I confidently believe is in their hands) and debated
twice or thrice when I was with him: but I never en^ertaived it at all, and at
the last flatly disowned it, and told him I would have nothing to do in it. He
was many times pressing me to nominate what persons I knew I could bring, and
to have their names; but let them show any such thing if they can against me.
But I am certain he is in their hands. Pawsing here a little, and fetching a
turn or two upon the Scaffold, being very hot (as he had baen all that morning)
he called for some small beer, which he had given order to be ready, and was
brought thither in a stone bottle, of which he drank a little once or twice.
Then the Minister went to him, and minded him that something might be expected
from him as to his Religion, and disposition to dye. To which gathering up an
extraordinary resolution in his face) he replied, I die a Christian, a true
Christian, according to that Faith and Religion which was professed by the
Church of England, in the time of our late King of blessed memory. And I praise
God I am so fitted and ready to dye, that I am confident by the merits of
Christ Jesus, that my sins are pardoned, and my salvation is at hand. Then
turning about he called for his wast-cote and cap, and throwing off his
doublet, put them on, whilst his servants helped to put up his hair. His
wast-coat was not very clean, which he took notice of to his man: but it is no
great matter says he, if the heart be clean, ali^s well enough. Being thus
prepared, he calls for the Block: and viewing it (as with delight) laid himself
down upon it to see how it would fit, and was so far from sinking at the sight
of it, that he almost played with it: and rising quickly pulls a little
paper-book out of his pocket, which he gave to the Minister, willing him to
find that particular Prayer which was proper for that occasion, but the crowd
being great, he could not quickly find it, so that he kneeled down with the
book open a while in his hand as if he had read; but quickly shut it, and
prayed with great expressions of fervency by himself. When he had done, the
Lieutenant said something to him (as it seems) concerning his Brother Charles
that had witnessed against him; I know not what the Lieutenant said, (for he
spoke low) but Mr. Gerhard spoke aloud, and replied passionatly O Christ Sir! I
love my poor brother with all my heart, he is but a youth and was terrified, I
know how he was dealt with; tell him I love him as well as ever I loved him in
my life. And commend me to my brother Sir Gilbert, whose release I beseech you
Sir to assist: there being no more cause, that I know of for imprisonment then
only that he was found in the same bed with me, which sure is no capital crime.
Having said this, he took his leave of him and the Sheriff, and all he knew on
the stage: and turning about once more to the people, desired them to pray for
him, himself kneeling down with the Minister, laid his hand in his bosom, and
they prayed together the last time. After this he bids them all farewell again,
and besought them to remember they had a poor Sovereign abroad who deserved to
be remembered. Then forgiving the Executioner and saluting the Minister with his
last embrace and kisses, he bowed himself to the stroke of death, with as much
Christian meekness and noble courage mixed together, as I believe was ever
seen in any that had bled upon that Altar. And this all the people that were
Spectators, did seem to understand and acknowledge: beholding his fatal blow
with an universal sadness and silence; whereas, when the other Gentleman fell
quickly after upon another score of blood and riot, they gave a great and
general shout, as applauding the Justice of the Portugals death; but pitying
and bewailing the untimely fall of so brave and magnanimous a spirit as did
(through all the clouds of death) shine gloriously in this unfortunate
Gentleman.

His Speech
Gentlemen,
AS this kind of spectacle is no new entertainment to your eyes, for you havhad
a late glut of such objects: So is it no strange thing to me to be made such a
spectacle; for I have been bred upon the Theater of death, and have learned
that part so well, though I confess a very hard one, as to perform it pretty
handsomely, both as becomes a Gentleman and a Christian.

Only I must desire you to expect no fine Prologue, or Speech from me; I never
studied to make Orations: a very unfit man to lay plots against a State, who am
scarce able to lay a few lines of plain English together, as I ought: But
though I cannot speak happily; I doubt not but I shall die happily.

I confess my self a great sinner. Who is innocent? God be merciful to me a
miserable sinner. I adore the justice of God in all this that is come upon me:
I have deserved to die long since; and blessed be God who has given me such
time to prepare. But for this Crime I stand condemned for to day, I do protest
mine own innocence, as to any consent or ingagment to act in it.

I hope you will believe me, when you consider upon what slender proofs and
testimonies I suffer; none of them legal, or positive, but circumstantial.

For my brother Charles; Alas poor youth! how he was wrought upon! but I desire
all my friends to think honor ably of him.

For my Brother Sir Gilbert.

This imagination of a Plot is said to be hatched in France, but I fear the
nest was at Whitehall.

As for the King, -- so far from concurring to such a Deed, that I am only
unsatisfied in this, whether I shall dye right in his favor, because suspected
of any thing so unworthy of him.

I fear he lost his Kingdom by such practices, but whether he would recover
them so, is a question: God has better ways when it shall be good in his sight
to plead his cause.

I was lately in France, but on my own score; for I have commanded there and
probably might.

For my past life it has been but a troublesome one, but now I hope I shall
rest! Since I was any thing, I have served the King, as I was bound: And I wish
all that did so, had done it as faithfully! He was condemned for a tyrant, but
God --

For my Religion, though a Soldier, I am able to profess I am a Christian
soldier, a true Son of the Church of England, as constituted under Queen
Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles of blessed memory. Her Doctrine and
Government I embrace. Her Truth and Peace I pray God to restore.

I humbly give thanks to God Almighty for providing me the comfort of a
Minister, on whose fidelity I might repose my soul.

And I pray God to bless the poor faithful Ministers of this Church, and give
you hearts to esteem them, the want whereof is no small cause of our misery.

My days have been few and evil, yet God be blessed in all the vanities and
folly of youth, I have been far from Atheism, or concempt of Gods worship: I
had always awful impressions of Gods honor and service, which is now my
comfort.

And now dear Countrymen, fare you well, I pray God bless you all, his whole
Nation.

Alas poor England? When will these black days be over! When will there be
blood enough! I wish mine might fill up the measure, I forgive all.

Once more fare you well, Commend me to all my friends, Pray for me.

I pray God make you as faithful and loyal as I have lived, and as happy as I
shall be by and by, when I am dead.

Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Father of mercies, have mercy on me!

Savior of the world, save my soul.

O lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the world, hear my prayers.

Into thy hands O Lord I commend my p^irit.

Lord Jesus receive my soul.

The last Speech of Mr. Peter Vowell, which he intended to have delivered (had
he been permitted) upon Monday the 10th of July 1654. (on which day he suffered
death in the place where Charing Cross stood) as from the Original paper
written with his own hand appears.
Gentlemen,
AT this earthly Bar from them that pretend to have a great measure of
sanctity, I had hard measure: but to that Bar I am now going, the Bar of
heaven, I shall have Justice, yea one day Justice against them, except they
water their beds and couches with tears of Repentence.

The court gave severe and rash Judgment on my body, and sent a pitiful fellow
(bur a pitiless fellow) that gave as rash a Judgment of my soul; but that
precious Jewel none of them could touch to hurt.

The souls under the Alter cry loud for vengeance long ago; how many more of
late years have been added to them to help the cry? the cry is loud of those
lately whose blood has been unlawfully spilt; but vengeance is Gods, and I
will leave it to him.

The Court at my Trial said, I was confident, and held it as a fault; He also
whom they sent to the Tower (I know not if to entrap me) under pretense to
comfort my soul, told me also, I was confident; I say the same: and the same
confidence I bring with me now, and by Gods assistance, I hope I shall carry it
out of this world with my innocence.

Gentlemen Soldiers, Among the ancient and savage sort of Heathen, they had a
Law once every three, six, or twelve months to offer up a sacrifice of humane
blood to their god; and that their god was a Devil: Among us, whether Heathen
or not, you best know; of late years we have had a fatal custom, once in
three, six or twelve months to make not only a sacrifice, but many sacrifices
of humane Christian blood, our Scaffolds have reek'd and smoked with the
choicest sort of blood. But unto what God do you judge? What God is he that
delights in the blood of man? Baal, the god of Ekron, B^lzebub, the god of
Flies.

Amongst the Primitive Christians that lived nearest the time of our Savior
Christ, the greatest Tyrants and persesecutors of the Christians lived; the
persecution was great, and yet the courage of those persecuted Christians was
so great, that it excelled the fury of the persecutors; that they came in
faster to be killed, then they could kill; they offered their bodies and
throats so thick unto the slaughter, that the hands of Tyrants were weary with
killing; and yet Sanguis Martirum, was Sem^n Ecclesi^e, and many Heathens came
in with the Christians, seeing their cheerful constancy, turned Christians,
and dyed Christians, and dyed with them; the Christians still increased the
more.

Of late years here has been a great persecution in this Nation, and yet the
sufferers have been so many, and present themselves so thick in the vindication
of their King, Country, and Laws, that they startled the very enemy himself;
their constancy so great, that the eyes of their Judges dropped tears, whether
real or true, let the Judge of Judges judge; They still stand amazed at their
constancy, though they exceed the old Heathens; are not weary of killing.

Oh Soldiers! How many of you have been brought up, and led on by blind
principles, wronged in your education, or seduced by your indiscreet, heedless
and heady Teachers? How many of you young men have for some small discontent
departed from your loving Masters, dear Friends, or tender Parents, and fled
into the Army? how many of you driven by Tyranous oppression, poverty, or
cruelty, have left your dear wives and children? And some for novelty or
wantonness adhere to this employment, not considering the great danger of
spilling innocent blood.

How many of you have drawn your Swords, you do not know for what? How many of
you keep drawn your Swords, you do not know for what? You have put to death a
pious and just King, and in his stead have reared up, even another Jeroboam,
that makes Israel to sin: What his goodness is, you best know: You have put
down a good old Law, and reared up another of your own to judge the people by;
my calling for the benefit of the former, and for the equity even of your own
Law, I am in part condemned here to die. Be you Judge of the proceedings.

How many of you have had a hand in putting down the ancient true Church, and
raised up in your own imaginations a new one? But alas! You know not what you
do; if you did, you would grieve to see what a glorious Church you have ruind:
You would never have pulled down the hedges, and broken down the fences, that
the wild beasts of the Forest should come in, that the little foxes should
devour; and the wild Boar should root out so stately a Vine.

When the Jews were led into captivity; their goodly and magnificent Temple
was burnt; but in process of time, they obtained favor amongst the Heathen
KINGS they dwelt amongst, and had liberty therewith to re-build: re-build they
did, and finished a second Temple, at which fight all the young men rejoiced to
see so gallant a Temple, but the old men wept to see how far different and
short the second Temple was from the glory of the first: So you young men
rejoice at your imaginary Church, but the old men methinks I see some weep, (Oh
weep not so: me) weep for your Country, weep to see Religion, Liberty and Laws
taken from you, weep to see so many good men snatched a way; but indeed from the
miseries to come, and weep for what your unhappy selves will suffer.

Soldiers, however you flourish for atime, and perhaps many of you may rejoice
at our deaths; but believe it, as Sampson pulled the house of the Philistims
down when he fell: so shall we give you and your Cause a greater blow by our
deaths, than living we possibly could have done. You may for a time flourish,
but remember what our Savior said, All you that make use of the sword, shall
perish by the sword, you shall be cut down like the grass, and whither away
like the green herbs.

But do you behold yonder glorious place? Do you behold the spangled Heavens,
where the holy Angels dwell, where God himself is rounded with Thrones,
Principalities, Powers and the Celestial Spirits of just men, when the Trump
shall blow, when the dead shall rise at the dreadful day of Judgment How will
you answer all your Rapes and Murders? Do you think your hands that have been
bathed in the blood of your King, the blood of so many of your eminent
Countrymen so unjustly, that have been bathed in the blood of many of your
friends, your kindred, perhaps your Parents, can ever reach yonder glorious
place without repentance? Oh no! Repent now therefore, it is not too late,
shake off your bloody Protector, rescue your ancient Laws, and call in your
Royal young Prince, whom you have long enough wronged, Make your Add esses to
the great Protector of Heaven and Earth, as I now do my self for a Pardon, for
all your former and present transgressions.

I dye an obedient Son of the Church of England, and with a dutiful heart to
the KING, and desire that none present that love him, will he disheartened by my
death, but continue faithful to the end.

And so farewell, I forgive all the world, etc.

Colonel Penrudock, Colonel Groves and others, are taken at Southmolton in
Devonshire in their Quarters: some of them beheaded at Exeter and Salisbury:
others hanged there, and at Chard in Somersetshire, May 16. 1655.
THe restless Fears and Disturbances which attended the ambitious head of
this bloody Protector; some drove him to the same facinensious courses and
practices, upon the Lives and Estates of other Loyal and honest persons, who by
the like Artifices fell into his Clutches.

It was but just a year past since his butchery committed upon the two
aforesaid Gentlemen: and now the Axe is whetted again, against the lives of
many more innocent persons. He had called a Parliament by virtue of his
Instrument in September 1654. This continued five lunary Months without any
mutual fa^isfaction, or scarce intercourse betwixt them and Oliver, therefore
by the same Power he dissolved them: at which time he gave them an account,
that by their sullenness, and disaffection to the settlement of the
Commonwealth in Him, the Common-Enemy, meaning his Majesty's Loyal Subjects,
were hatching and raising new troubles, which he was well satisfied were
fomented by some of them then present.

This was fair intimation for the Confederates to desist: but, believing this
spoken by him out of a real fear of their Power; the Design being universally
laid; and that it was beyond his power to prevent it, and no doubt some
countenance and foundation of this enterprise they also had from the
Parliament, they resolved to proceed to the Execution thereof.

But Oliver had all along countermined them: for by intelligence he held with
one Maning (whose Father was a Colonel in the Kings Army, and slain in the
service at Alesford fight) then with the King at Colen, in the quality of one
of his Majesty's private Secretaries near servants, he understood the whole
Cabal of that business, from the beginning to the end, and accordingly managed
them whose Counsels were intended wholly against him, but as it proved were
aimed at themselves.

Maning at last came to be discovered to the King, when his Friends in England
were betrayed and undone, and the whole design frustrated, and was deservedly
shot to Death at a Castle in the Duke of Newburghs Country. But this, as I
said, was too late; for, the Western Association which was to be commanded by
Sir Joseph Wagstaffe, according to the time agreed on, rose in part at
Salisbury, at such time as the Judges were come thither in Circuit. Here
appeared to the number of two or three hundred Horse on Monday morning in
Maxch, where we having seized some of the Lawyers Horses, and taken away the
Judges Commissions: they marched to Blandford, where Col. Penruddock proclaimed
the King, and so on Westward: some leaving, but none joining with them.

Cromwell had so ordered his business, that his Troops were ready in every
quarter; but knowing that this rising would be the first and most general, gave
them fair time and opportunity of Rendesvouzing, no more but only two Troops
under Butler, then upon their march thither from Bristol, being near
thereabouts; but as soon as ever they were up Forces were drawn together from
several places to prevent their dispersing and returning.

The Royalists having marched day and night, came at last wearied and tired to
Southmolton in Devonshire, where they took up Quarters for that night,
intending for Cornwall, where they expected an additional strength, both from
that County, and from Foreign parts there to be landed: But about ten a clock
that night, Captain Vnton Crook, with a Troop of Horse entered the Town, and
beset the Innes and Houses where they were quartered, and presently sell a
storming of them. After some two hours sharp Dispute, where few were killed,
they came to a Capitulation, which was, that they should render themselves
prisoners, Captain Crook promising them quarter for life.

Colonel Penruddock, and Col. Groves submitted on these terms; but Joseph
Wagstaffe, Sir Robert Mason, and Mr. Thomas M^mpesson escaped away and got over
Sea, leaving their Estates to the disposal of the Usurper; the rest of the
party became Prisoners, and were carried into Exeter Goal, where lay while the
next Assizes. In the mean time, several other persons engaged in the same fatal
business, were apprehended at Salisbury, and other places, and secured in the
several Goals, till such time, as Cromwell to make himself more absolute, had
perverted and forced such Judges as he had designed for the Summer Circuit to
comply with his instructions, and by the respective Sheriffs, upon pains of the
same displeasure, had empannelled Juries for his turn.

I omit wilfully the names of both Judges and Juries, not so much for their
sakes, as the memory of that obtrusion upon the Laws, being that murder was
countenanced by them while a High Court of Justice was ready at hand, and it
portended some ill irrecoverable mischief to the generality of the Nation,
where that passed by legal Verdict. So great a shame to us that challenge
English Freedom, and have contested so often with our Princes for Magna Charta,
that it cannot pass our Pen without burning our fingers: not only stygmatize
that age, but set a mark on the future.

In the Summer Assizes, as before is said, the Judges went their Circuit; but
before that time, Cromwell had caused Col. Penruddock, and one Mr. Jones related
to his Highness-ship, to be brought up to be examined before him, which, they
being in the custody of the Sergeant at Arms, several times underwent in
reference to a further discovery of other persons engaged in the business: but
that took not with them, who had founded their loyalty upon a Rock, which some
gusts and violent storms might batter, but never pierce nor enter.

They were not wanting in an honorable way to their own preservation, while
they had this seeming advantage, (as knowing how grievous to their Families
this their destruction would prove) of staying here; Mr. Jones got off indeed
afterward, but Mr. Penruddock suffered the extremity of their own Law, the
Sword, which had given him quarter for life at his taking.

Colonel Penruddock being removed to his prison at Exeter, after they had
finished their Inquisition with him, at his departure desired the prayers of
several Congregations in London, for a supply of comfort to him in his
distressed condition, (being then bound for his last home, and assuredly
knowing his near and inevitable dissolution) which was earnestly and loyally
endeavored, even in those dangerous times.

They were both presently re-guarded to their former Prisons to expect their
Doom, which not long awaited them and their partakers; for, at the Assizes held
in the County of Devonshire in the City of Exeter, they were indicted for
Treason, in levying War again the Protector, and by a perjured Jury found
guilty, according to that precedent newly brought to them from Salisbury, where
the same Charge was exhibited, and for Example prosecuted to Effect.

In fine, Judgment was given against them upon this Conviction, and some 16
suffered the pains and penalties thereof: whose Names we refer to an ensuing
Catalogue: only desiring you to be satisfied with the brief account of the
principal persons here, because it will be not only some trouble to write their
particular stories involved in the general design of this Service, but by
reason the whole was transacted by these men's Purses and Authority, and more
signalized by their life and death.

I presume not neither to be punctual in the matter of Colonel Penruddock; for
that he himself was abused in the hopes of the publishing his Examinations and
Trial, wherein the high injustice offered him would most plainly appear,
especially in the business of Capt. Crook, and therefore shall transmit the
memory of this noble and Heroic Royalist, with as much honor and solemn
veneration, as indignation and zeal against those Times and Persons, that
envied us the Retrospect of this his glory, by forbidding and suppressing any
account thereof to be published, that they might thereby conceal their base
treachery and unlawful proceedings.

Colonel Penruddock thus butchered, Colonel Groves, a somewhat ancient and very
grave man, was brought upon the reaking Scaffold, he had been an Officer of
that Dignity and Command in the Kings Armies before; and therefore that
honorable solemnity of murder was afforded him. He spoke at his Trial little
to his Judges, whose enjoined business and meritorious Service with Oliver, he
well knew was to bereave him of his life; but addressed himself wholly to the
Jury, who were a packt number of Schismatics, and, who, Serpent like, were
deaf to his Charms of Reason and Law, though pressed and tenacioufly urged by
him.

As he said little at the Bar, so he said less at the Block, but piously and
fervently recommended his Soul to God, desiring him to forgive his Enemies, and
so laid down his life, and slept in the Lord; their Speeches follow.

After this Execution was past, they proceeded (not because they saw it pleased
the people, for the Royal people of Exeter never beheld the like detestable
sight) in their violence against others of the meaner sort, who were taken in
that same business at Southmolton, who by their discriminating malice were
destined to the Gibbet, nine of whom suffered thereat, averting their most
righteous Cause, and telling the Sheriff, a Knight of Olivers, that another
account and estimate would not long after be made of them, to the shame and
confusion of their Enemies. After they were dead, they were all honorably
buried in that City, all sorts of persons in great numbers following them to
their Graves, which was highly resented, and stuck deeply in Cromwels stomach,
but he knew not which way to punish the City for that piety; no more then he
could brook or prevent their charity; the Citizens from the time of the
imprisonment of them, being above fourscore in number, maintaining them with
all necessaries, even to abundance and superfluity.

But though he could not stop the giver, he found a way to hinder the receiver,
for after the Assizes (wherein many more were condemned besides them that were
Executed, and the others still kept in durance, in expectation of future trial)
he caused them to be transported to the Barbado's, selling them as slaves to
some of those Turkish Merchants, who trade in the lives of men, as this Butcher
Crommwel in their deaths, who sold and employed them in those Plantations,
where the Pagan clowns, or more properly villains, used and worked them beyond
their strength and endurance, which soon after the Tyrant was gone to his
place, came to a hearing in Parliament, in Richards nonage.

The same Judges at their return back held another Assize at Chard in
Somersetshire, where Cromwells Scouts had gleaned up a few of those scattered
persons, two whereof they murdered there, but Major Hunt, whom they had
principally designed for the gorge, gave them the slip in the habit of one of
his Sisters, who staid behind in his Chamber in bed, which they discovered not
till morning, to the unspeakable, intolerable vexation of the tyrant, who
threatened all manner of deaths to the Jailer.

I had almost forgot their errand at Salisbury, where they likewise beheaded on
Mr. (...) of Hungerford, and one Mr. Kency, and three others were hanged for
the same matter; much stir was made, and many addresses were presented to
Cromwell, in the behalf of them, but all proved ineffectual, only one Mr. Dean,
the only son of a widow, and he not actually in arms, was after sentence
reprieved; The sufferers dyed constantly and assured in their just actions, as
the rest, and gave glory to God, and received it again in their eternal
recompense.

The Speech of the Honorable Colonel Penruddock, the greatest part whereof he
delivered upon the Scaffold in Exon. Castle the 16. day of May 1655. the whole
he left with a Gentleman and friend of his, written with his own hand; which is
as follows.
Together with the manner of his being beheaded.

As he was ascending the Scaffold, baring his knees, and bowing himself, he
used these words: This I hope will prove to be like Jacobs ladder; though the
feet of it rest on Earth, yet I doubt not but the top of it reaches to Heaven.

When he came upon the Scaffold, he said, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? I thank God who has given me victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Then with abundance of Christian cheerfulness he spoke to the people as
follows.

Gentlemen,

IT has ever been the custom of all persons whatsoever when they come to die,
to give some satisfaction to the world, whether they be guilty of the fact of
which they stand charged. The crime for which they stand charged, the crime for
which I am now to die, is Loyalty, (but) in this age called high Treason. I
cannot deny but I was at Southmolton in this County: but whether my being
there, or my actions there amount to so high a crime as high Treason, I leave
it to the world and to the Law to judge. Truly, if I were concious to my self
of any base ends that I had in this under^aking, I would not be so injurious to
my own soul, or disingenuous to you as not to make a public acknowledgment
thereof. I suppose that diverse persons, according as they are biassed in their
several interests and relations, give their opinions to the world concerning
us. I conceive it is impossible therefore so to express my self in this
particular, as not to expose both my judgment and reputation to the censure of
many, which I shall leave behind me. Because I will not put others (therefore)
upon a breach of Charity concerning me or my actions, I have thought fit to
decline all discourses which may give them a capacity either to enjure
themselves or me. My trial was public, and my several examinations (I believe)
will be produced when I am in my grave. I will refer you therefore to the
first, which I am sure some of you heard, and to the later, which many of you
(in good time) may see. Had Captain Crook done himself and us that right which
a Gentleman and a Soldier ought to have done, I had not now been here. The man
I forgive with all my heart; but truly Gentlemen, his protesting against those
Articles he himself with so many protestations and importunities put upon us,
has drawn so much dishonor and blood upon his head, that I fear some heavy
judgment will pursue him. Though he has been false to us, I pray God I do not
prove a true prophet to him.

Nay, I must say more, that coming on the road to Exon, he the said Captain
Crook told me, Sir Joseph Wagstaff was a gallant Gentleman, and that he was
sorry he was not taken with us; that then he might have had the benefit of our
ARTICLES, but now (said he) I have beset all the Country for him so that he
cannot escape, but must be hanged.

He also questioned me as I passed through Salisbury from London, whether he
had given me conditions: Which I endeavoring to make appear to Major Butler,
he interrupted me, and unwillingly confessed saying, I proffered him four hundred
pounds to perform his Articles; which had been a strange proffer of mine, had I
not really conditioned with him. And I told him then (having found him
unworthy) I would have given him five hundred pounds, believing him to be
mercenary. To make it yet farther appear, I injure him not by stiling him
unworthy, after these Articles were given, he proffered to Pistol me, if I did
not persuade another house to yield, which then were boldly resisting. To which
my servanr John Biby (now a prisoner) replied. I hope you will not be so
unworthy as to break the Law of Arms.

Thus much I am obliged to say to the honor of the soldiery, that they have
been so far from breaking any Articles given to others, that they have rather
bettered them then otherwise.

It is now our misfortune to be made presidents and examples together: But I
will not do the Protector so much injury, as to load him with dishonor; since
I have been informed, that he would have made our conditions good, if Crook,
that gave them, had not abjured them.

This is not a time for me to enlarge upon any subject, since I am now become
the Subject of death: But since the Articles were drawn by my hand, I thought
my self obliged to a particular Justification of them.

I could tell you of some soldiers which are turned out of his Troop for
defending those conditions of ours: but let that pass; and henceforward,
instead of life, liberty, and estate, (which were the Articles agreed upon) let
drawing, hanging, and quartering, bear the Denomination of Cap. Crooks Articles.

However, I thank the Protector for granting me this honorable death.

I should now give you an account of my Faith. But truly Gentlemen this poor
Nation is rent into so many several opinions, that it is impossible for me to
give you mine without displeasing some of you. However if a man be so critical,
as to enquire of what faith I die, I shall refer him to the Apostles,
Athanasius and the Nicene Creed, and to the testimony of this Reverend
Gentleman, Dr. Short, to whom I have unbosomed my self: and if this do not
satisfy, look in the thirty nine Articles of the Catholic Church of England;
to them I have subscribed, and do own them as authentic.

Having now given you an account concerning my self; I hold my self obliged in
duty to some of my friends, to take off a suspicion which lies upon them: I
mean as to some persons of Honor, which upon my examination, I was charged to
have held correspondency with. The Marquess of Hartford, the Marquess of
Winchester, and my Lord of Pembrook were the persons nominated to me. I did
then acquit them, and do now second it with this protestation, That I never
held any correspondency with either or any of them, in relation to this
particular business, or indeed to any thing which concerned the Protector or
his Government. As for the Marquess of Winchester, I saw him some twelve years
since, and not later; and if I should see him here present, I believe I should
not know him. And for the Earl of Pembrook, he was not a man likely, to whom I
should discover my thoughts, because he is a man of a contrary Judgment.

I was examined likewise concerning my Brother Freke, my Cousin Hastings, Mr.
Dorrington, and others. It is probable their estates may make them liable to
this condition: but I do here so far acquit them as to give the World this
farther protestation that I am confident they are as innocent in this business
as the youngest child here.

I have no more to say to you now, but to let you know that I am in charity
with all men, I thank God I both can, and do forgive my greatest persecutors,
and all that ever had any hand in my death.

I have offered the Protector as good security for my future demeanor as I
suppose he could have expected: if he had thought fit to have given me my life,
certainly I should not have been so ungrateful as to have employed it against
him. I do humbly submit to Gods pleasure, knowing that the issues of life and
death are in his hand. My blood is but a small sacrifice, if it had been saved,
I am so much a Gent. as to have given thanks to him that preserved it; and so
much a Christian, as to forgive them which take it. But seeing God by his
providence has called me to lay it down, I willingly submit to it, though
terrible to nature: but blessed be my Savior, who has taken out the sting: so
that I look upon it with terror. Death is a debt, and a due debt; and it has
pleased God to make me so good a husband, that I am come to pay it before it is
due. I am not ashamed of the Cause for which I die, but rather rejoice that I
am thought worthy to suffer in the defense and cause of Gods true Church, my
lawful King, the liberty of the Subject, and Privilege of Parliaments.
Therefore I hope none of my Aliance and Friends will be ashamed of it; it is so
far from pulling down my Family, that I look, upon it as the raising of it one
story hi he^ Neither was I so prodigal of nature as to throw away my life, but
have used (though none but honorable and honest) means to preserve it.

These unhappy times indeed have been very fatal to my family: two of my
Brothers already slain, and my self going to the slaughter: it is Gods will,
and I humbly submit to that providence.

I must render an acknowledgement of the great civilities that I have received
from this City of Exon, and some persons of quality, and for their plentiful
provision made for the prisoners. I thank Mr. Sheriff for his favor toward
us, in particular to my self; and I desire him to present my due respects to
the Protector, and though he had no mercy for my self, yet that he would have
respect to my family.

I am now stripping off my clothes to fight a duel with death, (I conceive no
other duel lawful) but my Savior has pulled out the sting of this mine enemy,
by making himself a sacrifice for me: And truly I do not think that man
deserving one drop of his blood, that will not spend all for him in so good a
cause.

The Truth is Gentlemen, in this Age, Trea on is an individium vagum, like the
wind in the Gospel, it blows where it lists: So now Treason is what they
please, and lights upon whom they will. Indeed no man, except he will be a
Traitor can avoid this Censure of Treason. I know not to what end it may come,
but I pray God my own, and my Brothers blood that is now to die with me, may be
the last upon this score.

Now Gentlemen, you may see what a condition you are in without a King: you
have no law to protect you, no rule to walk by; when you perform your duty to
God, your King and Country you displease the Arbitrary power now set up; (I
cannot call it government.) I shall leave you to peruse my trial, and there you
shall see what a condition this poor Nation is brought into; and (no question)
will be utterly destroyed, if not restored (by loyal Subjects) to its old and
glorious Government. I pray God he lay not his Judgments upon England for
their sluggishness in doing their duty, and readiness to put their hands in
their bosoms, or rather taking part with the Enemy of Truth. The Lord open
their eyes, that they may be no longer lead, or drawn into such snares: else
the Child that is unborn will curse the day of their Parents birth.

God almighty preserve my Lawful K. Charles the second, from the hands of his
Enemies, and break down that wall of Pride and Rebellion, which so long has
kept him from his just Rights. God preserve his Royal Mother, and all his
Majestys Royal Brethren, and incline their hearts to seek after him. God
incline the hearts of all true Englis^men to stand up as one man to bring in
the King; and redeem themselves and this poor Kingdom out of its more then
Egyptian slavery.

As I have now put off these garments of cloth, so I hope I have put off my
garments of sin, and have put on the Robes of Christ's Righteousness here;
which will bring me to the enjoyment of his glorious Robes anon.

Then he kneeled down and kissed the block, and said thus, I commit my soul to
God my Creator, and Redeemer. Look upon me, O Lord, at my last gasping: Hear my
prayer, and the prayers of all good people. I thank thee, O God, for all thy
dispensations toward me.

Then kneeling down, he prayed most devoutfuly, as follows.

O Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God, the Righteous Judge of all the
world, look down in mercy on me a miserable sinner. O blessed Jesus, Redeemer
of Mankind, which take away the sins of the world, let thy perfect manner of
obedience be presented to thy Heavenly Father for me. Let thy precious death
and blood be the ransom and satisfaction of my many and heinous
transgressions. Thou that sit at the right hard of God make intercession
for me. O holy and blessed Spirit which art the Comforter, fill my heart with
thy consolations. O holy, blessed, and glorious Trinity, be merciful to me,
confirm my faith in the promises of the Gospel revive^ and quicken my hope and
expectation of joys prepared for true and faithful servar^ts. Let the infinite
Love of God my Savior, make (...) love to him steafast, sincere, and constant.

O Lord consider my condition, accept my tears, aswage my grief, give me
comfort and confidence in the^: impute not unto me my former sins, but most
merciful Father receive me into thy favor, for the merits of Christ Jesus.
Many and grievous are my sins, for I have sinned many times against the light
of knowledge, against remorse of conscience, against the motions and
opportunities of grace. But accept I beseech thee, the sacrifice of a broken
and contrite heart, in and for the perfect sacrifice, oblation, and
satisfaction of thy Son Jesus Christ. O Lord receive my soul after it is
delivered from the burden of the flesh, into perfect joy in the sight and
fruition of thee. And at the general resurrection, grant that my body may be
endowed with immortality, and received with my soul into glory.

I praise thee O God, I acknowledge thee to be the Lord, O Lamb of God, that
take away the sins of the world, have mercy on me. Thou that sit at the
right hand of God, hear my prayer. O Lord Jesus Christ, God and Man, Mediator
betwixt God and Man, I have sinned as a Man, be thou merciful to me as a God.
O holy and blessed Spirit, help my infirmities with those sighs and groans
which I cannot express.

Then he desired to see the Axe, and kissed it, saying, I am like to have a
sharp passage of it, but my Savior has sweetened it unto me. Then he said; If I
would have been so unworthy as others have been, I suppose I might by a lie
have saved my life, which I scorn to purchase at such a rate. I defy such
temptations, and them that gave them me.

Glory be to God on high: On Earth peace: Good will toward Men. And the Lord
have mercy upon my poor soul. Amen.

So laying his Neck upon the Block, after some private Ejaculations, he gave
the Heads-man a sign with his hand, who at one blow severed his head from his
body.

The true Speech of that Valiant and piously resolved Hugh Grove of Chisenbury,
in the Parish of Enford, and County of Wilts Esquire, beheaded the 16th. of
May, 1655. in the Castle at Exon.
Good people,
I Never was guilty of much Rhetoric, nor ever loved long Speeches in all my
life, and therefore you cannor expect either of them from me now at my death.
All that I shall desire of you, besides your hearty prayers for my soul, is,
That you would bear me witness, I die a true son of the Church of England, as
it was established by King Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, King James, and
King Charles the first of blessed memmory: That I die a Loyal Subject to King
Charles the second, my undoubted Sovereign, and a lover of the good old Laws of
the Land, the just privileges of Parliaments, and Rights and Liberties of the
People; for the re-establishing of all which I did undertake this engagement,
and for which I am ready to lay down my life. God forgive the bloody-minded
Jury and those that procured them: God forgive Captain Crook for denying his
Articles so unworthily: God forgive Mr. Dove, and all other persons swearing so
maliciously and falsely against me: God forgive all my enemies; I heartily
forgive them. God bless the KING and all that love him, turn the hearts of all
that hate him; God bless you all, and be merciful to you, and to my soul, Amen.

And so meekly laying his Neck to the block, and giving a sign, his head at one
blow and a draw of the axe, was severed from his body.

Sir Henry Slingsby, and Dr. Hewyt, beheaded on Tower hill, June 8. 1658.
THis was the last Act of Cromwell's Tragedies; Death putting soon after a
period to his Usurpation, and Epilogizing other men's fate with his own, his
life had been attended, and his hours measured with stillation of blood; now
they were determined: this full pomp of slaughter went before, and ushered his
long desired Funerals to his usurped Grace.

He never stirt'd a Plot, but money stuck at the bottom. He had an Army of
Janissaries, which without constant pay could never be kept at his beck and
obedience, and all the design he practiced could not raise him money without
the tricks of Jealousies and Fears; that State-Device, serving by fondness and
force to bring in money for the Cause from the beginning to the very ending; and
this was the original of this horrid Plot.

For nothing else can be made out; he had lately so frighted all men by his
known intelligence at the Kings Court, that none but madmen, except the
condition of the Tyranny were altered, would venture upon any new Contrivance;
the Usurper being stronger and farther seated in his Domination then ever
before, and the severity of his Revenge against those whom he took in such
practices was so fresh and recent in memory, that nothing but Desperation could
thrust men upon such Pikes.

Therefore ho had recourse to his old Artifices, and because no body would be
dealing with him, he would be dealing with others, to make the people believe
and apprehend danger, and afterward pay for the delivery from, (that is to
say, for the perpetration of) it.

The Design was laid in all quarters, North, East, West and South, but centred
in the City of London; 'twas a General Conbination betwixt him and his
Secretary, and so ^e not dive in it further, but leave those parties who are
concerned in the death's of these and some preceding persons, to consider of
the rest, and proceed to the Narrative.

The first man that was produced in this Plot (which was to subvert the
Usurpation, till the Tyrant introduce and restore our Sovereign, with a
particular kind reference to the City, which should be fired (by its former
Incendiaties) was Sir Henry Slingsby, a Gentleman of a very Noble Family in
York shire, of an ample and large Revenue and Estate in York shire, but
exhausted and wasted in the Kings Service, and afterward wholly sequestered for
the Parliament.

This Knight, for some time before had been a prisoner in Hull, in order to the
security of the Peace, as their Tyranny termed it, but for manyyeares together
no stranger to such demeurances. In that Garrison he became acquainted, as the
solace of misery, and life necessirated him, with some of the Officers; they
likewise insinuating and ingratiating with him, but more particularly, when
instructions were given them of trapanning him into some design, against their
Sultan Cromwell.

This engaged them into a nearer famisiarity, Sir Henry's case and hard usage
is lamented, the state of the Kingdom laid open, and the oppression of the
people aggravated, with many the like overtures, to feel if the pulse of Sir
Henry would beat an Alarm to an insurrection, which for their part truly they
feared, but should not draw a Sword against any, who should so attempt the
regaining and recovery of their liberty.

To these Discoveries Sir Henry gave some pleasant, but not serious ear,
though he did not utterly disbelieve the discontents of those men: knowing, if
it was absolute truth they spoke, and might in time be accomplished, and
therefore let fall some words tending to that purpose; on which they replying,
and professing their serious service to the King if occasion presented it; drew
some further matter from Sir Henry; which was, the offering of a Commission to
them to secure that place for the King.

This was an old Commission, and which had lain by him a long while: ^oremote
and distant were his thoughts from effecting any thing; Before they had thus
brought him on, and had then produced upon the sudden and unexpected hopes of
gaining that Town.

The producing of this Commission was enough for their Tyrants satisfaction,
who straight gave Order that he should be sent up to London, who after some
Examination, he was sent to the Tower, and finally brought before a High Court
of Justice, where he manifested the Juggle by which he was brought into the
snare; and demonstrated the impossibility of his doing any prejudice to the
State, but that was no Argument there; so that he was sentenced to be beheaded,
by virtue of a late Act of one of Olivers Conventions, whereby it was made
Treason to hold intelligence with the Kings Majesty.

Much application was made to save his life by the Lord Viscount Fauconbridge
his Nephew, who had lately married one of the Usurpers Daughters; but as Sir
Henry said at the Scaffold, he was inexorable; the truth is, the Tyrant
supposed, that his not sparing a person so related to him, would make all the
World believe there was a reality of some horrid design, which could not be
dispensed with, without extreme danger to the public.

He said very sittle at his death, not caring to busy the world with his
concerns, having spoken largely to his Charge at his Trial, before the said
High Court, the substance on the Scaffold was this.

The fatal Execution of Sir Henry Slingsby on Tuesday the 8. of June, 1658.
upon Tower Hill: With the substance of his speech before his Death.
ABout Eleven of the Clock Sir Henry Slingsby was brought from the Tower to the
Scaffold on Tower Hill; whither being come he fell upon his knees, and for a
short space prayed privately.

Then standing up, he did with a very low voice, address himself to that noble
Gentleman Mr. Sheriff Robinson, telling him that what he had to say he would
speak to him; which was to this purpose.

That he had received a Sentence to die, upon account of his endeavoring to
betray the Garrison of Hull; But said, All that be did in that business he was
drawn into by others.

That the Officers of that Garrison did believe he had some greater Design in
hand, and therefore they would needs pump him to the bottom: But what he spoke
to them in private was brought into evidence against him. He likewise said,
That he did no more than any person would have done that was so brought on.

That he had made many applications (by his Friends) for a Reprieve, but found
his Highness was inexorable.

He did confess that he did deliver a Commission (as it was charged against
him:) But said, that it was an old Commission, and what he meant was well known
to himself; but what construction others had made of it, might appear by his
present condition.

He dscovered little sense of sorrow, or fear of Death; but said, He was ready
to submit, or words to like purpose.

Then he addressed himself to private prayer again; and kneeling down to the
Block, he prayed privately for a short space: Then laid his head upon the
Block, and at the sign given, the Executioner severed His Head from his Body at
one Blow: And his Friends put his Body into a Coffin, and removed it into a
close Coach prepared near the place.

Doctor Hewyt.
THis Venerable Doctor was next brought upon the Stage, and baited to Death by
their Belial President Lisle. His objected Crimes, were for conspiring against
the Government, with diverse others, and holding intelligence with the King,
branched out into several Articles.

After the Charge exhibited, he demurted to their Jurisdiction, citing diverse
Law-Cases and Presidents to back the Reasons he alleged against their
Authority, but withal, prayed the Court he might not be taken upon the nicety
and punctilio of their Law; and that, if they would please to evince the
legality of their Court to him, he would instantly plead to his Charge, and
leave himself to them.

While he thus disputed with them, they took advantage of three times demanding
his Plea, after which they would not admit of it, though he thrice petitioned
them, that they would please to accept thereof; but it seems they were more
contented without it, being not able to prove their Charge, their Witnesses
failing them, as it appeared after wards in other men's cases, whom they had
appointed for the slaughter.

They were also the more peremptory and untractable to this reverent person,
because of his great Esteem and Abilities, which he had a long while employed
at St. Gregory's in the service of this Church, King, and Kingdom, whose cause
he forbore not to plead in the worst of those times, till he was taken from his
Ministry by the Tyrant, and his Eloquent Tongue silenced in the Grave.

And if Cromwell had any particular malice to any person, in the contrivance of
their death, this good Doctor was one, whom he upbraided with railing and
unbecoming language at his Examination before him, as may appear in the
Doctor's Speech on the Scaffold, to which we refer the Reader, and with the
rest of this Taper-light, now expiring, bring him down to his Monument. He
prayed very fervently and earnestly for the space of almost half an hour, and
then sealed his Martyrdom, by having his head severed from his body with much
Christian Magnanimity; where we leave him, till his appearance with the Lamb,
with his white Robes, and Crown of Martyrdom.

The Horrid Execution of the reverend Doctor John Hewyt D. D. on the same
Scaffold, on Tuesday the same 8. of June 1658. with his speech before his Death.
AS soon as Sir Henry Slingsby's body was removed, as is aforesaid. Dr. Hewyt
was brought upon the Scaffold, whether being come (together with Dr. Wild, Dr.
Warmstry, and Mr. Barwick) he fell upon his knees, and prayed privately for the
space of a quarter of an hour; After that he prayed audibly for a good space.

After which prayer he addressed himself to the people in a speech which
continued above the space of an hour, the substance of which speech was as
follows,

I am now become a public Spectacle to Men and Angels (I hope) God, who is
Omniscient, is now beholding me with much pity, and great mercy and compassion;
and the more, because I am now come to that end that his own Son came into the
world to, To bear witness to the truth: he himself said, For this end was I
born, for this cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness to the
Truth: I was brought into the world (the Christian world) for to bear witness
to the truth of the Gospel, as a common Christian; I was brought into the world
(the Church) as a Minister of his blessed Word and Sacraments; [Blessed be his
name for that great honor and dignity] and I came into the world to die more
immediately for the testimony of JESUS, which God has now called me to. I came
into this world (this Commonwealth) to be a member thereof, to bear witness
to the truths of the Customs, the Laws, the Liberties, and Privileges
thereof, So I am a member of the Commonwealth? And me thinks it seems to me a
strange thing, that in as much as we all plead for Liberty, and Privileges,
and I pleading for the Privileges, the Laws, the Statutes, and the Customs of
this Land, yet I should die by those that should stand for the Laws, the
Statutes, and Privileges of the Land: And I am here beheld by those that plead
for their Liberties, and I hope I am pitied, because I here give up my self
willingly and freely to be a State Martyr for the public good; and I had
rather die many deaths my self, than betray my fellow freemen to so many
inconvences, that they might be like to suffer by being subject to the wills of
them that willed me to this death.

And it is worthy remembrance, that Mr. Solicitor having impeached me of
Treason to the Commissioners of the Court against his Highness, I did often
(when brought before those Commissioners) plead for the Liberties of the people
of England, though I had not the knowledge of the Law, yet I had instruction
from those that were learned in the Law, and had several Law-Cases and
presidents put into my hand, though not by them, and urged several Law-Cases,
and made my Appeal, First for the Judicature that I was to be tried by, whether
it were according to Law? whether it were according to the Act? and whether it
were according to the words of the said Act? I did appeal to have the said Act
argued by learned Lawyers on both sides, and then to be resolved by his
Highness own Council, which was denied me, [This by the by] I pressing the
Argument made a second appeal, that those Judges, if they would give singly
their several judgments that it was a just and lawful Court of Judicature, I
would answer to my Charge, I did make another Appeal to those that were his
Highness's Council, and pleaded against me. That if they would deliver it to me
under their hands to be according to Law I would then go on to plead and answer
to the Charge. What was then said further, my spirits being faint, I shall not
say much, but only this, I was taken in three defaults, upon formality of the
Court: It seems it is a custom in all Courts, (which I did not know before)
that if they answer not the third time, speaking by the Clerk, that then they
are guilty of three defaults, and proceeded against as mute: [I had no such
knowledge of the Law.] So they found me guilty of those defaults; and when I
would have pleaded, and resolved to begin to plead, I was taken from the Bar. I
did the next day make my Petition to the Court in the Painted-Chamber, two
Petitions were presented the same in effect; the former the Title was mistaken:
Yet because the title was mistaken, and no answer given, therefore it was that
another petition was drawn up to the same effect, with a new Title given, (as I
remember) presented by the Sergeant at arms, and one writ it over in such have,
lest they should be drawn out of the Painted-Chamber into the Court, that I had
not time to read it over, only I subscribed my name, and there was in the front
of the Petition a word left out, but what the word was I know not; and this was
taken so ill, as if I had put an affront or contempt upon the Court; And it was
thought they would have heard me plead; and then because of that mistake, they
sent word, I should have my answer when I came into the Court; and my answer
was the sentence of condemnation. And therefore I pray with all my sonl, that
God would forgive all those that occasioned the charge to be drawn against me:
to give such unjust things against me: I pray with all my soul, that God would
forgive all those upon so slender and small, grounds adjudg'd me to die, taking
advantage of such simple ignorance as I was in. And I had at the very beginning
of my pleading engaged their honors, no advantage should be taken against me
to my prejudice, that in as much as I understood nothing of the Law, And having
heard that a man in the nicety of the Law might be lost in the severity
thereof, merely for speaking a word out of simple ignorance, I made it my
prayer to them, that no advantage might be taken against me to the prejudice of
my person; and there was to me a seeming consent; for the President told me,
there should be no advantage taken against me; and upon these considerations I
am afraid there was too great uncharitableness. But I pray God forgive them
from the very bottom of my soul, and I desire that even those that shed my
blood, may have the bowels of the God of mercy shed for them.

And now having given you the occasion of my coming hit her, it is fit I should
give you somewhat as concerning my self, as I am a Christian, and as I am a
Clergyman. First, as I am a Christian, I thank God I was baptized to the holy
Church, so I was baptized to be a Member of the holy Catholic Church, that is
the Church of England, which I dare say for purity of Doctrine, and orderly
Discipline, till a sad reformation had spoiled the face of the Church, and made
it a query, whether it were a Church, or no? I say it was more purely Divine
and Apostolical, then any other Doctrine or Church in the Christian world,
whether National, or Classical, or Congregational: And I must tell you That as
I am a Member of this Church, so I am a Member of the holy Catholic Church,
and shall give a most just confession of my Faith, both negatively and
affirmatively. Negatively, I am so a Member of the Catholic Church, that I
abhor all Sects, Schisms, Sedition, and Tyranny in Religion. Affirmatively so,
that as I hold Communion with, so I love and honor all Christians in the
world, that love the same Lord JESUS in sincerity, and call on his Name,
agreeing with those truths that are absolutely necessary, and clearly
demonstrated in the Word of God, both in the Old and New Testament, though in
charity dissenting from some others, that are not necessary. And I, as I am
thus a Christian, I hope for salvation through the Merits of Christ Jesus, his
blood I rely on, his merits I trust to for the salvation of my own soul:
though to this Faith good Works are necessary; not meritorious in us, but only
made meritorious by Christ his death, by his alsufficiency, by his
satisfaction, and his righteousness, they become meritorious, but in us they
are no other than as defiled Rags. And truly, as I am a Member of the Church,
so I told you I was a Member of this Community, and so pleaded for the
Liberties and Privileges thereof. I must now answer something I am aspersed
withal in the World.

They talk of something of a Plot, and a Treasonable design, and that I had a
great interest in the knowledge and practice thereof, and that, for the saving
my life, I would have discovered and betrayed I cannot tell what. I hope my
conversation has not been such here in this City, where I have been a long
time very well known, as to make one imagine I should intermedle in such an
action, and go so contrary to the practice of my profession: and I hope there
are none so uncharitable toward me, as to believe I had a knowledge of that
design.

Here I must come to particulars for a Plot, of having a design upon the City
of London, for the firing of it. I so much tremble at the thought of the thing,
that should have been done, as they say, for the carrying on of such a design,
(if my heart deceive me not) had I known it, I so much abhor the thing, I
should have been the first discoverer of it: Nor ever had I had correspondency
or meerings with such persons as would have carried on such a design. It is
said likewise I entertained the Earl, the Marquess of Ormond: To my remembrance
I never saw the face of that honorable person in my life. It is said, one
Lords day I did preach at Saint Gregory's, and the next Lords day I was at
Brussels or Bruges, and kissed the Kings hand, and brought I cannot tell what
Orders and Instructions from him. This I shall say, For these three years last
past together, I have not been sixty miles from this City of London, and I
think it is somewhat further to either of those places than threescore miles.
It is said that I kept correspondency with one Mallory and Bishop: They are
persons I have heard of their names; but never saw their faces: and to my
knowledge I do not know they know me: nor do I know them at all, but only as I
have heard of their names. And whosoever else has suggested such things
against me, I know not.

His Highness was pleased to tell me, I was like a flaming Torch in the midst
of a sheaf of Corn: He meaning, I being a public Preacher, was able to set the
City on fire by sedition and combustions, and promoting designs. Here truly I
do say, and have it from many of those who are Judges of the High-Court, that
upon examination of the business they have not found me a medler at all in
these Affairs. And truly I must needs say therefore, That it was a very
uncharitable act in them (whoever they were) that brought such accusation
against me, and irritated his Highness, against me. I will not say it was
malice, it might be zeal, but it was rash zeal which caused me to be senrenced
to this place: The God of mercy pardon and forgive them all. And truly as I am
a Member of the Church, and as a member of Community where on behalf I have
been speaking, I cannot but do as our Savior himself did for his Disciples,
when he was to be taken from them, he blessed them, and ascended up to heaven.
My trust is, in the mercy of the most High I shall not miscarry; and however my
days are shortened by this unexpected doom, and shall he brought untimely to
the Grave I cannot go without my prayers, for a blessing upon all the people of
this land, and cannot but bless them all in the name of God, and beseech God
to bless them all, the blessing of the Almighty be upon them.

Colonel Edward Ashton, John Bettely, and Edward Stacy, Executed July 2. 1658.
THese persons being all Arraigned together at the same High Court, with four
more, being concerned in one Sentence, and one pretended Crime, I have put
together, and briefly will give you an account of them.

They were charged to have conspired the raising of a new War, the firing of
the City, and the Death of Cromwell, to which they all pleaded not guilty, as
all the World did judge them, who sensibly understood the detestable practice
against them.

Colonel Ashton was then a prisoner for Debt in Newgate, but by the Keepers
favor, having liberty to go abroad, one day fell into Company with some of
Cromwell's Trapan's: who finding, or perhaps knowing him to be a Cavalier,
uttered in his Audience, such dangerous words as those, and without amy more
ado delated him to the Secretary, as conscious and partaker to the design,
which was all his guilt, as he justified it upon his Death, which he suffered
in Towerstreet, by being hanged, drawn and quarrered, where he declared his
Loyalty to the King; but took it upon his approaching salvation, he was
innocent of any the Crimes charged against him.

John Bettely suffered next, being brought from the Tower to Cheapside, in the
same Sledge that drew Colonel Ashton from Nawgate; (their Executions being
divided into several quarters of the City, as their pretended Plot was of
firing it: the old Cheat, of picking out places to attend the guilt, and to
collogue with the City, by the dissembled care thereof) and near the Cross
Executed in the same manner, where he likewise protested his Innocence, being
merely betrayed by those Ruffian Emissaries of Cromwels. After he had hung a
long while, that every one concluded him dead, in a strange miraculous way, as
might serve to the confusion of his Blood-thirsty Enemies, he pulled off his
Cap, and held it in both hands, staring with his eyes as if alive: but the
Executioner quickly after dispatched him, and concluded his Martyrdom.

Mr. Edward Stacy was hanged only two days after, where he said the like, and
suffered with patience the loss of this temporal, to enjoy with unspeakable
happiness Life Everlasting.

The others Were Reprieved, and by the Death of Cromwell, soon after set at
Liberty, which was consummated at the Restoration of his Sacred Majesty, whose
benign Rays of Peace and Security, have dried up all our Tears of sorrow and
mourning into Tears of Joy, and is leaving us to forget our past miseries, and
losses of our Liberties, Estates, and Relations.

CAROLO SECVNDO Britanniarum and Regi Precibus Martyrum

In sacrosanctam and Beatissimam HOC OBLATUM

F. H.

To the most Illustrious TRIUMVIRATE The Heirs of Martyred LOYALTY and HONOR,
Charles Earl of Derby, etc. William Earl of Strafford, Knight of the most
Honorable Order of the Garter, etc. and Arthur Earl of Essex, etc.
My Lords;
THis Piece directs it self into your hands, for without a greater presumption
it could not pass them.

Your Noble Families, were the resplendent Triones that accompanied the Devex
of Charles his Wain, his Morning and Evening attendants, that portended and
extended his Declination, (for in two of them He suffered beyond His own Fate)
being plunged with Him in the depths of the same Red Sea, and are now risen
again in a full and most radient luster.

They were that Constellation, that directed three wandering Kingdoms into their
way of Loyalty, and pointed out the due veneration to the King their Redeemer.

It was their all-powerful Influence of Duty and Obedience that has serened
these Times. The dark Obscurity of that Cloud that hid them in their death,
soon revealed it self in Glory. This storm which tempested these Kingdoms,
being laid by their Blood, which was poured out like water in the streets, has
brought again our Halcyon days, and turned our Miseries into Jubilees.

This is the supererrogated Merit, of your Illustrious Parents, whom this Age
and Posterity shall reverence and admire; That your Lordships may surmount
their Virtues, as well as their difficulties, as you have exceeded their
Titles; that you may, as the Branches of those Vines, which being made to
bleed, produce more generous and abundant Fruits, that you may be the delight
and Joy of these Nations, and flourish for ever, is, and shall be the incessant
prayers of,

My Lords, Your Honors most obedient and Devoted Servant, James Heath.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER.
THis is only to inform you, that I have used my best endeavors to be
punctually true in these Collections; but in such Distractions of the times,
and Divisions of the mind and opinion, in which they were registered, I hope to
be excused, if there be any uncertainty found therein. If I have omitted any
out of this Martyrology, or have slightly passed them over, it is for want of
fuller Information. I likewise desire all the Persons Related to them, would be
pleased to give me a better Account, then our Re-searches could arrive at, and
I shall insert, rectify, and enlarge their Narrative as occasion shall offer,
For the Confessors, I acknowledge, I have not been nice, nor yet have I been
uncurious in their Catologue: I suppose I have set down the most Noted and
Public Persons; but if there be more to add, I shall be very ready to do their
Memory the Honors that duly appertain to them.

Vale.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to pass by the Errors of the Press, wherever you meet with them;
and Page 119. Title. for Wesiminster, read Winchester.

A CATALOGUE AND Brief Account of the Confessors of the Royal Cause.
I Should undertake a volumenous and as difficult a labor, were it my purpose
here to register all those gallant persons, that have suffered in their liberty
and estates for their Loyalty. But I confine my self to the chief of those only
who by particular Orders of Parliament, their pretended Courts of Law, and High
Courts of Justice, were vexed, oppressed, and persecuted even to the brinks of
death, leaving the other to the reward of a good Conscience, and the faithful
record thereof in Heaven.

These ensuing illustrious and Noble Patterns as well for imitation as
information, I thought fit to propose, and do humbly crave their pardon, if
this weak and mean endeavor, cannot reach that grandeur of Spirit, with which
they constantly endured their fiery trials, and dreadful and doleful sufferings.

I observe the order of time, and not of Dignity, and shall begin with the
right Honorable, the Lord Finch of Fordwich, who being. Lord Keeper of the
Seal, upon their arbitrary proceedings against the life of the Earl of
Strafford, wisely withdrew himself, and endured banishment and exile from his
own Country for sixteen years, and then returned, and died in Honor. His
faithful serving his Sovereign in that great employment, being all his charge
and accusation.

Mr. Secretary Windebanke, who pursued the same course, to avoid the Popular
fury, and died abroad.

The Right reverend Father in God Matthew Lord Bishop of Ely, who with eleven
more of his Sacred Order, were committed to the Tower, in 1641, from which
imprisonment he never ^irred, till the end of the year 1659, at which time, by
the means of the ever renowned Lord General the Duke of Albemarle, he was set
at liberty from thence, in kind remembrance of those fatherly counsels and
happy advice, the said noble Duke had, during his restraint in the same place,
for the same account of Loyalty, received from this reverend Bishop, who is now
reestablished in this same Diocese, to the Honor and support of this restored
Church.

Doctor Featly, a very Learned Religious and grave Divine, to whom this Church
owes much for his accurate defenses of its Doctrine and Discipline, being for
no other cause committed to Peter House by an Order of Parliament, languished
there a year and a half, and with much importunity was at last removed to
Chelsey College for the air, but he died there within three weeks after his
coming, being too far spent by his barbarous misusage.

Sir Robert Heath Lord Chief Justice of England, known so well for his
integrity and moderation, and as famous for his constant Loyalty, of whom
quarrelsome John Lilburn, a sworn Enemy to the Royal Party, gave so noble a
character before his Judges at Guild Hall, forced to abandon his Country, fled
over, toward the expiration of the War, into France, being by the bloody
prevalent Faction at Westminster excepted from mercy; not long after the Kings
death, with grief and anxiety of mind, to see the miseries and ruins of the
King and his Country, he himself died at Caen in Normandy, and was received no
doubt into mercy.

Judge Bartlet who weathered the same Storm, being the first committed of that
reverend Robe, and long survived their high and insignificant charge and
accusation; This gives us an Evidence of the intended Justice of the Reformers,
who would first put out the eyes of the Law, that the Subject might see the
better.

Sir Ralph, afterward Lord Hopton, who so courageously, and prudently, and as
an Expert Captain, commanded for the King in the West, and had so many notable
successes; after his disbanding in Cornwall, he took Shipping with the Prince,
our now Sovereign, into the Island of Scilly, and from thence into France,
following the Kings hard Fortune in all his peregrinations, till Death arrested
him at Paris, and put an end to his Travel.

Judge Jenkins, one of his Majesty's Justices in Wales, brought to the Chancery
Bat for some misdemeanors of Loyalty, where he denied the Authority of the
Court, for that the Seal was contrary to Law, as well as the Commissioners;
whereupon he was sent to the Tower, where he persisted in his integrity,
published several Presidents and Statutes, and argued them Rebels, and owned
the same again at other bars, did what he could to set the Army and the
Parliament together by the ears, desied them and their threats, and asserted
the King and the Laws against their usurpation; was continued a close Prisoner,
till they were weary of him, and then was sent to Windsor in the same quality,
where he continued of the same mind, till without thanks he was permitted the
liberty of the Town. This brave stout person is yet living, but when dead, his
memory shall endure for evermore.

Mr. Secretary Sir Edward Nicolas, who constantly abode with the King from the
beginning of his troubles, and afterward, continued the same Service and
Office to his present Majesty, in all his troubles abroad, by no less trouble
than Honor, having faithfully and prudently managed that employment, to the
happy effect of his Majesty's Restitution.

Sir Edward Hide now the Right Honorable Earl of Clarendon, Lord Chancellor
of England, the Counsel-Favourite of his late Martyred Majesty, and therefore
no wonder so hated by the Faction at Westminster, and traduced by their
scandalous Votes, being excepted likewise out of their mercy. He not only
continued the same advice, but also saw it in conclusion attain that success
to which it had always been directed, but had missed of approbation till the
general applause and shouts of our Deliverance.

The Lord Wilmot, afterward by King Charles the Second made Earl of Rochester,
who throughout the War, particularly at Roundway Down near the Devizes, so
valiantly behaved himself, passed over with the Prince, and my Lord Hopton into
Scilly, and accompanied his Highness in all those difficulties he passed, more
especially at Worcester, and in his Majesty's happy conveyance from thence,
which he principally managed. And here I must not omit the Duke of Buckingham,
with an honorable reference also to his noble Brother my Lord Francis Villers,
who young at Kingston (as in the primitive times) gave early testimony to this
cause, the valiant Earl of Cleveland, the Lord Wentworth his Son, and other
Gentlemen in that Expedition, who suffered for their assistance and obedience
to his Majesty in those commands. As also my Lord Gerard, now Captain of his
Majesty's Lifeguard, who bore part afterward as well as before, in the
calamity and misfortune of the Kings adventures in foreign parts. My Lord
Wilmot unhappily died a little before the Kings restitution, and has left
behind him the sweet favor of a most Loyal affection to his Majesty.

Nor without due observation can I pass by the Earl of Norwich, my Lord
Loughborough, Bernard, Gascoign, Col. Far, Squire Hales and the rest engaged in
that design at Colchester, nor Sr. John Owen, for the same endeavor in Wales,
being condemned with the said Earl of Norwich by the High Court of Justice; but
must give their names and memories their veneration.

Nor likewise the right reverend Dr. Shelden now Lord Bishop of London, and the
famous Dr. Hamond, who were a long while in restraint, and threatened with more
cruelties, at the same time, expecting to have been transported to some
foreign plantations.

Dr. John Berkenhead, who so hazardously and in so very great dangers, and
several imprisonments, asserted his Majesty's cause in its lowest extremities;
this Gentleman is so deservedly well reputed, that this mite will signify
nothing.

Sr. Marmaduke Langdale, now Lord Langdale, a Person not inferior to any of
his Majesty's Subjects for industry and personal Valor, which he for the
desence of his Sacred Majesty and his Restoration, deserves to be had in
everlasting Remembrance.

But above all, the sad visitations of the Universities deserves remembrance,
that the guilt and danger of such barbarity may make posterity to tremble at
the thought of it; being the comprehensive design of all those evils they after
perpetrated, making those Sources and Fountains of Learning and Piety, as
broken Cisterns, that should hold no water, and the place become a mere puddle
a mare mortuum, that should send forth pernicious sents, as might insect the
Kingdom.

To enumerate all those excellent persons who were forced out of their
Fellowships and other Collegiate Emoluments, and places, will require a Work of
it self, and so I pass that sad Story and beadrol, though with that due
compassion to those, who though now Aug^as stable be swept, yet cannot find the
Manger.

After the two Universities, which afforded sufferers enough to make up a
Catalog^e as big as this whole Book, the next place is due to the Martyred City
of Worcester, the Scene of ruined Loyalty, which would fill many pages with Red
Letters, whose Citizens might all be transcribed into this Cannon, who besides
their constant adherence to the Royal Cause from the first, when the honest
Mayor Mr. Soles hardly escaped a gallows, set up for him at his own door, held
out to the last for King Charles the First, not rendering without his Order, and
had the honor to entertain King Charles the Second in Fifty one, where he was
with great solemnity and greater joy proclaimed, and in that fatal defeat
suffered with him and for him, devoting their estates and lives as a ransom for
his Majesty's safety; whilst the streets at the Rebels entrance resounded with
the Peoples cries, Oh! save the King; save the King.

Sr. John Stowel a Somersetshire Gentleman, and Knight of the Bath, of a very
great estate and as much loyalty, who adhered vigourously to the King during
the War, till the surrender of Exeter, upon whose Articles he came to London,
to make his composition, where contrary to that capitulation, the Committee at
Goldsmiths-Hall tendered him the Negative Oath before any admission to compound.
He withstanding this unjust and perfidious dealing, and pleading the benefit of
the said Articles, was reported to the Parliament as a Contemner of their
Authority, and an Enemy, and thereupon committed to the Sergeant at Arms,
thence to Newgate, from whence he was brought to their High Court of Justice,
where with much ado he escaped with life, being remanded to the Tower, and all
his Estate amounting to seven or eight thousand 1. per Annum, sold by a
pretended Act of Parliament as forfeited for Treason. He now survives all those
losses and miseries, and may he like Job be rewarded trebble in the future of
his life for his constant and stout integrity.

And here I could make a record of that black Bill and List that passed for
Acts of Parliament against several of the Nobility and Gentry, by which their
estates were forfeited, and sold by Trustees thereunto appointed, for this only
fault of Loyalty; but shall forbear.

Let the Purchasers blush at their shame and folly, while honest Loyalty keeps
its countenance, and wears out the sudden braves of staring Rebellion.

I must also pass over the old Earl of Kingston, Father to the right Honorable
Lord the Marquess Dorchester, who being surprised by the Parliaments Forces,
and by them put in a Vessel disigned for Hull, was shot by some of the Kings
Forces at his passing by Gainshorough, the Rebels offering him (if the
Royalists would venture to shoot) upon the Deck to their Bullets, by which he
sell immediately.

The noble Marquesses of Winchesters Newcastle, and Worcester, deserve a more
durable Register than the scantling and shortness of this little breviary,
having divided all the sorrows of life, viz. imprisonment, distress,
banishment, deprivation of Estate, and other discommodities of those wretched
times, among them, without any Intermission of that, which weak men term
insupportable misery.

Dr. Barwick, now the Reverend De^n of Sr. Paul's, who lay Prisoner in the Tower
of London, while he was near famished, by the cruel Order of the Long
Parliament, soon after the Kings death, and was scarce able to stand, when Col.
West, the then Lieutenant, gave him his Liberty, on Parol, to render himself at
a certain time soon after, which he performed, but the Lieut, dying, his wife
set him at perfect Freedom, and gave him his Conge, it being the method of
those Tyrants, to bury men in their Prisons, unless they had that against them,
which would presently reach their Lives. And upon this Account, I hope to be
excused, if I cannot retrive other Loyal Persons from those Obscurities and
Dungeons, and the Depths of Villainy, and bring neither them, nor their Memories
into Light.

What should I mention the general calamity of the Clergy, Loyal and Orthodox,
more especially the Fathers of the Church, since nothing can be more evident to
us, and Posterity; but yet I cannot forget that most cruel Edict of Oliver,
which by restriction of their Function, nay, their particular Abilities, took
clearly away from them all hopes of sustentation and Maintenance of Life.

The Honorable Col. John Russel, Brother to the Earl of Bedford, who served
all along his Majesty in his Armies, and suffered all along afterward in the
Usurpers Prisons, being one of the first, that, upon any the least occasion of
their fear, was presently secured, and tossed from one Custody to another, till
the happy Revolution of his Majesty's Return.

Col. John and William Ashburnham, the former so well known in our Annals, both
signally Loyal and honest, were served in the same manner, and in conclusion,
sent away to remote Castles and Islands, and there debarred of any Intercourse
or Correspondence with their Friends, merely upon suspicion, as to proof of any
thing, whatever was in the bottom.

The Right Honorable, the Lord Bellasis, in the very same Predicament, no
where more resident or constant then in their custody, nor could go or travel
any where, without a Pass, or safe Conduct from the next Officer, to the place
of his Abode, for many years together, and perpetually in danger of being
betrayed out of his Life.

Sr. Humphrey Bennet, formerly a Brigadeer in the Kings Army, an eminent Person
for his Loyalty, seized, and secured as a partaker and confederate in that
unfortunate business of Col. Penruddock, at Salisbury, (being of that Country)
as aforesaid, was kept in Prison at the Tower of London, from the time of that
Rising, till Olivers next Plot in 1658. upon Sr. William Slingsby, etc. which
was near 3 years, and then brought before the High Court of Justice, with those
Gentlemen, where, after some days attendance, their preparations of his Charge
not taking with their Intentions, he was superseded from his Trial, and
remitted again to his Confinement.

For the Honor of the City of Land. S. Abr. Reynoldson, Sr. John Gaire, Ald.
Adams, Ald. Bunch, and Major Genesis Brown, who suffered a sharp and tedious
Imprisonment.

The Right Honorable, John, now Lord Viscount Mordant, Brother to the Earl of
Peterborough, who indefatigably labored in the Kings Business, being really
engaged in the matters wherewith he was accused, and came off but by one saving
voice, at his Trial before the said Court, when others not concerned at all,
were there condemned, no sooner got his Liberty by the death of Oliver, but he
was as earnestly busy as before against the Rump, and by Proclamation
commanded to render himself by such a time, or else be reputed a Traitor. He
now lives, and has seen some of them suffer the Reward of such, and is
Governor of Windsor Castle.

Mr. now, Sr. Thomas Woodcocke, a Confederate in the same Design with my Lord
Mordant, so wisely managed his Defense at the aforesaid Bar the same time, that
he was fairly acquitted by those bloody Justices, and soon after set at
Liberty, which by his Majesty's Gracious Favors is improved into Honor.

Mr. Christopher Pits, Brother to M. Pits of Hampshire, who married the Lady
Chandois; I the rather mention his Noble Family, because of the Nobleness of
this subsequent Action: He was apprehended with Mr. Garrent, and other
Citizens, for the same business of the Lord Mordant, and committed to Newgate;
after his Examination taken, they would have made use of him (having not enough
against his Life) as a witness against his Associates, and in order thereunto,
brought him down to the High Court, where he refused, and resolutely denied to
give any Evidence concerning, or against the Prisoners; whereupon, after many
vain Threats and Menaces, he was by the Court sent back to Newgate, there
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment, and fined 1000 l. which he willingly
submitted to, rather then be guilty of the Blood of his Friends, though a kind
of forcible necessity would have seemed to warrant such an Action. He continued
a Prisoner, but at large, after Olivers death, till the Coming of the General,
when he forsook that Station, and recommenced his Freedom, with the Kingdoms.

Mr. William Garrent, who was tried before the same Court, for the same
business, escaped, as is generally believed, through the want of that Evidence
they relied upon from Mr Pits, with much ado he was quitted, and soon after set
at Liberty.

Henry Friar, who was one of those also, was condemned at the said Court, and
was brought afterward to West-Smithfield, where in the Rounds a Gibbet was
erected, upon the Ladder, and ready to die, the Reprieve was produced, and he
carried back again to the Tower, whence, not long after, he was dismissed.

John Sumner, and Oliver Allen, the like, the one drawn on a Hurdle to
Bishopsgate, and the other to Grace-Church street, the places of their
appointed Execution, but were both there reprieved, and afterward freed.

Sr. George Booth, now Lord Delameres who in 1659. rose against the Rump, and
was proclaimed Traitor, with Major Genesis Egerton, Col. Worden, and Sr. Thomas
Middleton, being defeated near Northwich in Cheshire, fled in disguise to
Newport Pagnel, and was there taken, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London,
and soon after his Estate was Ordered to be sequestered, and sold; and
Preparations to be made for his Trial: but upon the division of his, and their
fore-gotten Spoils, betwixt that Remnant at Westminster, and their Commander
Lambert, which brought about, through the Prudence and Loyalty of our Noble
General, the Readmission of the Secluded Members, he was set at Liberty, and
his Estate freed likewise, which is now mounted to the Honorable Revenue of a
Barony.

Sr. Thomas Middleton, engaged in the same Quarrel, after this Defeat, was
forced to flee, leaving his Sons to defend Chirke Castle, which rendered soon
after to Col. Zanchy, but the happy Revolution aforesaid, restored him, and his
Estate together.

I do here also leave out all Persons, who condemned by Courts Martial, with
others that suffered, or alone were afterward reprieved, because it is an
undertaking of so wide a circumference, that is impossible, without much Error
and Uncertainty, particularly, I pass by the Names of those, who were kept so
long in Durance at Exeter, and were afterward sent away to the Barbados. for
the Rising with Col. Penruddock, because of the Prosixity of that Roll, and I
would not be partial.

Lastly, It were an infinite Task to particularize the several Sequestrations,
Plunderings, and Rapines committed on the Kings good Subjects; the Product of
which Spoils amounted to a vast sum of Treasure, and might be sister to the
Public Faith-Money, as Violence and Fraud are seldom asunder. But what is
herein defective, would indeed be redundant, and therefore I refer every
Particular of those sufferers to the General Day of Account, when they shall
receive full Recompense.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader,
THere is now Published, the Reconciler of the Bible Enlarged: wherein above
three thousand seeming Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament are
fully and plainly Reconciled: being a very useful Work for all such as desire
to understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto Salvation. And sold by Simon
Miller at the star in S. Paul's Church Yard.

Courteous Reader, These Books following, are Printed for Simon Miller, or Sold
by him at the Star in St. Paul's Church Yard.
Small Folio.
THe Reconciler of the Bible Enlarged: wherein above Three Thousand seeming
Contradictions throughout the Old and New Testament, are fully and plainly
reconciled. A like work never yet extant, and may serve for the Explanation of
the most difficult Places of the Bible: being useful for all such as desire to
understand the Sacred Scriptures aright unto Salvation. Humbly presented to the
Censure of the Sons of the Prophets. By J. T. and T. M. Ministers of Gods Holy
Word and Sacraments.

Astrology restored; or an Introduction to the Language of the Stars, in four
Books, by William Ramsey, Gent.

The Civil Wars of Spain, in the Reign of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of
Germany, and King of that Nation, wherein our Late unhappy Differences are
paralelled in many Particulars.

A General History of Scotland, from the Year 767. to the death of King James,
etc. by David Hume of Godscroft.

The History of this Iron Age, wherein is set down the true state of Europe, as
it was in the Year 1500. also the Causes of all the wars and Commotions that
have happened to this present time; with the memorable Sieges and Battles,
together with the lively Effigies of the most Renowned Persons.

Mr. Paul Baine his Practical Commentary on the whole Epistle of S. Paul to the
Ephesians,

The most pleasant and profitable History of Francion, wherein all the Vices
that usually attend youth are plainly laid open, that the Misfortunes of some
may teach others to abandon Vice; done into English by a Person of Honor.

Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature, being the sum and substance
of Natural Philosophy, first designed by Doctor John Weeker, and now much
enlarged by Dr. R. Read.

The Queen of Arragon, a Play in Folio.

In Quarto Large.
Jo. Barkley his Argenis, Translated by Sr. Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late
Majesty's special Command; with Figures, or without.

Quarto small.
An Experimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz.

Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, etc. by John Nicholson, Minister of
the Gospel.

The Anatomy of Mortality: by George Stroud.

Attersols three Treatises.

Universal Husbandry improved, or diverse rare and choice Experiments and
Secrets in Husbandry, Gardening and Planting, with diverse Rarities of Gabriel
Plat, and others, by Sam. Hartlib.

Aynsworth on the Cantic.

Gralle against Appolonius.

A Treatise of Civil Policy, etc. By Sam. Rutherford Professor of Divinity of
St. Andrews in Scotland.

Politic and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government,
containing the Birth, Increase, Decay of Monarchies, the Carriage of Princes
and Magistrates.

Mr. Pinchin his Meritorious Price of man's Redemption, cleared.

Astrology Theologized, showing what Nature and Influence the Stars and Planets
have over men, and how the same may be diverted and avoided.

Wells his Souls Progress.

Christ tempted, the Devil conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the Fourth
Chapter of St. Matthews Gospel: By John Gumbleden, Minister of the Gospel.

The Saints Society.

D. Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his Body of Divinity.

The Reasons of the dissenting Brethren, concerning the Presbyterian
Government, together with the Answer of the Assembly of Divines.

The Doctrine of man's Redemption, by Edward Holioke.

Of the Doctrine of the Church of England, sweetly harmonizing with the
Confessions of Faith of all the Protestant Reformed Churches.

The Philosophical Touchstone; or Observations upon Sr. Kenelme Digby's
Discourses of the Nature of Bodies, and of the reasonable Soul, by Alexander
Ross.

The Saints Triangles of Dangers, deliverances, and Duties, by Nathanael
Whiting Minister of the Gospel.

The Confession of Faith, of all the Congregational Churches of England, agreed
upon at the Savoy, 1659.

An History of Angels, being a Treatise of our Communion and War with them: by
Henry Lawrence.

The Description of the Universal Quadrant, etc. by Tho. Stirrup, Mathem.

The whole Art of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching: collected out of the
choycest Italian and German Authors, by Alex. Brown, Practitioner.

Several Pieces of Mr. Edward Bagshaw, Student of Christs-Church.

1. Exercitationes duae de Presbyt. and Episcop.

2. A Discourse of Christ and Antichrist.

3. Signs of the Times, or Prognostics of Future Judgments, with the way how
to prevent them.

Large Octavo.
A Treatise of the Divine Promises: by Edw. Liegh Esquire.

The Rights of the Crown of England, as it is established by Law, by Edward
Bagshaw Esquire, of the Inner Temple.

Florus Anglious, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens since
the Conquest, cut in brass.

The Life and Reign of King Charles, from his Birth to his Does, bp Lambert Wood.

The Night-search, the second part: by H. Mill.

A view of the Jewish Religion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies.

Useful Instructions for these Evil times, held forth in Twenty two Sermons, bp
Nicholas Lockier, Provost of Eaton College.

The N^llity of Church Censures, or Excommunication, not of Divine Institution,
but a mere humane Invention: Written by the Famous Tho. Erastus, and never
before Englished.

Merry Drollery in two Parts, being a Collection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs,
and Witty Drolleries, intermixed with pleasan Catches.

Small Octavo.
Edw. Waterhouse Esquire, His Discourse of Piety and Charity.

Panacea, or the Universal Medicine; being a Discourse of the admirable Nature
and Virtues of Tobacco, by Dr. Everard, and others.

A View and Defense of the Reformation of the Church of England, very useful in
these times.

Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his Antidore against Popery; published on purpose to
prevent the Delusions of the Priests and Jesuits, who are now very busy among
us.

Vinditiae Gratiae Sacramentalis duobus Tractatulis comprehensae. 1. De
Efficacia Sacramentorum in genere. 2, De Efficacia Baptismi, quantum ad
parvulos quibus praesigitur.

Epistola Reverendissimi Patris Johannis Davenanti nuper Episcopi
Sarisburiensis.

Dr. R. Record his Urinal of Physic.

Rare Verities: or the Cabinet of Venus unlockt, and her Secrets laid open.

Ovid de Ponto, in English.

The Loves of Clerrio and Lozio, a Romance.

Herberts Devotions.

Mr. Knowles his Rudiment of the Hebrew Tongue.

Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the
Conqueror, to the death of the Late King.

Lingua, or the Combat of the Tongue: and five senses for superiority; a
serious Comedy, acted by Oliver Cromwell the Late Usurper.

The Spirits Touchstone, being a clear Discovery how a man may certainly know
whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not.

The poor man's Physician and Chyrurgion, now Printing.

Physical Rarities, containing the most choice Receipts in Physic and
Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases Incident to man's Body: by R.
Williams. To which is added the Physical Mathematics, by Hermes Tris-megistus.

The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of VVat Tylers Rebellion.

The Raconian Catechism in English.

The Life of that incomparable man Faustus Socinus Senensis, described by a
Polonian Knight.

The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the Clothing of England.

Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations.

Vigerius Precepts of Idiotismes.

Grotii Poemata.

Three Books of M. Matthews, Minister at Swansey in South Wales.

Duodecimo.
Dr. Smiths Practice of Physic.

Proverbs, English, French, Dutch, Italian and Spanish, all Englished, and
Alphabetically digested.

The London Distiller, or the whole Art of Distillations laid open.

Friar Bacon his Discovery of the Miracles of Art, Nature and Magic.

The Grammar War.

Posselius Apothegmes.

Fasciculus Florum.

Crashaws Visions.

The Juniper Lecture.

Helvicus Colloquies.

The torments of Hell shaken; or a discourse with many proofs, showing that
there not is a punishment after this Life for any to endure that shall never
end, by Sam. Richardson.

The understanding Christians duty, often to commemorate the death and Passion
of our Lord and Savior Jesus; with the necessary preparatives thereunto.

The Christian Soldier, his Combat with the three Arch Enemies of Mankind, the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil.

Seasonable Advice to the Apprentices of the Honorable City of London,
touching their duty to God, and their Masters.

Heinsius de Crepundiis.

The History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperor of Muscovia, with the
Manner and Fashions of the People of that Country.

Drexelius his School of Patience.

Drexelius his right Intention of every ones Action.

A School or Nurture for Children or the Duty of Children to Parents, very
useful for all that intend to bring up their Children in the Fear of God.

A Help to Prayer, being the duty of every man and Woman that intends to be
saved.

Viginti Quarto.
The New Testament.

The third Part of the Bible.

Sr. Richard Bakers Meditations and Prayers for every day of the Week.

All the Works of that Great and Glorious Monarch and Martyr King Charles the
first, Collected into one Volumn.

The London Chanticleers, a Play.


