Controversy Ended: OR, The Sentence given by George Fox himself against
himself and Party in the persons of his Adversaries, ratified and aggravated by
W. Penn (their ablest Advocate even in his Huffing Book of the Vindication of
G. F. etc.

BEING A Defense of that little Book Entitled, The Spirit of the Quakers Tried.

HERE It is manifested out of their Writings, that the Leading- Quakers do but
equivocally confess the Divinity, and plainly deny the Humanity of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Mediator between God and Men.

Also, from eye and ear-witnesses, is related the Divine Honor some give to
others of them.

And no marvel; for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light.

2 Cor. 11.13, 14. Who is a Liar but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ?
He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son.

1 John 2.22. London, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle
near the Royal Exchange in Corahil; and at the same sign first Shop without
Temple Bar, 1673.

Controversy Ended: OR, The Sentence given by George Fox himself, against
himself and Party in the persons of his Adversaries, ratified and aggravated by
W. Penn, (their ablest Advocate) even in his Huffing Book of the Vindication of
G. F. etc.
IT cannot seem strange to any judicious Man that considers the nature of the
Argument I undertook against the Spirit of the Quakers in G. F. that I should
doubt of Mr. Penn's being able to satisfy his Conscience in its Vindication;
because. I looked upon him as a Man of some Learning and Judgment more than
others of that Party, and as conscientious as many.

But behold! a Book is at length come forth under his Name, and bearing the
Title of A Vindication, etc. Which having considered, I must confess I find my
self mistaken in the opinion I had of him, both in reference to his Judgment
and Conscience. My reasons for such change of my mind, I shall in these Papers
produce. And first, His address to his Reader challenges some short remarks.

1. He will have me to be the most unjust of any that ever yet wrote against
them, because (says he) he draws a general charge from a particular failing. I
answer, He should first have answered the Reasons I gave why I did so. But do
they not generally account G. F. most eminently filled with that Spirit wherein
they boast? Did he not write this Book in the Name of the Quakers? Have they
not defended it? And does not W. P. here in their Names undertake the defense
of it? And in such a case I am justied by W. P. himself, see page 136.

2. He faults my generosity, because I wrote against G. F. at a juncture (says
he) when he might understand him to be at America.

Answ. Methinks it savours of arrogance, as if the Voyages of their great
Prophet must be as generally taken notice of, as if he were some Prince or
Cardinal.

3. He suggests the unseasonableness of the opposition, just when they should
make the best of an unexpected toleration.

Answ. And would they not have cried out with more color of reason, if it had
been done at a time when they were under sufferings? And if he tells us (says
W. P.) that he had no mind to add to our troubles, he deals deceitfully: for
his self-safety, and not charity to us was hinderance.

Answ. It Is no marvel that Mr. P. errs in judging men's hearts, when he fails so
grossly in things before his eyes, as I shall soon show. But the Bookseller can
tell him, the little Book was so well approved of by Men of Learning and
Authority, (persons I know not) that it might have been printed in the most
dangerous times.

4. But it is a very grievous thing to them to want my Name, and no simall
enquiry have they made after it: which ingenuous Persons would have scorned to
have done: But I persuade my self, I gave satisfying Reasons to all
unprejudiced Readers why I concealed it; and W. P's Book has justified them:
for he has at a venture given me a new Name, and ascribed to me what may seem
odious under it. If they set their Names to their Books to have praise of men,
I seek it not.

Next, he is much offended at a quondam Friend of his, who was so kind as to
give away some six-penny Books to those he knew would not buy them, and yet
were concerned to read them: A notable Crime in another Man, but a virtue in a
Quaker! I wish they would practice it in reference to their Vindication. But he
bestows some foul Epithites upon G. F. as Knave, Puppy, etc. Answ. O the
blindness of Self-love! that Mr. P. should thus expose a man's name for words
spoken in a free manner, and privately to his Acquaintance, and that after he
had recalled those terms, and promised to forbear them for the future; and in
the mean time himself to be such a proficient in abusive Terms and Phrases, as
if he were Doctor of the Chair among the Satyrists, save that he mixeth some
Billingsgate language withal. I shall here present the Reader with some of his
sweet language; if I should transcribe it all, I dare say, it would take up
more Paper then I intend to write in the whole.

Measure his Book by the Title, The Spirit of Truth Vindicated against that of
Error and Envy, unseasonably manifested, [as if there were a season for the
manifestation of Error and Envy] in a late malicious Libel. He designs to
mischief; owl-light way of stabbing men, or deceiving people; -- great
injustice and deceit; Mongrel-Socinian; stupid or malicious; more Mohammedan
than Christian; Serpentine Associates; a lie, plain lie, arrant lie, palpably
belie; idle Boaster, indeed a very Dreamer, his vulterous Eye; malicious
Comments; his own vexed, base, murdering Spirit; mere novice; -- wickedly says
him; weakness, folly, malice, and untruth; Saturnal Dreams; so overrun with
the lazy, etc. left his Wits behind in exchange; Pseudo-Linguist; brawling
Associate; to will mischief was present, etc. [Why may not he profane
Scripture to abuse men?
This miserable Man; smaller degree of distraction: O stupendous folly! such
creeping Spirits; how dark and vile the man is; the poor man has an irksom way
of telling his Tale, etc. wonted folly; so absurd -- better Argument out of
Bedlam, Sacrilege and Ingratitude, I almost tremble to think on; brazon'd,
language of brutish malice, such Bats as himself, fools himself, frothy spirit,
peevish, Antichristian, etc.

If he say that I have applied the like opprobious tenns to G. F. as False
Prophet, Liar, Impostor, Falsity, Forgery; I must tell him; 1. That the nature
of my Argument required those terms; I could not express that which was
necessary to be said without them, or such like. If G. F. be a Prophet, he must
be either a true one or a false one. 2. G. F. supplied me with them, bestowing
those, or the like, upon his Adversaries upon unjust accounts. But I appeal to
any prudent man, whether W. P. might not, with greater advantage to his
Apology, have omitted his many reproachful and virulent expressions. Besides, I
doubt not but to make it as evident as the Sun at noon, that W. P. is himself
guilty of those very Crimes which he falsely charges upon me, and in those very
Instances.

Before I came to the main Argument of my Epistle to the Quakers, I addressed
my self to them by way of Introduction, wherein I gave some reasons of that
manner of Argument which I intended. This Mr. P. first falls foul upon, and by
the honesty and discretion he uses here, we may judge of his performance in
the whole Treatise.

In his first and second Sections, the Reader may take notice how greedily he
catches at the commendations I give of some of them: I said there were
honest-hearted amongst them; and he says, He is pleased to allow us, at least
a great many among us, to be honest-hearted; It may as well be understood of
some few. Is he not a modest man? If his Neighbor say, Honest-hearted, he will
have it, at least, a great many honest-hearted. I said, Whilst some of you
excel in many things, etc. But W. P. (like a man that will rob his Neighbor
for praise rather than go without it) says thus, Sect. 2. If we excel in all
things, as he confesses: Here W. P. has committed a double falsity. 1. He puts
all for many; and 2. the Quakers indefinitely, for some of them.
I have looked among the Printers Errata's, whether he had not corrected all by
many, but find no such thing: And if I should grant him that error (without
good reason) yet the other piece of falsity, viz. putting we the Quakers in
general for some of them, will abide by him, to the gross injury of me, and the
shame of himself. Does he call me idle Boaster, and at the same time vainly
boast of the praise I never gave them?

In his third Sect. He calls those praises, (which by falsifying my words he
wrings out) paying them their due.

In his fourth Sect. he says of me, Nor does he less then palpably belie us in
telling the World, we condemn all virtuous Persons whatsoever, if not of our
own Persuasion. And yet I cannot understand his Answer to be less than an
implicit concession of the Charge, Sure I am G. F. denies the Worship and
whole Religion of all Sects that differ from the Quakers. Mystery, Epist.
It seems I belie them with a matter of truth, which, because it is not
plausible, W. P. would palliate. You may see what he is resolved on.

He says, Sect. 5. Christ's Person (which he (meaning me) prejudicially says
we deny) is, etc. My words are these, But you seem at least to deny his Person.
Is there no difference between denying, and seeming to deny? But I shall have
occasion to speak further of this matter. Only the Reader may take notice all
along of his great honesty in quoting my words. But this is a trivial fault in
comparison with that which follows.

W. Penn, Sect. 8. But (says he) he promises for the future to decline this
way of proceeding, and withal, to avoid the use of both Scripture and Reason,
etc. I will not (says he) give him the lie, but I hope he will not say I am
uncivil, if I tell him, He has already ^^ntradicted himself, and broke his word
with us; for within eight lines, he that promised to relinquish all personal
reflection, -- lays to our charge, etc. And in p. 92. he has it up again, and
gives me the lie in plain English, which he says here he will not give me. He
words it thus; First, Then he has broke his word with us, which in plainer
English is, he has told us a lie, in assuring us, at the beginning, he would
deal with us neither from Scripture nor Reason, and yet undertakes both. Now
Reader, have patience to hear my words, which run thus; But it is not my design
at this time to take a full view of you: And indeed I have found it very
fruitless to deal with you by way of Reason and Scripture for your leading men,
etc. It follows in my next page, I will not therefore now deal with you so much
by Arguments drawn from Reason and Scripture, and depending purely upon the
understanding and mind, but by such Arguments, whose evidence depends mostly
upon the outward Senses. Now let the sober Reader judge on whom the lie is to
be fixed! and whether I have not sufficient reason to tell him, He is both
uncivil and unchristian. Behold here the infallible Minister! the Censor of the
World, and of other men's foul language! Behold, the Spirit of Truth vindicated!
Let me beg of thee (Reader) to read his Book: See how he treats me, and what
himself deserves! Acknowledge the special hand of our Lord Jesus in giving up
this man to these shameful failings in the very entrance of his work.

Page 15. Upon occasion of my savine they look upon themselves as led by an
infallible Spirit, this plain Englishman takes up his Post, and will defend
this: That God's Holy an^ Vn-erring Spirit, is, or should be, the proper Judge
of Truth, Rule of Faith, and Guide of Life among men. I commend him for his
wit: I have charged G. F. with about fifty such failures, as for which he
condemns his Adversaries to be perverters of Scripture, and consequently,
Deluders and Blasphemers. W. P. here in vindication of him, enters into a long
discourse of two and thirty pages, to prove from Scripture, Reason, and humane
Authority, That G. F. is, or, if he is not, should be led by an infallible
Spirit; for his Hypothesis is no other way to his purpose.

1. I do not only willingly grant, but contend for it, That there was in G. F.
at that time when he wrote his Mystery, etc. a Conscience, which had he
hearkened to, he should thereby have been a Law to himself, and it would not
have suffered him to be guilty of such things as he condemns in others.

2. I grant also that this Rule is infallible, viz. That he that judges
another for any thing, is inexcusable, if he do the same thing himself.

I grant, 3. that God is the Author of this Conscience, Light, or Knowledge.

4. That G. F. might have known the Rule aforesaid by a good use and
improvement of his own understanding! but I suppose he came to the knowledge of
it by some outward Teaching or Tradition, especially by the Scriptures.

And so, 5. the Spirit of God may in a true and good sense be said to have
taught G. F. that Rule, because it inspired those that preached and wrote that
Rule in the Scriptures.

6. That the Spirit of God was ready to have assisted him in walking according
to that Rule.

7. That it may be, God did by his Power and Providence work upon him toward
obedience.

Lastly, Perhaps the Spirit of God did at that time when he was about to
disobey, suggest to him his Duty and Rule: But there is little reason to think
so, because that Rule was sufficiently know to G. F. by the means aforesaid;
and God is not wont to give that special Gift, but to his humble Servants and
Friends, or to those whom he will employ upon some special business in the
World. And if he had such a suggestion, the more notoriously wicked was he to
disobey so great a Light.

Now if any judicious Reader will take pains to consider the 25 Texts W. P. has
quoted, (and he may add 25 more to them) with their Contexts, I am persuaded he
will find them every one to intend some of the Cases I have mentioned.

Now let us see if we can understand what W. P. intends by the terms of his
Position; for we must understand him, as he understands the Scriptures, not
Literally, but Mystically.

1. We are to know that by God's Holy and Vnerring-Spirit, he means (if he
means as the leading Quakers) neither Hypostasis nor Person, nor any thing
else, but God himself; who is the Father.

2. By Judge of Truth, Rule of Faith, Guide of Life, he means, That God does
immediately teach G. F. and every man, to judge infallibly of all Truth, what
is to be believed, and what to be practiced. [For otherwise it is not
intelligible, That God should be the Judge of Truth, etc. among men.]

And therefore 3. that the Scripture is (as he says page 38.) much like the
shadow of the true Rule, which may give us some ground to guess what the Rule
if self is. In the next page, he says in effect, That the Teachings of God,
are like the knowledge of the Princes Will and Secrets, viva Voce, or
immediately; which he that has (and every man ought to have) heeds not so much
the same when he meets it in print, that is in the Scriptures: They are like a
Gazette to a Privy Counselor. But he says, That the eternal Spirit, [that is,
It had been to be desired, that he had not failed in his English in this place.
these immediate Teachings] to be superior to those Writings. So that when G.
F. says, How can they but delude People that are not infallible? This is to be
heeded more than any sentence in Scripture, and is superior to those Writings.

4. He means by his Position, that men are to be guided into Truth, and Faith,
and good Life, immediately, in opposition to their endeavors, studying the
Scriptures, setting themselves to Prayer, Reasoning, Preaching, and the like;
that is, such of these as are performed by us, which he calls, ( p. 84.)
Running in our own Wills, poring, beating of our Brains, and daily striving.

Now if this be his meaning, (as manifestly it is) then let any man, that has
read any of those Authors Books, tell me whether he thinks that any one of
those he mentions was of his mind, that is, Tollet, or Maldonate, Beza, or Dr.
Hammond, or Hutchinson, Socinus, Selichtingius or Crellius? Did they not all
abhor that Doctrine? It comes to this, That God has made men with faculties
capable of believing and understanding what the Will of their earthly Superior
is, by the means of Ministers, Messengers, Proclamations, Writings, etc. and of
obeying his Will heartily without immediate assistance. But if our Heavenly
Superior will have us to know or do his Will, he must tell us immediately
himself, he must go along with us, and lead us step by step, or else he must
expect no Service, Duty, or Obedience from us at all. The truth is, This
Doctrine of the necessity of God's immediate Teaching, does overthrow the
Mediatorship of the Man Christ Jesus our Lord, and quite subvert the Gospel;
for mediate and immediate, are directly contradictory.

Besides, still we have gained nothing by this doctrine; for if men do not
hearken to the Un-erring Judge, or mistake him, or resist him against
knowledge, refusing to be led by him, they fail as much as if they had no such
Immediate Guide, but a Mediate Guide and Direction. Let Mr. Pen be the Example;
who even in the beginning of his Book, has (notwithstanding his immediate and
infallible Guide) run into five or six such palpable Falsities and Calumnics,
as I am consident the Cobbler of Gloucester would never have been guilty of; nor
any man else, that had not been transported with pride, rashness, and revenge.
What has he gained then by his immediate Guide, which another man (that knows
by Nature or Tradition he ought to speak truth) is not equally capable of?

But why does this Apologist spend so many Pages upon this Point, and take no
notice of my arguing in the following Lines, which he says, I had obliged my
self against? Must it be past over therefore? I am persuaded (to use his words)
he was confounded at it. It was to this effect; We by your own confession have
the Light within, or the infallible Guide as well as you, why then is not our
Doctrine as true as yours? You answer, That we are not obedient, we are in the
customs of the World, etc. and therefore not to be heeded. Thus you prove your
selves to be in the Truth, and us to be in Error, not by Divine Reason, and
Holy Scripture, but by the high opinion you have of your selves, and your low
opinion of others. And it indeed they acknowledge that there are virtuous
Persons that are of a contrary persuasion to them, and none but who are guided
by an infallible Spirit, then they are no more certain than other men, and we
need still an infallible Judge. I add, If every man has, the I have a measure
of infallible Light, the least measure whereof convinces of sin, especially
gross sins, such as Malice, Envy, Lying, Murdering-Spirit, etc. which W. P.
imputes to me: But I am so far from having any such convictions that on the
contrary, my Conscience hears me witness of a hearty love to Truth and their
Persons, in what I have done, and am a doing: Therefore, if their Doctrine be
true, his Imputation is false; if his Imputation be true, their Doctrine is
false. But enough of this.

Having now in this Introduction given the Reader a proof of W. P's faculty in
accusing, meek language, faithfulness in representing my words and sense,
modesty in praising himself and Party, evading of that which is weighty
confidence in denying what they are charged with, and his sense of the Spirits
guidance; We are pretty well prepared to make a conjecture of what we are to
expect from him, in the handling of the main Argument; which I think fit first
to give a short account of. And I must tell you, that it is Argumentum ad
Hominem, an Argument against G. F. formed out of his own words, and runs thus:
He that is not Infallible, in a Deluder:
But G. Fox is not infallible,
Therefore G. F. is a Deluder.


The Major Proposition (as they call it) is expressly proved by that Quotation
out of G. F's Book, where he faith, How can ye be Ministers of the Spirit, if
ye be not infallible? And, How can they but delude people, that are not
infallible? And again G. F. faith, Is is not Blasphemy for you to Speak and
Preach that which ye have not received from Heaven? Whence I further Argue thus:

He that Speaks and Preaches that which he has not received from Heaven, is a
Blasphemer: But G. F. Speaks and Preaches that which he has not received from
Heaven, therefore, G. F. is a Blasphemer.

It remains now that I prove the Minor Proposition of the former Argument;
namely, G. Fox is not infallible: and that also I shall do out of G. F's words,
thus: He that so quotes Scripture, The instances of these things out of G. F's
Book, are to be seen in my Epistle, p. 5, 6.
as that he expresses the Pronoun Ye, where it is to be understood, or renders
the Greek Preposition (...), by, with, or among, or to; or puts He for We; or
leaves one something that ought to be expressed, or adds to Scripture words; He
that does any one of these things, or that which is manifestly equivalent, such
an one is a Perverter or Corruptor of Scripture, and not infallible: But G. F.
does some one of these things, or that which is manifestly equivalent;
therefore G. F. is not infallible. The same medium proves the Minor of the
second Argument, viz. G. F. Speaks and Preaches that which he has not received
from Heaven: Thus, he that perverts or corrupts the Scripture in any of the
forementioned Instances, or one that is manifestly equivalent, Speaks and
Preaches that which he has not received from Heaven. But G. F. does so pervert
the Scripture, Therefore G. F. Speaks and Preaches that which he has not
received from Heaven. The Minor of this, and of the former Prosyllogism,
namely, that G. F. does so pervert the Scripture, was proved in my Epistle, by
fifty Instances out of G. F's Book; The Mystery of the great Whore.
and I appeal to every unprejudiced Reader, whether there be not as much weight
in every one of them, as in some of those, for which G. F. charge his
Adversaries with perverting of Scripture? And whether there be not in many of
them greater weight than in any of those? And if it should prove that but two
or three of those fifty Instances are full to my purpose, it would be enough to
prove what I have undertaken, namely, That G. F. is, according to the true
sense of his own words, a Deluder and Blasphemer.

I have been forced to this way of syllogyzing, that Mr. P's fallacious way of
handling my Argument may more readily appear; though I believe the common
people did understand it as well (if not better) in that vulgar way, wherein I
proposed it in my Epistle.

But to return; The evidence of all the Premises, is matter of Fact, obvious to
the eyes of every man that can but read English, and discern one word or phrase
from another, or when he finds more or less in any Sentence; for what can be
lighter than the adding of a Pronoun to a Verb, where it must be understood.

But I must not go too fast; though my Argument proves G. F. to be a Deluder of
People, and a Blasphemer, and so a Liar; yet it does not prove him to be a
false Prophet, or Impostor: therefore I added that large (and indeed
blasphemous) Testimony of Solomon Eccles, who says, Woe [G. Fox] is a Prophet
indeed, and has been faithful in the Lords business from the beginning: It was
said of Christ, That he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and
the World knew him not: So it may be said of this true Prophet, whom John said
he was not. I added also the Quakers common Principle, which does not permit
any one to be of the Ministry, (as they call it) but Him or Her that has an
immediate Revelation, or a Prophet. Now if G. F. be a Prophet, and a Prophet
indeed, not only of the Ministry, but the most eminent therein, and the
Patriarch of the Quakers; I suppose they will not deny that writing to all the
Worlds, in defense of Religion, is Speaking, or Preaching, or equivalent.
and if he be a Deluder and Blasphemer, even when he Speaks and Preaches, then
it follows roundly, that G. F. is a false Prophet, or an Impostor. This is the
substance of that Argument which Mr. P. undertook to overthrow. Let us now see,
how he has acquitted himself in that warfare.

First, He does not charge me with one word of false quotation, (that I
remember) either out of Scripture, of G. F's Writings, so that I take it for
granted, that the quotations are all true and genuine. 2. He grants that G. F.
is a Prophet, or sent of God, by his eternal Spirit, to turn people from
Darkness to Light, p. 67. 3. He does not deny, at least for the most part, but
that what I have ascribed to G. F. as Scripture words quoted by him, is such,
and consequently distinguished from G. F's Paraphrases, Explications, or
Inferences. But he does deny, 1. That G. F. his affirming things to be true,
which are false, and false which are true, Here this great Linguist has forgot
to write good English, that is his Mother Tongue.
to be obvious to their eyes or senses: That is, He denies that G. F. his
putting them for him, ( Col. 3.10.) thereby changing the Antecedent, with for
in, ( Ephess. 2.6) the corruption he blames in others; Conscience for Thoughts,
( Romans 2.15.) God for Lord, ( Romans 14.9) God for Christ, ( Col. 3.16.) and so
of the rest; He denies, I say, that these and the like falsities in G. F's
quotations of Scripture are obvious to his senses: and yet 1. they are words
written, and therefore proper objects of sense; and 2. the change of the words,
(which is the falsity in this case) is in his answers, not denied, but excused.
So that this his first Answer comes to this, That W.P. does deny that to be
obvious to his sense, which he reads and acknowledges by excusing. And if this
answer may serve his turn, I must confess I am non-plust; for when I have shown
an Object of sight to a man's eyes by noonday light, and when he perceives it,
and acknowledges it by manifest implication: If he still persist to deny it
expressly, I cannot help it, nor I think any man in the World. I may well be
said to fetch Arguments out of Bedlam, (as he says) If I should prosecute such
a man any further. -- But for the sake of some that will believe their Sense
and Reason, I will proceed.

2. He utterly denies that such falsity, as I have spoken of, renders G. F.
either a false Prophet or Impostor; Liar he does not deny. Now, 1. I must
confess I have not so subtle a wit as to put a difference between a lying
Prophet and a false Prophet, and if my Argument will serve to prove G. F. a
lying Prophet, I will not contend, whether the name of Impostor be proper for
him, but use it without scruple till I be better informed concerning it. 2. Let
it be considered, what it is that W. P. denies, and it will amount to as much
as if he had confessed it. For he denies that such falsities or changes of Words
and Phrases, (in citing Scripture) as G. F. by his infallible Spirit, calls
perverting and corrupting of Scripture, are such; which is all one as to say,
that G. F. is not infallible, and if he be not infallible, he is judged by
himself to be a Deluder and Blasphemer. Now has not W. P. vindicated G. F. to
purpose? Or, has he not, under color of vindicating him, condemned him, and
that with the most opprobious terms he could devise.

This that I say is very manifest, so that if I would spend my time, or the
Readers, so unprofitably, I might here transcribe almost all that he says as
any way pertinent to the Argument, and all his vilifying Speeches on that
account, and retort them upon G. F. to whom they do in truth belong, and not to
me. For though I have in some instances imputed faultiness to him for small
variations from Scripture words, because I saw that those variations
countenanced some error; yet I am confident, it would never have entered into
my head so to do, unless I had first found him blaming his Adversaries for
perverting Scripture upon far slighter, yea, and ridiculous accounts.

Might I not here tell G. F. as W. P. tells me? (p. 50.) Had he not been void
of all sense himself, and reason too, he would never have suffered so much
weakness and untruth, to pass the Press without correction. And (p. 21.) That
no man in that compass, could have manifested more weakness, folly, malice, and
untruth, (as well in defending of his own, as in opposing our Principles) then
G. F. has done in his Mystery of the Whore. Witness the quotations before
mentioned, and W. P. Again, (p. 52.) with a little variation; But that a man
should make 22 corrections of so many Texts of Scripture corrupted by the
Translators, and twelve or thirteen of them to depend upon the rendering of the
Greek Particle (...), in, and not otherwise, befits no man that loves to be
profitably employed, but it therefore suits G. F. which is so overrun with,
etc. That on Shipboard (a kind of public place, or else I should not mention
it) he suffers (as the Passengers inform) elder men than himself, and Prophets
too, to minister to him in the lowest Offices, such as untying and pulling off
his Shoes, etc. But how should Mr. Pen know that I am so overrun with the
lazy? Did his infallible Spirit reveal it to him? for otherwise he does but
guess who I am. Here he scorns me with saturnal Dreams: See the tender
Conscience of this Quaker! He dare not use the word Saturn, when it is a mere
signification of a certain day in the week, as John or Thomas is of a man; but
when if serves to abuse his Neighbor, he can use it without scruple.

Again, p. 53. I look upon it (says W. P.) as conceited and presumptuous, for
any man to undertake what he cannot prove, and not less base to affirm a man
miscites, perverts, and corrupts Scripture, when he renders the genuine sense
of it. Had Mr. P. so soon forgotten what he had read in the Page immediately
foregoing? (Epist. p. 6.) Or, Does he think that Destroy ye this Temple, is not
the genuine sense of Destroy this Temple? is this to vindicate G. F. to render
him base? And may not Mr. Pen (p. 62.) confess himself troubled, [as well for
G. F. as for me] not at his great skill, but folly? When he finds him asking
his Adversaries, so like a Critic, Where does the Scripture speak of humane,
the word Humane? And will not W. P's words, p. 6, serve pertinently against G.
F. viz: Certainly then this word Humane, is not of such dangerous consequence,
nor inconsonant to Scripture Language, as this idle and ignorant person would
render it. But I must hasten. And yet give me leave a little to borrow Mr. P's
pathetick figure of speaking, p. 80. thus: And that which is more to be
wondered at, this miserable man, even while he denies G. F. to be a false
Prophet or Impostor, does manifestly assert him to be a Deluder and Blasphemer.
I heartily pity the man, and am really afraid he has overcharged the strength
of his brain; for with me such manifest contradiction is but a smaller degree
of distraction. O stupendous folly! Thus does Mr. P. treat his Adversary.

These passages, out of many more of the same complexion, I have taken out of
W. P's vindication of G. F. from the first instance of Scripture mis-recited
(in his language corrupted) taken from John 1.9. which may be by me applied to
them according to truth; but are by W. P. to me, by abuse of my Words and
Person, as may casily be perceived by any intellgent Reader. But that which is
matter of wonder (if any thing be so in this Author) is, That he spends near
two and thirty pages upon this Head, and concerning the Light, and not one word
(that I can perceive) whereby G. F. is any way vindicated from my chief
exception; which lay in this, That every man whom the Light lights, is not of
necessity or effectually enlightened: But G. F. reads it, Every man that comes
into the World is enlightened. I added, for explanation of my sense, ( Romans
2.4.) That the goodness of God leads -- to repentance those that are
impenitent, and not led to repentance. I added moreover, Mat. 5.15. and Luke
11.33. and 36. but of this Mr. P. has deep silence. He spends near 16 pages
about the translation and reference of (...), coming, whether to Man, or to the
Light; and about the translation of (...), lights or enlightneth; which were
transiently mentioned by me in less than three lines, and not insisted on, and
may be determined either way without prejudice to my chief Exception. He joins
Greece and Italy together, (calling me Pseudo-linguist) to abuse me for my use
of the Greek-Tongue, yet has not charged me with any error therein, which
himself or his Authors have not recanted. I said that (...) coming, might refer
to (...) the Light, as well as to (...), Man: He wonders that a man so mean in
that Tongue, should undertake to thwart the current of all indifferent
Translators. He ostentates his skill in the Oriental Tongues out of the Latin
Translations of them, What an unworthy thing is it in W. P. to intimate, p. 67.
that I would have the Text rendered, Haec est lux illa vere, quae venientem in
mundum illuminat omnem hominem?
(which Tongue, by the way, cannot render the Greek of this Text so well as our
English can.) The question is concerning the Greek: The Arabic and Aethiopick
(as he cites them) are on my side: The three French, and the Low Dutch
Translations (as he renders them) are for me. Erasmus grants that the sense is
ambiguous, (which is as much in effect as I say) Mr. P. in translating
Erasmus's words, says, too ambiguous, wherein he wrongs Erasmus: --
Ambiguitatem sustulisset.
Does he learn that of the New Academy at Paris? His Maldonate says, My sense
is neither false nor absurd. Grotius says, I do much approve of the
Exposition, which is extant in Cyril and Augustine, that this (...), COMING, be
referred to (...), THE LIGHT, Dr. Hamond reads it so. And are not these four
indifferent Translators and Expositors? Did they not all own the eternal
Divinity of Christ? And did not Mr. P. know it? Let the Reader judge whether he
does not knowingly abuse me? and whether he has not abused him too, in writing
so much to no purp^se?

As for the difference between lights and enlighteth, I stood not upon it;
but now, after all his impertinent labor, I say, There is as much difference
between these words, as between destroy this Temple, and destroy ye the Temple;
and our Translators seem to use the word lights, for the Gospel preached; and
the word enlighteth, for the Gospel received and believed. W. P. deals here
like a cunning Lawyer, who having a bad Cause, labors hard to turn off the
Judges from the Matter in issue, to something that is not so. In order to that,
another Artifice he uses is, To make an hideous outcry against me, as a
Socinian, Mungrel-Socinian, Bidlean, and other frightful names; as if it were a
sufficient vindication of G. F. from the charge I have proved against him, out
of his own Writings, that I am an Erroneous or Heretical Person. Let me be all
that W. P. says I am, a Turk, a Jew, an Anthropomorphite, an Arrian or
Sabellian, or what he will; will G.F. his Doctrine be e're the truer, or his
Person the wiser or honester? Away with such Mercurial sleights! Here he would
fain draw us into the Controversy of his stating, viz. Whether the Light be
natural and created, or supernatural and eternal? Into which if we should be so
foolish as to follow him, I dare say we might have work enough for a full age,
and be never the wiser at last; For how is it possible to come to any
determination with one that is equivocating in his terms? as I shall show the
Quakers to be.

Next he falls upon my Concessions concerning the Light in every man, and
pleases himself hugely in making me contradict my self, and give away my Cause:
But it is no great matter, for one that is wont to equivocate in his own words,
to make his Neighbors contradictory by the same art.

And, 2. if if should appear that I had failed in expressing my mind concerning
that matter, yet still the Argument of my Book might be firm and valid against
G. F. Here under this Head, upon my sober appeal to the Light in the Quakers,
he falls (as it were) into an exstacy, and cries out monstrum horrendum! (as if
some Poetic Deity had inspired him): Why! what is the matter? He says, That
unto which a man makes an appeal, must be capable of giving an infallible
judgment, and so a true Judge, or else he appeals foolishly. Answ. It seems,
when Paul appealed to Caesar, that is, Nero, that Nero was capable of giving an
infallible judgment, or else Paul appealed foolishly. Do not all men know that
Appeals are made to men upon the account of necessity or convenience, not upon
an opinion of his infallibility to whom the appeal is made? Does not Mr. P.
reason like a man in a fright? 2. He says, that G. F. is by the verdict of
that Light in them, pronounced not guilty; and I tell him, that G. F. is by the
verdict of the Light in me, and as many thousands as the Quakers pronounced
Guilty: On which side now is the infallible judgment? or, are we both
infallible? What tristing is here with terms and words! Upon the question if
self, of the Light in every man, I have in effect discoursed already, when we
considered W. P's Position touching the Un-erring Judge, etc. I add further,
That every man that grows up to years of discretion, has a capacity, by Nature
or otherwise, to know so much of Gods Will, concerning his Duty, as whereby his
honesty and sincerity may be tried. 2. That he that is faithful in the
obedience of that knowledge he has, shall have more. 3. That such an one (as
was Cornelius, Acts 10.) who fears God, and works Righteousness, shall be
accepted of him. But. 4. that such a person may be yet without the Knowledge or
Faith of Jesus the Mediator between God and men. And, 5. that God did not to
Cornelius, neither was wont in those Primitive times, nor does he in these
days (that can be made to appear) reveal unto such men inwardly by his Spirit,
the knowledge of Christ the Mediator; which was contained in those words which
Peter preached to Cornelius, whereby he and his House were to be saved. 6. I
say, That that knowledge in those words are conveyed to us by the Holy
Scriptures, as unto Cornelius by word of mouth. 7. I say, That the Quakers in
vilisying the knowledge from tradition, and the profession of the Person of
Christ by tradition, and contending for an immediate revelation of this
Knowledge, do vilify the dispensation of the Gospel by the Mediator Jesus, and
his Apostles and Evangelists their Preaching and Writing. These things are
evident, partly by themselves, partly by Scripture, as Acts 10. and 11. Mat.
25. Romans 2.

Now let us look into Mr. P. and his Associates, their sense of that Doctrine
they so much glory in, and upon the account of which they sing such loud
tryumphs in the World, viz. The Light in every man is infallible, and they that
are not infallible, are Deluders. For we shall deceive our selves, if we think
we understand them, when we understand the words in one sense. 1. Then you must
know that by the term Light, sometime they mean Christ; so, when they say, the
Light is supernatural and eternal, they mean by the Light, Christ, that is,
God; and the sense is, See p. 68, etc.
God is supernatural and eternaly, and God is infallible: Who ever denied it?
But, 2. when they say, the Light justisies or condemns, then they mean that
which we call Conscience, for so G. F. expounds it, ( Mist. p. 11.) saying, And
the Light condemns, which you call Cousciouce. Suitable to this sense, when a
man proceeds rightly in the use of his faculties, and those means which God
assords him, and attains to a true knowledge, then he is infallible, and the
Light, that is, his Judgment is infallible: But when he does not proceed
rightly, and gives a wrong judgment, then he is fallible, and his judgment
fallible, but not the Light. And so the sense of their Position, The Light is
infallible, (when they do not mean by the Light, God) is, that true knowledge
or true judgment, is true knowledge or true judgment. And Mr, P. has unhappily,
(by being a little more open than their Doctrine will bear) utterly betrayed
both his Cause and his Friends: For thus he says, ( p. 82.) Infallibility of
persons, any further then as they are joined and conformed to the Light of God,
me never affirmed; and fallibility of the Light, because of the fallibility of
persons, we never owned. That is to say, when G. F. and W. P. preach nothing
for truth, buth what they certainly know to be so, then, and in that point they
give a true judgment, and are infallible; [and so is every man in the World] so
are G. F's Adversaries;] but when they give a false judgment, thinking it to be
true, then they are fallible: He might as well have said, They that are
intallible, are infallible; and on the contrary. They that are infallible, are
fallible; and they that are fallible, are infallible, for there is nothing
hinders, but that the same person may be infallible in some things, and
fallable in many things, for nothing is more common, than for the same person
to follow the Light of God in one thing, and neglect it in another. When G. F.
quoted Scripture right, then he did conform to the Light of God, which told him
he ought to do so, and was infallible: But when he quoted it wrong, then he was
not conformed to the Light of God, but fallible. Behold here the Quakers
Doctrine of Infallibility! May we not retort then G. F's words? How can he but
delude people, since he is not infallible? But they have yet a third sense of
the term Light, when they say, it is infallible, and that is this; The light in
every man, is the immediate Teaching or Speaking of God in every man; and that
is always infallible. Answ. I have spoken of this before in the Introduction;
And again, 1. I ask, Is the mediate Teaching or Speaking of God, either by
Nature or Scripture, fallible? I hope not. 2. Mr. P. grants, p. 72. That men
may, through their sins and insirmities, mistake, and not perceive the teaching
of the Light, and so not conform it; and then they are fallible like us or
other men. 3. This is that which I said in my Epistle, If God be pleased in a
mediatory way, by such very vile means (in the Quakers account) as the
foolishness of Preaching, and traditional Scripture to reach men sufficiently;
and if they despise that way, must God be bound to supply their pride and
idleness by his immediate Teaching? which when he has done, they are still as
liable as other men to be inconformable to it. And so this their great Doctrine
of infallibility comes to nothing but equivocation, noise and wind. Their
persons W. P. in contradiction to G. F. grants to be fallible; their Light
within, when it is taken for the last Dictate of their understanding, (which
men are obliged always to follow) for whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin) Mr.
P. grants to be also fallible. And why may not I now retort his exprobration?
Well! before I would undertake Controversies, and thus give away my Cause, nay,
so woefully, yet frequently contradict my self, [and my Friends] I would never
write while I live.

These things thus discoursed, to follow Mr. P. though they are a digression
from my Argument, yet I hope not unprofitable to the Reader. We may now proceed
to his Answers upon the particular Instances, and show that even in those that
are of least moment, his Vindications of G. F. and his contemptuous Speeches
against me for the slightness of the Objection, do all fall heavily upon his
Prophet George. For I have him upon this Dilemma: If the Instances I have
produced of G. F's mis-citings of Scripture, be indeed pervertings and
corruptings of Scripture, then G. F. is fallible and a Deluder; if they be not,
then also he is fallible and a Deluder, because he has judged them and the like
to be so in his Adversaries. So that if I had hired W. P. to have wrote in
defense of my Argument, and in aggravation of G. F's Golly, I Am confident he
could not have it done more effectually, than he has in this his Book, where
he denies the Antecedent, namely, That such mis-citings are pervertings, which
he does almost in every instance. It would tire the Reader to pass through them
all, we will try it in some few of them, that are, in his esteem of the most
trivial account.

And the first shall be that from Ephess. 2.6. where for in Christ Jesus, W.P.
p. 13.
G. F. puts with him. Here I said there might be a different sense: but however
G. F. charge the Translators for corrupting Scripture, because they had
translated (...)( Jud. 14.) with ten thousands, and not in. The like corruption
he sinds in the Translation of Matthew. 3.11. with water for in water. Now I
appeal to any Reader that understands English, whether it was not as great a
corruption in G. F. to put with for in, where both the Greek and English had
in, as for the Translators to translate the Greek (...) by with. Now let us see
W. P's defense retorted. First, G. F. wrongs the Translators in saying, they
have corrupted the Scriptures, by putting with for in, since there is no
difference at all in what be would fantastically have to be one. -- And with
such arrogance does G. F. charge the Translators with corrupting Scripture, as
if he were the only Master of the Sentences, Doctor of the Chair, or grand
Critic of the Age, who, to speak truth, shows himself a Scholar much at the
same rate, and by the same figure that Pedlars are called Merchants. Save that
he comes short in this, that he knows not a piece of Stuff from a piece of
Silk, not one clause from another.

Next, 2 Pet. 2.1 Denying the Lord that bought them; W. P. p. 117.
where he inserts Christ, and yet perhaps it may be meant of denying, the
Father. Now is not this as great a perversion of the Text, as the saying,
destroy ye this Temple, instead of destroy this Temple. Besides, this
countenances their Doctrine of the Father and Christ their being, so one, as
that they are not distinct. Let us hear W. P. now.

We may guess at his meaning without an interpretation; But must Christ be Lord
and not Lord, [distinct and not distinct] at every turn, when this presumptions
person G. F. will? -- In short, If a man's expressing, ye, where it must be
understood, must conclude him a perverter of Scripture, and consequently a
Deluder and Blasphemer, Who is true? Let all the World read, and observe of
what ungodly stuff, and very trash his [Mystery Book] does consist!

3. G. F. ranks it among Scriptures corrupted by the Translators, that they
render Col. 1.23. The Gospel which was preached to every Creature; and himself
(in contradiction to him that asserted that the Gospel is not first made known
by the seeing within, but by hearing tidings without) renders it, The Gospel is
preached in every Creature, where he puts is for was, and in for to. Now W. P.
(p. 121.) does not deny the change; but says, that is and was are both true.
He says also that in every Creature, and to every Creature, may be the same.
What now? How can it be a corruption of Scripture in the Translators, to render
it to, if it be the same with in. W. P. seems in this, and indeed in the sum of
his Vindication, to have writ by immediate inspiration, that is, what came next
to his fancy, without consideration of its being for him or against him. Well!
what is his censure against me, which lights upon G. F? His carping there is
like all the rest, malicious and troublesome. It seems G. F. is a malicious and
troublesome Prophet.

Thus I might go through all the instances, and present W. P. wounding and
goring himself and Friend upon the Horns of my Argument, but the Reader will
easily excuse me from that travel, and do it himself in his own mind. And yet
methinks I cannot but note one more of his mercurial watchings: (He Will go near
to charge me with palpable lying, (as he has done diverse times in the like
case) for this common phrase, because I say, I cannot, when I can). It is in my
p. 33. in his p. 126. where I fault G.F. for saying absolutely, God said, For
did not sin with his mouth, where the Scripture says, In all this did not Job
sin with his lips: Now my exception lies in those words, In all this, which W.
P. according to his wonted honesty, leaves out, and gives out, that my
exception lies in the putting of mouth for lips, P. 127.
and that I charge G. F. with imposture on that account, when as he has found
as great a change as that in Christ and his Apostles their quoting of
Scripture. Well! suppose (what is not) that my exception had been that; Is it
not as great a corrupting of Scripture, to put mouth for lips, as to put to for
in, where Mr. P. faith, To and In, may he the same; or as, destroy ye, for
destroy ( ye understood). Thus all the foul play that W. P. can use, will not
excuse his good Friend; but every blow that he strikes at me, wounds G. F.
mortally. But the most deadly of all comes at last; it is this, (without change
of his Argument) If Christ and his Apostles have not observed such exactness as
[G. Fox] so severely reproves [his Adversaries] for the want of. It is to be
hoped, that be will either retract his unworthy abuse -- or else not think it
hard in us to charge this blasphemous inference upon him, namely, that he makes
Christ Jusus and his Apostles perverters of Scripture, and what else be
wickedly concludes against Professors. This inference falls with all its weight
upon G. F. as the Reader may readily perceive: But for me, it touches me not at
all: For,

First, We will suppose G. F. but equal to Christ and his Apostles, in changing
words to the same sense, yet there will be this difference between them. 1.
They testified the infallibility of their spirit by many Miracles, etc. but I
never heard of any that G. F. did, except the eating and making one or more
meals of Spidars, of which I hear not of any evidence but his own word. 2.
Christ never called the Scribes and Pharisees Perverters of Scripture, for such
change of words as G. F. has done Professors. 3. Christ did not at the same
time challenge the World, and call them forth to come and have their Doctrines
tried by that very Scripture, that is, that Version, or that Copy then in use
among them, and which he corrects them for not following exactly in every
point, without their meanings, as G. F. has done in his Mystery, etc. and
Preface to the same. Which things considered, are enough to render him
(according to his own Judgment) as Deluder and Blasphemer, and W. P. no less in
making the Parallel; but our Lord and his Apostles innocent.

But, secondly, of fifty instances, there are not above three or four that have
not either addition or substration both of words and sense, or an alteration of
words either importing or countenancing a bad sense, or at least varying from
the sense of the place, as I doubt not but will appear to any judicious Reader.
And W. P. himself, in most of the Instances, does not deny the various sense,
only he endeavors to make that sense consist with truth in general, or some
opinion of their own, which others count error.

Lastly, It Is more than Mr. P. knows, for all his skill in the Hebrew, (which
is very notorious among learned men) whether out Lord and his Apostles in their
Citations of Scripture, did not keep to the very words of that Version which
was then in use, or allowed by those to whom he spoke, and they wrote. So vast
a difference is there between the Citations of Christ and his Apostles, and
those of G. F. that it is a most shameful thing they should be brought into
comparison. Here I might transcrible much to the bitter condemnation of them
out of their own mouths, but I must hasten.

Notwithstanding after Mr. P. has writ a Book stuffed with Invectives, and
opprobrious condemnations of G. F. his Doctrine and Person, under my Person and
Cause, he comes at length, in the end of it, to say something to his purpose of
Vindication, if it were true and reasonable, but it proves no Armor of proof,
but a mere Cobweb. He argues thus, Professors hold the Scripture to the such a
sufficient, infallible -- Rule, as that God has not given unto men any thing
more clear and certain: But G. F. and the Quakers hold, That the eternal Spirit
is, by way of excellency, the Rule and Guide of Christians: Therefore he was
not consined to the very express words and points thereof as his Rule.

Could he satisfy his Conscience in this Apology? But I answer, 1. This
arguing clearly supposes that the Dictates of G. F.'s Spirit, are more
excellent than the Scriptures. 2. It supposes that the Spirit of God, or God
himself, can affirm that to be written which is not written, that is, can lie:
for in citing Scripture, men have respect to the very express words, and upon
those they build the sense. 3. It supposes that because G. F. has a less esteem
of the Scriptures than other men have, therefore he may honestly do that to the
Scriptures, which will render other men Pervertors and Corruptors of them. 4.
It supposes that which is false, viz. That Professors hold the prosent English
Transslation to be unalterable, for G.F. charge them with perverting
Scripture, for altering it to the very same sense, as both he and they must
acknowledge. 5. G. F. charge the Translators with corrupting Scripture, for
rendering it so as W. P. confesses to be the same with the rendering that G. F.
would have, as I showed upon Col. 1.23. 6. It seems by this arguing, that when
G. F. calls upon other Christians to come forth and be tried by the Scriptures,
we must understand, not the form of found words contained in the Scriptures,
but his interpretation of Scripture: But they, poor Men! Divinity of Christ
Pref.
must be charged, nay, commanded to give him plain Scripture, printed
Scripture, Chapter and Verse. What? though G. F. his words are to W. P. of
equal, yea, greater authority than the Scriptures, (as proceeding fresh and new
from the holy Spirit, but these have passed through many foul hands); must they
therefore be so to other men, that do not acknowledge him led by that Spirit?
When the truth of any matter in question is to be tried by a written Testimony,
and that writing may be produced; he that shall then, instead of the
determinate words of that Testimony, produce other words to the prejudice of
his Neighbors cause, shall be counted forger and liar. And I nothing doubt,
but that G. F. if he had dealt so with other writings of civil concern, as he
has done with the holy Scriptures, would by this time have lost his ears. And
it would not have excused him in such a change, to have urged that his own
knowledge and testimony were of greater cortainty and vilidity, than the words
of that written Testimony, forasmuch as Party concerned acknowledged no such
matter. 7. G. F. in accusing Professons of perverting Scripture in the
Instances cited, follows his own Judgment and Principle, and not theirs; for
the makes it an Argument of the Quakers their being sent of God, because they
speak of Scripture right as it is, but Professors the contrary; and tells them,
they run into all absurdities that give their meanings to Scripture. Lastly,
such is the unhappiness of W. P's undertaking in this matter, that almost all
his reasonings and scornings too against me, in vindication of G. F. turn
directly to his condemnation: For because Prefessons do not acknowledge any
other common Rule of Faith but the Scriptures, it was necessary therefore for
G. F. to confute them by express Scripture, especially in that he had
undertaken so to do, and dared them to go to a trial at than Tribunal. See the
Epistle to his Mystery. I have been long in the answer of this Allegation,
because it seems to be the only thing of weight in his whole Book; but you see
how it disserves him.

Having now seen my Argument against G. F. confirmed and improved with much
bitterness by W. P. under pretense of vindicating him, I might here fairly
conclude; but having added to my Argument (in my Epistle) that he had not only
done to same, or the like to that which he condemned in other, but much more,
and that which was really conclemnable, and urged my Instances to prove that
also, it may perhaps be sit for me to say something in vindiation of them, or
some of them, from W. P.'s exceptions: Though indeed, if the Reader would but
take the pains to compare my Epistle with his Answer, and what I have here
already written, I might well spare mine and his further labor in this Matter.
But because every Reader may not have opportunity so to do, I will proceed.

The first instance I have spoken to already.

The second Instance is form John 1.7 where G. F. applies that to the Light,
which John speaks of the Baptist, vis. That all men through him might believe:
Which taken, as it is spoken, proves, that the preaching of John Baptist, was a
means of bringing all men to believe, and consequently that the true Light may
light every man by the foolishness of preaching or outward means; which is
contrary to the Quakers Doctrine of the Light, and is avoided by his perverting
the Text.

The third Inst. in from 2. Cor. 4.6. For God who commanded the Light to shine
out of darkness, has shined in our hearts to [give] the Light of the knowledge
the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. G. F. has it thus; When as Paul
said that the Light which shined in their hearts, to give the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. 1. He puts the light insted of God.
2. He leaves out Light immediately before of the knowledge. 3. The whole
Sentence is nonsense; and notwithstanding all this, W. P. has the face to tell
his Reader, He obtrudes an arrant lie upon our very senses, and call me,
wretched Scribler! How idle? How frivolous, etc. The error that is couched here,
is. 1. That God and Christ the Light are not distinct, but all one. 2. That by
Light here is not meant Knowledge. 3. That this Light is not an effect of
Creation.

4. Inst. from Col. 3.10. where G. F. reads them for him, and so takes away
from us a proof, that the New Man there spoken of, is created. W. P. says, in
his defense, If he did put Them for Himit is not false; but if we, in common
discourse, say you for thou, he will say it is false.

(5.) Romans 2.15. G. F. puts Conscience for Thoughts, because Conscience was
more easily drawn to signify the uncreated Light in every man.

(6.) John 7.38. There he puts Christ's helly for the Believers belly, to
countenance the foresaid Notion.

(7.) 2 Cor. 2.16. G. F. applies that to the immediate Word, which is plainly
spoken of the Apostles. P. 119.
And W. P. that he may be true to his way, of abusing me falsely, says, I
undertake to prove him to be an Impostor, for putting the before Death and
Life, which the Translation does not. Did ever man make less conscience of what
he wrote?

(8.) Col. 1.23. Putting was for is, to prove inward preaching without outward.
I have spoken of it before.

(9.) 2 Cor. 13.5. Within you for in you, to countenance (as he supposes) their
Doctrine of God's immediate Light.

(10.) 2 Cor. 3.6. G.F. says, The Scripture said, The Letter was dead and did
not give Life. W. P. blames me for referring these words to this Scripture,
(which is the nearest I can find) but he finds no Scripture nearer, to which to
resen it. How captious he is! Paul says, The Letter ^illeth, (speaking of the
first Covenant, as W. P. confesses) but G. F. intends, that the outward
dispensation of the New Covenant in the Scriptures is dead. An Opinion that has
done no small mischief in the World.

(11.) I have charged G. F. that twenty times or more (as I suppose) he denies
that the Scripture is called Word, but says, it is called a Treatise, Acts
1.1. And yet that word there rendered Treatise, is the same which is rendered
Word, when applied to Christ: But W. P. to help at a dead lift, says, G. F.
intended, The Word of God by way of excellency: Which of G. F. his Adversaries
did ever affirm it was?

(12.) But W. P. can desend him in any thing, even when he obtrudes upon his
Reader the grossest absurdity instead of Scripture, and will not have it to be
any more than a trivial Objection against his infallible Prophet, when he
says, And so to the Word Christ Jesus, Him by whom the World was made before
is was made. This G. F. puts in a Scripture Letter, and this he repeats in his
Book at least seven times without any variation; the eighth time he has it
thus, By which the World was made before it was made. It Is evident enough he
has respect to John 1.3. Without him was not any thing made that was made. What
says his Chamption now? But is there no allowance to be had for curt
Expressions, eseapos of the Pen, oversight in Compositors, and Errors in the
Press? What! eight times after the same manner? Where was W. P.'s Conscience?
But can be not make sense of it? Yes, yes: Suppose a Comma at the first made,
where and being understood, explaineth the sense, was makes it more clear:
That Is one way. Again, Take the middle Clause and put in last interchanging the
World and it, thus: And so to the Word Christ Jesus, before the World was made,
him by whom it was made. All this stir is to make it sense, (as for Scripturee,
it is such as God's infallible Spirit in G. F. wirtes) And may not a man at this
rate excuse the groffest nonsense that ever was writ? Go thy ways for an
admirable Advocate! Once more let me ask the Reader what he thinks of the
honesty of W. P. and whether he will excuse me hence-forward, if I mingle any
more Discourse with him? It may benefit some or other, therefore I will yet
proceed a little further.

(13.) Who can read Deuteronomy. 30.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and not perceive that by the
word very night unto them in their mouth and in their heart, is meant, the Word
written? And yet G. F. would have it to be the inward immediate Word, and
therefore in thy mouth, must be left out as not well agreeing with that notion.

(14.) It Is for the sake of that Notion, that the Power of God is said by him
to be the Gospel, and the Gospel the Power of God, as if they were convertible
terms; whereas the Apostle Paul says only, That the Gospel is the Power of God
(not simply and absolutely but in a certain respect) to Salvation to every one
that believes: This I expressed fully in my Epistle, but W. P. would not see
it, but cries out, Gross folly, etc.

(15.) Next you must know that the Quakers detest the thought of Christ's
having the Essence of a man in any place remote from their own dear hearts, and
therefore when G. F. cites that Scripture, Luke 24.5, 6. He must leave out of
the very heart of the Text, He is not here: And W. P. will have it very aptly
used to express the Mystical Resurrection: but still he is not here must be
out, for that does not quadrate with their fancy.

(16.) And G. F. cites that Text ( Ephesians. 5.30.) defectively, to prove Christ
not absent from his Church, and W. P. avows it. Indeed G. F. says, He is
deceiced, who says, Christ is distinct from the Saints, Mist. p. 16.

(17.) But upon that Text, Luke 17.21. W. P. gives my chief exception a go-by,
takes no notice of G. F's changing, The Kingdom of God into plain Heaven. But
if he had, he abhors to think that Heaven is a visible place to be lived in,
bearing some resemblance to this visible World, p. 12.

(18.) Amos 3.13. There G. F's applying that to Christ, which is spoken of the
Lord God, favors their Doctrine of no distinction between God and Jesus Christ
the Mediator, and W. P. defends it on that account.

(19.) The like may be said of 1 Cor. 15.28. where W. P. according to his usual
candor, tells me of Col. 3.11. but takes no notice of G. F. his citing Chapter
and Verse, which he is not wont to do.

(20.) Joh. 1.1. God is the Word, is defended by the same perverse Doctrine.

(21.) So is his adding He or Christ to the Father, Joh. 10.29.

(22.) His palpable diminishing from Phil. 2.11. has the same tendency, and W.
P. owns it. G. F. in his own Cause, would have exclaimed here, as he does upon
the Ministers of Newcastle.

(23.) W. P. talks of Brazen -- but I wonder with what face he could give such
answer to John 15.25. which if it be not (as G. F. cites it) an addition to
Scripture, I never saw one, nor ever shall. What? call for plain Scripture from
another, and at the same instant urge Scripture with addition himself! He
thinks if he can but make G. F. speak sense, and truth in his Opinion, he has
done enough. He may as well say, all G. F.'s Book is Scripture, for he believes
it all as infallible as Scripture, as if there were no difference between a
Quotation, and a Comment or Exposition. But G. F. has said it, Christ is not
distinct from the Father: That Is enough for W. P. though it subvert the Gospel.

(24.) The like ground there is for inserting Christ into the Text, 2 Pet. 2.1.
which I have mentioned.

(25.) And for putting God for Lord, Romans 14.9.

(26.) And so he would confound God and the Holy Spirit by putting the one for
the other, 1 Cor. 2.10, 14. And why did not W. P. answer what I urged, rather
then pass it by, and call me Busy-body, which is very easy.

(27.) Add to these Col. 3.16. and John 17.5. (which I am about to speak) and
we have 11 Texts abused to serve that goodly Doctrine of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, their not being distinct but all one: A very trivial Matter that does
but subvert the Faith of Christ, and introduce another Gospel.

(28.) When G. F. says, This is Scripture, If we find it not there, we must
say, He is mistaken, and then he is fallible. If he give us the sense of
Scripture in other words, and obtrude them for Scripture, he corrects the
Scripture instead of citing it. Christ says, John 17.5. And now, O Father,
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee
before the World was. But G. F. Christ who was glorified with the Father before
the World began. W. P. cries out, Sottish Ignorance and Enmity with a witness:
Did ever Christ of his Apostles, or any sober man living, chide or reprove a
person, if he did leave out or put in, or change a word, not in the least
perverting the sense? Yes, G. F. does it, for expressing ye, where it must be
understood. It seems then G. F. is no sober man in W. P's account; and if so, I
know not how he should be a true Prophet. But I have showed in my Epistle, that
he perverts the sense, and that the Phrase is to be understood of the glory
which Jesus had, not in possession, but in decree with the Father, before the
World was. Here Mr. P. cries out lamentably, That ever any man should undertake
to correct others in that which does not deserve it, whilst the beam is in his
own eye, and is himself most guilty! This is like the rest, suitable to the
honesty of Mr. P. that he should compare an Exposition of Scripture with a
quotation of it. He charge me ( p. 61.) with driving at the Divestigating
Christ of all right to eternal Divinity! This is learned non sense; G. F's
spirit could never elevate him to such a degree of Jargon: Besides, except he
can produce some Author for it, (which I am persuaded he cannot) I shall
conclude him the first that ever used the word divestigate, or divestigare, in
any sense whatsoever.
And because the chief artifice of his Book, is to render me odious and
detestable under the name of Socinian, mongrel-Socinian, Bidlean, and the like,
and for that takes no small occasion from my exposition of this Text; I shall
show, 1. that two great Authors, no Socinians, are of the same mind. Grotius
upon those words, The glory which, I had, adds, Destinatione tua, in thy
Decree. Augstinus, Et nuno clarifica me, And now glorify me: Hoe est sient
unno, it a and nuno; sient tune praedestinatione, sie and nuno perfectione,
That it, us then, so also now, as then in Predestination, so also now in
Perfection. Secondly, I shall declare the Opinion of the Leading Quakers
concerning the Essence or Being of our Lord and Mediator Jesus Christ, so far
as the equivocation of their Writings will permit. And it was as much as all
the reputation of the Quakers is worth to be plain in this point, therefore we
must not expect it from them.

First, Then for the Godhead or Divinity of Christ, in the confession whereof
Mr. P. and G. W. do so much glory and boast; Mr. P. in his Sandy Foundation,
has brought many Texts of Scripture, and five Arguments from right Reason,
Though the word One is not in the Hebrew in some Texes, where he so confidently
puts an Emphasis.
to prove that God is the Holy ONE, not it Holy THERE: that ONE is God, and God
only is that Holy ONE: He rejects there that impertinent distinction, that he
[God] is ONE in Substance, but THREE in Persons or Subsistencies. G. Whitehead
defends this Position of W. P. in his Book called, The Divinity of Christ,
where in the Name of the Quakers he confesses, That there are Three that bear
Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and that these Three
are One, both in Divinity, Divine Substance, and Essence, not three Gods, nor
separate Beeings. That they are called by several Names in Scripture, as
manifest to and in the Saints, -- and are -- One infinite Wisdom, One Power,
One Love, one Light and Life, etc. I should have given G. F. the pre-eminence,
for I believe he is the Author of this Opinion among the Quakers; he says (
Mist. p. 142.) Christ is not distinct from the Father; and p. 199. they are not
only One, but all One. Hence it is manifest, 1. that when they say, Christ is
God, they mean nothing by Christ, neither Substance nor Essence, Person nor
Subsistent, (especially in the sense of their Adversaries) Wisdom or Power,
Light or Life, or any thing else that is really distinct from that which the
Jews mean by the God of Israel, or the Mahometans by one God. He that believes
less, must be an Atheist.

2. That the Propositions, Christ is God, and the Father is God, are of the
very same import and signification, even as to say, W. P. is a Man, or, The
Author of the Sandy Foundation is a Man. So that (respecting the time before
Jesus was born) the Father, the Son, or Christ, did as much signify one and
the same intelligent and happy Person or Hypostasis, as Paul and the Apostle of
the Gentiles, the same individual Man or Person. And this is that Opinion which
Ecclesiastical Writers attribute to Sabellius, and they that maintain it, are
called by them Sabellians. The consequence whereof is that, the Son of God, or
Christ as God, was at that time nothing but another Name of God or the Father,
and had no more Life, Knowledge, Power or Property distinct from the Life,
Knowledge. Power or Properties of God, or the Father, than he that is not, has
from him that is. And so all that the Quakers contend for, (when they seem so
zealous for the Divinity of Christ) is nothing in the World, (beside their own
glory, and the disparagement of their Adversaries) save that God, or the
Father, was or might be in those days called, Christ, or the Son of God, or
the Light, etc.

Thus much touching the Divinity of Christ, according to the Leading Quakers.
Now for his Humanity or his being a Man. And we shall find, that whatever W.
P. talks of Christ, as Man, and as God, yet that he equivocates and deludes his
Reader, believing no such thing as Christ his being a Man, or else he dissents
from his Brethren, which I suppose he will not own.

1. G. F. (for it is fit he should lead) does in an insulting manner crow over
his Antagonists, for using the word Humane, when they speak of the Nature of
Christ, (see my Epistle, p. 37.) Where does the Scripture (says he) speak of
Humane? the word Humane? In his Epistle before the Divinity of Christ. Is God a
Man? No, he is a Spirit. -- Is the Holy Ghost a Man? It is called the Holy
Spirit; and Christ was a Man, the Man Christ Jesus. If G. F. believed Christ to
be now a man, why did he not retain the Present Tense is, but change it into
was, very roughly? But that which we find in the Postscript of that Epistle,
will put the matter out of question, where that Author, out of Scripture,
defines a person to be -- a Man or Woman; sometime the Body, the Face, or
visible appearance of either: He cites many Texts out of the Old Testament, for
that use of the word Person, and says, that in the New it is mentioned with
the same acceptance as before in the Old. As for instance, (says he) Thou
regardest not the Person of Men, Mat. 22.16. Mark 12.14. Luke 20.21. In the
Greek it is (...), i. e. faciem hominum, the face of men; (he cites Gal. 2.6. 2
Cor. 1.11. Jud. 16. where the same word is rendered Person) and concludes, That
the word Persons is attributed to men. How now? If Christ is a Man, and a Man
is a Person, will not Christ be then a Person? No such matter, according to
these men's Logic; for immediately he goes about to vindicate the Greek Text, 2
Cor. 2.10. from being translated Person of Christ, and says, it is translated
face of Christ, or sight of Christ; and our Poly-glottist W. P. says, p. 11.
Christ's Person is (strictly considered) an unscriptural expression, and will
needs make me manifestly guilty of perverting Scripture for using it. Yet eight
lines after, himself confounds and abuses Scripture, Heb. 2.16. with Romans 4.5.
But what weight there is in his friends answer to that Text I see not; for if
a Person be a Man, or the face of a Man (as he defines it); then if Christ be a
Man, he will be a Person, and his face will be the face of a Person: And if
Christ be not a Person, then he is not a Man; for the definition of a thing,
and the thing defined, are convertible. But that they do absolutely deny Christ
to be a Person or Man, I prove further, out of G. W's Book, Christ Ascended, p.
24. This manner (says he) of excluding God's right hand, and Christ to a
limitation out of his People in a personal Being, (which are no Scripture
terms) still implies him to be a personal God or Christ; like the
Anthropomorphites and Muggletonians conceits of his. Where note, that he does
with equal contempt, reject a personal Christ as a personal God, and so Christ
is no more a Person that God, and consequently no more a Man, for they deny God
to be a Person.

Again, p. 31. Is the Essence or Being of the Son of God personal? And p. 37.
He challenges his Adversaries, saying. What rule in Scripture have thou for
these words, [visible God, visible Christ, etc.] And a little below, Thou like
the old heretical Egyptian Monks, (the Anthropomorphites, and late
Muggletonians) art relling of a visible God, and Christ remote, not in any.
Behold here what an abominable thought it is to this man, and the Family of
Light, called Quakers, (that is his phrase) that Jesus Christ should be like a
Man, visible, or in any place remote from Men and Women that live here upon
Earth; and if he be not, then it is certain he is not a Man; for a Man being in
his Substance, Body, as well as Spirit, and finite, cannot be in more than one
place at the same time. And Mr. P. talks at the same rate (with G. W.) P. 12.
Sect. 6. where he argues thus, If Gods, presence make the Heaven, as we have
been always taught, and all have believed and confessed; [let every Reader judge
whether he say true or false.] Do not all Christians in the World (except a
few) believe and confess that Heaven is a certain place, (distinct from Earth)
into which Christ ascended, when a Cloud received him out of their (the
Apostles) sight, Acts 1.9.] Then (says he) since God vouchsafes to Temple and
Tabernacle in men, it follows, that his Heaven is there also. And so the Man
Christ Jesus sits at Gods right hand in Heaven, when W. P. sits at G. F's right
hand, for God Tabernacles in G. F. and has his Heaven there, and Christ is in
W. P. or else there is no such thing as Christ's being a Man. Here W. P. derides
and abominates their Faith, who believe, That Heaven is a visible place to be
lived in, etc.

But we will return again to G. W's Christ Ascended, p. 18. -- Except you eat
my Flesh, and drink my Blood, you have no Life in you, says Christ, -- So
neither is Christ, our Gods right hand, so limited 20 a remoteness from them
[the Saints.] Is seems that Jesus Christ is no otherwise in Heaven, then he is
in the Saints, when they eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood. And indeed J.
Newman's design was from what appears in G. W's Book to assert, That the Man
Jesus our Lord, although he is the Eternal God, has in Heaven, a place remote
from Earth, an Humane Body, which is not substantially in any Man, nor in any
place, but in that which all men call Heaven. To this G. W. opposes himself,
and says, p. 21. Does not this oppose the Infiniteness and Omnipresence of God
and Jesus Christ, and bring them under the limitation of finite Creatures. So
that Jesus Christ (according to him, has no other Body of a Man, than what is
as Infinite and Omnipresent as God himself.

Next we will see what Isaac Pennigton (another famous man) says to this
Point; in his Book entitled, A Question, etc. p. 33. -- The Scriptures do
expressly distinguish between Christ and the Garment which he wore; between him
that came, and the Body in which he came. So then Christ's Body, by which he
means the whole Manhood, was but Christ's Garment.

A little farther he says, This we certainly know, and can never call the
bodily Garment Christ, but that which appeared and dwelt in the body.

To this agrees our Author W. P. (p. 11.) We dare not say, That the entire
Christ was that visible Body that was crucified at Jerusalem. What was then? J.
Pennington will tell us in his next words; Now if ye (Professors) indeed know
the Christ of God, tell us plainly what that is which appeared in the Body?
whether that was not the Christ before it took up the Body, after it took up
the Body, and for ever?

Here it is manifest, that by Christ he understands nothing of Manhood, Body nor
Soul, but only that which was before Jesus was born, and the same is still the
Christ, his Body or Manhood was only his Garment, which he took up and laid
down. And G. W. uses the word Manhood; p. 14. He took upon him the Manhood in
time.

Now I may appeal to my Reader, whether I have not clearly proved (as far as
the nature of the thing will bear) that the Leading Quakers do not believe that
Jesus Christ is a man: I say, as the nature of the thing will bear, because if
they should in so many Syllables deny it, (though I have had it so from some of
their mouths) they must contradict express Scripture, whcih often calls Christ
a Man, even since his Resurrection; and that would destroy their reputation
among those that reverence the Holy Scriptures. But how they can, by an
unparalled equivecation, both confess him in Scripture to be a Man, and at
the same time, in Heart, and in their Books, deny him, I shall now show you,
out of the Books of Isaac Pennington, and G. Fox a forenamed.

I. P. p. 20. For that which he (Christ) took upon him was our Garment, even
the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of an carthly perishing Nature; but
he is of an eternal Nature, and his Flesh, and Blood; and Bones, are of his
Nature. Here observe, that the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, that is, the
Manhood which he took upon him, was a Garment, and so no part of his Nature;
but he had Flesh, and Blood, and Bones too before that time; which Flesh,
Blood, and Bones, were of an Eternal Nature, that is to say, God; for I know
nothing else that was of an Eternal Nature.

Here Christ is denied to be by Nature a Man, and yet by his Eternal Nature to
have Flesh, Blood, and Bones. Now if any man in the World can show me a grosser
piece of equivocation than this, I will acknowledge my self a very ignorant
Person: To speak of the Flesh, Blood, and Bones of a Man, and to intend nothing
of the Nature of Man, but only of God. Has Muggleton, or the Anthropomorphites
of Egypt (whom they so often call upon) said any thing of so gross a nature as
this, if it be taken properly? and if it must be taken improperly, what horrid
deceit and equivocation?

But it were a disparagement to G. F. that I. P. should have a Notion that was
not first revealed to G. F. Therefore we find that long before, G. F. had said
in his Mystery, p. 68. -- And is not Christ in Man? And does not Christ say,
they must eat his Flesh? And so if they must eat his Flesh, Is not his Flesh in
them? -- And how can ye call him Christ in Man, without the Man he there? I.
P's words may be the exposition of these, and tell us, that by Man, G. F. means
the Eternal God, and by the Flesh which men eat, and whcih is in them, he means
the Flesh, Blood, and Bones of the Eternal God. Who can read these things
without horror? Now let me put two or three Queries to my Reader, which he may
resolve from these Premises.

Q. First, Of what use is or can the Scripture be to these men, who do thus
confound Heaven and Earth, God and Man, Flesh and Spirit, Man's Nature, and
God's Nature, Eternity and Time, that they will understand the one, when the
other is named and plainly spoken of? And for so doing, pretend the guidance of
God's infallible Spirit? And W. P. tells us, p. 38. It Is their Principle, That
the Eternal Spirit, (their Guide and Rule) who in several Generations has
revealed a great part [it seems, not al of the things contained in the
Scriptures to be superior to those Writings; Nonsense as was observed before.
and below that, The Scripture is much like the shadow of the true Rule. I say,
of what use can this shadow of a Rule be to these Persons?

2. Whether I did not take the most proper way of dealing with these men in my
Epistle, showing to their senses, that G. F. in his Ministry had asserted for
Written and Spoken, that which is not Written nor Spoken?

3. Whether any ingenuous man could express a charge more modestly than I did,
when I said, -- You seem at least to deny his Person, seeing I have now, and
could then have proved, that they not only seem to deny Christ's Person, but do
effectually deny it, both in the sense of their Adversaries, and in their own
sense of that word?

4. Whether Mr. Pen be not either a very weak man, or was not in a great rage,
or both, that he should write such a Book as this I have in hand, when he might
know before what I could produce against them? For he might castly imagine that
I could have recourse to that Christian Letter, wherein these things had been
represented to him; which he received above twelve months ago, and takes no
notice of.

5. Whether he will impute it to Mr. P's want of all honestly and good
Conscience, or to a transport of Passion and Revenge, that he makes such
hideous outcries of Sacriledges and Ingratitude toward Christ Jesus, against
those he calls Mongrel-Socinians, because they will not own that God was called
Christ before Jesus was born; and in the mean time himself to deny whatsoever
of Essence, Substance, Person, Power, Life or Happiness is attributable to
Jesus, as he is the Mediator between God and Men?

Lastly, Whether the Reader will not freely give me, himself and all other
Christians, a Supersedeas or Dispensation from ever writing or speaking any
more about matters of Religion to such men that deny the Conclusion, when their
senses evidence all the Premises; that condemn that falsity in other men, which
they excuse in themselves; that palpably belie other men, to get glory to
themselves; that deny Christ totally under his name and pretense of Zeal for
his Divinity; finally, that are such notorious Equivocators as I have
manifestly proved these men to be?

Nevertheless, because Mr. P. has made it his great study to render me and
consequently what I have said (thought it is inconsequent enough) odious and
detestable, under the name of Socinian, Bidlean, and the like, although I wrote
nothing but what was approved by men of learning and piety, and strangers to
me, and (for ought I know) to all my Friends: I will therefore present to the
Reader a short account of these men's opinion concerning, Christ, who for
distinction sake call themselves Unitarians, being so called in those places,
where by the Laws of the Country they have equal liberty of Religion with
other men, or because they own but one Person, and one Substance or Essence of
the most High and Independent God, and to distinguish them from other
Christians that hold Three Persons, and one Essence of God, and are therefore
denominated Trinitarians.

I say therefore, that they are very zealous Assertors of the Unity of God, and
that is the reason (as they solemnly profess) why they cannot allow of three
Persons in the Godhead, because they think it destroys his Unity or Oneness;
and I have showed that the Quakers (W. P. especially) do also disallow them.
Notwithstanding the Quakers, according to their equivocating manner, can call
God the Father by the Name of Christ, and the other cannot. I know not that
they differ in one tittle more concerning the one God.

But concerning the one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. The Unitarians willingly and heartily acknowledge, that he was
fore-ordain'd before the foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1.20. that he was born
of the Virgin Mary, by the coming of the Holy Ghost upon her, and the power of
the most High overshadowing her, Luke 1.35. and therefore he is called [IS] the
Son of God; likewise that he, and no Man but he, ascended into Heaven, and
descended thence, John 3.13. being sanctified and sent into the World, into
which he came, not to do his own Will, but the Will of him that sent him, John
6.30. that by reason of this mission and sanctification, he did, whilst he was
here upon Earth, deservedly challenge the Name of God, or the Son of God, John
10.34, 35, 36. in a far more excellent sense than either the Magistrates among
the Jews, that were called gods, and Sons of the most High, Psalm. 82.1, 6. Or
Moses, who was God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7, 8, and also to his Brother Aaron, Exodus
4.16. Heb. or than any Angel, who in the Dispensation of the Law, did represent
God, and was therefore called by his Name, Acts 7.35. Exodus 23.20. Gal. 3.19.
see Jud. 13.22. And that as there was but one God then, so there is but one God
now, notwithstanding that Jesus is God over all. Unto which glorious and
supreme Dominion, next to the most high God himself, Jesus did attain, by doing
the Will of God fully and perfectly on Earth, the perfection of which
obedience: was, that being, as is said, in the form of God, he thought it not
robbery [or a prey] to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation,
etc. and became obedient unto Death, even the death of the Cross. Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name, which is above every Name;
that at the Name of Jesus every knee should how, -- and that every tongue
should confess that Jesus is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. That God has made that same Jesus, whom ye [the Jews] have
crucified, both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. Him has God exalted with his right
hand to be a Prince and a Savior, Acts 5.31. God raised him seem the dead, and
set him at his own right hand, in the heavenly places, far above all
principality and power, etc. For by God's exalting Jesus, and setting him at
his right hand, they understand that the same Man Jesus, that was crucified and
raised from the dead, was also taken up in the sight of the Apostles into
Heaven, a Cloud receiving him out of their sight, Acts 1.9. And that he is
there, having not now a Body of Flesh and Blood, (for flesh and blood cannot
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15.50.) but an heavenly, spiritual,
incorruptible and glorious body of a Man, the like whereof all Saints shall
have in the Resurrection, when this Man Jesus shall descend from Heaven to
judge the World; that in the mean time he sits at God's right hand, that is, he
has all power in Heaven and Earth committed to him, and reigns over Men and
Angels, as will appear by comparing 1 Cor. 15.25. with Psalm. 110.1. They
believe that the Father has committed all judgment unto the Son; that all men
should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, Joh. 5.23. Therefore
they worship Christ, and call upon him as their Lord, their King, their great
High Priest, their God, that searches their hearts, and is perfectly able to
save them that come unto God by him. And they say, it is no wonder, that they
honor Christ as God, whilst they acknowledge God his Father to be above him,
forasmuch as the Author to the Hebrews does the same, ( Heb. 1.8, 9.) saying,
But unto the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God, is forever and ever, -- Thou
have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity: Therefore God, even thy God, has
anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy Fellaws. Finally, When all
things shall be subdued under him [this Man Jesus], then shall the Son also
himself be subject to him that put all things under him, that God may be all in
all, 1 Cor. 15.28.

Now I know not any thing of all that I have said concerning the Manhood,
Resurrection, and Exaltation of Jesus, wherein the Trinitarians and Unitarians
do not agree. The only Point in difference between them is this; Whether this
Dominion, Power and Glory, which are conferred upon the Man Jesus, be conferred
upon him, by assuming him into a personal Union with God, so that the Man and a
Person of God make one individual Person; or whether they be conferred upon
him, by God's communicating to him such a Supernatural and Divine Power, as he
never communicated, nor ever will, to any Man or Angel, and greater than which
God himself cannot bestow. The first the Trinitarians hold, the latter the
Unitarians. Herein they both agree, That the Man Jesus is really invested with
this Power. But for the Quakers, I have showed, that they really deny this
Person, this Man Jesus, and consequently all that power and glory which he is
invested with. So that all that they talk of him, and all their contention for
him is mere equivocation. The Man Jesus, the Mediator between God and Men, is,
according to them, so far from being our King, our Lord and God, our
High Priest and Intercessor, and from being in himself immortal, most happy,
and glorious, that he has not so much Being as a Bat, I mean, a proper Bat, not
one of Mr. Pen's Bats. So that he that shall call Jesus accursed, (O horribled)
(meaning by Jesus, that personal Being or Man that was dead, and is now alive
in Heaven, a place remote from men on Earth) he commits really no greater
offense, than he that shall call the man in the Moon accursed; for the one (as
they hold) has as much Being as the other. And now let the World judge,
whether I did not use a soft expresson, when I said that some Doctrines of the
Quakers, did render them very dishonorable and dangerous to Christian
Religion. If the Deists in France should once get the Quakers knack of
equivocating, and meaning by Jesus Christ, when they speak of him, nothing but
God, then what havoc might they make of Christian Religion?

I would not be mistaken, when I charge these things upon the Quakers, I mean
the Leading Men; for I am still persuaded there are some honest-hearted among
them, that neither know this that I have said, to be their Doctrine, nor
believe it. And perhaps there may be some that own it and profess, it, that are
so silly, they neither know what they say, nor whereof they astirm.

Moreover, I prosess solemnly, that it is not from any malice, envy or revenge,
that I impute these things to them; for I do heartily believe their Doctrine is
such as I have said; and I hope the Proofs I have quoted out of their Writings,
will sufficiently vindicate me in the eyes of all impartial Readers; and I can
easily produce more of the same kind. See the Dialogue between a Christian and
a Quaker.

Now as I have showed, that they do not believe the Being of Jesus the
Mediator, and consequently none of those Articles of Christian Faith which
depend upon his Being; so it were not very difficult to demonstrate, that they
cannot upon their Principles believe any of them.

I will try a little, and for Example, let the Proposition to be believed be,
God raised up the Lord Jesus from the dead; It you bring them Scripture, and
universal Tradition, to get credit with them, it is all nothing: G. Keith says,
in his Immediate Revelation, p. 35. -- The best words uttered from Christ in
the days of his flesh, or from any of the Apostles or Prophets, and yet
recorded in the Scriptures, cannot reveal the Father, nor the Son either.
Again, p. 37. Outward Revelation or Discovery by words spoken from without of
Chirst, or any of his Disciples, or Apostles, cannot reveal the Father nor the
Son. It seems then that if Christ himself (as after his Resurrection with his
Apostles) should converse with us, and preach to us, that God had raised him
from the dead, and if the whole College of the Apostles should bear witness to
what he said, all this could not work in us any true saving-Faith of the
Proposition aforesaid, without an immediate Revelation within; for that is the
purport of his Book, the Title whereof is, Immediate Revelations -- not ^^^si^^
but remaining -- of indispausable necessity as to the whole Body in general, so
to every Member thereof, every true Believer in particular. And by immediate
Revelation, he tells us, p. 16. They understand not only immediate
supernatural influences of the Spirit of God -- to assist and enable or elevate
the mind to know and understand savingly, but also such inward influences as
are the very immediate Objects of our mind. Hence he says, p. 40. The Lord
knows the thoughts of Man to be but vanity, and his wisdom foolishness and
enmity against God, even all that wisdom, which the carnal mind can gather into
it self, whether from the Words of Scripture, or from the Works of Creation and
Providence. Here by man's wisdom and carnal mind, mind, you must understand him
of all wisdom whatsoever, which comes not by immediate inward Revelation. So p.
59. All your Scripture, literal, traditional Knowledge and Wisdom is a burden
unto this [something] in you. And G. White head says, ( Christ Ascend. p. 28.)
That [Faith] that is without the divine and immediate illumination of the
Spirit within, which is no Divine Faith, but men's Knowledge, Faith, and
Religion, are but Traditional, Literal, and Lifeless. So that if W. P. would
have told heartily and plainly with us, he should have told us that the
infallible Spirit is the immediate Judge, Rule and Guide to men, and so that no
man can have any true Faith or Religion without its immediate proposing, by way
of Object, unto him, as was done to the Prophets and Apostles. Therefore G. F.
in the very beginning of his Mystery, (as I hinted before) showing, the ground
of difference between the Priests and Professors, and all Sects in these
Nations, and the Quakers, says, That the controversy on their part is just
and equal against them all, and that they have sufficient cause to cry against
them, and to deny their Ministry, their Church, their Worship, and their whole
Religion, as being not in the Power, and by the Spirit of the living God.
Compare this with what I have cited before, and then it plainly appears, that
all right Quakers in G. Fox's sense have renounced or denied their Faith,
Worship and whole Christian Religion, which they had before they were Quakers,
as being grounded (as ours is) upon Reason, Scriptures, the Preaching of Jesus,
and his Apostles and Prophets, and Tradition, with an assistance of the Holy
Spirit elevating the mind; but not upon immediate objective Revelation, such as
the Apostles and Prophets had, and such as the Quakers now pretend to have. For
we, and those that differ from them profess those things before mentioned to be
the ground of our Faith; they profess the last of Immediate Revelation to be
the ground of their Faith and Religion; and deny ours to be Divine Faith or
true Religion; Nay, they cry out against it as foolishness and darkness,
literal and lifeless.

So then W. P. does but make a fair flourish, when he faith, p. 39. The
Scriptures we own, and the Divine Truth therein contained, we reverence and
esteem as the Mind and Will of God to men: For they cannot, according to their
Principles, esteem any saying of Scripture, be it that God raised up the Lord
Jesus from the dead, or any other word of any Apostle, or of Christ himself, I
say they cannot esteem it as the Mind and Will of God, except they have an
immediate Revelation dictating the same unto them: Which if they have, then the
Scripture is superfluous to them, and they do no more esteem it the Mind and
Will of God, because it is written in the Bible, than if it had been written in
any other Book among Fables and Lies.

These things considered, I argue thus: If among the Professors of Religion in
these Nations, there be those that sincerely confess the Lord Jesus, and
heartily believe that God raised him from the dead, upon the grounds
forementioned, and not upon the ground of immediate objective Revelation of
God's Holy Spirit, then G. Fox and the Quakers deny, and cry out against true
Christian Faith and Religion, and consequently cannot have them.

Again, If men in general cannot savingly believe without hearing a sent
Preacher; then men cannot believe by immediate inward Revelation: and then they
that assert they can, and do, and deny the Antecedent, cannot have saving
Faith. The Antecedent is true from Romans 10.13, 14, 15. The Consequent from the
opposition between mediate and immediate, 1 Cor. 1.18.

They to whom the preaching of the Cross is foolishness, and not the Power of
God, cannot have Gospel-Faith: But to G. F. and some Quakers, the preaching of
the Cross, without immediate Revelation, is foolishness, and not the Power of
God: Therefore G. F. etc. cannot have Gospel-Faith.

Let us proceed now to the other Instances of Scripture abused, and show the
tendency of it to false Doctrine.

(Inst. 29.) Next he would vindicate G. F. in correcting the Translators for
rendering (...), I protest by, 1 Cor. 15.31. saying, there is nothing in the
Greek for I protest, and yet Mr. P. cannot but grant that (...) is commonly at
least a particle of Swearing; and if but so, it follows, that there is
something in the Greek that answers I protest by; for supposing that not to be
the sense of the place, which the current of Interpretors say is, yet there is
that word there which will bear such a Translation, there is something in the
Greek for I protest, which G. F. denies, and therein imposes upon his Reader,
which is enough for my purpose.

Here W. P. (p. 91) that he may be true to his presumptuous way of arguing,
though he venture the abusing God and Men, tells us, That an Oath having been
made from the distrust of honesty in him that was to take it, where the cause
(Lies, Equivocations, etc.) is removed, the effect (Swearing) should cease: As
if Christ, or rather God himself, had distrusted his own honesty, when he swear
unto Christ, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec; or the
Patriarch Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, had distrusted God's honesty,
and therefore God swear to him to free him from his dissidence; and not because
(as the Scripture speaks) God [was] willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs of Promise, the immutability of his Counsel, Heb. 6.17.

(30.) Next we come to that Text in Matthew. 23. Neither be ye called Masters,
etc. Here, as his manner is, he abuses my words, as if he came out of Bedlam,
and then my Argument must be a Bedlam one. Read both, and compare, for I may
not now repeat. If the Quakers restrain the Text, where they have reason, why
may not others restrain it, where they have as good reason? and that without
blaming the Text? or strange irreverence to Holy Writ? If my Neighbor be a
Master of Servants, why may I not treat him in compellation as such? and not as
if he had no Servant, and were himself a Servant? And by Mr. P's favor, I
count it no sin to call another Man's Wife, Good Wife! or another Man's
She-Servant, Maid! Mr. P. does; but no sin to tell me, I have told a plain lie,
when himself has made my words so, by detracting from them. And therefore the
Reader has no reason to believe him, when he says, Civil honor, namely of
calling Master, is repugnant to common Truth, and Christian Religion.

But I wonder W. P. should take so much pains to vindicate Stephen in calling
the Counsel of the Jews, Men, Brethren, and Fathers, who yet were not his
proper Fathers; for he might with more ease have done it, by saying, He had a
special impulse for it, as the Quaker that came many score of miles (as they
said) to perform his obeisance to Margaret Fell, at her own House; where at a
solemn Meeting, the Man rose up from his Seat, and went and fell down upon his
knees (with his Hat in his hand) directly before Margaret Fell, and made his
humble address to her by the compellation of my dear Mother! and beseech'd her
to pray for him.

In like manner, on the third or fourth day after, John Stubs, at another
Meeting, requested the like favor of her, with his Hat under his Arm standing,
and calling her, My dear everlasting Mother: The truth of these things can be
proved by eye and ear-witnesses, and I suppose there are some Quakers that will
attest them.

This is that Margaret Fell, who was formerly Judge Fell's Wife, and is now G.
Fox's; concerning whom he gave forth a Paper, that his marriage with her, was a
sigure of the Marriage between Chirst and the Church: Likewise that his
Marriage was above the state of Adam in his Innocence, in the state of the
second Adam who never fell. Thus I find it reported by a certain Quaker in a
Letter (a notable piece) to his Friend. The same person faith, That upon two
occasions persons kneel before G. Fox, though it is done in a very private
manner, and but by a few; the one is, when he sends them forth to Administer;
the other is, upon some misdemeanour committed by a Minister, who acknowledging
his fault, upon his bended knees, George absolves him.

My next Argument was thus: Christ says, Be ye not called Kathegetai, but he
does not forbid them to be called Kyrioi; and we find in Scripture Philip
called by Strangers Kyrie, and Paul and Silas, Kyrioi; and Chirst himself
mistaken for a Gardener, by a notable Disciple called Kyrie, and all without
rebuke; therefore the compellation of Kyrie, is not forbid in Kathegetes: If it
be, our Lord Jesus himself, as well as the Apostles, will be brought under
suspicion of conniving at sin, in a place where he had opportunity to correct
it. And besides, the inspired Writers giving us no notice of any failure in any
of these cases, the Scripture, and practice of Christ and the Apostles, and
Primitive Believers, will be so far from being of Example and Teaching to us,
that they will be a temptation to us unto evil; and, as Mr. P. says, like the
shadow of the true Rule, that is, an evening shadow, which is five times as
long as the substance it self. Let the Reader see now if he can pick any thing
out of W. P's answer, but evasion and shuffle. He says indeed, in excuse of
our Lord's silence in the case, that he never particularly checked Peter for
denying him; which how parallel to this case, let the sober Reader judge; and
how boldly our Lords innocence is called into question, and how lamely
defended. And whether G. F. would have incurred that suspicion of guilt in the
like Circumstances? or the only Scripture of his Life and Doctrine, wrote by
the Quakers, left him under it?

(31.) As for his defense of Women speaking in the Church, it is like the rest,
mere shuffle. Judge what a pliant Conscience this man has! who can accuse some
that he had nothing to do with, page 68.
of making John speak equivocatingly, because they do not expound Scripture to
his sense, and me a little before of strange irreverence to Holy Writ for
restranining the Text, which himself also restrains; page 92.
and here behold what a sense he puts upon 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. as if he were
expounding one of the old Poetical Fables! But at length he comes to this, I
permit not an unlearned or ignorant Woman to speak in the Church; And Did the
Apostle permit, or Do the Quakers permit unlearned or ignorant men to speak in
the Church? I said, The Apostle forbids Women by Sex, in those cases wherein he
allows men by Sex to speak in the Church: Where Is his Answer? Find it that can.
He tells us of Women's laboring in the Lord, Helpers in Christ Jesus? Servants
of the Church: as if they might not do all that without speaking in the Church,
where there were men enough qualified for that work. He tells us of Women
prophesying, for among them (the Quakers) any profound and vehement prattle may
serve for that: but I never yet heard of a Quaker that spoke an unknown Tongue.
And yet one would think they needed it enough, when they are sent to the
Indians, or to the Great Turk.

(32, 33, 34, 35, 36.) These five Instances, ( Jam. 3.2. Ephesians. 5.25. Heb.
10.27. Joh 2.10, 2 Pet. 1.4.) the change of the Phrase in the two first and
last, and the defect in the third and fourth, do all favor their doctrine of
Perfection, which is indeed a Doctrine of Sin and Imperfection: for he is a
persect Man according to them, who sins not against his immediate Light or
Conscience, and so their Persection is consistent with all manner of sins of
Ignorance of Error proceeding from any passion, as is most manifest in these
two, G. F. and W. P. who must be accounted perfect men, notwithstanding all
their blasphemics against God and Christ, and conrumelies against men, which I
have evidently demonstrated. And then it is consistent with sins of Omission in
great plenty, for whilst they deny the Worship and whole Religson of all but
themselves, they must of necessity want that love toward them, which is due to
Christian Brethren. Behold here a sort of Christians, without either Faith in
the true Christ, or love to his faithful Servants!

(37.) And it is not a little mischief that has been wrought by that Notion of
God's working all in us, and for us, which G. F. will have the Apostle to say;
and W. P. beings three Texts, from whence he infers it, as if I had charged G.
F. with a false Infexence, and not false Scripture.

(38.) Our Translation has, ( Isa. 8.20.) -- If they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no Light in them: But G. F. You that speak
not according to that Rule, it is because you hate the Light in you. And W. P.
instead of vindicating him, rails at me. Who knows not what that change meant?

(39.) That G. F. may disparage the places wherein other Christians worship
God, says, Is God worshipped in Temples made with hands? And would have his
Reader take that for Scripture. W. P. says nothing to it.

(40.) I showed in my Epistle, p. 27. what Error of the Quakers is countenanced
by G. F.'s putting is for was, 2 Cor. 5.19. as if there were no work done by
Christ for reconciling men, which he was not, and is not always a doing. I
showed also that G. F. said, God was in Christ, reconciling himself to the
World. But W. P. takes no notice of it. He seems to have wrote his Book only
for the Quakers, or those that either never read my Epistle, or else have
forgot it.

Upon the whole Matter, (for I have exceeded my intended brevity) let the
impartial Reader judge of W. P's, and my performance in tals Argument; And
whether I have not proved by evidence of sense what I undertook, viz. That G.
F. is a false Prophet, a Liar, or Impostor? Yea, whether W. P. himself has not
confirmed unawares this Sentence concerning him? Whether it is not horrid
impiety for these men to pretend the guidance of God's infallible Spirit in
what they write; and to run in to such Absurdities, Falsities, and pernicious
Errors, as I have proved them guilty of? Whether it will not be great folly in
me, or any man henceforward to write, or indeed to speak to these men
concerning Matters of Religion, (except perhaps further to discover their
deceit) whilst they practice such unheard of Equivocation in their words, as
renders all Discourse vain and inessectual? Or, is it possible to convince
those men by Reason, that will deny the evidence of Sense? Besides, how can
there be either end or fruit of writing, where a man shall not only
musunderstand things that are plain; but impute to his Adversary Words and
Sayings of his own coining, and proceed to the bitterest reproaches thereupon;
and in the mean time omit to take notice of Matters of moment? Therefore I have
entitled this Discourse, CONTROVERSY ENDED, for I am bold to affirm, that it
must either be ended here, or if not, It may be continued infinitely upon the
same grounds. What remains then to be done, but earnestly to beg of God through
Jesus Christ, that he would give them repentance to the acknowlegment to the
Truth.

O Holy Jesus, who wast dead, but art alive, and live for evermore; who wast
crucified through weakness but live through the Power of God; to whom God,
even thy Father, has given al Power in Heaven and Earth; who can be touched
with the feeling of our Infirmities, for thou wast in all things tempted as we
are; Have pity upon these men, who (some of them) have a zeal of God but not
according to knowledge, work in them Humility, and enlighten the eyes of their
minds, that they may acknowledge thee to be their Lord, and the Mediator
between God and Men; that they may no longer despise that Knowledge and Faith
of thee, which is by Preaching or Tradition through the Holy Scriptures; but
may contend earnestly for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.
Tradita.
Have morey upon me, O Lord, pardon mine Infirmities, and judge whether I have
not been as careful not to wrong them in this Work, as I would have them, or
any man to be of not injuring me? and grant that it may be fo benefit and
advantage to many, and that thou may be glorified thereby. Amen.

POSTSCRIPT
NOw it will appear whether there be any prudent and houest men among the
Governing Quakers, by their dealing with W. P. for this Book of his: for I
appeal to the Reader, whether he thinks there be any such inconsiderable
Society of Christians in England, that would not either have required a public
acknowledgment of his Offense, or have disowned that Member, which should have
wrote in their Desence a Book of 138 papges, and but two of them (that is p.
130, and 131.) that have any pertinency of Auswer to their Antagonist's chief
Argument; and that also, which is there alleged, to be partly false, and
altogether inconsequent, save against himself: But to contain many pages that
directly confirm and aggravate the Charge brought against them, and moreover,
to be so stuff with palpable, calumnious, and self-praysing untruths, and
virulent Language, that it makes their Cause and Dealing odious in the sight of
sober men: all which I have proved W. P. to have done in relation to the
Quakers.

It will easily appear to the considering Reader, that I have, for brevity
sake, omitted to impprove many Advantages which my rash Adversary has given me,
contenting my self to in timate them, and so proceed. And he that has
diligently and judiciously read my Epistle and his Answer, may perceive that I
have not so much as intimated diverse things of much advantage to my Cause and
Person. Among those is that Passage in p. 136. where he essays to answer some
of my Reasons for keeping my Name from them, and says, very civilly, That I
horribly bilie them: why? wherein? Not in this, That there are some of their
Writers, that make it a great part of their Answers to Books, the reproaching
the Author. Let this very Book of W. P. be an Instance, How many Sheets must it
have wanted, if all of that kind had been subtracted? Not in this, That they
are very Rhetorical in that point. I am persuaded W. P. could not Rhetoricate
so well in the praise of any Person in the World, ( G. Fox not excepted) as he
has in reproach of me. He has taken up one of Muggleton's peculiar Phrases,
wherewith to abuse me and my Friends, calling us Serpentine Associates. It Is
like Muggleton had used it in W. P's hearing, and W. P. according to his
nature, was taken with it, and so bestowed it upon his next Adversary. Neither
in this do I belie them, that if they had my Name, then it must be considered
what Party I am of, and accordingly all that is odious, or so reputed, either
in the Doctrine or Practice of the whole Party must be raked up against me. Let
his Book be witness whether he has not dealt so with me, even upon a suspicion
of my name. But, (says he) we never charged the infirmities of a single
Person, further then upon that guilty Person, unless he were connived at, or
justified in his wickedness by any whole Party.

Now here lies the Wit, If any part of the Charge be not found apparent, all
the rest, how manifest soever, must go for a horible lie. But W. P. (kind Man!)
will not put me to much trouble in searching for an Instance: It is but turning
back to p. 7. and there I find a single Person described, (as it were in a Hue
and Cry) and his being wanting in the very Alphabet of common civility,
attributed plurally to him and me at least, and I think to all the Party that
W. P. assigns for us. Has he not then raked up against me what is odious, or so
reputed both in the Doctrine and Practice of a Party, and of a particular
Person? Which he can never prove me guilty of justifying in that case.

Another Instance shall be of an elder date; see the Epistle to G. Whitehead's
Divinity, etc. where G. F. tells the Presbyterians and Independents, that when
the people of God, called Quakers, were gathered together in diverse places to
Worship God, then you said, They were plotting together against Oliver, (whom
some of you called the Light of your Eyes, and Breath of your Nostrils) to
bring in King Charles. If they can make it appear (which I much doubt) that one
or another Presbyterian or Independent did suggest any such thing against them,
it can never be believed by any sober Man that that Person was connived at, or
justified therein by one or both Parties, Presbyterians or Independents, and
yet here G. F. and J. S. impute it to them both indefinitely; and that so, as
thereby to insinuace that the Quakers were generally at least esteemed Friends
to the King, and sufferes upon that account: But the Presbyterians and
Independents Friends to Oliver, and Enetnies to the King and the Quakers. O the
Candor and Simplicity of G. Fox! O the Modesty and Meekness of W. Pen!

Again, Inreference to their calling men Tinker or Tailor, W. P. replies, We
never told the World men's Trades in a way of detraction or reproach; our Souls
abbor it. When he has taken shame to himself in the ingenuous acknowledgment to
the World, of those untruths I have proved him guilty of; then he may better be
believed. In the mean time who can believe that G. W. did not call Bunyan the
Tinker, by way of detraction, when he adds immediately, a railing envious man;
and in a late Pamphlet, calls railing Language, Tinkers-Rhetorick Besides,
Tinker is a term of reproach, and he that is such, may by Stature be punished
as a Rogue.

FINIS.
The Book entitled The Spirit of the Quakers tried;etc. is to be had at the
Elephant and Castle heat the Royal Exchange in Cornhil London.


