Englands Chronicle: OR, THE LIVES and REIGNS OF THE Kings and Queens From the
time of JVLIVS CAESAR To the present Reign of K. WILLIAM and Q. MARY:

Containing The Remarkable Transactions and Revolutions in Peace and War, both
at Home and Abroad, as they relate to this Kingdom, with the Wars, Policies,
Religion and Custom, Success and Misfortunes, as well of the Ancient Britains,
as Roman, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Conquerors, with Copper Cuts, and whatever
else is conduceable to the Illustration of History.

By J. Heath.

LONDON: Printed for Benj. Crayle, at the Peacock and Bible at the West end of
St. Paul's, N. Bodington in Duck-lane, and G. Conyers at the Ring on
Ludgate Hill. 1689.

W: Conq:

K: Will: 2

K: Hen: 1

K: Ste:

K: Hen: 2

K: Ric: 1

K: Iosor:

K: Hen: 3

K: Ed: 1

K: Ed: 2

K: Ed: 3

K: James. 2.

K: Rich: 2



England's Cronicle.

K: Hen: 4:

Hen: 5



or the Lives and Reigns of all the KINGS and QUEENS To the present Reign of K.
William and L. Mary and

K: Hen 6:

K: Ed: 4

K: Ed: 6

K: Hen: 8

K: Hen: 7

K: Ric: 3

K: Ed: 5

K: Ch: 2

K: Ch: 1

K: James

Q: Eliz:

Q: Mary



Englands famed Monarchs, thus pouri^^^^^ behold Whose warlike Deeds, this
vollume does unfold, For Wisdom and for Valor they were known* Each had their
Triumphs on the British Throne

Licensed,

July the 3d. 1689.

And Entered according to Order.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
READER,
IN this Book you have the Recital of the past and present Glories of this
famous Kingdom, from the time it was first dis^vered to this day, continued in
the renowned Actions of its Kings and Princes, being a Series of History so
remarkable and delightful, that nothing material can be truly said to be
omitted. Here you may find the Original Manners, Wars and Customs of the first
Britains, their contending with the Romans, their Courage and various Success,
and wh^^ and by what means this Nation became subject to the Roman, Saxon, Dane
and Norman Conquerors, with the sundry Revolutions of Church and State, as well
in Peace as War; Transactions at home and abroad, various Policies and
Stratagems, etc. And indeed, those things hat have made this Island lift her
Head above other Nations, blessed by the plenteous hand of Heaven, and the
Industry of her Natives, her Renown has traveled with the Sun, scarce any
corner of the habitable World, where Fame has not breathed her Glories: I need
not much infist upon this, to those who are daily Spectators of her Riches and
Plenty, as well of her own Product and Manufacture, as accruing by Navigation,
etc. from the remotest Oriental Parts, nor of the Purity of Religion, or
Tranquillity we enjoy under the Auspicious Reign of our Gracious King and Queen;
but it remains that I recommend to you the perusal of what cannot, but aford,
as much satisfaction as any thing of this kind is capable of rendering: So
hoping it may prove very useful to all Lovers of History:

I am, Reader, yours to serve you, J. Heath.

Englands CHRONICLE: OR, The Lives and Reigns of all the Kings and Queens, from
the time of JVLIVS CAESAR, to the present Reign of K. William and Qu. Mary, etc.
A Description of the Island of Britain, with its Original Denomination, etc.
THE Island of Great Britain, whose Fame has traveled with the Sun, and reached
the remotest Kingdoms of the Earth, is bounded with Germany and Denmark on the
East, or properly with the German Ocian, on the West with Ireland, or the Irish
Seas on the North, with the Ducalidonian Seas; and on the South, with France
and Normandy, situate in the eighth Climate of the North Latitude, and placed
in relation to Longitude between the Parrals of fourteen and sixteen,
Containing in length from Strathy-Head in the Kingdom of Scotland, to the
Lizard point in Cornwall, Six Hundred Twenty Four Miles, and in Breadth, from
the Isle of Thannet in Kent, to the Lands end in Cernwal, Three Hundred and
Forty Miles, though formerly its Limits were Fancied from the Orcad^s, to the
(...) Mountain^

As for the time of its being peopled, (even the most curious Historians vary)
some hold it to be inhabited long before the Flood, and that being a part of
France, it was by the Rapid Inundation of the Universe, broken off from the
Continent, where now the Channel parts Dover from Calais; and by that means,
being left by the Flood, became an Island: But this I conceive only
conjectural, without any warrantable Testimony; and is grounded upon the
Pariety of the Soils, and Temprature of Air. Since that, there are others that
will have it possessed by one Albion a Giant, who beat out the Samotheans,
whose Gigantick Race increased till the time that King Brute, Coasting these
Seas with a power of Trojans under his Command, observing its spaciousness and
fertility, made a Descent, and subdued it; and of this latter Opinion, is the
so much Celebrate Antiquary and Historian, Jeffry of Monmouth; and from this
Trojan Prince he would have us believe, the Island took its Name: But those,
who have seriously enquired into the Date, he proposes for the Landing of
Brute, viz. In the 2887 Year of the worlds Creation, find not any Foundation to
Build a belief, that such a Man was ever in these Parts; but rather the Name
was derived from the word Prith or Brith, signifying Painting, and probably the
Greeks, who were then the greatest Navigators, Sailing along the Coast, and
perceiving the painted People that inhabited it, might, from that
signification, give it a Name, as indeed they did to most Islands and
Countries, that were not Civilized, where ever they came; or it might be from
the word (...) Metals, for its abounding with Metals, as it had done that of
Albion, from Albis Rupibus, viz. White Rocks, that appear toward the Coast of
France.

These are the Conjecturals, and we might run on in a maze of uncertainty, till
we tired the Reader; considering, that, before the Landing of the Romans, the
People were uncivilized, keeping no Writings or R^ cords of their Country or
Actions, to Druids or Priests themselves being a kind of Magicians, or such as
dealt in Spells and Charms, preserving their Religious Rites and Ceremonies in
Hieroglipicks and Figures, after the manner of Egypt, the better to create an
Awe and Dread upon the more ignorant, and raise an esteem and veneration of
themselves, which otherwise must have much abated the Credit they had gained:
But leaving things that are doubtful, and have never been fully cleared by the
most curious and industrious Writers, we come to what is more warrantable, and
for what we have sure^ grounds (laying aside the Story of the Samothes, sprung
from the (...) Son of Japhat, perhaps as Fabulous as the rest) and that is to
the Year of the Worlds Creation, 3873. Viz.

Caius Julius Caesar, by the prevailing Arms of the Roman Commonwealth, having
subdued Gallia, now France, and a great part of Germany, thirsty of new Glory,
by Conquest, being invited hither by Andragius, one of the Sons of King Lud,
upon a Quarrel that happened between him and his Uncle Cassibelan. King of the
Trinobantes, he, from the Shoars of Gallia, viewing the Coast, and finding, by
Report and Situation, that it was fair and fruitful, in a temperate Climate;
and that its Conquest would highly redound to his Honor, and the Advantage of
the Roman People, he settled, as well as the shortness of the time, would permit
the new Conquests, and prepared an extraord^nery Fleet of Ships, and smaller
Vessels, for the Transportation of his Army; yet had he much ado to mak^ the
Legions Imberque, who perceiving the dreadful Rocks on the distant Shore,
together with the roughness and danger of the Sea, complained, That after all
the Toiles and Hardships they had endured, he was now about to carry them into
another World; for so they esteemed this great Island.

Caesar, notwithstanding the speed that attended his Expeditions, was not so
silent in his Preparation, but the Britains had notice of it from such of the
Gauis, as had made their escapes in small Barques; and upon his attempting to
land, he found the Shores between Dover and Sandwich covered with the armed
Britains, under Casib^lan and other Kings, who disputed his landing with great
resolution and sury, beating him twice from the Shore, with the loss of his
Sword, and the no small danger of his Person, which constrained him to put his
Archers on board small Vessels, whose Shot (to which the Britains were not
accustomed) made them retire, whilst under that Favor he landed part of his
Legions, yet long was it before he could make good his ground, with the loss of
his huge Fleet broken to pieces by the fury of the Tempest, and a great number
of his Men slain in diverse Conflicts and Skirmishes, for the Natives sighting
partly in hook-armed Wagons, or their fashioned Chariots of War, and partly on
foot with Spears, small imboss'd Shields, and large Swords, being exceeding
nimble, charged and retired in Parties as they saw it convenient, and when in
any Battle they were worsted, they betook themselves to fortified Woods, which
served them in the nature of Castles: So that in the end this great Conqueror,
tired with continual Alarums, thought it convenient to make a Peace with those
Kings that had opposed him, and taking Hostages, he returned to France, there
to quiet some new Commotions that were arisen.

The People, in the condition Casar found them, were tall, big-bodied, strong,
and greatly addicted to hardship, having few Towns, unless such as were the
Capitals of their Kings, but lived in fortified Woods, the Men being allowed as
many Wives as they could keep, fierce and cruel, yet sparing in Diet, and not
much addicted to Labor, so that the Ground lay mostly untilled; and when they
sowed their Corn, they only strewed it on the Earth, and harrowed it over with
Bushes, on which they laid considerable weights; and being carried away with a
notion of the Pythagorians, they forbore very much to kill or destroy the
Creatures lest they should unhouse the Souls of their Friends and nearest
Relations, which they concluded at their deaths had passed by Transmigration
into them; so that Hares, Hens, and Geese especially, were found in such
plenty, and so same, that it was admirable, with great store of delicious
Fruits, which Nature of her own accord had produced.

The Trade of the Britains, if any abroad, was very inconsiderable; for, as
Casar observes, their Boats were for the most part Leather drawn over Wicker of
Osiers, or such as were fewed together with Thongs, so that they durst not
venture far from the shore, nor did they trouble themselves with any store of
Provision when they Sailed. The better sort were clad, but they mostly with
Skins, which they had not the art to dress; taking a (...) of pride in
Nakedness, for as much as being Young, they Raised and S^arrified their Skins
into Carved Works, of B^rds, B^asls, Tr^es, Flowers, Fist, Sun^, Mcon^, S^rs,
and the like; it b^ing a Trade o^ Employment, to persons well versed in i^ as
well as Pai^ting or Carving at this Day; and in there Sears they suppled the
Juice of Would or Wo^d, which not only coulo^red their Bod^^, (...) sinking in
where the Skin gave way, left a lasting Stain that grew up with them to
Maturity, fortifying their Bodies by shutting up the (...) against heat or cold;
and though they lived in a sind of a state of Innocence, sequ^stered from the
hurry and business of more Civilized Mations, yet being under many Governors,
they frequently Wared upon each other through Emulation; though their Riches
were inconsid^rable, their Coin, or what was Courant amongst them, being only
Brass or Irsn, Ring^, Boxes, O^nches, at a certain Sieze or Weight, though
afterward, by the Example of the Romans, they stamped Silver and Gold, with
sundry Devices, Imbos^ Shield ways. They made their Drink of Barley, boiled in
Water, but took little account of Milk, and less of their Cattle, taking great
pride in shaving themselves all but the upper Lip, which they did in imitation
of the Gauls, wearing Iron Chains about their Necks and Wastes, with Brass Rings
on their Fingers, as Ornaments; and they had Women in common, amongst Brothers
and Parents, and the Issue was attributed to him who first gathered her
Virginity.

As for the Religion of the Ancient Britains (if so I may term it, and not
rather a Diaboliea^ Delusion) it was Superstitious and Barbarous for the Druids
or Priests, whom they held to be very Oracles, gave themselves up to
Witchcrasts and Enchantments, muttering horrid Charms, pretending to raise
Sto^ms and Tempests, to call for Lightning and Thunder: Nor was their Idolatry
less, for they had Images, almost without number, to which they prayed, and
made Sacrifice under certain Names and Figures, as the Priests directed, not
sparing to offer the Flesh of their Enemies taken in War, and amongst them,
even Priestcraft reigned in those days; for Excommunication was of great
Force, and the Theology they held, was, that the Soul being Immortal, lost
not, nor lessened in its Existence by the dying of the Body, but passed in its
Existence by the dying of the Body, but passed into another, either rational or
irrational Creature, and their Pxiests were Judges in all Civil Controversies.

This was the state of the Britains, when the Romans same first acquainted with
the Island and those of England, so named since that time, from a place in
Denmark called Engelon, or from the East Augles, were distinguished by their
Cantons or Tribes, in the following order and possession, viz. The Cantij
possessed Kent; the Regni, S^ssex and Surry; the Durotriges, Dorset-shire; the
Damnoni, Devon-shire and Cornwall; the Belg^e, Somersetshire, Wilt-shire, and
Sonthampton-shire; the Atrebati, Bark-shire; the Dubuni, Oxfordshire and
Gloucestershire; the Catieuclani, Warwickshire, Buckingham-shire, and
^edford-shire; the Trinobantes, Hartford-shire, Essex, and Middl sex; the
Icenij, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge-shire and Huntington-shire, the Conitani,
Lincolnshire, Rutlandsh^re, Northamptonshire, Leichestershire, D^rby-shire,
and Nottingham-shire; the Cornaby, Staffordshire, Worcestershire, Cheshire,
and Shropshire.

The Cantons of Wales had likewise their order and division, viz. The Ordovices
possessed Flintshire, Carnarvan-shire, Denby-shire, Mountgomery-shire, and
Merionoth-shire; the Silures Hereford-shire, Radnor-shire, Brecknock, Monmouth,
and Glamorgan-shire; The Dimet^e Car^marden-shire, Pembrook-shire, and
Cardigan-shire; the Ottodini and Brigantes Parisi were accounted separate from
the former, and possessed themselves of Yorkshire, Lancashire, Durham,
Richmond, County Westmorland, Cumberland, North^mberland; and the latter,
sometimes of March, Teifidale, Tw^edale and Louthian: These Divisions had their
respective Heads or Governors, to whom they made Acknowledgment, and paid
some inconsiderable Tribute; though most of that kind fell to the share of the
Priests; and indeed their Riches was but small, for Caesar, when he found he had
a considerable Advantage over the Southren part of this Island, laid no
greater Tax upon them, than three hundred pounds a year, as a Tributary
Acknowledgment to Rome: We might insist on the Tribes that were possessed of
Scotland, and the Island, belonging to Great Britain, but not being much to the
purpose, it is convenient to pursue the more materialpart of History.

This part of Great Britain, is the most plentiful, abounding with all Things
necessary for the pleasure and Support of Humane Life, and was named (as is
said) England, from Englone, a place in Denmark; or as some will have it, from
a People, called East Angles, who placed themselves in the Eastern part of it,
in the time of the Saxons; which name, neither the Danes nor Normans, in their
Conquests, thought fit to Change or Alter; so that it contained it for the
space of eight hundred seventy three years, when King James united it with
Scotland, 1602. and restored the Ancient Name of Great Britain; and such
Reputation it all along had, a^ to gain the fifth place in General Councils,
and was styled (for the abundance of Plenty it afforded, to Supply the
Neighbor Nation) the Storehouse of the Western world, for from hen^s, even in
early days, the Romans were wont yearly to Lade eight hundred Vessels with
Corn, for the supply of their Armies in other Countries; so that it has been
often taken for the Fortunate Island, mentioned by ancient W^iters, especially
the Gr^cians: But above all, it has been the peculiar Care of Heaven, in that
the Christian Faith was planted here, in the sixty third year of our S^viours
Incarnation; and it is held (not without good ground^) that Jos^ph of
Aramathca, was sent hither by Philip, the Apostle of France, and that he was
Buried at Gl^ss^nbury; and some will have it, and show much Reason for it, that
St. Paul was here, and Preached the Gospel: However, this is certain, It
enjoyed the first Christian King, in the person of King Lucius, and gave birth
to that Glorious Propagator of Christianity, Constantine, the great Emperor of
Rome: But thus much for History in General, from whence we proceed to what is
more particular.

Thus Fame, to breath our Nations Glory's proud:
Hark! How her Golden Trumpet sounds aloud!
From Pole to Pole, the Mighty ^las^ is gone,
To fill all Nation^, circl'd by the (...).
An Historical Account of the British Princes, that opposen the Romans, in
their attempting to Settle in th^se parts.
THE Romans, under Casar, first taking the Advantage of the Divisions and
Animosities, riegning amongst the petty Princes of the Britains, made no other
account, but to Gain a full Possession, with little trouble or hazard; but
found themselves mistaken, even in barbarous Valor, as they Termed it; for so
it fell out, That King Lud, who built the W^st-Gate of the City of London; and
was the first Founder of the City it self, calling it Carelud, though not in
extent, as at present, dying, and leaving two Son^, viz. Andragius and
T^mantius, their Uncle Cassibelane (by the Fathers direction) took upon him the
Government, till they should be of Age, stiling himself Prince of the
Trin^bants, or new Troy, as some will have it; being the most powerful of all
the Princes of the Britains, and when his Nephews were capable of Rule, he gave
to Andragius Trinovant, the Dukedom of Kent; and to Temantius the Dukedom of
Cornwall, reserving to himself the City of Verilum, now St. Albons, and other
^ependances: But Andragius being dissatisfied with his Uncle, and hearing the
Fame of Caesar's great Actions, ^mplored his Assistance against him; and so far
prevailed, that he came over, and Overcame this Prince, after a long and
obstinate Resistance, wherein eighty thousand were slain on both sides, at
sundry times, and the Country's Amerced for breaking the Truce; and when he
left the Island, Andragius, with a great many British Soldiers, went along
with him, to help him in his Wars against Pompey the Great, whom he Overthrew
in the Pharsalian Fields. So that, after the death of Cassibelan, who expired
at York: Temantius possessed both his Father's and Uncle's Dominions; nor had
Caesar only this Prince to Contend with, but likewise Cingitorix, Taximagul,
and Caravil, petty Kings of Kent; but his Fortune prevailing against them,
their Men slain, and they routed; the first was taken, and the two last fled:
So that the Roman Arms growing dreadful to the rest of the Princes, after they
had lent what Assistance they could, and found themselves too weak to Oppose a
prevailing Conqueror, Senimagues, Ancalites, Bibroses, and the rest of the
States of Icenij laid down their Arms, and submitted, as did many others:
However, C^esar rather showed the Romans this Island, than subdued it, or knew
the Extent of it; for neither by Arms, or Intelligence, could he discover,
whether it was an Island, or Continent.

Caesar, (after having waded through the World, at a Sea of Blood, and reached
the very Pinnacle of humane Greatness) being slain in the Senate House in Rome,
by the Conspiracy of the Senators; Augustus Caesar coming to the Imperial
Throne, the Britains b^gan to bethink themselves of casting off the Roman Yoke,
under Cunobeline, who held his Regal Seat ^ Malden in Essex, and had been
Kinghted by Julius G^sar; and indeed they went a great way in it; A^gustus
prepared three times, utterly to Subdue him, an his Dominions, but was diverted
by other Affairs: ^ that in the twenty third Year of this King's Reign, the
PRINCE of Peace, our Blessed Lord and Savior, being Born, the Lion lay down
with the Lamb: An Univers^ Peace ensued, according as it had been foretold b^
the Prophets. This was the first of the British King that stamped his Image
upon his Coin; and Dying ful^ of years, he was succeeded by Guiderius his Son,
wh^ was no less desirous than his Father, to shake off the Roman Tribute: When
he heard Augustus C^sar wa^ Dead: and Caligula, who was Emperor in his stead^
being denied the Payment, made great preparation against him, but being an
Emperor of little Conduct, an^ less Courage; coming to the Belgic shore, he
made h^ Soldiers gather Shells in their Helmets, whilst the Trumpets sounded a
Charge, as to the Battle, and ^ returned in a foolish kind of Triumph, proud to
ha^ taken the Spoils of the Ocean; but Claudius Drusius, wh^ succeeded him,
overthrew Guiderius, and his Britain under the Conduct of his Deputy; and in
the Figh^ the King was slain by the Treachery of one Hamo, wh^ (pretending
friendship) in a Disguise got near his Pe^ son; but being pursued by Arviragus,
the King's B^ther, to the shore of the Sea, himself was there di^patched, from
whose Fall some Antiquaries affir^ the Place took the Name of Hamo's Haven, now
t^ Town of Southampton.

The Father and Son thus Dead, Catacratus, a seco^ Son to Cunobeline, assumed
the Throne; when following his Predecessors, in opposing the Romans, he was a
great and mortal Battle, overthrown with the loss almost all his People; and
himself being taken Pri^ner, was carried to Rome, where he was led throu^ ^he
streets in a triumph of Derision, to honor Aulus ^lautinus his Conqueror; yet
Togodumnuis the third ^on of Cunobeline, succeeded him, but with as bad
for^une; for after he had harazed their Camp, and slain many of them, in such a
manner, that Plautinus was obliged to send for the Emperor Dr^sius, who ^rought
with him a great Power, a Mortal Battle was ^ought, in which the British King
was slain; yet Ar^iragus, the last of the Brothers, had leave to Succeed ^im;
and he, for a while, held a fair Correspondency with the Romans, but finding
his opportunity fell off, and joining with some petty Neighbors, gave the
^mperor such Apprehensions of Danger, that he ^hought it best for his Repose,
and the Securing the Roman Interest in this Island, to give him his Daugher
Genissa in Marriage. This Assinity calmed Affairs for a time, and the Britains
having learned the Roman Customs, became much civilized, forgetting their
Barbarous Nature, clothing themselves, and building Houses; so that the Island
extremely Flourished, and ^ested from War, during the Life of Arviragus, and
was very little troubled in the time of Cogid^nus: But Characticus, a Prince of
the Silures, growing powerful, by the contracted Forces of his Neighbors, drew
into the Field, and beat the Roman Soldiers from their Strenghts, making great
Slaughter of them; yet in the end, being Overthrown, he fled to Cart^smandua
for shelter and protection; but she, desirous to ingratiate her self with the
Emperor, caused him, contraty to her Faith plighted, to be delivered up to his
Enemies, who, the better to keep their new Acquiessitions in Peace, sont him to
Rome, where, beholding the Magnificence of that Luxurant City, he reproved the
Roman Covetousness and Ambition, saying, He adm^red, that they, being Master,
of such glor^ous T^mples, Structures, and Riches, should neverthe^^ss crave
after the Cottages, and poor Poss^ssions of the Britains: And although this
Prince was removed, another stood up in his stead, Pr^sutagus King of the
Icenij; yet finding himself in no good Condition to Resist, h^ made Peace, and
growing near his end, left Quee^-Boduo, and his two Daughters, in the
Protection of the Emperor Nero, whom he had made his Heir; but the Ladies being
of Incomparable Beauty, and contrary to the Trust reposed, Ravished; the
valiant Queen called together her Friends and Commanders, acquainting them with
the Treachery, and desiring their assistance, telling them, That the Romans
were infeble^ by Ease and Luxury; and therefore being resolutely so^ upon, they
would fly like a timorous Hare; and at that word (opening her Lap, she let go a
Hare, which so the purpose she had concealed.

This so animated the rest, that they immediatel^ took Arms, and falling upon
the Romans, in their to^ much Security, under the Conduct of this Queen, pu^
eighty thousand of them to the Sword; but in the en^ New Forces arriving, she
was forced to lay down her Arms, and seek for Safety: And next to he Venutius,
King of the Brigantes Warred upon them but by the Treachery of his Queen, the
faithless Cart^ mandua, he was Overthrown; so that the Roman having pierced
into Scotland, Overthrew, in a great Battle, Galgacius, Prince of the
Callidonians; an^ finding none to Oppose them, they became absolut^ Masters of
the Famous Island of Great Britain: No^ was it known, that they discovered it,
till this time t^ be an Island, which was about one hundred thirty six years
after the Landing of Caesar, when, in a far less^ time they Subdued all France,
Germany, and other Countries insinitely larger, by which we may perceive,

The Early Valor of the British Race,
Who boldly durst the worlds proved Conquerors Face,
And put even Rome her self to soul disgrace.
An Historical Account of the Roman Emperors, who were personal in this Island,
or Ruled by their Lieutenants.
Caius Julius Caesar (as you have heard) was the first Roman that set footing
in this Island, landing in the Year of the worlds Creation, 3873. But he did
little more than show it the Romans, laying a small Tribute of 300 pounds upon
it, not having passed with Armed Forces (as many hold) beyond St. Albans, then
called Verillum, finding by the great Resistance he experienced, he had to deal
with a stubborn People, over which he had no other advantage; but being better
Armed, and somewhat more expert in the Trains of War; yet, after three
Expeditions, he came no more; but proceeded to put the project, of gaining the
Sovereignty of the World, in practice, wherein he was Successful, after the
Fatal Battles of Pharsalia, Philipi, and Munda; yet his Aspiring cost him his
Life, as has been Related.

Octavian Augustus Caesar, succeeded Julius, after many Troubles, and much
difficulty, but came not into this Island, though he thrice intended it; and in
this Golden Reign, the SAVIOR of the World was Born: To this Great Emperor
Succeeded Tiberius; in the eighteenth year of whose Reign, The LORD of LIFE was
put to Death, to Rise more G^orious, and Triumph over Death and Hell, and the
prodigious Defects in Nature, that attended his Passion; being ob^erved by
Dionisus Areopagita, as the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, etc, He cried out,
that The God of Nature suffered, or the Frame of the world was about to be
dissolved: To this Emperor, Caligula Succeeded; but the most memorable Act he
did, was, the Banishing Pontius Pilate, who, thereupon, grew desperate, and
Slew himself: Then came Claudius Drusius, under whom, Aulus Plautinius was
Deputy in Britain, who was put so hard to i^, that the Emperor was obliged to
come over; and, by the Marriage of his Daughter, put an end to the Troubles
Nero succeeded him in the Imperial Throne, whose wickednesses are too many to
be related in this place: Amongst other things, he Crucified St. Peter, and
caused St. Paul to be Beheaded, Burnt the City of Rome, Killed his Wife, Ripped
up his Mother, and Persecuted the Christians with new invented Torments; he did
great Injuries to the Britains, by his Lieutenants, for which Queen Boduo slew
Eighty Thousand of his Romans. Sergius Galba began his Reign Anno Dom. 70. But
being a Cruel and Desolute Prince, he was Killed by his Soldiers, after he had
continued seven Months in the Throne; So that Maximus being then Deputy, the
Britains felt not the Effects of his Anger; and thus, Rome wanting a Head,
Marcus Sylvius Otho entered upon the Stage, yet Reigned but three Months and
five Days, before he made way for Aulus Vitellus, who, after eight Months
Reign, was Killed by the Soldiers, and Elavius Vespatian, made Emperor in his
stead: So that, in these short Revolutions, the Britains had Peace; yet, in
this last Reign, the Brigantes and Silures, were up in Arms, but Julius
Frontius overpowered them. Petilius being Deputy, the Famous City of
Jerusalem, after an obstinate and bloody Siege, was Taken by the Romans, under
the L^ading of Titus Vespatian, who succeeded his Father in the Empire, after
he had Reigned about nine Years: and Reigned two years, and three months; yet
we find not that he had any War with the Britains, but left the Empire to
Domitian, his Brother, who raised a Persacution against the Christians, by the
Example of Nero: Insomuch, that Christianity then beginning to Flourish in this
Island, many were cut off, for the Testimony they bore to their Lord and
Master: And Julius Agricola, being Deputy, he, upon the Revolt of the Britains,
gave them ^ and in a fearful Overthrow, slew Ten Thousand of them, with the
Loss of Three Bundred and Forty of his own Men; and this is he that first
discovered this Country to be an Island, and Domitian, after about fifteen
years Reign, dying, Coc^eius Nerva came to the Throne of Empire, being a very
Charitable Prince; but after ten Months he gave place to Trajan, who raised the
Third Persecution, and Overthrew the Revolting Britains, by Spartia^us his
Lieutenant: Leaving the Stage of Honor, after Twenty One Years Six Months,
when Adrianus was Proclaimed Emperor; and although he had no War with the
Britains, he nevertheless raised a Persecution against the Christians, and made
the Church of Christ weep Tears of Blood in all Lands, whither his Power
extended; yet he Reigned twenty two years: But at length Antonius Pius, who
Succeeded him, restrained, and re-called his Cruel Edicts; yet in his time the
Britains (rising in Arms) were Overthrown by Lollius Urbicus: Marcus Aurelius
taking next upon him the Administration of the Imperial Power, revived the
Persecution, but had no War with the Britains; and giving place, after nineteen
years Reign, Commodius took upon him the Sway of the Empire; and now the
Almighty smiling upon this Land (with the brightest Rays of Divine Love) raised
up a Christian King, and the first that the World had seen, viz. King Lucius,
Son to King Ceilus, and Great Grand Child to Arviragius, who Married the
Emperor Drusius's Daughter; and he being more mindful of Religion, (that
dearest part of Government) than of any other Consideration, the better to
Establish the Work, so prosperously begun, sent two Learned Men to Elutherus,
then Bishop of Rome, to be further Instructed in the FAITH; who thereupon sent
him Fagarius and Damianus, with his Letter, in the following words:

You have received, in the Kingdom of Britain, by GOD's Mercy, both the Law and
Faith of Christ; you have both the Old and New Testament, out of the same
(through God's Grace) by the Advice of your Realm take a Law; and by the same,
through God's Sufferance Rule your Kingdom of Britain; for in that Kingdom you
are God's Vicar.

This I have mentioned, to show, The honesty and plainness of the Bishops of
Rome, before they came to be Debauched, and Corrupted with Pride and Avarice:
And this good King so far improved the Advice, that he immediately Changed the
Seats of the three Arch- Flamens, and twenty-eight Flamens, into so many
Archiepiscopal, and Episcopal Sees, appointing for the first three, London,
York, and Gloucester; and thereupon the Christian Religion, in spite of the
Oppressors, grew up like a stately Cedar, and overspread the Land.

Helvius Pertinax, the next Emperor, did nothing of note, having but a short
Reign, not exceeding eight Months; and was Succeeded by Didius Julianus who
continued not above two Months; neither o^ them having any War with the
Britains: Yet in the Reign of Septimus Severius, the Calledonians were up in
Arms, and Heraclionus his Deputy, not being able to Quell them, the Emperor
came over in Person, yet could not Effect it, by reason of the Fortresses and
Marshes, where they usually Fortified themselves, with less than the Loss of
fifty thousand o^ his men; and the better to Bridle them, he caused a mighty
Wall, with Towrs, to be run from Shor^ to Shore; but being come over a second
time, (upon new Commotions) he fell Sick, and dyed at York and in his Reign,
the fifth Persecution was raised against the Christians. Bassianus Caracala
Reigne^ after him six years, and being made Co-Emperor with his Brother Geta,
he slew him; yet the Britains were not molested, during his Reign; and then he
gave place to Opilius Maerinus, who reigned about one year two months; and was
Succeeded by Heliogabilus a Lude, Debauched, and Luxurious Emperor, wh^ had
been formerly Priest to the Son, yet he held the imperial Seat four years, and
then gave Place to Alexander Severus, who gave Liberty to the Christi^ns, to
live peaceably and quiet, without oppression or persecution; but when he had
reigned six months and seven days, he was killed by the Mutiny of the Almain
Soldiers, and made way for Maximinus, who ^aised the sixth Persecution; yet in
his time the Bri^ains were in Peace, but three Years put a period to his Reign,
and Julius Varius Maximus mounted the Throne; but he soon after was slain by
the Soldiers. And Gordianus, who succeeded him, Reigned but forty days: For
now the Petorian Soldiers began to commit all manner of Disorders, setting the
Empire to Sale, raising any one to it for Money; and then, either Killing or
Deposing them, made room for more Gain; and instead of One, they sometimes set
up Two in Co-partnership, as Claudius Puppienus, and Celius Balbinus, who
Reigned only a Year, then Antonius Gordianus Reigned; and after him, Julius
Philippus; the one Reigning Four, and the other Five Years: Which short
continuance, and the Care they had to Secure themselves, made them little mind
what was done abroad; and Lieutenants of Provinces perceiving things go thus
unfortunately, did not so much trouble themselves, in Gathering the public
Taxes, as to ingratiate in the Peoples Favor, and enrich themselves by
Presents and Offerings, which were daily made them, without running the hazard
of forcing them to Rebel. And now Decius coming to the Imperial Seat, stirred
up by the Enemies of the Church of Christ, he raised the seventh Persecution;
but his Fury continued not, for he reigned but two years, e're he gave way to
Trebonianus and Vo^usianius, who stayed the Persecution, and had Peace with the
Britains: But in two years they gave way to Aelmelianus, who reigned not above
two months; and though Valerianus, that succeeded him, held not the Dignity
above a year, yet being of a Cruel Temper, he gave vent to his Anger on the
Christians, wh^ now, in all places, began to Multiply; so that again the Church
was forced to wear the bloody Scars of eight Persecution; and under him St.
Laurence, an^ St. Cyprian suffered Martyrdom.

Thus went on the course of things, in these earl^ times; and as the Wealth of
Britain increased, so the Romans raised their Taxes to a higher pitch; yet the
people, by this time, being better used to their Guest and interchanged
Marriages amongst them, the were not easily to be drawn into Insurrections,
especially when they considered, they (by the Arts an^ Manufacture the Romans
taught) were greatly improved.

And now came Galienus to the Imperial Seat, who notwithstanding his fifteen
years Reign, had no Wa^ with the Britains; and though Flavius Claudius wa^ a
great hater of Christians, and studied for Torment to destroy them, yet he
lived not to effect it; but having reigned two years without molesting this
Kingdom, he gave place to Quintilius, who, rather desirous of Death than Rule,
(as it appeared by the consequence) opened his own Veins and Dyed, without one
way other troubling the Britains.

Aurelianus succeeded Quintilius, and reigned five years, without concerning
himself with the Affair of this Island; yet he put out severe Educts against
the Christians: so that we may reckon under him the ninth Persecution. Tacitus
succeeded him; yet reigned but six Months, e're he gave place to Florianus and
he having a shorter Reign, was succeeded by ^robus, who held the Imperial Seat
five years: These ^ad no War with the Britains; but Marcus Aurelius Carus,
hearing they were in Arms to Recover their ^ Liberty, sent Carantius his
Lieutenant, to Quiet them, but he joined with them; so that the Tribute was
denied, during this Emperors Reign: However, Carancius was slain by Alectus, a
succeeding Lieute^ant. Dioclesian coming to the Throne, greatly Persecuted the
Christians; but God (considering ^he Distress of His People) put an end to his
Reign, after three Years; and so gave Rest to his Church. This Emperor made
great Wars in this Island, by his Lieutenant, but with various success; and was
^ucceeded by Constantius Clorus, who continued the War, and came in Person
against the Calledonians and ^ists: And it was this Emperor, that, finding King
Coilus (his Trusty Friend) dead, upon his Arrival Married Helena, his beautiful
Daughter; and reigning about thirteen Years, dyed at York, leaving his Son
Constantine the Great, to Succeed him; but he being in his Nonage, the Throne
was Usurped Alternately by Constantius Galerus, Maximus Severus, Ma^entius
Lucinus, and Martinianus; But at length these were Overcome by the good Fortune
of Constantine the Great, a Britain by Birth, and half so by Parentage; he
Allotted part of his Empire to his Sons, and was the first Christian Emperor the
world beheld. Some hold, That being about to Persecute the Christians, he was
smitten with a Leprosy, and had it Revealed to him in a Vision, That unless he
called home Bishop Sylvester, and the rest of the Banished Clergy, he might
despair of Cure; which accordingly ^e did, and found himself in perfect Health,
which obliged him to embrace the True Religion: Others hold, That being about
to give Battle, and doubting the Success, he, all on a sudden, beheld, in the
Air, a bright shining Cross, with this Motto, In boc vinces, In this thou shall
overcome: And taking thereupon the Cross for his device, he, accordingly became
Victorious; but however it happened, no doubt, God (in Compassion to His
bleeding Church, which had undergone ten Cruel Persecutions) raised up this
Emperor to Heal her Wounds; and indeed, being Baptized, and Received into the
Church, he lest nothing undone that might tend to her Welfare, and the
Propagation of the True Religion. Some Wars he had with the Britains, but they
not considerable, when after a long Reign, he dyed ^ Peace.

Julian, called the Apostate, succeeded this goo^ Emperor, beginning his Reign
Anno Dom. 356. The man, before he came to the Throne, professed Christianity,
and seemed Zealous to promote it, being person of great Cunning, and much
Learning; bu^ with the Change of his Condition, his Conscienc^ altered, which
made many believe, he made Religion but a Stirrup, to Mount the Imperial
Throne; for then he became their professed Enemy, using all the Policy he
could, to baffle and destroy their Interest and although he did not violently
Persecute them himself, yet he gave way to such as spared no Affront or
Indignities; and Writ, with his own hand, a Book to Ridicule the Gospel,
calling our Blessed Savior Gallilean, in derision: When preparing for the Wan^
of Persia, as he Rod forth, he asked one of the Christians, What the Carpenters
Son was doing at that time He is (replied the good Man, with an holy Anger
making a Coffin for your self: At this Julian smiled but whether prophetically
spoke, or by chance, it so^ fell out: That riding at the Head of his Army, an^
Arrow, none knowing from what hand it came, More tally wounded him; whereupon,
perceiving hi^ Death certain, he drew forth the Arrow, and throwing up handfuls
of his own Blood in defiance to Heaven, he cried out; Vicisti Galilee, thou
haft Overcome me O Galilean; and so expired: After whose Death, Jovinianus took
the Rule, and had so great a liking to the Christian Religion, that he
easilyembraced it, causing the Soldiers and People to do the same; and would
often Express himself in these terms: O that I might govern wise men; and wise
men^ govern me! His Reign was but short, not exceeding a Year, when he gave
place to Valentinianus, in whose Reign the Roman Empire was threatened by the
barbarous Nations, who made great Spoil and Desolation; insomuch, that the
Legions in Britain, were drawn off to Assist nearer home; which gave ^e Picts
and Irish an opportunity to Invade and ^arrass this Kingdom, with great Spoil,
and Slaugh^r of the People, which made them beseech the Em^ror for Aid; and
Theodosius was sent with a Po^er that Repelled the Invaders, and left the
Bri^ins in Peace, but no longer, than till the Romans ^ere departed: He was
moreover a great Favourer ^f the Christians, restored their Temples, and for^id
Idolatrous Worship, and Midnight Sacrifice; and ^aving found some treacherous
dealing amongst his ^en of War, he was wont to say; Gold was tried ^ith the
Touch stone, and Men with Gold: And to him ^ucceeded Gratianus and Valence, the
former behaving himself with all due Respect to the Christians, but ^he latter
closed with the Arian Heretics against them; causing eighty of the Christians
to be sent ^o Sea in a Ship, and there set it on Fire, giving them ^he choice,
either to Drown themselves, or Perish in ^he Flame: Yet, after a Reign of Six
Years, full of Trouble, Maximus, and Valentinianus, took place; but the first
held it so short a time, that, in many Authors, he is not mentioned; they had
no War with the Britains, and had indeed enough to do, to Defend themselves;
and were succeeded by Theodosius, who began his Reign Anno Dom. 379. under whom
the Christian Religion flourished; and Damassus being Bishop of Rome, the
Second General Council was held, and now, for the space of six Months, the
World was so troubled with Earthquakes, that the Dissolation, and Ruin they
occasioned, is not countable.

Arcadius, and Honorius, next took place, viz. 402. In whose Reign a mavelous
Thing happened at Constantinople, viz. About Noon, a Fire entering the Great
Church, fastened upon the Bishops Seat, and Consumed it; thence growing up like
a Pyramid, seized the Roof, and Burnt it, not doing the People, then Assembled,
any harm, though it passed through them; leaving the Church, it passed directly
^ Senate House, and reduced it to Ashes: This man looked upon, as a Divine
Presage of those Miseri^ that soon after befell the Church and State; for no^
the Roman Greatness growing to a period, the Bra^ ches being too ponderous for
the Bole, to Suppo^ the Storms of War, that came thundering from sevral
Quarters, rent and tore them in pieces; ins^ much, that we may say, The Red
Horse, and h^ Rider were sent forth, about this time, To take pea^ from the
earth: and now the Britains groaned under the weight of their Enemies, the
Picts, Scots, an^ Wild Irish, who came upon them in great Swarm laying waste
all their pleasant places, which mad^ them again Address the Romans (who had so
lon^ been their Masters) for speedy Succor; but ha^ word sent them: That their
hands were full of En^mies, and that they could not spare any of their Forces^
However, Theodosius Junior, and Valentinianus, coming to the Thrones of the
West and East; for now the Roman Eagle was double headed, a Legion wa^ ordered
for Britain; upon whose approach, and after some Skirmishes, the Barbarous
People retired; and the Romans, before their departure, taught the Britains the
more perfect Exercise of Arms, ad^ monishing them to renew, strengthen, and
fortify their Wall from Sea to Sea, and keep Watchmen o^ the Towers to defend
them, and give notice of the Enemies approach, seeing they might be confident
this was the last time they could expect any Succou^ from Rome; so that after a
possession of 597, years the Romans of their own accord left the flourishing
Island of Britain, carrying with them, at sundry times, the Flower and Strength
of the Land to assist them in^ their Foreign Wars, by which the Britains lay
more easy and open to the Inroads and Incursions of their Enemies.

^us (...), whom balfe the world obeyed, ^r conquering (...) spread ^ve hundred
ninety seven years, and then ^fatal times ^ the Isle again: ^en blood and (...)
raged in every place, ^d Crimson Seas had deluged Natures Face; ^en 'twas,
Great Kingdom, thy sad Woes came on, ^us plagues over took thee, that thou
thoughts't to shun, (...) friendly seeming Saxons more undone.

(...) what means the Saxons came to Conquer this Kingdom, and divide it into a
Hepterchie, with their Succession of Kings, and Description of their
resprective Kingdoms, till it was reduced to a Monarchy, and from thence till
conquered by the Danes.
THE Romans, as we have said, by a voluntary relinquishment having left this
famous Island in^mbered with restless Enemies, whose Ravages and ^oils are too
many to count, and the poor defence^ss Britains quite wearied out with
continual Ala^ms, Slaughters, Burnings, and the Ravishment of ^eir Wives and
Daughters, heartless to defend ^emselves, and out of all hopes of Assistance
from ^eir old Masters the Romans; they at last understand^g the Saxons were a
powerful and prevailing Peo^e in Germany, who had enlarged their Borders, and
one great Actions, resolved to apply themselves to his People for Succor; and
hereupon Vertigern ^e King, with the consent of his Nobles, sent Am^ssadors to
the Heads of the Saxons, and Jutes, ordering upon the Rhine, laying before them
the ^plorableness of the Kingdoms condition, and how was at a point to be lost,
the Enemy having al^ady advanced as far as Stamford in Lincolnshire, ^ith
dreadful Spoil and Devastion, entreating a speedy Succor and Protection,
promising large Re^ wards for the Service. The Saxons having well^ weighed the
thing, upon certain notice of the^ Fruitfulness of the Country, and finding
their own^ Borders to straight and scanty for their numbers,^ immediately
closed with the request of the Britains^ dismissing their Ambassadors with a
very obliging^ Letter, and instantly drew out 9000 Men, under the^ leading of
Hengist and Horsus, two Brothers of a^ noble Family, who with expedition,
suitable to the^ imergency of this occasion, landed at Ebsfleet in^ the Island
of Thanet, where they were received by^ the King's Order with Songs and
congratulations o^ Joy, and then joining with them such Forces as he^ had drawn
together, gave the Enemy Battle with great slaughter, defeating and
overthrowing them so that they were obliged not only to repass the Wall that
was drawn from Sea to Sea, as a defence^ against Scotland, but to leave the
Kingdom in entire peace: So the face of things seemed very much^ changed, but
long this tranquillity had not lasted before the two Brothers (the first having
married his Daughter Rawena to the doting King, who had fallen in love with
her, upon a Complement she passed in drinking to him) gave their Soldiers so
much liberty, that the People found themselves greatly oppressed, of which
reitered Complaints were made and the King used his interest with the Captains^
to restrain them, but they connived at it, and demanded larger Pay, giving out,
That they would lay the Kingdom iu Ashes, if it were denied them; seizing upon
sundry Towns and Castles; so that the Nobles perceiving the King blindly
carried away by the couns^ls of his young Wife, on whom he infinitely doated;
they consulted with Vortimer his Son, (...) Prince of great Hope and Courage,
when drawi^ together what Forces they could, without the knowledge of the King,
they sell so unexpectedl^ upon the Saxons, that having overthrown them in (...)
bloody Battle, they resolved to drive them out of the Land, which accordingly
they did, forcing the remainder, with their Captains, to take shipping and be
gone.

This defeat, and disappointment, so perplexed the Brethren, that gathering
greater Forces they came again, coasting the Country in their Ships and Barks,
and under pretense of friendship, and desire to have the Daughter with them,
they were permitted quietly to Land; but here their treachery appeared, for it
being agreed, that so many of theirs should hold a conference, with a like
number of the British Nobles, about settling Affairs, and reconciling the
Differences between them and the Saxons, under their long Coats they hid short
Swords, and during the Treaty, and upon and watchword given by Hengest, fell
upon the unarmed Nobles, who expected no such matter, killing all but one Earl,
who geting a Hedgestake, made his passage through them, and alarumed the
Country with the fatal news: And this some Authors affirm to be done upon
Salisbury plain, but, however, the Nobles thus dead, the Juits, Angles and
Saxons, fell on with Fire and Sword, killing and destroying all that came in
their way, carrying a Torrent of Destruction from Sea to Sea; so that the poor
Britains being utterly disheartened, and destitute of a Head, fled before them
like Flocks of timorous Sheep to the Mountains and Fastnesses, many of them
living in Rocks, Caves and Woods, upon such as Nature afforded them, to avoid
the fury of the destroying Enemy, who resolutely bent upon a total Conquest,
daily sent over for more of their Companions, who came in swarms, devouring
like Locust all the good things of the Land.

Thus the misery of the Britains renewed, and these People began to frame their
Government, dividing the Country by Lot into seven Parts or petry Kingdoms,
called from thence, The Hepterchie of the Saxons in this order.

1. Kent. 2. South Saxons. 3. West Saxons. 4. East Saxons. 5. Northumberland.
6. Mercia. 7. East Angles.
These they formed into Kingdoms, striving, as much as in them lay, to
exterperate the whole Race of the Britains, and raise themselves in their
places: Some may be curious to know the Original of this Transmarine People but
Originals of this kind are generally obscure, but Historians conjecture they
were a branch of the Sacae an Asian People, who came into Europe to find
themselves better Habitations, and planted on the Banks of the Rhine. They were
upon their arrival in Britain Idolaters, worshipping a God for every day in the
Week, and greatly persecuted those they found to persevere in the Christian
Faith: And when they went to Battle, they had certain Songs prepared to invoke
the favor of their Deities, and were very unmerciful, for they sacrificed
every tenth Captive, and would admit of no Ransom.

The Garments of the Saxons were in the form of a Gassock, clasped over, or
pined with wooden Pins their Weapons, bended Swords, with three notches on the
back, in the form of a Back-sword, but broader, with fiat sloaping points, and
battle Axes, using to try the quarrel of a whole Province, by single Combat,
suffering their Virgins to Marry but once; and their Men were forbid plurality
of Wives, except they were Noble; and they, only for want of Issue; Adultry
they punished were severly.

These People going under the Denominations, o^ Saxons, Argles, and Jutes,
divided the Kingdom, now called England, for King Vort^gorn, being (by his
Inr^ged Subjects) overwhelmed with wildfier in his Castle or Palace, as the
cause of all their Calamities, by g^ving (at first) too much way and
countenance to the (...), they parted it out as they found themselves in most
power or advantage, by birth; and Hengist having leave to take his Lot, chose
Kent, and formed it into a Kingdom, Stiling himself the first King of Kent,
beginning his Reign 455, and Reigned with great success, 34 years; and was
succeeded by Esca or Oscia, from whom the Inhabitants were called Eskins, this
Prince began his Reign in the year of our Lord 490, and continued it 24 years,
giving place to Octa who Reigned 23 years; and was succeeded by Imerick, who
somewhat enlarged his Borders, and continued his Reign till 562; and during his
time, was held the second General Counsel at Constantinople, for the
Establishment of the Church; when by the Pious and Exampler lives, and
Preaching of good Men, Christianity, that had been trampled on by the Saxons,
began to revive in Britain; so that Ethelbert, that succeeded Imerick began to
harken to them, and upon the Arrival of Austine, the Monk, and Forty others
with him, sent by Gregory, Bishop of Rome, he was Converted, and Baptized Anno
596. In the 36th year of his Age, and the 4th year of his Reign, giving a
general Liberty to his Sujects, to Renounce their Paganism; so that, these
good Men (by the Kings Appointment) settling at Canterbury, are reported to
Baptize and Convert 10003. in a very short time; which prosperous Work, by the
Influence of Heaven, soon overspread the Kingdom, and God, accordingly blessed
the King with a Long Reign; for he continued in his Throne 36 years, and then
was succeeded by Edbald, who, at first, was averse to the Christians, and for
fear of him, Melitus, and Justus fled their Bishoprics, but he being Converted
by Laurence, Archbishop of Canterbury, they were recalled; but having Reigned
24 years, he gave place to Ercombert Anno 5^2. This King brought Christianity
to be highlier prized than before, turning the Idol Temples, that had been
heitherto allowed. into places of True Worship, commanding the first Lent to be
kept, that this Kingdom knew; but after a Reign of 24 years he dyed; and was
succeeded by Egbert his Brother, who basely Murdered Ethelred, and Ethelbert,
his two Nephews, Sons to Ercombert, and ^ast the Dead Bodies into the River
Medway; for which (no doubt) his Reign was shorter than any before him for he
continued it but 9 years, ending it by Death 666, and was succeeded by
Lothaire, who, after holding the Scepter of Kent 11 years, Engageing in a
Bloody Wa^ against Ethelred King of the Mercians, and Edrick, King of the South
Saxons, he was shot through with a Dart which put an end to his Life and Reign.
In his time a^ third Counsel was held at Constantinople, being the 6th General
Counsel for the Provision and Establishment o^ the Church; Agathus, being
Bishop of Rome and Ederick succeeded this Prince, he held not the Scepter long
before his Subjects, (upon a disgust) took Arms against him, and slew him in a
pitched Field, maintaining themselves against all Opposers, So that the Kingdom
lay destitute of a Head, for the space of six years (...) this Kings Reign
being the shortest of any, Viz. two years only; but at the end of 6 years,
Withred, hi^ Brother for a great sum of Money paid to Inas, go^ the Possession,
and Reigned 33 years; and there gave place to Egbert, who began his Reign 727,
in his time there appeared two fearful Commets, thaeatning Wars, and
Desolation, which afterward Ensued by the falling out of Petty Princes; he
Reigned 23 years, and was succeeded by Ethelbert, Anno 750, who held the Throne
11 years, and gave place to Edrick, who lost his Life after a Reign of 34
years, in a fatal Battle at Otteford, against Offa King of the Mercians; and in
his time another General Counsel was held at Nice, and consequently the second
General Counsel; and then the Kingdom of Kent was Usurped by Ethelbert the
third, who (for that cause) being Wared upon by Kenwoolf, he was taken
Prisoner, and crrried into Mercia (...) yet he afterward was released, and
Reigned 3 years giving, at the end of that time, place to Cuthred, whom
Kenwolf, King of the Mercians, Instated in the Thron^ of Kent: Yet his Reign
was short, terminating in the space of three years, and Baldred succeeding him,
(after a long dispute with the Mercian King, and 18 years continuance in his
Kingdom) was forced to flee, and leave the Possession to the Conqueror; who,
about the year 824, made it cease to be any longer a Kingdom, annexing it, (by
right of Conquest) to that of Mercia; in which, for the future, we must account
it: This Kingdom continued entire 372 years.

Thus fell the Kentish Kingdom, thus bereft
Of all its Grandeur, to the Conqueror left;
Its name was swallowed by a greater sway,
Ingulf'd, in what we must call Mercia.
An account of the Kingdom of the South Saxons containing, Sussex and Surry
under the Succession of four Kings.
THis parcel of the British Land fell first to E^^^ Captain of the Saxons, who
brought supplys out of Germany, at their greatest need, Landing at Shoram in
S^ssex, where he gave barrel to the Britains, and by a great overthrow obliged
them to the Woods and Fastnesses, whereupon, sending for more Aid to A^sure him
in his Conquest, he took possession of Sussex and Surry, beginning his Reign
488. and continued it 32 years. Then giving place to Cossa, who Reigned, as
some will have it 72 years; and to him succeeded Ethels Wolf, who, after 25
years Reign, was slain by Cadewel, a Banished Prince of the West Saxons; yet
before his death, the Christian Religion was tolerated in his Kingdom, himself
being Converted by, (as Bede has it) Bishop Willfride, though some allow his
Conversion to Berinus Bishop of Dorchester, however, he was held to be a good
Prince; nor did Cadewel long rest in quiet, after his death, for Barthun, and
Authun, took up Arms against ^im, and made him fly the Kingdom, but he
returning with a great power, overcame the two Dukes; and after that, it became
a part of the West Saxon Kingdom, when it had continued a Kingdom 133 years.

Thus set the second Kingdom, or it is Fame;
For from this time, it lost it is ancient Name.
An account of the West Saxon Kingdom, containing Cornwall, Devonshire,
Barkshire, and Hampshire, with the succession of Kings.
THe first that possessed himself of this Kingdom, was Chardick, a low Country
German Captain, who entered Britain about the year of our Lord 495. and Killing
Nataulcon, a great Prince of the Britains, in a dreadful Battle, he made
himself King of the West Saxons, beginning his Reign in 501, and continued it
33 years; at the end of which, he gave place to Kenrick, who prosecuting the
War against the Britains, gave them two great overthrows, at Banbury in
Oxfordshire, and Shrewsbury in Wiltshire, whereby they losing Courage, and
hopes of Conquest, left him in quiet possession of what his Father had
acquired; but after a Reign of 26 years, he was succeeded by Chewlin, who
fought Ethelbert, King of Kent, and defeated his Army at Wimbledon: And this is
accounted the first Battle, the Saxons had amongst themselves; he gave likewise
a great overthrow to the Britains at Bedfold, and surprised four of their Towns
as Liganburgh, Alisbury, Bensington, and Evesham; and about six years after, he
fought the Britains at Durham, and slew Coinmagil, Caudigan, and Farmnagil,
three of the British Kings; thereupon surprising Gloucester, Bath, and
Cirencester; but at length, some Saxons Joining with the Britains, to Oppose
his growing greatness, he was overthrown at Wodensbeoth, and his Son Cuth
slain; and thereupon Cearlick, his Nephews, prosecuting the War against him,
bereft him of the Kingdom, after ^e had Reigned 33 years; yet the Nephew held
it but ^x years, before he gave place to Chelwoolf. This ^rince held the
Scepter of the West Saxons Kingdom 14 ^ears, but being assaulted by the
Britains, in confedra^y with the Scots and Picts, after much trouble and ^ile,
he dyed in the Wars; so that his Kingdom fell ^ Kingil, who gave the Britains
Battle at Beandune, and killed 1046 of them; and the better to strengthen
himself, he made peace with Penda, King of the Mar^ans, and was converted to
the Christian Faith, by ^erinus, to whom he gave Dorchester, as a seat. This
King Reigned 31 years over the West Saxons. and ^hen gave place to Redwald, who
was Baptized, and Reigned 13 years; after him Eskwin began his Reign, ^75. and
continued it but two years, being overcome ^t that time by Wolfere, King of the
Mercians, at Bu^amhford, and most of his people slain, and was succee^ed in the
Kingdom of the West Saxons by Kentwin, who was a greater Persecutor of the poor
remnant of ^he Britains, making them fly into the Rocks and Mountains for
shelter and security; but his Reign ^asted not long, for at the end of 9 years
he dyed, and gave place to Cadewalde, who slew Ethelwoolf, King of ^he South
Saxons, and afterward usurped his Kingdom; and being a Heathen, he destroyed
many of the Christians, especially the Clergy; but in the end, he was succeeded
by Ine, who began his Reign, Anno 688. ^he brought the South Saxon Kingdom into
a province, and had Wars with the Britains and Mercians, and made many wholesome
Laws; upon which, many now ^n force, are founded; he built the Abbey of
Glassenbury, and went a Pilgrimage to Rome, and there dyed. This was he that
gave the Pope the first Peter Pence from England, to be paid on Lammus day;
his Reign continued 37 years, and was succeeded by Ethellred, in whose Reign,
two dreadful Blazing-Stars appeared; his Reign continued 14 years, and then he
gave place to Cuthred, Anno 740. this King made Peace with the Mercians, and
Joining his Force; with them, the cruelly opressed the Britains, but Adelem, an
Ea^ and one of his Subjects, Rebelling against him, h^ was obliged to give it
over, to Defend his Trritories but having Reigned 14 years, he was succeeded b^
Siges^^rt. This King caused Cumbra, an Earl of h^ Counsel, to be slain for
reproving his Vices, which occasioned his Subjects to Rebel, and forced him t^
shelter himself in a Wood, where he was found, an^ slain by the Earls
Swinheard, when he had Reigned about a year; to whom Kenwoolf succeeded, who
Wa^ed very furiously on the Britains, and gave them gre^ overthrows; but in the
end, himself was overthrow^ by Offa, King of the Mercians, and there slain, ^
Captain Ciyto, but his Subjects recovered hi^ Body and revenged his death upon
the Captain, and Eighty of his followers. The King thus dead, Brithrick steped
into the Throne, in whose time diverse strange prodegies, and Phantoms appeared,
as well in the Air, a^ on the Earth; and when he had Reigned without any
considerable Action, fell by Poison, which he took in in a confection, the
Queen had prepared for one of hi^ paramours; whereupon he fled into France, and
ther^ died Miserably, and now this Kingdom began to draw to a Period, or rather
to loose it is name, to be joined with the rest, in a sole Monarchy; for Egbert
succeeded Brithrick, Anno 806. as King of the West Saxons, he (after a long
War, wherein much blood was spilt) gained an absolute rule over the Seven
Kingdoms, making a strict Law against the Welsh, that should dare to venture
over Offas Ditch, which he appointed for their Boundard, he slew Bernulph, King
of the Mercians in Battle, and drove the King of Kent out of his Kingdom, and
to his Conquering Arms the East Angles, and East Saxons, likewise submitted, so
that finding none oppose him, he caused himself to be Crowned the first sole
Saxon Monarch at Winchester, and gave the Country the name of England; and the
Danes, (with 33 Ship) Landing in the 14 of his Reign, he gave them ^attle, but
was Obliged to retire with loss; and the ^ext year (being invited by the
Britains) they Landed ^ Wales, against whom he Wared, and was Victorious. This
was the 17 King of the West Saxons, that had ^eigned successively, and began
his Reign as sole Mon^rch, Anno 819, and Reigned 17 years, and in all 36

Thus the divided Kingdom did Unite,
And on one head her Crown shone Dazzling bright.
An Account of the East Saxon Kingdom, which contained Essex, and Middlesex,
beginning Anno 522, and continuing 305 years under the success of 14 Kings.
THe first that we find to Govern the East Saxons, was Erchenwine, who began
not his Reign, till Anno 527, and is held continued it Sixty years; and ^hen
gave place to Sladda, who held it only 9 years, when Sebert took upon him the
Kingdom; and being Converted to the Christian Faith by Miletus, Bishop of St.
Paul's in London, which had been founded by himself, and Ethelbert King of Kent,
in the place where ^he Temple of Diana had stood, restored them their
priveledges, and free Exercise of Religion, which had before been denied them,
and Reigned 12 years, noted to be the first Christian King of the East Saxons;
Seered succeeded him, Anno, 617. who, contrary to his Predecessor, put many
Indignities upon the Christians, as Prophaining their Communion-Tables, and
Offering to Idols; for which, being reproved be Miletus, he banished that
Bishop, and fell heavey upon the rest of the Clergy; but at the end of 6 years,
he was slain by King^ils, King of the West Saxons; and Sigesbert Reigned in
this stead, Continuing King of the East Saxons, by the space of 23 years; and
after him Reigned Sigebert, whom Oswye, King of the Northumbers, persuaded to
be Baptixed, and accordingly it was performed by Bishop Finnan; but being of a
wild and sordid nature when he had Reigned 15 years, his Brothers Conspir^
against him, and slew him, and Swith^lm succeede^ Anno 661, who was Converted,
and Baptized ^ Bishop Cedda, and Edelwald, King of the East Angl^ stood his
Godfather, but he Reigned only 3 year^ and then gave place to Sighere; who,
after he had bee^ Baptized, turned Apostate, but brought again to ^ former
Principles, by the means of Woolfere, King ^ Mercia; he caused the Idol Temples
to be Demolishe^ and in his time a Raging Plague continued for the space of 5
years: Sebba, succeeded him; but havin^ Reigned about 30 years, he laid down
his Crown as more desirous of a Monastic Life, and entered the Monastery of St.
Paul's, London; and Sigherd took upon him the Government, and Reigned 7 years;
A^ the end of which Seofrid began his Reign, which continued 7 years, as the
former; yet in neither of the^ Reigns, did any thing Memorable happen, nor in
the^ Successor Offa's; for he (when he had held the Scepte^ of the East Saxons
8 years) went to Rome, and the^ turned Monk, and dyed in that state: Selred
began hi^ Reign 722, and Reigned 38 years, without any thin^ Memorable, except
His Wars with the Mercians; and leaving Cuthred, (his Successor,) Imbroyled in
Troubles, Egbert King of the West Saxons, at the end of ^ years, drove him out
of his Kingdom: so that, after the Succession of 14 Kings, it was, in the year
872 made a part of the whole, under a sole Monarch.

Thus Heaven, by secret Wheels, Winds on the Fates,
Of Empires, Kingdoms, and of petty States;
Turns all things, as is in Wisdom thought,
That his Decrees be to perfection brought.
An account of the Northumber Kingdom, and Succession of Kings.
THe Kingdom of the Northumbers, contained Northumberland, Cumberland,
Yorkshire, Durham, ^ncashire, Westmerland, and some part of the Marches; ^d
began in the year of our Lord 547, continuing 379 ^ar, but it does not
Challenge a Succession of Kings, ^long; for the number found, are but 25; and
of ^ese in their order.

Ida and Ella took upon them to be Kings of the Nor^umbers, Conjunctly, Anno
547 and continued 24 ^ars, but were obliged, (after 15 years of that Term) ^
take in 5 Partners, Viz. Adda, who held it 7 years, ^appa 5 years, Theodwald 1
year, Frethulf 7 years, ^odorick 7 years; but of these, some dying, and others
^ing dispossessed, Ethelfride took place, making great ^ar upon the Britains,
and Subdued Edanaden, King ^ the Scots, whom he Overcame in a great Battle at
^egsaston, and at Westchester; he slew not only the ^uldiers of the Britains,
but even the Monks, and Religious of all sorts, to the Number of 1100, and
Ban^ed Edwin the British Prince, who fled to Redwold, ^ing of the East Angles,
who, Joining his Forces with ^e Britains, they fought against Ethelfride, and
slew ^m, when he had Reigned 33 years; and Edwine was ^aced in the Kingdom,
who, at length, turning Chri^ian, restrained the Persecutions that had been
made in ^ose parts, against the Church; he was Baptized by ^aul^nus at York,
together with many of his Nobles, but Reigned not above 7 years, and then
Osrick came to the throne, whose reign was far shorter for, within a year,
Waring on the Britains, he was slain by Cadwal, their King, and so made way for
^swald, who slew Cadewal, a British Prince, but was Overthrown by Penda, the
M^rcian King; and slain at a place called, from that Mifortune, Oswaltree, when
he had Reigned 9 years, and succeeded by Cswye; this King gave Battle to
Ofwine, Prince of the Deirans, at Wilfairs-Downs, wh^ flying the field, was by
one of his confidents delive^ed up, and put to Death; and although Ethelbald, Son
^ Oswald, and Egbert King of the East Angels, Unite^ their Forces with Penda,
King of Mercia, he Ove^ threw them, near Leads in Yorkshire, Killing Pe^
Ethclbald, with 30 Dukes and Leaders, giving tho^ United Armies a great
Overthrow, and decided the long Controversy about the Celebration of Easter;
an^ founded the Cathedral Church in Litchfield, for a Bisho^ See: He Reigned 28
years, and was succeeded b^ Egfride, who, raising a great Power, and Waring
upon Ethelred, King of the Mercians, he found not the Su^cess of his
Prodecessor; nor being so contented, ^ made an expedition against the Irish,
who then, (^ small Barks) perplexed the Coast, but following the^ too far in
the Mountains, he was Intraped by an Ambushment, and there slain, after he had
Reigned ^ years; leaving his Kingdom to Alfride, who, thoug^ he Reigned 20
years, did nothing of Note, he was su^ceeded by Osred, who gave himself up to
Prodigiou^ Lusts, Insomuch, that he forced Nuns out of their M^nasteryes, to
satiate himself; and commiting outrage^ he was at last slain by Kenred, and
Oswick, when h^ had Reigned 9 years; and these alternately succeede^ him, the
one Reigning two years, and the other 11 ^ but we find nothing worthy of note
in their Reigns.

This being removed Ceolenuif took the Scepter, bu^ was more given to devotion
than to Rule; insomu^ that at the Expiration of 8 years, he laid aside his
Roy^ al Robes, for a Monks Habit, making him a Cell in a^ Holy Island, where he
lived a Contemplative Life and in his Reign, two threatening Commets appeared
the one before, and the other after, Sun rise and se^ continuing so to do, for
the space of 2 Weeks; A^ now Egbert took up the Scepter, and having held it 2^
years, turned Monk, such was the Superstition of tho^ times: To conclude, that
by so doing they Mer^ Heaven. Oswulph succeeded Egbert, but his Reign wa^
^hort, and unfortunate; for scarcely had he held it a year, but he was
Murdered by his Servant, at the In^tigation of his Stepmother, to promote her
own Son ^t Mick'e Woughton; and Ed^lwald took place, but in ^he 6th year of his
Reign, he was slain by A^red, who ^teped thereupon into the Throne; but at 9
years end, ^or his many Violences, and cruel Dealings, he was, ^y his Subjects
Expeled the Kingdom, and Eth^red ^laced in the Throne; but he being twice
deposed for ^is Misgovernment, was at last slain by his Subjects, and Alfwald,
who succeeded him, after he had Reigned ^1 years, was Murdered by the
Conspiracy of Siga; and Osred succeeded him, in the year 789, but after a ^ears
Reign, his Subjects Expeled him the Kingdom.

Thus the Northumbers Kingdom Wavering slood,
Sometimes in Peace, some times in War and Blood,
There Is nothing stable men, and fortune Change,
Fates unseen Springs, can Monarchys unhinge,
Or make a Kingdom to a Pesant crindge
An Account of the Kingdom of Mercia, or the Midland Kingdom of the Saxons,
with the Successon of Kings.
THis Kingdom more large than the rest, contained the Counties of Rutland,
Linco^, H^tington, ^eicester, Derby, Notingham, Oxford, Ch^sh^re, ^^ire,
Gloucestershire, Wor^^stershire, S^^^^ordshire, Becking^amshire, Warwickshire,
Be^^^^^^shire, and ^ and frequently contend^d with the rest; for the sole
Monarchy beginning in the year 582, and contin^ ^out 292 years under the
Succession of 20 King^; in ^der as follows:

Crida, the first of the Mercian Kings, began his Reign 582; and being a very
w^^lik^. Prince, had gr^sped larger part of the Island than the rest, holding
it with so hard a hand, that nothing could be taken from him, during his Reign
of 12 years. Wibba succeeded him in the Throne, who greatly perplexed the
Britains, and incroached upon the Neighbor Saxons^ But when he had reigned 20
years he dyed, and Ceorle took place, but did nothing of moment: Hi^ Reign
lasted only ten years, when P^nda the Great and Warlike King of the Mercians,
came to the Throne, who slew in a pitched Field Edwin and Oswald, Kings of
Northumberland; Sigesbert, Egfrid and Ema, Kings of the East Angles; and
Expulsed Red^wald, King of the West Saxons, out of his Countries ^ But Fortune
not always favoring, he in a Battle against Oswye, King of the Northumbers,
ventering t^ far upon his late Success, was there slain, when he ha^ reigned
about 32 years.

This great King thus disasterously fallen, Penda ^ Wenda took upon him the
Government, and becam^ the first Christian King of Mercia: But being young and
his Stepmother desirous to prefer her own So^ conspired with some of his
Nobles against him, an^ procured him to be murdered in the Third year o^ his
Reign, but missed her aim; for Wolfere, a secon^ Brother, was placed in the
Throne: This Prin^ conquered the West Saxons, won the Isle of Wigl^ and gave it
to the King of the South Saxons; an^ although he, before his Conversion, had
caused his tw^ Sons to be put to death, for suffering themselves ^ be Baptized,
he becoming a Christian, greatly ^ mented that Cruelty, and caused the Heathen
Temples to be converted to the Worship of God, and held to found the Abbey
Church of Peterborough: Y^ he reigned but Four years, being the Seventh pet^
Monarch of the Mercians. Ethelred succeed him ^ the Throne, and warred upon the
King of Kent wi^ great fury, insomuch, that Blood was shed like W^ter; nor did
the Churches, or Abbeys, escape his Rag^ putting W^lfridus out of his
Bishopric of Northumberlan^: But at last he resigned his Crown to Kenr^ his
Nephew, from whom he had unjustly detained it, and structen with remorse for
the Blood he had shed; ^e turned Monk, and dyed in that state; his Reign,
however, continued 29 years, and in that space two ^lazing Stars appeared.

Ke^red coming to the Throne, held the Scepter of ^he Mercian Kingdom in much
peace Four years, and ^hen falling into a Melancholy, he coveted a Mona^tical
Life, and resigning the Crown to his Cousin Chelred: He went to Rome with Offa,
King of the East Saxons, and Edwin, Bishop of Winchester, and there dyed a
Monk. Chelred succeeding Ki^red, found a trouble^ome Reign, for he was fiercely
warred upon by In^s, King of the West Saxons, who greatly envyed him: ^o large
a Kingdom his Reign continued Seven years, ^and he was succeeded by Ethelbald,
who greatly perplexed ^he Northumbers, by making Incursions into their Country,
which occasioned C^thred, King of the West ^axons, to give him Battle, and
overthrew him at ^urford: But engaging him a second time, Ethelbald ^o dealt
with the West Saxon Soldiers, that they slew their Master near Tamworth in
Warwickshire. This King founded the Monastery of Crowland, and reigned over the
Mercian Kingdom Eleven years, and then gave ^lace to Offa, who warred upon
^rick, King of Kent, and slew him at Ottef^rd and so marching from South ^o
North, brought all in subjection, as he passed, over^rowing Kenwolf, and his
West Saxons, near Merton; and made a Ditch of prodigeous length and breadth ^o
be cast up, to hinder the Incursions of the Welsh ^ritains, who presuming to
throw a part of it down, ^e entered their Territories with Fire and Sword, ^ew
Marmodius their King, and all his Associetes; and the Danes landing in his
time, were beat back ^ith great slaughter: He it was that procured, at ^reat
cost, the Canonization of Alban, the Proto ^artyr of this Kingdom, and built a
Monastry in the Town of that Name, giving a Tenth part of his ^oods to the
Churchmen and Poor, as an Expiation for the Blood he had shed: He began his
Reign, An^ 758, and continued it 39 years. Egfrid succeeded thi^ great King,
and being of a Pious Inclination, he restored the Church to all her Ancient
Privileges, o^ which his Father had deprived her; but his Reign wa^ short, for
it exceeded not four Months.

Kenwolf succeeded this good Prince, and began hi^ Reign with a War against
Kent, whose King he mad^ Prisoner, and gave his Kingdom to Cuthred; but at the
Dedication of his new Church at Winchcomb, he restored his Royal Prisoner to
Liberty; and in hi^ 22 years Reign did many great Exploits, and wa^ succeeded
by Kenelem: But this Prince was unfortunat^ in his Youth, for having discovered
some close Intreagues between his Tutor and Quindride his Sister the latter to
prevent his reproofs, caused the forme^ to Murder him, when he had Reigned
about thre^ Months; and Cleolwolf, who succeeded him, reigne^ but a year before
he was Expulsed his Kingdom by his Subjects, at the Instigation of Bernulf, who
ther^ upon stepped into the Throne; but being warred upon by the West Saxons,
and East Angles, he was slai^ in Battle the Third year of his Reign, Anno 831;
an^ Ludecan, who succeeded him, felt the like Fate i^ the Second year of his
Reign, from Egbert the We^ Saxon, in Conjunction with the East Angles. Witl^
the next King of the Mercians, was overcome ^ Egbert, and forced to flee his
Kingdom, in the Thir^ year of his Reign. And now the Danes began to pe^ plex
the Coast, having an Eye to the Conquest ^ Britain, so that they drove
Berthulf, who succeede^ W^laf, out of the Mercian Kingdom, in the Thirteenth
year of his Reign: And although Brudre^ got the Possession of it, Anno 852, yet
they kept hi^ in continual Alarums; and, notwithstanding, at fi^ he was
Victorious over them, yet they returning wit^ greater Force, he was forced to
quit the Kingdom when he had reigned about Twenty years, and w^ the last of the
Saxon petty Monarchs in this Kingdom of Mercia.

Thus Kingdoms tossed by fickle Fortune's hand,
Must Rise and Fall, yet never are at a stand:
Great things oppress themselves with their own weight,
And still must yield to the Decrees of Fate.
An Account of the Kingdom of the East Angles, with their Succession of Kings,
etc.
THis Kingdom, so named from the Angles that claimed it for their Portion,
contained Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridge, and the Isle of Ely, and took upon it
the form of a Kingdom, Anno 373, continuing ^53 years, and had the Succession
of Fifteen Kings, of whom in their order.

Uffa was the first King of the East Angles, who ^etled and founded the
Kingdom, but was in his beginning very much opposed by the British Princes: He
Reigned Seven years, and gave place by Death to Titulus, who Reigned a longer
time; for some Authors will have it, that he held the Scepter of this Kingdom
about 32 years. Redwald succeeded him, and although, upon his coming to the
Throne, he was a Christian, he turned Idolater, he assisted Edwin to gain the
Crown of Northumberland, by slaying Ethel^ride in Battle, and reigned over the
Angles 8 years; Expenwald succeeded him. This King professed Chri^tianity, and
not being well settled in his Kingdom ^ne Richebert conspired against him, and
slew him, when he had reigned Twelve years: And Sigebert succeeded him, being a
younger Son of Redwald; but being given up to a devout Life, he after two years
Reign, resigned his Kingdom, and turned Monk: But that place could not secure
his Life, for he was ^lain by Penda. Egrick, upon the resignation, took up the
Scepter, yet he reigned but four years, before Penda overcome his Country, and
slew him in Battle. Anna succeeded him, but after a Twelve years Reign^ Penda,
who was a mortal Enemy to the Angles, cam^ again, overcome and slew him.

Upon the unfortunate falls of these last Kings, E^theibert got into the
Throne, as a favorite of Penda's but he had not reigned about Two years, when
O^win, King of the Northcumbers slew him in Battle, for taking part with Penda
against him: And Edelwa^ succeeded in the Throne, yet he reigned only Eigh^
year^ before he gave place to Aldu^, who reigne^ Nineteen years, and then
E^swo^f succeeded in a Reig^ of Seven years. Beorn reigned after him Twenty for
years, and then gave place to Ethelred, who reigne^ Thirty five year^, yet
there is nothing memorably recorded of their Actions. And now these petty
Kingdoms growing to a period, Ethe^bert began his Reign^ but having displeased
the bloody Quindride, Wife t^ Offa King of the Mercians, she prevailed with he^
Husband to send for him, under pretense of givin^ him one of his Daughters in
Marriage; but having got him in her power, she caused him to be put t^ death,
when he had reigned Forty five years, an^ was succeeded by Edmund, in whose
time the Danes cam^ over in great numbers, burning and destroying before them;
insomuch, that the King was obliged to shu^ himself up in Framingham Castle,
and after a lon^ Seige surrendered it: But the Pagan Danes, not regarding their
Faith, having stripped the poor King, fin^ beat him with C^dgels, then scourged
him, and afte^ that, tying him to a Stake, shot him to death with Arrows,
whilst with much Patience and Devotion he suffered the usage, calling upon the
name of Jesus and recommending his Soul to his Redeemer; the years of his Reign
are doubtfully mentioned, however he began to Reign over the East. Angles, An^
794; he was afterward cannonized a Saint, and the Town of St. Edmunds-bury
still remains in remembrance of him.

Thus you the Saxon Hepterchie may view,
How first it rise, and to a period drew,
To rise more glorious in what does eus^e.
The Saxon Government, under sole Monarchs, with the Succession if Kings, their
Reigns and Actions.
THe Hepterchie of the Saxons appearing very troublesome in their continual
Wars amongst themselves, and those of the Danes and British Princes, who still
held out, the chief of the last that ^pposed them, during their petty Kingdoms,
were ^ortimer, Son of Vortinger, who reigned Four years; Aurelius Ambrosius,
who reigned Thirty two years; ^ter Pendragon his Brother, who reigned Eighteen
^ears; Arthure, of whom the Monks, have created so ^any Fables, that the truth
of his Actions are doubtful, who reigned Twenty six years; Constantine, Son ^f
Cador, Duke of Cornwall, and Cousin to Arthur, who ^eigned Three years; Aurelius
Conatus, who reigned Thirty three years; Vortiporus, who reigned Three ^ears;
Malgo Cononus, who reigned Five years; Care^cus, who reigned Three years;
Cadwan, who reigned Twenty two years; Gadwallo his Son, who reigned forty eight
years, and Cadwallader, who reigned ^leven years: These were the Chief, of the
British Princes, who opposed the Saxons, and held ^eir Kingdom for the most
part, in Wales and the Marches, giving them, at sundry times, many notable
^verthrows, disputing their Country with the Inva^ers, till their Power was
wasted, and the remainder of their People compelled to betake themselves to the
Mountains and Fastnesses. Egberts's Fortune prevail^ng he united the seven
Kingdoms into one, and be^ame the first sole Saxon Monarch, causing himself to
^e crowned at Winchesier, giving the whole Country the Name of England, and the
People the Epethit^ of English. In the Fourteen year of his Reign, the Danes
with thirty three Ships landed in England, t^ whom he gave battle with such
Forces, as on the sudden could be raised, but was worsted, loosing two Dukes,
two Bishops, and most of the Common Soldiers, he hardly escaping the Field, yet
afterward the Danes were driven to their Country; but not so much discouraged,
as to hinder their landing in Wales the next year, and there they joined the
poor remainde^ of the Britains: But the King being aware, had more time to draw
his Forces together, when giving then battle, he overthrew both parties; yet
not long after the Danes sacked the Isle of Shippy, and were not with out much
slaughter expelled.

This was the Seventeenth King of the West Saxon^ and First sole Monarch of
England, beginning h^ Reign as Monarch 819, and reigned Seventeen year^ much
improving and increasing the welfare of the Kingdom.

Ethelwolf the Second sole Monarch, eldest Son ^ Egbert, began his Reign, Anno
837, and was in h^ Fathers time Bishop of Winchester: But being in ^ manner
constrained to take upon him the Government, he resigned his Bishopric to
Swith^n his Tut^ and gave a great overthrow to the Danes at Ocl^ freeing the
Church Lands from all Trib^tes and R^gal Services; and going to Rome, at the
Bishop's pe^swasion, he confirmed Peter Pence, and settled a yea^ly Pension of
Three hundred Marks upon the R^ man See, and continued his Reign about Twen^
years.

Ethelbald succeeded Ethelwolf, being his eldest S^ by his Wife Osburge, who
was his Butlers Daughte^^ his Valiant Actions sufficiently appeared against t^
Danes in his Fathers Reign; but that which bloted ^ great Actions was his
Marrying Judith, Danghter ^ the French King, and his Mother-in-law: But ^
reigned only two years, and was the Third sole M^narch of the English Men.

Ethelbert, the second Son to Ethelwofe, succeeded ^is Brother, Anno 860, he
was continually alarumed ^y the Danes, who finding the pleasantness of the
^ingdom, compared with their Rocky Land, came in warms, sometimes landing in
one place, and some^mes in another, and destroyed W^nchester; but the ^ople
gathering in great numbers, and falling upon ^em before they could recover
their Ships, most of ^em were slain: He reigned Five years, and then ^ave place
to

Ethelred, in whose Reign the Danes and Norwig^ans got more and more footing,
and being Pagans, ^ed all manner of Rapin and Violence, deslowring Virgins, and
ravishing Women, not sparing the Veiled Nun, but destroyed the Abbeys and
Mona^eries; so that to save their Chastity, by the advice ^f their Abbess, the
Nuns of Codingham Monastery ^ut off their Noses and upper Lips, to render
themselves deformed, and that the frightful spectacle might ^ay the Lusts of
the inslamed Danes; but it prevailed ^ot, for the Monsters having first
deflowred them, ^ut them to the Sword, and set the House on fire, and so
proceeded under the leading of Hungar and Hub^a, their Commanders in chief, to
burn the City of ^ork, committing extraordinary Outrages and Vio^ences: But
Ethelred at length gave them a great over^hrow slaying one of their Dukes, or
petty Kings, with nine Earls, and a great many common Soldiers: ^ut about
eighteen days after, being recruited with ^sh Forces, they put the King to
slight at Basing, and about two Months after wounded, and overthrew ^im at
Merton, of which wound he dyed, when he had ^eigned about Six years; and was
succeeded by

Elfride, fourth Son to Ethelwolf, who fought seven Battles with various
success against the Danes; for in ^is time they sorely oppressed the Land,
insomuch that the Highways were unfrequented, and the Ground ^n most places
Untilled, and the King himself obliged ^o flee into Woods, and Desert places,
but in the end, weary of that solitude, he put himself in the Hab^ of a
Musician, under which disguise he discovered t^ sluggish security of the Danes
in their Camp, when upon secretly rallying his scattered People, he su^prised
them in that manner, killing a great number ^ them, and taking their Standard:
And more Da^ attempting to land in Devonshire under Halden the Captain, the
people rise generally in Arms, and falli^ upon them near Exeter, killed the
Captain, and 8^ of his Followers. This King caused all Thieves to banished, and
divided the Kingdom into Shires, Hundred and Tythings, he founded the first
common Scho^ in Oxford, which is now called University Colledg^ and continued
his Reign Twenty nine years.

Edward, the Eldest Son of Elfride succeeded him and began his Reign 901, when
soon after he came ^ the Throne, his Nephew Ethelwald stirred up ^ Subjects to
rebel against him, but they were quiet^ without much trouble; yet the Danes
were still ^ possession of one part of the Country, which man the King build a
strong Castle at Hartford, and mar^ against them, when at St. Edmuns Ditch he
gave the^ Battle, but prevailed not, however, in that Mort^ Battle two of their
Kings, viz. Ethelwald and Croc^cus were slain: And soon after he gave them
anoth^ Battle at Wodesfield with a great overthrow, killi^ two other of their
Kings, and two Earls, with abo^ 4000 Common Soldiers: He reigned Twenty for
years and gave place to

Etheistance, who began his Reign 923; his Subject upon his coming to the
Crown, rose in Mutine under Elfrede a Norman, but the Ringleader taken, and
se^ to purge himself, they were quieted; yet he was ^ jealous of his Brother
Edwin, that he consented ^ his being murdered, which created in him such
remorse, that he caused his Murderers to be put ^ death, and had like, soon
after, to have been slain ^ his Tent by one Anlafe a Dane, but by a lucky
r^moval he escaped, and a Bishop, who had pitched ^ ^ent on the same Ground,
was assaulted and slain. after he had killed many of the Danes with his own
and, as well Nobles as Plebeans, and having ^yed their fury, he had leisure to
pass into Scotland ^th a powerful. Army, and brought that Kingdom ^o
subjection: But upon his return, he found the ^nes had strengthened themselves,
yet he routed them ^ar Winchester, and in this contest, it is reported, Guy
^rl of Warwick sought with Colbron, the Danish Gi^t of mighty seize, and slew
him hand to hand, as ^e Kings Champion in single Combat; and so far read the
fame of this King, that Historians report ^ut with what credit I know not) that
Hugh King ^ France, greatly desirous of his friendship, sent him ^e Sword of
Constantine the Great, which had in its ^ile one of the Nails that fastened
Christ to the Cross; likewise his Spear, which was that with which Lo^^us
peirced his side with a piece of the Thorny Crown ^ wore, that Otho the Emperor
sent him a Landscape ^ with precious Stones, and the King of Norway a ^ip with
guilt Decks, and Purple Sails, he reigned ^een years, and was the Eldest Son to
King Ed^d.

Edmund the fifth Son of King Edward, succeeded his ^other Anno 940. he fought
sundry Battles with vari^s success against the Danes, and his Son Dunmail
re^lling against him, he caused his Eyes to be put out; ^ was Crowned at
Kingstone upon Thames, his picture ^ memory of it being still preserved in the
Church ^ith many other^, his Successors he made many whol^m Laws, but
interposing, as some Authors have it, ^tween two Deuelists, he was
unfortunately run ^rough after he had reigned six years.

Edred succeeding Edmund Anno 946. the Danes be^n to gather courage not without
being privately a^mated by some treacherous English, and amongst ^em Weelstan
Archbishop of York; so that ^ the ^ caused himself to be Crowned King of
Northum^rland, against whom Edred marched with a great Army, but had the Rear
of it surprised by the underhand dealing of Woelstan; however, he made his
party good, put the Danes to the rout, and returned with victory. He made St.
Germans in Cornwall a Bishops See, which was by Canute the Dane translated to
Credington, and at last settled at Exeter by Edmund the Confessor, where ^it at
present remains. This Edred was Tenth sole Monarch of England, and reigned Nine
years.

Edwy succeeded Edred, Anno 955, and was crowned at Kingston upon Thames, where
it is repoted he committed Adultery with a great Lady, his near Kinswoman, in
the sight of his Nobles, and afterward caused her Husband to be slain, that he
might more freely enjoy her: He thrust out the Monks, and put married Priests
in the places of those that affected a single Life; Banished Dunstan, who is
now styled a Saint, and the same that is reported to have taken a she Devil by
the Nose, with a pair of Tongues, for disturbing him at his Forge. These things
turned the Peoples Affections against the King, to a degree of laying him
aside, and swearing Fealty to Edgar, which made him pine to death, after he had
Ruled Four years, and was buried in the New Abbey Church at Winchester.

Edgar began his Reign, Anno 159, he recalled Dunstan, and outed the married
Priests, making a Penalty against Drunkenness; and the Land at that time being
pestered with Wolves, he laid a yearly Tribute of three hundred Wolves Heads
upon the Prince of Wales, and upon the Noblemen and Freeholders, according to
the largeness of their Possessions, so that in a few years they were all
destroyed: He made it his business once a year, to ride the Circuit of his
Kingdom, to inquire of Abuses done by his Judges in Illegal Actings, or those
that were done by private Persons one to another, inflicting severe punishments
on such as he found tardy; yet he have himself up to prodigeous Lust, insomuch,
that casting his Eyes upon any Women he liked, he would have his satisfaction
by fair means or force; and killed Ethelwald an Earl, and one of his principal
Courtiers with a Spear, as he was hunting in the Forest, because he had married
a beauteous Lady, Daughter to Duke Orgarus, when he had sent him to fetch her
for his own use, and then took her to Wife: He deflowred a Nun, called
Wolfechild, and got on her a hopeful Brat, which was afterward Sainted by the
name of Edith; and afterward another Nun, called Ethelflede, on whom he begot
his Son Edward, who succeeded him; he had peace, except a little bickering with
the Welsh, all his Reign, feared a broad and at home, having the greatest Navy
of any King before him, some Authors reporting it consisted of Three thousand
Ships: He was crowned at Kingston upon Thames by Otho, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and reigned sixteen years.

Edward, the Thirteenth sole Monarch of England, began his Reign, Anno 975, and
was ushered in by a Famine and a Blazing Star, with great contentions between
the Monks and Married Priests: Dunstan taking taking part with the former, and
Duke Alfarus with the latter, and meeting to Dispute in an upper Room, the
press being great, the Flour fell down, and many were wounded, only Dunstan's
Chair stood fixed upon a Post, which gave such credit to the Monks, who without
doubt had contrived the sinking of the Four, as appeared by the Chair, being
fixed, that they gained the point, and the Married Priests were turned out,
suffering great necessity, no Man daring to entertain or relieve them: Soon
after this, the King going a Hunting, and being near the Castle of Queen
Elfreda, his Motherin-Law, he separated from his Company, and went to pay her,
and her Son, a visit: But the treacherous Queen to advance her own, caused one
of her Servants to stab him in the Back, whilst he was drinking on Horseback at
her Gate; whereupon turning his Horse he fled the farther Treachery, but not
finding his retinue, he through loss^ of blood fainted, and falling in the next
Wood, expired when he had reigned four Years.

Ethelred the Son of Edgar, and Elfreda succeeded Edward, who for his slowness
in Affairs, was Nicknamed, The Unready; he was Crowned at Kingstone upon
Thames, the ordinary Seat of the Saxon Monarchs, and upon his Coronation day a
Cloud was seen throughout England, half resembling Blood, and half Fire; and in
the third year of his Reign, the Danes Landed in diverse parts of this Kingdom,
committing great Outrages, and much about the same time, a great part of London
was laid in Ashes. The King not being able to oppose the Torrent of the Danish
power, compounded a Peace for 10000 Pounds a Year; but finding their Advantage,
they soon raised it to 40000 l which (...) heavy upon the Nation, and was
called Danes Guilt, o^ Danes Money, nor did this suffice them, but they
pillaged, and ravaged the Country so extremely, that the King to free his
Sublects from the Oppressions they groaned under, gave them private notice on
St. Brices day to fall upon the Danes in all the Cities and Towns where they
quartered, which was done with so much secrecy, that most of them were cut
off, this being done on the 13 of November, Anno 1002. the News flew into
Denmark, whereupon new swarms came over, under the Leading of Swanus, who
destroyed all before them with Fire and Sword, in such a terrible manner, that
the People fled to the Woods, and Mountains, and although the King bought his
Peace at the price of 30000 Pounds, yet not long after they flew 900 Monks and
such as were of Religious Orders in Canterbury, and having gotten a great sum
of Money from the Archbishop Aphegus for his Ransom, they notwithstanding
ston^d him at Greenwich, so that the King perceiving their treachery, and cruel
dealing, and that he was no ways capable of opposing their fury, he sent Emma
his wise with her two Sons, to her Brother Richard Duke of ^^^mandy, and soon
after left the Kingdom to follow them, but Swanus being stabbed by his own Me^,
and Canutus his Son set up in his stead. Ethelred returned, but finding many
Treasonable Designs carried on against him by Edricus one of his Dukes, and a
powerful Enemy in the Land which he was no ways able to oppose, he died for
grief when he had Reigned thirty seven years, and was the fourteenth sole
Monarch of England.

Edmund the Eldest Son of Ethelred Surnamed Ironside, succeeded him Anno 1016.
and was Crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, by Livingus Archbishop of
Canterbury, though Canute then Reigned as King at Southampton. This Edmund gave
the Danes many Battles, and being of a hardy and courageous temper, he great^y
raised the drooping hearts of his Subjects, raising the Siege of London, and
worsting their Army four times in open fight, so that Canute having Challenged
him to a single Duel, for the Kingdom he loyfully accepted the offer, so that
going into an Island called Alney near Gloucester, they fought valiantly, but
Canute finding himself over matched, and having received some dangerous Wounds,
he desired a Parley, which being granted, he said, What should move us, most
Valiant Prince, that for the obtaining of a Title we should thus endanger our
Lives, better it were to lay Malice and Weapons aside, and to condescend to a
Loving Agreement: Let us now therefore become sworn Brothers, and divide the
Kingdom between us, in such League of Amity, that each may use the other as his
own, so shall the Land be peaceably governed, and we joyfully assist each other
in necessity.

Upon these words, they threw down their Arms, and embraced as Friends in the
fight of both Armies, so that the Kingdom being divided, Edmund had the South,
and Canute the North; but in a while after, Edrick the Treacherous Duke, who
had betrayed the Councels of Edmund, thinking to ingratiate himself with the
Danes, run a Spear into the Body of the King as he was easing himself, and
having by that means killed him, he cut off his Head, and hastening with i^ to
Canute, he cried, Hallsole Monarch of England, behold the Head of thy
Copartner; upon which Canute promised to advance him above all the Nobles of
England, but whilst the Traitor was big with expectation of honor and
preferment he caused him to be Arrested, and cutting off his Head fixed it on
the Tower, advancing him in that sense as he deserved. This Edmund was Third
Son of Ethelfrid, and Fifteenth sole Monarch, his Reign exceeded not a year.

Thus the Great Saxon Monarchy did yield,
And with her slaughtered King gave up the Field,
To the Blood-thirsty Danes but three short Reigns,
Bring back the Saxons and expire the Danes.
The Danish Monarchy over England, and what remarkably happened in the Reigns
of the three Danish Kings, etc.
THe Original of the Danes as indeed all Originals is variously reported by
Historians, some will have that People derived from the Scythians, and others
from Scandia an Island Northward, however when they Invaded England, they were
populous, as it appears by their continual repairing the great numbers they
lost for their first Invasion, was in the year of our Lord 787, and were about
230 years before they gained the sole Monarchy. They were as to their Religion
Pagans.

Canute their first sole Monarch was Crowned at London, by Livingus Archbishop
of Canterbury, Anno 1017. he upon his coming to the Crown Banished Edwin Son of
Ethelred, and sent Edward and Edmund, the two Sons of Eumund Ironside to his
Brother then King of Sweed^n, to be made away, and proceeded to Mary Queen
Emma, who had been Wife to King Ethelred, and was Sister to the Duke of
Normandy, upon condition the Heir gotten on her Body should succeed him in the
English Throne, upon which he assembled the Peers in Parliament at Oxford, and
there made many good Laws, establishing the Christian Religion, injoyning that
all decent Ceremonies tending to Devotion and Divine Worship, should be
observed with reverence, that the Lords day should be kept holy, and a
Clergyman that should kill a Layman, or be found guilty of any other notorious
Crime, should be deprived of his Order and Dignity. A married Woman committing
Adultery, to have her Nose and Ears cut off, and a Widow marrying within a
Twelvemonth to loose her Joynter, and being great in power both by Sea and
Land, some of his Flatterers would needs go about to persuade him, that not
only the Earth but the Ocean was obedient to him, and that he might raise or
calm it at his pleasure, and he then being at Southampton, to upbraid them
caused a Chair to be set on the Sand when the Sea was coming in, and placing
himself in it commanded the Sea to retire, and not dare to wet his Garments,
but the regardless Waves roaling on, dashed him to that degree, that he was
forced to remove when turning to his Parasites he said, You well now perceive
all the might and power of Kings is but vanity, for none is worthy to have the
name of King, but he that keeps Heaven Earth and Sea in obedience to his
Will: And from that time he declined to wear his Crown, causing it to be placed
on the Head of Christ's Crucified Imageat Winchester; and gave many large Gifts
to the Church and Churchmen, building several Churches, and going a Pilgrimage
to Rome, procured the taking off the excessive Charge the English Archbishops
were at when they took the Pall. He Reigned eighteen years, and was the 16.
sole Monarch of England, being Buried in the old Monastery at Winchester.

Harold succeeded his Father Canute, though he was opposed at his Entrance by
Earl Goodwin; he was likewife Son to Queen Emma, and Crowned at Oxford by
Elmothius Archbishop of Canterbury, using man^ D^ vices to get Edward and
Alfr^d the two So (...) into his hunds, he decoyed over the latter in his
Mothers Name, but he landing, in hopes to be joined with the promised Forces
was betrayed by Earl Goodwin, and the King setting upon his small Forces at
Guilford, caused them all except every tenth man to be slain, and taking.
Alfrid alive, he made his Eyes be put out, and fastening one end of his Bowels
to a stake, he was pricked round with Ponyards till such time as he had drawn
out his Guts, and so died this poor Prince: Nor did he rest here, but proceeded
to Banish Queen Emma, and Confiscate her Goods for reproaching him with the
Death of her Son. This Harrold was second Son of Canute, and the seventeenth
sole Monarch of England; he began his Reign Anno 1036, and Reigned four years,
being buried (according to Stow) at Westminster.

Hardicanute succeeded Harrold, being invited over from Denmark, both by the
Danes and English, and Crowned at London by Elnoth Archbishop of Canterbury,
he caused the Body of Harrold to he dug up, and cutting off the Head threw
it into the Thames, but it being found by some Fishermen, they decently
Interred it in St. Clements-Danes, so called for its being the chief Burial
place of the Danes. This King was given much to Eating and Drinking, insomuch,
that he caused his Tables to be spread four times a day with all manner of
Dainties, and raised a Tax of 32147 pounds to maintain a great Fleet at Sea and
in vain Ostentation Earl Goodwin sitted out one with a Golden stern, and Men
completely armed with guilt Arms and Armor, but the King hearing the Tax was
denied, and that Thurston and Feader, two of his Collectors were slain by the
people at Worcester, he expulsed the Bishop and burnt the City; but as he was
Revelling at a Wedding in Lambeth, he suddenly f^ll down dead, when he had
reigned about two years: He was third Son of Canute, and the eighteenth sole
Monarch, he began his Reign Anno 1040, and was (...) at Win^r, and with him
fell the D^sh Monarchy in England, and the Saxons re-entered to the no small
Joy of the people,

Thus Monarchies and Monarchs rise and fall,
Whilst worldly Pomp is Fortunes Tennis-ball.
The Saxon Monarchy restored, etc.
HArdicanute being dead, Edward the seventh Son of Ethelred by Queen Emma, was
sent for out of Normandy, where he had taken Sanctuary during the Danish
Monarchy, and Crowned upon his Arrival at Winchester by Edsine Archbishop of
Canterbury, Anno 1042. and to gain the greater favor of the people he remitted
the Tax of 40000 Pounds a year, which had for 40 years been levied upon all
Lands except those of the Clergy, by the Name of Dane-Guilt, and the better to
settle his Kingdom, he compiled a Body of wholesome Laws from those of the
Mercians, West Saxons, and Danes, still known by the Title of Edward the
Confessor's Laws written in Latin, his Wars were only with the Welsh, Irish,
and some Danes, but those very inconsiderable, yet Earl Goodwin being very
powerful, joined with his Sons against him, and in January a very deep Snow
falling, which covered the Earth, till the middle of March, the Cattle, and
Fowls of the Air were starved in abundance, and the Summer produced Lightnings
that burnt up the Corn, whereupon a Famine ensued, and the King (at the
Instigation of Goodwin, and Robert Archbishop of Canterbury, seized upon his
Mothers Jewels, and committed her Prisoner to the Abbey of Warwick, putting her
to undergo the Law Ordalium, which is to pass over nine hot Plowshares with
naked feet, and blindfold, laid about a yard asunder, which she did without
touching them before she knew she was come to the place; so that a
reconciliation hereupon ensued, and this manner of trial was by way of
Purgation for such as were suspected of Incontinency, he Imprisoned her for
Marrying Canute and not assisting him and his Brothers in their Extremity.

In this Kings Reign a great Earthquake happened, and Earl Goodwin was choked
at the King's Table with a piece of Bread, which he wished might choke him if
he had any hand in the Death of Alfrid the Kings Brother. He is accounted the
first King that ever Cured the King's Evil, he Married Edith Daughter to
Goodwin, a very Beautiful Lady, but had no Children by her, being reported
never to have Carnally known her, and seeing a needy Courtier come into his
Chamber one Morning as he lay in Bed with the Curtains drawn, and take as much
Money out of his Coffer as he could carry, he suffered it without speaking, but
upon his third coming he reproved him of Covetousness, charging him to be gone,
for if Hugoline his Treasurer should come and seize him in the Fact, he would
be sure to stretch for it, and scarce was he gone when the Treasuaer, who had
casually left open the Coffer, came, and appeared in a great Consternation at
the loss; but the King bid him not trouble himself, for he that took it had
most need of it: And lying soon after upon his Deathbed, perceiving those that
stood about him to weep, he said, If you loved me you would not weep, but
rejeyce because I go to my Father, with whom I shall receive the Joys promised
to the Faithful, not through my merit, but the free mercy of my Savior, who
shows mercy on whom he pleases. And giving up the Ghost he was buried at
Westminster, when he had Reigned 20 Years and 6 Months, and 27 Days; he rebuilt
St. Peter's Westminster, and St. Margret's Church; made the first Great Seal,
and was the 19 sole Monarch of England, called the Confessor.

Harrold Son to Earl Goodwin, and Sitha his Wife Sister to Swain the younger
King of Denmark, was upon the Death of King Edward taken for King, though he
waved the Ceremony of this Coronation; and to ingratiate himself with the
People, lightened the Texes and Behaved himself Courteous and Affable to all
Men, but he had not long held the Regal Dignity, before William Duke of
Normandy sent to put him in mind of his Oath, which was made during his
Imprisonment in Normandy, whether in the time of King Edward he had been driven
by stress of weather, importing, that when ever Edward died he should secure
the Kingdom for the Norman Duke; but Harrold urging what he then did was by
constraint, and that he conceived himself not obliged to stand to it: The Duke
prepared to Invade the Kingdom, at which time a Dreadful Commet appeared,
denouncing the Woes and Miseries that ensued, for before the Normans arrived, a
great number of Danes and Norwigeans landed in the North under the Leading of
Testo and Harrold Harfrager King of Denmark, and spoiling the Country before
them, marched to York, which constrained the King to draw out his Army, but
being about to pass Stamford-bridge, built over the River Derwent, his Forces
were stopped by a single Dane of Gigantick stature and strength, and forty of
his Men killed in attempting to remove him, but in the end, a Soldier getting
under the Bridge in a Boat, run his Spear through a Creuis, and by that means
killed him, so that the Bridge gained the King gave Battle, and overthrew the
Enemy with great slaughter, killing the Danish King and Tosto his Brother, and
Olave the Kings Son, with Paul Earl of Orkney, were taken Prisoners, however
they upon earnest supplication were suffered to depart the Kingdom in the ships
that brought them, with the heavy news of their loss, but the King had scarce
time to consider his advantage before he had News that William Duke of Normandy
was Landed with 50000 Men at Pevensey in Sussex on the eigth of September 1066,
and fired his Fleet, to put his Soldiers out of hopes of return, which made
Harrold hasten to oppose him, who by this time had sent a Messenger to London
to demand the Kingdom, but they dismissed him with Threats, and although the
Duke to prevent the effusion of more blood, proffered to fight hand to hand yet
the King refused it, saying, It should be tried by more Swords than one:
Whereupon the Armies advancing pitched in a large Plain, and from thence the
King sent Spies into the Dukes Camp, who being taken were lead from Rank to
Rank, and made to take a perfect survey of the Army, and so dismissed.

The 14th of October 1366, being come, the Armies drew out, and faced each
other, till the Trumpets sounded the Charge, when at the first Encounter the
Normans were forced to give ground and retire in disorder, which the English
perceiving, and thinking the Battle won carelessly disranked to pursue them,
which they perceiving and taking that advantage rallied and changed the face of
Fortune, for the Normans entering the loose squadrons, overwhelmed the English
with showers of Arrows, so that all was turned to Confusion; and although they
perceived their error too late, and casting themselves into a Ring stood to it
manfully, yet the King as he was rallying them being slain with an Arrow that
pierced his Brain, as likewise his two Brothers Leofin and Grith, with most of
the English Nobles, and 97974 Soldiers, the rest threw down their Arms, and
submitted to the Conqueror, who from that time took upon him the Kingdom. This
Harrold began his Reign, Anno 1065, and Reigned about 9 Months and 9 Days, and
was buried at Waltham in Essex.

Thus Fortunes fickle wheel still turning round,
Does raise to Greatness, and again confound.
The Reigns of the Kings of the Norman Race, and first of William ( usually
called) the Conqueror.
THe Normans knew not their own true Original, but found themselves a mixed
People, composed of Norwigeans, Sweeds, and Danes, taking their denomination
from that Northern Climate anciently called Cimbrica Chersonesus and Norway,
but the Country being supposed too little for the people, they drew out their
Collonies, and sent them abroad under diverse Captains, to seek their Fortunes,
in planting a more advantageous soil, and having made many descents upon the
Coasts of Belgia, Frizia, England, and Ireland, under Rollo their Captain a
Noble Norman; they pitched upon this Nation, and had great Wars with the Saxon
Monarchs, till such time as Rollo in a Dream fancying himself upon the highest
Hill in France, perceived beneath him a most pleasant Country, and that a River
stowing from his seat watered it, whilst little Birds with red Breasts run to
drink at the stream and sung melodiously about him. This being Interpreted by a
Monk, That it was the will of Heaven he should go over, and settle himself in
that part of France, he fancied himself to be in; and that there he should be
victorious.

Whether this Interpretation was seigned by the Monk, to be rid of so powerful
an Enemy, or by secret Devination revealed to him, we determine not; however it
wrought so powerful with Rollo, that he drew his Forces out of England, and
passing into France, during the Reign of Chales the Simple, with continual Wars
so far endangered that Kingdom, that the King was constrained to make an
Alliance with him at no less a rate than giving him his Daughter Gilla in
Marriage, with the Duchy of Normandy in Dow^. This Rollo was Great Grandfather
to Richard the fifth, Duke of Normandy, which Richard was Elder Brother to
Robert, who was Father to William, of whom we are now to speak.

William the first King of England, etc. (usually called the Conqueror, his
Reign and Actions, etc.
William the Conqueror was Natural Son to Robert Duke of Normandy, by Arlotte
a Beautiful Woman of mean Birth, her Father being no other than a Tanner, or
Skinner; however it is Recorded, That being great with Child of this William,
she Dreamed her Bowels delated, and extended all over Normandy, and Britain,
and as soon as the Child was Born, being laid on the Floar strewed with Rushes,
a Custom amongst the Normans to try the Presage of Fortune, he instantly
grasped the Rushes in his hands, and thence they concluded his future
greatness, and when his Father died he took upon him the Rule of Normandy and
gained England as has has been already related.

William the Conqueror, began his Reign, October 14. Anno 1066. and was Crowned
the 25th. of the following December, by Aldred Archbishop of York causing the
English Bishops and Barrons to swear Allegiance to him, taking himself a solemn
Oath to defend the Rights of the Church, to establish such Laws as were
agreeing to the Constitution of the Kingdom, and to see them administered with
Uprightness and Justice, and supposing himself by this means securely settled in
the Throne, he went a Progress to be more assured of the Southern Parts; but as
was passing through Kent to Dover, Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Eglesine Abbot of St. Augustines Assembled the Commons to oppose him, who
placed themselves in a Wood near Swancomb, waiting the Conquerors Arrival, when
perceiving his approach with a slender Train, shadowed with Boughs, cut down
for the purpose, they marched against him, who supposing himself enclosed with
moving Woods, was so much surprised that he was neither capable of advancing or
retiring, but whilst he was considering what it might tend to the Kentish-men
now enclosing his Army, threw down their Boughs and displayed their Banners;
when the Bishop and Abbot presented themselves on the behalf of the rest,
Addressing the Conqueror in the following Speech.

Most Noble Duke,

Behold here the Commons of Kent are come forth to meet and receive you as
their Sovereign, requiring your Peace, their own free condition of Estate, and
ancient Laws; if these things be denied, they are present to abide the Battle,
being fully determined rather to die than to part with their Laws, or to live
servile in Bondage.

The Conqueror much surprised, forbore reply for a time, but perceiving the
Kentish Men making ready their Weapons, and resolute to give Battle, knowing
himself much Inferior in number, loath to stake a Kingdom upon so small a
cast, he granted their Demands, so that to this day they retain by ancient
Custom many Privileges that other Counties enjoy not; yet the Conqueror was
not so favorable to the English as they expected; for after his Coronation, he
Banished such of the Nobles and Gentlemen as were most likely to oppose him in
his Proceedings, seizing most of the Estates of the Kingdom, and gave them to
his Normans, whom he most respected, or such as had helped toward desraying
the Charge of the Expedition, depriving Monasteries, Bishoprics, Cities, and
Corporations of their Ancient Liberties and Privileges; and then obliged them
to redeem them at great Sums of Money, constituting new Laws, and ordained four
Terms, when as all Controversies (except what was rare, and extraordinary, were
tried in the respective Counties, Hundreds, or Monthly Moots, or Gemotes; and
to prevent great Meetings, which he feared might turn to his prejudice, he set
out a severe Edict, commanding all Persons upon the ringing of a Bell, called
by the Normans Coverfeu, or Coverfire, to put out both Fire and Candle exactly
at eight of the Clock in the Evening, and causing an exact survey of the Lands
and Estates of all the people, he amerced them accordingly, exacting six
shillings for every Hide of Land; and the Book thus made of every several
survey, the number of the People, and their Abilities, is called Doomesday
Book; nor did he permit any of the English to be in places of Trust, and for
his pleasure, as some will have it) though others say it was out of Policy,
that he might have a Desolate place to Land new Forces out of Normandy, if the
English should rise in Arms against him, he laid waste 36 Parishes, with their
Churches, and made of that Vacancy a large Forest, by him called new Forest,
reaching to the Seashore, and in Circuit 60 Miles, he fortified the Tower of
London, and other places, the better to secure his new acquired greatness, and
was the first that admitted the Jews to Inhabit England, and finding some stirs
in Normandy, he re-passed the Seas, and fought his Son Robert, who dismounted
him, but knowing his voice, remounted him, and begged his pardon, and by that
means they were made Friends, and the War ceased: However finding Odo Bishop of
Bayeux, and Earl of Kent, secretly Conspiring against him, he Confiscated his
Estate, and Banished him his Dominions; and being about to War against the
French, who (during the Contest with his Son) had offered some Indignities to
his Dominions in Normandy, he fell sick of a great pain and disorder in his
Bowels, whereat the French King in a scofing manner said, Our Cousin William is
now in Childbed, therefore it behooves us to consider what number of Candles we
must offer when he is Churched, for no doubt they must be very many. This being
told to King William he in a rage swore by the Resurrection and brightness of
God, That his Cousin of France should be at no such cost or trouble, but that
at his Churching himself would light a thousand Candles in France; and he
failed not in his promise, for entering that Kingdom with Fire and Sword, he
burnt the City of Mentz or Metz, and many other places; yet being too eager in
pursuit of the French, and of a Corpulent Body, his Horse with a surious bound
broke the Inner Rim or Film of his Belly, of which (when he had quieted the
Disturbances abroad, and at home) and an extreme Surfeit he got by overheating
himself in action, he died after a considerable sickness, at Roan in Normandy,
Anno 1087. and there forsaken of his Sons and Courtiers, who hasted to secure
their respective Interests, his Body was left unburied, till one Harulims, a
poor Country Knight, at his proper charge conveyed it to Cane, where, upon the
attempting to bury him in St. Stephen's Chapel, it was denied by one Ascelinus
Fitz Arthur, who in the Name of God forbad it, saying, It was the very place of
his Father's House Floar, which the Duke in his Lifetime had wrongfully taken
from him, and upon his Inheritance founded the Church: Therefore (continued he)
I challenge the Ground, and on God's behalf forbid that the Body of any
Oppressor, or Dispoiler, be buried in my Earth; neither shall it be Interred in
the Precincts of my right: But in conclusion, Henry, the Conqueror's younger
Son hearing of the refusal, compounded for 100 pound weight of silver, and the
Body was accordingly Interred with little or no Pomp, for during the Contest,
his Belly burst in sunder, and the Contageon thereby occasioned, was so great,
that few could endure it, he died on the 9th. day of September 1087. in the
56th. year of his Dukedom of Normandy, and the 21st. of his Reign over England,
in the 64th. year of his Age, his Wife was Maud Daughter to Baldwin the first
Earl of Flanders, his Issue was Robert, surnamed Curthois, or Short-boots,
William, surnamed Miser, who died Anno 1028. Richard, who after his Father had
gained the English Diadem, came to a violent Death, being gored in the New
Forest by a Stag, or (as others have it) died by the stroke of a Bough.
William Rufus, who succeeded him in the Kingdom of England, though he nominated
no Successor, but left it to God's disposal, much bewailing on his Deathbed
the Rigor and Oppressions he had used toward the English. Henry born at Selby
in Yorkshire, Anno 1070. Cicely a veiled Nun, Constance Married to Allain Earl
of Britain in France. Alice Married to Stephen Earl of Bloys, by whom she had
Stephen Earl of Mortain and Boleine afterward King of England. Gundred Married
to William d' Warren a Noble Norman, and first Earl of Surry. Ela, who in her
Childhood was contracted to Duke Harrold afterward King of England. Margaret,
who in her Childhood was given to Alphons King of Gallicia in Spain, and
William Preverel his Natural Son, who was Created Earl of Nottingham.

His last Will and Testament was, That all his Goods should be distributed to
Churches, Ministers, and Poor, limiting their respective Portions; and to the
Church and Monks of St. Stevens in Normandy, where he above all ^oveted to be
Buried, he gave several Manors, as likewise his Crown, which was afterward
Redeemed by his Son Henry. To Robert he left the Dutchey of Normandy, but left
(as we said) England free, only wishing that his Son William might succeed him
in it, and presageing, that Henry should in Conclusion possess all his
Dominions, he gave him 5000 Pounds, the remainder of his Treasure. He Deposed,
and Imprisoned Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, who died in Prison: However
he built many fair Churches, and Abbeys, endowing them with Revenues, and large
Privileges, specially Battle-Abby, where he slew King Harrold; so that any
The^f, or Murderer, flying thither, had safe Protection, and if the Abbot came
by where any Execution was in hand, he might (if he pleased) save the
Malefactor; he allowed a certain Pention to the Monks to ^ray for the Soul of
King Harrold, and those that were ^lain in the Battle.

In this King's time, who was the 20th. sole Monarch of England, happened a
dreadful Earthquake, strange Burning Feavors, proving very Mortal, Murrains
causing great Dearth of Cattle, extraordinary Rains, and Inundations which
softened the Hills to that degree, that some of them sunk to a flatness, and
overwhelmed the Neighboring Villages, most of the chief Cities suffered by
Fire, and London had her Houses and Churches burnt as the fire carried it from
the West Gate to the East Gate.

Thus Lived, and sell the Potent Conqueror,
Death's sorce subdued what never was foiled in War.
The Reign of William II. Surnamed Rufus, King of England, etc.
William Rufus, so named from the redness of his Face, although his Elder
Brother Robert was alive, immediately passing to London, he by the assistance
of Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury and VVolstane, so far wrought upon the
Council, that he procured himself to be Crowned Anno 1087. at Westminster, but
Odo his Uncle returning from his Banishment, stirred up Robert his Brother
against him, instigating the Nobles to take part with him; but Robert wanting
Money, was obliged for the better carrying on the Expedition to Pawn the
Province of Constantine to his Brother Henry, but whilst these preparations
were in hand, William to ingratiate himself with the English made large
Promises to take off the hard Taxes, and restore the Laws his Father had
abolished, upon which the people siding with him, he wrested many of the strong
Holds out of the hands of thos^ that had seized them; for his Brother Robert
proceeding to besiege his Uncle Odo in Richester, putting forth his
Proclamation, by which he ordered all people to repair thither in Arms, and
whoever refused he should be accounted a Niding, which word at that time was so
distastful and hated by the English, as signifying a Coward, or mean-spirited
Fellow, that without any constraint, or imposition of Penalty, they flocked
thithe^ from all parts, whereupon the place was constrained to yield, and Odo
again Banished, but whilst these thing passed, Duke Robert was not idle, for
having gathere^ what Forces he could, he Landed at Southampton, but finding
himself unable to resist the Army that was marching against him, and not joined
by the expected supply he repassed the Seas without doing any thing o^ note,
except the ingageing William to pay him 3000 Mark a year, and after his
Decease to resign it to him or his Heirs; and now Lanfrank the Archbishop
dying, the King supplied himself with Treasure by keeping the Sea of
Canterbury, and many other Ecclesiastica^ Promotions vacant for the space of
four Years, some o^ which he likewise sold, and was wont to say, That Christ's
Bread is a sweet Dainty, and most delicious for Kings: Howbeit, when two Monks
were contending who should give most to be made Abbot of a certain Abbey in the
King's Disposal, he espied a third Monk standing in a corner, and causing him
to advance, he demanded, What he would give to be made Abbot? Not on^ Farthing
(replied the Monk) for I have renounced the World and Riches, that I may the
more carefully serv^ God. Then (replied the King) thou art worthy to b^ made
Abbot, and the Abbey shall be thine.

The Scots by this time having Invaded England under the leading of Molcolm
their King; King William marched his Army Northward to oppose him, but before
it came to the trial of Battle, a Peace was concluded, and the 12 Villages in
the Northern Marche^ which the Scots had held during the Reign of William the
Conqueror, restored them for a Tribute of twelve Marks a year: And this year
the King to strengthen him against the Scots, rebuilt Carlisle in Cumberland,
which had been demolished by the Danes about two ^undred years before: And in
Anno 1093 made An^elm, a Norman Abbot, Archbishop of Canterbury; but ^ong the
Peace lasted not between the two Kingdoms, for Malcolm coming to Gloucester, to
treat about further ^ccord, and not being received, or entertained, according
to his liking, he returned in a rage, and raising a great Army in his own
Country, fell into the English Frontires with Fire and Sword, destroying all
before him as far as Alnewick; and no sooner were these stirs quieted, but
Robert Mobray, and William of Anchon, conspired, with diverse others, to depose
King William and set up Stephen de Albermarle a Sisters Son, but were prevented
and defeated.

The Welsh making many Incursions, and Inroades, into the Kings Territories, he
marched a powerful Army into the heart of Wales, and there did such notable
Exploits, that the Welsh finding themselves unable to make head against his
Forces submitted themselves, so that from the year 1093 Wales has been subject
to the Crown of England.

The King upon new provocations Invaded his Brother Roberts Terretories in
Normandy, taking diverse Castles and strong holds, enforcing him thereby to a
Peace; after which uniting their Forces against their younger Brother Henry,
who had practiced the surprising their Territories, he was besieged by them in
the Castles of St. Michaels Mount in Normandy, during which Siege King
VVilliam's life was in great hazard, for being too forward in charging such as
sallied, he was overthrown by a Knight, and had his Horse slain, but being
known, the Knight took him up, and presented him with another Horse, when the
King springing into the Saddle, and coming up with a fierce countenance,
demanded who it was that ha^ overthrown him; but the undaunted Knight, instead
of excusing it, boldly told him it was he: Then, sai^ the King, looking mildly
upon him, by St. Lukes fac^ for that was his usual Oath, thou shall be my
Knight and inroled in my Check, with a Fee answerable to the worth: But in
conclusion, Henry being constrained for want of Water, and other necessaries,
to submit the Brethren were reconciled, and Robert preparing for the Holy Wars,
mortgaged his Dukedom of Normandy to King William for 6660 pounds, to rais^
which petty sum, at that time, he caused great Taxes as they were termed to be
laid upon the People, and forced the Religious Houses to contribute toward it
And in the absence of Robert, the French besieging Main in Normandy, the King
upon notice of it, as h^ sat at Dinner, in his Palace of Westminster, swore H^
would never turn his back till he arrived there; and so causing the Wall to be
broke through for his passage he hasted to Sea, commanding his Army to follow
him; but the Winds being contrary, and the Sea^ rough and boisterous, the
Mariners doubted to set sail and the Pilot besought the King to continue in the
Port till the Weather was more favorable, but he impatient of delay, and
disdaining to fear, replied Have thou ever heard that a King has been drowned
therefore hoist up the Sails, I charge thee, and be gone So that safely, and
unexpectedly arriving in Normandy, the French were so terrified, that they
raised the Siege.

This King denied that the Pope had any Authority over any Bishop of his Realm,
and also the Power of binding and loosing; yet in acknowledgement to the Sea of
Rome, he paid Peter pence granted by his Father; he derided Invocation of
Saints, and curbed the avarice and aspiring Ambition of the Clergy In his Reign
a great Earthquake happened, and the Steeple of the Abbey of Winchester was
burnt with ^ghtning, which likewise rent the roof of the ^by, casting down the
Image of the Virgin Mary, ^d her Crucifix, breaking one of her Legs; and not
^ng after, so great a Wind happened at London, that it ^ew down sixty, some say
six hundred Houses, taking of the roof of Bow Church, and carrying it a great
^ight in the Air: And so great a Famine and Mor^ity ensued, that the quick were
scarcely able to bu^ the dead: Two blasing Stars appeared, and many ^ars, as if
they shot fiery Darts at each other: and in the last year of his Reign the Sea
over^wed her Banks, carrying away a great number ^ People, Cattle and Houses,
drowning most of the ^ands, which had been Earl Goodwins, which is not ^covered
to this day, but retain the Earls Name as ^own by that of Goodwins Sands. At
Finchamstead, ^ear Abbington in Barkshire, a Well of bloodly co^oured Water
sprung up for fifteen days, and then ^eased.

King William, by this time having settled his Af^irs, betook him to
Recreations, and especially ^unting in the New Forest his Father had made by
^he unpeopling, and delapidation of a great many ^owns and Vilages; when so it
happened that Sir Walter Tyrre, a French Knight, shooting at a Stag, he Arrow
glanced against a Tree, and flying aslaunt ^ruck the King into the breast, of
which he imme^ately died, August 1. Anno 1100. and his Body being ^id in a
Cart, the best Hearse those times afforded a ^reat King, it broke, bemired in a
dirty way, yet be^g put into another, it was carried to Winchester, and buried
in the Cathedral Church; but since the ^ones have been removed to, and laid
with those of ^anute, the Danish King.

This was the King who built Westminster Hall ^inety yards in length, and
twenty four yards two ^eet in breadth; yet when he came to see it, he
complained it was too little by half, and therefo^ he would reserve it for a
lodging Room: He w^ slain, as you have heard, in the thirteenth year his Reign,
and the sorty sourth of his Age, being t^ one and twentieth sole Monarch of
England.

Thus Second William, by misfortune's hand,
Dropped in the Grave, and left the wealthy Land:
Two Sons of the Great Conqueror met their fate,
Where he had laid the Country desolate.
The Reign ^and Actions of Henry the First King England, etc.
HEnry the First English Monarch of that Nam^ who for his great Abilities in
Learning, w^ called Beau-clark, or good Scholar; upon the une^ pected death of
his Brother William, and his Broth^ Robert's being in the Holy Land waring
again the Infidels, upon many fair promises to the Nobl^ and Commons, procured
himself to be accepted King, and was Crowned at Westminster, Anno 11^ Anselm,
being Archbishop of Canterbury; and at fi^ made it hisstudy to please all
sorts, striving to man his House and Court a pattern of Virtue, and go^ Living
to the rest of his Subjects, permiting the Pe^ ple to have Fire and Candle in
their Houses, at the own discretion, which under severe penalties had be^
prohibited by his Father, freeing the Churches from reservations upon
vacancies, allowing the Heirs Noblemen to possess their Fathers Lands without
Redemption, engaging the Nobles to do the like by the Tenants, allowing, so it
were, not to his Enemies, t^ Gentry, to marry their Daughters and Kinswomen
whom they pleased; and that the Widow enjoyi^ Joynter should be at liberty to
ma^^y whom (...) ^ased: That the Mother, and nearest Relations, ^ould be
Guardians to Fatherless Children, during ^ir Minority: That such as coined
false Money ^ould loose their Right Hand: And if Men be de^ved of their
Genitals, he ordained a certain Mea^e to be a Standard; Measure of Commerce
accord^g to the length of his Arm, which is our Yard: For^ing all Debts due to
the Crown before be came to ^ Renewing the Laws of Edward the Confessor: And ^e
better to strengthen his Title, he married Maud, ^ughter to the King of Scots
by Margaret, Sister to ^gard Atheling, joining in Succession to the Saxon ^ngs.
But by this time News came that Robert his ^der Brother (after refusing the
Scepter of Jerusalem, which for his Valor and Conduct, upon taking ^t City
from the Insidels, was offered him by all the Western Princes that commanded
the numerous Army of Christians in that glorious Expedition) was ^nd^d with an
Army at Portsmouth, and that many ^ the English sided with him, which put the
King to no small consternation; however, having got by ^s lenity, and fair
pretenses, the hearts of the greater ^rt of the People, he resolved not to
forgo what ^ had gotten; and thereupon tried so far the good ^mper of his
Brother, that by Presents and large ^omises, he worked upon him to remit his
Claim, ^ein of which he was to have three thousand Marks ^id him yearly, and
gave him six Months Royal En^tainment.

The Sunshine of Peace lasted not long before Be^isine, Earl of Shrewsbury, and
Roger Montgomery, ^ith diverse other r^d, but being vanquished, ^ey sled to
Normandy; however, he was perplexed ^the Archbishop, who influenced by the Sea
of ^ome, contended to regulate the Clergy, and dispose ^ Ecclesiastical
promotions, as he pleased, refusing Consecrate such Bishops, as the King was
desirous to advance; yet the King fearless of what might happen in England,
upon notice, his Brother, at the instigation of some English Fugitives, was
preparin^ for a second Invasion: He resolved to prevent it by carrying the War
into Normandy, which he effected with such precepitation, that he overthrew
Robert, took him Prisoner, and sent him to Cardr^ Castle, where at first he was
only Prisoner at large having the privilege of the Medows and Parks under a
slender Guard; but as some will have it, at tempting his escape, but others,
the People, too much pitying his condition, and the apprehensions i^ wrought,
made the King confine him a close Prisoner, and the better to secure himself
against any attempts, this poor Prince might make, cause the Twinkles of his
Eyes to be put out, or clouded i^ darkness by burning Glasses, and not long
after h^ lost his Life; some say by a voluntary starving himself, out of a
disdain he took, that the King, his Brother, sent him a Suit of his old cast
Clothes, with a^ addition, That they were good enough for a Prisoner; however,
this unnatural act greatly eclipsed the glory o^ this King, and too plainly
showed that Crowns know^ no Kindred when they stand in competion.

The Duke being dead, King Henry seized upon his Duchy of Normandy; so that
England may now be said to conquer Normandy, though indeed it was unhappy for
the English, whom he began to restrain with a harder hand, seeing he had
removed the danger that threatened him, banishing the Flemings who were desirous
to instruct us in the Woollen Trade retracting many Grants he had passed, and to
strenghen his Alliance abroad, he married Maud, his Eldest Daughter, to Henry
the Fourth, Emperor of Germany, or the Romans; and the Welsh promoting some
disorders, he forced them to obedience: A^ likewise these in Normandy, where
new trouble^ arose, and that which gave him hopes of the settlement of Affairs,
was the death of the Archbishop, who to raise the Popes Power, had opposed ^im
in his important proceedings, and was a great Enemy to the Married Priests, who
were tolerated ^n this Kings Reign. The High Court of Parliament, some Authors
will have to be constituted in his Reign, Anno 1116.

William, Eldest Son to Robert the deceased, Duke of Normandy being alive,
Lewis King of France, together with the Earls of Flanders and Anjou, labored
^o fix him in the Dukedom, but were frustrated, and a great Battle, Anno 1119,
was fought between ^he two Kings, wherein Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, with
diverse other Nobles, and some thousands of Common Soldiers were slain, and the
Victory falling ^o the English, occasioned great loss and dishonor ^o the
French; and the Earl of Anjou, upon King Henry's return to Roan with Palms of
Triumph, gave his Daughter and Heiress, in Reversion of that Province, to
William the Kings Eldest Son, whose Nuptials were solemnized with great joy,
and hope of future happiness: But all things are unstable in this World, for
the King setting sail for England, and the Prince with his Bride, his Brothers
Sisters, and other great Personages, staying six hours sail behind ^o take
leave of their Friends, resolved, notwithstanding, to come up with the King
before he landed; (...) that the Mariners running a desperate course, as ^eing
elevated with Wine and good Cheer, fell soul ^n a Rock, which broke the Ship to
pieces; yet the ^rince with his Bride, and some others got into the ^ng Boat,
and might have gone off, but the Coun^ss of Perch crying to him from the
Fore-castle ^or help, he caused the Boat to turn and take her in; ^ut before he
could effect it, so many leaped into it, and clung to its sides, esteeming, in
that extremity, their Lives as dear as their Princes, that it sunk with the
overlaiding, and they were all drowned.

This doleful news coming to the Kings Earl by some of the Seamen that had
escaped upon pieces of the Ship, he greatly lamented the loss of his Children;
and though he was well in years, yet in some measure to repair it, he Married a
second Wife, viz. Adilicia, Daughter to Jeffery Duke of Lorain; but having no
Issue by her, he sent for Maud his Daughter, who had been married to the
Emperor, her Husband being at that time dead, and calling a Parliament, caused
Stephen, his Sisters Son, with his Nobles to swear her, as to his lawful, and
now only Heir, when sailing into Normandy, after the toil of hunting, eating a
great meal of Lampries, he presently fell sick, and after seven days sickness,
dyed in the Town of St. Denis, Anno 1135, his body was brought to Reading, and
buried in the Abbey himself had founded, and his Bowels and Brain at Roan; nor
did he dye without suspicion of being poisoned, for the very sent that came
from his Brain, was the death of the Physician that took it out.

The Wives of this King were two, viz. Maud, Daughter to Malcolm King of
Scotland, and Adilicia, Daughter to Godfry Duke of Lorain, his lawful Issue, by
the first, was William and Maud, by the last he had none, yet is held to have
fourteen Illegitimate Children: He built many Abbeys and Monasteries, and was
very charitable to the Poor. In his time many Prodigies appeared, and the
Ground rent by an Earthquake, sent forth such flames as destroyed some, and
endangered the lives of more: He was King of England, and Duke of Normandy,
fourth Son to William the Conqueror, beginning his Reign, Anno 1100, and
Reigning 35 years, being the 23 Monarch of England, dying in the 65 year of his
Age.

Thus falls another Monarch, soon or late,
All Crowns and Scepters in the dust must set:
All breath of Life, the lowly and the high,
Must leave this narrow stage for vast Eternity.
The Reign of King Stephen with his Memorable Actions, etc.
STephen Earl of Bloys, Son to Adilicia, Daughter to William the Conqueror, and
Stephen Earl of Bloys, notwithstanding he had sworn Fealty to the Empress Maud,
laid claim to the Kingdom, and by the interest and policy of his Brother Henry,
Bishop of Winchester, and Roger Bishop of Sarum; as also one Hugh Bigot, who
swore that King Henry, upon his Deathbed, taking a distaste at his Daughters
proceedings, had disenherited her, and appointed this Stephen to succeed him in
his Kingdom of England, and Dukedom of Normandy, so that upon these, and other
interests that were made, he was Crowned at Westminster on St. Stephen's day,
Anno 1135, by William Curboil, Archbishop of Canterbury, the Prelates swearing
to hold him King so long as he should preserve their Churches Rights, and the
Lay-Barrons, in like manner, swore Allegiance to him, so long as he should keep
his Covenants with them, in preserving their Rights and Privileges, so that he
accepted of the Crown, and owned his Right as by Election: The Charter
containing his peoples Franchises, Liberties and Immunities, which he obliged
himself to maintain, he Signed and Sealed it at Oxford, which was, That all
Liberties, Customs, Possessions granted to the Church, should be firm and in
force; That Persons and Causes Ecclesiastical should appertain only to
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; That Church vacancies, and the Goods of
Churchmen, should be at the sole dispose of the Clergy; That all ill usage
touching Forests, Exactions, etc. should be abolished, and the Ancient Laws
restored to their Purity: And for his security against the expected storm, he
caused or suffered many Castles to be erected, which afterward proved to his
detriment.

This King took quiet possession of the Throne, and had an interrupted Series
of Tranquillity for a time; but by degrees the distractions came on, that turned
the Land into a seat of War for many years: Baldwin de Redners was the first
that openly began to declare himself in favor of the Empress Maud, and
hereupon the Welshmen took up Arms, and falling upon the English, not
altogether provided, gave them a considerable overthrow: Nor did David, King of
the Scots, forbear to invade this Kingdom; and the Wesh encouraged by their
former success, continued to spoil the Frontiers, and under the favor of
another Scottish Invasion, wherein, under the leading of their King, the Scots
committed almost unparallel outrages. The Nobles conspired against King
Stephen, betaking them to their respective Castles, and strong Holds, declaring
that they were slighted and rejected in favor of the Flemmings; and
especially, one Willinm de Ypre, his chief counselor and privado to follow,
whose directions he had neglected that of his Peers. But the Scots, instead of
assisting these Lords, making many other Invasions, made great spoil and havoc
of their Houses, Castles and Estates, seeming rather to aim at a conquest than
any thing less: So that those in the North marched against them, and being
animated by Thurstan, Archbishop of York, by whose Authority Ralph Bishop of
Durham, being made General, undertook (but by what Warrant I know not) to
forgive the sins of all that should fall in Battle, and secure them from
punishments and pains in another Life; the English fell on with such fury, that
they drove the Scots out of the Field with great slaughter; nor could the
presence of their King, and the Prince his Son, restrain them from open flight
into Scotland; and King Stephen following this advantage, obliged them to sue
for Peace; however, he found himself but slenderly assured in the Hearts of his
People, especially of the Nobles, which made him prepare for the worst; and
hearing the Empress Maud was landed, with a small train, not exceeding 140 men
at Arundel, he hasted to oppose her, but she being a Woman of great Policy,
colored over her Intentions, protested she came in peace, only to spend the
remainder of her days in a Country, wherewith she was so much delighted; and
although the King had some little mistrust, he nevertheless dissembled it, and
gave her Royal Entertainment, causing her to be conveyed to the City of
Bristol, appointing it for her reception: scarce had the Empress continued at
Bristol two Months, before she privately withdrew to Wallingford, expecting the
Forces, her Brother, Earl Robert was raising on her behalf: But the King having
notice of many underhand contrivances, besieged that place, whilst his Brother,
the Bishop of Winchester, under a pretense of friendship, and important
business, inviting many of the Nobles (that he thought disaffected to the King)
he made them Prisoners in his Palace, and by that means constrained them to
render their Castles as Ransoms for their Persons, which much weakened the
Interest of the Empress; yet Earl Robert burnt Worcester for holding out
against her, and the like did Ralph Painel, one of her Captains to Nottingham.

The Empress finding her Measures broken by the crafty Bishop of Winchester,
hasted to Lincoln; but the King followed close, and besiged that City, and took
it; yet she made her escape; so that new Measures being taken, her Forces daily
increased, insomuch that becoming strong in the Field, Robert Earl of
Gloucester, and Ralph Earl of Chester, gave the King battle near Lincoln, which
was maintained with great obstinacy, and effusion of blood, Victory seeming to
incline to neither party, till such time as the Kings Horse gave way (thought
to have been done by treachery) however, the Foot stood manfully to it; but
being overcharged and trampled down, for want of their Horse to cover them,
they fled likewise, leaving the King, who chose rather to die than give back,
to fight the Battle, when with a very weighty Battle-Ax, like an enraged Lion,
he drove whole squadrons before him, killing a great number, for wherever he
struck, the blow proved mortal; but in the fury of the Fight, having broken his
Battle-Ax, and after that his Sword, he was beaten down with a Massiestone
thrown at him, and by that means brought under, and taken Prisoner. King
Stephen thus made a Prisoner, was carried to Gloucester, where the Empress
expected him, and from thence sent Prisoner to Bristol, whereupon all but the
County of Kent acknowledged her as their Sovereign, so that going to Winchester
in state, she there received the Regal Crown, and passing to London, she was
met with Procession, and the Acclamations of the people, but the Earl of
Gloucester, Brother to the Empress, being taken by some of the Nobles that sided
with King Stephen, and Imprisoned at Gloucester, searing if any violent Death
befell the King, he should run the same Risque, he so far solicited the matter,
that an exchange was made, and both the one and the other had Liberty, after
which the Earl went for Normandy, which had revolted from Stephen, to raise
Forces to secure what was gained; but whilst this was doing the Londoners being
displeased, as not receiving the satisfaction they expected, and the Nobles
thinking themselves slighted by her, the restless Bishop of Winchester set the
Nation again into a Blaze of dissension, making a strong Party for King
Stephen, besieging the Empress in the Castle of Winche^ster seven weeks, and
then the better to work his advantage, feigning a Peace, and causing it to be
proclaimed, set open the City Gates, but she and her followers almost starved
out with Famine, were scarce departed, when he caused them to be pursued, in
which pursuit many were slain, and taken Prisoners, and amongst them Earl
Robert, who by this time was returned with a slender Train, and others taking
Sanctuary in the Nunnery of Worwell were burnt together with the House, nor did
the Bishop spare Winchester, but fired it for taking part with the Empress.

The Empress escaping this Storm, betook her self to the Castle of the Devizes
in Wiltshire, but being closely pressed by the prevailing party, and out of all
hopes of relief, she contrived a Stratagem to prevent her falling into their
hands, viz. Enclosing her self in a Coffin and making it known to a few of her
Trusty Friends, under pretense it was the dead Body of a Person, whom the
Besiegers knew to be dead in that place, procuring a pass for the burial of it
with its Ancestors: She was in a Horse-litter carried to Gloucester, and there
joyfully received by those of their Party. But finding it not safe to continue
there, she hasted to Oxford, where being straightly Besieged by the King in the
depth of Winter, and the Suburbs gained, she found her self in no capacity
longer to defend the place; but taking the advantage of a Snow that had fallen,
she put on white Garments, and by that means in the dusk of the Evening passed
alone undiscovered to Abington on Foot, and from thence to Wallingford on
Horseback the same Night, (so sweet is a Crown, that no Difficulties, or
Dangers are thought too much to attain it.) It was indeed strugled for with
various success, causing a great deal of blood shed as the Partys prevailed,
with Burnings, and Devastations. However that he might assure the Succession of
his Son Eustuce, he called a Council at London, commanded Theobald Archbishop
of Canterbury to Anoint him King; but having received the Pope's Mandate to the
contrary, he refused it, for which he was obliged to leave the Land, and fly
to Normandy; yet the King for this refusal seized upon his Possessions. But
shortly after, Prince Eustace dying, the King became more inclinable to an
agreement with the Empress. The death of this Prince is by some Historians thus
reported, viz. Having set fire to the Corn Fields belonging to the Abbey of
Bury, because the Monks refused to supply him with a sum of Money for his
present occasion, after that at his first sitting down to Dinner, upon the
first bit of Bread he touched he fell distracted, and died in that fit, but
this seems a Fable of the Monks to terrify people from meddling with their
Diana, or the abundance of Treasure they in those days of Ignorance scraped to
themselves even from those that had far greater need: However the Kings hope
dying in this Prince, he was content to adopt Henry, by some called Fitz
Empress, though indeed Plantaginet; for his Son and Successor, to whom at
Oxford in the great Assembly held there for that purpose, the Peers did Homage,
as to the undoubted Heir, and the Prince acknowledged the King as his Father,
and after whom he was to Reign; nor did Stephen live long when this was done,
for being afflicted with the Illiack pasio, and the Haemorhoids worn out with
Labor and continual toil, left the Crown which he had worn with so much
trouble and variety of Fortune, to young Henry dying at Dover, Anno 1134, and
was Buried at Feversham in Kent, though afterward his Body (only for the value
of the Lead that enclosed it) was cast into the River by the covetous Sexton.

This Stephen was King of England and Duke of Normandy, third Son to Stephen
Earl of Blois, by his Wife Adilicia, or Alice Daughter to William the
Conqueror, he began his Reign the second of December, Anno 1135, and Reigned
Eighteen Years, Ten Months, and 20 Days, and had Issue by Maud, or Matilda his
Wife, (Daughter of Eustace Earl of Bulloigne, Brother of Godfry, and Baldwin
Kings of Jerusalem) Baldwin, Eustace, William, Maud, and Mary, he had likewise
two Natural Sons Gervas the younger, he made Abbot of Westminster.

Thus in a Tempest lived the Warlike King,
Small rest he found till death the calm did bring,
Which shows the frailness of each earthly thing.
The Reign of Henry the Second King of England, etc.
HEnry Plantaginet, commonly called Fitz Empress, was three times Crowned,
first by Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury at Westminster, then at Lincoln,
and lastly at Worcester, and being settled in the Realm, he demolished sundry
Castles that had given too much encouragement to the falling off of such as at
any time grew discontented, some that had Honors unduly conferred on them he
divested and reduced to a private State, purged the Land of Foreign Soldiers,
and chiefly of the Flemings that had come over with King Stephen, choosing his
Council out of the most Worthy and Learned Men, restraining the Encroachments
and Oppressions of the greatest Persons, without respect of their greatness,
which made the Lord Hugh Mortimer fall off, and take up Arms, against whom King
Henry went in person, and had been slain at the Siege of Bridgnorth, had not
Hubert d' St. Clare one of his Courtiers, stepped between as the Arrow was
coming, and lost his own Life to save his Masters, but this Lord soon reduced,
and the face of calmness appearing at home, he passed into France to do Homage
to King Lewis, for his Provinces of Normandy, Acquitain, Anjou, Main, and
Lorain, which he claimed as his right (...) in himself, and partly in Eleanor
his Queen, and there he adjusted differences between himself and his Brother
Geofry, and after being highly Caressed and Entertained he returned to England,
where as much as in him lay, intending to live peaceably, he contracted an
Alliance with Malcolme King of Scots, restoring him the (...) of Huntingdon.

The Welsh about this time making Inroads, and greatly indamaging the English,
the King marched against them, and joined Battle, but in the heat of the Fight
his Standard was cowardly abandoned, and his person in danger to be slain, or
taken Prisoner, for which Henry d' Essex Standard bearer being accused by
Robert d' Montford, as the main cause of the dissertion, the Combat (as usual
upon such Accusations) was allowed them at Reading, and Essex being overcome
the King was notwithstanding contented to spare his life upon condition he
became a Monk which accordingly he did, and was immediately shorn, but in
conclusion the Welsh were subdued, and the King returning in Triumph, was
Crowned together with Eleanor his Queen at Worcester, where they both at the
Offertory laid their Crowns on the high Altar, vowing never to wear them after,
and this was the last of the three Crownings, and his Brother Geofry now dead,
he seized upon sundry Citys and strong places in Normandy, and settling his
Affairs in that Province, he returned to England, where Becket, Archbishop of
Canterbury, influenced by the Pope, began to trouble the Kingdom, not only at
the Council Tours, privately surrendering those Honors the King had heaped upon
him to the Pope, and from him receiving them again, thereby to cast off the
acknowledgements he had to the King or his Prerogative, but countenanced all
manner of violence in the Clergy, even to murder; so that the complaints of
above a hundred Murders done by the Clergy, coming to the King's car, and he
not finding them punished by Church Censure, brought some of them under the
Civil Power, commanding Justice to be administered without partiality, as well
to the Clergy as Laity, to that end appointing Ministers of Justice in all
parts of the Land, whose charge it was to enquire into crimes of that, or the
like nature: But this was opposed by Becket with a high hand, challenging the
King with invading the Rights of the Church, demanding at the same time the
Castle of Rochester, and sundry other places, as belonging to the Sea of
Canterbury. This made the King assemble all the Bishops in Convocation at
Westminster, Becket excepted, where it was agreed, That no Appeals should be
made to Rome without the Kings License: That no Archbishop or Bishops, upon
the Popes Summons, should go out of the Land without the like leave: That no
Bishop should excommunicate any person, holding of the King in chief, or put
any of his Officers under interdiction without the like License: That Clerks
criminals, should, if the King thought fit, be tried before Secular Judges. But
although the King urged Becket to agree to them, yet he absolutely refused it,
sending thereupon complaints to the Pope, who for his profit and interest, not
desirous to break with England, commanded Becket to yield to the King without
any Salvo's or exception, which not without much stomaching the matter, he at
last consented to on the word of a Priest, and swore that he would observe the
Laws, which the King called Avitae, as being made in the Reign of his
Grandfather; yet he refused afterward to set his Seal, saying, What he had
done was rather in some measure to pleasure the King, than out of conscience:
For which, and his continuing obstinate, he was condemned to the confiscation
of his Goods; and the Bishop of Chichester, in the name of the other Bishops
disclaimed; and for the afronting the King in his Palace with his Cross, he was
adjudged as a Traitor and perjured person, and that he should as such be taken
and imprisond, which made him flee into Flanders, where Pope Alexander, and
Lewis the French King openly declared for him, which so far incensed King
Henry, that he banished his Kindred, commanding his Sheriffs, and other
Officers, to seize such as appealed to Rome, as likewise the Kindred of those
Clergy that were with Becket, excluding him from being prayed for as
Archbishop.

Becket being by this time in France, excommunicated the Bishop of London, and
proceeded in the like nature with others, so that there were scarce any found
in the Kings Chapel to perform the Service: This made him send to the Pope for
Legates to absolve his Subjects, and settle a peace in the Kingdom; and
although accordingly they were sent, yet Becket standing off with much
obstinacy, nothing was effected, wherefore, as some Historians will have it, to
spite the Archbishop the more, and the more firmly to establish the Kingdom,
he caused Roger, Archbishop of York, to Crown his Eldest Son Henry, and at the
Coronation Feast, the King carried up, and served at the Table, the first Dish
of Meat, whereat the Archbishop, whispering the young King, said, Rejoice, my
fair Son, for there is no Prince in the World that has such a Servitor
attending at his Table, as you have this day. To which the early raised
Stripling replied, Why wonder you at that, my Lord, seeing my Father knows he
does nothing that is unbeseeming him? for as much as he is Royally born on one
side, but as for our self we are Royally born on both, as having a King to our
Father, and a Queen to our Mother. Upon which proud speech, the old King told
the Archbishop, That he repented the too early advancement of the Boy: And now
by the mediation of Friends, the old King and Becket were reconciled, and all
the Profits and Arrears of the Sea of Canterbury restored: But this restles
Prelate taking his time to disturb the Kingdom, whilst the old King was in
Normandy, published the Popes Letters, by which Roger Archbishop of York, and
Hugh Bishop of Durham were suspended from their Ecclesiastical Functions, for
that they had crowned the young King in prejudice to the Sea of Canterbury, and
the Bishops of Exeter, Sarum and London, were cut off from the Church, by
censure, for being Assistants at that Coronation; nor would he, at the young
Kings earnest entreaties, but under diverse restrictions and hard conditions
Absolve them.

Becket's new insolences coming to the ear of the old King in Normandy, he
fell into a great rage, and let such words fall, that some of his Courtiers,
interpreting them to intimate the Kings desire to be rid of that proud Prelate,
contrary to his knowledge, Richard Fitzurse, William Tracie, Hugh Brito, and
Hugh Norvil passed secretly into England, and getting admittance into the
Cathedral Church at Canterbury, took their opportunity, with concealed Weapons,
to fall upon him, as he stood in the Evening Service time before the high
Altar, and there slew him with a Monk or two that made resistance, and
thereupon made their escapes. This news flying to Rome, and the Murder charged
upon the King as done by hi^ order, the Pope began terribly to mennace him when
he, to take off the imputation of guilt, not only protested his innocence, but
offered to purge himself by submitting to the Judgment of such Cardin^ Legates,
as the Pope should send upon inquiry into the Fact, and the better to quiet the
people that began to murmur against him, he passed into Irelan^ with a great
Army, and finding the several pett^ Kings divided amongst themselves, he made a
Conquest of that Kingdom, and made himself Lord Ireland.

Upon the Kings return from the Conquest Ireland, he found two Cardinal Legates
arrived Normandy, by whom he was absolved, after giving Oath that he was no
ways consenting to the death Becket, and declaring his sorrow for having let f^
words in his anger that might administer any oc^sion of committing that crime,
whereupon the conditions of his Penance were enjoined, viz. That his own
charge, for the space of a year, he should ma^tain two hundred Soldiers for
defense of the Holy La^ That he should revoke all Customs introduced to the
(...) judice of the Churches Liberties, and restore and make up the Possessions
of the Church of Canterbury: That he should cull home, and freely receive all
that were in Banishment for Becketg 's cause. There were other secret Penances
enjoined, which upon his coming over he performed.

The King, notwithstanding the satisfaction he gave the Pope was not at ease,
for the young King, Henry his Son, instigated by his Mother, the Kings of
Scotland and France, his two Brothers, Richard and Geofry, with diverse Nobles,
as well English as Normans raised a Rebellion, and seized upon many Towns in
Britain and other places. But the old Kings Fortune prevailed against them, and
by Humphry Bohun his High Constable in England, he overcame Robert Earl of
Leicester, which made Lewis of France seek a Truce with him of six Months,
which was accorded; and coming to Canterbury three Miles bare footed, as his
private Penance, he entered the Chapter House of the Monks, and humbly
prostrating himself on the floor, begged pardon, and suffered himself
voluntarily to be whipped on the back with Rods by all the Brethren of the
House, so that his stripes amounted to fourscore. This confirmed the people of
his innocence, or at least, satisfied their anger; so that the Scots invading
England, were so unanimously opposed, that they were defeated, and William
their King taken prisoner: Young King Henry attempting to land, was driven back
to France by contrary Winds; but making some other attempts, he died in the
expedition, Anno 1183: And the next year Heraclius, Patriarch of Jerusalem,
came into England to implore the Kings Aid against the Infidels, that
grievously oppressed the Eastern Christians, and that he would go thither in
person; but the Nobles being consulted, and not approving it, only a supply of
Money was granted.

The King, the better to quiet his Son John, who was of a turbulent spirit,
constituted him Lord of Ireland, assigning him rents in England and Normandy;
however, he conspired with his Brothers Richard and Geofry against him; but
before any thing came to perfection, Geofry was trodden to death under the
Horses feet, at a Turnament in Paris, notwithstanding Richard, by the
assistance of Philip, the French King, drove his Father out of Mentz, the place
of his birth, and for which reason he loved it above all other; whereupon with
tears he declared, that seeing his Son had taken from him that day the thing
which he most loved in the World, he would requite him, for from that day he
would deprive him of that thing, which in him should best please a Child, viz.
his heart, and having a Scrowl of the Conspirators, he no sooner found his Son
John in the head of them, and first in that Scrowl, but he cursed the hour of
his Birth, laying God's curse, and his own, upon all his Sons which he could
not be prevailed upon to recall, but fretting himself for the unnatural
proceedings of his Children, and worn out with age and toil, he fell sick at
Charon, and finding the approach of death, he caused himself to be carried to
the Church, and laid before the high Altar, where after humble confession and
sorrow for his sins, he gave up the ghost, Anno 1189, and wa^ intered at Font
Everard.

This King Henry the Second was King of England Duke of Normandy, Guen and
Aquitain, eldest Son to Jeffery Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, Son to Foulk King
of Jerusalem, by Maud his Wife, eldest Daughter t^ Henry the First: He began
his Reign on the 25th o^ October 1154, and reigned 34 years eight months an^
eleven days, and was the twenty fifth sole Monarc^ of England, he had Issue by
his Wife Eleaner, Will am, who died 1156, Richard, Geofry and Philip wh^ died
very young, John, Maud who was married (...) Henry, surnamed the Lion Duke of
Saxony, Elean^ married to William King of Castile, Joan married (...) William
King of Sicily, and afterward to Ramu^ the fourth Earl of Tholouze.

By the lovely Rosamond, his beautiful Concubin^ he had natural Issue, viz.
William, surnamed Longspur, and Jeffry, Archbishop of York. This Rosamond was
Daughter to the Lord Clifford; and whilst the King prosecuted his Wars in
Normandy and France, he caused her to be kept in a Labrinth built at Woodstock
to secure her from his jealous Queen, but she finding her by a clew of Thread or
Silk, which the Fair one had accidentially let fall, compelled her to drink
Poison, of which she died to the unspeakable grief of the King, who not only
detested his Queen for so much cruelty, but raised a stately Monument at
Godstow with this Scription.

Hic jacet in Tumba, etc.
Here lies the Worlds fair Rose which once was sweet,
But faded now you no such savor meet.
He had likewise Morgan by another Concubine, and in his time it reigned blood
in the Isle of VVight for the space of two hours. A great Earthquake happened,
and a Dragon of mavelous higness was discovered, at St. Osyph in Essex
another Earthquake happened that rent in pieces the Cathedral of Lincoln, and
at Oxford, in Sussex certain Fishermen drew up in their Net a hairy Creature
out of the Sea, in all proportions like a Man, which was exposed to the ^ight
of thousands, living upon Flesh, but in the end ^ole from his keepers, and got
to Sea again: And his King it was that caused Leicester to be burnt, the Walls
raised, the Castle demolished, and the Inhabiants to be expulsed for their
disobedience, and taking ^art with his Enemies.

This King long struggling for a Throne, at last
The glitring Diadem he grasped so fast,
That Becket, nor's rebellious Sons, nor Rome,
Could seize the Prize till death had found his (...).
The Reign and Actions of Richard the First King of England, etc.
KIng Henry the Second being dead, Richard his third Son, for his strength and
courage, surnamed Cour (...) Leon, or Lions heart, was crowned by Baldwin,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and sworn to keep several Articles administered to
him by the Peers advantageous to the Kingdom: the Solemnity of his Coronation
was at Westminster, and was followed with much bloodshed in diverse parts of the
Nation; for by the instigation of several Monks and Friars, the people in a
tumultuous manner fell upon the Jews, and upon some disgust made miserable
havoc of their Goods, and slaughter of their Persons, for which diverse of the
Ringleaders were executed: And now it being in the power of this King to put
in practice what he had long determined, viz. to pass into the Holy Land, with
an Army, for the rescue of the oppressed Christians, wherefore hearing that
diverse other Princes had determined the like, he appointed VVliliam Longchamp,
Bishop of Ely, his Chief Justice, and Lord Chancellor; and to him he joined
Hugh Bishop of Durham, for the Conservation of the Northern parts Beyond
Humber, and with these he associated diverse Temporal Lords, concluding at the
same time a Peace with the King of Scots; so that supposing all safe a^ home,
the next undertaking was to furnish his Navy which being done, he put to Sea,
with a very great attendance, not sparing to mortgage and sell severa^ parcels
of his Revenues, and forced William d' Tur^ham, his Fathers Treasurer, to
contribute 1100 pound to defray the Charges, and that he might the bette^ keep
his Brother John in quiet, during his absence h^ appointed him for his
maintenance, the Revenue of Earldoms.

The King being on his way toward Palastine, af^^ he had wintered at Sicily,
passed toward Cyprus, when finding some of his Ships that had put that into
Island stress of Weather, had been seized by the Cypriots, and his men roughly
used, he sent to the King for reparation, but that being denied him, not
without Threats, if he did not depart the Haven; our undaunted King not used to
be braved, beat the Defendants from the shore, and resolutely Landing, seized
the Island, together with its King, and appointing a Governor, carried that
King in Manacles of Gold to Ptolomais, where the Christians lay at Siege,
taking by the way a great Argosey, on board which was 1500 Sarazens and Turks
furnished, beside other things, with Fireworks, and Barrels of Venomous
Serpents bound for Ptolomais, since called Acon, intending to disperse those
Venomous Creatures amongst the Christians, as they lay Encamped before the
Town, but King Richard caused them to be cast into the Sea, and in the dispute
there perished by the Sword and Waters, for many voluntarily cast themselves
overboard 1300, of the Sarazens, etc.

The King by this time safely arrived at Ptolomais, or Acon, found it Besieged
by sundry Nations under the Western Princes, as Genoways, Florentines,
Flemings, Danes, Almains, Dutch, Pisans, Friez-landers, Lombards, and the
English that had passed thither, under Hubert Bishop of Sarum, in the time of
King Henry the Second; as likewise the Knights Templers of European Nations,
beside the Asian Christians who made a gallant Army; and soon after came Philip
King. of France, and the Duke of Austria with a great Fleet, whereupon a
Council of the Princes was held, concluding that part of the Force, being left
to maintain the Siege, the rest should draw out to give Battle to the Saladine
or King of the Turks and Sarazens, who lay hovering on the Plains, a few
Leagues distant with 300000 Horse and Foot, but they could not engage him to a
fight, yet falling upon his rear in his retreat, they cut off a great number,
and took much spoil, returning again to the Siege; but the Saladine, who knew
the importance of this strong City, followed with greater force, but durst not
attempt its relief, yet in ravaging the Country, have gotten, at sundry times,
1500 Christian captives, he sent word, If they did not raise the Siege, he
would cut them in pieces in the sight of the Army; Whereupon King Richard sent
a Trumpet, commanding him to desist, For if he put those Christians to death,
the prisoners in his Camp must expect the like treatment: However, upon the
next assault, the Saladine caused them to be put to death, whose piteous cries
piercing the Ears of King Richard, he in a rage caused the Heads of 2500 of the
Turks and Sarazen Captives to be sinitten off in the fight of the Enemies Camp;
and now a general assault was given, where the English with showers of Arrows,
beating the Infidels from the Walls, mounted with such resolution and bravery,
that nothing was able to resist them; so that seconded by the rest, the strong
City of Ptolomais was taken, and in the overrunning the Streets, a great
number put to the Sword; so that whilst the English were busy in repulsing the
Enemy, who made a great resistance, the Austrians advanced the Standard of
their Duke upon the Walls, as if by the valor of a handful of men that
important place had been taken, which so far incensed King Richard, that he
threw it down, and trampled it under foot, which raised a mortal grudge in the
Austrian Duke against our King, nor did he rest till in some part he had given
his anger vent, which at that time he durst not express.

This place being taken and garrisoned by Christians, the next design was upon
the City of Jerusalem; but Philip the French King, envying the glory of the
English, drew off the greater part of his Army, and returned to France, the
like did the Duke of Austria, and diverse of their faction, not withstanding the
prayers and entreaties of the Asian Christians, who hoped by the prevailing
Arms of these Western Princes, to be delivered from the tyranny and oppression
they had so long groaned under; however King Richard was no ways dismayed, but
drawing out his Forces, offered the Saladine battle, which was refused,
vvhereupon he caused the Army to march toward Jerusalem, but by the way he
was diserted by the Duke of Burgundy, who the French King left as his General
with part of the Forces, and upon no other account, as Burgundy himself
declared, But that it should never be said the English should have the glory of
wining Jerusalem, which greatly grieved the King, that so famous an enterprise
should miscarry through malice and emulation, and whilst he was in his
melancholy upon this occasion, a Knight mounting a high sandy Hill, said, Come
hither, Sir, and I will show you Jerusalem: but the King, at these words,
covered his face, and fetching a deep sigh, said, Ah, my Lord God, I beseech
thee, that I may not see thy holy City Jerusalem, because I am not able to
deliver it out of the hands of thine enemies Hovvever he made an honorable
peace with the Saladine, which including that the Christians should quietly
enjoy what they possessed, and so selling the Isle of Cypruss to the Knight
Templers for 30000 Marks, he returned with his Army, having obtained the
nominal Title of King of Jerusalem, from Guy of Lusig^am, the last of the race
of the Christian Kings of Jerusalem, which Title the King of Spain claims at
this day, but without power or effect: One thing is not lightly to be
forgotten, viz. that the King above all others that had been in the Holy Land,
though many great Potentates had been there before him, brought terror and
dread upon the Sarazens, for when at any time their Children cried, they to
quiet them would say, King Richard is coming and will have you; nay, when their
Horses stumbled, they would cry, Ha Jade! you think King Richard is in the way.

King Richard; as is said, returning home with his fair Queen Berengaria, was
separated upon the Coast of Histria, by a storm from the rest of the Fleet, and
the Ship being broken, and in no condition to put to Sea, he in disguise of a
Merchant, or as, some say, a Knight Templer, resolved to pass over Land; but
being too lavish in his expenses, that raised a suspicion of his being of great
Quality; so that, near Vienna he was made a prisoner, by the order of Leopold
the Archduke, whose Standard he had thrown down from the Walls of Ptolomais,
and by him sold to the Emperor Henry the Sixth for 60000 Marks, and was
ransomed after sixteen Months imprisonment, and very bad usage at 160000
pounds, to pay which, a great Tax, was levied throughout England, yet joyfully
disbursed by the people, who suffering under such Ministers, as were set over
them, greatly desired the return of their King, so that Philip of France,
having notice he was at large, sent to tell John, King Richard's Brother, who
had usurped the Rule, during his captivity, That the Devil was let loose; and
although several waits were laid to entrap and retake him, after security was
given for the Money; he landed safe at Sandwich, and was joyfully received by
Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, who had been in the Holy Land with him, as
likewise by his Subjects, but more especially by Queen Eleanor his Mother, who
by her prudent Conduct and Authority, had secured the Kingdom, during his
absence, from the total usurpation of his Brother John, who now hasted to meet
him, and submitting himself, was freely forgiven in these words, viz. I would
that thy faults may be so forgotten of me, as thou thy self may keep in memory,
wherein thou have offended; and thereupon taking him into his favor, he
restored his forfeited Possessions, who from that time became firm to the Kings
interest, and did him faithful service, especially against the French, whose
King contrary to his Oath he gave King Richard, upon his departure from the
Holy Land, had warred upon his Countries of Normandy, Anjou, etc. stirring up,
in his absence, many discensions and disorders in England, when in one of the
Skirmishes, taking the Bishop of Bevois prisoner completely Armed, the Pope
interceeded by Letter for the delivery of his dear Son, as he termed the
Bishop, when the King in a merry humor sent his Habergeon Curiass, and the
rest of his Armor he was taken in, and ordered the Bearers in the words of
Joseph's Brethren to say, This we found, see if it be thy Sons Coat or not: To
which the Pope earnestly replied, They belonged not to his Son, nor to a Son of
the Church, but to some Imp of Mars, and therefore he should free himself as he
could, for as for his part he would have no further hand in the matter; So that
the Bishop was obliged to ransom himself with a large sum, and soon after the
King at Gysors gave the French a great overthrow, taking 100 Knights and
Servetors on Horseback, thirty Men at Arms, 200 great Horses, whereof 140 had
Barbs and Caparisons, armed with Plates of Iron, killing a great number, many
of the first Rank; and here the King in Person did wonders, bearing to the
ground with his Lance Matthew d' Monmerancy Alan d' Rusci Foulk d' Giserval,
and made them Prisoners, and after this Victory, it was that the King expressed
himself in these Words, that have since become the Motto of the Arms of
England, viz. Diu and Mondroit, Not we, say he, have gained this Victory, but
God and our Right: But now the fatal time approached that was to eclipse the
Glories of this Prince in the shades of Death, for hearing the Count of Limogen
had found in one of his Lordships a great Treasure of Silver, he sent to him
for it, as properly belonging to the Sovereign, but the Count would not yield
to send him above one half, which incensing the King, he besieged him in his
Castle of Chauluz, at which Seige he was shot by a square Arrow out of a Steel
Bow into the Shoulder; yet he took the Castle, and the Arcubalaster, being
brought before him, boldly owned the shot, alleging That the King with his own
hand had killed his Father, and two Brethren, which incited him to revenge
their deaths in an honorable way: Whereupon the King perceiving the undaunted
confidence of this Bertram d' Guidon, not only forgave him the fact, but
ordered him 100 shillings, yet through the unskilfulness of the Surgeons,
the Wound proved Mortal; when the King perceiving his end to approach, he
greatly bewailed his sins, and then receiving the Sacrament, expired Anno 1199,
having before given order that his Bowels should be buried amongst his
rebellious Subjects of Poctiou, as those that deserved his worst part; his
heart at Roan, which City had always been constant and loyal to him; and his
Body at Font Everard, there to be laid at the Feet of his Father, to whom he
had been some time disobedient, and for which he greatly reproved himself.

This Richard the First was King of England, Duke of Normandy, Guin and
Aquitain; he began his Reign the sixth of July 1189, and reigned nine Years
nine Months, dying in the 42 year of his Age, being the 26 sole Monarch of
England, he was conttacted to Alice, Daughter to Lewis the seventh King of
France. But falling passionately in love with Berengaria, Daughter to Sanches
the six King of Navar, he married her in the way to the Holy Land, whether she
was accompanying her Father, but had no Issue by her, yet he left behind him
Philip and Isabel his natural Children.

Thus the stout Lions Heart to Death did yield,
Whose dreadful Arms had strewn the bloody field
Of fruitful Palestine, no Infidel,
Nor French, nor Rebels could resist his Steel:
Victorious every where he did remain,
Cyprus he won, yet by an Arrow slain.
The Reign and Actions of John King of England, etc.
JOhn called by King Henry the Second, his Father, Lackland, as being out of
hopes of the Crown, by reason so many Brothers were before him, was,
notwithstanding Arthur his Eldest Brother Geofry's Son being alive, crowned
upon the Death of King Richard, by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury at
Wes^minster, through the instance of Queen Eleanor, and most of the Nobles; yet
the French King promoted great troubles in England, under pretense of
Inthroaning the young Prince, yet for great sum he connived at his being
delivered into his Uncles hands, so that upon new disturbances, occasioned as
well by the Clergy as Laity, he was closely imprisoned. The Poctovians
rebelling, the King prepared to quiet them, but as well the Clergy, as the
Lay-peers, denied him assistance of Men and Money, or to wait on him in person,
yet with such a Power as he could raise, with present Treasure, he passed the
Seas, overthrew the Rebels, took the young Prince, who had escaped, prisoner,
with diverse Peers, and two hundred French Knights, reducing all the revolted
Towns to their obedience; so that Prince Arthur, now kept under stricter
restraint than ever, died in prison, as some will have it, not without
suspicion of violence, which caused much murmuring amongst the people; and the
French King laying hold of that opportunity, cited King John, as an Homager,
for the Dukedom of Normandy, etc. to appear at a set time to be tried by his
Peers, upon Articles of Murder and Treason; but the King disdaining to obey
the Summons, he was pretendedly, by the French King and his Peers, disinherited
and condemned in his absence; so that by reason of the Intestine Troubles, not
being able to pass over with a sufficient Army, to repel the insulting French
men, they seized upon many of his Towns and Castles, some by force, and others
by treachery, yet quieting matters somewhat better at home, and getting a
considerable sum of Money from the delinquent Barons, and such as had been in
Rebellion against him, and having moreover a Subsidy granted him, he prepared
to pass the Seas, when in the mean while the French King, out of a bravado,
sent a Knight, as his Champion, to challenge to single Combat any of the Kings
Subjects, and in a mortal battle to justify the proceedings of his Sender: To
match this Braggadocia, John Curcy, Earl of Ulster in Ireland, who had some
time before been brought prisoner into England, upon a revolt of the Irish, so
that the King knowing him to be of a savage and untractable nature, went in
person to propose this honorable undertaking; when looking on the King with a
stern countenance, enough to strike terror in the beholders, he said, In thy
Quarrel I will neither draw Sword, or fight a stroke; but for the honor of the
Realm of England, I will shed my last drop of blood: Hereupon the day was
appointed, and all things ordered to be in a readiness; but in the mean while
the Monsieur geting knowledge of the Earls Gigantick Stature, and proportion of
Limbs; as likewise the great quantities of Provisions he daily devoured, he
thought it no boot to stay, and thinking it was not safe to return into France,
he sneaked away and went for Spain; so that Philip of France ashamed of the
disgrace, sent to excuse it, yet new troubles, (as indeed this Kings Reign was
a perpetual storm) arising, h^ could not so soon get over Sea, as he expected;
how ever, upon his coming, the French were terrified t^ a degree of suing for
peace, and it was, upon the relinquishing sundry places they had taken
accordingly so that the two Kings appointing an interview, an^ the Irish Earl
happening to be there, the French Kin^ was very desirous to see a trial of his
strength, when placing a Steel Helmet upon a knotty trunk of Oa^^ the Irish man
with a strong Sword, that no body b^ himself could weld, after a dreadful sneer
or two, let fly with so full a charge, that he cut not only the Helmet in two,
but entered his Sword so far into the wood, that none but himself could pluck it
out, when being asked by King John, (...) he looked so furiously before he gave
the blow? his ^^ply was, That had he missed it, he would have killed not only
the two Kings but all the spectators.

The Truce that the French made with the English at this time, served but to
gain the greater advantage, by rendering King John more supine in his Affairs,
for by degrees they encroached upon all Normandy, geting even the City of Roan
it self, upon which Main Tourain Poctou revolted, nor could King John hinder
it, having his hands full at home, and when he was about to go for Normandy,
Habert, Archbishop of Canterbury suspected to be a Pentioner of King Philip,
peremtorily forbid him to proceed in that voyage; and the Earls and Barons a
second time denied their Aid, insomuch, that the King, in a rage, seized upon
some of their Estates, and grievously fined others; nor was it a little gainful
to him, that Hubert the Archbishop dyed the same year, whose large Treasure
the King ^ook for the use of the Wars, but now an obstacle ^rose: The Monks of
Canterbury chose one Reginald for their Archbishop, who was Subprior of their
Convent, yet the King opposed it, and presented John Gray, Bishop of Norwich,
so that the Pope, upon no^ice of what had happened, rejected both, and went
about to impose on them one Stephen d' Langton, whom the Monks for fear of the
Pope's high Curse, wherewith they were threatened, received as their
Archbishop; but the King knowing him to be one ^f the French Faction, and that
he would consequent^ be prejudicial to his Affairs, could not be brought (...)
hearken to it, though the Pope sent him a present ^f Rings, with some
flattering Comments on them ^eclaring, That the Right and Power over all
Chi^^^^ as in the Sea of Rome: But the King threatening, if he desisted not from
such pretentions in England, he would stop all Moneys that passed from hence to
Rome; and thereupon a hot contest by Letters happening between them, the old
blade in a pet Interdicted the Kingdom, which the Bigottry of the times made
the people think to be the greatest Malediction that could befall them; so that
the Priests to strengthen their Masters Power, and make him more dreadful to
the World, lay idle for the space of six years and fourteen Weeks, in which
time there was neither public preaching nor praying, no Administration of the
Sacrament, Burial or Christning, by which we may plainly see, whatever the
Papists pretend, as to the Sanctity of their infalible Father, how much he
prefered his private revenge before the Service of God, and this he denied not
to Heretics, but to Papists; so that the people, being greatly discouraged,
many parts of the Kingdom lay untilled, and became, as it were desolate; when
the King, on the other hand, prescribed the disloyal Clergy, confiscated their
Temporalities, as also their Bishoprics, Abbeys and Priories, putting them into
the hands of Laymen, suffering the Clergy to be oppressed without taking
notice of it, or righting them by civil Justice, declaring they had, by
obliging the Pope, put themselves out of hi^ protection, yet some of the more
prudent, as the Bishop of Durham, and his Successor, the Bishops of Winchester
and Norwich, encouraged the King, not to regard the Papal Curse as being weak
and insignificant; like wise the Abbots of Cistercian Order took no notice o^
it, but went on, as before, till such time as the Pop^ suspended them, for that
contempt, and the more t^ show his spleen, Anathamatized the King by name
whereupon some, as well Nobles as Plebeans, diserte his service, for which, in
a stout resolution, he b^nished and fined them, but wearied out with the
practices of the Clergy against him, and the Rebellion of his Nobles, he
concluded it was better to give wa^ to the humor of a petish Pope, than to
live in di^quiet, and daily hazard his Kingdom, whereupon Langton was offered
to be confirmed, the other Bishops and Clergy restored, and that the Churches
should have its Franchises, as in the time of Edward the Confessor, but not
being willing (as indeed he was not at that time in a condition) to restore the
Moneys received for Ecclesiastical confiscations, the Legate sent by the Pope
would not come to a conclusion.

This being the state of Affairs, and the Pope desirous to humble the King,
discharged his Subjects from their fealty and Allegiance to him, which some
taking as a good warrant, utterly disowned him for their King, and the Welsh
thereupon took up Arms, which so enraged the King, that he caused the 28
Hostages, which they had given for the security of their good behavior, to be
hanged up at Notingham; but by this time the Barons had invited Lewis, Dauphin
of France, to invade the Kingdom, promising to set the Crown upon his Head,
when, in the mean time, while Stephen Langton and other Bishops implored the
Popes assistance to settle the Church, which must otherways fall into ruin,
whereupon he decreed that King John must be deposed ere it could be settled,
sending to Philip the French King to take upon him the Crown and Kingdom,
offering him a pardon for all his sins, in case he effected it. King John, upon
notice of the spightful proceedings, prepared to oppose the French, or any
other Invader by Sea or Land; but in the mean time Pandulph the Pope's Legate
came into England, and so wrought with the King, that he suffered himself, to
prevent the storm, conditionally to be deposed, and at the Knight Templers
house at Dover, he surrendered his Crown into the hands of the Legate (some say,
whilst he kneeled, the proud Priest kicked it off with his foot) for the use of
the Pope, and to be disposed as he thought fit, laying his Scepter, Sword and
Ring at the Legates feet, and subscribed a Charter, whereby he resigned his
Kingdom to the Pope, professing (but how sincerely I suffer the Reader to
judge) he did it not through fear or force, but of his own voluntary accord, as
having no other way to make satisfaction to God, and the Church, for his
offense, and from that time forward he would hold his Crown and Kingdom in fee
of the Sea of Rome, at the A^^al pension of 1000 Marks for England and Ireland
(a very hard case, but necessity it seems has no Law) so that the Legate having
gained his ends more favorable than he could reasonably expect, passed over
for France, to put a stop to King Philip's preparations, but he declared that
seeing the Pope had been the main Instrument in seting him on, and that the
charge was already very great, he would not desist, though the Pope should
Excommunicate him, and calling a Council of Peers, all but Ferdinand Earl of
Flanders, approved his intentions; and the Barons denied to aid him, till he
was Assailed of the Excommunication, and that all their Laws and Liberties
granted by Henry the First were restored, which obliged the King to send diverse
rich Presents to Rome, thereby to allure the Pope, who upon the Receipt sent
the Bishop of Tusculum, who would have persuaded him to have made over the
Kingdom of England, but not only the Archbishop, but all the Peers of the
Kingdom opposed it, so that in Parliament it was Enacted, That since the King
could not without the consent of Parliament, bring his Kingdom and People to
such a Thraldom, therefore if the Pope should, in the future, attempt any such
thing, they with their Lives and Fortunes were ready to oppose it. So that the
Pope finding there was no good to be done this way, sent his Authentic Letters
for the repealing the Edict, yet not without the restitution of 1300 Marks to
the Clergy, most of which came to his Coffers, so that the King passed into his
Transmarine Territories; but before he could quiet the disturbances, news came
that the English Barons had bound themselves at the high Altar of St.
Edmundsbury by Oath, to pursue the King with Arms, till he had granted them
their Charter of Liberties, granted in the Reign of Henry the First, whereupon
he found himself necessitated to return, and finding they had not only seized
London, but were otherways very formidable a Council to reconcile differences
was held in Running Marsh, between Stains and Windsor, since called Council
Mead, and there he granted them Magna Charta, and Charta Forestae, and
consented that 25 select Peers should command the rest, who were bound by Oath
to be obedient, but the King long dijested not this abating of his Power, but
withdrawing himself, he sent to complain of it to the Pope, as likewise to his
Friends abroad for Aid, and was in both successful, for at Rome by a definitive
Sentence the Barons Charters were made void, and both they and the King
accursed, if either of them observed the conclusion of the Treaty in Council
Mead; he likewise had considerable Forces sent him from Gascoin, Brabant and
Flanders, so that he again took the Field, dividing his Army in two parts, when
himself marching Northward, and the Earl of Salisbury Southward, they brought
all into subjection, and although the Barons were excommunicated, yet they
slighted it, and encouraged the City of London, which was Interdicted for
adhearing to their Interests; and sent to Lewis, Dauphin of France, their
Letters of Allegiance confirmed with their Seals, entreating King Philip, his
Father, to send him in order to take possession of the English Diadem, but the
Pope advertised of what was in hand, sent his Apostolic commands to Philip,
charging him not to suffer his Son to molest St. Peter's Patrimony, with a
Curse upon such as should assist him, but it prevailed not, for the hotheaded
Prince sent over with a Fleet of 600 Ships and 80 Boats landing in Kent, where
he joined the Barons, whereupon the King retired toward Winchester, and the
Dauphin came to London, where he was received in triumph, the Citizens doing
him homage, as did the Barons at Westminster, he swearing to them, That he
would restore all men their Rights, and recover to the Crown whatever King John
had lost; so that most important places submitted.

During these Transactions, the King ruined the Houses and Castles of the
Barons in Arms, and set forward from Lyn in Norfolk to give them battle; but
passing the Washes, the Floods destroyed most of his Baggage, with many of his
Soldiers, which obliged him to desist: But the Barons not having their rents
paid, began to look back, and perceiving their services slighted by the
Dauphin, and the places of trust bestowed on his Frenchmen; they thought it
high time to reconcile themselves to their King, which was hastened by the
discovery the Viscount d' Melun made upon his Deathbed, viz. That Lewis had
sworn, when established on the Throne, to condemn the Barons to perpetual
banishment, as Traitors to their King, and utterly root out their Kindred, so
that forty of them immediately addressed their Letters of humble submission to
the King, but it so unfortunately fell out, that he was dead before they
arrived.

The death of this King is variously reported, some will have it to be of a
Flux, others of a Surfeit, but Writers of best credit say, that coming to
Swinstead Abbey, after his great loss in the Washes, and seeing the liberal
profuseness of the Monks, whilst his Army was in a manner half starved, he said
in a pet, holding a Loaf in his hand, That if he lived but half a year, he
would make it 12 times as dear, which being overheard by a Monk, he mixed
poison in a Cup of Wine, and served it to the King, as he was at dinner, by the
force whereof he died; some again will have it to be done by intoxicated Fruit.

This John was King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Normandy, Guyen and
Aquitain, sixth Son of King Henry the Second by Q. Eleanor, and 27 sole Monarch
of England, he began his Reign on the 6th of April, Anno 1199, reigned 17 years
6 months and 13 days, dying of poison, the 19. of October, 1216.

Thus from a troubled Throne King John descends,
And in his Grave all toil and trouble ends:
There factious Subjects, Popes, nor Galick Arms
Disturb his rest, with their too rude alarms.
Death can alone from cares of state give rest,
The slumbring Grave is with no fears oppressed.
The Reign and Actions of Henry the III. King of England, etc.
KIng John being dead, the Barons almost with one voice and consent,
notwithstanding Lewis was yet in the Land with his Army, chose Henry, eldest
Son to the deceased, King, about Ten years of Age, Crowning him nine days after
his Fathers Death, and the Earl of Pembroke was constituted his Guardian, who
raised an Army and marched against the French, giving them a great overthrow
near Lincoln, taking several of the Barons that stood out with about 400
Knights and Esquires Prisoners, besides a great Booty the French had scraped
together in plundering the Country, and many of the French that scattered from
the Battle were killed by the Peasants; nor was the Fleet, appointed to bring
Supplies out of France better treated; for being met by the English, most of
the French Ships were burnt, sunk, or taken, so that the Dauphin was obliged,
with such Forces as he could Rally, to shut himself up in London, whither he
was followed by the Earl, and besieged by Water and Land; which made the
Monsieur begin to think of a timely Capitulation: The substance was, That
Lewis, and the Barons in Arms should submit to the Censure of the Church, and
that then he, and as many as would go with him, should be permitted to depart
the Land, with a Promise never to return again, in a design of harming it; and
that he should use his Interest with his Father, that such things as belonged
to the English Crown, and were wrongfully detained, should be restored, and
that when himself should be King of France he should peaceably part with them;
and that he should immediately render to Henry all Castles and Places taken in
England, during the War. To this Lewis swore, and for the better security of
the Barons that had been in Rebellion, Wallo the Legate, the Earl of Pembroke,
and the young King swore they should be restored, as well the Barons as others,
to all their Rights and Inheritances, with their Liberties before demanded of
King John; that none of the Laity should suffer damage or reproach for the Side
or Party they had taken; and that the Prisoners taken in War, or by Surprise,
should be released. Upon this Lewis the Dauphin, and as many of his Followers
as were left, passed into France; yet the Kingdom was molested by sundry
turbulent Persons, whom no Concessions, nor Favors, could oblige; and amongst
these were William Earl of Aumarle, Robert de Veipont, etc. which encouraged
the Welsh to raise new Broils on the Frontiers: And soon after one Arnulph, a
Citizen of London, with diverse others, Conspiring to call in Lewis a second
time; Arnulph and two others were hanged, and several had, for the like
Attempt, their Hands or Feet cut off, and the Barons finding their Liberties
but slowly confirmed, began to murmur.

Lewis extremely vexed for the disgrace he had suffered in England, upon the
Death of his Father, though contrary to his Oath seized upon Rochel, and the
County of Poictu, both appertaining to the English, and the true Cause he
excused by pretending King Henry, as Homager of Aquitain, should have attended
at his Coronation; but that he neither did it in Person, nor showed any Reason
for his being absent, by his Ambassadors. These Proceedings made King Henry, n^
at Age, Call a Parliament, which granted him Supply, in order to raise an Army
for the recovery of his Right, but that not proving sufficient, though he that
Summer vanquished the French in a set Battle, he pressed about 5000 Marks from
the Londoners above their Fifteenths, and the Clergy were not exempted, but
under pain of the papal Censure, obliged to pay the Tax of Fifteenths; but the
greatest Sum he raised was by revoking the Charters and Liberties, excusing
it by declaring they were granted in his nonage: But this begat Hubert de
Burgo, his chief Justice, who advised him to it, a very great hatred amongst
the People; however, the King with the Money thus gotten, raised an Army, and
sailed for Britany, winning many Places, and driving them from their
Encroachments; but the Irish rebelling he was constrained to return sooner than
he purposed; but upon notice of his Preparations, the Irish laid down their
Arms, and sneaked into their Eogs. He about the same time quieted the Welsh
that began to be mutinous; and now it was that the Bishop of Winchester, and
others, found an opportunity to accuse Hubert de Burgo of many high Crimes and
Misdemeanors, upon which he fled, but being taken at Brent Wood in Essex, he
was brought bound to London, and Imprisoned in the Tower; when in his Place, as
chief Counselor and Confident, the King ordained Peter de Rupibus, Bishop of
Winchester, but he being a Foreigner by Birth, so greatly favored Strangers,
that he procured them to be put into Offices, and the most important Trusts of
the Kingdom; which made the English Noblemen confederate against him, and the
King summoning them to Parliament, they sent him word that if out of hand he
removed not the Bishop of Winchester, and Strangers, out of his Court, they
would drive both him and them out of the Kingdom; and having removed him, with
his evil Counselors, they would consult about Creating a new King. But
animated by the Bishop of Winchester, his Confident, the King marched to
Gloucester with an Army, and sending for them by Name, such as appeared not he
burnt their Manors, and gave their Inheritances to his Strangers; which made
the Earl-Marshal and others that stood out, contract a strict Alliance with
Lewellin Prince of Wales, and by way of Reprisal fell upon the Possessions of
the Kings Favorites, burning some Towns, and many Castles; but the
Earl-Marshal crossing the Seas to recover his confiscated Possessions in
Ireland, was there wounded, and of that wound he dyed; whose Death, instead of
Rejoicing the King, as some expected, made him on the contrary burst into
Tears, declaring. That he had not left his peer in England; and the King
plainly perceiving the People's hatred in general against the Bishop, commanded
him not to meddle any farther in Matters of State; and finding the necessity of
it, he laid aside Peter Rivalis, his Lord-Treasurer, commanding the
Poictuovians to depart the Land: But the Disquiets ended not in this manner,
for the Pope perceiving the English Clergy did not greatly stickle for his
Interest and Advantage, he, the better to support his Usurpation, sent over 300
Romans requiring they should be placed in the first Benefices, as they became
vacant, at the same time, demanding great Sums of Money of the Clergy, for
the Maintenence of his Wars against the Emperor, the which though at first
denied, was at length complied with; and soon after the Pope, as he alleged
out of a Curiosity from a Report, he had heard of the Country's Fertility and
Pleasantness, was greatly desirous to come over and see it, making his Suit to
the King that he might be admitted: but the Council considering he had some
sinister end in it, not only the Laity but the Clergy opposed it.

In the year 1240 Richard Earl of Cornwall, with the Earls of Lincoln,
Salisbury, Pembroke, Chester, and others, departed, with a great Train, to the
Holy Land; and two years after, King Henry passed the Seas to recover Poictou,
but spent a great deal of Treasure without effecting any thing memorable, which
made him in his Return levy grievous Taxes to supply his Coffers, and above all
he sat heavy upon the Jews, who were then great Usurers in this Kingdom,
draining them of what they had unlawfully gotten: He likewise retrenched the
Expenses of his House, condescending to such a meanness, that to save Charges,
he would invite himself, and his Court, frequently to the Houses of such
wealthy Persons as he thought best able to give him Entertainment; getting
likewise a great Sum of the Parliament, under pretense of going to the
Holy Land, and for his consenting again to restore the Liberties and Charters.

Anno 1257. Richard Earl of Cornwall, the King's Brother, was chosen King of
the Romans, by the Electoral Princes, and with King Henry's consent passed into
Germany; yet he was obliged to purchase this Leave with a great Sum of Money,
as being accounted one of the richest Princes in Europe. He was Crowned King of
the Romans at Aquisgrave, and received the Honor due to his Character, from
all the Princes and Estates of the Empire. But after his Departure new
Differences arose between King Henry and his Nobles, upon the Account of the
Return of Strangers, contrary to the Agreement, so that they came armed to the
Parliament at Oxford, binding themselves by Oath, to have Things of that nature
regulated; and the King, the better to quiet them without bloodshed, together
with Prince Edward his Son, was there content; and the wide Differences being
referred to a Parliament, appointed to meet at London, they were cemented: But
the Peace continued not long, e^ upon new Disgusts, both Sides prepared for
War; so that the King seizing upon Oxford, turned out the Students, of that
University, to the number of 15000, whose Names were entered in the
Matriculation Book; which made many of them take part with the Barons, and
imbody themselves under a peculiar Standard; so that when the King broke into
Northampton, where part of the Confederate Army lay, the Students bore the
brunt of the Battle, and killed more Men than all the rest of the Soldiers;
which so incensed King Henry, that he vowed a sharp Revenge; but being told
they were many of them the Sons and Kinsmen of the Noblemen in his Army, and
that such Rigor would alienate them from him, he retracted his Resolution: Yet
heightened with this Success, he pursued the Barons to Nottingham, burning, and
wasting their Possessions; which made them seek for Peace; declaring, by a
submissive Letter, their Loyalty to him, and that they had no Design against
his Person, but their Quarrel was to his evil Counselors, the known Enemies of
the Kingdom. But the King reproaching them by the Name of Traitors, sent them
word, that the Injury done to his Friends he took as done to himself, and
therefore held them as theirs, and his own Enemies; so that no good
understanding being toward the Armies, drew out, and engaged in a mortal
Battle, wherein Prince Edward the King's eldest Son behaved himself with much
Bravery, routing the Battalion, composed of Londoners, and following the
pursuit four Miles; which notwithstanding was prejudicial to his Father, for in
the mean while the King's Horse was slain under him, and he made Prisoner,
together with his Brother, the King of the Romans, who a little before returned
to England, for the security of his Possessions; so that the Prince not being
able to restore the Battle, Victory fell to the Barons, and the next day a
Truce was concluded; yet Simon de Monfort, Earl of Leicester, who headed the
Baron's Army, carrying the King about with him as his Prisoner, got into his
hands all the strong Holds.

These Proceedings in England putting a stop to the Pope's Revenue, he sent
Cardinal Ottobon, his Legate, to Excommunicate the Barons, but they for a while
despised it; yet soon after falling out amongst themselves, many of them came
over to Prince Edw. who had taken the Field with an Army; so that he enclosed
the Earl of Leicester's Camp at Evesham, and obliged him to battle, where the
Earl lost the day with his Life, and had his Head, Hands, and Feet chopped off,
as a mark of Infamy. By this Overthrow the King was rescued, and set at
liberty; when to heal the long Divisions a Parliament was called at Winchester,
by whose Approbation the King seized the Charters of London, and other Cities
and Towns that had proved disloyal; and the Legate proceeded to excommunicate
the Bishops of Winchester, London, Worcester, and Chichester, for taking part
with the King's Enemies. And now Prince Edward, with a great Train, took a
Journey to the Holy Land, and the King more firmly to settle the Nation, called
a Parliament at Marlborough, where the Statutes called by the name of the place
were enacted; but having been at Norwich to quiet a tumult, and punish such as
had burnt the Priory Church, upon his return he fell sick at the Abbey of St.
Edmund in Suffolk, and after a short Languishment dyed, Anno 1272. from whence
he was conveyed to Westminster, and there buried in the Abbey.

This Henry, King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Guyenne and Aquitain,
was eldest Son to King John; his Wife was Eleanor, Daughter of Raymond, Earl of
Provence, by whom he had Issue Edward, Edmund, Richard, who dyed young, also
John, William, and Henry, Margaret, married to Alexander the Third, King of
Scotland, Beatrix, married to John the First, Duke of Bretaigne, and Katharine,
who dyed young. He began his Reign the 19th of October, 1216. and reigned 56
Years, and 28 Days, being the 65th Year of his Age; he was the 27th sole
Monarch of England. He was very charitably given, and founded many Churches and
Religious Houses. In his time four Suns appeared from the Rising to the
Setting; after which followed a great Famine, and eighteen Jews were hanged for
crucifying a Child, and others severely punished for circumcising another that
had been christened.

Thus dyed Third Henry, when on England's Stage
H'ad swayed the Scepter near a long lived Age,
The longest Reign the Nation ever beheld,
Yet Life wound off by time the Cedar's felled.
The Reign and Actions of Edward the First, King of England, etc.
KIng Edward, at the death of his Father Henry, was warring in the Holy Land,
where he did Wonders in his own Person, insomuch that the Sarazens dreading his
Prowess, the Governor of Damascus, under a feigned Friendship, sent a Villain
to assassinate him who seeming as if he was about to deliver him a Letter,
stabbed him in three places in the Arm with a poisoned Dagger, and had repeated
the Wounds, but that the Prince struck him down with his Foot, whereupon his
Guards came in, and cut the Wretch in pieces as he lay on the floor; yet these
wounds by the Chirurgions were accounted mortal, unless some one would hazard
his own Life, by sucking out the Poison; but when every one shrunk back,
Eleanor his Wife, who would by no means be persuaded from accompanying him in
that tedious Journey, cheerfully undertook it, and effected the Cure without
any Injury done to her self; for which generous Undertaking he raised Crosses,
and Monuments, to her Memory in England.

The News of his Father's death no sooner reached him, but settling the Affairs
of the War, he returned to England, where together with his Queen, he was
crowned by Robert Kilwarby, Archbishop of Canterbury, at whose Coronation 500
Horses were let loose in a large Forest, to be possessed by those that first
caught them; and upon notice the Welsh were in Arms, he marched against them,
overthrew and slew Lewelin, their Prince, in a great Battle, whose Head,
crowned with Ivy, was set upon the Tower, and utterly subduing those
Mountainiers, he made his Son Edward, born amongst them at Caernarvon, Prince
of the Country: And going for France he sat as a Peer of that Kingdom, in
consideration of the Lands and Territories he held there, and upon his return
banished the Jews, to the number of 15000, for bringing in base Money, and
exacting Extortion.

Alexander the Third, King of Scotland, who had married King Edward's Sister,
being dead, and the Lords Bruce and Baliol, for want of other Heirs, standing
in competition for the Kingdom, Edward, by his Authority, became Umpire, and
adjudged it to the latter, promising to support his Right by Arms, for which he
was to become his Homager; but that Prince being in the Throne, to please his
People, who feared the English Greatness might be prejudicial to them,
hearkened to Proposals with France, and suffered his People to enter the North
parts of of England with Fire and Sword; Edward drove them back with great
slaughter, entering Scotland, and making such terrible Destruction, that the
Cities and Towns for the most part surrendered, the Scotch Nobles sued for
Peace, and in the Parliament held at Berwick they acknowledged him their King,
swearing to be true Subjects to him for ever after, sealing a solemn Instrument
to that purpose; whereupon King Edward leaving John de Warren, Earl of Surry,
and Sussex, as his Viceroy in that Kingdom, sent John Baliol, the late King,
Prisoner to the Tower of London, and brought away with him the Crown, Scepter,
and Cloth of State, burning their Records, abrogating their Laws, altering the
Form of their Divine Service, and transplanting their learned Men to Oxford: He
brought likewise the Marble Chair, wherein the Kings of Scotland were wont to
be crowned, from the Abbey of Schone, and sent it to Westminster, upon which is
written this prophetical Distich: Ni fallat Fatum, Scoti quocunque locatum
Invenient Lapidem, regnare tenetur ibidem.
Wherever this Stone the Scot shall placed find,
There shall he reign, for there his Rule's assigned.


This was verified in King James the first, upon the uniting the Kingdoms, but
more of that in his Reign.

King Edward going into France to recover such places as the French had taken
in the latter end of his Father's Reign, and refused to restore, especially in
Gascoign, the Scots rebelled, and under the leading of one William Wallis fell
upon the English at an advantage, near Striveling Bridge, and put them to the
rout, killing amongst others Hugh de Cressingham, the Treasurer, and having
flead him, divided his Skin in parcels amongst them, as a Trophie of their
Revenge, and committed many other outrages, which hastened the King's Return;
at which time he summoned a Parliament at York, giving the Scots a day to
appear, but they neglecting it, and refusing to acknowledge they ought so to
do, he with a powerful Army entered Scotland, and being about to charge the
Enemy, as he was mounting his Horse startled, and threw him, breaking by a
spurn of his Heel two of the King's Ribs, yet without delay he remounted, and
gave them Battle, charging quite through their Army with such slaughter, that
in a very short time they were all in Rout and Confusion; so that in this
Action near Fawkirk 70000 Scots are reported to be slain, after which most of
the strong places yielded to King Edward, when returning victorious to England,
he in Parliament restored Mogna Charta, and Charta Forestae, agreeing that no
Tax or Subsidy should be levied upon the People, but by the Consent of
Prelates, Peers and Commons in Parliament, and in the end of his Grants left
out Salvo jure Coronae nostrae, viz. Saving the rights of our Crown; and at the
earnest entreaty of the Pope, he set Baliol at Liberty. And now the King being
desirous absolutely to subject and annex Scotland to the Crown of England,
raised another powerful Army, against which the Scots not able to make head,
retired, and as their last refuge entreated the Pope to send his Letters of
Inhibition, which accordingly were sent; but the King was so far from regarding
them, that he in a great passon swore he would not desist; ahd when they urged
it farther, that if he persevered, the Pope would take it upon himself, he with
a disdainful Smile replied. What! Have you done Homage to me as to the chief
Lord of Scotland, and do you now suppose that I can be terrified with
Threatenings, as if (like one that had no Power to compel) I would let the
right which I have go out of my Hands. Let me hear no more of this, for if I
do, I swear by the Lord I will consume all Scotland from Sea to Sea. This
resolute Protestation so terrified the Scots, that they only replied, For the
Justice and Rights of their Country they were ready to shed their Blood; and
the King, to justify his Proceeding, sent the Earl of Lincoln to Rome, so that
by the Influence of the Pope a Truce was concluded from all Saints to
Whitsuntide; but the Pope not so contented, before the Truce was expired,
declared himself in favor of the Scots, whereupon King Edward, in a Parliament
holden at Lincoln, by the General Consent defended his Proceedings with a
Protestation, that they had not exhibited any thing to the Court of Rome, as in
form of Judgment or submitting to the Trial of his Cause, but rather for the
satisfaction of its Merit and Justice; and when the Pope required the King to
stand to his decision for matter of Claim; the Peers, to whom the King had
entirely referred it, signified to the Pope, that the King of England was not
to answer in Judgment for any rights of the Crown before any Tribunal under
Heaven, and that by sending Deputies and Attorneys to that purpose, he should
make the Truth and Justice of his Cause doubtful, forasmuch as it manifestly
tended to the Disinherision of the Crown, which with the help of God they would
maintain against all Men: And this was subscribed at Lincoln, Anno 1301. by no
less than 100 Peers; so that Pope Boniface the Third perceiving no good to be
done, and loath to break with England, gave over his Pretensions, and left the
Scots to make the best of their business; whereupon the King made the Lord
Segrave Custos of that Kingdom; but the Scots thereupon growing impatient, took
Arms, and overthrowing the Custos, took him Prisoner, but he was soon rescued
by Sir Robert Nevil; yet this made King Edward set forward with an Army, which
brought such a Terror upon Scotland, that he marched through the Kingdom from
Roxborow to Cathiness, 300 miles, without the lest resistance; for those that
were in Arms betook themselves, upon his approach, to the Woods and Mountains.

The King thus absolute in Scotland, had for a sum of Money Wallis, their
Ringleader, delivered into his hands; so that at Westminster being found
guilty of Treason in rebelling against the King his law full Sovereign, he was
hanged and quartered, his Quarters sent into Scotland, and set up in diverse
remarkable places; after whose death Bruce, that had contended with Baliol for
the Kingdom, headed the Scots, and gathered a considerable Army, but was routed
by Aymery de Valence, one of King Edward's Captains, and forced into the
Orcades, where he lived an obscure Life, with much hardship, till he found
another opportunity to head his Contrymen, and did many noble Exploits,
which drew King Edward to oppose him; but in his way he fell sick at Carlisle,
where finding the near approach of Death, he charged his Son Edward, who was to
succeed him, that he should be industrious to bring the Scots under the English
Obedience, and that he should carry his Bones along with him through Scotland,
the better to render him victorious; commanding on pain of his Curse, not
without common consent to recall out of Banishment Pierce Gavestone, and
farther enjoining him to send his Heart into the Holy Land, accompanied with
149 Knights, and their Train; to which end he had laid up two thousand pounds
of Silver, and that upon pain of Damnation the Money should be turned to no
other use; then removing from Carlisle to Bury upon the Sands, he there dyed of
a Dissentery, anno 1307. and his Body buried at Westminster,

This Edward the First was King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain,
etc. eldest Son to Henry the Third by Eleanor his Queen; his first Wife was
Eleanor Daughter to Ferdinand the Third, King of Castile, by whom he had Issue
John, Henry, and Alphons, all dying young, Edward, who succeeded him; Eleanor
married to Henry the Third, Earl of Barrie; Joan married to Gilbert Clare, Earl
of Hereford and Gloucester; Margaret married to John the Second, Duke of
Brabant; Berenger, Alice, and then Mary, who at the earnest Entreaty of her
Grandmother, became a veiled Nun at the Age of Ten years; Elizabeth first
married to John Earl of Holland and Zealand, then to Humfrey Bohun, Earl of
Hartford and ctssex,; then Beatrix, and Blanch. By his Second Wife Margaret,
Daughter to Philip the Hardy, King of France, he had Issue Thomas Earl of
Norfolk, and Earl Marshal of England, Edmund Earl of Kent, and Eleanor, who
dyed young; he began his Reign on the 16th of November, anno 1272. and reigned
34 Years, 7 Months, and 12 days, dying in the 35th year of his Reign, and the
69th of his Age.

Thus did grim Death close up our Monarch's eyes,
From whom no mortal Might could take the Prize,
In Arms renowned, the World his Fame has heard,
Beloved by most, and by all Mankind feared.
The Reign and Actions of Edward the Second, King of England, etc.
THis King, from the place of his Birth, was called Edward of Caernavon; he
began his Reign anno 1307, and prosecuting the Wars of Scotland, he obliged
many of the Scotch Nobility to do him Homage at Dumsreize, and upon his return
he imprisoned Walter Bishop of Chester, seizing upon all his Goods and Credits,
for causing by his Complaint the Banishment of Gaveston, in the Reign of Edward
the First, as likewise himself to be restrained in his disorderly way of
living: Then passing the Seas, he at Bulloign in France married young Isabel,
Daughter to Philip the Fair. King of France, and returned with her in a most
splendid manner, bringing back with him Gaveston, his darling Favorite, who
was a Gentleman Stranger brought up with him in his youth, and now under the
Influence of the King began to be so imperious, that the Nobility was set
against him, yet the King, who thought nothing too dear for his Minion, not
only upheld him, but supplied him with Treasure to the highest Profuseness,
giving him his Jewels, and wishing nothing more than that he might succeed him
in the Throne, which obliged the Parliament to pass an Act for his perpetual
Banishment, but had much difficulty to get it passed by the King; nor did he
do it but to pass another, giving him a great Sum of Money, however with
reluctance he signed it; yet he would suffer his Privado whom he had made Earl
of Cornwall to be no farther from him than Ireland, where he maintained him in
a splendid manner, and within a while called him to Court, and married him to
Joan of Acres, Countess of Gloucester, his Sisters Daughter, which made him
more insolent than ever, consuming the King's Treasure in Feasts, Plays, and
other Riotous Proceedings, at such a rate, that there was not enough left to
supply the necessities of the Court, drawing the King likewise into such
Debaucheries, that the Queen finding her self sensibly injured, reproved him at
first with mildness, but finding that ineffectual, she openly complained; so
that Gaveston was a third time banished; yet he staid not long before the King
privately sent for him, making him principal Secretary of State, which so
incensed as well the Bishops as the Temporal Lords, that they resolved to
expel him by Force of Arms, choosing for their Leader Thomas Earl of Lancaster,
and at Dathington, whither his Fear had driven him, he was surprised by Guy
Earl of Warwick, who conveyed him to Blacklow, where several of the Nobles
consulting, that if he was set at Liberty he would work their Ruin with the
King, they proceeded to prevent it, and without any formal Trial caused his
head to be struk off, which greatly incensed the King, and raised in him a
mortal Enmity against those Lords, yet by the Mediation of Gilbert Earl of
Gloucester they were seemingly forgiven.

The Scots about this time rising in arms under David Bruce, whom they had
chosen their King, or Leader, entering England, and doing great Mischief in
Northumberland. King Edward marched against them; but in this expedition many
of the discontented Lords refused to aid him, under pretense that he had
delayed to ratify their Liberties and Charters, through which defect he
received a great overthrow near Bannocksbourn; for there the two Armies
joining, the crafty Scots had in diverse places made deep Trenches, covering
them with rotten Hurdles and Earth, so that the English Chavalry pressing on,
fell into those Pits, and were gored upon the sharp Stakes that were placed at
the bottom; and although the King behaved himself with much bravery, refusing
to leave the field till he was forced thence by his Friends, yet the Earl of
Gloucester, the Lord Clifford, and about seven hundred Knights and Esquires,
with a great number of common Soldiers, were slain, many Nobles taken
Prisoners, together with a large Booty; and this was the greatest Advantage the
Scots ever gained over the English, which encouraged them to make deeper
Inroads with whom some of the discontented English joined, while King Edward in
the most solemn Pomp interred the Body of Gaveston at Kings-Langley in
Hertfordshire, and soon after instead of one he raised up two Privadoes, or
Favorites, viz. the Spencers, Father and Son, who perceiving themselves high
in the King's Favor, instead of taking warning by the Fate of Gaveston, they
strove to exceed him to pride and Arrogance, which soon procured them the
hatred of the Nobles to such a degree, that the King could not consider himself
in Safety till he had consented to their Banishment. But now the Queen, who had
hitherto been a Mediatrix between the King and his Barons, being denied a
Night's Lodging in one of the Baron's Castles, she so highly resented the
Affront, that her former good Offices were changed into Studies of Revenge; and
in this humor she labored with the King to ruin those she a little before
had sought to protect; and the King easily exasperated, soon consented to
pleasure her to his Power; and therefore to cross the Barons, he caused the
Judgment against the Spencers to be reversed.

Some of the delinquent Lords, fearing the Storm that threatened them,
submitted to the King, others were taken Prisoners as the two Roger Mortimers,
Father and Son, and committed to the Tower, but the rest resolved to stand out
under the Leading of the Earl of Lancaster, but they were overthrown at
Burrough-bridg where Humphrey de Bohun was slain by a Spear from under the
Bridge. And the Earl, with other principal Men to the number of Ninety, or
upwards, most of them Barons and Knights were taken Prisoners by Andrew de
Herkerly, Captain of Carlisle; for which Service he was afterward created Earl
of that place.

These Noble Prisoners were not long confined before they too sensibly felt the
King's Anger, for being pushed on by the Queen, the Spencers, and other Court
Favorites; he caused the Earl of Lancaster, his Uncle to be beheaded at
Pontefract, where he stayed five hours upon the Scaffold before the Sheriff
could procure an Executioner, and the Barons and Knights were hanged and
quartered in diverse places. And here the Queen had her Revenge; for the Lord
Badelmere, who refused her the Lodging, being taken amongst others, was hanged
before it; so that by this rigorous Execution most of the Noble English Blood
supplied the thirsty Earth with too precious a draught: But it appears that
this Cruelty was rather an Act of the Courtiers, than done by the King's
natural Inclination; for one of a mean family being taken in the Rebellion, and
the Favorites pleading earnestly for his Pardon, the King, in a great rage
reviled them in these terms, viz. A plague upon you cursed Whisperers,
malicious Backbiters, wicked Counselors! Entreat you for the Life of a most
notorious Knave, who would not speak one word for the Life of my near Kinsman,
that most noble Knight, Earl Thomas? By the Soul of God this Fellow shall dye
the death he has deserved; and accordingly he was executed.

In the Year 1322. The King, to revenge former Injuries, marched with a great
Army into Scotland, but through the neglect of his Purveyors a great Scarcity
of Provision happening, he was constrained, without performing any memorable
Action to make his Retreat; nor was the Scots so contented, but falling on his
Rear, not only cut off a great many of his Men, but obliged him to leave his
Baggage, with much Treasure, as a Prey to them. But now the Pope, in favor of
England, having interdicted Scotland, a Truce was concluded between the two
Kingdoms for thirteen Years, and so ended this tedious War, and the King had
leisure to make his Progress through the several Counties of York, Lancaster,
and the Marches of Wales, punishing such as had been in the former Rebellion,
and amongst others, Andrew de Herkerley, was drawn, hanged, and quartered, for
taking part with the Scots. But now a greater Storm began to gather; for young
Mortimer making his Escape out at a Window, and swimming the River of Thames,
fled beyond the Seas, and joined himself to other Fugitives, and banished
English; and not long after the Spencers oppressing the Kingdom, and setting
the King against the Queen, she, under a pretense of Visiting her Father's
Court at Paris, found means, with her Son Edward, to get beyond the Seas, and
refused, upon the King's sending for her, to return, till she, joining with
Mortimer, her dear Fovourite, and other Lords, raising a considerable Power,
and holding Correspondence with the Lords that yet were disaffected in England,
landed in a hostil manner, and marched against the King, who was preparing to
oppose her, seizing upon many considerable Towns.

The King by this Proceeding finding himself in distress, and that the
Londoners, and many of the Lords, had declared against him, setting the
Prisoners every where at Liberty, and recalling those that were banished,
thought it good to avoid coming to Battle; whereupon the Queen, with her
Forces, sat down before Bristol, took it, and therein Spencer the Elder, whom
she caused to be cut up alive, after being dragged through the Streets for the
Satisfaction of the People, who mortally hated him. And now the King finding
himself in a manner forsaken, fled into Wales, and there for a time lay secret
in the Abbey of Neath; but in the end being discovered, and with him the younger
Spencer, Robert Baldok, Chancellor, and Simon de Reading; the King hereupon
was conveyed to Kenelworth Castle, and the Lords to Hereford, where the Queen
lay, and there Spencer and Reading being condemned by Sir William Trussel, Lord
Chief Justice on that occasion, they were hanged.

The Confederates with the Queen having in this manner imprisoned the King, and
not conceiving it safe to set him at Liberty, resolved amongst themselves to
make Edward his Son, a Prince of about thirteen years of Age, King, and
thereupon sent Sir William Trussel to the Castle where the King was Prisoner,
to acquaint him with what was intended, which put him into a mortal Agony, from
whence being recovered, he greatly lamented and bewailed his hard Fate; however
Trussel being instructed what to do, proceeded to unking him in these words: I
William Trussel, in the Name of all Men of the Land of England, and of all the
Parliament, Procurator, do resign to thee Edward the Homage that was made to
thee some time, and from this time forward I deprive thee, and defy thee of
all Power Royal, and I shall never be tendent to thee after this time. Anno
Dom. 1327.

And here, following the Rule of other Historians, we put an End to his Reign,
though he lived in Captivity, as we shall have occasion to mention in the Reign
of his Son.

This Edward the Second was King of England, Lord of Ireland, Duke of Aquitain,
and fourth Son of Edward the First, by Eleanor his Queen; he began his Reign
the 7th of June, Anno 1307. and reigned 19 Years, 6 Months, and 18 days, and
was the 30th sole Monarch of England; he was murdered Anno 1327. in the 20th
Year of his coming to the Crown, and the 41st of his Age, and afterward buried
at Gloucester: His Wife was Isabel, Daughter to Philip the Fair, King of
France, and by her he had Issue Edward of Windsor, John of Eltham, Joan married
to David Bruce, and Eleanor married to Reynold Duke of Guelder. In his time
there happened a very great Famine throughout England, with many strange
Sights, betokening the Woes and Miseries that after followed, etc.

Thus by misguided Zeal a Monarch fell,
Undone by Parasites he loved too well;
Hard Fate of Princes! that in time wont see
Their Friends from Foes, until they ruined be.
The Reign and Actions of Edward the Third, King of England, etc.
EDward the Third, though scarcely of sufficient years of Discretion to know
what belonged to the Titles or Rights of Crowns and Kingdoms, had however more
compassion on his afflicted Father than the Queen his Mohter had on her
Husband; for young as he was, when he heard what had happened, he greatly
bewailed his Misfortune, vowing never to take upon him the Government, unless
the King freely consented to resign without compulsion; nor could they
constrain him to it, but with threats that they would utterly reject the whole
Line, and choose a King out of the Nobility, though of another Family.

Upon these Considerations the young King, eight days after his Father's
Resignation, was crowned with the usual Ceremonies; but the old King being yet
alive, and the People compassionating his Captivity, his Deposers thought
themselves no ways secure, especially Mortimer, who was suspected to be over
familiar with the Queen, and from that time they fell to plotting his death; in
order to which Mortimer procured an express from the young King to remove him,
under pretenses of Friendship and Advantage, but indeed that he might put him
into such hands as he was sure would dispatch him, and thereupon he was
conveyed to Berkley Castle, when by the way, for fear he should be rescued by
the People, who had yet some remains of Love for him, they set him on a
Molehill, in order to shave him, for the better disquise, and in an insulting
manner told him, That the Water of the next Ditch should accommodate him for
that purpose, to which the sorrowful King replied, That there should be warm
Water whether they would or not, and thereupon sent forth a flood of Tears, and
being arrived at Berkley Castle, in the Custody of Thomas Gurney, and John
Matravers, he was murdered by them, or such as they appointed, in this
barbarous manner, viz. being bound to a bed with his face downwards they thrust
a hollow Horn into his Fundament, and through that, to prevent any burning or
searing in the outward parts, they thrust an Iron Instrument, red hot, twisting
it amidst his Bowels, till with horrible pain and torment, amidst cries and
groans he expired. And this Wickedness Historians record to be acted upon
Mortimer's sending an ambiguous Sentence, prepared by Adam Torleton, Eishop of
Hereford, to such as kept the Castle, viz. Edvardum occedere nolite t^mere
bonum est
To kill King Edward refuse to be afraid is good
This passage in Mortimer's Letter being written without stops, and the Keeper
well-knowing that aspiring Lord had no kindness for the King, took it as the
Writer truly meant though Mortimer upon his being Accused, alleged, his
Command was not to kill the King, but that he sent word it was good to be
afraid to do it.

Young King Edward, upon the inhumane Murder of his Father, was on the Borders
of Scotland, and had environed the Scots in the Woods of Wividale, and
Stanhope; but Mortimer desirous to eclipse the Glory of that young Prince, that
his own might appear, so carried the Matter, that through the carelessness of
the English Army they escaped; so that the King, after a vast Expense of
Treasure, and the hazard of his Life, which had been lost had not his Chaplain
stepped between him and Death, receiving the mortal Wound in his own Body,
returned inglorious: And soon after Joan, the King's Sister, was married to
David Bruce, whom the Scots had made their King; whereupon a Peace, though
somewhat dishonorable to the English, ensued; and in the same year, viz. 1327
dyed Charles the Fair, King of France, without Issue, by which means that Crown
devolved to King Edward, in Right of his Mother, Daughter to Philip the Fair,
and Sister to Cha^l^s; but to bar the English of that Advantage, the French
Peers opposed their Salique Law, pretending thereby, that no Woman was capable
of Inheriting the Crown of France, or being admitted the Regency; and thereupon
they admitted Phillip de Valois, whose Father was younger Brother to Philip the
Fair, which afterward cost the French many showers of Blood.

About this time the Lord Mortimer and the Queen Mother, perceiving Edmund Earl
of Kent, the King's Uncle, to cross their purposes, found means to procure his
Death; which so far opened the Eyes of the young King, together with the
Report, that his Mother was with Child by Mortimer, as not to think himself in
safety till he had crushed that ambitious Man* and the better to do it, he
undertook a daring Enterprise; for fearing he was with the Queen at Notingham
Castle, notwithstanding it was strongly guarded, he entered in the night time
accompanied with a few of his trusty Friends, and by an unsuspected way, viz.
through a Vault under ground, coming suddenly into his Mother's Chamber, found
Mortimer undressed, and ready to go to Bed to her; whereupon he caused him to
be a Arrested, and carried away Prisoner, and being tried in open Parliament he
was Condemened at Westminster, upon several Articles, viz. For causing the King
to make a dishonorable Peace with the Scots, and taking large Bribes to procure
it. For procuring the Death of King Edward the Second, and his over Familiarity
with Queen Isabel. For his oppressing the People by illegal Exactions. And
lastly, For embezzling the King's Treasures. And for these and the like
receiving Sentence, as a Traitor, he was drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged, and
his Body left on the Gallows for the space of two days and nights; and with him
in the same manner dyed Sir Simon de Bedford, and John Deverell Esquire as
Contrivers of King Edward the Second's Death; the Queen had likewise her
Pension shortened. And now there arising a Dispute between the Houses of Baliol
and Bruce, for the Crown of Scotland, King Edward, not thinking himself obliged
to stand to what Mortimer, and his Mother, had done in his Minority, since many
of his Towns were detained, raised a considerable Army, and striking in with
Edward Baliol, besieged Berwick, when to relieve it the whole Power of Scotland
advanced, so that at Halydon Hill the Battle was joined, and after an obstinate
bloody Fight the Scots were routed with great slaughter; there dyed Archibald
Douglas, Earl of Angus, Governor of Scotland, the Earls of Southerland,
Carrick and Ross, the three Sons of the Lord Walter Steward, and about 14000 of
lesser rank, with a very inconsiderable damage to the English; whereupon
Berwick surrendered, and Baliol was accepted King of Scotland, submitting to
King Edward as his Homager, for the Kingdom, and he in lieu thereof became his
Protector.

King Edward having settled Scotland, began to take into Consideration the
Injuries the French had done, in preventing him of his Right; as likewise by
encroaching upon his Territories in that Kingdom, and finding no redress by way
of Embassy, he resolved to gain it by the Sword; yet to justify his Actions,
he sent his Reasons to the College of Cardinals, and the better to strengthen
his Interest made a League with the High and Low Dutch, as he did with other
foreign Potentates; and now he proceeds to require a Supply, which being
liberally given, and Moneys raised, by sundry other ways, he raised a gallant
Army, and crossed the Seas to Antwerp, assuming by the importunity of the
Flemings, the Title and Armories of France, quartering the Lillies with the
Lions; and having all things in a readiness, he entered the North part of that
Kingdom, burning and destroying the Country as far as Turwin, returning with
the Spoil to Antwerp, where, with Philippa, his Queen, he kept Christmas, and
about Candlemas set Sail for England.

The French having had a taste of the King of England's Courage, and he
resolving to go on pressed the Parliament for a greater Supply, which was
liberally granted, and he in lieu of that Kindness gave a general Pardon of
Trespasses, and other dues to him, confirming Magna Charta, and Charta de
Forestae; and on the 23d. of June set sail from Harwich, intending for Sluice,
but in the way was encountered by 400 French Ships, with which the King
engaged, and having the favor of the Wind and Sun made an almost incredible
Destruction, so that the terror of the English caused many of the French to
leave their Ships, and leap into the Sea, so that Thirty thousand are said to
have perished together, with the greatest part of the Fleet, and the King
landing, entered France, sitting down before Tourney from whence he sent the
French King a Challenge to fight single handed for the Kingdom, or if that
pleased not, each to bring 100 Men into the Field, for the saving the effusion
of more blood, or otherwise within Ten days to join Battle, near Tourney: But
to this King Philip made no direct Answer, alleging, the Letter was not sent
to him, the King of France, but barely to Philip d' Valois, (for so it was
directed) and he therefore thought himself in honor not bound to Answer it;
yet he approached the English Camp with a very numerous Army, and every day
Battle was expected, but Two Cardinals, and the Mother of King Philip so
labored to prevent the slaughter that must have ensued, that a Truce was
concluded till the Midsummer following.

The Truce was no sooner expired, but King Edward invaded Normandy to the City
of Caen, and overran the Country almost within sight of the Walls of Paris,
forcing his way over the Sein, and where the Bridges were broken down, and the
better to encourage his Men to beat off the French that guarded the farther
Shore, he entered the Water, at a Ford in the head of the Army, crying, He that
loves me let him follow; so marching toward Cressie, in the Province of
Ponthieu, he understood the French King was advancing with 100000 Horse and
Foot; nor was it long before the two Armies came in sight of each other, which
made King Edward divid his Forces into three Battalions, giving the Van in
charge to his Son Edward, commonly called, The Black Prince, through the
Warlike Actions that attended his Life, etc. the middle Battalion he reduced
under the Command of the Earls Arundel and Northhampton; and the last he
retained himself, placing his Carriages in the Rear, commanding every man to
leave his Horse, and fight on Foot, as resolving either to win the Victory, or
dye. As for the French Army, the King of Bohemia, and the Earl of Alanson, had
the charge of the Vanguard, King Philip of the Main Battle, and the Earl of
Savoy of the Rear; and no sooner the Charge was sounded, but a bloody Conflict
ensued, whilst King Edward stood upon a hill with his Battalion to behold the
Event, and at the beginning the French Horse charging with great Fury, made the
Prince give way, and had almost enclosed his Battalion, which made the Nobles
that had the care of his Person send to the King, to advertize him of the
danger his Son was in, when demanding only whether the Prince was alive, and
certified that he was, so instead of sending the succors demanded, he replied,
Let them send no more to me for any Adventure that may befall whilst my Son is
alive, but let them either vanquish or dye, because the Honor of this glorious
day shall be solely his, if God suffer him to survive. This resolute return not
only made the English obstinate in fighting, but repent they had sent to
require aid; wherefore redoubling their fury, the French were overthrown on
heaps, especially by the Showers of Arrows that continually poured upon them,
from whence such a rout and disorder ensued, that their Horse trampled down
their Foot, so that all was in confusion, and nothing remained for the English,
but the Slaughter of the flying French men, and the Field being entirely won,
the King advanced and embraced his Son, encouraging him to future Glory by so
prosperous a beginning. In this Battle were slain Eleven Princes, and about
1500 Barons, Knights, and Men of Arms: Here fell the Kings of Bohemia, and
Major^u, Earl of Alanson, Duke of Lorain, Duke of Burbon, Earl of Flanders,
Earl of Savoy, the Dauphin of Vienois, the Earl of Sancerrer and Harecourt, the
Earls of Aumarl and Nevers, with six Counts of the Empire; the grand Prior of
France, and Archbishop of Roan; and of the meaner sort about 30000. The English
lost not above Five thousand, and amongst them none of considerable Note.

The King by this means grown terrible to the French, marched to Calais, and
straightly besieged it, yet permitted about 1508 Starvelings, whom the Governor
had turned out to spare Provision, free passage, relieving them with Victuals,
and Money. And now the French finding their own weakness, dealt underhand,
stirring up the Scots, that so they might divert the King's Forces nearer home;
but they being encountered near Durham, were overthrown, and their King David
taken Prisoner, and in the Encounter the Earls of Murray and Strathern, the
Constable, Marshal, Chamberlain, and Chancellor, with many other Nobles, were
slain. The Noble Prisoners, beside the King, were the Earls of Douglas, Fife,
Weigton, Southerland, and Mentieth, and King Edward being still in France, sent
Parties abroad under several Generals, who gained great advantages over the
French, insomuch that the Kingdom was quite disheartened, not only to see their
Field Forces worsted, but their Towns drop away very fast, and amongst the rest
that considerable one of Brigerac, where the Earl of Darby and Lancaster
commanding the Forces, promised, the better to encourage his Soldiers, that
when the Town was taken, every Man should have the Plunder of the first house
he enterd; when so it happened that a common Soldier broke into the
Mint-Master's Stores, and there found great store of coined and uncoined Gold
and Silver, insomuch that not knowing how to dispose of it, he acquainted the
Earl with his Fortune, desiring him to take it into his possession; but he
generously refused, saying, that his word was past, and he would not recall it;
and the King having lain eleven months before Calais, had it surrendered upon
discretion, which was seconded by the News that Sir Walter de Bendley had
vanquished the Marshal of France, slain 13 Lords, 140 Knights, 100 Esquires,
and made 9 Lords Prisoners, with many Knights, and Gentlemen of Note; so that
the French suing for Peace, and offering extraordinary Advantages to the
English, it was accorded upon sundry Articles and Limitations; but the French
not long observing them, the War broke out again, more dreadful than before;
for King Edward, who had withdrawn the greatest part of his Forces, entered
again that Kingdom with a puissant Army, laying a great part of it waste; but
in the mean while King Philip dying, and John coming to the Crown, and upon his
giving the Duchy of Aquitain to Charles the Dauphin, King Edward, to
counter-balance him, gave it to Prince Edward his Son, commanding him to defend
it, who passing thither with an Army, took most of the Towns with little
resistance, when heightened with the Success, he pierced as far as the Gates of
Burges in Berry, but in his return to Bourdeaux, John the French King opposed
him with a very numerous Army, but notwithstanding he had six to one in the
Field, he was overthrown by the Prince, and taken Prisoner, together with
Philip his youngest Son, the Archbishop of Sens, with many great Lords, and
about two thousand Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, bearing Armories, and in
the Fight were slain Fifty two Lords, one thousand seven hundred Knights,
Esquires, and Gentlemen, together with the King's Standard Bearer, and about
six thousand Common Soldiers, it being ever the Fate of France to have the loss
fall heavy on the Nobility; and after many other advantages gained, the Prince
settling his Affairs, returned to England with his Prisoners, and was received
with great Triumph; and Henry Picard being then Lord Mayor of London, at his
own charge feasted four Kings, viz. of England, France, Scotland, and Cyprus,
and eight days were taken up in giving Glory to God for the Victory; and the
King not thinking the English Interest in France sufficiently secured, sent
over a Fleet of 1100 Sail, and coming with his Army before the Walls of Paris,
he knighted, for their better Encouragement in military Atchievments, 400
Esquires and Gentlemen, but at length, through many Mediations and
Intercessions, it was concluded that King Edward and his Son, should ever
release unto King John, and his Heirs, the Right and Claim they had to the
Crown of France, and Duchy of Normandy, etc, and in lieu thereof King John,
and his Son, should for them and their Heirs, release unto King Edward, and his
Heirs, the entire Country of Aquitain, Santogne, and their Dependences, etc.
That King John should pay 300000 Schuts of Gold, each valued at six Shillings
eight pence Sterling; which Agreement was ratified at Calais, but not all
performed; for now the Black Prince dying, Anno 1377. in the 46th year of his
Age, and the King growing in years, and sickly, matters abroad were neglected,
and the French renewed their Encroachments; nor did the King long survive the
death of that dear Son, for having appointed the Son of that Prince to succeed
him in the Throne, he dyed on the 21st of June, Anno 377. in the 51st year of
his Reign, and was the 31st sole Monarch of England, etc.

This Edward was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of
Aquitain, eldest Son to Edward the Second by Isabel his Queen, Daughter to
Philip the Fair, King of France, he dyed at Shene in Surry, and was buried at
Westminster; his Wife was Philip, Daughter to the Earl of Hanault and Holland,
by whom he had Issue Edward the Black Prince, William of Hatfield, Lionel Duke
of Clarence, John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, Edward Earl of Cambridge, and
Duke of York, William of Windsor, and Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester,
Isabel married to Ingelram of Guisnes, Earl of Soysons, and Arch Duke of
Austria, Joan espoused by proxy to Alphons the Eleventh, King of Castile and
Leon, but dyed before the consummation of the Nuptials, Blanch who dyed young,
Mary married to John Montfort, Duke of Bretaigne, and Margaret married to John
de Hasting, Earl of Pembroke.

He built many stately Fabrics, settled the Wool Staple at Calais, instituted
the Order of the Garter, restrained the Pope from conferring Benefices upon
Strangers, constituted Prince Edward his Son first Duke of Cornwall, since
inherent to the Eldest Son of the Kings of England; in his time flourished the
famous John Wickliff, who first openly and successfully opposed the Pope, and
exposed the manifest Errors of the Church of Rome. Blazing Stars likewise
appeared with continued Rains, and a great Mortality through all Europe so
vehemently, that the Dead were more than the Living.

Thus the great Warrier after all his Toil,
From whom whilst living none could take the spoil,
Dropped in old Age, and made the Grave his Bed,
Whom late the Nations did both love and dread.
The Reign and Actions of Richard the II. King of England, etc.
THis Richard was Son to Edward the Black Prince, he was crowned on the 21st of
June, 1377, in the eleventh Year of his Age, but the Government growing out of
Frame, by reason of the King's Nonage, and the Differences amongst the
Nobility, the French took the opportunity to invade some Sea coast Towns, and
the Scots were emboldened to enter England, burning Roxborough; and to augment
the miseries of the English the Pestilence raged fearfully in the Northern
parts, so that the glorious Face of things seemed utterly to be changed; but a
better Accord ensuing, the Earl of Northumberland regained Berwick; and in the
Year 1379. a Parliament being held at London, where it was agreed that the more
wealthy sort should be taxed for the King's present occasions, and the poorer
exempted; but this held not long, for the next year another Parliament being
called at Northamp^on, a Poll Tax was agreed on, that every Person of either
Sex, above the Age of Sixteen, should pay 12 pence a head, which was looked
upon as so great a Grievance, that many refused not only to pay it, but took up
Arms, especially in Kent, Surry, Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridge-shire,
under the Leading of those notorious Persons Jack Straw, and Wat. Tyler, who
making no less than one hundred thousand came to London, where the multitude
sided with them, and committed many outrages, as burning the Priory of Saint
John's, the Duke of Lancaster's Palace at the Savoy, us likewise the Archbishop
of Canterbury's Goods at Lambeth, defacing all Rolls, Records, and Writings,
wherever they found them, as professing themselves great Enemies to the Law;
nor did this suffice, but dragging the Archbishop, then Chancellor of England,
and Sir Robert Hales, Lord Prior of St. John's, out of the Tower, though the
King was present, they in a rude and barbarous manner heheaded them on logs of
Timber, with loud Shouts and Rejoicings, and proceeded to exhibit many
unreasonable Petitions, yet necessity constrained the King either to dissemble
their Insolence, or grant them their Demands; whereupon many dispersed, went to
their respective Habitations, and the rest the King by his Proclamation ordered
to meet him in Smithfield, with promises of Satisfaction, where in great
numbers they came, armed with a Messeline of Weapons, headed by Wat. Tyler, who
in presence of the King using insolent Speeches, and attempting to kill Sir
John Newton for contradicting him, William Walworth, Lord Mayor of London,
being by, and no longer able to endure such Arrogance, after some Expressions
of his Resentment, stabbed Tyler with a Dagger, which his companions
perceiving, prepared to take a bloody Revenge; but the King taking courage,
spurred forward, commanding them to follow him, declaring that he would be
their Captain, and in the mean while Walworth armed the Citizens, and came with
a thousand well appointed men, bearing Tyler's Head on a Spear before them, by
which he so daunted the rout, that they threw down their Weapons, and besaught
the King's Mercy, with a Promise of future Obedience; and Walworth for this Act
was knighted, with a Donative of one hundred pounds a year free Land; and from
this Action many will have it that the Dagger was added to the City Arms; and
soon after this Jack Straw, and about 1500 others were executed upon the
account of this Rebellion, Straw at his death confessing that their Design was
to murder the King and Nobles, and set up petty Kings of their own choosing in
every Shire.

The Nation being better at quiet, the King bethought himself of Marrying, and
in order to it having treated with the Emperor, Charles the Fourth, for the
Lady Anne his Daughter, she was sent into England, and the Nuptials were
celebrated, upon which a Peace with France ensued; yet the Scots continued to
invade the Northern parts, though with various Success; but this was not all;
for the King advancing diverse persons of mean worth to the highest Dignities,
or at least the greatest Favors, and places of Trust; the Nobles began to
murmur, and fall off, so that although a Parliament was called, they would not
grant the King any Aids, unless his Favorites were removed or degraded, which
he could not well digest, and therefore resolved to find out some other way to
supply his Coffers; in order to which he seized upon the Estates and Effects of
sundry that had withdrawn themselves, and consulting his Lawyers for his better
justification, about sundry Articles of Treason, in the compass of which the
Lords that stood out might fall, he got them subscribed at Nottingham by Robert
Trisilian, Chief Justiciar, Robert Belknap, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
John Holt, Roger Fulthrop, and William Burgh, Justiciars, as likewise by John
Lecton, Sergeant at Law, whereupon he proclaimed them Traitors, and both sides
armed; but the King finding the Lords too powerful for him, and that they had
discovered the Snares he had laid to entrap them, thought it no time to oppose
his small number against forty thousand men, but shut himself up with such
Forces as he had in the Tower of London, where he had laid up Stores for his
Subsistence, if things came to farther Extremity.

The King withdrawn, the Lords came to Westminster, and there assembling to
consult what was to be done, they resolved to dispatch a Messenger, to let the
King know, that if he left not the Tower, and came quickly to them, that things
might be better settled, and ordered, they would proceed to choose a King that
should and would hearken to, and the Judgment and Counsel of his Peers. This,
though much against his will, constrained him to meet them at Westminster, and
after some debate consented to remove from his Person Alexander Nevil,
Archbishop of York, the Bishops of Durham and Chichester, the Lords Zouch and
Beaumont, and many others, with certain chargeable Court-Ladies, who were
maintained as Spies upon the Actions of the Nobility; and the better to make up
the breach a Parliament was summoned, in which the Judges were called to an
Account, for the subscribing of the Articles, and other matters, and most of
them being arrested, as they sat in Judgment, were sent Prisoners to the
Tower, but Trisilian took an opportunity to escape, yet being apprehended, he
was in the morning sentenced in Parliament, and in the Afternoon, pursuant to
that Sentence, as one that had wheedled in the rest to a compliance, he was
conveyed to Tyburn, and there had his Throat cut by Hand of the common
Executioner, and many others were put to death as evil Counselours, and
Betrayers of the People. The Estates of the King's chief Favorites were
likewise confiscated; but the Scots at the same time invading the Northern
Parts, the Proceedings were not carried on to the highth as was otherways
intended; and not long after the Scale turned for another Parliament, being
called at London, the Sanctuary of former Laws, and all partscular Charters of
Pardon were disannulled, and taken away from Thomas Duke Gloucester, the Earl
of Arundel, and others, for their Treasonable Practices and Enterprises, and
all the Justiciars who stood for the King were cleared from the Danger and
Scandal they lay under, and the Articles they had signed were ratified, and
such as had offended against them proclaimed Traitors, and Richard Earl of
Arund^l was beheaded on Tower Hill, as guilty of the breach of them. The Earl
of Warwick upon the like cause was banished, and the Duke of Gloucester
arrested, and carried to Calais, where he was privately made away, and the King
created himself Earl of Chester, and to his Escutcheon Royal added the Armories
of Edward the Confessor, creating his Cousin Henry Duke of Hereford, who was
not long after accused by Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk, for speaking
dangerous words of the King, and Mowbray constantly affirming what Hereford
denied, the Combat was granted them, and all things in order to it prepared;
but when they were entered the Lists, and at the point of defying each other to
death, the King threw down his Warder, by that means staying the Combat,
changed the manner of the Order, and banished them the Kingdom, the Duke of
Norfolk for ever, and the Duke of Hereford first for ten Years, then for six
only, constraining them upon pain of death immediately to depart, and soon
after the Duke of Lancaster, Father to the latter, and Uncle to the King,
dying, he seized on all his Wealth, which was extremely considerable, he being
looked upon one of the richest uncrowned Heads in Europe.

Long had not these Things passed, before the Irish fell into Rebellion, when
to quiet them King Richard raised a great Army, to supply which he grievously
oppressed his Subjects by a heavy Tax, which begot no small Hatred amongst the
People; so that some of the Nobles who favored Hereford, now become Duke of
Lancaster, sent to him to advertize him of the Discontents, letting him know
that this was his time to make his Fortune, and he not delaying the
opportunity, with an Army of about 2000 English and Foreigners, landed whilst
King Richard was busy in Ireland, and was immediately joined by the Earl of
Northumberland, and his Son, and declaring as a specious pretense he came for
no more than his Duchy of Lancaster; the People in compassion of his wrong
flocked about him from all parts, so that the Duke of York, whom King Richard
had left Governor of the Kingdom till his Return from his Irish Expedition,
not being able to oppose the Torrent, was obliged to acquiess, and suffer him
to take Bristol, where Bushy and Green, two of the King's Privy Counselours,
being made Prisoners, they lost their Heads to please the multitude.

This allarmed King Richard in Ireland, and obliged him to hasten for England,
gathering some Troops in Wales, which he joined to those he brought over; but
few of the Nobles coming to his Assistence, and finding himself too weak to
oppose the Torrent, he suffered them to disband, and betook himself, with a few
of his Followers, to Conwoth Castle, and from thence sent to demand Honorable
Conditions, and amongst the rest, That if himself, and eight more whom he
should name, might have Allowance becoming their Qualities, and an assurance of
a quiet Private Life, he would be content to resign the Crown to his Cousin the
Duke of Lancaster, and being promised what what was demanded, he put himself
into the hands of the Earl of Northumberland, and was conveyed to the Tower of
London; whereupon a Parliament was called in his Name to sit at Westminster,
who concluding upon his Resignation, sent an Instrument to him in order to his
subscribing, which being accordingly done, as likewise sealed, he put his
Signet Ring, upon the Duke's Finger, and after this a definitive Sentence
passed in Parliament, at which time the Duke of Lancaster rising from his Seat,
made his Claim and Challenge to the Crown in the following words, viz.

In the Name of God Amen. I Henry of Lancaster claim the Realm of England, and
the Crown, with all the Apurtenances, as coming of the Blood Royal from King
Henry the Third, and that Justice which God of his Grace does send me by the
help of my Friends, for the Recovery of the said Realm, which was in point of
Perdition through default of Government, and breach of Laws.

After this Claim Henry was acknowledged by all the Estates for King, and
seated in the Royal Throne, which is accounted the end of Richard's Reign.

This Richard the Second was King of England and France, Lord of Ireland, and
Duke of Aquitain, second Son to Edward the Black Prince by Joan his Wife,
Daughter to Edmund Earl of Kent. His Reign began the 21st day of June 1377. and
he reigned 22 Years, three Months, and eight days, and was the 22d sole Monarch
of England, etc. and was murdered in Pontefract Castle, as will appear in the
next Reign. He had two Wives, but no Issue, or at least none that survived him;
his last Wife Isabel, Daughter to Charles the Fifth, King of France, being so
young that she was incapable of consummating the Joys of a Marriage Bed, etc.

In his time made Portents and Prodigies happened; the Bay and Laurel Trees
withered throughout England, and suddenly after became green and flourishing,
and the deep River near Bedford divided into two Streams, leaving the Chanel
dry for three miles: He caused his Palace of Shene, now Richmond, in Surry, to
be demolished, occasioned by the excessive grief he conceived for the loss of
his first Wife, Queen Ann, who dyed there; he likewise, upon the City's
refusing to lend him 1000 l took away their Charter, and obliged them to
ransom it at a far greater Sum.

Thus we behold how Fortune plays with Kings.
There Is nothing stable found in earthly things,
The Greatness that on Power and Honor grows,
Like the wild Ocean, has its Ebbs and Flows.
The Reign and Actions of Henry the IV. King of England, etc.
HEnry of Bullinbrook, so called from the place of his Birth, Son to John of
Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, upon the Resignation of King Richard, was crowned by
Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, making it his business to ingratiate
himself with the People, thereby the better to secure what he had gained, he
sent his Ambassadors likewise abroad to keep up the Correspondency with
foreign Princes, as also to justify his Proceedings, but France and Normandy
approved not of them, but rather condemned what had pasted in dishonor of King
Richard, nor were there diverse in England wanting who labored to restore him;
and amongst these were John Holland Earl of Huntington, Thomas Hollnnd, Earl or
Kent, John M^^acute, Earl of Salisbuy, Thomas Spencer, Earl o^ ^^^ucester, with
the Dukes of Surry, Exeter, and (...) but these Lords were altogether
unsuccessfull (...) Undertaking, although they raised a considerable number of
Persons in Arms, giving out, King Richard was at liberty, and there present,
the better to confirm which they had gotten his Chaplain to personate him; for
the Townsmen of Cyrencester assailed them, took diverse of them, and because
some of the Lords Servants had fired the Town, to contribute to their Masters
Escape, whilst the People were busy in extinguishing the Flames, they in
Revenge cut off the Heads of such Noblemen as they had taken, without Law or
Process; and the Commons of Essex did the like to the Earl of Huntingdon, in
revenge of the Duke of Gloucester's Death, mentioned in the foregoing Reign to
be made away at Cailais. The Lord Spencer falling into the hands of the Rabble
at Bristol, met the same Fate. Others were put to Death at Oxford and some at
London, John Maudlin, the Counterfeit Richard, and one Thurby, were drawn,
hanged and quartered: The Bishop of Carlisle was condemned, but afterward
pardoned; and thus the Attempt was totally frustrated; yet it proved fatal to
Richard, for Henry finding he could not assure himself in the Throne, whilst
the deposed King lived, and he purposely letting fall some words before his
Favorites, as, Who shall rid me of the cause of my troubles? etc. Sir Pierce
of Exton, to curry-favour with him, went to the Castle where King Richard was
lodged, and gaining admittance, under pretense of an Order from the King, he
and seven of his Accomplices fell upon, and murdered that poor Prince with
Battel-Axes; yet before he fell, wresting a Weapon, he killed four of them;
others will have him to dye through Famine and Discontent, which may appear
something likely, when we consider he was exposed at St. Paul's London, for the
space of three days, thereby to assure the People of his Death, and prevent any
Counterfeit that might be set up, and afterward buried at Kings-Langly in
Hartfordshire; ye^ in the fifth year of Henry the V. his Remains were brought
to Westminster, and interred with his Ancestors, where some will have that
beautiful P^^ture of a King Crowned in a Chair of State, to be placed at the
upper end of the Choir in memory ^ him: However this freed not Henry from
dang^^^^ for the Scots entered England, and the Welsh took (...) Arms under the
Leading of Owen Glendour, but were both defeated yet these public Practices
were seconded with a private one, which had prove^ more dangerous had it taken
effect, viz. a Calthrop, being an Engine with four sharp Spears, standing
upward, was placed in his Bed, and had peradventure put an end to his days had
he not espied it before he lay down, but it could not be known who placed it
there.

The Welsh, who rather retired than overcome, took Arms in greater number, and
overthrowing the Lord Edward Mortimer, who was sent to surpress them, took him
Prisoner, and obliged him to marry Glendour's Daughter; nor did People spare to
spread abroad sundry inveterate Libels, for which some were executed, and
amongst them several Gray Friars; and the King going against the Welsh was
repulsed by a mighty Storm, yet succeeded his Lieutenant the Early of
Northumberland, and his Son Piercy Ho^spur, better against the Scots in the
North; for by them the Scots were overthrown in two Battles, and some Persons
of note taken Prisoners.

The King being at this time a Widower, took to Wife the Lady Jane of Navarre,
Widow to John de Mountfort, Duke of Britain, which Marriage was followed by
dreadful Prodigies; and soon after the Lord Piercy Hotspur, when he had done
Wonders against the Scots, and thinking his Services slighted, grew
discontented, and turned his Arms against King Henry, and with him joined
Mortimer Earl of March, Henry Piercy his Father, and Owen Glendour, pretending
a Care to reform Disorders in the Government, though it was afterward
discovered, they intended nothing more than their own Interest, for Mortimer
was to have the South part of ^^gland, Piercy the North, Glendour all beyond
the (...), and Archibald Earl of Douglas, who had be^^^^ been takan Prisoner,
to have his Liberty, and the Town of Berwick, with the Territories belonging to
it; but before they could gather into any great Body, the King was advancing
with a powerful Army toward Shrewsbury, which they had fortified; when
Hotspur no sooner discovered the Royal Standard, but resolving to loose his
Life, or win the Day, drew out Fourteen thousand Men, and desperately engaged
the King, and Prince Henry his Son, yet being inferior in number, though he
fought with a Courage beyond expression, Fortune, that never before failed him,
turned her back, so that he was slain, and the Earls of Worcester, and Douglas,
Sir Richard Vernon Barron of Kinlaton, taken and beheaded 200 Esquires and
Gentlemen of Cheshire, and a great number of common Soldiers lost their Lives,
not without considerable Loss to the King, and the ending his Life; for Hotspur
broke furiously through the Squadron where the Standard was, and there had
killed, or taken him Prisoner, had he been seconded as he expected; yet this so
incensed the King, that he caused his Body, whom his own Party had carried off
and buried, to be taken out of the Grave, the Head cut off, and the Quarters to
be dispersed in diverse Places: As for the Earl of Northumberland, he was taken,
after this Defeat, as he was raising Forces in the North, yet had his Life
pardoned, but was abridged in his Estate; and the better to quiet the like
Disturbances, the King called a Parliament, but could get no considerable
Supply, neither in that nor the other two Parliaments that succeeded it.

About this time William de Willford being abroad with a Squadron of Men of
War, brought in 40 Prizes laden with Iron, Oil, and Rochel Wine, which was sold
to supply the King's Coffers; and a Troup of Western Men brought 3 foreign
Lords, and 20 Knights, of note, Prisoners from Dartmouth, having slain the Lord
Castile, and a great many of his Followers, who cruzing on the Coast, attempted
to burn and plunder that place, as before they had served Plymouth; for which
Service the King bestowed liberal Rewards amongst them, and in Parliament
caused the Earl of Northumberland to be restored to his entire Possession; yet
these things quieted not the minds of the Nobility, for soon after Thomas
Mowbray, Earl-Marshal of England, drew Richard Scroop, Archbishop of York,
into a Conspiracy, who tampering with the Earl of Westmoreland, and he
promising them fair, instead of siding with them, delivered them up to the
King, and they were thereupon beheaded; but the Pope being highly incensed at
the Archbishop's Death excommunicated all those that had a hand in it.

This was seconded by another of the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord
Bardolf, but their Forces being weak they were encountered by the Sheriff of
Yorkshire, where the Earl in a sharp conflict was slain in the Field, and the
Lord mortally wounded; and, as a mark of Ignominy, the Earl's Head was carried
on a Pole through London, and fixed on the Bridge-gate, and because the Scots
had encouraged this Undertaking, and to surpress the Rumor that went abroad of
King Richard's being alive, the King marched an Army of 37000 Men to their
Borders, battered Berwick with a piece of Cannon, the first that was used in
England, and took it; as likewise siezed on all the Castles belonging to the
Earl of Northumberland; then marched into Wales, but was ^isappointed in that
Expedition by the sudden In^undations and Torrents of Water, that flowed from
the Hills, whereby fifty of his Wagons with Treasure and Provisions were
destroyed, and a great part of his Food, which obliged him to re^ire.

The King to repair his Loss, called another Par^iament, which, through his
Importunity, was constrained to grant him a Subsidy; and in the year 1407 a
Plague raged throughout England, and destroyed in London 30000 Persons. A great
Frost followed it, that lasted 15 Weeks; yet the Duke of Burgundy craving the
King's Aid against the Duke of Orleance, had his Request granted: And amongst
other memorable Actions of the English, Sir John Blunt raised a Siege, beat
Four thousand Frenchmen, with Three hundred English, taking about Twelve
Noblemen, and One hundred and Twenty Gentlemen Prisoners: And now Wickliff's
Doctrine beginning to spread the Archbishop Arundel so incensed the King that
William Sawtree, William Swinderby, and William Thorp, all eminent Divines,
were put to Death for their profession of a good Faith: but the King did not
long survive that Cruelty, for Anno 1413. falling sick, and into an Appoplexy,
whilst his Crown was placed on his Pillow, Prince Henry his Son came and took
it thence, which the King perceiving, upon his reviving sent for him, and
demanded the reason of his hastiness, who boldly replied, That he seeming dead
in all Men's esteem, he took it as his Right: Whereupon the King, with some
trouble of mind, looking on him, said, Ah Son! with what Right it was got God
only knows, who forgive me the Sin: To which the Prince fiercely replied,
However it was got I mean to keep it when it shall be mine, and defend it with
my Sword, as you by your Sword have obtained it: and soon after the King dyed,
and was buried at Canterbury.

This Henry the IV was King of England, and France, Lord of Ireland, etc.
eldest Son to John Duke of Lancaster, by Blanch his Wife: He began his Reign
the 29th. of Sptember, Anno 1399, and Reigned 13 Years, 3 Months and 16 Days,
and was the 33d. sole Monarch of England: by his first Wife Mary he had Issue
Prince Henry, Thomas Duke of Clarence, John Duke of Bedford, Humphrey Duke of
Gloucester, Blanch and Philippa; by his second-Wife no Issue that survived him.

Thus ill-got Crowns create a troubled Reign,
However so easy got, hard to maintain;
Such Crowns have Thorns that still the Wearer pain.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of Henry the V. King of England, etc.
HEnry of Monmouth, so called from the place of his Birth, in his youthful
years lead away by wild and debauched Courtiers, committed many extravagancies,
not being exempted from Robbing on the Highways, putting his Father in fear of
some Design he had upon his Person, and attempting to rescue a Prisoner from
the Face of Justice in the Court of King's Bench; but when he came to the Crown
he was wonderfully changed, commanding his former lewd Companions to alter
their manners, or not dare to approach his Court, nor within Ten miles of his
Person; choosing grave and worthy Counselors, and much honoring the Clergy;
and the more to ingratiate with the People, every day after Dinner he was wont,
for the space of an hour, to receive Petitions, in order to redress Grievances,
which he would do with wonderful Equity, much lamenting the untimely Death of
King Richard, and so near it touched him that he sent to Rome to be absolved
from a Fact he had no hand in.

Whilst things went on prosperously, a Parliament was called, wherein it was
moved that the superfluous Lands and Temporalties belonging to Religious Houses
were sufficient of the Maintenance of 15 Earls, 1500 Knights, 6200 Esquires,
and 100 Almshouses, and over and above 20007 l per Annum, to the King's
Coffers; and this, to curb the Pride of the Clergy was pressed very home, and
had gone on had not the Archbishop of Cante^bury, to turn his Thoughts from
it, persuaded him to seek his Right in France, of which Kingdom he told him he
was the true Heir, enforcing it with strong Reasons; insomuch that the young
King being naturally of a fierce and warlike Spirit soon hearkened to what he
had suggested, and sent in the first place a Summons to demand the Duchy of
Normandy, Aquitain, Guyne, and Anjou; upon which the Dauphin, who ruled all at
Court, sent him in derision a Tun of Tennis Balls, as supposing them fittest
for a Prince that had formerly given himself over to Sports and Recreation; but
at this time he was mistaken in his mark; for the King highly incensed at the
affront, sent back word, that he would shortly send him London Balls that
should shake Paris Walls, and proceeded to make large preparations for passing
the Seas; which incited the French to use their old Artifice of stirring up the
Scots; but they upon their attempting to enter England were overthrown by Sir
Robert Humfreville: This made the French King, who was but weak in mind,
consult his Peers, who concluded it would be most expedient for France to come
to Terms with the English before the Matter was carried too far, and
accordingly Ambassadors were sent, who at Winchester made offers of some
Territories, with a sum of Money to defray the charges of the preparation;
but more especially thinking by that means to please the King, they made
proposals of Marriage between him and and the beauteous Princess, Katharine of
France; but all this came to nothing; for the King peremptorily demanded what
had ever formerly belonged to his Progenitors, and that being refused,
Antilop, his Pursuvant at Arms, was sent to King Charles with Letters of
Defiance, and he passed with such Forces as he had raised in order to his
Embarking at Southampton, commanding the Nobles, and all that held Fee of the
Crown, to follow him, and the French perceiving fair means would not do,
proceeded to Treachery, by corrupting the Lords Gray, Scroop, and Cambridge
too, with promises of vast sums of Gold, to murder him before he took the
Seas; but this was discovered by a paper found in the bosom of the latter, and
the matter being plain, the two first were executed, but the last, at the
Instance of the Duke of York, whose Son he was, had his Pardon procured.

The King being by this time in a forwardness, set sail on the 7th of August
1414. with 500 Ships, and 30000 Soldiers, besides Engineers, Artificers, and
Laborers, and on the 15th cast Anchor at the mouth of the River Seyn, three
miles from Hareflew, and no sooner he came on shore, but falling on his Knees,
he implored God's Blessing, and Assistence, in prospering his Enterprise for
the gaining his Right, and his Army being landed, he caused Proclamation to be
made, that no person whatsoever, on pain of Death, should presume to injure
Churches, Churchmen, Women or Children; and encouraging his Soldiers, he soon
made himself Master of the Town of Harflew, and having at St. Martin's Church
given God Thanks for the first success of his Arms, he detached two thousand
Horse, and thirteen thousand Foot, and marched with them through the Countries
of Caux and Eu in his way to Callis, when to hinder him the flying parties of
French not only skirmished as they saw advantage, but broke down Bridges,
plashed Trees, carried away or destroyed all manner of Provision and Forage, so
that he was obliged to march along the Banks of the River Some, as far as
Bathencourt, before he could gain the Pass, and on the 24th of October he came
to Azin, or Agincourt, the numerous Army of the French attending, and watching
all advantage.

The King being thus far advanced through a ruined and destroyed Country,
whereby his Soldiers for want of necessaries were become extremely feeble, he
found he could not proceed without giving Battle, and therefore resolved to
pitch his Banner Royal, but finding the Army extremely weakened, and himself
surrounded in a Toil, at the instance of the Nobles he proposed Overtures to
the French, proposing the delivery of Harflew, and such other places as he had
taken since his arrival in France, in consideration that himself, and all with
him, might pass quietly to Calais, and there ship for England. To this the
Marshall, and Constable, who had the chief Command in the French Army, were
willing to hearken, as knowing the danger of compelling a desperate Enemy to
fight in the extremity of Despair; but the other Commanders, young Princes, and
Nobles, more fiery than either valiant or wise, would not hearken to any
accord, and so confidently they promised themselves the Victory, that they had
before hand divided the spoil, causing the Bells to be rung, and Thanks to be
given in the neighboring Churches that God had delivered the Enemy into such a
(...) of advantage, that he could not escape: (...) when Man proposes, God
disposes, for too much confidence ruined them, not considering that when it
seems good the Almighty by weak things can destroy the powerful; nay, so
confident were they, that they sent for King Charles, and the Dauphin, that
they might have the Honor of the Victory, and spent the night before the
Battle in a careless manner of feasting and revelling, whilst the English spent
it in moderate refreshment and prayer.

King Henry seeing the Storm that he was bound to oppose, commanded two hundred
Archers to lodge in a Meadow, secured against the French Horse, with strong
bushes, and a large Di^ch; placing likewise Archers in the Front of the Battle;
and to secure them they had long stakes, shod with Iron, to stick slantwise
against the breaking in of the Horse, which might be removed as accasion
required, ranging the Host into three Battalions, flanking the whole with
Archers; and that he might not be hid on so eminent a day, he wore on his
Helmet a small Crown of Gold, riding from Rank to Rank, and giving necassary
Orders in all places, declaring that England should never be charged with his
Ransom, but that he resolved either to conquer or dye; and then commanding his
Standard to advance; Since (says he) our injurious Enemies do attempt to shut
up our way, let us set upon them in the Name of the most glorious Trinity, and
in the best hour in the whole year: whereupon Sir Thomas Epingham, with a
Warder in his hand, advanced against the French, who kept their ground,
covering the plains for many miles, and throwing it up in the Air, gave the
signal to join Battle, whereupon a joyful shout ensued, and the Archers from
the Meadow, as the French advanced, let fly their Arrows, galling and wounding
Horse and Man, whilst the Main Body joined; and then the English army fell on
like Men driven to their last necessities, yet not without expressing a
singular Conduct and Courage, having the advantage of the French in charging,
by reason of the unweildiness of their Army; insomuch that the English Arrows
flying like Thunderbolts upon the thronging Horse, no ways able to avoid them,
and those that advanced furiously being goared with the stakes, as the Archers
retired to give way to the Men of Arms, making a Barracade against those that
pressed behind, nothing but rout and confusion ensued, the French at such a
disadvantage not being capable of using their Arms, which the Duke of Brabant
perceiving, advanced furiously to break the Order of the English, and encourage
his side, but met his Fate in that Attempt; however the Duke of Alanzon broke
in upon the King's Standard, and there had slain the Duke of Gloucester, had
not the King prevented it by timely interposing, and between them began a sharp
dispute, wherein the Duke of Alanzon all most beat the King's Crown flat to his
Helmet, but being struck from his Horse by Henry, and crying out, he was
Alanzon, notwithstanding his begging quarter, and the King's endeavor to save
him, the enraged Soldiers, for the Danger he had put their Sovereign into,
dispatched him on the spot; so that the Rear-guard of the French Army being
worsted, and unable to sustain the Fury of the English, fled without fighting,
leaving the Victory, with infinite spoil, and a great number of Prisoners, to a
handful of Men, in a manner naked, and almost half starved which may convince
the World, that Victory depends not upon the Arm of Flesh, but scarcely was the
Field cleared of the French, before another Army bigger than that of the
English, which was coming to their Aid, and knowing nothing of the Defeat,
appeared upon the Hills, and the King fearing the great number of Prisoners
might turn against him, during the heat of the Fight caused them all, as a
Maxim of self-^^eservation, except those of the greatest Quality, to be killed,
and then sent a Herald to summon them to fight, or depart immediately, for if
they stayed whilst he charged them, they must expect no Quarter; whereupon the
King of Sicily, who commanded in chief, not thinking it convenient with those
Forces to dispute what so great an Army had lost, drew off; so that King Henry
finding himself an entire Conqueror, fell on his Knees and commanding all,
both Officers and Soldiers, to do the like, with up lifted hands and said, Not
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be given the Glory. And having
learned the name of the place, he said, Let this be called the Battle of
Agincourt all posterity.

In this Battle were slain of the French one thousand Princes, Noblemen,
Knights, and Esquires, and ten thousand common Soldiers. The Prisoners of note
were Charles Duke of Orleance, John Duke of Burbon, the Earl of Richmond, Lowis
de Burbon, the Count de Vendosme, the Earl of Eu, Edward de Roven, and diverse
others. The English loft of Note were the Duke of York, and Earl of Suffolk,
with two Knights, and David Gam Esquire; the common Soldiers that fell were
very inconsiderable, some not allowing above one hundred twenty eight, but that
seems somewhat partial.

The next day after this Battle Henry marched with the spoil, and his
Prisoners, off the Field toward Callais, his Soldiers now having Clothes, and
plenty of all Necessaries; and having fortified the Towns he had taken, and
given necessary Orders, he came for England, and was received in London with
Triumph, and there presented with one thousand pounds, and two Gold Basins, and
calling a Parliament, he had a Subsidy of a Tenth granted for the carrying on
his Wars in France, which not sufficing, he pawned his Crown to Cardinal
Beaufort, his Uncle, and his Jewels to the Lord Mayor of London for ten
thousand Marks; then he passed the Sea with an Army of 25527. every fourth
being an Horseman, besides a thousand Carpenters and Laborers, and the first
of August 1417. arrived in Normandy, bringing such a terror upon the Country,
that most of the Inhabitants fled into Bretaigne, and having dubbed thirty
eight Knights, he laid Siege to Conquest, and took it the 16th of August, with
the Castles of Aubeliers and Lovers; he likewise stormed the City of Caen, and
gave the Pillage to his Soldiers.

During K. Henry's Success in France, the Scots invaded England, bringing with
them a Person representing Richard the Second; but hearing as they lay at the
Siege of Roxborough and Berwick, that the English Army was marching toward
them, they raised the Sieges, and fled. This did not hinder the King's
proceeding in France; for there he took many Cities, and had the strong Castle
of Fallors delivered him, then divided his Army under the Commands of the Dukes
of Clarence, Gloucester, and Earl of Warwick; so that taking diverse places at
once, he set down before Roan, and took it after a year's Siege, obliging the
Burgesses for their Ransom, and being permitted quietly to live there, pay him
356000 Crowns, and swear Fealty to him and his Successors. And now the French
finding themselves unable to make head against the English, and Accommodation
was sought, and to bring it the easier to pass, an Interview was had between
King Henry and King Charles at the Town of Melun, where the Queen and the
Princess Katharine of France was present, and there King Henry first fixed his
Eyes and Affection on that beauteous Maid, and finding the French Noblemen
averse to his Demands, he told the Duke of Burgundy, that he would either have
the Princess and what he had farther required, or he would drive him and the
rest of the Nobles out of France: To which the Duke replied, That he might say
his pleasure, but before he should drive them out of France, he should be weary
of the Enterprise.

This Treaty proving ineffectual, the King took the Town of Ponthois, and gave
large spoil to his Soldiers, which obliged the French King to remove his Court
from Paris to Troyis in Champaigne; and now to facilitate the English
Conquests, the Dauphin having put a sensible Affront upon the Queen, his
Mother, she conceived a mortal hatred, and labored to ruin him, confederating
with the Duke of Burgundy, and procuring her self, by reason of the King's
Imbecility, to be made Regent of France; and soon after the Dauphin causing
John Duke of Burgundy to be slain in his presence, as he came to do him
Homage, for contriving, as he said, the death of Lewis Duke of Orleance, that
he might the better sway the Kingdom under an infirm King. Philip, the young
Duke of Burgundy, to revenge his Father's death, closed with King Henry, and
proceeded to persuade Charles, the French King, to disinherit the Dauphin, and
give the Lady Katharine in Marriage to the King o^ England; and the Queen
seconding this Project, it was effected, and a Peace concluded between the two
Crowns upon diverse Articles, the chief being, That Charles and Isabel should
retain the name of King and Queen, and hold all their Dignities, Rents and
Possessions, during their natural Lives. That after their deaths the Crown and
Realm of France should, with all its Rights and Appurtenances, remain unto the
King of England and his Heirs for ever; and that by reason of the Infirmity of
King Charles, therefore during his Life, the Affairs of the Realm of France,
together with the Government thereof, should remain in the King Henry, so that
thenceforth he should govern the Realm, and admit to his Council and
Assistence, with the Council of France, such of the English Nobility as he
should see convenient, with other Articles, to the number of thirty, very
advantageous to the English, were all sworn to at Troyis, May, the 30th, 1420.
and proclaimed in London the June following, and Homage sworn to King Henry,
who was proclaimed Regent of France; and on the 3d of June the Marriage was
celebrated in the presence of diverse of the chief Nobility of England and
France at Troyis, with great Pomp and Splendor, and they rode in Triumph to
take Possession of the Palace in Paris, and a Parliament of the three Estates
were assembled in that City, who confirmed what had been done by the Kings; and
it was there likewise ratified by the General Estates of the Realm, and Sworn
to particularly on the Holy Evangelist by the French Noblemen and Rulers,
Spiritual and Temporal, who moreover sealed the Instruments which were sent
over to be kept in the King's Exchequer at Westminster; which done, the King
left the Duke of Clarence his Lieutenant in France, and came for England with
his Queen, where he was received with Joy and Triumph, causing her to be
crowned at Westminster, and then proceeded to call a Parliament for farther
Supplies, to maintain his War against the Dauphin, who still stood out to
recover the Kingdom; but the Commons exhiting a Petition of Poverty, he again
pawned his Crown to Cardinal Beaufort for 20000 pounds, and passed into France
with 4000 Horse, and 24000 Foot, and his presence there was necessary; for the
Dauphin, strengthened by Forces for Scotland, under the Leading of the Earl of
Buchanan, and Archibald Douglas, defeated and killed the Duke of Clarence, took
the Earls of Huntindon, Somerset, and others, Prisoners; and heightened with
that Success, he laid Siege to Alenzon, and cut off the Provisions of Paris,
but the King's Approach made him to retire to Bury.

King Henry soon recovered what the Dauphin had taken, and drove him to great
distress; but when this great King had triumphed over that mighty Kingdom with
unconquerable Fortune and Success, and annexed it fully to the Crown of
England, death laid his Arrest upon him, for falling sick of a burning Fever
and Flux, he dyed on the 30th of August, 1422. at Bloice de Vincennois, and his
Body brought over, was buried with pomp at Westminster, hard by the Tomb of
Edward the Confessor, appointing by his last Will and Testament his younger
Brother, Humphry Duke of Gloucester, Protector of England, his Brother John,
Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, and Thomas Beaufort Guardian of his Son
Henry, born a little before at Windsor, contrary to the King's express command,
who when he heard the Queen had lain in at that place, prophetically spoke,
viz. Good God! I Henry of Monmouth shall have but a short Reign, and win much;
but Henry of Windsor shall reign long, and lose all; yet God's Will be done.

This Henry was King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, eldest Son of
Henry the Fourth by Mary his Queen: He began his Reign on the 20th of March,
1412. and reigned 9 Years, 5 Months, and 10 days, and was the 34th sole Monarch
of England.

Thus Beauty, Power and Honor yield to death,
Great Conquerours, like Slaves, resign their breath
Their Laurels in the Dust with them must lie.
But Fame's immortal and can never dye.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of HENRY the Sixth, King of England, France, etc.
HEnry of Windsor, so called from the place of his Birth, upon the death of his
Father, was crowned when he exceeded not eight Months of age, the Queen holding
him in her lap whilst the Solemnity was performed, to whom his Nurtriture and
Education was committed, but his Minority much disadvantaged the English
Interest in France; for old King Charles dying, Charles his Son greatly
strengthened his party, and although he was called by the English in derision
only King of Burry, as having little more left him, yet now he encroached upon
the English, wresting from them sundry places by the help of Aids from Scotland
and Italy, which made the English Regent think it time to give him Battle, and
accordingly the Armies joined near Vernoli, where the French were overthrown,
the Regent doing wonders in his own person, and there were slain the Constable
and Lieutenant of France, the Earls of Wigton and Vantadour, with about five
thousand others, and the Duke of Alanzon taken Prisoner, upon which Victory the
English besieged Monts in Main, and having with his Cannon made a great breach
in the Wall, it was surrendered, and a little while after, the Earl of
Salisbury besieged Orleance, and brought it to such distress, that the Garrison
was willing to surrender to the Duke of Burgundy, but the Earl refused it,
which so offended the Duke, that he declined the English Interest, which proved
very prejudicial.

The French being in a drooping Condition, and using strong Cordials to support
their Spirits, one Joan, a Shepherdess of Lorrain, came to the Dauphin, and
offered him her Service, saying, She was sent by God, to deliver France out of
the hands of the English; and not exceeding eighteen years of age, her offer at
first was looked upon as rediculous, but she persisting in what she had
declared; the Dauphin caused her to be armed at all points, and desiring the
Sword that hung in St. Catharines Church, she got into Orleance, then besieged
by the English, and from thence sent a Letter, commanding them to raise the
Siege, and deliver up the Towns they possessed, for she was resolved to drive
them out of France; but they looked upon it, only as proceeding from Folly or a
raving fit, yet in the several Sallies she made it proved otherwise, for by the
violent Sallies she made the Siege, was raised with loss to the English, she
commonly fighting in the head of the French, and animating them to go on
courageously, for being in one of the Sallies, shot through the Arm with an
Arrow, and persuaded to retire; she cried out, This is a favor, let us go on,
they cannot escape the hands of God, and there of note were slain the Earl of
Salisbury, the Lords Moline and Poynings, Sir Thomas Gagrave, and the French
say about eight thousand common Soldiers, yet our Historians allow but six
hundred; and the French following their success wrested several Towns, and
surprising a party of English, overthrew them taking Prisoners the Lords
Talbot, Scales, Hungerford, and Sir Thomas Rampston, whereupon several Towns
revolted, and the Dauphin took Auxier and Rhiemes, in the latter of which,
according to the direction of Joan, called by the French, the Maid of God,
Charles the Dauphin caused himself to be Crowned King of France.

Joan of Arks, having been hitherto very sucsessfull, and done, the Dauphin
singular service coming to the relief of Campaign, which was greatly distressed
by the English and Burgundians, in a desperate charge advancing too far and
being separated from those that should have succored her, she was made
Prisoner by a Burgundian Knight, and by him sold to to the English, who sent
her to Roan, and being charged with Witchcraft, Bloud-shead, and the unnatural
use of Man's Apparel contrary to her Sex, she was burnt, which was too
barbarous a usage, and had not been executed, but to put the French out of the
great hopes, they conceived in the Promise she had made to drive the French out
of the Kingdom and in some kind, it had its effects; but another expedient was
resolved on, which was to send over for young King Henry, and he accordingly
was crowned in Paris with great Pomp, by the Cardinal of Winchester, on the
7th. of December, 1431. The French Nobility doing him homage, and the King's
Pattents and Grants, touching the French Affairs, passed under the Seal and
Style of Henry King of the Frenchmen, and of England, and the Lords Talbot and
Arundel were successfully victorious in the Provinces of Main, Anjou, and other
places, but John Duke of Bedford Regent of that Kingdom dying at Paris, Anno.
1435. with his death, the English Affairs sunk; for although Richard Duke of
York, was sent over Regent, yet before his arrival, Paris was lost by the
treachery and revolt of the Citizens and the Duke of Burgundy falling off,
besieged or blocked up Callais; upon notice of which the Duke of Gloucester,
passed with a great Army, but the Burgundians were retired before his arrival,
which made him proceed to waste the Burgundian Territories, and then returned
to England, whilst the Duke of Somerset, the Lords Talbot and Willoughby, made
good the English Interest against the French; and now it was thought expedient
that King Henry should Marry, and by the contrivance of de la Pool, Duke of
Suffolk, he took to Wife, Margaret, Daughter to Renate, Duke of Anjou and
Lorain Titular King of Sicily and Jerusalem, etc. with whom he had little or no
Dowry, and Suffolk's too much favor and interest with the Queen, made the
Nobles begin to murmur and indeed, this Match proved in the end,
disadvantageous to the English; for the Queen being a Woman of a high Spirit,
and finding her power over a good natured and easy King, she delayed not to
use it, placing and displacing at her pleasure the greatest Counselors and
Ministers of State, so the Interest in France daily lessoned, and the Dauphin^
recovered the greatest part of the Kingdom, which moved Duke Humphry to
reproach the Queen and her Council with bold truth, whereby they became so
exasperated, that from that time they laid Snares to entrap him; but finding
no plausible opportunity, they resolved to take a violent occasion, and at a
Parliament holden at St. Edmunds-bury, Anno. 1447. he was arrested by John Lord
Beaumont, Lord High Constable of England, and others, charged with
High Treason, and put under a Guard of the King's Household, but had not been
long in his Confinement before he was found dead, not without strong
presumption of violence used toward him yet to shadow it with the people, who
entirely loved him, as a virtuous, wise, and learned Patriot of his Country,
his body was exposed, and it was given out that he died of an Imposthume and
Palsy.

This Duke, who had been the Prop of the English Affairs, removed, his Servants
(the better to color the Matter,) were brought to Trial, and five of them
convicted of High Treason, upon which Sentence they were drawn to Tyburn, and
being hanged about two Minutes, were cut down alive, stripped naked, and marked
out with a Knife to be quartered and then their Charters of Pardon were
produced by the Marquess of Suffolk; and now the whole frame of Government
seemed to repose it self in the Queens Authority, and such Favorites as by her
insinuation with the King, she raised to the highest Dignities. This gave scope
to the Duke of York's Ambition, who concluding there was an open passage to the
Crown, delayed not the opportunity, but consulted his Friends, declaring his
Title, as descended from Lionel, and Elder Brother to John of Gaunt, Duke of
Lancaster, great Grandfather to King Henry the sixth, aggravating the
miscarriages in Government, and keeping up popular divisions, and indeed the
King's mildness, a Council out of Favor with the people, ^osses and dishonours
abroad, a disorder and confusion of things at home, mainly contributed to his
design; and about this time a Rebellion happening in Ireland, the Duke of York
was looked upon as the fittest Man to go over, for the appeasing it, and had
the fortune to bring it to a happy issue, when in the mean while the Duke of
Suffolk, the Queens great favorite was charged in a Parliament at Westminster,
with evil Demeanor, Misprision and Treason, and committed Prisoner to the
Tower; but the Queen soon after procured his release; and now the Yorkists
Faction considerably strengthened, appeared barefaced, and being vigorously
withstood by Adam Molins, Bishop of Chichester, Keeper of the Privy Seal, to
remove him out of the way, a rabble of Seamen were stired up to fall upon him at
Portsmouth, by whose rude hands the good Bishop was slain, and in a Parliament
holden at Leicester, they procured the Banishment of the Duke of Suffolk for
five years, and as he was attempting to pass the Seas, he was taken in Dover
Road, by such as the Duke of York had laid in wait for him, and for want of a
Block, had his Head cut off on the side of a Cockboat, which was looked upon as
a Judgment, for his being a contriver of the death of Humphry, Duke of
Gloucester, the King's Uncle.

Suffolk thus removed out of the way, the Duke of York concluded he wanted but
one step into the Throne; and although he was yet in Ireland, he so effectually
wrought by his Friends in England, that the Kentish Men took up Arms under the
leading of Jack Cade, and were joined by those of Essex, demanding that the
Duke might be called home, and that he with some others, that Cade named, might
bechief in Council. That those guilty of the death of Duke Humphry might
receive due punishment: That the Grievances of the people might be redressed;
and because these requests were not speedily answered, they committed many
violent outrages in and about London, as plundering the houses of the
Citizens, beheading the Lord Say, Treasurer of England, and Mr. Comer High
Sheriff of Kent, for attempting to persuade them to return to their Obedience:
However their fury being spent, and the King's Proclamation for a Pardon coming
out to indemnifie them, they returned to their respective Habitations; but Cade
finding his Power and Credit with the Multitude, upon some new disgust
attempting again to raise the Rabble he was encountered by the Gentry of Kent,
and slain by one Edan.

Upon the stirs and uproars in England, the Duke of York without any Order,
hasted from Ireland and took up Arms, pretendedly for the Reformation of the
State, which made King Henry fortify himself, and prepare to oppose their
force ^ but the Duke of York so far prevailed with the easy King, that a
Reconciliation was made, and the Kuke of Somerset, who mainly opposed the
Yorkists Interest, was confined a Prisoner to his house, which done; the Duke
of York dissolved his Army and came to London, making great complaints to the
King against Somerset, of which that Duke had no sooner notice, but he came
before the King, and accused his Accuser, Face to Face, charging him with
High Treason, as having conspired to depose the King, and take the Sovereignty
on himself; whereupon the Duke of York was confined, till such time as he swore
in St. Paul's Church, before a great Concourse of Nobility, to continue a true,
faithful, and obedient Subject to King Henry. And about this time, by the
success of John Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury, the Affairs of France began to
appear in a better posture, for by the prevailing Arms of this valiant man,
Bordeaux, the chief City in Normandy was taken, with many other Places of Note;
but upon his attempting to relieve Castilion, charging the Enemy upon unequal
Terms, he was slain in the Field, together with his Son, the Viscount Lisle,
and with him dyed all the English hope of ever recovering what was lost in
France; for the Duke of York not regarding his Oath, An. 1445. took up Arms,
and broke into the King's Palace, and the King to oppose him drew out
considerable Forces, so that a great Battle was fought at St. Albans, where the
King was wounded with an Arrow, and taken Prisoner, and the Duke of Somerset,
the Earls of Northumberland and Stafford, together with the Lord Clifford, and
diverse other Knights and Gentlemen of the Royal Party slain.

Henry being brought to London, a Parliament was called, in which the Memories
and Honors of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester were restored; and those that had
taken up Arms under the Duke of York, indempnified of the Treason, and that
Duke created Protector of England. The Earl of Salisbury made Chancellor, and
the Earl of Warwick, his Son, Captain of Calais: And thus having gotten the
Power into their hands, they worked out the Counselors and Favorites of the
King, placing such in their stead as would stickle for their Interest. The
Divisions gave the French the boldness to make discents into several places: In
Kent and Devonshire they burnt some Towns, and committed many Outrages, which
yet abated not the heat and heartburning of the English one to another; for
although (...) Lords met, and concluded a seeming Agreement^ yet it lasted not
long, before both side ^^^^med, and a mortal Battle was fought on (...) where
the King's Party was worsted: And soon after another Battle was fought at
Ludlow, where the Duke and his Adherents received a great overthrow, and the
Town of Ludlow laid in Ruins for adhering to the Yorkists; and hereupon a
Parliament was called, wherein the Duke of York, the Earls of March, Salisbury,
and Rutland, and others, were attainted, of High Treason, and had their Estates
confiscated: But on the 9th of July 1460. the Scale turned, for in a fatal
Battle at Northampton the King was overthrown by means of the revolt of the
Lord Gray of Ruthen; and in this Battle on the King's part there were slain the
Duke of Buckingham, the Earl of Shrewsbury, Viscount Beaumont, the Lord
Egrinham, Sir William Lucy, and others, and the King himself was made Prisoner,
and carried to London, where in a Parliament, begun the 8th of October, the
Duke of York laid Claim to the Crown, and set forth his Pedigree, and urged it
so far, that the Parliament came to a conclusion, That Henry should enjoy the
Crown during his natural Life, but then it should fall to the Duke of York, and
his heirs, and the heirs of Henry to be utterly excluded; and accordingly the
Duke was proclaimed Heir apparent to the Crown: But Queen Margaret, who was in
the North raising Forces, resolved not to stand to what her Husband had been
forced to consent to, but to maintain the right of her Son Prince Edward; but
having gathered a considerable Army, she marched toward London; against her
the Duke drew out, and near Wakefield a bloody and doubtful Battle was faught,
in which the Duke of York was slain, his Forces overthrown, his Son, the Earl
of Rutland, killed begging his Life on his Knees, and the Earl of Salisbury
taken Prisoner, and beheaded; the Duke's head was cut off, and a Paper Crown
set upon it, by way of derision and thus had ended the fatal Quarrel between
the Houses of York and Lancaster, had not Edward Earl of March, eldest Son to
the Duke of York, advanced with a great Army, gathered in the Marches of Wales,
and near Mortimer's Cross in Ludlow fought with the Queens Army, when at the
joining of the Battle three Suns appeared in the Firmament, which immediately
united into one. In this Battle the Queens Forces were overthrown with great
Slaughter, and Owen Tudor, Father in law to King Henry VII. being taken
Prisoner, was, together with Sir John Scudemore, and his two Sons, beheaded;
but An. 1460. the Queen overthrew the Earl of March in a great Battle, at St.
Albans, rescuing King Henry out of his hands, who was brought thither to
countenance the Soldiers; but the Londoners sided with him, and upon the Queens
drawing off to the North, proclaimed him King of England, etc. And here
Historians put an end to King Henry's Reign, though he lived much longer, as
will appear in the succeeding Reign; his Wife was Margaret, Daughter to
Reynate, King of Jerusalem, etc. by her he had Issue Edward.

This Henry was King of England, and France, and Lord of Ireland, the only
Child of Henry the Fifth by Katharine his Queen; he began his Reign on the 30th
of August, 1422. and reigned thirty eight Years, 6 Months, and 3 Days, being
the thirty fifth sole Monarch of England, and was stabbed to the heart in the
Tower by Richard Duke of Gloucester, Brother to Edward the Fourth, on the 20th
of May, 1471. in the 46th Year of his Age, buried first in the Abbey of
Chartsey, in Surry, afterward removed to Windsor by Henry the Seventh, then
removed again none knows where. In his time many strange Accidents happened,
portending the Woes and Miscries that befell the Kingdom.

Thus the good pious King, bereft of Crowns,
Bore patiently the Wreck of Fortune's frowns;
Yet murtherous minds were not with this content,
But in a stream of Blood to Heaven he is sent.
The Reign and Actions of Edward the Fourth, King of England, etc.
EDward the eldest Son to Richard, Duke of York, in the beginning of his Reign,
found great opposition from the Lancastrians, who pitying the Misfortune of
pious King Henry, raised Forces in many parts; he was crowned at Westminster;
but the Citizens, who had been the greatest Sticklers for him, not finding him
answer their expectations, in performing the Promises he had made them, began
to decline his Interest, however he marched against the Forces raised in the
North, giving the Lord Fitz-walter battle at Ferrybridg, near Pontefract, but
not being able to maintain it, he was there, with most of his men, cut in
pieces by Henry's Forces, when both Armies facing on the Plain between Towton,
and Saxton, on the 28th of March they joined Battle, that of Edwards consisting
of 48660 men, and Henry's of 60000, but by the Lancastrians mistaking Stars for
Suns, being the Cognizance of each Party, and doubting some Treason in the
case, many of them fled; so that those who remained lost the field; and in this
Battle were slain the Earl of Northumberland, the Lords Clifford, Neuel, Wells,
Scales, Beaumont, Dacres, Gray, Willoughby, Fitzhug, and other Persons, of
Quality, about 357, and in all 35091, being the most bloody and obstinate
Battle that had been fought; upon this Overthrow Henry, with his Queen and Son,
fled into Scotland, and were honorably received by King James, whose Sister
Prince Edward not long after married. From Scotland the Queen sailed to France,
to seek aids in that Court, and in mean while King Edward returning to London,
was a second time proclaimed, and calling a Parliament, Henry, together with
his Queen, and Prince Edward his Son, were disinherited, and about forty three
Nobles disinherited and attainted.

The Queen, a Woman of a Martial Spirit, by her Interest in France had by this
time gotten a considerable number of Men; but sailing for Scotland, and
afterward making for England, her Fleet was scattered by a Tempest; so that
she and her Husband were left solely to the Aid of the Scots, and with what
Forces they could gather, marched as far as the Bishopric of Durham; but the
Forces of the Scots were defeated at Hegely Moor, where Sir Ralph Percie dying,
said in allusion of his Oath to King Henry. I have saved the Bird in my Breast.
And another defeat happening at Hexam Feries, Fortune seemed utterly averse;
and that poor Prince coming out of Scotland into England in disguise, was
betrayed, and apprehended as he sat at Dinner in Wadington-Hall, and in an
ignominious manner brought to London, with his Legs bound under the Horses
Belly, and secured as a Prisoner in the Tower.

King Edward by the Imprisonment of Henry, conceiving himself more secure, sent
the Earl of Warwick to woo for him in the Court of Savoy; but whilst he
earnestly solicited, and had brought the matter to perfection, by obtaining
the good Will of the Estates; News came that King Edward had married the Lady
Elizabeth Gray, Widow to Sir John Gray, slain in the Battle at St. Albans,
fighting on the part of King Henry, with whom he had fallen in Love, upon her
becoming an humble Suitor to him for her Jointure; and because he could not
compass his ends without Marriage; that virtuous Lady disdaining to be the
Harlot, even of a puissant King, he resolved against the Minds of his Friends
to obtain his desires, by making her his Wife. This so sensibly touched the
Earl of Warwick, in reflecting upon his Honor, in serving a Master of so
little Constancy, that although he had been mainly Instrumental, in helping him
to the Kingdom he changed his love into mortal hatred, and working upon George
Duke of Clarence to favor his design and by secret Practices, they stirred up
a Commotion in the North, where one Robert Huldren headed 15000 of the Commons,
but he being executed Sir John Conyers undertook to head them, Proclaiming as
they passed, that King Edward was an unjust Prince, and unprofitable to the
Kingdom; when to surpress these disorders, he sent an Army under the leading of
the Earl of Pembroke, who joined Battle near Banbury, and had been victorious,
had not one John Clapham, Esquire and Servant to the Earl of Warwick, come in the
heat of the Fight, and displayed his Master's Colors, whose Cognizance was the
White Bear, and by crying a Warwick, so dismayed the Welshmen, of whom most of
the Army was composed that thereby thinking the Earl was come in with his
party, they threw down their Arms, and betook them to flight, leaving their
General, who valiantly fighting, was taken Prisoner; together with his Brother,
Sir Robert Herbert, and ten other Gentlemen of Note, who lost their Heads at
Banbury, by the Judgment of Conyers and Clapham, Anno 1469.

The Success of the Northern men occasioned them to rise in great Number, and a
Party under the Leading of Robert of Ridisdale, surprising the King's Manner of
Grafton siezed the Lord Rivers, the Queens Father, together with John his Son,
whom they beheaded at Northampton, which obliged the King to hasten with a
great Army, but whilst the people were expecting the issue of a bloody Fight, a
Truce was concluded, which rendering the King more secure than cautious, the
Earl of Warwick entered his Tent in the dead of Night and with little
resistance made him Prisoner, and carried him to Warwick Castle, and from
thence in the Night time conveyed him to Middleham Castle in Yorkshire, and
there committed him to George Nevil, Archbishop of York, Brother to the Earl,
but having Liberty allowed to hunt in the Park and Forests, he was rescued by
a Troup of his own Men; however, Sir Robert Wells with thirty thousand of the
Commons, disturbed the Country, Proclaiming King Henry. but encountering King
Edwards Forces and himself in a bloody Battle, made Prisoner; the Lincolnshire
Men, of which the Army was mostly composed, threw of their Coats, with the
Earls badge on them and in great Confusion left the Field, so that from that it
was called the battle of Losi-Coa^field, upon which defeat, and the putting Sir
Robert with many others to death. The Duke of Clarence Earl of Warwick, and
diverse Nobles, found themselves obliged to pass the Seas, but were refused
entrance at Calais, of which place Warwick was Captain, by one Vawclear whom
he a little before had Substituted his Deputy, and for which refusal King
Edward made him Captain in VVarwick's stead; however they went to the Court at
France, and were there entertained with much respect, where gathering Aids and
holding Correspondence with their Friends in England; soon after they Landed at
Dartmouth, and Marched toward London, Proclaiming King Henry, and commanded
all from Sixteen to Sixty years of Age, to take up Arms on his behalf, against
Edward Duke of York whom they termed a Usurper, so that all the Land in a
manner was in Arms; and King Edward perceiving his Fortune utterly averse, and
that the few forces he had raised, were ready to Revolt, he thought it no fit
time to dispute, but rather to reserve himself to a more favorable Fortune,
whereupon with a few of his Friends, he passed the Seas- and was received by
Charles Duke of Burgundy, who had married the Lady Margaret his Sister, whilst
his Queen took Sanctuary in Westminster, where she was delivered of a Son,
afterward Christened by the name of Edward, and other Sanctuarys were filled
with the King's Friends, and such as had adhered to him. This disorder gave the
Kentish men an opportunity to rise in Arms, and do great mischief, especially
in and about the City of London, and had been greater, but the Earl entered
with his Army, and put an end to those disorders, and set King Henry at
liberty, who had been a Prisoner in the Tower, for almost the space of Nine
years, conveying him to the King's Palace in great Triumph, where on the 13th.
of October he was crowned again, and went with the Crown on his head to St.
Paul's Church, the Earl of Warwick bearing up his Train, and the Earl of Oxford
carrying the Sword before him, whilst the people cried, God save King Henry,
and a Parliament being called to sit at Westminster, the 26th. of November,
King Edward was declared a Traitor to his Country, and a Usurper of the Crown,
his Goods and Lands were confiscated, and his Adherents were attained: The Earl
of Worcester, for his Cause lost his Head, and all the Statutes made by Edward
Revoked: The Crowns of England and France were entailed to King Henry and his
Heirs Male, and for default of such Issue to George, Duke of Clarence; The Earl
of Warwick to be Governor of the Land till it could be better settled.

Thus went the various change of Affairs in England, (...) the bloody contest
between the houses of York and Lancaster, yet continued not the advancement of
King Henry; for King Edward holding Correspondency in England, and gathering
some Forces beyond the Seas, landed at Ravenspur in Yorkshire, where the better
to insinuate with the People: He at first pretended to come for his right, as a
private person, but finding himself strong enough, he siezed upon York, and
increasing in Power, marched till ^he came near to the City of Warwick, where
his Brother the Duke of Clarence being reconciled to him by the means of a
Maidservant, that had lived with the Old Duchess of York, desiring the Earl to
forsake King Henry's Cause, and close with his Brother, but that great Man more
regarding his Engagement than Life or Interest, sent him word, that he had
rather be an Earl, and always like himself than a perjured Duke, and that ever
his Oath should be falsified as the Dukes apparently was, he would lay down his
Life at his enemies Feet, which he doubt not should be bought very dear,
whereupon King Edward hasted to London, and was received by the Citizen no ways
able to resist him; when drawing out his Forces, he marched against the Earl
and his Accomplicies, and on Easter day in the Morning, Battle was joined on
Glad-more Heath, near Barnet, in which bloody Conflict, fortune at first seemed
to favor Warwick but by an unlucky mistake, he lost the day, for a great Mist
falling the embroidered Stars, upon the Coats of such as were commanded by the
Earl of Oxford, being taken for Suns, which was King Edward's Cognizance;
VVarwick's Battallion charged by that Error upon their Friends, and they
suspecting it done on purpose, crying out, Treason quitted the Field, which the
Earl perceiving, and resolving not to outlive the loss of the day, charged
desperately into the King's Battle, killing many with his own Hands; but being
cut off from the assistance of his own men, he there was slain, as likewise was
his Brother the Lord Montacute, in attempting to Rescue him; on King Edward's
Party, dyed the Lords Cromwell, Bourchier, and Barns, with Si^ John Lisle; and
on both sides about 10000 of all sorts: But thus ended not the Contests for the
Crown; for Queen Margaret, in the right of her Husband, and Son, raised a
strong Power, Anno Domini 1471. and gave the King Battle at Tewxbury; but
Fortune now turned fatally averse to the Queen, and her Family; for losing the
day, with the death of John Lord Somerset, John Courtney, Earl of Devonshire,
Sir John Delues, Sir Edward Hampden, Sir Robert Whitingham, Sir John Leukner,
and several others; and a great many of lesser note. The Queen in this rout
fled, and betook her self to a religious house for sanctuary, but was takan
thence, and made close Prisoner; young Prince Edward, her Son, was taken in his
flight by Sir Richard Crofts, who presented him to King Edward, who having a
while beheld him with a stern countenance, demanded how he durst presume with
Banners displayed to disturb his Kingdom; to which the Prince replied, that
what he did was to recover his Father's Kingdoms, and his most rightful
Inheritance. But how dare you, continued the Prince, being but a Subject,
display your Colors against your Liege Lord? Upon this resolute reply, King
Edward unworthily struck him on the Mouth with his Gantlet, when Richard Duke
of Gloucester, basely taking the hint, stabbed him, and the Wound being
seconded by some of the Servants, the poor Prince fell dead at the King's feet.

Things being carried at an extraordinary highth, Edmund Duke of Somerset, the
Prior of St. John's, with diverse Knights and Esquiers, who had taken sanctuary,
were contrary to the Custom of those times, taken thence by force, and
executed at Tewxbury; and soon after Richard, Duke of Gloucester, the King's
Brother, stabbed the pious King Henry to the heart in the Tower of London, and
his body was exposed in a Coffin at St. Paul's, to convince the People he was
dead. As for the Queen, she continued several years a Prisoner, but at length
her Father mortgaged most of his Principalities to pay her Ransom, and she
thereupon was sent over Sea, where in much sorrow and perplexity she languished
^ut the rest of her days; and by this means the Lancastrians being utterly
disabled to make head, King Edward more assured in his Throne, betook himself
to his Pleasure, and hearing of the Fame of Jane Shore, Wife to a Goldsmith in
Gracechurch-street, he sent for her, and took her to his Bed; upon which her
Husband renounced her, and for Grief, and the Disgrace, betook himself to
travel beyond the Seas, never returning into England. He had likewise two other
Concubines, high in his esteem, and being in the Year 1474. in France, at an
Interview with the French King, Lewis told him, that he would one day invite
him to court the fair Ladies of Paris; to which Offer Edward readily consented;
insomuch that the French King not being pleased with his forwardness,
whispering to Philip Comines, his Bosom Friend, told him that he repented of
his Offer, considering that there had been too many English Princes already at
Paris; so that the King returned without having any opportunity to prosecute
such Amors.

Anno 1478. by the contrivance of Richard Duke of Gloucester, George Duke of
Clarence, was accused of sundry Crimes, and committed to the Tower, where soon
after he was smothered in a Butt of Malmsey Wine; and it is reported the King
consented to so great a Wickedness upon a Prophecy, That a G. should succeed an
E. which however proved true, though he mistook the Man; for Richard Duke of
Gloucester usurped the Throne, and murdered his two Sons, as will appear
hereafter. Two Acts yet more of this King's Cruelty are memorable, viz. Going
into the Country he was invited to hunt in the Park of one Thomas Burdet Esquire
where after having caught much Game, he, by the persuasion o^ some that were
about him, killed a white Buck, which for its Tameness and comely Form was
greatly beloved by the Owner; and upon notice it was slain, he wished the Horns
of it in the Belly of those that advised the King to do it; which being
overheard by some Court Parasites, they, to curry favor with the King, made
their Report of it to him with aggravation; insomuch that Burdet was tried and
cast for High Treason, in wishing the King's Death, and accordingly beheaded at
Tyburn. Another Person he caused to be hanged before his own door in Cheapside,
for saying to a little Youth, his Son, that if he would mind his Book, and be a
good Boy, he would make him heir to the Crown, meaning in all probability his
house that bore that Sign, etc. But now the King worn out with Wars and Women,
much grieved for the untimely death of his Brother, fell sick, and sending for
the Nobles that were at Court, he earnestly desired them to live peaceably
together, and have regard to his Children in their tender Years, forgetting
Injuries and Animosities, as they tendered the Love of God and their King,
appointing his Son Edward, a Youth of about 12 years of Age, to succeed him,
making the Duke of Gloucester Protector of his Person during his Minority, and
then gave up the Ghost on the 9th of Apr. 1483.

He had Issue by Elizabeth his Wife, Daughter to Richard Woodvile, Earl Rivers,
Prince Edward, Richard Duke of Bedford, who dyed a Child, Richard Duke of York,
Elizabeth married to Henry VII. Cici^ married to the Lord Viscount Wells, Anne
married to Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk, Bridget, a veiled Nun, Mary, who
dyed 1482. Margaret, who dyed an Infant, Katharine married to William Courtney
Earl of Devonshire; his base Issue was Arthur and Elizabeth. This Edward was
King of England, France, and Lord of Ireland, Son to Richard Plantagenet, Duke
of York; he began his Reign on the 4th of March, 1460. and reigned 22 Years, 1
Month, and 5 Days, and was the 36th sole Monarch of England; he dyed in the
40th year of his Age, and the 23d of his Reign; his Body was buried in the new
Chapel at Windsor, whose Foundation himself had laid.

Thus after bloody Toils with restless Fate
The Warlike Prince does to the Grave retreat;
The mighty dead now undistinguished lies,
Death makes the Monarch and the Slave his prize.
The Reign and Actions of Edward the V. King of England, etc.
EDward V upon the death of his Father was committed to the Care and Tutulage
of Sir Anthony Woodvile, with whom were joined sundry of the Queens Relations
before her Marriage; but Richard Duke of Gloucester, the deceased King's
Brother, thirsting after Sovereignty, labored to remove them from the Person
of the young King; and to that and hearing they were bringing him out of the
Country, whither he had retired, to be crowned ^t London, with a great Power
and Train, he so ^ealt with the Queen, that she sent express word, they should
save the charge and trouble of so great (...) Concourse, and urged as
Gloucester had insinuated, that it would give the Nobility at London
apprehensions of danger, and occasion of disturbance or discontent; and having
made the Duke of Buck^ngham, the Lord Hastings, and others, his Confidents, he
marched to Stonystratford, and there took ^ho young King by force from the
small Train that attended him, arresting the Lord Richard Gray, Sir Thomas
Vaughan, and Sir Richard Hawtre, in the King's presence, nor could his entreaty
prevail for their delivery; he made Sir Anthony Woodvile, now Lord Rivers,
Prisoner, and soon after sent him and the Lord Gray, with a strong Guard, to a
Castle in the North, pretending for his Justification of these proceedings,
that they had a design upon his Life, and the Lives of the ancient Nobility,
that they might have the power of the King and Kingdom in their own hands; and
to render the report more plausible, caused old Armor, and rusty weapons, to
be showed to the people in his way to London, pretending those were the
Instruments intended to do the business.

The Queen upon the surprising news began to have mortal Apprehensions of the
danger the King and her self were in, finding how she had been imposed on by
the Protector, in forbidding the strength intended for the Guard of her Son's
Person and the better to secure her self she removed with her son Richard, Duke
of York, and her Daughters into the sanctuary at Westminster, and people were
filled with fear and confusion, especially when they found the Thames full of
Boats, with the servants o^ Buckingham and Gloucester in them, to prevent the
escape of any persons that way, and to preven^ their coming to sanctuary;
however the Archbishop of York comforted the Queen the best he could,
delivering up the Broad Seal, and telling her, if an^ misfortune came to the
King, he would crown hi^ Brother; and the Duke of Gloucester caused the Lord
Hasting, Lord Chamberlain, to send a Messag^ to the Archbishop to assure him
all would be well but the Queen declared against that Lord, as on^ that sought
the Ruin of her Family: however o^ the fourth of May the King came to Town,
and wa^ in much Pomp conveyed to the Bishop of London Palace, where the Dukes
of Gloucester, Buckingham, and other Noblemen, swore Fealty to him, and by a
second Approbation the first was confirmed Protector of the King's Person and
Kingdoms.

Gloucester having made a prosperous beginning, fell to strengthening his
Party, and held diverse Councils, to contrive what was farther to be done; but
he found he had as yet but half his Prey in his hands, and thereupon he
labored to get the Duke of York into his possession, and to that end
Consultations were held in the Stra-chamber, where it was resolved, that for
sundry Reasons he should be with his Brother; but the Abbat and Archbishop
declaring it was no ways reasonable, but altogether dangerous, to make a
breach upon the sanctuary; the latter was appointed to wait upon the Queen to
prevail with her for his peaceable delivery; and although she used many
pregnant Reasons to the contrary, yet understanding the Protector was resolved
to have him by force, if fair means failed, she with much regret, and a flood
of sorrow, delivered him to the charge of the Archbishop, and other Lords that
attended, saying, I deliver him and his Brother into your hands, of whom I
shall require them before God and the World; after which she tenderly kissed
and embraced the Infant, blessing him, and weeping over him, as a fatal presage
of his Misfortune, whilst the Child wept as fast; the Protector having gotten
him, he took him in his Arms, and gave him a treacherous Kiss, saying, Now
welcome, my Lord, even with all my heart. The Prize thus gotten, the Councils
were removed, one held in the Tower, and the other in Bishopsgate-Street, under
pretense of preparing for the King's Coronation; and the better to color the
matter Pageants were ordered to be made, but the Protector perceiving the
Lords Hastings and Stanly to cross what he aimed at, he resolved to remove
those Obstacles, in order to which coming in the morning to that Council in the
Tower with a very pleasant countenance, and excusing his lateness, he went out
again for a little space, but then returned with a frowning and angry
countenance, and demanded what ought to be done to those that sought to compass
his death, who was of the Royal Blood, and so near allied to the Crown. To
which they agreed, that they ought to be punished as heinous Traitors. They
are, said the Protector, that Sorceress, my Sister, meaning the Queen, and
that Witch Shoar's Wife, of her Council, that have wasted my Body with their
Sorceries, an^ Witchcraft, and thereupon drawing up his slieve showed his Arm,
which was wasted and wearish, bu^ indeed had never been otherwise; whereat the
Lords stood mute, as knowing it was only designed to quarrel with them, till
the Ld. Hastings presuming upon the friendship he had all along had with him
and at that time keeping Jane Shore as his Miss whom he thought to excuse,
said, Certainty, my Lord, if they have so done, they are worthy of punishment,
What, replied the Protector fiercely, thou serves^ me with If's and Ands, I
tell thee they have done so, and that I will make good upon thy Body, Traitor.
Upon me, my Lord, replied Hastings? Yes, upon thee, Traitor, replied the
Protector; and thereupon gave a Blow with his Fist on the Table, at which, as
the Signal one without cried, Treason, and immediately there rushed in a
company of armed Men, one of them letting fly with his Sword at the Lord
Stanly, and wounded him in the head; nor had he failed to have cleft his Skull,
had he not nimbly shrunk under the Table. Then the Protector caused Hastings
to be arrested, bidding him speedily take a Priest, and confess himself,
swearing by St. Paul, he would not dine till he saw his Head off; and it was no
time for that Lord to reason the matter, but taking a Priest at a venture,
after he was shriven his Head was struck off on a Log of Timber in the Tower,
and the sooner to save the Protector's Oath, who was in haste to go to dinner.
And thus dyed this man in the time of his greatest Security, betrayed by a
Servant of his, whom he had too much relied on, and trusted with his secrets.

To color off the Murder of the Lord Hastings, who fell without Process or
Trial, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen were sent for, to whom the Protector and
Duke of Buckingham appeared in old rusty Armor, declaring that their Lives
being in such eminent danger, by the Conspiracy of the Lord Hastings and
others, of which they had not been informed till ten in the Morning, that in
their defense, they were forced to take what came first to hand, requiring them
so to report it to their fellow Citizens, and an Instrument in Writing to the
same purpose that had been drawn up before hand, was Proclaimed by the
Heralds; and to set some Gloss upon his Words, he caused the Sheriffs of
London to sieze upon all the Riches and Furniture of Jane Shea^s House, and
commanded the Bishop of London to put her to open Penance, and accordingly she
went barefoot in her Shift, with a Rope about her middle, and a Tapour in her
hand, through the Streets of London, to Paul's Cross, etc. and further, the
Protector commanded under great Penalties, that she should be turned into the
Streets, and none should relieve her, yet several did it privately, whose Lives
and Estates she had saved by her Power and Interest with King Edward; however,
she lived to an old Age, not dying till the 20th. year of the Reign of Henry
the eight.

The Protector's hand dipped again in Blood; he resolved not to stop, but by a
private Order, sent to his Creature, Sir Reheard Radeliff, the Lords taken from
the King at Stonystratford and Northampton, were beheaded in Pontefract Castle.
And now the Protector concluding his passage open to the Throne, no longer
Masqued his Intention; but gaining Edmund Shaw, Lord Mayor of London to side
with him, many Clubs and Caballs were carried on by his Party, and Dr. Shaw,
Brother to the Mayor, Preaching a Sermon at St. Paul's Cross. on the 19th. of
June, declared to the people that there had been no lawful Marriage between
King Edward and his Queen, and therefore the Children ought not to succeed to
the Throne, and that neither King Edward nor the Duke of Clarence, his Brother,
were held by them that knew most of that Affair, to be the lawful Sons of
Richard Duke of York, but said he This Noble Prince (meaning the Protector who
wa^ to have come in just at the time the Words were uttering) he is his Fathers
own Picture, his very Features and his Countenance, which remarkably declar'^
him to be the true Son of the great Duke of York; ye^ the Protector not coming
at that time, but somewhat late, the Doctor turned back from the other Matter
he was upon to the old Lesson, repeating the very words again, which rather
made the Audi-Laugh, than give heed to them; and the Doctor afterward grew so
ashamed of his flattery, that finding himself every where reproached, he not
long after dyed for Grief.

This way not succeeding, the Mayor was ordered to Summon the Citizens to meet
at Guild Hall, where the Duke of Buckingham made several Orations, to persuade
them to reject the Line of King Edward and own the Protector for their King,
but all he could obtain, was only the Shouts of some Servants and Foot-boys,
who were ordered to be there for that purpose, which the Duke laying hold of as
the Consent of the People, he told them it was a very goodly Cry; and then
whilst the Citizens stood amazed at his discourse, he desired them to make
their humble Petition to the Protector, that he would receive the Crown, and
take upon him the Kingly Government; and accordingly the next day the Mayor,
Aldermen, and some of the Commoners with abundance of Rabble at their Heels,
accompanied the Duke of Buckingham and some other Lords to Bainard's Castle,
where the Protector kept his Court, and sending in their Message, the Protector
appeared in the Balcony, as seeming to fear some danger of his person, if he
give them nearer access, feigning an Ignorance of their coming, and when
Buckingham (having first entreated his Graces Pardon, and a License to acquaint
him with the cause of their coming) declared it was to beseech him to take the
Crown and Government upon him; he looked angry, and dissembled an amazement at
such a request, protesting against it, and was forced, (if you will believe it)
to be threatened into an acceptance of what he had so passionately sought; for
by Buckingham's declaring, that none of Edward's Race should Reign over them,
and therefore they had offered the Crown to him, which if he refused, they
would give to another of a different Family that should be worthy of it:
Hereupon with a seeming unwillingness; he told them, seeing they were so bent
against the Lineage of his dear Brother, which he was sorry to hear; rather than
they should be destitute of a King of the Royal Blood, in the house of the
Plantagenets, he should be content to submit to their desires, and take the
Government upon himself. These words ended, the people cried, King Richard,
King Richard, and from this time is accounted the end of Edwards the Fifths
Reign.

Thus by false seeming Friendship, the poor Prince
Betrayed and Murdered in his Innocence.
Without a Crown goes down into the Grave,
Yet so had rest, which others could not have.
The Reign and Actions of Richard the Third, King of England, etc.
RIchard, by the means, mentioned in the foregoing Reign, having obtained
Possession o^ the Throne, and laid his Nephews aside, he kep^ them strict
Prisoners in the Tower, when calling ^ Parliament the Crown, was confirmed to
him and his Heirs, and great preparations were made for the placing it on his
Head, but fearing the Nobility when gathered in a body, might oppose it; he
sent for his trusty Friend, Robert of Risdale, wh^ gathering about 5000 of the
Northern Rabble came to London as his Guard, when at Westminster the Ceremony
was performed with great Splendor; Quee^ Ann, Daughter to the great Earl of
Warwick; being Crowned with him, who had been contracted to Prince Edward, Son
to Henry the Sixth, and the more to ingratiate with the people, he discharged
the Archbishop of York, and the Lord Standly from their Imprisonment, taking
his Seat likewise in the Court of King's Bench, and there pronouncing pardon
for all Offenses committed against him, and a^ the Entreaty of the University
of Oxford, John Morton, Bishop of Ely, was delivered into the hands o^ the Duke
of Buckingham, who sent him in close confinement to his Castle of Brecknock in
Wales, and then suffered him to continue upon his Parole.

King Richard, by this time notwithstanding he had Possession found himself,
but slenderly settled in the Throne, whilst the young Princes his Nephews were
alive, and therefore to make sure, he sent his Letter by John Green to Sir
Robert Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, to make them away privately; bu^ he
detesting so great a Murder, refused it with expressions of the horror he
conceived at such a proposition, but this changed not the Usurpers
determination, rather making him more earnest, least the design should be
discovered before it was put in practice, wherefore being wished by some of his
Privados; to one Sir James Tirrel, a Man of desperate Fortune and wicked
Principles, he disclosed the Matter to him, and he promised if he might have
the Keys of the Tower delivered to him for one day, he would see it effected;
hereupon the King Wrote to the Lieutenant on pain of high displeasure, to
deliver they Keys to this Person, and he not daring to refuse, least his own
Life should go for it, unwillingly surrendered them, whereupon Tirrel, when the
young Princes were in Bed and a sleep, sent in two of his Hell Hounds, viz.
Miles Forest and John Dighton, who wraping the innocent Youths close in the
Bed-cloaths, and clapping a Bolster on their Fa^es; Forest being a heavy squat
Fellow, lay upon them whilst the other kept down their Bodies, and ^o continued
to do for the space of an hour, till they found no more struggling, life, or
motion in them, at what time Tirrel came in, and finding them dead, caused
their Bodies to be buried under the Stairs deep in the Ground, and a great heap
of Stones were laid upon them.

The business being done, the Murderers redelivered the Keys, and went to give
an account of the Wickedness, and receive the Wages of Iniquity; but the
Usurper in this was mistaken, for instead of contributing to his peace, it
added exceedingly to his disturbance and disquiet, for he never after en^oyed
any content of mind, not through any Remorse, but through the terror of a
guilty Conscience, fearing every one that looked wishfully on him ^ame to kill
him, and in his sleep he fancied horrible Apparitions of Devils and Spirits
came to ^ear him; so that he often would start out of his Bed, run up and down
the Chamber, crying out for help. As for the Instruments of this Murder,
Tirrel was beheaded for High Treason, in the Reign of Henry the Seventh;
Forest Rotted alive, and Dighton dyed miserably beyon the Seas: As for the
Bodies of the Children, they were by Richard's Order taken up, and being
enclosed in a Leaden Coffin full of holes, they were said to be carried to the
black deeps in the Thames mouth, and there thrown in, out of a Fancy that this
would appease the Terror of his Dreams.

The Duke of Buckingham, who had been mainly Instrumental in raising Richard to
the Throne, soon after this Murder fell into discontent, some say, for that
the King refused him the Duke of Herefords Lands, to which he pretended himself
rightful Heir others, because he was not looked upon and esteemed at Court as
he expected, but he declared it was from a Remorse for the Murder of the two
Princes, of which he could not but conceit himself somewhat Guilty, because he
had raised one to the Throne that had caused them to be Murdered though he was
ignorant of the Fact, or its Contrivance, and hereupon leaving the Court, he
retired to his Castle of Brecknock, and there conferring with Bishop Morton,
that crafty Clergyman, to gain his entire Liberty, so fed the Dukes Ambition,
who was naturally of an aspiring Spirit; that after having founded his
Inclinations, he plainly told him that nothing grived him so much, since there
was so worthy a person allied to the Crown, that a Tyrant and Murderer should
sit upon the Throne, commending the Duke to be a person of such rare virtues,
that none merrited to wear the Crown so much as himself, and although the Duke
excused it, in telling him Henry Earl of Richmond had a right before him, he
was prompt enough to harken to so pleasing a Subject. These debates, that
seemed at first in jest, came at last to earnest, for Buckingham resolving (if
possible) to displace King Richard; Communicated his designs to diverse of his
trusty Friensd, amongst whom it was agreed, that the Earl of Richmond Heir of
the House of Lancaster, should Marry Elizabeth, Daughter to Edward the Fourth,
Heiress to the House of York, and by that means unite the two Families:
Whereupon the Mothers of the Earl and Princess being made acquainted, and
apropving the Project, Bishop Morton was sent with ample Instructions, to let
the Earl know what was agreed upon, and desire him with such Forces as he could
raise to come over where he would find his Friends ready to receive him, and
join their Forces with his.

These Matters were not carried so privately, but the King got notice of them,
and sent a very kind Message to the Duke of Buckingham to invite him to Court;
but he excusing it, by reason of pretended Indisposition; an Express was sent
to command him to come, or he would fetch him dead or alive, by this he knew it
was time to stand upon his own defense, and returned answer that he would not
come to his Mortal Enemy, and thereupon sending for Thomas Marquess of Dorset
out of a Sanctuary, and gathering such power as he could in the North, whilst
Sir Edward Courtney and his Brother the Bishop of Exeter, raised another in
Devonshire and Cornwall, as likewise did Sir Richard Guilford and other
Gentlemen in Kent, they resolved to join their Forces; but before it could be
effected, the King marched directly against the Duke with a great power,
whereupon his little Army mostly consisting of Welshmen, disbanded, and left
him to shift for himself, so that he was forced to hide him in a poor disguise
putting himself into the hands of one Humphrey Bannister, that had been his
Servant and raised by him to what Estate he had, and with him he lived for some
time as his Gardener; but the treacherous man upon the Kings putting out a
Proclamation, promising a reward of 1000 pounds to those that could decover
him, delivered him up for the lucre of the Money to the Sheriff of Shrewsbury,
who siezed this Duke diging in a poor habit; and being carried to the King at
Salisbury, he there without Trial or Process, was beheaded, upon which all the
Accomplices dispersed, and fled many of them beyond the Seas; and to this
Treachery, many attributed the Judgments that soon over-took Bannister and his
Family, for most of his Children dyed distressed or unnatural deaths; his
Substance decreased, and he dyed in extreme Poverty.

The measures of the Confederacy thus broken, many were imprisoned, and put to
death, and the King fearing an Invasion, caused the Sea Coasts to be guarded
and fortified, and then assembled a Parliament at Westminster, wherein the Earl
of Richmond, and all his Adherents that had fled the Land, were attainted, and
proclaimed Enemies of the Country, their Goods and Possessions were
confiscated; nor did Richard delay to use the same Practices his Brother had
done, sending his Agents to the Duke of Bretaigne, in whose Court the Earl
resided, with store of Gold, and many Presents, to persuade that Duke either to
send Richmond Prisoner into England, or if he refused that, to keep him a
Prisoner there, and missed but a little of succeeding; for the Duke lying sick,
and Peter Landois, his Treasurer overcome with the Presents, had delivered him
into the hands of such as were appointed to receive him, had not the Earl had
notice of the design, and made his Escape; but the Duke highly blamed this
Action of his Treasurer, and discharged him his Office.

King Richard knowing whilst his Brother's Daughters were alive, that his Title
was but ill grounded, and therefore to strengthen it he proposed (though Queen
Ann his Wife was living) to marry Elizabeth his Niece, by that means to cross
Richmond's Pretensions, and to try in this case how the people stood affected,
it was given out that his Queen was dead, and soon after it proved so, that
virtuous Lady dying, as many conjectured, an untimely death. The Earl of
Richmond having notice of what was intended, by the Money he received from
England, and other Assistence, gathered what Forces he could, and landed at
Milford-Haven with 2000 Men, on the 15th of August, 1586. and from thence
marched to Shrewsbury, being joined by the way with a considerable Force, under
the Leading of Sir Rice Ap Thomas, and so marched to Newport, where Sir Gilbert
Talbot met him, sent by the Earl of Shrewsbury with 2000 men, and passing from
thence he came to Lichfield, where he was joyfully received; but whilst
Richmond's Army gathered King Richard was not idle; for raising such Forces as
could be got in such a pressing Condition, he marched to oppose his Invader,
and near Market-Bosworth in Leicestershire both Armies met, and being
encouraged by their Generals with moving Speeches, the forward Soldiers rushed
on to the Battle, and for some time it continued both bloody and doubtful; nor
did Fortune in the first Shock fail to favor King Richard; but the Lord
Standley, who had been entrusted by Richard with a Squadron of Horse, revolting
in the heat of the Fight, and charging upon, the almost tired Soldiers, bore
down all before him, and turned the scale of Victory, which King Richard
perceiving, and resolving not to out^ive the loss, charged furiously into
Richmond's Battallion, and with a Courage hightened by despair, beat down all
before him, till overpowered by number, and weary with fighting, he fell
amongst (...) thousand Swords, and with him fell the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord
Ferrers, Sir Richard Radcliff, Sir Robert Berkenburg, and about 4000 others of
lesser ^ote, and Sir William Cateshy, with two others of his ^rivado's, being
taken, were two days after beheaded for evil Counsel, and other Practices,
against the Good and Welfare of the Kingdom; and Thomas Howard, Earl of Surry,
and Son to the Duke of Norfolk, being made Prisoner, and demanded by Henry how
he durst bear Arms on the behalf of a Tyrant and Uusurper, courageously
answered, He was my Crowned King; and if the Parliamentary Authority of England
set the Crown upon a stock, I will fight for that stock; and as I fought then
for him, I will fight for you, when you are established by the like Authority.

After this fatal Battle, wherein the number of the slain on either side did
not greatly differ, the Crown that King Richard brought into the Field was
found by the Lord Stanley, or those that attended him, in an Haw-thorn-Bush,
and by that Lord set upon the Head of the Earl of Richmond in the Field, at the
sight of which the Soldiers cried, Long live King Henry. The Body of Richard
being found amongst the heaps of the slain, was stripped and spoiled by the
Pillagers, and laid naked on a Horse behind St. Leiger, Pursuvant at Arms, and
in that contemptible manner carried to Leicester, where it was buried in the
Grey-Friars Church in a stone Coffin, which was afterward made a Trough for
Horses to drink in in a common Inn, and thus fell the greatness of the Usurper,
setting in blood, who had so often unjustly shed the blood of others.

His Wife was Ann, Daughter to Richard Nevil, Earl of Warwick and Salisbury,
called the Make King of those times; by her he had Issue Edward Earl o^
Salisbury, created Prince of Wales 1463. and the Crown entailed upon him by
Parliament; but he dyed by an unfortunate Fall before his Father. This Richard
stands accounted among the Kings of England, etc. he was third Son to Richard
Duke of York and began his Reign the twenty second day of June 1483. reigning
two years and two months, and wa^ the 38th sole Monarch of England. Many good
Laws were made in his time, and he built and endowed several places to
charitable uses; he caused William Collingbourn to be executed as a Traitor on
Towerhill, for writing this distich:

The Cat, the Rat, and Lovel our Dog,
Rules all England under a Hog.
Descanting thereby on the Names of Catesby, Ratcliff, and Lovell, three of his
chief Favorites; and as to the Hog, upon Richard himself, as having the White
Boar for his Cognizance.

Thus the Usurper, who through Seas of Blood
Had swum to Empire, and there tottering stood,
Till Fates just hand removed him at a blow,
He fell unpittied who'd no pity show.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of Henry VII. King of England, etc.
HEnry Earl of Richmond, upon the Success of Bosworth Field, hasted to London,
and a Parliament being called at Westminster, on the 30th of October, anno
1485. he was crowned, and owned King of England; and to prevent future Stirs or
Insurrections, he imprisoned Edward Plantagenet, Earl of Warwick, Son to the
Duke of Clarence in the Tower, and King Richard was attainted in Parliament as
an Usurper, and Traitor against the Government, and the Crown entailed upon
King Henry and his Heirs for ever, and for the better security of his Person he
appointed a band of Archers under a Captain, in the nature of Yeomen of the
Guard, and a free Pardon was given to all that should submit themselves within
a set time, unless such of Richard's Friends as were excluded by name, and all
former Acts contrary to Henry and his Friends were repealed.

Anno 1496. on the 19th of January, the King married the Princess Elizabeth,
eldest daughter to Edward the Fourth, and true Heiress to the Crown, as had
been before agreed on, by which means the Houses of York and Lancaster, after
having overflowed the Land with blood, were united, to the ceasing of future
Jars on that occasion; however some that found themselves out of Favor, began
to disturb the Tranquillity of Henry; for the Lord Lovell, and Sir Humphrey
Stafford, his Brother, took up arms, and drew after them a considerable force,
but upon the approach of the King's Army they dispersed, and Sir Humphrey being
taken out of Sanctuary, whither he had fled for shelter, was carried to Tyburn,
and there executed: Yet this was but light to what followed; for Margaret,
Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, Sister to Edward the Fourth, mortally hating the
Line of Lancaster, by her contrivance with some discontented English, one
Lambert Simnell was set up for the Earl of Warwick, who was then in the Tower,
and passing to Ireland with one Simon, a Priest, who had been his Tutour, and
Manager, he was crowned King at Dublin, and assisted by the Dowager of Burgundy
with 2000 men, under the Leading of Colonel Swart, and getting an Army of
Irish, English, and Scots, he returned, and proclaimed himself to be the true
Son of the Duke of Clarence, still increasing his number; but at Stoke, a
little Village near Newark, the King's Army opposed them, and a bloody Fight
ensued, wherein, after three hours hot dispute, the Impostor's Forces were
routed, and put to flight, and the Earl of Lincoln, the Lord Lovel, Sir Thomas
Broughton, Colonel Swart, and Maurice Fitz-Thomas were slain, with about 4000
Soldiers, and Simnel and his Tutour being taken, the former upon his Ingenious
Confession how the whole Cotrivance had been imposed on him, was made the
King's Falconer, after he had drudged a while in the Kitchen; but the latter
condemned to perpetual Imprisonment Yet Henry gained not this Battle but with
considerable loss on his side, for the Strangers knowing their Lives were at
stake, if they lost the day, fought like men indespair, and sold their Lives
very dear.

King Henry finding those that opposed him took generally refuge in Scotland,
sent his Ambassadors to James the Third, to conclude a Peace with him, by
which means he was the better at leisure to prosecute his Wars with France, in
Favor of his Allies; but to this end raising a large Subsidy, the Commons in
Yorkshire refused to pay it, and took up Arms, but upon the approach of the
Earl of Surry, and his taking John Chamber, their Ringleader, the rest
dispersed, and Chambers, and the rest of the Ringleaders, were executed at
York; and the King sailed over into France, being furnished with Money from the
Citizens of London, but as soon as he set down before Bulloign, the French King
offering him 186250 pounds to retire, and the Emperor his Confederate not
being prepared to take the Field, the offer was accepted, and the Money paid in
the time limited; and he no sooner returned but he found employment at home;
for the Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, with other discontented English, had set
up a second Impostor, viz. one Perkin, or Peterkin Walbeck, who passed with
many for Richard Duke of York, younger Son to Edward the Fourth; and although
the King sent his Agents abroad to discover how the Designs were carried on, as
well as make the Impostor known to those to whom he applied himself for aid, he
received great countenance in the Court of France, and with considerable Forces
passed into Ireland, and from thence to Scotland, where he was very kindly
received by King James the Fourth, and setting off the deceit with a very
plausible Speech, in a princely Port, that King not only believed him to be the
Duke of York, but gave him the Lady Katharine Gourdon, his Niece, in marriage;
nor failed he to aid him: But whilst these preparations were making, the Lord
Fitz-walter, Sir Simon Montfort, and the Lord Standly, who at his coming in at
Bosworth Field had given King Henry the Victory, and with it the Crown, were
beheaded on pretense of holding Correspondence with Walbeck, and the King
proceeded to strengthen the Seaports, and all places of Advantage, raising
Forces, and using much diligence, that he might be able to weather the Storm he
foresaw breaking in upon him, when calling a Parliament, he had a Tax of 80000
l granted him, which caused the Cornish Men to rise under the leading of one
Flammock, a Lawyer, and Joseph a Blacksmith, and were joined at Wells by the
Lord Audley, and so marched to Black Heath in Kent, where they were fought with
and routed by the King's Forces, the Lord Audley taken, and beheaded on
Tower Hill, and the other two Ringleaders hanged and quartered; the Smith
comforted himself by the way, that his Name by this Action should be immortal.
And now the King, in requital of the Invasions the Scots had made during these
Revolutions, sent the Earl of Surry to fall upon their Frontiers with Fire and
Sword, who prosecuted it so rigorously, that they were obliged to sue for
Peace, which upon the Mediation of the King of Spain was concluded, and Perkin
by one clause of it excluded Scotland, whereupon he went for Ireland, and from
thence was invited by the Cornish Men to head them against the King's Forces in
England, promising their Aid to help him to the Kingdom; so that landing at
Whitsand Bay in Cornwall, many thousands resorted to him; and being strong
enough, he besieged Exeter, but it made a stout Resistance, and was in
conclusion relieved by the Earl of Devonshire; whereupon Perkin's Men
perceiving the little success they were like to have against the far greater
Forces preparing to encounter them, dropped away by degrees, which he
perceiving, fled privately to the Abbey of Beaulien in New Forest, for
Sanctuary, but upon Promise of Life, and a Pardon for his Crimes, he came forth
and submitted, making his public Confession and Recantation, how he was but
the Son of a converted Jew, born at Tournay in Flanders, and had been wrought
upon to take this Enterprise upon him by the Duchess of Burgundy, and others,
upon which he was committed close Prisoner to the Tower. Yet some Practices
being still on foot, King Henry not thinking himself secure, caused him to be
tried at Westminster for High Treason, in attempting to escape, and carry with
him the Earl of Warwick, to raise new Commotions in the Kingdom, and being
sentenced, was drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged. In this the innocent Earl of
Warwick was involved, without any other apparent reason than to cut him off,
that the Succession might be the more firm to Henry's posterity; and this poor
Prince who had been kept a Prisoner from his Infancy, and little kn^w what
belonged to Law, or Matters of State, being by some who insinuated to be his
Friends, persuaded to confess upon his Trial what he never intended or thought
of by having a Promise of Pardon upon such a Confession; the King very unkindly
took him at his word, and being condemned for High Treason, he was beheaded on
Tower Hill, and in him failed the Name of Plantagenet, as being the last of the
Male Line of that illustrious House. This cruel execution, little inferior to
what Richard the III. had acted by his Newphews, is held to be done upon the
account of the Match between Prince Arthur, the King's Son, and the Princess
Katharine of Spain, the Spaniard appearing averse to conclude it till by the
removal of the Earl of Warwick, the Succession was better secured.

Anno 1506. Edmund de la Pool, Earl of Suffolk, was tried by the King's express
Command at the King's-Bench-Bar Westminster, for killing a man; and tho he had
his Pardon, yet being of the Royal Blood, it so disgusted him, that he
privately retired beyond the Seas, and labored to disturb Henry's Reign, by
secretly holding Correspondence in England; which obliged the King to send his
Spies abroad, especially Sir Robert Courson, who insinuating into the Earl's
Favor, got out of him who were his Conferates in England; whereupon Sir James
Tirrel, the wicked Instrument in the Murder of the two young Princes, Edward
and Richard, in the Tower, and Sir John Windham, with three others, lost their
Heads on Tower Hill: Nor did the King spare any Cost or Labor to get the Earl
into his hands; but when his Policy failed, Fortune befriended him; for
Philip, King of Spain, and Archduke of Austria, in whose Countries the Earl
remained, being at Sea, was driven into the West of England by Stress of
Weather, of which Henry had no sooner notice, but he hasted to receive and
entertain him, which he did in a most splendid manner, and with some difficulty
procured his Promise to send him over the Earl a Prisoner, protesting his Life
should be secured to him, and accordingly he was sent over and secured in the
Tower.

King Henry supposing himself now secure, made it his business to heap up
Riches, and for that purpose he had his Instruments, Empson and Dudly, who by
grievous unlawful, and indirect ways oppressed the People, for which they were
justly punished as a Terror to corrupt Judges, which in the next Reign
appears; but in the midst of this Unrertaking the King dyed, viz. anno 1509. on
the 22d of April. He had Issue by Elizabeth his Queen, eldest Daughter to
Edward the Fourth, Arthur, who was married to Katharine of Spain, and dyed
before his Father, anno 1502. Henry, Edmund, who dyed 1499. Margaret, married
to James the Fourth, King of Scotland, Elizabeth, who dyed young, Mary, first
married to Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, and afterward to Charles Brandon,
Duke of Suffolk, Katharine, who dyed young.

This Henry was King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, Son to Edmund
Tudor, Earl of Richmond, by Margaret, Daughter and Heir to John Beaufort, Duke
of Somerset, Grandchild to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. He began his Reign
in the Year 1485 and reigned twenty three Years, eight months, and was the 39th
sole Monarch of England; he dyed in the 52d Year of his Age, and was buried in
the Chapel of his own Building at Westminster.

Thus after Toils of State and War are over,
Monarchs lie down to be disturbed no more:
The Grave yields quiet and Repose from ill
When Fate wound off the Wheels of Life stand still.
The Reign and Actions of Henry VIII. King of England, etc.
KIng Henry the Eighth was in his Father's Life time betrothed to Katharine of
Spain, his Brother Arthur's Widow; and the old King left him to set up with
1800000 l that he had scraped together in his latter days, the greatest
Treasure any King of England ever left before. This Henry was crowned at
Westminster, on the 25th of June, 1509. together with Queen Katharine, by
William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, choosing many grave persons out of the
Clergy and L^i^y. And now the people being enraged against Empson and Dudly,
for their illegal Oppressions, the King, to prevent Tumults that might have
happened in the beginning of a young Prince's Reign if Redress had been refused
caused them to be arrested and imprisoned, and soon after being brought to
Trial, and many heinous things proved against them, together with the Cries
and Clamours of the people for Justice, they were sentenced to lose their
Heads, and were accordingly executed.

The King being of a martial Spirit, and impatient of Ease, sent his Heralds at
Arms to the French King, there in his Name, and as in right belonging to the
English Crown, to demand the Dutchies of Normandy, Guine, Main, and Anjou; but
they being refused, he failed into France with a considerable Army, besieged
Terwin; and thither came Maximilian the Emperor, as a voluntary aider to the
King, and served under the English Standard as a Knight of the Order of the
Garter, and the French advancing with a considerable power to the relief of
this place, were routed almost without fighting; so from their cowardly
running away, being most Horse, it was called in derision, The Battle of Spurs;
yet six of their Standards, and many Prisoners of note were taken, and
thereupon the Town yielded, and the King marched to the Siege of Tournay, which
he won, and obliged the Citizens for their Redemption to pay him 10000 l and
about 80000 of them took their Oaths to become his Liege Subjects, making Sir
Edward Poinings Governor, and Thomas Wolsey, his great Favorite, Bishop of
that City: nor did this Success remain to the English in France alone, but at
the same time in England; for the Scots invading England with a powerful Army,
and having pierced as far as Northumberland, the Earl of Surry gave them
battle, with a great overthrow, in Folden Field, where James their King, one
Archbishop, 2 Bishops, 2 Abbats, 12 Earls, 17 Lords, a great number of Knights
and Gentlemen, and about 8000 common Soldiers slain, and almost all the rest
taken prisoners. This memorable Battle was fought on September. 9. 1513.

King Hen. victorious in France, the French sought all Ways for an
Accommodation, and at last, Pope Leo becoming Moderatour, a Peace was
concluded; and soon after Lewis XII. married Mary, the King's younger Sister,
at Albeville, with great splendor; yet he lived but 82 days after; for being
aged, and infirm, and over striving himself to pleasure a beauteous, lively,
young Lady, it no doubt contributed to the hastening his End; and upon his
Death the Queen returning for England, was privately married at Callais to
Charles Bradon, Duke of Suffolk, her first Lover, and from whom she had
unwillingly parted, to fall into the Arms of Majesty. And now by the too free
Access of Foreigners Trade greatly decreasing, one John Lincoln, and other
aggrieved persons, put up a Bill of Complaint, and it was read by the Minister
at the Spital Sermon. This so animated the Rabble that getting together on May
day, 1517. they fell upon, plundered, and destroyed the Houses of the
Strangers, committing many Outrages on their Persons: Nor was the Magistracy
able to quell them; for being all in an uproar, the Lieutenant of the Tower,
who had no Good Will for the City, played the Great Guns upon it; but the Rage
of the Multitude spent, they retired to their respective Habitations, yet
several were taken and tried, of which number Lincoln, and 13 more, most of
them youths, were hanged in diverse places of the City, and about 200 Men and
Boys, and 9 Girls and Women, went in their Shifts only, being bare headed,
footed, and legged, and Ropes about their Necks, to Westminster, where at the
upper end of the Hall the King sat, and after he had sharply reproved them,
and they on their knees had begged Mercy, Wolsey, by the King's command,
pronounced their Pardon, whereat with a joyful Cry they threw up their
Halters, in token of deliverance from death, and this day ever since is called
Evil May day, and soon after Tournay was restored to the French, in
consideration they paid the King 600000 Crowns in twelve years, and the Dauphin
to marry the Lady Mary, King Henry's Daughter, when she should be of sufficient
years of Consent; but if the Marriage took no effect, then the City to be
restored, and Wolsey, who by this time had bought him a Cardinal's Cap; to have
1000 Marks a year for the profits of the Bishopric; and Wolsey having power
with the King to do all, remembering a former Affront put upon by Edward
Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, he used his interest to the destruction of that
great Peer, who was beheaded on Tower Hill, upon pretense of aspiring to the
Crown.

In the Year 1521. the Emperor Charles V. in his way to Spain landed at. Dover
for Refreshment, and at the King's earnest Request came to London, and was
royally entertained with all the Magnificence and Splendor the Court abounded
with at that time; and King Henry having written a Book against Martin Luther,
and sent it to the Pope; he in recompense to his Zeal for the Roman Church,
sent him the Style of Defender of the Faith, which has ever since remained to
the Kings and Queens of England, sending him likewise a Consecrated Rose.

The Peace between England and France, by reason of misunderstandings, growing
to a Conclusion, a Parliament was assembled at the King's Palace in
Blackfriars, granting him half the yearly Revenues of all Spiritual Livings
to be paid for five years, and the tenth part of all Temporal Substance to
carry on his Wars, so that not staying to expect War, he sent to meet it,
commanding the Duke of Suffolk to pass over with an Army, who taking many Towns
and Castles, and every where worsting the French, returned Victorious, and the
King banished the Scots out of England, confiscating their Goods, but upon the
Mediation of his Sister, a peace was concluded for a time, yet there was
Martial business abroad, for the Irish rebelled, and siezing upon the Earl of
Kildare, who bore the Kings Authority in that Kingdom, they sent him bound to
England, with many Accusations against him, for which he was committed to the
Tower, and Wolsey who hated him, signed a Warrant for his Execution, without
the knowledge of the King; whereupon the Lieutenant went to Court, and the
Trick being made known to the King, Wolsey was severely checked, and the Earl
had the King's Sgnet sent him for his security.

About this time, overtures being made by the Emperor's Ministers in
consideration of Marriage with the Lady Mary; the French having rejected the
Match, and some scruples arising about the Legality of her Birth, as being born
on a Queen that had been his Brother's Wife, the King began to fall into a
dislike of his Marriage, and sent to Rome to sue out a Divorce; but finding
delays in that Cour^ he desired a Cardinal might be sent to hear the Cause, and
accordingly Cardinal Campius was sent whose Mules casting their Sumpters in
Cheap Side the Cardinal's Treasure was discovered to consist o^ old Shoes,
broken Meat, tattered Breaches and Rags, which raised no small Laughter in the
people. This Cardinal sat with Wolsey and other Clergy men; but when the King
expected the issue of the Matter, instead of giving the definitive Sentence he
dissolved that Court, and referred the Cause to the Pope, which so incensed the
King, that he Commanded him to depart the Kingdom, and sent Dr. Cranmer to
Rome, to justify the proceedings to the Pope, who with other learned Men,
bringing the Opinions of almost all the Universities of Europe under their
Seals that it was not Lawful to Marry (...) Brother's Wife, the Divorce was
made, yet the Queen lived in England till she dyed, and King Henry proceeded to
take to Wife Ann of Bullen, a very beautiful Lady, who to that end he had
before made a Duchess, and honored with many favors, but better she had been
without them, as by the sequel wi^ appear, Cardinal Wolsey, whose power was
such, tha^ he seemed to sway both King and Kingdom, began about this time to be
lessened in esteem, and shortly after, for not only disliking, but striving to
cros^ the King's Proceedings in the Divorce, and new Marriage, had first the
great Seal of England taken from him then several of his Bishoprics, which he
had engrossed, which beginning of disgrace, made him more liable to the Revenge
of some Courtiers whom he had i^jured, and they soliciting the King to proceed
further, he commanded him to leave the Court and retire to York, but as he was
on his way he was overtaken, and arrested by the Earl of Northumberland, and
his House and Furniture siezed: Hi^ Charge was for speaking Arrogant Words
against the King, which were interpreted that he meant to take revenge for his
disgrace; but at Leicester Abbey, in his way to London, taking an Italian
Confection to break Wind from his Stomach, he dyed not without suspicion of
Poisoning himself, rather than after so great a share of Power and Grandeur as
he had possessed, to fall into the hands of his Enemies. His last words were
these, viz. If I had served my God as faithfully as I have served my King, he
would not at this time cast me off. As for his Birth it was mean, being the Son
of a Butcher at Ipswich, rising from a low degree, by his Policy, Cuning and
prompt Genus.

About this time Queen Ann was delivered of a Daughter, Christened by the name
of Elizabeth; afterward our renowned Queen of England, and two years after of a
dead Child; but the Popish party at Court, perceiving this good Queen strongly
to incline to the Lutheran Doctrine, and encourage those of the Profession,
they found an opportunity to strike in with some displeasure of the King's, and
accuse her of Incest and Adultery with her Brother, the Lord Rochfort, which
appeared upon no other Foundation than his waiting upon her, whilst she was in
Bed, to inquire of her Health, and for joy of her recovery, presuming to salute
her; however she was beheaded on Tower Hill, making a very Pious and
Christian-like end, and for the same Fact dyed; Her Brother in like manner, on
the 19th. of May, 1536. and the next day the King gave a greater light into
this cruel Execution, by Marrying the Lady Jane Seymour, Daughter to Sir John
Seymour, which looked as though the removing one from his Embraces, was only to
make way for the other.

Wolsey, as is said being dead, Thomas Cromwell a Black-smith's Son of Putney,
who had been an under Favorite of the Cardinals began to rise in the Kings
esteem, being first made Master of the Jewel-house, then Barron of Okeham, then
Earl of Essex, after that great Chamberlain of England, and Vicar General of
the Spiritualities, he was a great favourer of the Reformed Religion, and
strove what in him lay to promote it, but this and his greatness proved his
downfall, by raising powerful Enemies at Court against him, so that after he
had done many great things for the King and Kingdom, he was Arraigned,
Condemned, and lost his Head; however some change of the Face of the Romish
Worship, made the Monks and Friars invite the Plebeans to take up Arms, under
pretense of redressing Grievances, and reforming matters of State, and were
headed in Lincolnshire by one Mackarel a Monk; but being promised by the King,
their requests should be partly answered, they laid down their Arms, but it was
not long before another rout got together, under the name of Pilgrims, carrying
in their Banner the Picture of Christ with his five Wounds, the Chalice Cake,
and other foolish Devices, declaring for Holy Mother Church, and a Reformation
in State. These assembled in Yorkshire to the number of 40000 Commanded by one
Diamond a Fisherman, who Styled himself the Earl of Poverty, and one Robert
Ask, yet upon the approach of the King's Forces, (though they had for a time
appeared very formidable) being promised as the former, some Redress of their
Demands, and a Pardon for what had passed, they dispersed themselves, yet upon
these and the like stirs, several of the Ringleaders were taken and Executed,
as four Abbots, two Pryors, three Monks and 3 Priests, nor did Captain Mackerel
escape this Execution, and of Temporal Persons dyed the Lord Dacres, Sir Robert
Constable, Sir Francis Bigod, Robert Ask, and diverse others, and now the
Churches began to be purged of Images, and other Trumpery, which greatly
enriched the King's Coffors, for many of them were of Gold and Silver, set with
precious Stones, and those of Wood were burnt, nor were the Monasteries and
Religious Houses long delayed, of which there were suppressed Monasteries ^645
Colleges, 90 Chanceries, and Free Chapels, ^374. So that the Bible was read in
English Register Books appointed, and Weddings and Christen^ngs Commenced in
due order, to hinder Clandestine Iniquities, for upon their being demolished,
great numbers of Childrens Sculls and Bones were found, which had been
Murdered, stopped up in the Walls and other places, to hide the Infamy of the
Lascivious Nuns and Friars, etc. But by this means the Revenues siezed, swarms
of Monasticks were turned out to shift, which made them labor to incense not
only many of the Commons, but some Noblemen and Gentlemen, against the King,
and the Pope sent a Bull Excommunicating the King, but the Bull bearer being
taken as he was fixing it upon the Bishop of Londons Palace, he was as a
Traitor conveyed to Tyburn, and there hanged with the Bull about his Neck, and
the Marquess of Exceter, the Lord Montacute and Sir Edward Nevile were Executed
at Tower Hill, for Conspiring to depose Henry, and place Cardinal Reignald
Pool, Grandson to the Duke of Clarence in the Throne.

The Lady Jane Seymour, whom Henry hade made ^his Queen, dying in Childbed
with Prince Edward, afterward our Edward the Sixth, the King Married the Lady
Ann, Sister to the Duke of Cleve, and she being sent over, the King no sooner
fixed his Eyes on her, but he took dislike a to her Person, and pretending he
had been deceived in the Report of her Beauty, the Beding was refrained and a
Divorce procured in Parliament, barring her the Tittle of Queen, and he
proceeded to Marry the Lady Catharine Howard, Neice to the Duke of Norfolk, but
she soon after run the same Risque as Ann of Bulloin had done, for she had not
been Married much above a year, before she was accused of Fornication and
Adultery, the one with Francis Derham before Marriage, and the other with
Thomas Culpeper after, she was Queen, for which, she together with the Lady
Jane Rochfort, lost her head, on Tower Hill, the latter suffering for
Concealing the Fact of the former, though the Queen declared to her Confessor
to the last she was innocent; as for Derham and Culpeper they were Executed at
Tyburn, nor did the Countiss of Salisbury, Daughter to George Duke of Clarence,
and Mother to Cardinal Pool escape the cruelty of the King, for upon a
suspicion she held Correspondence with her Son, she was attainted in Parliament
and beheaded upon that Attandure, and about the same time the Lord Leonard Gray
lost his Head for Treason, and for refusing to deny the Pope's Supreamicy, and
acknowledge the King's, upon a Statute acknowledging the King Supreme Head in
his own Kingdom. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and the famous Sir Thomas
Moor, Lord Chancellor of England, were beheaded, and yet by the contrivance of
the Papists, the bloody six Articles were brought in a sa Snare to those of the
Reformed Religion, upon which account many suffered the Flames, and amongst
others Dr. Barns and Mrs. Ann Askew, who refusing after Tortures to comply,
were committed to the devouring Fire, and the King Married the Lady Catharine
Parr, who favored the Lutherans, and was of the Reformed Church, whose Life
the Papists often put in danger, but she escaped the Snare and outlived the
King, who having invaded both Scotland and France, upon the disappointment in
the Match proposed and agreed on, between Prince Edward and the Lady Mary of
Scotland, Heir and Heiress to the two Crowns, and won Bulloin in France,
wasting Scotland wsth Fire and Sword, and taking upon him the Title of King of
Ireland, he fell sick in January 1547. and made his Will, that in default of
Issue, his Son and two Daughters should successively possess the Trone, and
giving great Sums to charitable Uses, dyed the 28th. of the same Month.

This Henry was King of England, France, and Ireland, second Son to Henry the
Seventh, he Reigned 37 Years 9 Months and six Days, and was the forty sole
Monarch of England, the Issue he left behind him, were Edward, Mary, and
Elizabeth, who succeeded him in the Sovereignty, he dyed in the 56th. year of
his Age, and was buried in the Chapel at Windsor.

Thus the Eighth Henry ends his bloody Reign,
Beauty it self with him cannot Pity gain;
Yet met by Death, amongst the Dead he lies,
And with his Life he ends his Cruelties.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of Edward the Sixth, King of England, etc.
PIous Edward the Sixth, far from his Fathers temper, was born on the 12th. of
Ostober, 1537. occasioning by his Birth the Death of his Mother Queen Jane, for
in her hard labor King Henry having notice it was a Son, for which he had
passionately longed, and that either the Child or the Mother must perish; he
intimated he could have more Wives, but knew not whether he should have another
Son, whereupon the Surgeons having dozed the Queen with strong Spirits, to
make her senseless of the pain, by making a large Incision, took forth the
Birth, but by that usage the Queen soon after dyed

This Prince was Crowned at Westminster, on the 20th. of February, 1547. having
the three Swords delivered to him, as King of England, France and Ireland, and
upon this he told them, there was yet another Sword to be delivered to him,
viz. The Holy Bible, which is the Sword of the Spirit, and without which, no
King can Govern well, Edward Seymour, Duke of Somerset, and his Mothers Brother
was made Protector over his Minority, and hereupon it was concluded the Scots
should be compelled to make good the Marriage, which otherwise they refused to
do, wherefore a great Army was raised, and led by the Lord Protector into
Scotland, and vanquished the Scots in Muschelborough Field, after an obstinate
and bloody Fight, with great slaughter of their men, chasing them about five
miles, so that there dyed the Lord Fleming, with sundry others of quality, and
ten thousand of lesser note, and one thousand were taken Prisoners, amongst
whom of note were the Earl of Huntly, the Lords Yester, Hobby and Hamilton, the
Earl of Cassis, and the Lord Weems, so that the English without any farther
opposition, sacked and burnt Lies, the Island of St. Colmes, Brougherag,
Roxborough, Humes Castle, and other places, which obliged many of the Scotch
Nobility and Gentry, to come and cast themselves at the Proctor's Feet,
beseeching him to spare their Country, entering into terms with him on
condition of Peace, whereupon he returned to England, and a Parliament was
called, and the bloody six Articles repealed those Colleges, Chapells and
Religious Houses that King Henry had spared, were given to the King Edward, and
Commissioners appointed to purge the Churches of Images, which accordingly was
done, but in the West, Mr. Body, one of the Commissioners was stabbed to the
heart by a Priest, and to justify the murder, 10000 of the Cornish and
Devonshire Rusticks took Arms, Headed by Humphry Aurundell, and six other
Gentlemen and eight Priests, who straightly besieged Exceter, but were beaten
off after they had done considerable mischief, yet they continued in Arms, and
sent the King sundry Articles to be aggreed to, viz. That they might have Mass
Celebrated as in times ^ast, that they might have Holy Bread and Holy Water in
^membrance of Christ's Body and Blood, that the six Articles might be again in
force, with some others; to which, the young King pitying their ignorance
returned them an answer with a general Pardon, if they submitted, but that not
prevailing, and the multitude still increasing, an Army was sent against them,
which put them to flight at Honiton, and beat them before Exceter, and on
Cliff-Heath utterly dis^omfitted them with considerable slaughter, and all the
Popish Trumpery which the Priests had brought unto the Field to encourage them,
were trampled under Feet, and Aurundel, Holms, Winsland, and Bury ^our of their
Ringleaders were taken and Executed, and a Miller's man near Bodmin taking
upon him, by ^is Masters directions to personate him, Sir Anthony Kingstone,
Marshal of the Field, commanded him to ^e hanged; the Fellow confidently
affirming himself to be the Rebellious Miller, till he came to the Gallows, yet
there declared he was but his man, yet this late Confession stood him in no
stead, for Sir Anthony caused him to be hanged, telling him he could never do
his Master better Service; but the troubles ended not thus, for the Priests
being unhived and deprived of their Roast-meat, stirred up the people in other
parts of the Kingdom, and especially those in Norfolk, were Headed by one
Robert Kett a Tanner, who Styled himself the King's Deputy to redress
Grievances, issuing out Writs and Warrants in the King's name, and choosing an
Old Oak to sit in Council, called the Oak of Reformation, to which Tribunal
all Complaints and Grievances of the Rusticks were brought to be redressed, and
Orders were sent for the plundering Gentlemen's Houses, taking Arms and
Ammunition out of Ships, etc. making themselves Master of the City of Norwich,
over-throwing the Marquis of Northampton; but the Lord Dudly Earl of Warwick,
being sent against them, forced the City and caused Sixty of such as he there
had taken i^ Arms, to be immediately hanged; however, the Rebels entrenched and
fortified their Camp at the foot of a Hill called Duffin-dale, encouraging
themselves upon a vain Prophecy, that Hob, Dic, and Hic, meaning the Rusticks
should with their Club^ fill up the Valley of Duffin-dale with the Bodies of the
slain.

On the 27th of August, the Earl prepared to give them Battle, when the better
to retard him, the Rebels set in the head of their Battle, all the Gentlemen
and others that they had taken Prisoners coupled in Irons; however Captain
Drury with hi^ Band of Almains broke in furiously, and gave those persons leave
for the most part to escape, and the Earls light Horsemen coming on, the
Rebels gave back, and at length betook them to open flight, and were pursued
three miles, with the slaughter o^ 3500 of them; yet such as had Barrocaded
themselves with Carts and Wagons amongst the Ordinance, as men in despair,
resolved to sell their live^ at a dear rate, but upon offer of Pardon they
threw down their Arms, crying, God save King Edward and the next day, Kett
being siezed in a Barn, was hanged in Chains upon the Castle of Norwich, and
his Brother William Kett, was hanged on Womanha^ Steple, and Nine others on the
Oak of Reformation. The pretense of this Rebellion, was about throwing open
Enclosures, which the King by his Proclamation had commanded to be done, but it
was neglected.

These Commotions were no sooner over, but another Rebellion broke out in the
North, Headed by Thomas Dale, a Parish Clark, one Stephenson a ^ost-master, and
William Ombler, a Yeoman, pretending to restore Church rights, and redress
Grievances, declaring the power of the Pope above that of the Kings, and that
the Church had power of ^oth Swords, but this feeble Rebellion not exceeding
^000 vanquished upon the Kings sending his For^es and offer of Pardon, yet
Ombler, Dale, and four others were on the 12th of September 1549. Execu^ed at
York, as Seducers and Ringleaders.

These and the like disturbances qeieted, considerable ones began at Court, for
Thomas Seymour, Baron of Sudley, High Admiral of England, having married Queen
Catharine Parr, Widow to Henry the Eighth, and some words and contest happening
between her and the Duchess of Somerset, Wife to the Protector, for precedences
the two Brothers so unadvizedly espoused their Wives Quarrel, which was fomented
by secret Enemies, that the Admiral by the Protector's procurement, being
accused in Parliament, for attempting to get the King's person and Government
into his hands, etc. Upon slender proofs was Sentenced and lost his Head on
Tower Hill, on the 20th of March, to the great grief of the young King, who
aboured to prevent it, but by Somerset's removing this Brother, he stood open
to the malice and revenge of his implacable Enemies; for soon after, by the
contrivance of Northumberland and others, diverse Articles were exibited against
him for abusing his Trust, Animating the Rebels, sowing Sedition amongst the
Nobles, keeping a Court of Requests in his own house, whereupon he was deprived
of his Authority, and sent to the Tower, but the King soon released him, yet
was he not restored to his Trusts.

Whilst these heats lasted at Court, the Affairs abroad were neglected,
insomuch that the Scots recovered most of the Town the English had taken, and
the French attempted to surprise Bullenberg with seven thousand men, but were
beaten off wit^ the loss of one hundred and fifty, and had no better sucsess in
their attempts upon Guernsey and Jersey Islands; however, things not going well
at home Bullenberg and Bulloin were surrendered to the Frenc^ upon Conditions,
and the payment of a large Sum^ of Money, and now to add to the Calamity, the
Mortal Disease, called the Sweating Sickness, raged in England, carrying off
many thousands, pursuing the English into Foreign Countries, where none but
they were afflicted with it: And now the Duke of Northumberland being grown
great at Court, labored to remove the Duke of Somerset, and by a^ Stratagem,
found an opportunity, for the Duke, by some of his flatters, being persuaded
there was a^ design against his life, went privately Armed to the Council, but
his Gown opening as he sat at the Board, it was laid hold of, as a design in
him to kill some of the King's Privy Counselors, and that, with some light
matters being urged with agravation they procured his imprisonment, and soon
after being tried and found guilty of Felony, though he might have come off by
his Clergy, yet his Council nor himself not foreseeing to claim it, he was on
the 22d. of February, Anno 1550 brought to Tower Hill, and there, after having
declared his Innocence, and made a most Christian Speech, he was beheaded,
which some looked upon as a Judgment, for so rigorously persecuting his Brother.

Upon the Death of this Uncle, though Plays and other Devices were made to
divert the King, he grew Melancholy, and the people were greatly Incensed
against Northumberland; however, he taking the occasion from the King's
Sickness and Disorder, procured him to disinherit his two Sisters, Mary and
Elizabeth, and settle the Crown on Jane, Eldest Daughter to the Duke of
Suffolk, by the Lady Frances, Daughter to Charles Brandon, and Mary, Queen of
France, younger Sister to King Henry the eighth, who was married to Guilford
Dudly, Fourth Son to Northumberland; and to this Will of the Kings, the
Council, Bishops, and all the Judges, except Sir John Hollis, Subscribed, and
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the City of London, afterward promised their
Assistance and Protection; but this was supposed to hasten the King's Death:
For Northumberland having gotten what he expected, viz. The Crown in his own
Family, removed his Physicians and trusty Friends, putting him into the hands
of a ^he Doctress, who wittingly, or unskilfuly brought him to his End, on the
6th. of July, 1553. This good Prince is accounted a second Josia, exceeding in
Charity and Piety all that went before him, having Learning and Understanding
far above his years, and had he lived a longer Date, he had proved more
perspicuously the Mirror of Kings.

This Edward was King of England, France, and Ireland, the only Son of King
Henry the Eighth, by Jane his third Wife, he Reigned six Years, five Months,
and eight Days, and was the one and For^ieth, sole Monarch of England, dying in
the 16th. of his Age, and was buried at Westminster.

Thus England's Phoenix early left the Stage
His Death was much Lamented of the Age,
Yet he contented died, from's Throne to rise,
In Angels Arms to everlasting joys.
The Life and Bloody Reign of Queen Mary.
UPon the Death of King Edward, according to his Will, the Lady Jane was
proclaimed in London and elsewhere, and confirmed by the Council; but Mary,
Eldest Daughter to King Henry the Eighth, being then at Fremingham Castle, sent
to complain against their Proceedings, in giving away her right, commanding
them to acknowledge he^ their lawful Queen, but they returned her a very
slight answer, commanding her to be obedient to Queen Jane, her Sovereign;
whereupon, with such Friends as she had about her, she prepared for London, and
to her a great many of the Suffolk men repaired, offering her their Service, in
case their Religion might be asured, insomuch, that by that means, and the
siezure of several Ships in the Ports out of which she caused the Cannon and
Ammuition to be taken, she became formidable, whereupon an Army of 13000 men,
under the Command of the Duke of Northumberland, marched out against her but by
that time the Duke was got as far as Cambridge, he had notice that the Council
at London ha^ laid aside Queen Jane, and Proclaimed Mary Queen whereupon most
of his Forces deserting him, h^ threw up his Cap likewise, and Proclaimed he
Queen, but this excused him not, for he was soon after Arrested by the Lord
Arundel, and brought Prisoner to the Tower. Queen Mary being com^ to London,
and perceiving her self a little settled i^ the Throne, by reason many Noblemen
and other had declared for her, and raised Forces in her Defense she soon
forgot, or rather rejected the Promise she had made to the Suffolk men, of not
altering any thing in Religion, setting at liberty the Popish Clergy, and
restoring them to their Benefices, Imprisoning Bishop Ridley, and Archbishop
Cranmer making Stephen Gardner the Inveterate Enemy of the Reformed Church,
Lord Chancellor, by whose persuasion Northumberland was tried and attainted of
Treason, when coming on the Scaffold, deluded by the Popish Priest in hopes of
Pardon he renounced the Protestant Religion, for which he had before appeared
so zealous, and openly professed the Roman Catholic, declaring it to be the
truly ancient Religion, but this meanness of Spirit, in prostituting his
Conscience availed him little for they showed him a Popish Trick, cuting his
Head off, notwithstanding his recantation, with him dyed, Sir John Gates and
Sir Thomas Palmer, and soon after the Queen was crowned at Westminster by
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester; and a Parliament being called, the
Popish Party so overruled the rest, that they were obliged to comply with
them, after a long refusal for the repealing an Act, made in the Reign of
Edward the Sixth, Entitled an Act of Uniformity of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, so that the Papists got again into the
Churches, and finding their Power, they began to wreck their revenge on those
that had any ways opposed and crossed their purposes; and now the Lady Jane and
her Husband, the Lord Guilford. being tried, and condemned at Guild Hall as
guilty of Treason, they were on the 12th. of February, 1553 beheaded the Lord
Guilford on the Great Tower Hill and the Lady Jane on the Green within the
Tower, both dying in the Reformed Church, with admirable patience and firmness
of mind, declaring they suffered not for any Crime of their own, but for the
Crimes of others, whose Ambition had driven them to take upon them the
Sovereignty.

This Innocent Blood satisfied not the Papists anger, insomuch that they
persuaded the Queen she could not be safe whilst the Duke of Suffolk lived, and
thereupon getting him attainted of Treason for conspiring to raise Rebellion,
and leavy War to hinder the Queens Marriage with Spain, etc. he was on the 23d.
of October, beheaded, and his Brother Thomas Gray, beheaded the 23d. of May
following, and now the Queen no longer desirous to li^ alone; a Marriage with
Spain was concluded very advantageous to the Trade of the English, ye^ many
fearing the Kingdom would be subjected or at least overrun by a Foreign
Nation, great Commotions were raised, and the Kentish-men rise under the
leading of Sir Thomas Wyat, against whom the Duke of Norfolk being sent,
instead of Fighting most of his men Deserted and joined with Wyat whereupon the
Duke retired, and Wyat advanced toward London, demanding a disanulling the
Match with Philip of Spain, and that for security, the Tower and other places
should be put into his hands which obliged the Queen to leave the Palace, and
betake her self to London, where many Consult were held in the Guild Hall, and
the Queen in those Councils, declared her right to the Crown, Magnifying the
Advantages that would Accrue by the Match with Spain, and encouraging the
Londoners to stand by her against her Rebels; however, Wyat advancing, and
Treaties proving ineffectual, the Earl of Pembroke was made General, and 100 l
^ Year Land promised to him and his Heirs for even that should bring Wyat alive
or Dead; however h^ fortified Southwark, and attempted with his great Guns, and
about 5000 men under 14 Ensigns to force London Bridge; but finding the
Drawbridge cut away, and the further part strongly guarded b^ the Citizens and
others, and at the same time moved by the Tears and Entreaties of the
Inhabitant of Southwark, many of whose Houses were beaten down by the Tower
Guns; he marched round by Kingstone upon Thames, and there, though part o^ the
Bridge was broken down and Guarded, he gai^ed a Pass, but coming too late to
London, by staying to remount a great Gun, he was furiously charged by the Earl
of Pembroke and others, yet he broke through, and marched with one Party to
Ludgate, whilst another Party assaulted the Court; but finding no Entrance, he
retired with his small Number, but was stopped at Temple Bar, and being by
Clarencieux, King at Arms, required to submit to the Queens Mercy, he
surrendered him, and was carried behind Sir Maurice Berkly to the Court, and
from thence sent to the Tower, and on the 11th. of April, 1554, he was beheaded
on Tower Hill, where he much bewaled his misfortune, and cleared the Princess
Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney, by declaring their Innocence, as to their
having any hand in his undertaking: About 50 of his Followers suffered in and
about London, and about as many in diverse parts of Kent, and 400 went through
the City with Halters about their Necks to White Hall, where the Queen from a
Gallery pronounced their pardon.

Queen Mary finding her Endeavors fruitless to bring over the Princess
Elizabeth her Sister, to the Popish Superstition, resolved to use violence, and
hereupon sent Commissioners to her Manor of Ashbridge, where she resided to
bring her live or dead to London, and accordingly she was brought Prisoner in a
very sick and weak condition and sent from White Hall to the Tower, under
pretense of holding Correspondence with Wyat and others, where she was kept
very close and strict, and on the 9th. of May removed to Woodstock; where
hearing a Milk-Maid sing merrily over her Pail in the Park, she preferred the
mean contented condition of that Maid, before her own wishing her self in her
State. The Princess by the usage she received, looking for no less than to be
made away, adicted her self to Devotion, when she was not under Examination;
for Gardener and others of the Popish Crew, that labored for her Death, spared
no pains to sift her, and examined some persons against her, even by Torture,
but finding nothing Criminal, Gardener to ensnare her in Matters of Conscience,
pressed her to Declare her Opinion, about the corporal presence in the
Sacrament, to which the Witty Princess warrily replied.

Christ was the Word that sp^ke it,
He took the Bread and brake it,
And what the Word did make it,
That I believe and take it.
And although when she was in the Tower, Gardner privately, and without the
Queens knowledge, signed a Warrant for her Execution, which had taken effect,
had not the Lieutenant's Scruples prevented it by going to the Queen, and the
Bords of her Chamber were Fired under her: As likewise two Ruffians sent at
another time to kill her, who were prevented by Beddingfield; her Keepers being
out of Town, she at last escaped the ruin intended her.

In the year 1554. on the 16th of April, a great Dispute was held between the
Popish Doctors and Thomas Cranmer, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridly,
Bishop of London, Hugh Lattimer, Bishop of Durham, and others of the Reformed
Religion at Oxford, about Transubstantiation and other Points, wherein, when
the Papists found themselves baffled, they told the Bishops, though they had
the word, yet they had the Sword, and indeed they used it with extreme cruelty,
for these good Prelates were then Imprisoned, and about a Year and six Months
after, were burnt for the sake of a good Conscience in Oxford Town-Ditch, and
now on the 25th of July, Philip King of Spain, arrived with a great Train of
Nobility, and the Marriage was solemnized and they proclaimed by the Titles of
Philip and Mary, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and
Ireland, Princes of Spain and Sicily, Arch Dukes, etc. of Austria Dukes, etc.
of Millain Burgundy and Brahant, Counts, etc. of Haspurg, Flanders, and Tyrol,
and in November following, the Queen was said to be with Child, and upon the
spreading this report, she took her Chamber, whereupon Midwives, Rockers and
Nurses were provided, and the Priests in their Pulpits prayed for her safe
Delivery, assuring the people before hand, it was a Prince, and some where so
vain to discribe it features, the Parliament likewise resolved if the Queen
Dyed, King Philip should be Protector of the Realm, and the Infant during the
Minority, and at last a false Rumor was given out, that the Queen was actually
delivered of a Prince, whereupon the English Merchants at Antwerp, and other
Ports discharged their Guns and drunk Healths to their young Master, but in
conclusion, it appeared the Queen was not, nor never had been with Child, yet
it was conjectured by many, that the Papists, if King Philip had not protested
against it, had shamed a Child upon the Nation, and soon after out of some
dislike, he left England, and returned no more, yet he taking part with the
Emperor his Father against the French, the Queen sent a Gallant Army, under
the Leading of the Earl of Pembroke to his Aid, as he lay at the Siege of St.
Qeintines, by whose help the place was taken from the French, whereupon the
Duke of Guis, with the greatest part of the French Army, coming about by swift
Marches, unexpectedly laid Siege to Calais the only English Town in France, and
there being no Succors sent from England, by reason of contrary Winds, as if
Heaven apparently declared it self against the breach of League, the besieged
few in number, after they had done all that men were capable of doing in
Defense of the place, surrendered it upon advantageous Articles.

The loss of this place, and the unkindness of King Philip, cast the Queen into
a deep Melancholy, insomuch, that she declared, if she was opened when Dead,
they might find Calais written on her Heart, and the Sweating Sickness coming
on, she fell desperately, ill and dyed the 17th. of November, 1558 in her Reign
were consumed in the Flames, for the sake of a good Conscience, five Bishops,
twelve Ministers, 18 Gentlemen, forty eight Artificers, one hundred
Husbandmen, Servants, and Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine
Virgins, and two Infants, the one Whipped to Death by Bonner's Chaplain, for
calling him Ball's Priest, and the other springing out of his Mothers Womb,
whilst she was in the Flames, was notwithstanding cast into the Fire, sixty
more were Imprisoned, and grievously persecuted, seven of them Whipped, and
sixteen perished in Prison, who being as Heretics denied Christian Burial,
were buried in Dunghills: The Duchess of Suffolk, and diverse others were forced
to fly beyond the Seas, where they suffered extreme Misery and hardship; nay,
so violent were the Priests, who altogether swayed the Queens Inclinations,
that they intended to take up the Body of King Henry her Father, and bury it in
a Dunghill, in revenge of the injurys he had done Mother Church in rooting out
the Monks and Friars, but the Council opposed it, and in process of of time,
almost all the Persecutors came to miserable Ends.

This Mary was Queen of England, France, and Ireland, Eldest Duaghter to Henry
the Eighth, by Catharine his Queen, Daughter to Ferdinand the Seventh, King of
Spain. She began her Reign, on the 6th. of July, and Reigned five Years, four
Months, and Eleven Days, dying in the fortieth Year of her Age, without Issue,
and was buried in Westminster, being the 42. sole Monarch of England, etc.

Thus Died Romes Darling, who a wonder stood,
In Cruelty and Feasting Flames with Blood,
Made England groan beneath a Popish Yoke,
Yet Death at last, the fatal Fetters broke.
The Reign and Actions of Elizabeth, Queen of England, etc.
QUeen Mary giving place by Death, her Illustrious Sister Elizabeth, after
escaping many Eminent Dangers, succeeded her in the Throne, the Nobles owning
her their rightful Queen, and doing her Homage; so that on the 15th. of
January, she was crowned by Dr. Oglethorp, Bishop of Carlisle, and soon after a
Parliament was called, in which the Title of Supreamacy was taken from the
Pope, and restored to the Crown with the tenths and first Fruits of
Ecclesiastical Livings, as also the Common Prayers as used in the Churches in
the Reign of Edward the Sixth, and such Acts as in Queen Marys time, were made
in favor of the Romanists were were repealed, so that the Face of Religion was
again restored, and many pious men that had fled the Land, returned, and about
this time, a Petition was made to the Queen to Marry, that her Royal Issue
might succeed her, but she absolutely refused to hearken to it, saying, That
she held it sufficient, that a Marble Stone should tell to Posterity, that she
a Quen had Reigned, lived and dyed a Virgin.

The Pope by this time having Notice that England was rescued out of his
Clutches, set all his Engines on work, to trouble the Reign of this great
Queen, which obliged her to enter into Confederacy with diverse Protestant
Princes of Germany, and upon demanding Calais; the French promised to deliver
it to the English at the Expiration of eight years, or to pay 500000 Crowns,
but it was never performed, though sworn to, and for the better Regulation of
the Clergy in England, Oaths were tendered; whereupon diverse refusing to own
the Queens Supreamacy, were turned out, and learned Men, who had been outed in
Marys Reign, put into their places, she likewise called into her Mint, Pase,
and Adulterated Coin; and allowing so much as the true value, she refined it,
and Coined that Money that now goes Current in her Stamp, laying up Magazines
and Stores of Warlik Provision, and sent Aids into Franne, to support the
Protestants in Arms against the Papist; but to divert her nearer home, Shan
O-Neal Rebelled in Ireland, laying claim to the Province of Vlster; but great
preparations being made against him, he came over, and submitted, yet returning
to his old Trade, he was at length slain by one of his Companions, who with his
Head, compounded for his own safety, etc. and shortly after great Dissensions
happened in Scotland, where the Scots Mutiniers Murdered their King, and the
Queen, the Heiress of Scotland, and Mother to King James the First, of England,
flying for France, was driven on the Coast of England, and made a Prisoner by
order of Council; and now the Pope impatient of delay by his Commissions and
large Promises stirred up many, as well Nobles as Plebeans to take Arms,
causing his Bulls to be dispersed the better to incense the people against the
Queen; however they were overthrown, and an Alderman, a Priest, and about 66
Constables and others Executed at Durham and other places The Earls of
Northumberland and Westmoreland, hereupon fled into Scotland; but raising new
Commotions, they were again routed, and Northumberland on the 22d. of August,
1570 beheaded at York, where to the last, he affirmed the Pope's Supreamacy,
and declared the Land to be in Schism, according as the Pope had declared in
his Bull, or Curse, against the Queen, which had been privately fastened on the
Gate of the Bishop of London's Palace, and diverse Priests conspiring
themselves, and stirring up others to raise Commotions, were convicted and
Executed at sundry times and places, as Story, Summevil, Parry, Campion,
Throckmorton, Howard, and others.

Anno 1577. the famous Captain Drake set sail from Plymouth, and in 3 years
wanting 12 days compassed the whole Earth, making many wonderful discoverys,
his Men being worshipped by the Barbarous Nations as Gods, and at a place which
he named Nova Albion, the King surrendered him his Crown of Network, and
Feathers curiously wrought desiring him to take upon him the Government of the
Country, which he did, to the behoof of the Queen, setting up a Monument of her
Sovereignty in those parts, by the consent of King and People; and much about
the same time, Sir Martin Forbisher tried the North East Passage, and named the
furthest Land, Queen Elizabeth's Forelands; and whilst this great Queen
flourished in spite of Foreign and Clandestine Foes, Francis de Valois, Duke
of Anjou, and Brother to the French King, made suit to her for Marriage, and
mistaking the Freedom she had taken for a consent came over to Woo her in
Person; but after the Expense of much Treasure, himself and his Suit were
rejected, and he returned no wiser than he came: And now the King of Spain
oppressing the States of the Neitherlands, and laboring to settle the
Inquisition amongst them the Queen, upon their humble supplication sent over
1000 Horse, and 5000 Foot, under the Leading of Sir John Norris, and for the
Security of the Reimbursment of her Charges, had the Towns of Brill and
Flushing with two Sconces, and a Castle put into her hands.

Anno 1587, The Priests, raised new stirs in England and Ireland, which
hastened the Death of Mary, Queen of Scots, for that poor Princess weary of a
tedious Imprisonment, holding some Intelligence with one Babington and others,
in orders to make her escape, was betrayed by her Secretary, and being
Sentenced as one that had designed to depose Queen Elizabeth, and set up her
self, she was on the 7th. of Feb. beheaded at Fotheringay Castle, whose
Execution proved afterward no small cause of discontent to our Queen.

All hopes by this means, and other disappointments, being lost to the Papists
of bringing their Designs about, by Clandestine ways, the Pope stirred up the
King of Spain to Invade the Kingdom, giving it him as the Patrimony of St.
Peter, and promising him success, whereupon he gathered his huge Armado, which
he named Invincible, even whilst there was a Treaty of peace on Foot, yet the
Queen having notice from Henry the Third, King of France, what was intended
against her, prepared by Sea and Land, to expect the Storm, pitching her Camp
at Tillbury in Essex, consisting of 15000 Horse, and 22000 Foot, and for her
own Guard out of the several Countys she drew 23520 Horsemen and 34500
Footmen, and in the remarkable year 1588, on the 20th. of July, the Spaniards
with their huge Hulks, which appeared on the Sea, like floating Castles passed
by Plymouth toward Calais to join the Duke of Parma, Governor of the
Neitherlands for the King of Spain, but were dispersed with a mighty Tempest,
yet gathered again, but were so beaten by the English, under the command of the
Lord Howard, Admiral, Sir Francis Drake and others, that of 134. great Ships
that Sail from Lisbon only 53 returned into Spain, so that there were missing
81 Vessels, 13000 Soldiers and Seamen, and there was hardly a Noble Family in
Spain but lost a Brother or Kinsman in this Expedition, which had cost the King
of Spain Ten Millions.

For this great deliverance the Queen gave public Thanks in St. Paul's Church,
and the Spanish Prisoners and Streamers were brought to London, and the Queen
resolving to be even with the Spaniard for this Treachery, sent Sir Francis
Drake and others into the West Indies, where they took many Spanish Towns and
Ships, with great store of Gold and Silver, and after that she assisted Don
Antonio, the expulsed King of Portugal to recover his right, whereupon they
burnt Cadiz, and the Shiping in the Harbor worth five Millions, took several
Towns in Portugal, and marched to the very Gates of Lisbon, against which the
Earl of Essex breaking his Lance, demanded the proudest Spaniard of them all to
come and answer him. They likewise sailed to the Azzores, and took and
plundered those Islands. This made the Papists at home begin to stir, for which
Patrick Cullen. Dr. Lopez a Spaniard and diverse others hired to kill or poison
the Queen, were detected and executed; and indeed the Plots and Contrivances of
the like kind against this Queen, are recorded to be very many; nor did the
Spaniards fail to send Forces to the Assistance of the Irish Rebels, under
Tyroen, but they were defeated by the Lord Montjoy, many of them killed, and
the rest obliged to beg leave to depart the Kingdom, and Tyroen forsaken of his
Followers, was sent into England and Imprisoned in the Tower.

About this time, the Earl of Essex, who had been under disgrace for some
Miscarriages, when he was Deputy of Ireland, and confined to his House being of
a fiery temper, and knowing his Enemies at Court were contriving his Ruin, he
sent for ^^e Earl of Southampton, and diverse other Friends as resolving to
force a Visit and confront them in the presence of the Queen; but being
strictly forbid it, he confined the Counselors that were sent to that purpose
under a guard, and marched into London, but finding himself opposed, and that
there were none very forward to stand with him upon such an Undertaking; he
returned, and fortified his House in the Strand, but finding himself to weak to
hold out, he surrendered himself, and was committed to the Tower, and soon
after, he with the Earl of Southampton, were convicted of High Treason, in
endeavoring to Leavy War against the Queen, etc. and the Earl of Essex, on the
20th of February, 1600 lost his Head on the Green within the Tower, not only
lamented of the people, whose Darling he was, but of the Queen her self, who at
the persuasion of his Enemies, had in the heat of her passion signed the
Warrant for his Death; diverse others were Executed on this occasion, as it were
to bare so great a Man company; nor did the Queen enjoy her self after the fall
of this Favorite, but hastened her own Death by grief, dying on the 24th. of
March, 1602, and was buried in Henry the Seventh's Chapel at Westminster, when
she had Reigned 44 Years, 4 Months and 7 Days, and in the 69th Year of her Age.
This Elizabeth was Queen of England, France and Ireland, Daughter to Henry the
Eighth, by his Wife Ann Bulloin, in her Reign happened Earthquakes, Blazing
Stars, and a Mortal Plague, of which 40000 dyed in and about London; She was
the 43th sole Monarch of England, etc.

Thus set the Glory of her Sex in Dust,
Whose endless Memory Fame keeps in trust;
When Eating Time shall Marble Tombs deface,
Her Name shall live, beloved in every place.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of James the First King of Great Britain, etc.
THe name of the Tudors expiring in Queen Elizabeth, gave way to that of the
Stuarts, James the Sixth of Scotland, great Grandchild to James the Fourth,
and Margaret his Wife, Eldest Daughter to Henry the Seventh, succeeding to the
Crown, by reason of the failure of Issue by the Male Line, who upon notice of
the Death of Queen Elizabeth, being invited by the Nobles, set forward from his
Kingdom of Scotland, and entering England was received on the Frontires with
great joy, and conducted to London, being met some distance by the Mayor and
Aldermen and five hundred Horse, who conducted him to the Charter House,
prepared for his Reception, but because the Plague raged, the Coronation was
deferred, and the Popish Party, who had earnestly expected the death of the
Queen, in hopes a Papist might succeed, finding themselves disappointed,
labored to prevent his establishment in the Throne, and several were detected
who had received Orders from the Pope to seize his Person, and bring him to
their own terms; however on the 21st. of July. 1603. The King, together with
the Queen his Royal Consort were crowned at Westminster, by Dr. Whitgift,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Conspirators being tried at Winchester, many
were found guilty, yet only, Watson and Clark two Priests, together with George
Brook suffered death; the King pardoning the rest, mostly at the place of
Execution; and then in a dispute between the Bishops of the Church of England,
and the Puritan Ministers who pretended to a farther Reformation, this wise
Prince gave it for the first, and by learned reasons so confuted the latter,
that they were utterly non-plussed, and after that, he caused the Holy
Scripture to be new Translated from the Original, and Anno 1604 he made peace
with Spain, and proceeded to a Uniting the Kingdoms of England and Scotland,
and took upon him the Style of King of Great Britain, banishing the Jesuits
and Seminary Priests, who began a fresh to disturb the Government, which made
them as their last Shift, or rather cruel revenge, contrived that hellish Plot,
called the Gunpowder-Plot, wherein they bound themselves by Oaths and
Sacraments, for the more secretly carrying it on, but nothing escapes the Eyes
of the Almighty, who, when they were in the highest expectation of success,
turned their Wisdom into Foolishness; for by a Letter directed to the Lord
Monteagle, whom one of the Conspirators was desirous to spare the Nest they had
so long been making, was found, and in it thirty six Barrels of Powder intended
to blow up the King, Lords, and Commons in Parliament; and this was discovered
under great heaps of Billets but the very Morning they were to assemble in
Parliament, and Guy Faux at the Vault Door under the Parliament House, Cloaked,
Booted and Spurred, with a Dark-Lanthorn, and Matches ready to lay the Train,
upon which the Conspirators were pursued, and in the dispute, John, and
Christopher Wright, Thomas Piercy, and Robert Catesby were slain, and Anno
1605, on the 27th. of January, Sir Edward Digby, Thomas Winter, Robert Winter,
Ambrose Rookwood, Thomas Bates, Robert Keys, and Guido Faux were found guilty,
and Executed as Traitors, at the West End of St. Paul's, and in the Palace-Yard.
In memory of this signal Deliverance, the fifth of November, the Day on which
it was discovered, by Authority of Parliament, was enacted a perpetual day of
Thanksgiving. Henry Garnet and diverse others concerned in this Plot, were
Executed at sundry Times, and Places. Garnet confessing it, though a Jesuit,
and warning the Roman Catholics not to practice any Treason against their
Prince; for God would certainly discover and defeat it: And soon after there
happened Insurrections in the Shires of Liecester, Warwick, and Northampton,
about throwing open Enclosures, Headed at last by John Reynolds, but were
dispersed and quieted without much Trouble; and the King to honor the City
entered himself a Brother of the Cloath-workers Company, and by his Example
many Nobles were made free of that and diverse others; the New Exchange was
finished Anno 1609, and furnished with Wares, being called by the King,
Britain's Burse.

The Priests and Jesuits were commanded to depart the Kingdom. The Body of
Mary Queen of Scots, Mother to King James, was Anno 1612 removed from
Peterborough, to the Royal Chapel at Westminster, and there splendidly
Interred, and the Kingdom remained in great Tranquillity: But to abate the Joy,
Prince Henry, the King's eldest Son, dyed November the 6th. of a Fever, though
not without some suspicion of Poison, to the great Grief of the Kingdom, whose
Darling he was: And Frederick the Electour Palatine of the Rhine coming into
England was married to the Lady Elizabeth, the King's eldest Daughter, in the
Royal Chapel at White Hall, on the 14th. of February following; but soon after
at the Instance of the Bohemians taking upon him the Rule of that Kingdom he
was routed by the Emperor's Forces, who seized likewise the Palatinate; and
the King gave the Citizens of London the Province of Vlster in Ireland, and
instituted the Order of Baronets, limiting them within the number of 200, and
to cease with the failure of Issue; and Anno 1614, the New River was brought to
London, to the great refreshment of the City, which was much stinted for want
of Water, being only supplied by a few Conduits in the neighboring Fields; and
this year a Divorce being sued out between Robert Devereux and his Countess, on
her Pretense of his Insufficiency, she married Robert Carre, Earl of Somerset,
and the King's great Favorite; for inveighing against which Marriage they
procured Sir Thomas Overbury first to be sent Prisoner to the Tower, and there
to be poisoned; for which Contrivance Sir Gervase Elwes, and Mrs. Turner
suffered Death; the Earls and Countess were likewise sentenced, but had by the
King's Mercy Leases of their Lives granted them for 99 years, and for ever
banished the King's Presence. The Fall of this Favorite made way for Mr.
George Villiers, a Gentleman of a good House, who was soon after created Duke
of Buckingham Anno 1618. Sir Walter Rawleigh was delivered from a long
Imprisonment in the Tower, and sent to discover a golden Mine in the
West Indies, promising it should be no ways prejudicial to the Spaniards; but
failing in that Discovery, and Sacking the Spanish Town of St. Thoms, upon his
Return to England, at the continued Importunity of Gondamore, the Spanish
Ambassador, he was Beheaded, upon a former Sentence, and on the 2d. of March,
1618, Queen Anne died, and was buried at Westminster, her Death was preceeded
by an extraordinary Blazing-Star. And now the King being desirous to see Prince
Charles Married, sent him into Spain, to render his Courtship to the Infanta,
but after a six Months stay, being trifled with, that Court insisting to have
him change his Religion, etc. the King recalled him, and prepared for War, in
order to recover the Palatinate, and set on Foot a Treaty of Marriage with
France, but lived not to see it concluded; for on the 7th. of March, Anno 1625,
he died of an Ague at Theobalds in Scotland, and was Buried at Westminster with
great Solemnity, much lamented of his Subjects, being a Prince of extraordinary
Learning, Conduct, and Prudence; his Wife was Ann, Daughter of Frederick the
Second, King of Denmark, by whom he had Issue Henry, Charles, Elizabeth, and
two other Daughters Mary, and Sophia, who dyed young.

This King James was great Grandchild, by Father and Mother's side, to
Margaret, Daughter to Henry the 7th. of England: He began his Reign over this
Kingdom Anno 1602, Reigned 22 years, 3 days, and was the 44 sole Monarch of
England, and first of Great Britain, whose ancient Name he restored, by uniting
the Kingdoms: He died in the 59 year of his Age.

Thus to Death's Fury the wise Prince gave way,
And left this Twilight for eternal Day,
That, Phenix-like, he out of moulder'd Dust
May Glorious rise, to mingle with the Just.
The Life, Reign, and Actions of Charles the First, King of Great Britain, etc.
KIng James giving way by Death, Prince Charles, his only surviving Son, was
immediately Proclaimed and Crowned at Westminster; soon after which he was
solemnly Married to Henrietta Maria, Daughter to Henry the Fourth, French King,
whom he had seen in his Journey through Paris, to the Court of Spain.

The Marriage being over, the King began to show his Resentments of the
Affronts he had received in the Court of Spain, and Anno 1625 a Parliament was
called, and Assembled at Westminster, on the 8th. of June, wherein, after some
strong Debates about Petitions of Right and Religion, the King had two
Subsidies granted him, and a Fleet was sent to Sea, which spoiled and greatly
indamaged the Spanish Coast; but although the War was just and honorable, yet
upon the Meeting again of the Parliament in the August following, they denied a
farther Supply; whereupon he endeavored, with the Advice of his Lawyers, to
raise Money by way of Tonage, but the Parliament forbid the Payment of it, and
many of the Merchants refused to obey the King's Mandates; however the King
making an Alliance with the united Provinces, set out another Fleet, and
greatly distressed the Spaniards; but amongst others, some French Ships being
sunk, burnt, or taken, they seized the English Effects in their Ports by way of
Reprisal, whereupon the French were commanded to leave England, but Monsieur
Basompire coming Ambassador, prevailed to have many of them recalled, yet all
Commerce ceased between the two Kingdoms, and the French greatly oppressed the
Rochellers, which made them humbly supplicate King Charles's Assistance, who
sent a good power under the leading of the Duke of Buckingham; but the French
being strongly Encamped and Fortified in Rhee, the English returned without
effecting any thing considerable; and the Parliament again complained of
several Grievances, whereupon they were Dissolved, and new Forces raised for
the Relief of Rochell; but as the Duke of Buckingham was about to Embark he was
stabbed to the Heart, by one John Felton, an English Adventurer, at Portsmouth;
for which the Murderer was Executed, seeming to approve off, and glory in the
Fact to the last, and thus unhappily fell this Duke that had been the Darling
Favorite of two Kings.

Anno 1630, the Queen on the 29th. of May was brought to Bed of a Son,
afterward Christened by the Name of Charles, and since our Sovereign Monarch,
as will appear in the next Reign; at his Birth a bright Star appeared in the
daytime, and on the 14th. of October, 1633, the Queen was delivered of the
Duke of York: but the Joy of these Births were a little Eclipsed by the
misunderstandings in Scotland, and the oppositions made in payment of
Ship Money, though Ten Judges had given their Vote for the legality of it; the
Occasion of great Commotions in Scotland arising about the Service Book of
Common Prayer, being sent thither to be read in Churches, as usual in England;
for when the Dean came to read it in St. Giles's Church at Edenborough, he
narrowly escaped his Brains being beaten out by the People's throwing Stools,
Chairs, and Cudgels at him; nor did the Bishop, who got up into the Pulpit to
appease them, fare any better, and so great in a short time grew the Tumult
that the Magistrates were not able to quell it, which obliged the King to raise
an Army; but upon his Approach, the Scots in Arms met him on the Lorders, and
submitted, and a Peace thereupon was concluded, but soon after fell to
Covenanting, and raised new Commotions, the which, and the Misunderstandings
between the King and his Parliament, gave the native Irish an opportunity to
Rebel, and commit a most horrible Massacre on the English, throughout that
Kingdom, murdering about 200000, of all Ages and Sex, before any Succors were
sent to their Relief: This happened in the year 1641, the same year the Earl of
Strafford was beheaded upon an Attaindure of Parliament; and about two years
after William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, was Executed in the same manner;
and the King having passed a Bill for the Parliament to sit during their
Pleasure, such Heats ensued, and such Tumults withal, that the King, after he
had endeavored to give them all the satisfaction that could consist with his
Honor and Conscience, was obliged to retire to Windsor, to avoid the
Insolences of the Multitude, who threatened him in his Palace, and committed
many outrages, pulling down the Organs, and spoiling the Vestments, and
Ornaments of Worship in Westminster-Abby; and during the King's Absence, the
Parliament having put the Country in Arms, and took into their hands most of
the Seaport Towns, the King sent to grant them their reasonable Demands; yet
though several Messages passed, nothing came to a conclusion, and many of the
King's Friends left the upper and lower House, as dreading the fatal
Consequence, so that at last there not being above 80 Members in the lower
House, and 16 in the upper: The Queen left England, with her illustrious
Daughter the Princess of Orange, and the King with diverse Nobles went to York,
whither he Summoned the Knights of the Garter, and those that held of the Crown
to repair: And now People fearing things would come to extremity, the County of
Kent petitioned for an Accommodation, but their Petition was rejected, and the
bringer, and receiver imprisoned by the Parliament; yet upon the King's
Summons, about 60000 Men of Yorkshire appeared on Howard Moor, near York, and
after a view were ordered to repair to their respective Habitations; but at
this time the Parliament borrowed a great Sum of Money of the Londoners, on
the public Faith, and raised an Army of 10000 Foot, and 2000 Horse, making the
Earl of Essex their General, and proclaimed War.

The King being denied entrance into Hull, and having vainly assaulted it,
fortified Newark, and Barwick, and advancing to Nottingham, set up his
Standard, so that Hostilities began, and a piteous War ensued, wherein many
brave Men lost their Lives, Victory declaring sometimes for one Party, and
sometimes for another, insomuch that the Fields ^n about fifty Battles and
Skirmishes were fatted with Blood, and made in many places white with the Bones
of the slain, no Wounds, as it is observed by Lucan, piercing so deep as those
of Civil War; but the King being extremely weakened by a fatal Overthrow at the
Battle of Nas^by, fought on June the 14th. 1645, where most of his Officers,
Soldiers, and voluntire Gentlemen, were ^lain, or taken Prisoners, his Baggage,
Cannon, Ammunition, or what not, seized, he, after the Defeat, for want of
Money, was never in a Condition to make any considerable Head, though some
Towns and Parties stood out for him; but going to Oxford, and finding the Storm
gather from all Parts, distrusting the strength of the Place, he privately
withdrew, and by the Advice of some about him, cast himself, for protection, on
the Scotch Army, then in England, whose Commanders promised him all manner of
safety, but being in Arrear, they for the Sum of 200000 l delivered up this
good Prince into the hands of his merciless Enemies, who carried him for a
while from place to place, flattering him with Treaties, and Commissioners were
sent to him, demanding Consessions, and Agreements to Articles, but when all
good people were in hopes of an Accommodation, and right understanding, that
the Land after so much bloodshed might have rest, the Scale suddenly turned,
and a High Court of Justice was erected, of which Sergeant Bradshaw was
President; and although the King denied their Jurisdiction, yet they proceeded
to try him, viz. for that he had caused the cruel bloodshed in England, and
Ireland, and born Arms against the Parliament; That he had given Commissions to
his Son and others to wage War, etc. and although he answered not to the
Charge, yet on the 27th. of January 1648. they pronounced Sentence against him,
that he should loose his Head, and accordingly on the 30th. of January; he was
beheaded on a Scaffold before White-Hall-gate, where he made a Speech
professing his Innocence, and desiring God to bless these Kingdoms, and forgive
his Enemies.

Thus fell this unfortunate Prince, when he had Reigned 23 years, 10 Months and
3 Days, in the 49 Year of his Age, and his Body was Buried at Windsor: He was
second Son to King James by Anne his Queen, and had Issue by Henrietta Maria,
his Queen, Charles, James, Henrietta, Mary, Elizabeth, Catharine and Henrietta.

Thus did the much lamented Monarch fall,
And left behind the slighted earthly Ball;
Too scanty was Earth's Glory and Renown
For him that had in view a heavenly Crown.
The Reign of Charles the II. King of Great Britain, etc.
AT the Time of the cruel Execution Charles the Second was in Holland, whither
he had withdrawn himself to prevent the Designs of his Enemies, and there with
inexpressible Sorrow received the heavy News of his Father's Death, and
although from the 30th. of January 1648, his Reign is dated, as being rightful
King of these Realms, yet that part of a Parliament then sitting, upon penalty
of Treason, forbid all Persons to proclaim him, or be aiding in his
Restoration; and then the Commons House, the better to assure it, Voted the
Lords useless, and dangerous; however the Marquess of Ormond, since Duke of
Ormond, Proclaimed the King in Ireland, and the Scots did the like in Scotland;
however in England the King's Arms were pulled down, and the Harp and Cross,
called the Arms of the Commonwealth, set up. The Processes in Law were altered
and Money Coined with the States Arms: And now the Lord Fairfax, disliking
these proceedings and having laid down his Commission of General of the Army,
Oliver Cromwell took it up and so labored to please his Masters, that with
armed Force he brought Scotland and Ireland to a Compliance, whilst the King
was soliciting the Princes abroad for Aides to recover his Right, when the more
to disturb that King's Party in England, not only the Crown Lands were set to
sail, but even the Palaces, and those of Bishops, Deans and Chapters run the
same risk, and many worthy persons were expelled places of Benifice or Trust,
in Church or State, and the Parliament for their greater security, caused many
Castles to be demolished.

The Marquess of Montross declared for the King's interest in Scotland,
performing wonders even with (...) handful of men, against the Arms of the
Country, but in conclusion after he had done all that ^ould be expected from
heroic Valor and Con^uct, his men being scattered and he obliged to ^hift was
taken, and at Edenburg, hanged and quar^ered. During the Treaty the Scots had
on Foot with the King to bring him into that Kingdom, ^owever the urgency of
the King's Affairs made ^im dissemble his resentments, and upon the Treaty
concluded landed at Spey, and was conducted (...) Edenburg, and afterward
solemnly Crowned (...) Schon, viz. January 1. 1650. setting up his Stanard at
Abberdeen, and causing the Forces reduced under his Command to march against
the English ^orces that had entered that Kingdom, but without ^mming to any
considerable Encounter, the King (...) July, 1651. passed the Tweed and entered
England, ^ot only to draw the Enemy out of Scotland, but (...) join his
friends that had promised him Succors, and without much difficulty, marching
through the Country to Worcester, many Gentlemen and others came in, to him,
but being followed in a manner, at the heels by Cromwell, and the Militia of
the Counties every where raised, and the Earl of Derby, whom he had sent to
raise Forces in Leicestershire, defeated by Lilburn, he resolved to fortify
that City, and abide the storm, he perceived was gathering about him, but long
he had not been there, before Lambert's men forced the pass at Vpton, and other
places, insomuch that he found himself constrained to hazard a Battle, and
thereupon sallyed with undaunted bravery, at the head of his loyal Forces
making great slaughter, forcing Cromwell's Regiment to give way and fall into
disorder, but being to contend with about 60000 men, with not above 7 or 8000;
after he had done all that could be expected from Resolution and Bravery,
finding himself overlay'd, the retreat was sounded and he retired in some
disorder into the City, and finding the day utterly lost, he passed out at an
other Gate and escaped the hands of those that sought his Life God so ordering
it, that although 1000 l was bi^ for him, yet he lay obscure till he found
means t^ pass the Seas.

Upon this defeat, the Earl of Derby was take and beheaded, the Scots prisoners
were sold and mad^ slaves, and diverse of the King's Friends, at sund^ times
suffered death and confiscation, as the Lo^^ Capel, Duke of Hambleton, the Earl
of Holland, and^ and soon after Cromwell got himself Proclaimed Protector, and
many strange things were Acted, t^ ^cedious to be in^erted. But the blustering
Tyra^^lying, and his Son Richard dismounted, the seat had mounted in his stead;
the form and method Government continually altering, and the Peo^ weary of
Oppression, General Monk came with Forces out of Scotland, and after a short
time de^red for a free Parliament; and that Parliament, to the great joy of the
People, happily restored the King, who was with his Royal Brothers the Dukes of
York and Gloucester, conducted in great Splendor to his Palace of White Hall,
on the 29th of May, 1660. which day, by Act of Parliament, is set apart as an
Annual day of Thanksgiving, and many of those that were of the High Commission
Court, or had an actual hand in his Fathers Death, were Tried, Sentenced and
Executed in diverse places, and the 30th of January appointed as an Anniversary,
in memory of King Charles I. his death, and the Churches were restored to
Episcopacy and the Purity of Worship, as also Crown and Church Lands; but to
damp this joy, the illustrious Princess of Orange coming over to visit her
Royal Brothers, fell sick of the small Pox and dyed, to the great grief of all
Europe: and on the 13th day of September dyed Henry Duke of Gloucester.

Notwithstanding this happy Restoration, there remained some restless people,
for the January following, one Venner, a Wine-Cooper, with his Fifth-Monarchy
Proselytes, took Arms and fell desperately upon the City of London killing
diverse people, but being suppressed, Venner and 11 more were Executed, and the
Bodies of Cromwell, Ireton and Bradshaw, were taken out of their Graves, and
hanged at Tyburn, their heads cut off and set upon Westminster Hall, and their
Bodies buried under the Gallows; and on the 23d of April, 1661. the King with
great Magnificence passed from the Tower to Westminster, and there was Solemnly
Crowned: The Nobles, etc. doing him Homage, and the Parliament gave very
liberally toward the support of the Crown, Voting him a Supply of Two Millions
Five hundred thousand pounds, to be raised in three years time, and to hasten
the Naval Preparations, the City lent him 100000 li. And Anno 1664. War was
Proclaimed against the United Netherlands, and the following year a fatal
Plague fore-run by two blazing Stars happened in most parts of England; so that
in the space of a year 100000. dyed in the Citys and Suburbs of London and
Westminster, and (...) 3 of June, a bloody Fight happened between the two
Fleets; in which many brave men were killed on both sides, and in June
following, another Fight happened which continued for three days: And on the 2d
of September, a Fire begun in Pudding lane, which in three days consumed 78
Parish Churches, 5 Consecrated Chapels, 18200 Houses, Guild Hall, the Royal
Exchange, and most of the Companys Halls: the total Loss valued at Nine
Millions 9 hundred thousand pounds, and after it many dreadful Fires happened,
as in Southwark, Lime-House, Northampton, etc. But care was taken to rebuild
these and other places, more Magnificent in Structure, and after several bloody
Engagements at Sea, a Peace, Anno 1667. was a Peace concluded with the Dutch,
as likewise the difference with the Crown of Denmark was adjusted, soon after
and in August 3. 1669. Henrietta Maria, the King's Mother and Dowager of
England, dyed at Columbee in France, and was buried at St. Denis, Anno. 1670.
the Project on foot to make England and Scotland but one, was strongly pressed,
but so many difficulties arize, that it was laid aside: And the Princess of
Orleance making the King a Visit, upon her return to France dyed suddenly: And
the beginning of the year 1671 dyed Her Royal Highness Anne Duchess of York
and was buried at Westminster: and in March a Second War was Proclaimed against
the Dutch, and the French King was brought into the League; and in May there
happened a desperate Engagement and after that several others, which occasione^
many disorders in Holland; but about the latter en^ to 1673. a Peace was
concluded, and the same yea^ the Duke of York Married the Princess of Modena,
much against the mind of the Parliament: the King accepted a Freedom of the
Goldsmiths, and was presented with his Freedom in a Box of Gold and Diamonds,
and soon after set out his Proclamation for the security of Merchants Ships,
from Men of War or Privatiers, that should come into any of his Ports: and to
prevent the growth of Popery, published an Order that none under very great
Penalties should hear Mass, or go to Popish Chapels, unless such as belonged to
the Queen or foreign Ambassadors.

These being the material Treasactions to the year 1678. at the end of which
year the Popish Plot came upon the stage, discovered first by Israel Tongue and
Titus Oats, two Divines, and afterward by diverse others, which put the whole
Kingdom in a flame, and for which diverse suffered, as Col^man, Ireland,
Pickering, Grove, etc. who were Executed at Tyburn: and William Viscount
Stafford lost his Head on Tower Hill, and Green, Berry and Hill, were Executed
for the Murder of Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey: And the following year a party of
desperate Scots, Murdered the Archbishop of Saint Andrews in his Coach, and
fell into Rebellion; but were dispersed by the King's Forces, under the Command
of the Duke of Monmouth, and several of the ringleaders Executed; but soon
after his return he fell into disgrace at Court, and went for Flanders, yet
stayed not long there ever he returned and was received into favor: And now
the Papists began to struggle to cast off the odium the Plot had cast upon
them, and labored to lay it upon the Dissenters: Nor was there some hotheaded
people of that kind wanting, who by their illtimed behavior toward the King
and his Ministers, gave them an unexpected advantage; so that the Earl of
Shaftsbury and others, were Imprisoned in the Tower: one Stephen College a
Joyner, was Tried at Oxford, found guilty of High Treason and Executed. And in
the year 1683. Captain Walcot, William Hone and John Rouse, were executed at
Tyburn, and the Lord Russell and Algernoon Sidney, lost their heads: And not
long after Sir Thomas Armestrong being brought from Holland; and James Holloway
from Nevis, were sentenced at the King's Bench Bar, upon their Outlawries, and
executed at Tyburn: And two Informations for Perjury, were preferred against
Titus Oats, the principal Evidence in the Plot: But before he came to Trial
the King dyed, for falling ill on Monday the 2d of February, 1684. With a
violent fit of the Appoplexy, which at that time bereaved him of his Senses, he
continued in a languishing Condition till Friday the 6th of February and then
dyed, in the 55th year of his Age, when he had Reigned 36 years and seven days:
And was buried in King Henry the Sevenths Chapel; being the 46th Sole Monarch
of England.

Thus Charles the Great, his Glory laid aside,
A Prince that Fortune in all Shapes had tried:
In War and Councils equally approved,
Feared of his foes, but of his friends beloved.
Remarkable Transactions from the Time of King JAMES the II. coming to the
Crown, till his Leaving the Kingdom, etc.
KING Charles leaving no Issue, by Queen Katharine, his only Brother succeeded
him, and was Proclaimed by the style of James the Second, King of England, etc.
at the Palace Gate, and in London with the usual Solemnity and Ceremony,
Causing the Lords and others present (that were before) to be Sworn of His
Majesty's Privy Council, signifying by Proclamation, it was his Pleasure that
all who at the decease of King Charles, were in Office of Government, should so
continue till his pleasure was further signified. And upon his first sitting in
Council he made a Speech, in which amongst other Expressions are these, viz. I
shall make it my endeavor to preserve this Government, both in Church and
State, as it is now by Law Established: I know the Principles of the Church of
England are for Monarchy, and the Members of it have showed themselves good and
loyal Subjects: Therefore I shall always take care to Defend and Support it. I
know too that the Laws of England are sufficient to make the King as a great a
Monarch as I can wish, and as I shall never depart from the Just Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown, so I shall never Invade any Man's Property. I have
often heretofore ventured my Life in Defense of this Nation, and I shall still
go as far as any man in preservation of it, in all its Just Rights and
Liberties. Nor was it long before a Proclamation was Issued forth to give
notice the King intended to call a Parliament, inculcating therein the
settlement of the Revenue for the support of the Crown and Government; that
there was a necessity for the maintenance of the Navy for the Kingdoms defense,
and the advantage of Trade, in order to which he desired that the settlement of
the Customs due in the Reign of King Charles the Second, might continue,
declaring it was his will and pleasure that the Duties should be Collected
accordingly, and that he did not doubt of the ready compliance of his Subjects
therein. This being given forth, the Merchants did not dispute the payment: And
the next thing taken in hand, was the preparation for the funeral of the
deceased King, all persons belonging to, or having business at the Court being
commanded, by an Order of the Earl Marshal, to put themselves into decent
Mourning, and indeed the loss of a Prince that ruled so much in the hearts of
his Subjects found a ready compliance, for not only the Courtiers were in
Mourning, but all the responsible persons of the Kingdom; and his Royal
Highness the Prince of Denmark, on the tenth of February, took his place at the
Council Board, as a Privy Counselor of this Kingdom.

All things being prepared for the Funeral Solemnities of King Charles the
Second, with decency and order as the occasion required, the Royal Corpse was
on the 14th day of February Interred in King Henry the Sevenths Chapel at
Westminster: The Prince of Denmark, whose Train was born up by the Lord
Cornbury, being chief Mourner; and a^ curious Figure of Wax, representing the
King, was set up amongst the rest of the Kings of England, his Predecessors;
and an Order was published for altering the Prayer in the Liturgy or Common
Prayer, relating to the Royal Family, by way of exchanging Names in the
repetition, viz. JAMES for CHARLES, and further, viz. our Gracious Queen MARY,
CATHERINE the Queen Dowager, Their Royal Highnesses MARY Princess of Orange,
the Princess ANNE of Denmark and all the Royal Family. And Money being wanting
in the Exchequer, it was taken up upon the Excise by way of Farming, and the
Earl of Rochester was constituted Lord High Treasurer of England, and the
Marquess of Halifax Lord President of the Privy Council, the Earl of Clarendon
Lord Privy Seal, and the Duke of Beaufort Lord President of Wales. These Great
Officers thus put in Trust, gave us prospect of the tranquillity of Affairs, and
the King was Proclaimed in all the Citys and Borough Towns of the Kingdom; and
in the like order in Scotland and Ireland, and the Earl Marshal issued out the
orders of Summons, in order to the preparation of the Coronation, which was
appointed to be on the 23d of April, being Saint George's day; requiring all
persons, who in regard of their Tenures, Customs and Usage, are bound to do and
perform Services on that day, to appear before the Commissioners and make out
their Claims and give their attendance at the Solemnity; and a Proclamation was
sent into Scotland, in order to the calling of a Parliament in that Kingdom,
with a Proclamation of Indemnity to diverse of the Scottish Nation. Then he
proceeded to put out a Proclamation to Summons a Parliament to sit at
Westminster, on the 19th day of May, 1685. And accordingly the Citys, Buroughs
and Shires, proceeded to Election; and sundry Ambassadors residing in England,
or such as came by Expresses, made their Complement of Condolence and
Congratulation; and the 23d of April being come, great preparations were made
for the Coronation, the Nobles and others met in their Robes and Formalities,
the Ceremony was performed with much Magnificence; and the Parliament,
according to appointment met; when the King, in his Robes, went to the House,
and being seated on the Throne made a Speech in which, amongst other things, He
informed them that the Earl of Argyle was Landed in Scotland, with the men he
brought with him from Holland, etc and soon We had notice that that Earl had
levied considerable Forces in Argyleshire and other places, which obliged the
Militia to rise in Arms, and several Troops were sent from England, and more
had gone had not the Duke of Monmouth landed at Lyme in Dorcetshire, with about
fourscore men, and a considerable quantity of Arms and Ammunition, declaring his
intention to deliver the Kingdom from the danger it was likely to be brought
into by the prevailing power of the Papists, under the influence of a King who
had professed himself openly to be of the Roman Communion, etc. and diverse of
his Declarations were printed and scattered abroad, for printing which, one Mr.
Desney, a Counselor was seized and Tried at the Marshalsea, upon an
Indictment of High Treason; and being by the Jury found guilty he was sentenced
and executed; his head being afterward placed on London Bridge.

The Duke of Monmouth increasing his Forces in the West, and causing himself to
be Proclaimed King; not only the standing Guards, but a great number of
New-raised forces were sent against him as likewise the Scotch Regiment sent
from Holland, when after sundry skirmishes, in which diverse were killed on both
sides. On the sixth of July, the Duke, in the dead of the night by a silent
March endeavored to surprise the King's Forces encamped on Sedgmore near
Bridgwater; commanding the Foot in person, and ordering the Lord Gray with the
Horse, to take a compass and fall in the Rear, but the design being discovered
by an early Alarm, after many brisk firings between the Foot, and the Dukes
Horse not coming timely up, the King's Horse entered the Ranks, and in spite of
the opposition that was made broke and disordered them so, that about daylight
they fled in great confusion and a piteous slaughter ensued, so that two
thousand are held to be slain. The Duke with most of the Commanders escaped the
Field, but having been Attainted in Parliament, and a premium of 5000 l set
upon his head, he was upon the information of an old Woman, searched for in the
Enclosures near Holt Lodge; and after diverse attempts to escape, was taken and
by easy Marches brought to White Hall, and by the Council committed to the
Tower, and the third day after brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, where
after he had made a very Christian-like and Heroic Speech, he had his Head
severed from his Body, at five strokes, so barbarous was his execution; the
Body of this unfortunate and much lamented Nobleman, in whose Veins flowed by
the Father's side the Royal Blood, was put into a Hearse in order to its
Interment; but this execution allayed not the fury of some persons, for the
Lord Chief Justice Jeffries and others, being sent into the West, to try such
as escaped Military execution, caused about 300 to be executed in diverse
places, amongst whom the Lady Lile was beheaded at Winchester, for harboring
some persons who had escaped the Battle, and soon after a Woman was burnt at
Tyburn, upon the like occasion.

During these proceedings, the Earl of Argyle was Routed in Scotland, taken in
a pond, and beheaded at Edenburg, Rumbold the Malster was hanged and quartered,
and his quarters sent to England and set upon the Gates of London, Colonel
Ayloffe and Mr. Nelthorp, were sent prisoners and executed, one before the
Temple, and the other before Gray's-Inn: And the Parliament meeting again after
its prorogation the King told them that in consideration of sundry good
Services, several Roman Catholic Officers had done him, he was willing they
should continue in their places, notwithstanding the Parliament was very
earnest to have them removed, and pardon granted them for what had passed in
Acting contrary to Law, as not being Qualified for places of Trust, without
taking the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy; however they were continued and
the Parliament soon after Dissolved. An Ambassador was sent to Rome, and the
Pope's Nuncio came to England, being kindly received by the King; and now it
began to be rumored that Father Petre, a Jesuit, was got to the Helm of
Affairs; and soon after he was declared a Privy Counselor: And diverse persons
were Tried upon the Account of what had been done in the Reign of King Charles
the Second; for which Alderman Cornish suffered in Cheapside, and Charles
Bateman, a Surgeon, at Tyburn: And the Dissenters were severely prosecuted,
though at the same time the Popish Priests began to build them Chapels in
Limestreet, Bucklers-Bury, St. John's and Southwark, promising themselves no
less than the re-establishment of that Religion, and some people were punished
for opposing their proceedings; the City Trained Bands being ordered on
Sundays, etc. to guard those houses from the violence of the Multitude; and
most of the Judges having declared a Dispensing Power in the King Papists
throughout the Nation were put into places of Trust and Offices, without taking
the Oaths. Especially after the Trial of the Case of Sir Edward Hale^, at the
Court of King's Bench, where the Verdict went for him, etc but the Members of
the Church o^ England seeming not well pleased, there followed an unexpected
closing with the Dissenters; and a Declaration was published for Toleration or
Liberty of Conscience, and a promise to Establish it by Law. The Church of
England-men we almost every where displaced, and Papists and Dissenters placed
in their stead; most of the Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford turned out,
and a President imposed on it. A High Commission Court was ^erected to censure
the Clergy; the Bishop of London was suspended, and most of the Corporations
had their Charters taken into the King's hands, some of them being shortly
after restored, with alterations. The standing Forces were increased, Campaigns
were held on Hounslow Heath, to exercise the Soldiers; and the King designing
to call a Parliament, the people were questioned in many parts of the Kingdom,
whether they would themselves, if chosen, or give their Voices for such as
should be willing to take away the Penal Laws and Tests. And the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with Six other Bishops were sent prisoners to the Tower, and
afterward Tried at the King's Bench Bar (but ^cquitted) for petitioning the
King to revoke his Order of Reading his Declaration for Liberty of Conscience,
in Churches, in time of Divine Service. And during their Imprisonment we had
news that ^he Queen was brought to Bed of a Son, for which (...) Thanksgiving
day was appointed, and the Con^uits in London ran with Wine, as likewise in
many other places, and the Ambassadors in foreign Courts, made great
Rejoicing: But whilst this ^oy lasted at Court, and things were making ready or
the calling a Parliament; news came that great ^reparations were making in
Holland, with a design ^o pass an Army into England, which changed the ^ace of
Affairs; for those that had been turned out ^f places of Trust were restored,
the Bishops were received into savor; the Charter of London and other Charters
were restored; Depositions were taken relating to the Birth of the Infant, and
enrolled in Chancery; and the King was willing no Papist should be a Member in
Parliament with many other concessions and great Levys were made for Sea and
Land; however the Dutch Fleet without much interruption, came to Torbay in
Devonshire, on the 5 of November 1688. and the Army to the number of 13 or
14000 Landed; seized upon Exceter and diverse other places, whilst the King was
prepairing to oppose it, causing his Forces and Artillary to march for
Salisbury, whether he went in person: But finding the falling off of part of
his Army, and afterward the Nobility; and the surprise of sundry strong Towns
in the North and other places, he returned to White Hall; and upon news of the
defeat of a Party set to Guard Reading and Twyford Bridge, the King on the 11
of December, left White Hall, having the day before sent the Queen away, etc.
but within a day or two he was discovered at Feversham, and a Message sent to
him from the Lords sitting in Council, to return which accordingly he did; but
afterward going to reside at Rochester, he privately withdrew himself and
taking Ship passed into France, where the Queen was arrieved some time before.

Thus fortunes Hand does turn about the Wheel,
And makes the great as well as feeble Reele.
Memorable Transactions under the Auspicious Reign of King WILLIAM and Queen
MARY etc.
THE Kingdom left without a Head, and th(...) Public Affairs receiving
prejudice in man(...) particulars; after several Addresses and Congratulations,
on the 25th of December, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, assembled at
Westminster, and humbly besought his present Majesty to take upon him the
Administration of of Public Affairs, both Civil and Military, and to dispose
of the public Treasury, etc. till the meeting of the Convention appointed to
meet the 22 of January, making i^ their further Request that he would cause his
Circular Letters to be Issued out to the Lords: And for the Election of
Representatives to repair and ^it at Westminster, and the next day a great
number of Gentlemen, who had been Members of Parliament in the Reign of King
Charles the Second, met at the Commons House, who drew up an Address to the
^^^ine purpose, as the Lords, which was presented and very Graciously received;
and on the 30 of December, a Declaration was Issued out, Authorizing Justices
of the Peace, Sheriffs and other Officers, who were in their Offices the 1st of
December, except Papists, to Act in their several Places and Stations. And
diverse Priests and other disaffected persons were seized in sundry Counties,
and committed to several Prisons; and the Circular Letters sent abroad, the
Papists were commanded to depart the Citys of London and Westminster: And many
eminent Citizens of London, upon notice that the Treasury was Exhausted, lent
toward the defraying the Charges of the Public Affairs of the Kingdom, about
300000 l which was paid in at Guild Hall, for the use of the Exchequer: Nor was
the Scots slow in making their Address for Protection; which many of the Lords
and Commnns did, and were kindly received, with a promise at their Request, of
Issuing out Letters for the meeting of a Convention of the Estates on the 14th
day of March, at Edenburg, which gave a general Satisfaction to Scotland.

On the 22d of January, 1688. According to appointment, the Convention met at
Westminster, where the Lord Marquess of Hallifax held the place as Speaker, in
the House of Lords, Henry Powell, Esquire did the like in that of the Commons: And
after some Debates and Considerations for the Settlement of Affairs, they made
an Address of Thanks for the Royal Care and Conduct; and at their Entreaty a
further continuation of the Administration was Accepted; and the days were
Appointed for a Public Thanksgiving for the great Deliverance of these
Kingdoms. But in Ireland things went not on so prosperously, for the Earl of
Tyrconnel greatly oppressed the Protestants, suffered the Papists to plunder
their Houses, every where disarming them, and putting them out of places of
Trust; however in several parts of that Kingdom the Protestants, under the
leading of Noblemen and others, gave them notable overthrows. But the Popish
party relying upon the Succors they expected from France, gave not over their
Ravages and Outrages. However great preparations were made in England to reduce
that Kingdom to Obedience, and some Stores of Ammunition and Provisions sent
from Scotland; and care was taken to stop such as were going over, and a
prohibition was laid on French Goods and Manufactures, etc.

And now the desire of the people being to see their present Majestys on the
Throne, a great number of worthy persons, in the Citys of London and
Westminster, Petitioned, setting forth it was their humble desire it might be
speedily done; and soon after Her present Majesty, upon the earnest Invitation
of the Estates, Embarked for England, attended by a Squadron of English and
Dutch Men of War; and arrived safely at White Hall, on the 12th of February,
1688. to the inexpressible Joy of the people, and was saluted all the way Her
Yatch passed by the Forts and Ships in the Road, as also by the Tower Guns, the
Standard being displayed; and at Court she received the Complements of all the
Nobility present, nor did the Lords and Commons delay to prepare for the
Proclaiming King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, by declaring the Throne Vacant, and
praying them to accept the Regal Dignities, Abrogating the former Oaths of
Allegience and Supremacy, and Incerting these, viz.

I A. B. Do sincerely Promise and Swear, that I will be Faithful and bear True
Allegience to their Majestys, King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. So help me God.

I A. B. Do Swear, that I do from my heart, Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical, this Damnable Doctrine and Position, that Princes
Excommunicate or deprived by the Pope or any Authority of the Sea of Rome, may
be Deposed or Murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; and so I
declare that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate has or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. So help me God.

Matters prepared in readiness for so great and solemn an Occasion; the Lords
and Commons on the 13th of February, having acquainted them with what they had
done, and obtained their Consent. About Eleven of the Clock they went to
White Hall Gate, where the Officers and Sergeants at Arms, Trumpets and other
persons being present, Sir Thomas St. George Knight, Garter Principal King at
Arms, receiving the Proclamation, and the Officers at Arms, by the Lords being
ordered immediately to Proclaim it; York Herald Proclaimed it at White Hall
Gate, after the Trumpets had thrice sounded, Garter reading it by periods in
the presence of the Lords and Commons, and a great concourse of people, and the
satisfaction conceived was manifested by loud shouts and general Acclamations
of Joy; and in good order they proceeded to Temple Bar, where having informed
the occasion of their coming; they had the Gates opened and all, except the
Bailiff of Westminster, and his men entered and were received by the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, Recorder, Sheriffs, etc. When having made a Second Proclamation, they
passed to Wood-street end in Cheapside, and there Proclaimed a Third time, and
the like was done before the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, and immediately the
great Guns made it known to remote parts; the Evening being concluded with the
Ringing of Bells, Bonfires and other demonstrations of Joy. Nor was it less
upon the like Proclamation of their Majestys in the principal Buroughs and
Towns of England and Wales. And two days following his Majesty was pleased to
give the two Houses a further Assurance of his Care and Protection for the
preservation of their Religion, Laws and Liberties; and that he was desirous to
concur with them in any thing that should be for the good of the Kingdom, and
do what in him lay to advance the Glory and Welfare of the Nation. And
thereupon published his Royal Declaration to restrain disorderly persons, who
took the liberty to kill the Deer, and cut down the Timber in diverse Chaces and
Forests, causing the Ports in the West facing Ireland to be stopped, to prevent
disaffected persons from passing over to Tyrconnel: And the City of London, by
the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and diverse of the Commons, Congratulated their
Majestys upon their happy Accession to the Throne; and on the 18th of February
the King went to the House of Lords, Royally attended, and too his Place on the
Throne: when the Gentleman ^sher of the Black Rod, had order to Summon up the
Commons, and they accordingly attending at the Bar of the Lords House, his
Majesty let them know how sensible he was of their kindness; and how much he
esteemed and valued the confidence they had Reposed in him, giving them
Assurance that at no time he would do any thing that might lessen their good
opinion of him, recommending to them the Care of the Allies abroad, and the
dangerous state of Ireland, etc. And soon after his Majesty being waited on by
the Bishop of London and about 100. of the London Clergy, with an humble Tender
of their duty, and fidelity he was pleased to express his Gracious promise of
Protection and Encouragement. And the two Houses resolved into a free
Parliament; his Majesty gave the Royal Assent to an Act entitled an Act for
the removing and preventing all questions and disputes about the Assembling and
Sitting of this present Parliament; putting out his Royal Declaration for
bringing in and restoring Arms, imbezled during the disbandings and disorder,
in the late King's Army.

During these prosperous proceedings, we had frequent news from Ireland, that
the Earl of Tyrconnel labored to increase his Army, and to draw away those
that yet remained unshaken; to prevent which, his Majesty was pleased to Issue
out his Proclamation, offering a pardon of Indemnity to all those that would
lay down their Arms and retire to their respective habitations, and there
quietly and peaceably behave themselves, and that according to Law, they should
enjoy their Estates and Possessions; likewise those of the Roman persuasion to
have all the liberty of private Exercise of Religion that the Law allows, with
a promise of calling a Parliament in that Kingdom: But if any refused they were
proclaimed Rebels and Traitors and their Lands forfeited, to be distributed to
those that should be aiding and assisting, to the reducing the Kingdom. But on
the other hand Tyrconnel, as much as lay in him to hinder this Gracious offer,
prevented its being dispersed in many parts of that Kingdom, and published a
Declaration of his own, wherein he promised them wonders, if they would
persevere, and laid before them the danger if they laid down their Arms, whch
animated them to great Outrages, however the English Protestants defended Sligo
and other places, making strong opposition, especially in the North, expecting
Succors from England, where extraordinary Levys were making, and the King the
better to encourage his Subjects, consented to the taking away the Act of Harth
Money, which had been a long time very grievous to the poorer sort of the
Nation; for which he received an Address of Thanks from both Houses, and an
other wherein they resolved to stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes, in
supporting his Allies abroad in reducing Ireland, and to secure the Protestant
Religion in that Kingdom, which was very Graciously Received; and his Majesty
declared his Opinion, as to what was requisite for the support of the Nations
Glory abroad and at home: And the two Houses, for declaring to stand by his
Majesty, etc. had two humble Addresses of Thanks from the City of London, and
they likewise tendered their Address of Thanks to his Majesty, upon his
Condescending to have the Harth Money taken away, which was shortly after taken
away by an Act for ever, only a Clause reserving to be collected, what was due
to the 25th of March before the publication of the said Act.

During these proceedings, the King had an Express that a considerable number
of Soldiers of the Regiment, once commanded by the Lord Dumbarton, and some
Companies of Fuziliers had had mutined near Ipswich, and marched away with the
Money sent to pay them and four Field Pieces, in their way proclaiming King
James; when to prevent the disorder, upon the Address of the Parliament they
were proclaimed Rebels, and a considerable force of Horse and Dragoons sent to
suppress them; and accordingly upon their enclosing those mutinous Soldiers,
they after some show of resistance, threw down their Arms and surrendered them
yielding upon discretion; when being disarmed they and their Officers were
disposed of in diverse prisons, and an Act passed the Royal Assent, impowering
his Majesty to apprehend such persons as he should find just cause to suspect
were conspiring against the Government, and an other to take off the Attaindure
of William Russell, Esquire commonly called William Lord Russell; and many other
Acts conducing to the good and settlement of the Kingdom, were soon after
passed.

Upon the death of Sir John Chapman, Lord Mayor of London, Thomas Pilkinton,
Esquire since Sir Thomas Pilkinton, was Elected at the Guild Hall, and presented to
the Commissioners of the Great Seal, and Sworn at the Hustings, and after that
by the Lieutenant of the Tower, by reason at that time there was no Court held
at Westminster.

Scotland at this time was not wanting, for the Convention pursuant to the
King's Circular Letters meeting, March 14th, and choosing Duke Hamilton their
Chairman, they earnestly labored for the settlement of that Kingdom, which was
fallen into some disorder upon the Grand Revolution, Summoning the Duke of
Gourdon to surrender the Castle of Edenburg, and upon his refusal Proclaimed
him and his adherents Traitors; on great penalties prohibiting any to have
intercourse with him, securing diverse suspected persons, and raising Forces to
secure the Kingdom, with many other things too many here to be incerted. And
now the Coronation Solemnity of their Majestys, being appointed on the 11th of
April, and a Proclamation issued out to the Peers, and for all that could make
Claims by right of Service or Tenure. Great were the preparations, and an Act
on the 21st of March passed the Royal Assent for granting their Majestys a
present Aid; and another Act soon after passed for recviving Actions and
Processes depending in the Courts of Westminster, discontinued by the omitting
Hillary Term, with others conducing to the regulation and settlement of
Affairs; and diverse great Officers were made and honors Conferred on sundry
persons. And now the Coronation day drawing near, the Parliament considered of
the Coronation Oath, and the Royal Assent given to an Act entitled an Act for
Establishing the Coronation Oath, to be Administered to all the Kings and Queens
that shall Succeed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, upon their respective
Coronations by one of the Archbishops to be done in Public; so that nothing
being wanting to perfect the Royal Ceremony of the Coronation; on Thursday the
11 of April, the King and Queen landing at the Parliament Stairs, went to the
Princes Lodgings between 10 and 11 in the Morning; and the Peers and Peeresses
being in their Robes, and having their Coronets, their Majestys came to
Westminster Hall, (the Procession being put in order) and there taking their
Seats on a Throne under a Cloth of State, the Regalia was presented and
delivered to those Noblemen, by whom it was to be born, and the Earl Marshal,
Kings at Arms and Heralds, having put the Procession in order, it passed on
through the Guard of Soldiers that made a Lane, blew Cloth being spread and
scattered with sweet herbs; their Majestys, under a Canopy of State, in their
Royal Robes, the King in a Velvet Crimson Cap, and the Queen with a Circlet of
Gold on her head, the Peers and Peeresses in their Robes, with their Coronets
in their hands, and entering Westminster Abbey, their Majestys Ascended the
Throne, and the Nobles and others disposed themselves according to their
degrees and Places, and the Ceremony was performed with great Splendour and
Magnificence; after which their Majestys with their Crowns on their Heads and
the Nobility with their Coronets on, returned in the same order they went, to
Westminster Hall, where a Stately Banquet was prepared, and being seated, the
first course was Marshalled in, and the King Champion in Complete Armor, came
into the Hall on Horseback and made his Challenge in these words repeated by
York Herald, viz.

If any person of any Degree whatsoever, High or Low shall deny or gainsay our
Sovereign Lord and Lady. King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, King and Queen of
England, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, to be Rightful King and
Queen of this Realm of England; or that they ought not to Enjoy the Imperial
Crown of the same, here is their Champion, who says he lies and is a false
Traitor, being ready in person to Combat with him, and in this Quarrel will
Adventure his Life against him on what day soever he shall appoint. The Royal
Entertainment ended, their Majestys returned to White Hall, and the great Guns
and Bells proclaimed the Joy, together with the peoples shouts and
acclamations. The Night was spent in Bonfiers and Drinking-healths, which in a
short time was so ordered throughout the Kingdom; and Scotland not to be behind
proceeded to Proclaim their Majestys King and Queen of that Kingdom, deputing
the Earl of Argyle and others to wait upon their Majestys with an offer of the
Crown, which being Accepted, their Majestys have since been so owned that
Kingdom, with equal demonstrations of Joy.

The Charges of the Government appearing very great, the Parliament agreed upon
a Pole B^^, which being brought in and approved, it passed the Royal Assent,
encouraging the lending of 300000 l upon its security till Money can be raised.
The late King being by this time in Ireland, and the French Fleet about to Land
more men in that Kingdom, were Engaged near Bantry-Bay, by an English Squadron
under the Command of Vice Admiral Herbert, and three of their great Ships
disabled and sunk a great many of their Seamen and Officers killed, without the
loss of one Ship on our side, though much inferior in number. And the French
and Irish laying Siege to Londonderry, were beaten off by the Besieged, under
the Command of Colonel Walker, Minister of that Place, and about 4000 of them
slain, insomuch that they were obliged to acquit it and draw off. And several
persons attempting to spread King James his Declarations in the City of London,
some were seized and committed to Newgate. And during these Transactions, the
late Lord Chancellor Jeffreys, and the late Lord Chief Justice Wright dyed,
one in the Tower and the other in Newgate.

The Convention of Scotland was turned into a a Parliament, the Lord Hamilton
made President, and an Act passed for asserting their Power, and preventing any
questions or dispute that may arise about their power to Act as being a
Parliament. And since the Castle is surrendered.

Thus Reader you may see our changed estate,
And own God's Mercies Wonderful and Great;
Whose swift Almighty Hand, the Ruin stayed,
That Rome's dark Thunder into Bolts had made,
Aiming 'em at Religion, Life and Laws,
But Heaven defeats where ever it owns the Cause.

