REASONS For Settling Admiralty-Jurisdiction, AND Giving Encouragement to
Merchants, Owners, Commanders, Masters of Ships, Material-Men and Mariners.

Humbly offered to the Consideration of His MAJESTY, and the Two Houses of
PARLIAMENT.

Printed in the Year, 1690.

REASONS For Settling the Admiralty-Jurisdiction, etc.
THere is nothing can conduce more to the Peopling and enriching a Kingdom, or
Commonwealth, than a free and open Trade; and as that by Sea is the principal
source of such Happiness, it may very well deserve the Governments most
particular Care and Application to advance it.

And since this is no other way to be done, but by enabling the King to set
forth Fleets for the Merchants Security abroad, and establishing good Laws for
defending them in their Rights and Properties at Home, it is most humbly
proposed, Whether this may not be effected with the greatest Ease and
Advantage, by re-setling the Admiralty Jurisdiction, and restoring the ancient
Power of enrolling Mariners.

Usage and Experience were always accounted very good Directors; and therefore,
the better to accomplish this Design, it may not be improper, in the first
place, to give a short Account of the Methods observed by our Ancestors, in
whose times, our Sea-dominion was at the greatest height, and Trade in as
flourishing condition as those Ages would admit: and in the next place, to
consider of the best means to improve these Methods, and adapt them to the
present Times.

The Seacoasts of England were anciently divided into several
Vice-Admiralties, viz. 1. Northumberland, Durham and York. 2. Lincoln. 3.
Norfolk. 4. Suffolk. 5. Essex. 6. Kent. 7. Sussex. 8. Southampton. 9. Dorset.
10. Devon. 11. South-Cornwall. 12. North-Cornwal. 13. Somerset. 14. Gloucester.
15. South Wales. 16. North Wales. 17. Chester. 18. Lancaster. 19. Westmorland
and Cumberland.

Each of these places (the Port of London being immediately under the Admiralty
Court, as to this matter) had a particular Vice Admiral, who had Power to hold
a Sessions once in the Year, or oftener, if occasion required, and to call
before him, or his Officer, all Seafaring Men and Mariners, living within his
District or Division, and then, and there to enrol all their Names and Places
of abode, taking Account likewise, of all Ships within their Jurisdiction.

This was the Method used several hundreds of years since, as appears by
certain Maritime Laws and Ordinances, Registered in the ancient Authentic Black
Book of the Admiralty; four Articles of which, are as follows:

1. Litera A. n. 1, 2, 3.
Puisque l'homme est fait Admiral, premierement luy fault Ordonner and
substituer dessoubs luy pour estre ses Lieutenants, Deputez and autres
Officiers, des plus loyaulx, sages and discrets en la Loy Marine, and anciens
coustumes de la Mer qu'il pourra en aucune part trouver, par ainsy que par
l'aide de Dieu, and leur bonne and droitture Governaill l'office pourra estre
gouverne a l'honneur and prouffit du Royalme.

2. Item, Apres doit l'Admiral en toute la haste qu'il bonnement pourra
escripre a tous ses Lieutenants Deputez, and autres Officiers quelconques par
tous les costez de la Mer, parmy toute la Royalme pour savoir combien de Nefs,
barges, balengers, and autres vesseaulx de guerre le Roy pourra avoir en son
Royalme, quant lui plest, ou mestier lui fera, and de quel portage ils sont,
and aussi les noms des Seigneurs and possesseurs d'icelles.

3. Item, Pour savoir aussi par bonne, and loyalles enquestes pris par devant
les dits Lieutenants Deputez cu autres Officiers de l'Admiral combien des
Mariniers deffensibles sont ou Royalme, and la cause est pourceque s'il soit de
ce demand de l'Admiral par le Roy ou son Conscil, qu'ily doncques bonnement
and justement a eulx monstrer le nombre tant de nefs, barges, balingers, and
d'autres vesseaulx de guerre and aussi les noms des Seigneurs and possesseurs
d'icelles, comme le nombre de tous Mariners defensibles parmy le Royalme, and
ainsy saura le Roy and son Conscil de certain tousjours sa force par la Mer.

Et pource qu'il a ete plusieurs fois debatu en Angleterre pour les Arrers des
Nefs quant le Roy a mande Sergeants d'armes ou autres Ministres pour arrester
nefs al ceps du Roy, Liter. C^. n. 16

If ancient usage and custom be Law in Engl. There is little doubt of Their
Majesty's Authority for pressing Ships and Mariners; but for the Satisfaction
of the curious, they may consult the Records quoted by Mr. Pryun in his
Animadvers. Fol. 127. and also consider the Statutes, 2 R. 2.4. 18 H. 6.19. 2
and 3. P. and M. 16. 5 El. 5.43 El. 3.


and les Seigneurs des nefs sont venus devant l'Admiral, and alleguent que leur
nefs n'estoyent mye arrestees, ordonne estoit au temps du Roy Richard le
premier a Grymnesby par advis de plusieurs Seigneurs du Royalme que quant-nefs
serent arrestees pour service du Roy que le Roy escripta par ses Lettres
Patentes a l'Admiral d'arrester les Nefs, etc.

If the Seafaring Men were not obedient to the Vice-Admiral's summons and
orders made according to the Maritime Laws, they had a coercive power
sufficient to oblige them to be enrolled, and to go into the King's service
whenever occasion required.

This method of raising Sea Men was continued in good order down to the end of
the prosperous Reign of Queen Elizabeth, from which time it began to be
neglected, and so dwindled by degrees, till at last the use and practice of it
quite vanished, insomuch, that at this day the very remembrance of it is almost
lost; and it is not at all strange that it should be so, if we consider the
temper of King James the first, the circumstances of King Charles the first,
the late troubles, the remisness of the Reign of King Charles the second, and
the designs of the late King.

During the two last Reigns, who would not think but the design was to transfer
the Sovereignty of the Seas, and trade of the World to France, since such
Industry was used by the Kings themselves, not only to instruct the French King
in the building Ships of War, and setting out Fleets, but also in the giving
him assistance in the compiling of his Sea-laws, set forth in the Ordinances of
that King in the year 1681 The French had from hence also the first footsteps
of their exquisite method of enrolling Mariners. And if it shall be thought fit
for the Kingdoms service, or in any measure conducing to our Happiness, why
shall we not follow likewise the more glorious Example of our present King, in
endeavoring to retrieve it? We have certainly the greatest motives that ever
English Men had, to excite every one in his respective station, to give his
Majesty those hearty assistances as may under the blessing of God regain the
betrayed honor of the Nation, and settle the Peace, Plenty, and Glory thereof,
for which, next to the establishment of our Religion, our Royal Leader has
hazarded more than ever any of our Kings did before him.

And therefore since a ready way of raising a sufficient number of Seamen to
Man the Fleet, is of the greatest concern in this affair, and the encouraging
of them voluntarily to enter into their Majesty's service, is of no less
importance, it is humbly proposed whether this may not be done most effectually
by emproving the ancient Methods of pressing Seamen with a Bill in Parliament,
to this purpose, viz.

1. That such Seamen as shall voluntarily enrol themselves in the Admiralties
or Vice-Admiralties, may be exempt from petty Offices in the Parishes where
they live, and also from the payment of Parish-duties, Taxes and the like,
during their lives, or so long as they shall continue enrolled.

2. That all Prizes be divided into three parts, one third to the Captor, and
his Ships-Crew, another to go to the Chest at Chatham, toward a Provision for
sick and wounded Mariners, and the Widows and Children of such as are slain;
the remaining third to pay the charge of Prize-Officers.

3. That the Act of Parliament 43. Eliz. 3. concerning the relief of Soldiers
and Mariners be amended, and the Money collected by virtue thereof, transmitted
to the Chatham Chest for the uses aforesaid: That Money amounts to about 14000
per ann. and may with care be made as much more if it shall be found requisite,
and as it is now ordered is of little or no use to the Government.

4. If it may consist with their Majesty's affairs that the wages of Captains,
Officers and Seamen be a little advanced, they being not so good (considering
the present value of Money) as they were formerly.

5. That such Mariners as shall not voluntaily enrol themselves or appear upon
the Vice-Admirals Summons, or stand out till they are pressed, shall not have
the benefit of the aforesaid Privileges and Exemptions.

6. That no Captains, Commanders, or Seamen remain in Foreign Service in time
of War, without License, and that they return upon their Majesty's
Proclamation, under such a penalty as shall be thought fit.

If such a reestablishment of the Admiralities, Vice-Admiralties were made,
besides, the benefit of easily supplying the Fleet wih Mariners, these further
advantages would accrue to ther^ Majesty's and such of their Subjects and
Allies as should ^e concerned in Sea-affairs, which will tend very much to the
advancement of Trade and Navigation.

1. In t^me of War the Officers of the several Vice-Admiralties, night take the
care and charge of all Prizes brought into their respective Districts, which
would make the business mu^^ more easy, and also save a great part of the
charge to their Majesty's; for it may be easily demonstrated whe^ever it shall
be required, that this business may be manage^ for own third part of the
proceed of Prizes, and the other two thirds may be applied to the Chest at
Chatham, and given to the Captor and his Crew, as is before hinted.

2. Their Majesty's and the Lord Admiral's Rights and Perquis^es in time of
Peace as well as War would be preserved. whereas at present no manner of care
is taken thereof, no^withstanding that they are many times of a considerable
value.

3. The Customs of Goods Ship-wrecked as well as the Lord Admiral's due will be
better preserved, and their Majesty's will not be so easily defrauded thereof
by People that steal such Goods, or by inferior Officers conniving at, or
combining with them: not only because the Vice-Admirals, who have the care
thereof are usually Noblemen, or Gentlemen of the best Qualities and Estates,
and so have great Authority and Power in their several Countries, but also
because the Vice Admiral or his Officer, and the Customer, will each of them be
obliged to set a Lock on the salved Goods, and one will be a check upon the
other.

4. Where Merchants are in distress at Sea near the Shore, or run a ground, the
Officers of the Vice-Admirals would be ready to assist, knowing that they shall
be recompensed according to their pains, and punished if they refuse: Whereas
at present the Country People make a prey of those miserable Merchants, and
will afford no manner of assistance, but rather contrive all they can that the
Ship may be cast away, nay many times are so barbarous to kill or drown People
making escape to land, that thereby they might have a pretense to a Wreck.

5. When Ships or Goods are cast away, and any part thereof driven on Shore,
the Vice-Admirals would take care to keep off the Rabble, and secure all f^r
their true Proprietors, upon moderate Salvage, whereas at present every one
takes away what he can get, and no emedy.

6. If the Vice-Admirals or their Officers happened not to be present at the
time when any Ship was cast away, or Goods driven on Shore, they would as they
^id usually in that case heretofore, issue out Commissions of Enquiry, or
procure such Commissions from the High Count of Admiralty, and summon what
Persons they please^ before them, and so examine by Maritime evidence, and ^ake
immediate restitution of all that was saved to the Ow^ers upon such Salvage as
was meet, and punish all the Ofenders that stole away, or embezeled the said
Goods; ^hereas that Jurisdiction being now interrupted, there is no relief for
the Sufferers but by way of Trover, Trespass, or other Actions at Common Law,
which must be brought separately against the several Parties offending; the
multiplicity of such suits will in the end but add to their Affliction in
spending their time and money; for many times at the last, when they have stayed
half a year or more for the Assizes, and those things are brought on to a
trial, it so happens that the Witnesses (whose whole livelihood consist's in
trade and being on board Ships) are gone to Sea, and so Evidence cannot be
brough^ Viva Voce to prove the interest in the Goods, as those ways of Action
require.

7. Mariners will have a quick and easy dispatch in the Admiralty Courts, they
being always open and ready to determine at one hearing in a Week's time, or
less, whenever they come on Shore; and they may also join a whole Crew in one
Action, whereas at Common Law they must be several, and must also attend the
Terms or Assizes, which they cannot do without Iosing their employments.

8. Builders of Ships and Material-Men, who furnish them with all sorts of
Provision for setting them forth to Sea, would in the Admiralty Courts have
likewise a quick dispatch and remedy against the Ship by them built, repaired
and furnished; whereas at present if the Party that they contracted with for
the same, proves insolvent, and procures a Prohibition, which is usually done,
they have no remedy at all, which is a great Discouragement to setting out of
Ships, and has occasioned frequent and very grievous Complaints.

9. Upon the Establishment of those Courts, the Fisheries on all the Coasts and
Navigable Rivers would be preserved; about which, no effectual care is taken at
the present.

10. All Annoyances in Ports and Navigable Rivers would be presented in the
Admiralty-Courts, and Offenders punished, and made responsible for Damages done
thereby; which of late has been neglected, and no Relief to be had for such as
have suffered thereby, especially, where a Ship or Anchor does Damage, and the
Master thereof proves insolvent.

11. The Re-setling of these Courts would be an Encouragement to Men of Parts,
to apply themselves to the Study of the Laws of Nations, and of the Sea;
whereas at this time, that Profession, heretofore thought to be of some use to
the Government, seems to be altogether discontinued and neglected. However, it
is not the benefit of any Profession that is to be regarded in this matter, but
the general Advantage of the People, for which end all Laws are made; and if
those Laws afford the best Remedy, in all reason, they ought to take place, and
be promoted.

The Common Law, although most excellent in its kind, yet being framed for Land
Affairs only, will be found too narrow for the Decision of all the Differences
arising among Seafaring Men and Merchants. Nay, the very Roman Laws
acknowledged by all to be the most comprehensive, are deficient in those Cases,
unless they take in the Maritime Laws, the excellency of which does not only
consist in proper Rules, made by the long Observation of Traders, but also, in
the incomparable dispatch that is given to Maritime Affairs at all times and
seasons; a thing absolutely necessary for the Encouragement of Trade and
Navigation, and no where else to be had, but in the Courts of Justice,
Established for that end and purpose: And this may be plainly demonstrated in
the following Cases. Concerning, 1. Building, Repairing, Victualling, and
furnishing Ships to Sea. 2. Contributing toward setting forth upon Voyages. 3.
Cases of Bottomry. 4. Contracts made beyond the Seas. 5. Damages on the Sea,
and Navigable Rivers. 6. Mariners Wages. 7. Freight and Charter-Parties. 8.
Misdemeanors and Nusances in Navigable Rivers. 9. Foreigners Debts.


1. Builders and material Men, have the best Remedy for their Debts in the
Admiral.
By the Sea Laws, the Ship is liable to the Builders, Amenders, and Victuallers
thereof: But by the Common Law, the Person that made the Agreement, who often
is an insolvent Master, or Part-Owner, and sometimes set up for that very end,
is only liable; so that if the Builder, Repairer, or Victualler, should be
constrained to sue at common Law, they would not only lose their chief
Security, but would also be forced to bring each Man his separate Action;
whereas they might be all joined in one Action in the Admiralty.

Besides, the Ship or Vessel being proceeded against in the Admiralty, every
Part-Owner is liable for his share; whereas, if the Master or Part-Owner that
made the Contract, be sued at Common Law, if he be solvent, will be constrained
to pay the whole; and yet many times cannot recover the respective shares of
his Part-Owners; at least, without beginning another Suit in Chancery.

2. The Admiralty to order Ships to be set out to Sea, although some
Part-Owners refuse to contribute.
If a Part-Owner refuses to contribute to the setting out of a Ship, the
Admiralty-Court uses to take Bail of those that would set the Ship forth, to
return her within a competent time, or else to pay the other Part-Owner that
refuses to contribute for his Part, according to an Appraizment then made: And
if this Practice of the Admiralty should be interrupted, it would be in the
Power of one cross Part-Owner to keep the Ship by the Walls, the Consequence
whereof may be easily imagined; and yet the Admiralty is many times obstructed
in the Cases following: Viz. 1. Differences about setting forth Ships upon
Voyages, often happen, in regard more parts are sold than are in the Ship; and
then, if the Admiralty goes to examine into the Truth of such Bills of Sale,
the Party obtains a Prohibition. 2. Sometimes a Part-Owner mortgages his Part,
and both the lender and borrower come in upon the Proceedings of the Admiralty
to contribute, and if any Party cannot obtain his end, he presently moves for a
Prohibition. 3. Frequently a Part-owner that is called to Contribute, will
first desire that the Master may give his Accounts, which the Court cannot in
Justice deny; and yet if it be ordered, such cross Part-owner has his end, and
immediately thereupon obtains a Prohibition or an Injunction; in all which
cases it is requisite that the Admiralty that has an undoubted Jurisdiction in
the principal Cause of Contributing to set a Ship forth, should likewise have
Power to Determine those incident Questions, or else Trade and Navigation will
be much discouraged.


3. Causes of Bottomry.
By the Common Law the Master cannot Pawn the Ship for Necessaries, although in
the greatest Extremity, and therefore a Voyage is many times lost; but by the
Laws of the Admiralty the Ship is chargeable upon Bills of Bottomry, provided
that the Money advanced be proved to be laid out for things actually employed in
and about the Ship, being in absolute necessity, and without which she could
not proceed, whereby the Voyage is performed: And if the Admiralty Jurisdiction
be obstructed in this, a necessary expedient of Navigation would be lost, and
our Ships when driven into Foreign parts, must lie there, till the Master can
send home, and procure Money to be remitted to him; whereas the Ship with other
Nations is the standing Credit in such cases of Necessity.

4. Contracts made beyond the Seas.
Contracts made beyond the Seas concerning Maritime Affairs may more
conveniently be tried in the Admiralty, than at the Common Law, because the
Witnesses cannot oftentimes attend at the Trial, as the course of that Law
requires; but in the Admiralty they may be at any time taken in Writing, or if
there be occasion, examined by Commission in Foreign parts.

Contracts beyond Sea are made by the Rules of the Maritime Laws, and by
Persons Experienced therein, and therefore Foreigners have reason to expect to
be Tried by the same Laws here, as well as in their own Country: For if the
Validity of such Contracts should be Tried by the Common Law, which differs
from the Rules of the Maritime Laws, the Contract that was as well and firmly
made by them, as was possible, may in the end have no effect and force.

5. Damages at Sea, and in Navigable Rivers.
If Damages happen by ill Stowage, or Insufficiency of the Ship, or by reason
of Storms, or the like, there are known Laws whereby the Admiralty Court uses
to Proceed.

If Damage be done by one ship running against another at Sea, or in Navigable
Rivers, or by Anchors for want of Buoys, or the like, the utmost remedy that
the Common Law gives, is against the Master and Mariners, which are for the
most part insolvent, unknown, or absent: In all which Cases the Laws used in
the Admiralty give remedy against the Ship.

In case of the loss of a Ship before it comes to the Port of Delivery, by the
Maritime Laws the Mariners shall receive Wages, and the Owners Freight to the
last Port of Delivery and no farther; but by the Common Law for so long as they
have Served, loss or not loss they may recover: Likewise in case of Average or
casting Goods over Board in a Storm, the Master, Mariners, and Owners shall
bear their proportion of the Loss: which things although they are very just and
equitable, and great obligations to use care and diligence, yet are unknown and
not observed in Proceedings at Common Law.

6. Mariners Wages.
If the Mariner knows he must Sue for his Wages in the Admiralty, and not at
the Common Law, he will be thereby obliged to more Diligence and Obedience: For
if he be Mutinous, Disobedient, or Deserts the Ship, he makes a total
Forfeiture of all his Wages: If he purloyns or embezels any of the Goods, or be
faulty in the due Stowage thereof, or damage happens for want of Pumping, or
through his default, his Wages will be liable to a proportionable satisfaction;
whereas at Common Law, the Mariner will recover his Wages for so long time as
he has Served, and leave the Commander or Owner of the Ship or Goods, to seek
his Satisfaction for the Damages aforesaid; and this may also be done by Letter
of Attorney, and so there is no remedy, which is a great discouragement to
Foreigners to lade their Goods on English Vessels. And as the Mariner is
Punished if he be Faulty, so he has an easy relief in the Admiralty, if he does
his Duty.

The necessity of a Mariner's condition requires a quick dispatch, which is
accordingly provided for by the Court of Admiralty, kept weekly in the
Vacations, as well as in the Terms: And although Forty Mariners may be included in
one Action, yet the whole may be Determined in a Weeks time; whereas, at the
Common Law, every Mariner must bring his several Action, to the great charge of
the several Defendants as well as themselves, and must all attend till the Term
or Assizes for a Trial, and perhaps at last want evidence, when in the
Admiralty he can have the Oath of the Contractor, for discovering the Contract,
which is usually private, and not to be proved by Witnesses. Besides by the
course of Common Law the remedy for the Mariner is only against the Contractor,
who may not be found, or else insolvent; but in case he be found, and solvent
there is another inconvenience on the other side, for the Contractor will be
forced to pay the whole Wages, and yet many times cannot recover the shares
that are due from his part-owners, without a Chancery-suit; whereas in the
Admiralty, the Mariner may have relief against the Ship or Freight that is due,
and the whole difference be determined at once.

7. Freight and Charter-Parties.
There is so necessary a relation betwixt Freight and Wages, that it will be
very inconvenient to try them in separate Judicatures. Because,

1. Usually the Wages are paid out of the Freight.

2. There be diverse cases wherein Mariners Wages are to be abated, in respect
of an abatement of Freight, as in case of loss or spoiling the Merchants Goods.

3. If the Master and Owner are sued in the Admiralty for Wages, and forced to
sue at Common Law for Freight out of which they should pay such Wages, perhaps
a Judgment may pass against them immediately upon a summary hearing in the
Admiralty, and yet they shall not be able to recover their Freight, in three
Months time or longer at the common Law.

4. There is a necessity in many cases to depart from the Letter of the
Charter-Party, otherwise the Merchant, Master and Owner may be ruined. This the
Maritime Laws and course of Admiralty does permit, which the Common Law does
not. For instance, A Contract is made for six months, payable monthly by the
Charter-Party; yet if within the time the Ship be embargoed, no Freight shall
be paid for that time; likewise, if the Goods perish before a Port be made,
there is no Frieght or Wages to be paid.

5. The Freight of one Voyage is the supply of another, and therefore requires
a very quick dispatch, for the advancement of Trade and Navigation, which is
settled by the course of Admiralty, and cannot be by the course of Common Law.

6. The Freighter may be upon or beyond the Sea, and cannot be arrested, or
maybe insolvent, whereby the Master and the Owner of the Ship is remediless at
the Common Law; but by the Maritime Law the Goods may be arrested, and upon
default condemned for the payment of the Freight; and this is the great
security of the Master and Owner.

7. If Freight must be sued for at Common Law, the Master and Owners of the
Ship may sue for the same by Letter of Attorney, and the Freight shall not be
stopped for damage done to the Goods, or embezelments: For the course of Common
Law is not to stop by way of compensation, but a Verdict passes for the Freight
upon the Charter-Party, according to agreement, and so the Owner of the Goods
is defeated of his satisfaction, according to the Maritime Law for damage, or
embezelments, besides the inconveniency of multiplying Actions; whereas the
whole may be more properly decided, by one and the same Action in the
Admiralty, and many times is done upon a summary hearing, in a Week or
Fortnights time, by which means, the great expense of Money and Time, two of the
most necessary supplies of Trade is prevented.

8. Misdemeanors and Nusances in navigable Rivers.
Misdemeanors and Nusances in navigable Rivers did formerly, and may again
with great convenience be settled under the Admiralty Jurisdiction. The Common
Law does not, and if the Admiralty should not intermeddle, there will be a
failure of Justice in those cases.

A Merchant lives beyond Sea, Foreigners debts.
or cannot be found, but has a Ship come into a Port, or Navigable River, or it
may be, has Goods on Board, and owes some of Their Majesty's Subjects Money; one
of these Arresteth the Ship or Goods by an Admiralty-Warrant, and thereupon
Bail is given to the Action: Is it not reasonable that Their Majesty's Subjects
should proceed to Sentence, and have the benefit of the Law of Nations? Shall a
Prohibition be sent to stop Proceedings, when the Common Law can give him no
Remedy? Or, that one of Their Majesty's Courts should hinder the other, when
they can give no manner of Relief themselves? This is certainly to be
redressed, if Trade be to be encouraged, since it preserves Foreigners and
Fugitives from paying their just Debts, by reason that their Persons cannot be
apprehended.

If these Matters may be thought fit to be resetled in the Admiralty Court, it
is humbly desired, That leave may be obtained for bringing a Bill into
Parliament for that end, so that it may be positively determined, what Causes
shall belong to that Jurisdiction: For the old Statutes that restrain it, as
they have in the late Reigns been put in Execution, are the terror of
Merchants, Owners, Material-Men, and others that live by Sea-Trade, insomuch,
that they dare not think of suing in the Admiralty, for their just Damages and
Debts, contracted by Maritime Employments, but are forced contentedly to sit
down with such their Losses, for fear of being sued at the common Law, upon the
Action of double Damages, which is very hard; when thereby they are not only
deprived of the best Relief, but in many of the foregoing Cases, they have no
ways to begin an Action at Common Law.

This Jurisdiction has been several times settled, particularly by the King in
Council, in the year 1632. after which it being interrupted, it was in the late
times thought necessary to be resetled by Ordinances of Parliament, as may be
seen in Scobell's Collection, C. 112. Anno 1648. f. 147. and C. 23. Anno 1649.
f. 16. Since the Restoration it has been again interrupted by Prohibitions,
which gave occasion for several Petitions from many considerable Merchants,
Masters, Owners, and Material-Men; one of which Petitions is hereunto annexed,
but they could have no relief during the two last Reigns. However it is hoped,
that this Parliament will restore so necessary an encouragement of Trade and
Navigation, the chiefest Wealth and Support of the Kingdom.

It must be expected, that some of the common Lawyers will oppose such a Bill,
for the same reasons that some Civilians will promote it: But either of their
private Advantages is not to be regarded, but only the public Good. It may be
easily demonstrated, that the Admiralty anciently had cognizance of many more
Causes than are abovementioned: And on the other side it is as plain, that
Prohibitions have been awarded in most, if not all of them: But Arguments drawn
from thence, would do no more than tell the World, that one Jurisdiction
oppressed the other, according as it had Power, and between both, did grind and
harress the Subject, and is a better reason for settling the Jurisdiction, than
for serving the private ends of either Party. And there need be no more other
weight laid upon what is urged from thence, but rather to pass by all Disputes
of that kind, and not so much examine, whether Prohibitions have been duly or
unduly sent to the Admiralty, of which there will be no end; (as may appear by
the several fruitless Tracts that have been published to that purpose on each
side,) but rather to consider, what is fit and expedient to be done for the
general Advantage of the Kingdom; and what Courts, what Laws, and which
Profession can most easily and readily administer Justice to the Subject in the
foregoing Cases.

APPENDIX.
At Whitehall the 18th of February, 1632.
Present The King's Most Excellent Majesty. Lord Keeper, L. Archb. of York,
Lord Treasurer, L. Privy Seal, Earl Marshal, L. Chamberlain, E. of Dorset, E.
of Carlisle, E. Holland, E. Danby, L. Chanc. of Scot. E. Morton. L. V.
Wimbledon, L. V. Wentworth, L. V. Falkeland, L. Bp. of London, L. Cottington,
L. Newburgh, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Comptroler, Mr. V. Chamberl. Mr. Secr. Coke,
Mr. Secretary Windebancke.


THis Day His Majesty being present in Council, the Articles and Propositions
following, for the Accommodating and Settling the Differences concerning
Prohibitions arising between His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, and His Court
of Admiralty, were fully Debated and Resolved by the Board. And were then
likewise, upon reading the same, as well before the Judges of His Highness's
said Courts at Westminster, as before the Judge of His said Court of Admiralty,
and his Attorney General, agreed unto, and Sub-signed by them all in His
Majesty's Presence. And the Transcript thereof ordered to be entered into the
Register of Council-Causes. And the Original to remain in the Council-Chest.

1. If Suit shall be commenced in the Court of Admiralty, upon Contracts made,
or other things Personally done beyond the Sea, or upon the Sea, no Prohibition
is to be awarded. 2. If Suit be before the Admiral for Freight or Mariners
Wages, or for the Breach of Charter-Parties, for Voyages to be made beyond the
Sea, though the Charter-Parties happen to be made within the Realm, and
although the Money be payable within the Realm, so as the Penalty be not
demanded, A Prohibition is not to be granted. But if Suits be for the Penalty,
or if the Question be made, whether the Charter-Party were made or not, or
whether the Plantiff did Release, or otherwise Discharge the same within the
Realm, That is to be tried in the King's Court at Westminster, and not in the
King's Court of the Admiralty; so that first it be denied upon Oath, that a
Charter-Party was made, or a Denial upon an Oath, tendered. 3. If Suit shall be
in the Court of Admiralty, for Building, Amending, Saving, or necessary
Victualing of a Ship against the Ship it self, and not against any Party by
Name, but such as for his Interest makes himself a Party, no Prohibition is to
be granted, though this be done within the Realm. 4. Likewise the Admiral may
enquire of, and redress all Annoyances and Obstructions in all Navigable
Rivers, beneath the first Bridges that are any Impediments to Navigation, or
Passage to or from the Sea; and also try Personal Contracts and Injuries done
there, which concern Navigation upon the Sea: And no Prohibition is to be
granted in such Cases. 5. If any be Imprisoned, and upon Habeas Corpus, if any
of these be the Cause of the Imprisonment, and that be so Certified, the Party
shall be Remanded.
Signed, Tho. Richardson, Rob. Heath. Humf. Davenport, John Denham, Richard
Hutton, William Jones, George Croke, Tho. Trevor, George Vernon, James Weston,
Robert Barkley, Franc. Crawley, Henry Marten, William Noye. Examinat T. Meautys.


At Whitehall the 22d. of February, 1632.
Present, Lord Keeper, L. Archbishop of York, L. Privy Seal, Earl Marshal, L.
Chamberlain, E. Salisbury, L. V. Wentworth, L. V. Falkeland, L. Cottington, L.
Newburgh, Mr. Treasurer, Mr. Comptroler, Mr. Secretary Coke, Mr. Secretary
Windebanck.


IT was this Day thought fit and Ordered, That such Prohibitions as have been
sent into the Admiralty-Court, from any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster,
falling under the Rules contained in the Articles Agreed on, and Signed in His
Majesty's Presence, the 18th of this Instant, as well by all the Judges of His
Majesty's said Courts at Westminster, as by His Judge of the Admiralty, and his
Attorney General, should be withdrawn, and superseded; whereof the Judges of
the said Courts from whence such Prohibitions have Issued, are hereby prayed
and required to take Knowledge, and to give Order therein accordingly.

Examinat Meautys.

The Jurisdiction of the Court of Admiralty, Settled.
THE Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, S^obells Col. f. 147. Cap. 112.
finding many Inconveniences daily to arise, in relation both to the Trade of
this Kingdom, and to the Commerce with Foreign Parts, through the uncertainty
of Jurisdiction in the Trial of Maritime Causes; do Ordain; And be it Ordained
by Anthority of Parliament, That the Court of Admiralty shall have Cognizance
and Jurisdiction against the Ship or Vessel, with the Tackle, Apparel, and
Furniture thereof, in all Causes which concern the Repairing, Victualing, and
Furnishing Provisions for the setting of such Ships or Vessels to Sea, and in
all Cases of Bottomry; and likewise, in all Cases of Contracts made beyond the
Seas, concerning Shiping or Navigation, or Damages happening thereon, or arising
at Sea in any Voyage; and likewise, in all Cases of Charter Parties, or
Contracts for Freight, Bills of Lading, Mariners Wages, or Damages on Goods
laden on Board Ships, or other Damages done by one Ship or Vessel to another,
or by Anchors, or want of laying of Buoys; except always, that the said Court
of Admiralty shall not hold Pleas, or admit Actions upon any Bills of Exchange,
or Accounts betwixt Merchant and Merchant, or their Factors.

And be it Ordained, That in all, and every the Matters aforesaid, the said
Admiralty Court shall and may proceed, and take Recognizances in due form, and
Hear, Examine, and finally End, Decree, Sentence and Determine the same,
according to the Laws and Customs of the Sea, and put the same Decrees and
Sentences in Execution, without any Let, Trouble, or Impeachment whatsoever,
any Law, Statute, or Usage to the contrary heretofore made, in any wise
notwithstanding; saving always, and reserving to all, and every Person and
Persons that shall find or think themselves agrieved by any Sentence Definitive
or Decree, having the force of a definitive Sentence, or importing a Damage not
to be repaired in the definitive Sentence, given or interposed in the Court of
Admiralty, in all or any of the Cases aforesaid, their Right of Appeal in such
Form as has heretofore been used, from such Decrees or Sentences in the said
Court of Admiralty.

TO THE King's Most Excellent Majesty. A Copy of the Petition to K C. II
mentioned p. 13.

The Humble Petition of several Merchants, Owners, and Masters of Ships,
Victuallers, and Material-Men, belonging to the City and Port of London.
Shows,
THat it has been anciently the Wisdom of the Kings of England, your Majesty's
most Royal Progenitors, so to provide for the Wealth and Good of Commerce, and
Navigation, as to give it all Encouragement, and to remove all Obstructions
from it, your Wealth, Happiness, and Honor, much consisting in it.

And more particularly, your Majesty's most Royal Father of blessed memory in
the year 1632. taking notice of some differences concerning Prohibitions then
arisen, betwixt his Majesty's then Courts at Westminster, and his Majesty's
Court of Admiralty, was graciously pleased to hear them Himself in full
Council, and upon full Debate thereof, had the 18th. of February, 1632.
Propositions for accommodating thereof were by his Majesty, and the Board
resolved upon, and upon reading thereof, as well before the Judges of his
Majesty's Court at Westminster Hall, as before the Judge of his Highness's said
Court of Admiralty, and his Attorney General, agreed unto, and subsigned by
them all in his Majesty's presence, and entered in the Council Book, and the
Orig'nal to remain in the Council-Chest, a Copy of which Order, Agreement, and
Propositions is hereunto annexed. See the Order above P. 15.


That the same Order, so made by your Majesty's said Royal Father and the
Board, and agreed unto and subscribed by all the then Judges of England, did
very much tend to the Advancement of the Navigation and Commerce of this
Nation, to the Encouragement both of the Merchants and Seamen, to the credit of
Shipping with the Material-Men, to the furtherance of Ship-masters, and
Building of Ships, the Wooden Walls of the Kingdom, and to the keeping a right
understanding abroad; for that the Foreign Contracts made beyond the Sea, and
the matter of Charter-Parties for Voyages, all Ship-building, Repairing,
Victualling of Ships, Mariners Wages, and other matters of mere Admiralty, did
from thence forth proceed in their due course in the said Court of Admiralty,
by the Rule of the Civil and Maritime Laws, well known abroad as well as here,
and that without either being Prohibited or Interrupted: By which
Encouragement, and for that as well the People here, as Foreigners, had speedy
Justice in the Admiralty, by one Common Rule well known to them all, more Ships
were Builded, Freighted, set out to Sea, more Voyages and Returns made,
Commerce flourished, the Wealth of the Kingdom increased, and his late
Majesty's Customs and Revenues were advanced.

But for as much as there have been of late Obstructions arisen by the Grant of
Prohibitions in causes of Charter-Parties, Repairing and Building of Ships,
Mariners Wages, and other the causes and cases so settled as aforesaid by his
late Majesty and the Board, with the consent and agreement of all the then
Judges; Your Petitioners do sensibly perceive, that unless by the Piety, and
Wisdom of your Majesty, your Majesty's Court of Admiralty be established in its
Jurisdiction, that it may minister due Justice in all these and other cases of
Admiralty, without being Prohibited or Obstructed; The building of Ships will
be discouraged, the Material-Men will not trust upon the credit of the Ship,
fewer Voyages to Sea, and Returns from thence will be made, Trade and a right
understanding abroad (especially since all such causes, and matters are abroad
referred to the Admiralty) will decrease, and your Majesty's Customs be
lessened, and Ship Masters, and Seamen, as well as Merchants be endamaged, and
much more Inconveniences ensue also.

The Petitioners, who do heartily upon their bended Knees bless God for your
Majesty's most Happy and Glorious Restoration, to your Crowns and Kingdoms,
and do Humbly and Devotedly pray that the same may Flourish, and that your
Majesty may enjoy a Long Peaceable and Prosperous Reign, do humbly submit it to
your Majesty's most Wise and Prudent consideration, whether your Majesty in a
matter of this Universal Concernment, will not be pleased upon the perusal of
the said Order annexed, to tread in your Majesty's most Royal Fathers Steps,
and to call your Majesty's Judges, or such others as your Majesty shall hold
requisite to be present at your Majesty's Council Board, and cause the said
former Order to be renewed and confirmed, and to be inviolably observed, that
your Majesty will in your own great Wisdom do therein for the good of your
Kingdoms, Commerce, Shipping and Navigation, as to your Majesty shall seem
requisite.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray. Will. Batten, Will. Penn, Will. Rider,
Nic. Harlestone, Law. Moyer, Brian Harrison, Edw. Jonson, Daniel Gates, John
Lainbery, Tho. White, Tho. Harman, John Casse, John Proud, John Swanley, Will.
Wild, Jam. Modyford, Robert Lant, Greg. Wescomb, Will. Wescomb, Nich. Warren,
Rich. Lant, Jam. St. Hill, John Marshal, John Harbin, Philip Pain, Will. Wood,
Nich. Bradley, Will. Green, Tho. Gates, Joshua Waters, Will. Clarke, Rob.
Wood, George Percy, John Frederick, Tho. Bludworth, Tho. Brodrick, John Bull,
Ri^h. W^scomb, John Mascal, David Skynner, Tho. Andrews, John Lemkuele, Law.
Blankcart, Tho. Bantry, Godfrey Lee, John Paige, Christop. Boon, Peter
Vandeput, John Moon, Alex. Bence, John Soame, Charles Michel, Na. Houldings,
Peter Leare, Rich. Ford, John Jollife, Rob. Canning. John Harris, Tho. Warren,
Joseph Debins, Joseph Cambel, Tho. Davies, Will. Walker, Rich. Adames, Rob.
Ellis, C. Bennet, Edw. Lopegood, Nich. Meade, Sam. Put, Tho. Canham, Tim.
Alsop, Tho. Tyte, Dan. Ford, Rob. Hooker, Nich. Corsellis, Peter Proby, Andr.
King, George Smith, John Dickens, Will. Parker, John Heath, Edw. Wambwel, Ant.
Nicholetts, Edw. Jews, Tho. Culling, Rich. David, James Young, Nath. Tenche,
George Maryet, R. Church, Jun. Not. Townsend, Jacob Wachter, Pe. Heninghook,
Rob. Gale, Ger. Weyman, Nich. Skinner, Edw. Bouverie, Mich. Godfrey, And. West.


FINIS.

