SEDER OLAM: OR, THE Order, Series, or Succession OF ALL THE Ages, Periods, and
Times OF THE WHOLE WORLD IS Theologically, Philosophically, and Chronologically
Explicated and Stated. ALSO The Hypothesis of the Pre-existency and Revolution
of Humane Souls. Together with the Thousand Years Reign of Christ on the Earth,
probably evinced, and delivered in an Historical Enarration thereof, according
to the Holy Scriptures. To which is also annexed, Some Explanatory Questions of
the Book of the Revelations of the like import. And an Appendix; containing
some Emendations and Explanations of diverse Passages, in the two foregoing
Treatises, out of the Author's Original Manuscripts and Papers.

Translated out of Latin by I. Clark M. D. upon the Leave of F. M. Baron of
Helmont.

LONDON: Printed for Sarah Howkins, in Georgeyard, Lumba^, street, 1694.

TO THE English Reader.
Serious and Inquisitive Reader,
FOR thy sake was this small Tract translated into the English Tongue, by the
Consent of the Baron of Helmont, now resident at London, wherein I have rather
affected a plain English Style, than any artificial Embellishment left, I
should make it less intelligible, by ^ndeavouring to render it more po^ite, and
so rob the Author, to divert the Reader, which is to betray ^he Understanding,
to gratify the ^ancy. And now Reader, as to the ^ubject, sure I am of Opinion,
if ^ere be any such thing as revealed ^eligion in the World, (as none b^^
^theists will deny) the only sure ^ay to prove it, is by reconciling Faith with
Reason; for though the subtilties of Faith may soar above the perfect
comprehension of Reason, yet no true Faith can be so absolute, as to appear
wholly inconsistent with it, as is manifest in the Example of Christ's
Incarnation; where Faith persuades me of this miraculous Union, and Reason
s^ews me the necessity of it. Here is the Conformity of Faith with Reason: and
no Hypothesis more effectually proves the veracity of Scripture against the
Objections of Atheists, than that which perfectly demonstrates the harmonious
congruity and conformit^ of those truths; but all the vulgar ^^positors have
hitherto been so far ^^om reconciling the Scriptures, that they have made i^
appear a Mass of Contradictions, and mightily strengthened the principles o^
Atheists.

J. C.

SEDER OLAM, OR, THE Order of Ages.
1. F^R as much as God is but one, the terms o^ Three Persons are very
improperly applied to the Mystery of the Father, Word, and Holy Ghost. It were
better to stick to the words of Holy Writ, in the Explication of so great a
Mystery. Herein w^ may be safe, and this would remove a Scandal from such, who
are offended at the names of Three Persons.

2. Because God does all things according to his infinite Wisdom, therefore
there is no indifference of Will in him; and therefore, in all things he does,
he is a necessary Agent, and yet also the most f^ee Agent.

3. Therefore he did ^ecessa^ily create the Worlds, and that not by constraint
from any foreign Agent, but from the Determination of his internal Goodness and
Wisdom.

4. Therefore the Attribute of ^ Creator is essential to God, because in God
there are no accid^nts.

5. Therefore God is a Crea^o^ ^^om ^ternity, and so by consequence did make
Cr^atures from i^fi^ite Ages; and also s^ill does and will c^e^te new to all
^terni^y.

6. The Worlds therefore, in respect of us, are infinite and innumerable.

7. But (among other differences) there is this special difference between God
and Creatures, that God is altogether unchang^able; but all Creatures are, in
some Sense or other, changeable.

8. But there is a twofold distinction in the mutability of Creatures; for
Creatures are either changeable to Good or Evil, (which indeed for some time is
the L^^ and Condition of all Creatures) or el^^ at length, after a certain
space of time, only changeable unto Good.

9. Which mutability of Creatures remains unto all Eternity; for there is no
Creature so perfectly good, but that it is ^^ill capable of a greater Degree
and Me^^ure of Goodness, to all Eternity.

10. Moreover, there is necessarily intercedent between God and Creatures a
certain middle Being, which indeed is less than the supreme Deity, but greater
and more perfect than all Creatures.

11. And this Ens medium^ or middle Being between God and Creatures, is Christ
the Heavenly Adam.

12. God, by this Medium, to wit, Christ create^ and produced all Creatures
whatso^v^r.

13. Again, among other Differences, there is this di^fe^ence between Christ
and C^e^^ures^ that all Creatures are for some time ch^ngeable unto Good and
Evil; but Christ is only changeable unto Good, but never unto Evil.

14. And therefor more justly merits the name of Son of God, than that of a
Creature, and his production is rather to be accounted a Generation, than
Creation.

15. Christ, the Heavenly Adam, is both God and Man, containing in him both
Natures, viz. the nature of God and Man.

16. For whereas the most Divine Humanity of Christ is intrin^ically, and most
perfectly united with the word of God, which is God; therefore this Heavenly
Man and Divine, Jesus Christ, is truly God.

17. But the Divine and Humane Natures in Christ must not be confounded, but
plainly distinguished; so that the Humanity is never changed into the Deity,
nor the Deity into the Humanity.

18. So great is the Excellence of Christ beyond all Creatures, that there are
certain Divine Attributes allowed him, which are communicable to no Creatures,
to wit, Omni-presence, and Omniscience.

19. Which Attributes of Omni-presence, and Omniscience of the Man Christ, are
nevertheless inferior to those, which appertain unto God.

20. For God is so present in all things, that he is every where centraly
existent; but the Divine Humanity of Christ has not its Center every where
present, but is universally extended by the essential Radiations from the
Center of his most Divine Soul into all Creatures and Worlds.

21. Lastly, the Omniscience of Christ's Humanity, is inferior to that which
appertains to the Deity; for as the most glorious Godhead most perfectly knows
all things without the Concurrence of crea^ed Objects, as Instrumental causes
to stir^ up knowledge in him^ the divine Soul of the Man Christ Jesus knows all
things, either by the perception of Objects, as they do some way or other
influence him, or in respect of things to come, are signified to him by divine
Revelation from God the Father.

22. Because Christ Jesus the Heavenly Man, is the first begotten Son of the
most excellent and supreme God himself, and by reason of his miraculous Union
with the supreme Deity is very God, equal with God the Father; and also because
he is most loving to all Mankind, every where present, and all knowing, and so
can, and will help all Men in any necessity or distress whatsoever, therefore
is deservedly to be called upon, worshipped and adored, and we cannot any other
way duly and acceptably call upon, worship or adore the supreme God himself,
but in and through Christ the Mediator.

23. That there is such a Medium, or middle Being between God and Creatures,
the very Order of things, clearly demonstrates. For as it agrees with the
highest and supreme God, to be a Being altogether unchangeable; so is it
congruous to the nature of every Creature or created Being to be changeable to
Good or Evil; but between that which is wholly unchangeable, and that which is
wholly changeable, there is a certain Medium partaking of both extremes, which
in the nature of it, is unchangeable to Evil, and changeable to Good, which
Medium is Christ, the Heavenly Adam.

24. And therefor in the order of Nature is before all Creatures whatsoever,
and pr^-excels the whole Syst^m of Creatures, yea, is the Lord and Head of
every Creat^re.

25. Moreover, the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily in this most divine
Medi^m Jesus Christ, according to the Testimony of the Apostle Paul, which
cert^inly is thus to be unde^stood; that the divine Hum^nity of Christ is the
House, and immediate Dewlling Place of the most High and Glorious God himself,
and is as it were a certain Body for the Divinity, in the which God himself may
be seen and apprehended by his Creatures, and by the Mediation of this beloved
and blessed Consort of God, when duly q^ali^ied and dispos^d thereunto, they
may enjoy him. Theref^r^ it is, that according to the words of Christ himself
his Saints and true Believers feed upon his Flesh and Blood to Eternal Life.
Which Flesh and Blood of Christ are of a Divine and Spiritual nature, and yet
not ^he very Essence of God, but of a certain middle nature between God and
Creatures; for God does as it were corporally manifest himself to his Creatures
by Christ; who nevertheless in his own nature, is purely a Spirit, absolutely
void of all corpo^eity.

26^ Now, because the divine Humani^y of Christ is as it were the Body and
House of the Divinity, (for the Greek Word (...) as it were (...) impo^ts as
much) therefore Christ does in some measure pa^take o^ the nature of a Body,
otherwise he could not be the true and proper Medium between God and Creatures.

27. For all Creatures, even the most noble and excellent, are in some degre^
or other corporeal.

28. Therefore Spirit and Body are not contrary Essences, as many do vainly and
f^lsly affirm; for every created Spirit is corp^real, having in it the true
ess^nce and nature of a Body, viz. it is an extended Being, bounded,
circumscribed with place, moveable, etc.

29. And therefore a humane Soul (which is also a Spirit) is corporeal, and
comprehends in it the true Nature and Essence of a Body. The most pure and
Spiritual Angels also are corporeal, and ^s it were spiritual Bodies.

30. For as every Spirit or Soul in the whole creatural System is a Body,
having in it the true Essence and Attributes of a Body; so every Body is in
some degree or mea^ure Animal and Spiritual, i. e. has Life, Sense and
Knowledge; or at leastwise capable of those Attributes^

31. Nor is it to be feared, that the Souls of Men could ever become mortal, or
be turned into Dust, Vapor, or soft Air, or dissolved into Earth and Stones,
if they were admitted to be corporeal; for not every thing that is corporeal or
Body, is dissolvable, because it is a Body; for there are immortal Bodies, and
such as are absolutely and indissolvable, such are the Glorified Bodies of
Saints and Believers in the Resurrection of the Dead, when this mor^al shall
put on Immortality, and this corruptible Incorruption, according to the
Apostle's word^.

32. Seeing therefore every Spiritual thing is corporeal, and every corporeal
thing is Spiritual, in some degree or measure; therefore all Creatures, from
the highest to the lowest, have some relation and natural Af^inity one to
another; the highest to the lowest, and the lowest to the highest; ye^,
certainly, as to their original essence and condition, they are of one and the
self same nature, nor is there any, even the basest Creature, but may be
changed, either into the noblest, or at least into some part of the noblest
Creature.

33. Therefore that false and vain Imagination of sundry Philosophers (so
called) concerning Matter and Body, is to be rejected, as though it were a thing,
not only wholly inanimate, and void of Life, but also utterly incapable thereof
to all Eternity. Which most absurd opinion borders too much on Atheism, and
most grievously strikes at the divine Goodness, Wisdom and Power, and other
Attributes of the most excellent and supreme God.

34. For from God, who is Life himself, and the fountain of it, nothing that
has not Life, or is incapable thereof, can proceed; for God created all his
Creatures in his most excelling Goodness, Wisdom and Power, that in him they
might at length b^ blessed: Rejoice in him, and ^njoy him and that in him, as
their end, they might most sweetly rest, and so praise, honor, and glorify
him as God, their Creator, to all Eternity, which they could never do, if they
we^e void of Life, and incapable of it.

35. In the Primitive State of created things, the most excellent, and most
wise Creator, made or produced a kind of intermediate or middle Creatures, with
a possibility in this their mediate, and of its own nature, changeable State
and condition, of being changed into the better, by the assisting Grace of God,
or into the worse, by the bias of their own proper Wills and Inclinations.

36. Therefore God's first Work about Creatures is to create them; then being
created to fashion them after this or that manner, either into the better, if
they follow faithfully in all thin^^, the conduct of divine Grace, or into the
worse, by the most just Judgment of God, if refusing the Guidance of divine
Grace, they wilfully and voluntarily renounce the Law of God.

37. Hence proceeds that diverse and contrary state and condition of most
Creatures one from another: For whereas sundry Creatures kept their primitive
Integrity and Innocence, nor did ever transgress the divine Law, therefore are
they blessed, and still enjoy the beatifick Vision, and Communion with God,
they are also pure, holy, and immaculate full of Light and divine Life, and
shine in that Glory and Beauty, which to us Mortals is certainly
incomprehensible. But because many others fell from their primitive Purity, by
Transgression and Disobedience of the divine Law, therefore are they miserable,
polluted with Sin, sullied and darkened.

38. And hence it is, that from this World of creation, other Worlds also burst
out, to wit, the World of formation, as well the Superior as Inferior; that
of Souls, who never fell, whose Seat and Region is the caelestial Paradise;
this of fallen Souls, and after a certain manner polluted with Sin, whose Seat
and Region is without that blessed place of Paradise in places and parts of the
World, invisible to our outward view.

39. Lastly, from the inferior World of Formation proceeded this World of
Fabrication, wherein we live, comprehending within it all visible things, from
the remo^est Stars, even to the Earths profundity, which is therefore called
the Wo^ld of Fabrication, because Death and Stupidity so p^evails in the most
parts of it, that all things in this World seem rather to move in a manner
Mechanically, than from a vital principle, which nevertheless is to be
understood in comparison to the superior Worlds, where indeed the vital
principle is far more predominant, than in this inferior World, nor is this
inferior World in any, even the most stupid part of it wholly, and in every
degree deprived of Life.

40. Nothing th^re^ore, which belongs to this vi^ible World, is immediately
created; ^or this vi^ible World is not properly a created World, but made and
composed of pre-existent principles, which pre-existent principles belong to
the World of Formation, and the World of Formation owes its original to the
Pre-existent principles of the World of Creation; the World of Creation only is
properly and strictly created, and its production is properly called Creation;
for this does not exist from any Pre-existent principles, or from a Subject, or
parts making a whole, but has only God the Father, and Christ his only begotten
Son, for its Author and Original.

41. Therefore Men born into this World, (to speak properly) are not
immediately created, neither in respect of Soul nor Body; the external or
o^^ward Body, with the Life thereof, is that which belongs to this World of
Fabrica^^on; but the Soul which is called Neshama, pertains to the World of
Creation. Lastly, the Spirit pertains to the World of Formation, which
possesses the middle place between the Soul and outward Body, and this Spirit
by the Hebrews is called Ru^ch, but the Life and Spirits of the external Body
are termed by the same Nep^esh, ther^ are therefore three vital principles in
every Man, Nesha^a, Ruach and Nep^esh; Neshama of the World of Creation, Ruach
of the World of Formation, and N^phesh of the World of Fabrication; moreover
Nephesh is the Clothing or Vehicle of the (...) Ruach, and Ruach is the
Vehicle and Garment of the (...) Neshama.

42. First of all, therefore Men are created in the World of Creation;
secondly, formed in the World of Formation (where they assume their Clothing
or Vehicle, which is called Ruach; and this Ruach is a certain Subtle and
Spiritual Body, of which sort are the Bodies of Angels, and just ^en made
perfect;) thirdly, they are made or fabricated in the World of Fabrication, and
all this is expressly confirmed by Testimony of the Scripture it self, Isai.
43.7. Every one that is called in my Name have I created, formed and made; and
consequently, according to these words of Scripture, the Hebrews call the World
of Creation Briah, the World of Formation Iezirah, and the World of Fabrication
Asiah, which three Hebrew words are expressly to be met with in the place of
Scripture above cited.

43. Moreover, besides this World Briah, higher than which our Original does
not reach (if we have respect to the parts composing humane Nature) there is
understood another World, more noble, and (in the Order of Nature,) more
ancient than the rest immediately ^lowing from the Author, God himself, called
in Hebrew Aziluth, which signifies the nearest to the most high and supreme God
himself, and this cannot agree to any other than Christ, the Savior and
Mediator b^tween God and Men.

44. Therefore those Hebrew Doctors do rightly and truly teach, and that
altogether according to Scripture Testimony that those four Worlds
abovementioned do exist, to wit, the Aziluthick, which is of Christ, the
Briatick, which is of Souls, the Ieziratick, which is of Angels, not yet
consummated, and the Asiatick, which is of Men, clothed with an external Body.
But as the A^ziluthick, as it is the noblest of all, so it is the greatest, and
but only one; although the Hebrews distinguish it into ten Emanations; the
distinction of which Emanation, nevertheless is only modal and not essential.
But the Briatick, Ieziriatick, and Asiatick Worlds, ^s to their number and
multitude, in respect of us, are infinite and innumerable, because (as I have
said before) God is continually a Creator; for the Attribute of a Creator is
essential to him, and therefore he does and will continually create new Worlds
to all Eternity. And lastly, from these new created Worlds, other new
Ieziratick, and Asiatick Worlds arise, and therefore 'twas truly said of
Solomon, we cannot search out the beginning, nor the end of God's works; as
true also was that saying in another passage. The mighty Works of God are past
finding out.

45. Now the Ieziratick World, from whence (as from its root) the Asiatick
World proceeded, penetrates and pervades the whole Asiatick World in every
part, with its vital and essential Rays; also the Briatick World, by the
difusion of its vital and essential Rays, penetrates the whole Ieziratick and
Asiatick World; and lastly, the Azilutick World, not only penetrates and
pervades the three inferior Worlds, by the transfusion of its essential and
vital Rays, but also most intrinsecally comprehends and embraces it in its
Bosom, as a Mother does her O^f-spring, and so indeed all these four Worlds are
intrinsically present one with another; yet, so that the ^hird is more subtle
and Spiritual than the ^ourth, the second than the third, and the first than
the second, and consequently more penetrative and per^usive.

46. From what has been said, it evidently appears, that humane Souls did
pre-exist before they came into these gross and Earthly Bodies; for nothing
which is properly created is of this visible Wo^ld, but the Soul is properly
created^ therefore the Soul had not its original or first exis^ence in this
visible World, but it first existed in the World of Creation; then descended
from the World of Creation into the World of Formation; and lastly, from the
World of Formation, into this World of Fabrication.

47. But as for this Asiatick World, this has its rise and Original from the
Ieziratick World, by reason of some great falls of the Souls contained therein
for transgressing the Law of God: And if these Souls had nev^r fell, this
Asiatick World, which is the World of Fabrication, had never existed.

48. Nevertheless, the Souls of the Ieziratick World are not changed into the
parts of the Asiatick World; that is to say, into the Dust of the Earth,
Stones, Plants and Trees; for such a change of Souls is plainly impossible, but
the Bodies of those Souls, distinct from the Souls themselves, and by the Sins
of those Souls, separated from them, as by a certain kind of Death, were
subjected to such a change, or conversion into the parts of the Asiatick World.

49. Therefor this Asiatick World is truly called Golgotha, or the place of
Sculls and ^^p^lchres, to wit, because it is nothing else in a manner but a
certain mass and heap of Carcasses and dead Bodies, which those Souls have put
off, by reason of their Sins in the Ieziratick World; and being thus divested,
they at length grew into this Grosness, Death and Stupidity, which they now
suffer.

50. And therefore our Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, after he came into
the Flesh in the likeness of sinful Flesh, was to be c^u^ified in Golgotha,
which is the place of Scu^^^ or Sepulchers, by which is typically signif^^^
this Asiatick World, or World of Fabrication^ that so in this place of Death
he ^^g^^ ^vercome Death it self, who is our Savior and Prince of Life, yea,
Life it self: which that he might do by the Ordination of divine Wisdom, he
was to die in a Body of Flesh, and then to rise again in the same Body in which
he died, that he might become the first Fruits of the Resurr^^tion of the Dead,
and his B^dy being Glorified and Immortalized, might at length glori^ie and
immortalize the Bodies of Saints, in which Bodies they shall live and reign
with Christ for ever in the Heavens.

51. Therefore this Asiatick World, is to be again converted and reduced into
the Superior and excellent Ieziratick World, that all its parts may be
reunited to these ancient Souls, whereunto in times past, they belonged, that
so at length the Souls and Bodies may be purified in this World from all
dreggs of Sin and Death, as in a refining Furnace of Affliction and Suffering,
and lastly, eternally glorified in a indissolvable and incorruptible union of
both Body and Soul.

52. And then indeed the natural and animal Body will be changed into a
Spiritual Body, which is far nobler; yea, all this gross and material World,
where Death and Stupidity so wonderfully reigns, will be rendered full of Life
and Spirit.

53. And yet this great, and truly wonderful change and conversion of all, even
the vilest things of this Asiatick World, may not be suddenly, and altogether,
but by parts, and in various Successions of Ages, according to the
predestination of divine VVi^dom.

54. Therefore the Ages of Worlds, i^ respect of human Intellect, are truly
infinite and innumerable; and that not only in regard of things to come, but in
regard of things past.

5^. Moreover, this Asiatick World has had its existence ^or many more Ages
than we Mortals are able to number.

56. Therefore this Asiatick World, wherein we live, must be distinguished
into many and various Worlds, (as a Whole is distinguished into its parts)
beyond the reach of Mortals understanding.

57. But those particular Asiatick Worlds are most commodiously distinguished,
in respect of the Years, whereof they consist.

58. Now every particular Asiatick World consists of seven Thousand Years;
which make up, as it were, one week, consisting of seven days.

59. For a thousand Years with the Lord are as one Day, and one Day as a
thousand Years, as it is in the 90th. Psalm, and confirmed by the Apostle
Peter, in hls second Epistle, ver. 3.

60. And the seventh Millenium, or seventh Thousandth Year of each Week of the
World, is the Sabbath of this World.

61. Therefore this World of ours consists of Seven Thousand Years, whose
seventh Millenium is the Sabbath, or Sabbatism of this our present World, as it
is in Heb. 4.

62. And indeed that Sabbath of days, which God commanded the Jews to observe,
was a Type or Figure of this Mystery, the same also was that of the Sabbath of
Years, Months and VVeeks, which in times past God likewise command the Jews to
observe.

63. Now, whereas every fiftieth Year comprehending seven weeks of years, was a
year of Iubilee, wherein every Captive was to be set at liberty, and every one
to return to his own Family, House and Posses^^on; this certainly signifies
fifty thousand years, which contain seven weeks of Worlds, therefore in the
fifty thousand year, or end of every seventh World, many Souls are to be saved
and reconciled to God by Christ, which as yet could not obtain Salvation in the
preceding weeks or Worlds, but suffered for their Impieties by the most just
Judgmnet of God the execrable torments of Hell Fire.

64. Others there are, whos^ Sins God does pardon in this World for the sake of
Christ, such as are Sins of Ignorance, and all others of which Men sincerely
repent; but there are some, whose Sins are n^i^her forgiven in this World, nor
in that which is to come, and yet are forgiven in some third World; and lastly,
there are others which are not remitt^d till the ^ourth, and so on, even to a
seventh, according to the most just Judgment o^ God; nay, far beyond a seventh,
even to the seventy seventh thousand year, the Remission of ^ome very notorious
and wicked Sins, seems to be deferred, that ^s, not less than eleven weeks; and
such a kind of a Sinner, that wicked Lamech seemed to be, who predicted of
himself his to Wives, that Vengeance should be taken on him seventy seven fold,
that is (as it seems) 77000 Years. But on Cain (who was not so wicked)
Vengeance was to be taken, but seventy fold, which is 7000 Years, to wit, the
whole time of this World.

64. Then if one day with the Lord be as a thousand years, by the same reason
one year ( i.e.) 365 days will be as 365000 years, which Period of 365000 years
^eems to be some vast Age, comprehending about 52142 Worlds, within which space
of time, whatsoever is of humane kind on Earth, will doubtless be converted
unto God.

Nevertheless, the Asiatick World does not cease to be upon this account,
because the parts of the Asiatick World, are continually multiplied, by reason
of the continual Multiplication of other Worlds, to wit, the Ieziratick and
Briatick, whereof we have already made mention.

66. Therefore they err extremely, and conceive too unworthily of God, yea, do
not righ^ly know nor consider the nature of him, who think the punishments o^
the damned are to be perpetrated to all Eternity without any end or
termination. For the very nature of God is Love it self according to the
express words of the Apostle John, and finally, because the nature of God is
unchangeable, therefore he did necessarily love all his Creatures, and that
constantly and unchangeably too, nor could he absolutely hate any thing that
ever he created; and because love is of the nature of God himself, and whatever
he operates or does in relation to his Creatures, even when he most severely
punishes them for their Sins proceeds all from Love, therefore God loves his
Creatures in the most miserable and wretched state and condition they can exist
in, and therefore cannot but benefit them, and so at length bring them out of
misery: Therefore all the punishments, which the most just and truly
tremenduous Justice of God inflicts on Sinners, are true effects, and real
tokens of his divine Love toward them, the most certain end and design of all
which is the Redemption and Deliverance of those Sinners from all their Sins
and Punishments inflicted on them for Sin, and their final Glorification and
Restoration to Justice and Holines^: which is apparently confirmed by St. John
in the Revelations, chapter 5. v. 13. who says, that he saw (in his prophetical
Vision, every Creature in Heav^n and Earth, and under the Earth, etc. praising
God, saying, Blessing, Honor, and Glory, and Power to ^im that sits on the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever; the same also the Apostle Paul
openly enough declares, Ephesians. 1.10. Phil. 2.10. Colos. 1.20.

67. Now forasmuch as when any human Judge punishes a delinquent, he ought to
love him, and direct his punishments to this end, that the punished O^fender
may be benefitted and bettered thereby; how much rather will God love those he
punishes, and i^flict such punishm^nts on every Offender, by which at length in
their due and appointed times^ according to the transcendant Wisdom of God
every Sinner may return from a state of Sin and Misery unto a st^te of
Righteousness, and everlasting Happiness?

68. Nor does that hinder, which is vulga^ly objected, that every Sin deserves
an exceeding great and everlasting punishment, because it is against God, who
is infinite Goodness; for because God is infinite Goodne^s, therefore God's
Will to forgive Sins is as necessary as his Will, to punish it. Again, this
clearly appears ^s well from Scripture, as from mani^old experience and
obse^vation, that God does not punish the smallest and greatest Sins in the
same degree, but is wont to punish the lesser Sins wit^ lighter and the greater
with the more grievous and heavy Judgments: therefore that consequence, drawn
from the infiniteness and greatness of the Object, is weak^nd invali'd; for
otherwise a Sin^er would be punished for the lightest and smallest
transgression with the highest and infinite punishment.

69. Because therefore there are degrees of punishments, according to the
degrees of Sins, and no Sin is in its own nature infinite, therefore all the
punishments of the damned, as well of fallen Angels, as of Men^ will have an
end after long Tracts of time according to God's Appointment.

^0. The longer any one has been a Sinner, the longer will God punish him for
his Sins.

71. The diversi^y of punishments, is manifestly apparent from the words of
Christ; some Sinners says he, are worthy to b^ punished by the Council, some
are worthy of the Judgment, others of Hell Fire. And then again some Sins are
remitted in this World, others neither in this World, nor that which is to
come, which neverthel^^s may be forgiven in some third or fourth^ etc. These
words of Christ also ought to be w^ll con^^^ered, that those that were cast
into Prison, should not depart thence till they had paid the last Fa^thing^
lastly, where he says it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the
day of Judgment, than for that unbelieving Generation of the Jews. Moreover,
such as are to be saved in the end of this World, and such as are not to be
saved till the end of the next, that is, till the Expiration of fourteen
thousand Years, seem to be fai^ly, though Aenigmatically described, Exodus 12. For
the Woman that brought forth a Male Child was unclean seven days, and on the
eighth day the Male was Circumcised; ^or this eighth day plainly signi^ies the
^lorification of the mortal Bodies at the Expiration of 7000 Years, that is in
the beginning of the eighth Millenium. But if she brought forth a Female Child
she was unclean 14 days; by the Male our spiritual Generation by Christ seems
to be signified, by but the Female Man's own Rig^teousness. For those who are
only Righteous by t^eir own Righteousness cannot be saved in this World but are
committed to the next, that denying their ow^ Righteousness, they may be
regenerate^ in Christ; and thus having put on the t^^e Righteousness o^ Christ
in a s^i^i^tual Regene^a^ion, finally obtained (...) Salvation.

72. But the words for ever, and for ever and ever, when they have a relation
to the punishments of the damned, are not to be understood at far^hest, than of
certain Ages.

73. But when they have relation to God, and the blessed Life of Saints, then
indeed o^ght to signify never ceasing, and in^inite Ages; for to punish for
in^inite Ages, is against the nature of God, who is infinite Love, and to do
good for infinite Ages, is most agreeable to the divine Nature.

74. The plurality of Worlds succeeding one another, ^^ems to be evin^ed by the
^2 ^ilgrimages of the Children of Israel, in the Wilde^ness, till they came at
last to Gilgal, where, by the command of Joshua, they were Gir^nm^ised; now
G^lgal seems a Wheel or Revolution^ And because all things happened to them in
the Type and Figure, as St. Paul had a^^irmed, those ^2 peregrinations seem to
signify six Worlds, that is, 42000 Years; which b^ing expired, all of them
will ^inally obtain the Glorification of their Souls and Bodies in the Heavens^
What can their coming to the twelve Fountains of Water, and seventy Branches of
Palm Trees in the^r Pilgrimage signify, unless it be this, that in the fifth
Millenium of this World, the most benign and gracious God would send them the
12 Apostles and seventy Disciples for them to hear, and this place of
Pilgrimage was called Elim.

75. Moreover this Succession of Worlds is clearly proved from what we read in
Scripture of a thousand, yea, of thousands of Generations, and yet from the
beginning of this World, to the end thereof, consisting of 7000 Years, there
cannot be rekoned 400 ^enerations.

76. Therefore, after the end of this World, another World will be prepared,
wherein the Multiplication and Propagation of Mankind will proceed^ and be
carried on as in this present World: and therefore also before this World
there did another World heretofore exist, in which the Propagation of Mankind
was made by successive Generations. But the number of all the preceding and
succeeding Worlds is not only undeterminable by any Mortal, but by any
creature.

77. B^t as out of the con^^agration of this World, another World will arise,
which will be produced as it were out of the Ashes of this present World; ^o
out of the Ashes of the past World, after the burning and conflagration of it,
is this World framed and brought forth, a^ it were de novo, or a new, and so
indeed the Generation and Fabrication of one follows the destruction and
dissolution of another, in a continual order.

78. But as to what pertains to the Creation of this World, described by Moses
in Gen^sis; this certainly is not Creation in a strict Sense, but Construction,
Fabrication or Faction, which is made of Pre-existent matter: therefore they
err extremely, who think this World was made of nothing, and that too in the
sp^ce of six days; for God the great Contriver and Artificer, did not make or
frame it out of nothing, but out of the matter of the preceding World, which
Fabrication or Structure of this World in the space of six days, may be well
enough understood in a Litteral Sense.

79. They who have attained to the Glorification of their Bodies in the end of
this World, do not descend in^o ^ucceeding Worlds, to be born any more in a
Body of Flesh, but remain to all Eternity with God and Christ in the Heavens,
ascending continually unto greater Glory and Dignity; but those who are not
per^ected in t^is World, nor have attained the Glori^i^^tion of their Bodies,
do descend into ^^cceeding VVo^lds, to be bo^^ in their o^der and turn in a
Body of Flesh, until they (...) at la^t p^^fected, and have obtained the (...)
of their Bodies in the Hea^^^^.

80. And it is worth our consideration, and diligent enquiry, whether or no
from ^he proportion of the holy City, compared into the whole Earth, may not be
Mysti^ally, and as it were abstrusely represented ^o us, how great a part of
Mankind of this World shall be saved in this World? First, therefore let us see
what is the measure of ^his holy City in its solid content. John in the
Revelations says, this City was equal in length, breadth and depth, that it
was ^2000 Stadia or Furlongs in length, that ^s, 1500 of our Miles; (for eight
Furlongs make a Mile) therefore the ^olid content of the City is ^^^5^00000
Miles, as in the M^rgin. ^ But as for the Mea^ure of the Earth we will suppose
61 Miles for every degree, which is one Mile above the vulgar Computation, and
then the Circum^erence will contain 21960 Miles; but the Diametre will contain
6989 Miles, whereof is 1164. To find the Superficial content, multiply the
Circumference by the Diametre, that is 21960 by ^987, the whole Sum is
153434520 Miles; lastly, multiply the aforesaid number by 6987^ of the
Diametre, and the Product will be as in the Margin 178597781280 Miles, the
(...) content of the Earth; which if you divide by the solid content of the
Holy City, the Quotient will be 52, with the remaining Fraction, as in the
Margin. Therefore, ^ after this rate, the Holy City will be in proportion to
the whole Earth, as 1 to 52, and, thence will arise that great year of 365000
Years, wherein all the Souls on this Earth are to be saved; for if the 1/52,
part of Mankind be saved in one World, then in 52 Worlds, or Weeks of Worlds,
that is, 365000 Years all Mankind will be saved.

81. It Is likewise to be considered whether or no that slow Motion of the
eighth Sphere (as it is commonly called) does not answer to the great year of
Iubilee of 50000 Years, that is, seven Worlds or Weeks. Ex. gr. Let us suppose
this ^ighth Sphere to finish its Revolution in 49000 Years, one degree of the
said Sphere will make 138 Years, which does not much differ from the vulgar
Computation of Mathematicians.

82. Therefore for the clear understanding of many Mysteries of true
Philosophy, we must have a true and exact Chronology or Computation of times,
from the beginning of this World, to the end thereof.

83. The true Chronology, from the beginning of the World, to the end of it, is
to be ^ound in, and deduced from the Scriptures; for to what purpose are parts
of Chronology, exhibited to Men in Scripture, with such care, industry and
diligence of Writers, unless all the parts of it were exhibited also; for if
the Scripture fails in any part of Chronology, it fails in all; and if it fails
in all, it is vain and unprofitable to exhibit any part, which is absurd: and
therefore all parts of Chronology are to be had in the Scripture, otherwise the
Scripture were certainly very imperfect, but the Scripture is perfect, giving a
perfect Testimony, not only of ^ll the Doctrines of true Religion, but ^lso of
all the parts of true Chronology, without which, the Doctrine of true Religion
is maimed and imperfect.

84. Now the true Chronology of the World (as it is in Scripture) contains from
the Worlds Creation, to the ^ruci^iction of our Savior Christ 3996 Years. From
the Crucifixion of Christ, to the e^d of the World, 3003 Years, which in entire
Years, from the beginni^g of the World, to the end thereof, is 7000 Ye^rs.

85. And that our Savior Christ was to be Crucified, and raised from Death to
Life in the end of the fourth Millenium, from the World's Creation, may be
clearly evinced for diverse reasons. 1. The Analogy of the six days of the
Worlds Fabrication, or construction of the 6000^ Years of this World; for the
first day, by a wonderful Analogy, agrees with the first Millenium, the second
with the second, the third wi^h the third, the fourth with the fourth, the
fi^th with the fifth, the sixth with the sixth, and las^ly, the seventh with
the seventh Millenium, which also is the Sabba^h of this World, that the Sun,
Moon and Stars were placed in the Firmament on the fourth day. This most
excellently and clearly points out, that Christ the Son of Justice should come
in the fourth Millenium, and ^scend into the Heavens to enlighten all Men.
Lastly, by the Moon and Stars, the Church, with the Apostles and Evangelists,
(...) clearly demonstrated. 2. The entrance of the High Priest, in the Sanctum
Sanctorum, or Holiest of all, once a year to expiate the Sins of all the People
in the end of the ^eventh Month, apparently signifies, that Christ by virtue of
his Blood, should en^^r into Heaven it self, in the end of the ^our^h Millenium
of the World, which ex^ctly agrees to the end of the seventh Month, to wit, the
22th. day of the seventh Month, which was the last day of the Feast of the
Tabernacles; for by the Rule of Three, as 7000 Years, is to 3996, so is ^65
days to 208 days, and in 208 days are contained the days of six Months, from
the Vernal Aequinox, to the 22th. day of the seventh Month, that is, 187 and
21, which together make up 208, 3. This is confirmed by the division of time,
from the beginning of the World to the Resurrection of Christ, delivered in the
second Book of Esdras, chapter 14. And this Division is made into twelve parts,
where of ten and an half were elapsed, when the Angel delivered those things to
the Prophet Esdras, which Division also Christ made into twelve hours, and
called the time of his Incarnation the twelfth Hour, saying to the Jews, Are
there not twelve Hours in the day? Work whilst you have the day, etc. clearly
hinting, that that very time was the twelfth Hour from the Worlds Creation. Now
how many Years one hour of the Day or Night does consist of, may be positively
concluded from that mysterious Psalm, the 90th. ver. the 4th. A thousand Years
are in thy sight but as yesterday, and as a Watch in the Night; but a Watch of
the Night contains three Hours; Therefore, if a thousand Years be as a Watch of
the Night, or three hours, one hour will be the third part of a thousand Years,
that is, 333 ^ Years, and Christ arose from the Dead in the end of the twelfth
hour, which answers to 3996 Years, from the beginning of the World^ for 333
multiplied by 12, gives the number 3996. And certainly, no other Division can
agree with the time of Esdras, (but this Division does very well agree with it)
when the Angel revealed those things unto him; for ten parts and an half make
3496, the time of the Angels discovery, viz. 500 Years before the Death of
Christ, and 56 Years after the Ca^tivity. And therefore that place, in the
second Book of Esdras, chapter 7. v. 28, 29. concerning 400 Years, from that time,
to the Death of Christ, ought to be read 500. For without all peradventure, by
the mistake and inadvertency of Writers, 400 was put for 500. 4. And lastly,
the self-same thing is very elegantly demonstrated from the Age of Abraham, and
the Age of the World; for Abraham, whom St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans,
calls the Father of all Men, mystically represents the whole World: And
therefore by Abraham's Son Isaac, whom he had born to him in his old age, our
Savior Christ is signified (who took upon him the Seed of Abraham) who should
come into the World, be Crucified, and arise from the Dead, in the old Age of
the World: and for the clear demonstration of the said Analogy, let the numbers
be disposed in their due order after this manner: as 175 Abraham's whole age,
is ^o 1^0 when Isaac was born, so is 7000 to 4000, which numbers stand in a
true and accurate Analogy, as will appear to any one that will but examine it
by the Rule of Three. But the Nativity of Christ mystically ^ypi^ied under
Isaac, rather answe^s to his Resurrection from the Dead, than to the time that
he was born of the Virgin Mary in the Flesh; for ^^ul applys the Resurrection
of Christ to the words of the second Psalm. Thou art my Son, this day ^ave I
begotten thee; and Christ is called by the Apostle Paul the first Begotten, in
respect of his Re^urrection from the Dead, Acts 13.33.

86. Also the afo^esaid Analogy evidently demonstrates to us the number of
Y^ars, from the beginning of the Captivity unto the Resurrection of Christ; ^or
the Na^ivity of Ishmael answers to the beginning o^ ^he Captivi^y; for when
Isaac was born, Ishmael was completely four Years old, born in the 86th. year
of Abraham's Age; therefore we may say by the Rule of Three, as 175 is to 86,
so is 7000 to a fourth proportional 3440, and then indeed was Ishmael
mystically born, to wit, from the beginning of the Captivity. And this Ishmael
mystically ^ignifies the I^ws themselves, who mocked and pers^cu^ed Christ, as
Ishmael in times past ^ersecuted Isaac. Now Ismael persecuted Isaac when he was
^o^rteen Years old, and therefore was with his Mother cast out of Abraham's
House under the old Law, which exactly answers the time wherein the Jews
persecuted Christ, hung him on a Cross, and mocked him, wherefore they were
together with their Mother, to wit, the Law or old Testament cast out of the
House of God, that is, 14 Years being elapsed, which is 560 Years from the
beginning of the Captivity; for as 1^0 Years do analogically signify 4000
Years, so do 1^ Years also signify 560 Years, which are 70 Years of Captivity,
and the 7^ Weeks of D^niel, to wit, 490 Years. And here indeed 560 make up
those 14 Generations, from the Babylonian Captivity to the Resurrection of
Christ; for these 14 Generations agree with the 14 Years of Ishm^el, when he
derided and scoffed at the true Heir^ and yet in S^. Matthew's Genealogy of
Christ there are but 1^ Generations from the Captivity, to the Birth of Christ,
therefore the fourteenth Generation is to be computed from the Birth of Christ,
to his Resurrection. And agreeable to this Analogy, the whole time of the
giving the Law, to the time of the Captivity, is described by the Age of Hagar,
the Mother of Ishmael, and whereas the Law was delivered to the Israelites
about 900 Y. before the Babylonian Captivity, all that time of 900 Y. signifies
the Age of Hagar, when Ishmael was born, which according to the aforesaid
Analogy, is 22 Y. for as 14 Years answers to 560; so 2^ answers to 900.
Therefore the Damsel Hagar brought forth Ishmael when she was 22 Y^. old, that
is, the Law being 900 Ye. old, brought forth Ishmaelitish Jews; which because
of their Ishmaelitish Natures were delivered into Captivity, who about 560 Ye.
afterward persecuted Christ unto death, even the Death of the Cross; but
because Christ suffered Death in the middle of the last week, therefore 3 Years
are to be deducted out of the number 560, and therefore there remains 556
Years, to wit, the true time from the beginning of the Captivity, to the Death
and Resurrection of Christ, and from the beginning of the World 3996 Years.

87. Now it ^emains, that we deliver a particular Chronology of every Period
from the Scriptures.

And we shall find six Periods from the Creation of Adam, to the Resurrection
of Christ; namely, Years. From Adam to the Flood 1656 From thenc^ to the Birth
of Abraham 381 From thence to the Israelites departure out of Egypt 505 From
thence to the Building of the Temple 480 From thence to the Babylonian
Captivity 418 From thence to the Death and Resurrection of Christ 556 3996


88. The truth of these Periods is demonstrable by parts. The first Period
consists ^f 1656 Ye^rs from Genesis the 5. which computation is not disputed by
Chronologers.

^ The second Period of ^ears 381 is proved from Genesis the 11.

Sem begat Arphaxad after the Flood 2 Years. Arphaxad begat Cainan 35 Years.
Cainan begat Sala 29 Years. Sala begat Heber 30 Years. Heber begat Peleg 34
Years. Peleg begat Reu 30 Years. Reu begat Sarug 32 Years. Sarug begat Nahor 30
Years. Nahor begat Terah 29 Years. Terah begat Abraham 13^ Years. 3^^
Note, That (by negle^^ (...),) Cainan is omitted in the ^ebrew ^^xt, who
notwithstanding is mentioned in Luke, chapter 3. and also by the LXX Interpreters,
and in right reason we conclude his number to be 29, to wit, that the whole
Period from the Creation of Adam, to the Death of Christ, is 3996 Years and an
half, as is already proved. Consider, lastly, that we rationally affirm, that
Abraham was born in the 130th. Year of T^rah`s Age, as appears from Genesis 12.
for when Abraham was 75 Years old, Terah departed this Life, aged 205 Years.

And that the third Period consists of 505 Years, is proved: For when Abraham
recei^^d the Promise, he was aged 75 Years + 430 Years = 505 Years. After this
the Law was given

Genesis 2.17. In the same year the Israelites departed out of Egypt.

The fourth Period expressly contains 480 Years, 1 King. 6. v. 1.

The ^if^h Period stands thus in Years. 1 King. 11. Solomon reigned after the
Foundation of the Temple was laid 36 Years. 1 King. 14. Rehoboam reigned 17
Years. 1 King. 15. Abijam 8 Years. 1 King. 15 Asa reigned 41 Years. 1 King. 22.
Iosaphat reigned 25 Years. 2 King. 8. Iehoram reigned 8 Years. 2 King. 8.
Achazia reigned 1 Years. 2 King. 11. Athalia reigned 6 Years. 2 King. 12. Ioas
reigned 40 Years. 2 King. 14. Amazias reigned 29 Years. 2 King 15. Azarias
reigned 52 Years. 2 King. 15. Ioathan reigned 16 Years. 2 King. 16. Achaz
reigned 16 Years. 2 King. 18. Ezechias reigned 29 Years. 2 King. 21. Manasses
reigned 55 Years. 2 King. 21. Amon reigned 2 Years. 2 King. 22. Josias reigned
31 Years. 2 King. 23. Ioathas reigned 00 Years. 2 King. 23. Ioach^m ^eigned 11
Years. 2 Kin. 24. Zehoja^hin reigned 3 Mon. Years. 418
Note also that the Captivity must be reckoned 70 Years from Zehojathin, but
not from Zedekia, as appears from the Epistle of Ier^miah, chapter 29.10. But if
according to others the Captivity of 70 Years be computed from the third year
of the Reign of Ioachim, (according to that of Dan. 1^1.) the fifth Period from
the foundation of the Temple, unto the Babylonian Captivity, will contain only
410; and therefore that the number of Years from the Creation of the World to
the Captivity may be 3440, there must be 37 Years added to Cainan in the second
Period: So that it is all one whether the Captivity be reckoned from the third
Year of Ioachims Reign, or after the eleventh.

Lastly, it is to be observed that the truth of this Period is proved from the
Fourth Chapter of Ezekiel^ for those 390 Days signify 390 Years from the time
Jeroboam erected the Golden Calf, to the Destruction o^ Jerusalem; therefore 36
Years of Solomon's Reign are deducted, and two of Rehoboam's Reign. ^ To which
10 Years of Zedekia`s Reign, unto the Destruction of Jerusalem being added, the
whole amounts to the number of Years. 390
Lastly, the sixth Period of 556 years and an half is proved, for the Captivity
lasted 70 Years, and from the end of 70 years, viz. of Daniel's Weeks (3 years
and an half being deducted) there are to be accounted 486
Years when Cyrus published an Edict for the rebuilding of the Temple 556


Observe how exceedingly they wander from the Truth, who contend that the 70
Weeks of Daniel are not to be reckoned from the Edict of Cyrus, and suppose the
beginning of the said Weeks, to be long since Cyrus`s Time; forsaking the Truth
of Scripture, and giving credit to heathenish Historians, and so indeed they
abandon the Holy Scripture, as tho` it were a maimed and imperfect thing, which
true Christians, and such as are studious of the Scripture should not do. Admit
it be according to them, who follow the Historical falsehood of the Heathens,
that Daniel's 70 Weeks were long since^ Cyrus, that is, as they will have it,
70 Years after the end of the Captivity, to wit, by their computation in the
second Year of Darius Longimanus; after this rate, there will be 560 Years from
the end of the Babylonian Captivity to the Death of Christ; but this does in a
wonderful manner contradict Esdras, in that he says ten parts, and of the
World are elapsed from the Creation, to the Death and Resurrection of Christ.
For suppose that there were 560 Years, 1/21 and of 1/12 from Adam, to the Death
of Christ, all the twelve parts taken together, would make up 4480 Years, which
far exceeds the years feigned by the followers of the Heathenish History.

89. Now from the forementioned Chronology, the years from the beginning of the
World, to the Babylonian Captivity, are 3440, as it is inserted in the Margin,
to which, if 2300 be added, those Years which the Angel spoke of to Daniel.
Dan. 8.14. prophe^ically signified by Days, make up the number of 5740 Years,
which being complea^ed, the Sanctuary shall be purged, that is, that happy
Millenium of the Sabbath shall begin, and then adding to it the aforesaid
Millenium, and 260 Years more, thereof comes the sum of 7000 Years, which makes
up the entire age of the whole World, from the Creation of Adam, to the End. ^
Now the said 260 Years, is that little time mentioned by John in the
Revelations, Chap. 20. which commences after the expiration of the Millenium,
and therefore that Sabbatick Millenium begins 260 Years before the end of the
Sixth Millenium of the World.

90. And ^o indeed, the whole age or time of the Sabbatick Happiness,
comprehends 1260 Years, even as much as the Kingdom of Babylon and Antichrist
contained, that the Day of Christ`s glorious Reign upon Earth may be equal to
the Reign of Antichrist, in his base and filthy Kingdom of Darkness. And either
Period contains three years and an half, that is seven years taken together,
which answers to the seven last years that Jacob served Laban.

91. And indeed that whole time that Jacob served Laban, making about twenty
years, elegantly divides the whole age of the World into its distinct P^riods,
by a mavelous Analogy; for as 360 makes up one mystical and prophetical Year,
so 7^00 makes up 19 Y^ars, 5 Months, and 10 Days, that is in a manner 20 Years;
but such is the Analogy. The first seven years of Iacob`s Service, extend from
the beginning of the World, to Israel's departure out of Egypt; now the Time
of Iacob`s Marriage with Leah, signifies that time wherein the Lord engaged the
Childr^n of Israel to himself by the outward Law, and the ^our Sons of his
Wife, Leah Ruben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, extend from the Law to Christ's
Incarnation, who was to spring out of Judah. Lastly, the Children of the
Concubines, signify the Gentiles who were to believe in Christ in the days of
the Apostles, even almost until the end of the Babylonian Apostasy. And
Rachel's Barrenness signifies the Jewish Church, which during all that long
space, was as it were barren^ in the Christian Faith; which Rachel was
af^erwards to bring forth Joseph, whose time certainly reaches to the Sabbatick
Millenium; but the Birth o^ B^njamin being last of all, apparently signifies
the Apostle Paul, who was of the Tribe of Ben^amin with other Saints, who were
last o^ all to come into the World, to wit, about the year of the World, 6000,
and shou`d remain in the World, even till the coming of Christ from Heaven. And
^inally the death of Rachel, and the departure of Iac^b and his Sons out of
Padan Aram into his own Count^y, signifies the end of the World; and the
ascension of the Saints from Earth into the Heavenly Country in glorified
Bodies, all this is confirmed from Genesis 49. from verse. 1. to the 28.

92. But that little time aforesaid of 260 years, in which begins the Sabbatick
Millenium within the sixth Millenium of the World, to wit, at the year, 5740.
was prefigur'd under the Law by the Sabbath, which began in the Evening of the
sixth Day: wherefore those 260 years, are as it were in the evening of the
sixth day, that is, the sixth Millenium of the World.

93. Moreover, it is clearly demonstrated from the Words of Osea, when that
most blessed and truly Golden Age of the Sabbatick Millenium shall begin. Os.
Chapter 6. v. 2. after two days he shall quicken us, and in the third Day he shall
raise us up, and we shall live in his Sight. What can be here signified by two
Days, but two thousand years^ as in Psalm. the 90. as in 2. Pet. 3.8.? And
therefore by the third Day, he plainly means that Sabbatick Millenium of the
World, wherein he and all the Saints were to be raised up, to live entirely a
thousand years, neither to dye any more, but to ascend into the celestial
Country, when the Millenium o^ thousand (...) is fi^i^hed. Now Osea lived in
the fourth Millenium, and therefore when said after two days, etc. he had
respect to the seventh Millenium. but compare this Prophesy with that of
Daniel, concerning 2300 years, and thou shall plainly perceive that both extend
unto the Sabbatick Millenium.

9^. But because those 1335 Days ( Dan. 12.12.) contain 1335 years, to wit, the
whole time of the Apostasy after the Apostles, to the beginning of the
Millenium; therefore from 2300 years, 1335 years are deducted, and the
remainder 965, contains the time from the beginning of the Babylonian
Captivity, to the beginning of the Apostasy after the Apostles: and therefore
subtracting 556, from 965, there remains 409 years, the time from the
Resurrection of Christ, to the beginning of the Apostasy, to which add 33 from
the Nativity of Christ, to his Resurrection; the sum is 442 years and an half,
from the Nativity of Christ, to the beg^nning of the Apostasy. ^


95. Add to this Number 442, 1260 years mentioned in the Revelation, the sum is
1702 years from the Nativity of Christ, to the end of the first Period of the
Reign of Antichrist.

96. The second Period of 1290 years in Daniel, extends 30 years further, that
is, from the Birth of Christ, to the year, 1732.

97. The third Period of the reign of Antichrist, extends 45 years further,
which is 1335 years, viz. to the year of Christ's Nativity 1777.

98. Therefore the year 1777, from the Nativity of Christ, ends the reign of
Antichrist, and the four Monarchies, and all the Kingdoms of the World, and
from that very year, begins the reign of Christ, and of the Saints over the
whole Earth.

99. But it is uncertain, whether this present Epoch, or date from the time of
Christ's Nativity in the Flesh, commonly received among Christians be true or
no: for Usher thinks the Vulgar Epoch, to fail of the true Epoch, about four
years.

100. Also the great Coversion of the Gentiles, by the preaching of the Gospel
in its purity and efficacy, must preceed this happy Millenium of the World; and
then will follow the Conversion of the Jews, to the Christian Faith, to wit,
from the year 1702, unto the year 1777, but 30 years from the ye. 1702 unto the
ye. 1732, have respect to the Conversion of the Gentiles, then 45 years from
the year 1742 unto ^777, do in a special manner respect the Restoration,
Conversion, and return of the Jews into their own Country.

101. But from the year of Christ's Nativity 652, to the year of Christ 1702,
are prepared and gather`d unto God, and the ^amb 144000 Saints, which are the
first Fruits; for as the Feast of the first Fruits under the Law, was kept 50
days before the Feast of Autumn; so also now the Feast of the first Fruits,
preceeds the Feast of Autumn 50 years.

1. But the time of the ^uture Millenium, seems to have been prefigured to
Abraham, in the Sacri^ices which God commanded him to offer. Now God commanded
Abraham to take a Hei^er of three years old, a Goat of three years old, a Ram
of three years old, with a Turtle Dove and a young Pigeon. Now suppose the
Turtle Dove to be one year old, and the Pigeon twenty days old, the days of all
those years, according to the prophetic Style, signify years, and all being
added together, make up 3620. Admit also that Abraham saw this Vision when he
was 83 years old, which was the year of the Wo^ld 2120, according to the
aforesaid Chro^ology the number 3620, being added to the number 2120, makes up
5740, the year of the World, when the Millenium will begin. ^


2. In the future Millenium, all the Saints that ever lived since the beginning
of the Wo^ld, will be raised up to live a Holy and Blessed Life upon Earth, for
the space of a thousand years. Dan. 12. Hos. 6. Revel. 20.

3. This Resurrection of all the Saints to Life, is the first Resurrection,
expressly so called by the Apostle John, Revel. 20.5.

4. In this first Resurrection, the Saints are raised to Life in a Carnal and
Terrestial Body, not such as we now have, but such as Adam had in Paradise,
before he had eaten the Fo^bidden Fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, and such a Body likewise had Christ wherein he suffered Death for all
Mankind.

5. Therefore there is a twofold Resurrection of the Saints, the first is in a
carnal and Terrestrial Body, in which they shall all live for the space of a
thousand years. The second is that in which that Carnal and Terrestrial Body,
after the expiration of a thousand years shall not dye, but be changed in a
moment, or in the twinkling of an Eye, into a Spiritual and Celestial Body,
and ascend into Heaven, even as Christ ascended into Heaven, after his
Resurrection from the Dead.

6. Of which twofold Resurrection of the Saints, the Apostle Paul speaks
clearly in 1 Epist. to the Corinth. Chap. 15. That is not first which is
Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and then that which is Spiritual, as we
have born the Image of the Earthly, and we shall also bear the Image of the
Heavenly. But we shall not bear the Image of the Earthly in the Body, in which
we now live, viz. of the ear^hly Adam, as he was after the fall: but in the
first Resurrection we shall bear the Image of the earthly in the future
Millenium, living such a Blessed and Holy Life as Adam ^ould have lived if he
had not sinned: ^hen at the end of the Millenium we shall not dye, but be
changed, and this Mortal shall put on Immo^t^lity, and this Corruptible
Incorruption.

7. Yet the Body of the first Resurrection may be said in some sense to be
Mortal and Corruptible, not that it shall ever dye, or be corrupted, but
because in respect of a spiritual Bo^y, it is as it were Mortal and
Corruptible, that is at least, not beyond a possibility of dying or being slain
by external violence, (if God were so pleased) even as the Body o^ Christ
suffered Death, which notwithstanding in it is own Nature could not dye.

8. And that the Saints shall be raised to Life, in a Carnal or Natural Body,
appears from that which Paul said, speaking of himself and others: we shall not
all sleep, but we shall all be changed, and this Mortal shall put on
Immortality; Paul therefore expected to be raised up to Life in a Body of Flesh
in the future Millenium that should not dye but be changed.

9. It appears also that when the Millenium is finished, Gog and Magog shall
gather themselves together against the Saints, to slay them which certainly
they could never attempt to do, if they did not live in a Body of Flesh.

10. This is more largely con^^^^'d i^ that the Saints, even until 260 years
after the beginning of the Millenium, shall marry and propagate Children; for
the State of Matrimony and procreation of Children is not beneath the dignity
of the future Millenium, for Ad^m in his Paradisical State before the fall had
a Wife, and though he had not sinned, would have known his Wife, and have
begotten Children.

11. But that the Saints do for some time in the aforesaid Millenium, contract
Matrimony, and beget Sons and Daughters, appears from Isaiah. Chap. 65. where
the Inhabitants of this of this New Heaven and new Earth are pr^mised that they
shall build Houses, and in^^^ite them, plant Vineyards, and ear the F^^^t of
them; they shall not labor in vain, ^or bring forth in fear, for they are the
Seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring with them; yea, in the
same Chapter it is affirmed of the Sinners who shall live in the Millenium, that
they shall live to an hundred Years, nor shall any die in Infancy: and the days
of the Saints shall b^ as the days of the Tree of Life, (for so hereto^ore that
place was read by the Fathers) that is, they shall live a thousand Years, and
then shall not die, but ascend into Heaven in a Body changed, which Adam would
have done, if he had not sinned.

12. Now, that new Heaven which will be c^ea^ed in the future Millenium will be
only new, in respect of their excellent natures.

13. Ioseph's Bl^ssing by his Father Jacob, which belongs to the said Millenium
clearly demonst^ates that they should marry, and beget and bring up Children,
Genesis 49.2^, 26. For among ^^her Blessings which he had, he wa^ also blessed
with the Blessings of the B^easts, and the Womb which have a respect to Wives
and Mothers, whose Blessings also oug^t to reach to the utm^st bounds of the
everlasting Hills, viz. to the second Resurrection, when this Body of Flesh
shall be changed into a Spiritual Body; and being thus changed, shall ascend
into the everlasting Hills, that is, into the highest Heavens.

14. Therefore those Words of Christ, that in the Resurrection of the Dead,
they do not marry, nor are given in Marriage, but are equal to the Angels, are
to be understood of the second Resurrection, but not of the first: because
certainly in the first Resurrection they shall not be equal to to the Angels,
but as Adam was in Paradise before the Fall.

15. And hitherto may be referred those wo^ds of the book of Wisdom 3.43.
Blessed is the Barr^n and Und^fil^d, who has not known the Sinful Bed; for she
shall have Fruit in the Visitation of Souls.

16. Now all the Sons and Daughte^s of the Saints in the future Millenium, are
the Souls of all the Saints that ever have lived in a carnal Body since the
beginning of the World, and finally raised up to Life in a ^ody of Flesh, and
bo^n of Fathers and Mothers into the Wo^ld; for none shall enjoy the Reward and
Blessedness of the ^uture Millenium, but such who have lived an holy Life on
Earth, from the beg^nning of the World. Moreover Christ called this
Resurrection of the Saints unto Life regeneration.

17. And therefore all Saints that enjoy the Millenium, shall then be born into
the World, in a carnal Body, and shall have Fathers and Mothers according to
the Flesh.

18. Nor will this seem strange or incredible to any one, after it is clearly
demonstrated from Scripture that we have all lived several times in a Body of
Flesh, yea, for many years, and Ages of years.

19. This Truth being once demonstrated and granted, in a manner all the
Mysteries and things dif^icult to be apprehended of the future Millenium, will
be most easily understood; for the Ignorance of the Souls, being born again,
and returning to Life, in a body of Flesh, has mightily obscured the Mystery
of the future Millenium, and in a manner all other Mysteries of the whole
Christian Religion, which indeed (when the said new Birth or carnal
Regeneration is demonstrated) will display themselves, and appear with a
wonderful sweetness, facility, and evidenc^ of Truth.

20. First, therefore it shall be demonstrated by certain Arguments drawn from
Scripture, that the same Souls, after the death of the carnal Body were again
raised to Life, and born of Parents in a Body of Flesh.

21. First, this is proved from the express Words of Christ himself, who called
John Baptist Elias; yea, affirmed him to be Elias himself, Matthew. 11. Mark
9.12. and declared him also to be the same that was to come. But that, where
John denied that he was Elias is to be understood of the Mystery of 1045 Years,
couch't under the name of Eliah, which also signifies the strong and mighty
God; for that Dispensation or Ministration of John answers not to to the name
of Elias, but the name of John, which signifies Grace; but when he shall be
born again into the World, that Dispensation will most excellently suit with
the name of Eliah.

22. Secondly, It Is proved from that passage of St. Paul to the Romans; where
discoursing of the unbelieving Jews, he affirms, that they shall after many
Ages believe in Christ, and finally be reunited to their natural Root: but the
force of the Argument concludes in behalf of those Souls, who were unbelieving
in the Apos^les days, which after certain Ages were to believe in Christ, after
the fullness of the G^ntiles was converted to the Christian Faith: which
Conversion of the Jews we yet expect (...) Earth, even of those who were
unbelieving in the Apostles days; for all the Jews which are natural Branches
shall be saved, and their Hearts shall be opened, and that too before the
beginning of the Millenium.

23. Thirdly, It Is proved from Matthew. 23.35. compared with the 2 Chronicles. 24.22.
where Christ a^^irms that those very Jews, who were contemporary with him in
the Flesh, had killed Zacharias, the Son of Baruch, etc. But this Wickedness
was committed in the days of King Ioas, more than eighty Years before Christ's
Incarnation. See Matthew. 21.35. etc. compare here-wit^ 2 Chronicles. 24.22.
But if any should affirm that this was not their own, but their fo^e-Father's
Crime, and imputed to them, because they were led by the same Spirit of
Iniquity and Impiety: I answer, This cannot destroy the force of the Argument,
because according to the R^ghteous Ordinance of God, the Sins of the Fathers
are not imputed to the Children beyond the third or fourth Generation, even
when the Children are led by the same Spirit, and follow the same steps of
their Fathers. But be^cause many Generations have intervened between that
Wickedness, and the time of Christ's Incarnation, and many more be^ween the
Murder of Abel, and that time, therefore those very Jews had diverse times
lived in the World before that time; yea, Cain, who killed Abel, lived at that
time. Now, That the Fathers of those Jews did kill the Prophets, is true; for
all the Prophets which were killed, were either killed by the Fathers of those
Jews, but in the space of four Generations, or by those very Jews themselves.

24. Fourthly, It Is proved in that Christ affirms, that those very Jews, to
whom he spoke whilst in the Flesh had killed the Prophets. O! Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, said he, that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that were sent
unto thee; how often would I have gathered thee, but thou would not!

25. Fifthly, it is proved in that St. Paul 1 Thessalonians. 2.15. affirms that the
same Jews killed Christ and the Prophets.

26. Sixthly, In that Christ in his Parable af^irms those Husbandmen to have
ill treat^d the Servants of the Lord, and at last killed the Son himself.

27. Seventhly, from Christ's Parable of La^ourers, hired and sent into the
Field, some in the Morning, others at the third Hour, others at the sixth Hour,
others at the ninth Hour, others were called at the eleventh Hour; but they who
were called at the eleventh Ho^r stood all the Hours of the day idle in the
Marke^. By those Laborers who were called in the eleventh Hour, the Gentiles
are to be understood, who were called into the Church of Christ by the Minstery
of the Apostles after Christ's Resurrection. By those who were called in the
Morning, and at other Hours of the day the Jews are understood, the Morning is
the beginning of the Wo^ld, and therefore certain Jews, who lived in the
Apostles days, lived from the beginning of the World, and labored twelve Hou^s
in the Field: some labored nine, others six, three, etc. And when the Evening
came they all received a Penny, the Gentiles were made equal with the Jews, the
Jews mu^mur^d but without reason; for the Gen^i^es ^h^t believed in Christ, and
labored in the Field, had done as much (and some of them more) in the last
hour than the Jews had done in the whole day; for they had done but little
before Christ's Incarnation and Passion, and many of them did not labor
without grudging, therefore Christ said of them, Many are called, but few are
chos^n.

28. ^ighthly, It Is proved from the Words of P^ter, 1. Epist. Chap. 3. v.
18.19. For the same Souls, or the same Men who lived before and perished in the
Flood, lived also in Bodies of Flesh upon the Earth, when Christ ^u^fer'd Death
in the Flesh, who being mortified in the Flesh, was quickened in the Spirit,
and poured out upon Men a more abundant Life of Grace after he arose from the
Dead, and then indeed by the ministry of his Life and Grace, he preached to
those Souls who from the beginning of the World, were detained in Prison and in
Chains of Darkness under the Power of Satan, which Souls notwithstanding were
restored to Life in a Body of Flesh, to hear the Gospel Pr^ached. For the
Gospel is not preached to Souls that live out of the Flesh, but to such as live
on Earth, in Bodies of Flesh, John 1.9. John. 3.11.17.59. Luke 2.14.

29. 9 ly. It Is proved from the Words of Peter, where he affirms in his 1
Epistle, Chap. 4. verse. 6. that the Gospel was preached to the Dead, That they
might be judged as Men in the Flesh, and therefore they who in time past were
dead, lived again in the Flesh, that they might live to God in the Spirit.

30. 10 ly. It Is proved in that Christ preached that the Hour should come, and
was already come, in which the Dead should hear the voice of the Son of God,
and they that hear shall live. Whereby the Dead, he means not only the
Spiritually Dead, but such as are naturally Dead also; who were to live again
in the days of Christ, that they might hear the Gospel, and in hearing might
believe, and in believing, might have eternal Life.

31. Proof 11. St. Paul in his Epistle to Romans, ^.25. affirms that Redemption
is made in Christ Jesus, to the remission of Sins past, in the patience and
long suffering of God. Now the aforement^oned Sins are all the Sins committed
by all Men from the beginning of the World.

32. Proof 12. Christ is said to have reconciled us to God by his Death, even
when we were enemies to him, and to have born our Sins in his Body on the
Cross, which he could not have done, if we had not lived some time before the
Death of Christ.

33. Prof 13. Christ dyed for all Men, as well for those that had been dead
from the beginning of the World, as for those who were then alive; and
therefore the Efficacy of his Sacrifice extends unto all that have ever lived
from the beginning of the World, that they might repent, and obtain forgiveness
of their Sins,

If they would but believe in Christ, and obey his Commandments, for the time
to come. And how absurd is that opinion, that Christ should suffer Death for
all that dyed since the beginning of the World, and yet that the greatest part
of them should be wholly ignorant of so great Grace and Favor, neither should
ever taste of the Fruits of the said Grace, after the Death of Christ?

34. Proof. 14. Christ has affirmed that all Sins should be forgiven, exc^pt
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, but there were no Sins committed against the
Holy Ghost before the Death of Christ.

35. Proof 15. Paul said, God winked at Men in the times of ignorance, but then
he called all to Repentance. Therefore he called those also to repent, whom he
has formerly winked at, ever since the beginning of the World.

36. Because otherwise the Patience and long Suffering of God could not be
explained, for God forbore with much long Suffering the vessels of Wrath, etc.
And the great long Suffering of God allowed much time for Repentance, because
in the sight of the Lord, a thousand years are but as one day.

37. Proof 17. Peter in his second Epistle, Chap. 3, said God, did not come on
purpose to execute his tremenduous judgments in the conflagration of the World,
because he is long suffering, and wills all to come to Repentance, and
therefore the long Suffering of God, bears with Men almost two thousand years,
after the death of Christ, before the beginning of the Millenium, an^ three
thousand years before the last Judgment and Conflagration of the Wo^ld, which
three thousand years are with the Lord, but as three days. Now to what purpose
did God grant Men so long a time? But that such as had not lived a thou^and
years from the beginning of the World, might have the same time to live in a
Body of Flesh, before the end of the World; that they might at last repent, and
in case they did not repent, should be justly punished for the neglect of so
great Grace and long Sufferance.

38. Proof 18. Because the Lord will grant all M^n a day of Visitation in the
Flesh, that they may repent and lead a better Life, and that day of Visitation
is a thousand years, according to the Testimony of Peter, 2 Pet. 38. compare
herewith Hebrews, 4.7.

39. Proof 19. Christ affirmed, the Gospel should be preached to the whol^
World, that is to all Men, therefore all Men either have heard the Gospel
preached which Christ suffered Death ^or, or else shall hear it herea^ter
before the end of the World; therefore all Men that ever have lived since the
beginning of the World, (if they have not believed on Christ to come by the
ministry of the Prophets) must live again to hear of Christ, and to believe in
him by the Minis^ery of the Apostles, and other Ministers of Christ.

40, Proof 20. For the promise of eternal Salvation, has respect to the Faith
of Men, whereby they believe on Christ, that God raised him from the dead, and
therefore all either have had or shall have before the end of the World,
opportunity to hear of Christ's Resurrection from the Dead, which they cannot
have unless they are born again into the World.

41. Proof 21. The Lord promised by Moses, those Jews and Israelites who lived
in Moses time, that he would raise them u^ a P^ophet like unto Moses, whom they
should hear in all things, and therefore those very Jews and Israelites were to
live in a Body of Flesh, in the days of the Messiah.

And so the M^ssias was to be raised to all the Jews, and People of Israel,
both to the Fathers and the children that all the Fathers and all the Children,
especially those who dyed in Unbelief, might have opportunity to believe in
Christ, and obtain remission of their Sins past, for they were not to be
punished with Hellfire in the end of the World for transgressing the Law, but
for transgressing the Gospel. See Heb. 10. 28.29.

42. Proof 22. For those promises of the abundant Grace of God, and the
plentiful efusion of the Spirit, which God promised by the Prophets had respect
to those Jews and Israelites, who lived in the days of the Prophets, which
nevertheless were not to be fulfilled till the latter days, under the preaching
of the Gospel, after the coming of the Messiah in the Flesh, for the promises
were made to the Jews, and all their Children afar off, even to those who lived
from the beginning of the World, Acts 2.39. For how could the Jews rejoice in
hope of those promises, unless they were to live again in the days when they
were to be fulfilled under Christ.

43. It Is proved, 23. From Psalm. 90. v. 3.4. Thou turnest Man to Destruction,
and say again, return ye Sons of Adam, for a thousand years in thy sight are
as yesterday when it is past, and as a Watch in the Night. From hence is
clearly hinted the revolution of Souls, from Life unto Death, and from Death
unto Life, and that in the Space of 4000 years, which are but as Night
consisting of four Watches, which this Mystery seemed to signify when it was
said that Jesus went uppn the Sea to Disciples in the fourth Watch of the
Night, for that time in which Christ came in, the Flesh was in the fourth
Watch, that is, almost at the end of four thousand years, from the beginning of
the World.

44. Proof 24. From the Words of Solomon, in Eccle^iast. Chap. 1. v. 4. to v.
12. for by a three^old Similitude, of the Sun, Wind, and a River, is shown the
various and manifold revolutions of Souls from Life unto a corporeal Death, and
from Death again unto Life; for as the same Sun rises that Sets, the same Wind
blows from tho South into the North, and from the North into the South; the
same River that comes out of the Sea, returns into the Sea; so the same
Generation that goes out of the World, returns into the World, neither is there
any remembrance of former things. In which Words he tacitly answers the
Objection, Why therefore cannot Men remember that they have lived before? For
that stands in the Counsel and Goodness of God; but in the end of the World the
Books shall b^ opened, and they shall remember all things. And it was properly
said of Solomon, whatsoever was at that time, had been before, and should be
again; because all Souls had already been in the World before Solomon's time,
and performed their Revolutions, whereof none was to be finished before the
death of Christ on the Cross, which will appear more plainly from the Table of
the revolution of Souls he^eafter annexed.

45. Proof, 25. Is drawn from Ezeki^l, Chap. 36. and 37. verse. 12. I will open
you^ Graves and cause you to ascend out of your Sepulchers, (that is) from the
state of the Dead, into your own Land.

46. It Is proved, 26. from those four Wheels of Ez^kiel, ( Chap. 1. and Chap.
10.) and four Beasts which yet are but one Beast, and every Beast had four^
Faces, to wit, the Face of a Bull, the Face of a Man, the Face of a Lion, and
the Face of an Eagle. Which Wheels and Faces signify nothing else than four
great Revolutions of Souls; every great Revolution comprehends a thousand
Years, and under every great Revolution, are contained three other lesser
Revolutions, whereof each con^ains one third part of a thousand years, (that
is,) 333 years. And although there are said to be four Beasts, and every B^ast is
said to have four Faces, yet there are not 16 Faces but 12, because the fourth
of the first Wheel, is the first of the second, and so of the rest, as may be
seen by the following Table more at large. Those four Wheels are called Gilgal
or a Wheel, because they make but one great Wheel, to wit, the vast Revolution
of 4000 years, which make up a mystical Year; and all those Wheels belong unto
Men, but not unto Angels, because the said Wheels were circumvolv'd, or rolled
a^out under the Firmament, viz. upon Earth, which are nothing else b^t the
Revolutions of Souls in Terrestrial Bodies.

47. It is proved 27. Because they who killed the Mar^yrs since the Apostle's
days, to wit, within 300 Y. after the Death of Christ, were after many Ages to
be slain by Turks, and other bloody and barbarous Men; and this happened in the
opening of the fifth Seal, Rev. 6.10.

48. It Is proved 28. In that they are killed in the pouring out of the third
Vial, who in times past killed the Saints and Prophets of God. See Rev. 13.9,
10.

49. Proof 29. It is the rule and general Ordinance of God's Justice, That he
that kills with the Sword shall be killed with the Sword; and he that leads
into Captivity shall be led into Captivit^; but these things rarely happen in
one Age, and therefore are to be referred to diverse Ages and Lives.

50. Proof 30. For in Babylon was found the Blood o^ all the P^ophets and
Saints which lived since the days of Christ, and the Apostles; yea, also before
those times, even 4000 Yea^s ^ackwards, from the time Babylon ^^rst began to be
builded; for the number of 4000 Years makes an entire Period of twelve
Revolutions.

51. Proof 31. For this reason the Brethren of the Deceased were to raise up
Seed to their Decease^ Brethren, that they might, as far as was possible, be
born again into the Wo^ld in a proper and direct Line, and that because of the
Genealogy of Christ.

52. Proof 32. And for this reason the Lord in the Parable commended that
unfaithful Servant, who was so liberal to the Poor, that they might receive him
into their Houses, herea^ter when he should fail; and therefore said he, The
Children of this World are wiser in their Generation, to wit, in their
Revolution of Generation, than the Children of Light.

53. Proof 33. The Apostle Jude writes concerning certain wicked persons, who
turned the Grace of God into wantonness, etc. that they were before ordained to
Condemnation, but before, or of old, does not signi^ie from Eternity, or before
all Ages, neither does God ordain or sentence Men to Condemnation before they
have committed Sin, but for Sins committed; and therefore those who were before
ordained to Condemnation, have wilfully committed Sin in their former Life,
when they lived heretofore in former Ages, wherefore the most just God has
sentenced them to such a Condemnation.

54. Proof 34. For the Apostle Peter. 2. Epist. Chap. 2. v 3^ writes of
certain false Teachers among the Christians, whose Judgment then of a long time
lingered not, what then can be hereby intended, but that they committed such
Crimes^ ^^r a long time pas^, or in ^o^mer Ages, whilst they lived, for which
God condemned them to that punishment? Besides also he does not darkly hint
that the same ^alse Teachers among the Christians were he^etofore false
Prophets among the People^ see Verse 1. which Judgments of God against them, i^
they had believed in Christ would nevertheless have been cancelled and blotted
ou^, (for Christ dyed for them also, and redeemed them with his Blood, that
they might believe and be saved^) and because they did not believe in Christ
under the former Sentence brought against them, therefore it is confirmed, de
novo, or a new.

55. Proof 35. God speaking to Abraham of the Amorites, said their Iniquity was
not as yet to be fulfilled, till after 400 Years, but because those Amorites
were not to live so many years in the Flesh, no not one half of those years, it
evidently ^ollows that they were to be raised up again to Life in a Body of
Flesh, before the 400 years were completed, that they might ^ul^ill their
Iniquity; and this wonderfully agrees with the number of 33^ years, within
which compass (for that Man's Life is so abbreviated) the same Souls shall be
newly raised up to L^^e, as the following Table dem^nstrates, to which 3^3
^ears, if 67 be added, they make up the number of 400, or if 97 be added, it
makes us 430, which number of 67 or 97 was to be allotted to that People, that
in the succeeding Life they might (...) their Iniqui^y. Moreover the same
Amorites could have lived twice before this, since the Flood, and therefore the
third time of Life seemed to have been necessary, according to the order of
Divine Justice, before that they could have fulfilled their Iniquity, for which
they should deserv^ to be erradicated out of the Earth.

56. It Is proved 36. Because Salvation and ete^nal Life is the Fruit of good
Works which Men sow in the Earth, or in an ea^thly Body, and therefore those
that dye in infancy (especially if they have not lived before in a Body of
Flesh to ripeness of years) must be raised up to Life again, that they may grow
to maturity, and have opport^^ity to sow the Seeds of good Works in the Life of
a carnal Body, that they may at last rejoice in the Fruits of their Labor, for
except our Happiness were the Fruits of our own Work and Labor, it were not
real and true Happiness, nor should we have true Joy therein, for it would be
like the Son of a strange Mother, whom no Mother loves as she does her own Son.

57. It Is proved, 37. Because otherwise the Doctrine of God's Universal Grace
and Love, could not be established or defended; for certainly we find not a
few, who from their Infancy are so hardened and buried in Sin, that all the
time of this present Life, they seem wholly incapable of Repentance.

58. It Is proved, 38. Because the Apostle ( Romans 1^.) writes that many of the
Jews were blinded, according to the Prophesies of Scripture for many Ages, that
they could not believe till the fullness of the Gentiles were gather`d unto
Christ, and then they who were formerly blinded, were to be again illuminated,
when they should return again into the World.

59. It Is proved, 39. Because in Christ's Parable of the Fig Tree, that bore
no Fruit for three Years, this very thing is clearly hinted, Luke 13.6, 7, 8,
9. For what is to be understood by those three yea^s, but three thousand years?
for every Millenium is mystically signified by one year under the Law, and
therefore the Seventh Millenium of the World which is the Sabbath, was
signified by the seventh year, and by the Fig Tree that bore no Fruit for
those three thousand years, many of the Jews are to be unders^ood, who had
lived d^vers ti^es on Earth from the beginning (...) the World, and yet bore no
Fruit; but in the fourth Millenium, the Husbandman inte^cedes for the barren
Fig Tree, and applies Dung to the Roots thereof, that is, dies for the Sins
of the Jews, and applies the abundant Grace of his holy Spirit to them, that
they might bring forth good Fruit: And therefore the Patience and
Long-suffering of God suffers all Men 4 Years, that is 4000 Years, whereof they
live 1000 Years by parts in an Earthly Body, that they might at length repent.

60. It Is proved 40. Because John the Baptist provokes the Jews to Repentance
by this Argument: And now is the Ax laid to the Root of the Trees, Matthew. 3.10.
Therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit shall be hewn down, and
cast into the Fire. Now, why did he say, and now the Ax is laid to the Root of
the Trees? Certainly, because that time of Life was the last Revolution, and
the last Hour with a great many of the Jews: signifying by these Words, if the
Jews did not then repent whilst they lived in a Body of Flesh, that there was
no Hope for them to be raised up to Life, in the days of the Messiah, and to be
called to Repentance; for that was the last time wi^^ ^ great many that they
should have, and none could know whether he should have any other time to live
in the da^s of the M^ssi^h, and therefore he truly s^id, the (...) is laid to
the Root of the Tr^es, to wit, of a great man^. But such, whose twelve Hours of
Revolutions were not yet elapsed, might indeed (in regard they were to live
again in the Flesh after six or seven Generations) as from a Root le^^ in the
Earth, not as yet cut off, sprout, and put ^orth as it were new Branches in the
Ear^h.

61. This is proved 41. In that the rich Man, who was tormented in Hell, knew
that he should at length depart out of the place, and ^e born again into the
World, which is plainly hinted in the^e words^ for he had five Brethren, whom
he would not have come into that place, and therefor he desired some Body to
be sent from the D^ad, to call them to Repentance. To what ^urpos^ then should
he take so great care of his Brethren? Did he not look at his own Interest
therein? Yes doubtless, for he k^ew that he himself, after six or seven
G^n^rations should be born of one of the Sons of thos^ his Brethren, whom
therefore he desir^d to be good, that he himself might then have an opportunity
to become so, after he was born of good Parents into the World.

62. It Is proved 42. Because after Christ's Resurrection from the Dead, and
Ascension into Heaven, all that were detained under the Chains of Satan, from
the beginning of the World, were to be res^ored again from Death unto Li^e,
that they might hear the Gospel, and have that benefit offered to them, which
Christ purchased for them, as is manifest from Psalm. 68.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24. and Isaiah, Chap. 26.19.

63. It Is proved 43. Because those 144000, who were sealed even before the
Trumpets sounded, were raised up in the Interval of the sixth Trumpet, that
they might become the first Fruits to God and the Lamb, which thing begins
already to be fulfilled, and will be completely fulfilled in the year 1^^2.

64. It Is proved, 44. because those 144000, although they are accounted Gentiles,
yet they are really Jews and Israelites, to wit, 120^0 from each Tribe of the
Children of I^rael, I^ws, (I say) truly and properly, (and not only mystically)
that is, have the Souls of true Jews, who were in time past Jews, and s^rang of
I^^^s^ Parents.

65^ '^is proved 45. Because God promised t^ Si^n, that is, to the I^^^sh
Church, that her Sons should be brought to her in the Gentiles Arms, and upon
their shoulders, which plainly intimates that they should be born of gentile
Parents. See Isaiah, 49^ 21, 22. Romans 11.30, 31, 32. Romans 9.23, 24, 25.26.

66. It Is proved 46. Because from the beginning of the World a People was
prepared ^or Christ, both among the Jews and G^ntiles, Luke 1.17. Ioh. 4.38.

67. It Is proved 47. From Romans 11.30. where the Apostle Paul speaks of the
Gentiles, that believed on Christ, who in times past. did not believe in God,
and now they obtain Mercy, by times past we are to understand former Ages, when
they lived heretofore in the World, without either the true knowledge of God,
or hope in God. Compare herewith those sayings of Ephesians. 2.2, 3, 11, 12, 13.
Gal. 3.4.

68. It Is Proved 48. From 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11. where Paul affirms of such whom
Satan should deceive in the days of Antichrist, who were to be delivered up to
strong delusions by the just Judgment of God, that they might come into
Condemnation, because they did not receive the love of the Truth, which clearly
unveils the Reason wherefore God suffered so thick a mist, and Cimmerian
darkness to invade the World, about 409 years after Christ's ^esurrection. Also
why he suffer`d that ^arkness so long to blind the Minds and ^earts of Men,
that Men were in a man^er more blinded for some Ages past in the ^eign of
Antichrist, than they were hereto^ore whilst they lived under Ethnicism before
the incarnation of Christ: I say the ^eason of this is, because they who were
^^us blinded under Antichrist, when they ^^v'd under the clear Light of the
Gospel, ^id not love that Light, nor believe on christ, that true Light
enlightening every ^an that comes into the World, and therefor by God's most
just Judgment are blinded and darkened (when they return into ^his Life in a
Body of Flesh) with this ^ross and obscure darkness; and therefore ^^e Light of
the Gospel shone in the World ^ith so much luster for so small a time, to ^it,
the space of 333 years, and not longer, that the greatest part of Mankind might
have a sufficient opportunity to embrace the said light, but seeing they
depised it, it was not convenient that this ^ight should shine any longer to
them in ^ts lustr^; for the coming of Christ in his day, is (...) the morning
bri^htness which suddenly ha^tens (...) ^he East to the West; and ^h^^e^ore
they who love not that light n^r ^mb^ace it, are worthy to be left in da^kne^s^
^or the negle^^ of so great Grace^ but they who have not had the clear light of
the Gospel^Truth proposed unto them in the aforesaid space of 333 Years from
Christ's Death and Resurrection, shall live again 75 Years before the beginning
of the Millenium, and shall have the truth of the Gospel clearly shining before
the Eyes of their Minds, that so all that perish may be left without excuse;
for there shall not be a Man on Earth, to whom the clear light of the Gospel
shall not shine before the end of the World, and that too immediately, as well
as by Means of the preaching of the true Servants of God, even such who are
truly sent and commissioned by God and Christ^ For the Gospel must be preached
to every Creature before the end of the World.

69. It Is proved^ 49. Because God punis^ed the iniquities of the Fathers upon
the third and fourth Generation, that the Children of the third and fourth
Generation, which underwent that punishment, might be meliorated and reduced to
a better State and Condition of Life, that so at length from these so
meliorated, after the third and fourth Generation, i. e. from their Children
thus meliorated, they may be again born into the World, and become better, as
being born of better Parents; for it is a singular Gift o^ God to be born of
good Parents.

70. It is proved. 50. Because for this Reason, a Bastard was not admitted into
the Congregation of the Lord, until the tenth Generation; so that when he shall
be born the second time into the World in the 14 or 15 Generation, the
punishment which God inflicts on him and his Children, shall reduce him to a
better State and Condition, and that defilement of Lust and Depravity, shall be
in some measure purged away. But since by Christ, every sinful pollution is
more effectually and perfectly purged away from those who believe on him,
therefore that severe Law concerning Bastards, and a spurious issue, together
with all others of the like nature, is repealed and abolished; and hence also
the Words of Paul may be understood, where he speaks concerning Fornication,
that he that commits Fornication sins against his own Body, infects and
depraves his own Root and Original, (from whence he is to spring again and be
raised unto Life) with the odious stain of his own filthy Lust.

71. Lastly it is proved, because when certain of the Jews thought Christ was
Elias, or Ieremias, or one of the Prophets, (which pesuppos'd the Truth of such
a Doctrine in general, Christ did not generally condemn the same, but rather
confirmed it, saying that John was Elias. Moreover also he did the same in his
Answer to his Disciples concerning him that was born Blind, and so also when he
conversed with Nicodemus concerning Regeneration, or being born again, though he
chiefly intended Spiritual Regeneration.

There are other Arguments, not a few which might be brought to confirm the
Truth of this Doctrine, which for brevity are omitted^

72. Moreover this Doctrine of the return of Souls to live again, and be born
in a Body of Flesh, very easily answers to many of the most weighty objections,
to the ^^opping of the Mouths of Atheists, who dispute against the justice of
God, concerning the state of Infants dying in their Infancy, and the state of
Fools, and such as are possess`d with unclean Spirits, from their Infancy to
the last Moment of their Lives. Also it wonderfully demonstrates the Justice,
Wisdom, and goodness of God toward Mankind in all his Ways and
Administrations; it also evidently shows the equality of the ways o^ God, and
his marvelous ^enef^^s; yea, clearly evinces what, and how great Bene^its did
accrue to all Mankind, by the death of Christ in the latter Days, by the
abundant Favor and Benignity of God. Moreover also it does mightily
illustrate, confirm and perfect in a mann^r the whole Doctrine of Christianity,
mak^s the Salvation of Heathens possible^ and yet nevertheless makes the
knowledge o^ Christ's coming in the Flesh, and F^^^h in him of absolute
necessity to the Salvation of all, and finally greatly furthers the Conviction
and Conversion of the Jew.

^3. From what has been said, the truth of the said Doctrine of the various
returns of Huma^e ^ouls into a Body of Flesh is app^r^n^, but how often they
shall return, shall ^e somewhat more distinctly explained.

74. All Souls which are not perfect in Faith, Righteousness, and Holiness, do
return twelve times, until they are perfected, and that Soul which was made
perfect in Faith and Holiness, in some former re^olution, though before the death
of Christ, needed not to return into a Mortal Life, unless it were such that
were to come again in the Flesh for some public Benefit to all Mankind; as in
the case of Elias and some extraordinary Men.

75. Therefore we affirm that there is no necessity for many of the Prophets
and Saints to live again, after they have slept in the Lord, before Christ's
Incarnation, much less is such a Revolution to be affirmed after the coming of
Christ, because the faithful that dye in the Lord, rest from their Labors.

76. But it is proved that some imperfect Souls must necessarily make 12
Revolutions or Returns, as well from those 12 Hours the Laborers wrought in
the Field, as that the day of every Souls Visitation contains 12 Hours,
according to the words of Christ, are there not 12 Hours in the Day? Work
whilst you have the Day, then because four Watches of the Night contains 4000
Years, from Psalm. 90. v. 4. and every Watch three Hours; again, this is proved
from those 12 Faces and 4 Wheels in Ezeki^l, Chap. 1. v. 10.

77. But because the 12 Revolutions of the Souls are not completed in less
than 4000 Years, which are all to be finished at the end of the future
Millenium; therefore all Souls began their Revolutions in the year of the
World, 274.

78. All which and much more, this following Table will clearly exhibit to the
Eye.

The Explanation of the Table.
1. The first Column contains 7000 years of the World, as it were divided into
21 hours, wh^^eof each contains 333 years.

2. The eight Column at the right Hand contains the Revolutions of Souls from
the first ^o the twelfth.

^. The tenth Column contains the intervals of the si^ S^als, from the
Resurrection of Christ, to the year about 6000.

4. The eleventh Column contains 7000 years of the World as aforesaid, but
something disposed in a different Order.

5. The twelfth Column contains the names of Faces in each Revolution.

6. The second Column contains 12 Revolutions of Souls, from the beginning of
the World, to the year of the World, 3996.

7. The third Column contains the R^volutions of Souls from the year of the
World 3^3, to the year of the World, 4329, and so thence forward to the year of
the World, 6740.

8. Now, because all the Souls that come into the World have 3996 or 4000 years
to fulfill their twelve Revolutions in, if they are not perfect in goodness;
therefore all Souls came into the World and begun their first Revolution
between the beginning of the World, and the year of the World 2744, for if 3996
be added to the number 2744, the sum will be 6740, beyond which, the Revolution
of Souls does not extend.

9. Those Souls which came into the World from the beginning thereof, made
their twelfth and last Revolution, about the year of the World, 3996.

10. Therefore after the year 3996 some Souls were not to come into the World
any more till the beginning of the Millenium, if they were holy, and not till
in the exact Millenium, if they were Evil, and not yet purged.

11. And therefore Christ ought to offer himself to God the Father, a Sacrifice
for the Sins of all Mankind, about the year of the World 3996, otherwise they
who had finished their 12 Revolutions, would have had no benefit of his
Sacrifice if he had come later.

12. And finally^ because a great many Souls have accomplished their R^volution
between the year 3996 and 432; therefore since Christ's Resurrection from the
Dead, no Man [without some particular divine Revelation] could be certain
whether he should come again into the World, to have an opportunity of
Repentance^ and therefore none by the aforesaid Doctrine, can or ought to
indulge themselves into a wicked Life, in hope^ to come again into the World,
bec^^se he cannot certainly know wh^^^er he shall or not^

13. But no Man that died in utter impenitence after the year of the World 5661
is expired, can redeem his former misspent time, though he should come into the
Word within the interval of the blessed Millenium, so as to enjoy the happiness
of the Millenium, or obtain the Resurrection of the just in this World; for
truly the Millenial Happiness and Resurrection of the just is ordained and
appointed as a reward for such who have heretofore (...) a Holy Life before the
beginning of the Millenium, which was signified by this Type, that it was not
lawful for the Israelites to gather Manna on the Sabbath Day, therefore none
may or ought to de^er the amendment of his Life to another time, because this
present time is the last, that is granted to any in this World to obtain
Salvation.

14. But because before the death of Christ, Men might abuse this Doctrine of
the Souls Revolution, as they may now in some measure; therefore according ^o
the ordination of Divine Wisdom, it came to pass that the said Doctrine ^or the
mos^ part lay concealed as an hidden Mys^ery, and was not to be unlocked to any
but good Men, which nevertheless may now without danger, and indeed ought to be
revealed, for it is of great use to convince the Jews, and to demonstrate more
clearly other Heads of the Christian Religion.

15. For from the aforesaid Doctrine, the justice of God in punishing the
wicked and rebellious is plainly demonstrated, ^or seeing all the wicked and
rebellious have sinned against God a thousand years, whilst they lived in a
Body of Flesh, therefore it is just, that they should be punished in Hell fire
7000 years after the end of this World; for so God who made all things in
number, weight and measure, has also limited a number and measure to the
Torments of the damned, that every rebellious and incorrigible Sinner may be
punished seven fold, which space of seven thousand years being finished, the
same Souls are again sent into the World for a fresh Trial of their Obedience.
But those whom the space of seven thousand years, wherein they shall be
punished in Hell Fire, with the most grievous and tremendous Torments will not
deter from Sin, these certainly are so stupid and obdurate, that not any, even
the longest Torments that words can express, can deter from it: nor has that
infiniteness of Ages wherein wicked Men are to be punished, (though preached up
by many) re^orm^d Men, but rather led many into despair, and hardened their
Hearts against the Goodness and Mercy of God.

16. Now every one making his Revolulution from the first to the twelfth, comes
three times into the World in a carnal Body, in the space of one Millenium,
which is like one year: Consider then, whether this be not that which was
figured under the Law, when all were to appear thrice every year before the
Lord at the Temple of Jerusalem, which typified the temple of the Body; neither
does this seem to want a Mystery, that the Temple of Jerusalem stood about a
thousand years before it was utterly and totally overturned and demolished.
Moreover also this is worthy our animadversion, viz. that all Souls whatsoever,
that had lived in a Body of Flesh, ought to have lived once in some hour
between the hours Ten, Eleven and Twelve, including part of the ninth and
Thirteenth, in Case they had finished their twelve Revolutions from the
beginning of the World.

18. Therefore all Souls not yet perfect lived in the compass of one hour (to
wit in the interval of 333 years) viz. from the year of the World 3996, to the
year of the World 4329.

19. And therefore all that have performed their twelfth Revolution within the
said hour, or a^ leastwise their eleventh, tenth, ninth or eighth, ought to
hear the Gospel, because all Souls who were in their twelfth Revolution, were
not to return as yet; but others that were to return, had not su^^icient
opportunity of hearing the Gospel sincerely preached, by reason of
Antichristian Darkness.

20. Others also who were making but their s^v^nth, sixth and fifth Revolution,
from ^he Death and Resurrection of Christ, if so be within the said hour they
have not heard the Gospel preached, they must hear in their succeeding
Revolutions before the beginning of the Millenium, to wit, within the year
1700, and 1777 from the birth of Christ.

21. In Revel. 20. It is said the rest of the Dead lived not again till the
thousand y^^rs were finished, this certainly is to be unders^ood of those Dead
who had completed their twelve Revolutions; but those who had not as yet
^inished their twelve Revo^l^tions, were to live again in the Mill^nium, ^^t
none who belonged to Bab^lon were to live again in the Mill^nium, because they
b^gan their fi^^t Revolution at the year 1^^4, and ^here^ore ^inish their
twel^th R^^olu^ion at the year o^ the Wo^ld 6740, The TABLE.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 000 I 000 A Bull. 333 II 1 333 A Man. 6^6 III 2 1
666 A Lion. 1000 VI 3 2 1 1000 An Eagle. A Bull. 1333 V 4 3 2 1 1333 A Man.
1666 VI 5 4 3 2 1 1666 A Lion. 2000 VII 6 5 4 3 2 1 2^0^ An Ea^le. A Bull. 2333
VIII 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2333 A Man. 2^66 IX 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2666 A L^on. 3^00 X 9 8
7 6 5 4 3 2 3^00 An Eagle. A Bull. 3^33 XI 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 3333 A M^^. 3^00 XI
11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 ^6^6 A Lyo^. ^^0 XIII 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4000 An Eagle. 4333
XIV 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 1 Seal. 4333 33^ 1/^ A Bull 40^6 XV 12 11 1^ 9 8 ^ 2 (...).
^6^6 6^6^ ^/^ A Ma^^ 5^^ XVI 12 11 10 9 8 3 ^eal. 5^00 999 ^/3 A Lyo^^ 5333
xvii 12 11 10 9 4 Seal. 5333 13^2 4/3 An Eag^^^ 5666 xviii 12 11 1^ 5 Seal.
5666 1665 5/^ A Ma^^ 6000 XIX 12 11 6 Seal. 6000 1998 6/^ A Ly^^^ 6333 XX 12
6333 Millen. An Eagle. ^666 ^XI 66^6 ^^d what is worth our serious Consideration
(...) that these very Men which shall be at ^^st destroyed in Spiritual
Babylon, were ^^e same Men, (who in a litteral Sense) ^^ilt the outward Babylon.

79. The foregoing Scheme exhibits to our view one great Wheel being the
greaest of all, then four other great Wheels, ^^stly, twelve little Wheels. The
great ^heels containing 1000, the little Wheels ^33, and the greatest of all
4000 years.

The Explanation of the Figure^
1. In this Figure, the great outward ^ircle represents the greatest Revolution
^f Humane Souls.

2. The other four great Circles signify ^he same 4000 years, so as that one
of them, ^akes 1000 years.

3. And lastly the lesser Circles signify ^^ch, one only Revolution or Face of
333 ^^ars.

4. The chief use of the figure, is to ^^ew that there are but 12 Faces, although
^^ch great one contains four less ones.

80. The greatest Revolution of Souls ^omprehending 4000 years, is fairly
shadowed out to us under the type of the six days Creation. For as the first
days wo^k was finished in the fourth, the work of the second day in the fifth,
the work of the third day in the sixth, and finally all in the seventh; so the
Souls that begin their Revolutious in the first Millenium, finish it in the
fourth, and so fulfill their Mystical year, and are either made perfect in
Goodness, or have filled up their measure of Evil: those which are perfect in
Goodness, shall be raised up to Life in the Body, and after the Millenium is
expired, their Bodies shall be changed and spiritualized and they shall ascend
into Heaven; but such who have filled up their Measure o^ wickedness, shall be
raised up to live in a Body of Flesh, that they may suffer God`^ Judgment in
the Conflagration of the World, whose Resurrection is to Death, and
Condemnation. Mor^over Souls that begin their Revolutions in the second
Millenium, complete them in the fifth; and finally those that begin their
Revolutions in the third, complete them in the sixth Millenium. And forasmuch
as in the sixth day of the Worlds Cr^ation. Man was created perfect in the
Image of God, therefore in the sixth Millenium, all the Saints shall be raised
up to live in the Body, and be born in^o the World, to wit, for the space of
260 Years, from the year o^ the World 574^, to the year of the World 6000, and
they shall live such an holy and blessed Life on Earth, as Adam would have
lived, if he had not sinned; yea, and far hap^ier; ^or as Sin abounded, the
Grace of God shall much more abound. And the light of this day shall ^e as the
light of seven Days, because whatsoever was made in the first six Days, was
finished in the seventh.

And lastly, The Trees that bare Fruit under the Law were accounted
uncircumcised, until the 4th. Year, but in the 4th. Year they were as it were
circumcised, and hol^ to the Lord, and in the ^i^th Year their F^uit was ea^en.
This plainly signifies the whole Revolution of Souls, which were not
consummated, and per^ected till the fou^th Millenium after Christ's
Incarnation; for he purged our Sins on the Cross, whil^t he hung ^h^reon, that
so they might not be imputed to us, ^n condi^ion that we believe on him,
whereby we shall ^eceive from him the Evangelical Grace of the holy Spirit. But
the ^ifth Year signifies the Sabbatick Mill^nium, in which we shall enjoy the
Fruits of our L^bours and Toil of our Hands; ^^r a^ under the ^aw, whil^t they
had Manna, it was not law^ul (...) them to ga^^^r s^id Manna on the
Sa^ba^h-day; so also in the Sabbatick Millenium, they who gathered nothing in
their preceding Lives, cannot enjoy the Millenial Felicity. Lastly, as the
Manna which served for the Sabbath, was gathered on the Sixth day; so in the
end of the sixth Millenium, all the Saints are restored to Life, and attain the
Blessedness of the Sabbatick Millenium.

82. By the aforesaid Numbers 333 and 260 Years, the Mysteries of the seven
Seals, and seven Trumpets, are clearly unlocked.

83. And that the Interval of the first Seal contains 333 Years, appears from
the words of the first Beast, come and see: and so of the rest, plainly
intimating, that the Space or Interval of every Seal, from the first to the
sixth, comprehends 333 Years, which is the Interval of one Revolution or Face,
as may be seen in the Tenth Column of the Table.

84. Therefore the Interval of the first Seal contains from the Death,
Resurrection of Christ, Years. 333 ^/^ The Interval of the second Seal reaches
to 666 ^/^ The Interval of the third Seal extends it self to 999 ^/^ The
Interval of the fourth Seal reaches to 1332 ^/^ The Inter. of the ^ifth Seal
reaches to 1665 ^ The Inter. of the sixth Seal reaches to 2000


85. Now the Predictions or Prophesies of what should come to pass when each
Seal was opened, wonderfully answers to those Intervals, when the first Seal
was opened, viz. from the Death of Christ, to the Year 333. The Gospel was in a
manner pre^^hed to the whole World, which was s^gnifi'd by the white Horse, and
him that sat there^n with a Crown on his H^ad, and a Bow in his Hand, to wit,
Christ. After that time, the Light of the Gospel shone not so much, by reason
of Men's Sins. When the second Seal was opened the Roman Empire was exceedingly
infested with War, and almost totally ruined; this happened between 333 and
666. When the third Seal was opened, that is, from 666 to 1000, Famine and
Scarcity of Provision followed the War, as it commonly happens, that War is
succeeded by Famine; by the Red Horse War is signified, by the Black Horse
Famine. In the opening of the fourth Seal, from the Year 1000, to the Year
1333, not only bloody Wars, but also ab^minable Idolat^y, Superstition and
Here^ies, in^^^^^d the World, and were signified by the (...) Horse, and s^e
that sat there^n was ^^^ath, whom ^le^^ ^ol^owed. When the ^i^th Seal was
opened, the Sain^s and Martyrs cried un^o the Lord to revenge their Blood,
which certainly came to pass for from the year of Christ 1^3^, the Turkish
Empire miraculously prevailed, b^ whose Sword God revenged the Blood o^ the
Saints. This Interval reaches no F^^^ther than the year 16^6, from Christ'^
Death and Resurrection, that is to the year since Christ's Nativity 1700. For
within this ^pace or interval were man^ Saints to be killed, which would fill
up ^ determinate Number together with the Saints, which were slain before them,
an^ this indeed is clearly fulfilled, and yet is farther to be fulfilled to the
year 1700 sin^^ the birth of Christ. In the opening of the sixth Seal, that is,
in the interval of tim^ from the year 1^66, (from Christ's Death and
Resurrecti^n) to the year 2000^ al^ the Kingdoms of Men and Worldly Empires,
shall be overturned, and the Empire and Dominion of the whole World, shall b^
Christ's and his Saint^. And this is signi^ed by the great Earthquake, the
darkening of the Sun and Moon, the ^alling o^ the Stars, the removing of Heaven
out o^ its place, etc. But it is more clearly pointed out in the following
Words, touch^n^ the Kings of the Earth, and other leade^ and Potent^tes, that
they should ^ide themselves etc. which prophecy certainly cannot in reason, be
wholly applied to the ^^ys of Constantine, which yet many do. The seventh Seal
in regard it has not re^pect (...) any particular interval like the first
(...), but comprehends the whole Hi^^o^^; ^her^fore is to ^e considered apart.

^6. ^h^^ the (...) Seal was opened, ^here (...)eaven for the space ^f ha^f ^n
(...); after this silence ^he seven A^^el prepare to ^ound with ^^^ir seven
^^^^pets, Revel. 8. wherefore (...)eal contai^ the intervals of ^^l the seven
Trumpets.

8^. But the ^n^^^vals ^f these Trumpets ^re reckoned f^^m the seventh Trumpet,
^or at the sound of the seventh Trumpet ^egins the Milleni^m, and the Kingdoms
^f this World become the Kingdoms of God and his Christ, Revel. 11.15. and ^he
sound of this Trumpet lasts 260 years, ^o wit, from the year of the World 5740
(...) the year of the World 6^00, and in ^h^s interval the mystery of God shall
be (...) s^mm^ted, viz. the mysterious name of T^tragramaton shall be unlock`d,
and no ^ess than the reward of an immortal Life ^estowed on all the Servants of
God, and ^hen indeed the promise which God made ^o M^ses in the Bush shall be
fulfilled. I am ^he God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and it shall be known
that God is not the God of the Dead, but of the living.

88. But the interval of the seventh Trumpet being known, the intervals of all
the rest are known also, and are thus computed, The interval of the seventh
Trumpet, from the year of the World 5740 to 6000 The interval of the sixth
Trumpet, from the year of the World 5480 to 574^ The interval of the fifth
Trumpet from the year of the World 5220 to 548^ The interval of the fourth
Trumpet from the year of the World 4960 to 522^ The interval of the third
Trumpet from the year of the World 4700 to 496^ The interval of the second
Trumpet from the year of the World 4440 to 4^0^ The interval of the first
Trumpet, from the year of the World. 4180 to 444^


89. And from the Nativity of Christ ^hus. 1 218 2 478 3 738 4 998 5 1258 6
1518 7 1778 2038
The interval of the first Trumpet begins at the year of Christ's N^tivity, 218,
which ^s the 184th year from Christ's Resurrection, which number ^^4, answe^s
to half an hour, ^ithin which time the Saints of^ered many prayers to God by
jesus Christ. Revel. 8.3.4.5.

90. Now the said Events plainly answer ^o those Intervals. At the sound of the
^^rst Trumpet, there follow^d Ha^l and ^ire mixed with Blood. The Interval of
his Trumpet is from the year of Christ`s Nativity 218, to the year 478, within
which space of time the Roman Empire ^^gan to be vexed with grievous Wars. At
^^e ^^und of the second Trumpet, a great ^^^ning Mountain was cast into the
Sea, and the t^i^d part of the Sea it sel^ wa^ ^^rn'd into Blood, the interval
of this ^rumpet is from the year 478, to the 738, ^i^hin which interval or
space of time, ^^^re was most cruel and hideous Wars in (...) Roman Empire. At
the sound of the ^^i^d Trumpet, a great Star fell from Heaven upon those that
were living, and upon the fountains of Waters, and burned like a Lamp, by
reason whereof the waters were made bitter, and killed many. The interval of
this Trumpet is from the year ^^8, to the year 998; by this Star^ without all
peradventure, the Pope o^ Rome is to be understood, who within thi^ interval
advanced himself above all other Bishops, whom he corrupted with himself At the
sound of the fourth Trumpet from the year 998, to the year 1258, the thir^ part
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, wa^ smitten and da^kened. This doubtle^ signifies
that the Emperor and Empere^ together with the Nobility, and Princes o^ the
Empire, should be very much eclipse^ and darkened within this interval, and the
too by the power of the Pope, who i^ ^he same interval set himself above the
^^^perour.

91. When the fifth Angel sounded (...) Trumpet, a Star fell from Heaven, a^^
to him was given the key of the bo^t^^^less pit, etc. And when the bottomless
(...) was opened, and a smoke ascended from thence, and from that ^moak
proc^ede^ locusts upon the Earth, which c^uelly v^^^ed and tormented Mankind,
c^rt^^inly (...) all these is meant the School Men and D^^ctors, who have so
miserably ga^l'd a^^ disquieted Men with their p^rv^rse Opi^^nions and
Controversies, and infested the^ with their sharp and venomous stings, that
many choose rather to die than to live, and this happened from the year 1258 to
1518, but their chief time was 5 Months, viz. 150 years, to wit, from the year
1368 to 15^8.

92. Lastly at the sound of the sixth Trumpet, the four Angels bound at the
River Euphrates are loosed, which doubtless signifies the vast and mighty power
of the Turks, (which they had prepared 390 yea^s ago, that is, from the year
1228) and poured in upon E^rope like an inundation, to slay the third part of
Mankind, as it were the third part of the World, and this began from the year
1518; whosoever doubts o^ the truth hereof, let him consult the Turk^sh
Hi^^o^^, and he will find how great success the Turk has had in Eur^pe, and
what progress he has made from that time, to this very day.

93. The inter^als of the Seals and Trumpets being known, the myste^y of the
seven Phials with the intervals o^ every one of them, unsolds and displays it
self.

94. For the interval of the last Trumpet comprehends the interval^ of all ^he
seven Phials, and the interval o^ each P^ial contains 3^ years.

9^. Therefore the intervals of the Phi^^s are thus computed.

The Interval of the first Phial from the Year 1518 to the Year 1558 1 And so
of all the rest to the seventh 1592 2 1629 3 1666 4 1703 5 1740 6 1777 7



96. Now the event of these things wonderfully answers those Intervals; for in
the Year 1518, that is, according to the vulgar Computation in the year 1515,
which if we believe Uscherus, (fails of the true Computation three or four
Years) Luther was raised up, who was, as it were, the first Phial, poured out
on the Earth of the Antichristian World; for he did, as it were, sensibly touch
the Kingdom of Antichrist, from the top to the bottom again. From the year
1558, to the year 1595, the second Phial was poured out; for then the whole Sea
of the Antichristian World became as the Blood of the Slain, and thence began
fierce and bloody Wars, almost in all parts of the Antichristian Kingdom, so
that the very Sea seemed to be dyed with Blood. From the year 1592, to the year
1692, the third Phial was poured out upon the Rivers and Fountains of Water,
and they were turned into Blood. And this also answers to the said Interval;
for certain Dukes and Noblemen were killed with the Sword under that Interval.
Again, from the 1629, to the year 1666, the fourth Phial was poured out upon
the Son of Antichrist, because in that Interval Jesus Christ the Son of
Righteou^ness shone clearly in the Hearts of many, which scorcht and burnt up
those Men, who had the mark of the Beast. And from the year 1666, to the year
1703, the fifth Phial is poured out upon the Throne of the Beast, which very
thing is already begun; wherefore we joyfully expect his Ruin and Downfall till
the aforesaid year 1703. The effusion of the sixth Phial has re^pect to the
Slaughter and Destruction o^ the Turks, to make way for the Kings of the East,
that is, the Jews and Israelites, to return into their own Country. Lastly, the
effusion of the seventh Phials bring utter destruction to the Kingdom of
Antichrist, and all the Enemies of the Gospel. Babylon is utterly overthrown,
and New-Ierusalem appears as a Bride, adorned for her Husband.

97. But it remains, that we explain what the four Beasts and 24. Elders are.
By four Beasts it is meant the whole Assembly of the Saints, and termed four,
from their four great Revolutions afore^mention'd, and likened to four Beasts.
And by the 24 Elders are unde^stood the twelve Proph^^^ and ^welve Apostles of
Christ, who are thos^ P^ophets in the Law, in the second Book of Esdras, Chap.
1. where God expressly promised, and nominated them, together with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, for Captains and Leaders to the Jewish and Israel^tish People,
when the Kingdom of God shall be restored to them.

98. First of all, therefore the Prophets shall be born into the World in the
beginning of the Millenium, who are the Captains and Ring leaders to all that
shall be born afterward, and the Apostles shall be the last of all, who shall
remain on Earth to the coming of Christ.

99. But as touching Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they are of an higher rank than
the rest, whether Prophets or Apostles.

100. Moreover it is worth our diligent enquiry, whether Isaac be not that Seed
of Abraham which Christ assumed when he came into the Flesh; for the promise,
which God made to Abraham was concerning Isaac, that in him all Nations should
be blessed.

101. And then if Isaac was that Seed, it is farther to b^ enquired whether the
Soul of Isaac had perform`d his twelve Revolutions from the beginning of the
World, as others had done; if this be granted, se^ in St. Luke's Genealogy of
Christ, whether the twelve Revolutions of the same Soul be not described in
order, putting Abel in the room of Adam, a new Revolution of the some Souls,
always begins after every seventh Generation.

102. And these are the names of this Soul in his 12 Revolutions. 1. Abel, 2.
Methusela, 3. Heber, 4. Isaac, 5. Naas^n, 6. Mattatha, 7. Simeon, 8. Elmodam,
9. Rhesa, 10. Nagg^, 11. Melchi, 12. Christ. For seven Generations do intervene
in all these Revolutions, except in the last only, where there are not reckoned
7, but 6, which may be understood after this manner, viz. the Resurrection of
Christ from the Dead, was the seventh, and his Ascension into Heaven, as it
were the eighth Generation.

103. Therefore there are accounted seven Generations between every Revolution,
because certainly in the Revolutions of other Souls, the same Souls do return
after every sixth and seventh Generation. But the Interval of six Generations
cannot agree to that Soul which Christ assumed for two reasons; first, because
then he would not have had only 12, but above 13 Revolutions; secondly, because
no Revol^tion would have fallen on Isaac, which is absu^d.

104. Which Hypothesis being admitted, sundry portions of sacred Writ, very
mysterious, and hard to be understood, are with a wonderful Harmony unlocked.
And the mystery of Christ's Nativity will agree with diverse other Mysteries
herein delivered which will be farther insisted upon hereafter.

105. The most difficult passages of Scripture hereby explained, are (1) Genesis
3.15, that the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpent's Head, which Seed of
the Woman according to the aforesaid Hypothesis, is to be understood of Abel,
even as the Seed of the Serpent is to be understood of Cain; for in these two
Seeds, as in two Roots, the Children of God, (2.) and the Children of this
World are comprehended. When Cain was born, Eve said I have received a Man,
(...) Jehovah, or as others read it with (...). If the former be allow`d, that
is badly and falsely applied unto Cain, which was due unto Abel: If the latter,
it intimates that together with that worldly Man, she had received him
likewise, who in the fullness of time should bear the name of (...) (3.) Isaiah
7.14. A Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a Son, and she shall call his
Name Immanuel, which Matthew applys to Christ, who was born of the Virgin-
Mary, which prophecy nevertheless, ought to have been fulfilled in the days of
King Ahaz. Admit then that this prophecy was fulfilled in the days of King
Ahaz, and afterward when Christ was born, to wit, that the same Soul was twice
born in the Flesh of a Virgin, and peradventure of the same Mother; then this
Prophecy will be easily understood. And such a Virginian Birth answers to the
eight Revolution, having the name of Elmodam, who was contemporary with King
Ahaz. Notwithstanding Ez was said to have been his Father, for Christ was
called the Son of Joseph also. (4.) Hos. 11.1. Out of Egypt have I called my
Son, this Prophecy was fulfilled long before, yet the Evangelist applys it to
the time, when Mary returned with the Child out of Egypt, which if understood
of the same Soul, both accomplishments will agree together; for Naasson the
Prince of the Children of Judah, who departed out of Egypt with the rest of the
Israelites, answers to the fifth Revolution of the same Soul. (5.) Genesis 49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet,
till Shilo come, that is, he who was promised to be the King and Lawgiver of
all the People, shall not depart from the Tribe of Judah, but shall perform his
entire Revolutions, in a direct Line of that Tribe, and that notwithstanding
all manner of Affliction and Persecution which should press the Jewish Nation,
there shall still remain the Root of Iesse, which will at length bring forth
the promised Branch of Salvation into the World And this Prophecy cannot be
understood of the outward Scepter or Kingdom of Judah, for that was departed
from Judah above 1^0 years before Christ's Incarnation, to wit, during the whole
Reign of the Maccabees, who were Levites, Mich. 5.2. Out of thee, viz.
Bethelem, shall come the Captain or L^ader of my people Israel, whose goings
forth have been of old, even from everlasting, or as in the Original, from the
days of Ages: For according to the aforesaid Hypothesis, he had 12 outgoings
or Revolutions from the beginning of the World to that time wherein he was born
of the Virgin-Mary. (7.) Isaiah 61.1.2. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me,
etc. to show the acceptable year o^ the Lord; and therefore that time wherein
Christ came in the Flesh, was called the acceptable year of the Lord, to wit,
because agreeable to the said H^pothesis; even as the Sun runs through the 12
parts of the Zodiac, and finishes his course in one year; so Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, in the space of 4000 years, which is (as it were) a mystical
year, accomplishes his 12 Re^volutions through the 12 parts of time. And
therefore St. Paul called that time when he was born of the Virgin Mary, the
fullness of time; compare ^erewith that of the Nineteenth Psalm. from verse 1. to
verse 7. (8.) That that Psalm is to be understood of Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles, and the Church of God is evident from Roman 10.18. (9.) See also Heb.
10.^5. Psalm. 40.46. Sacrifice and Burnt Offering ^he^ would not, but a Body
have thou pre^ared me; but this Body is not a mere Body, but an animated Body,
that is, a Soul with a Body, to wit, the very Seed of A^raham which Christ
assumed, which seed was fitted and qualified by 12 Revolutions, even as by so
many preparations from the ^eginning of the World to that time, to ^e at last a
Throne and a Tabernacle for ^he King of Glory Jesus Christ, all which ^re but
according to the said Hypothesis^ and not possitively affirmed; wherefore ^y
the assistance of divine Grace, we shall with Sobriety, inquire farther into
the Truth of the aforementioned Hypothesis, before we absolutely and positively
assert it. (10.) Moreover the aforesaid Hypothesis ^eems wonderfully to
illustrate that Scripture where Christ is called our Forerunner, and doubtless
because according to it, he ^an the course of his 12 Revolutions, from the
beginning of the World, and was the first that had finished the course and
period of them. (11.) And finally that he was made like unto us in all things,
Sin excepted which is more illustrated by this Hypothesis; there are sundry
other places of Scripture, which seem to be very much illustrated by the said
Hypothesis, no^withstanding that, where Christ is said to have once appeared in
the end of the World, to purge away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; because
indeed that Soul bore the name of Christ and Lord only in his twelfth
Revolution. For neither Abel nor Isaac, or any other of those 12 Revolutions
was called Christ, nor ought any of them to bear the dignity or Character of
Christ, till they had performed their 12 Revolutions, whereby that Soul ought
to be fitted and prepared to Assume this excellent Title and Dignity. Wherefore
it is true that Christ was but once born in the Flesh, and but once suffered
for the Sins of all Mankind, even according to the aforesaid Hypothesis;
because Christ did not assume that Soul in a personal unity, as the seed of
Abraham till the 12 Revolution. (12.) Lastly, because Moses foretold that God
would raise up a Prophet to the Israelitish People, from amongst their Brethren
like unto him. The Word raise up, seems to intimate that the Soul of the same
Prophet had lived before in the Flesh, yea was at time living in the Flesh.

Moreover the aforsaid Hypothesis (if it should gain admittance) would arm us,
with the most effectual Argument to convince the Jews, that that was the very
Messiah who was Born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered under Pontius Pilate. For
he ought not to have come sooner, nor later into the World than he did because
if he had come sooner, he could not have performed his Revolution o^ 3996
years. (...) ought not to come later, because (...) some Souls would have
fin^shed all their Revolutions before the Messiah was come, and so would have
been frustrated and disappointed of the Fruit of his coming, which could not be.

107. But laying aside the aforesaid Hypothesis, still the Argument remains as
strong as before, to convince the Jews that the Messiah ought not to have come
later into the World then he actually did. (The Jews themselves deny his coming
sooner) because indeed if he had come later, then certain Souls would have
completed their 12 Revolutions before he came, and so would have reaped no
benefit by the Messiah coming into the World.

108. This Argment will be more forcible to convince the Jews, because the Jews
themselves do acknowledge the Revolution of Souls to live diverse times in the
Flesh, although they are ignorant of the number of those Revolutions; yet they
expect that all shall at last be raised up, and restored to ^ife in the days of
the Messiah, that they may enjoy the Benefits of his coming, when he shall
come. Now if it can be made appear to them from the Old Testament, which they
acknowledge and believe, that there are 12 Revolutions of humane Souls, living
in a Body of Flesh, and neither more nor less, even till they are at length
perfected in a good or evil; I think we need not doubt, but may positively
conclude, that the Jews, at leastwise all who are ingenious, and covet in any
Measure or Degree the knowledge of the truth, will be convinced that the
Messiah is come, and in the next place believe his coming in the Flesh; that he
suffered Death, and rose again from the Dead, and in believing, be converted,
and become true Christians, which God of his Mercy hast^n and accomplish, Amen.

109. Paul in 1 Cor. 15.51. says, We shall not all sleep^ but we shall be all
changed; in which Words he plainly hints, that some of the Saints shall sleep
after they shall be bor^ a^ain in the Flesh, and be again raised from (...)
^^ead; this indeed is affirmed of (...) El^as, ^ho are to come into the (...)
Yea^s before the Millenium, and (...) in the Flesh, who shall proph^^^ three
Years and an half in the World, and chiefly to the Jews, and People (...)
Israel, which three Years and an half being expired, they are to be killed by
the Beast, and in three days and an half raised up to Life again in the same
Bodies, wherein they were slain; and being thus raised up to Life, they shall
not remain on Earth, but ascend into the Heavens, and there remain with Christ,
till the end of the World, and then indeed they shall come with him, in the
Clouds of Heaven.

110. And that those two Witnesses, Rev. 11. are those two Prophets, who in a
proper and litteral Sense were to be killed, seems to me most evident, which
will be between the sixth and seventh Trumpet, viz. in the end of the Interval
of the sixth Trumpet, as it is to be seen from the words of the Revelations.
Also the days of their Prophecy are 1260 Days; not signifying so many Years,
but only so many common Days; because there are not 1260 Years between the
sixth and seventh Trumpet, but only 260, and yet this admirable event will
happen^ between those Trumpets, yea, in the end of the sixth Trumpet; for they
shall be born and slain in the space of 45 Years before the beginning of the
Millenium.

111. That Elias shall come before the beginning of the Millenium, appears from
the words of Christ; Elias truly shall come, and restore all things.

112. And lastly, That Moses and Elias were to come and be slain, and raised
again from the Dead, and then ascend into Heaven, and remain with Christ the
whole Millenium, appears from Christ's Transfiguration in the Mount, where were
seen with him Moses and Elias, and these are they whom God the Father has
ordained to sit the one at the Right Hand, and the other at the Left Hand of
Christ in the Kingdom of Heaven.

113. Wherefore they are of an higher Order and Rank than all the Prophets and
Apostles.

114. Therefore diligently weigh, and consider, whether Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, that sit in the Kingdom of Heaven, be not Moses, Christ and Elias, of
whom Christ has for the greatest Dignity? Consider also whether the same Moses
was not Enoch, and whether or no what is written o^ Enoch and Elias, that they
should be translated into Heaven, does not answer truly to this Translation of
M^ses and Elias? for in the first Translation they did not obtain the
Resurrection of a glorified Body; but it ^a^her happened to them in a figure;
for Ch^^^^ only was the first of all that attai^^^ the R^surrection of a
glorified Body, (...) is called in Scripture the first (...) among the De^d,
and the first (...) the Resurrection from the Dead. (...) ou^ Lo^d and Savior
Jesus (...) arose ^ir^t of all from the Dead, (...) ^ore to suffer Death; then
the first o^ all^ who s^^ll arise after him, is Moses and Elias, and then the
other Prophets and Apostles, with all the Saints, every one in his Or^er.

115. And that those two Prophets and W^^n^^ses in the Revelation, were indeed
Moses and Elias, is tacitly signified in these Wo^^^; they shall have power to
withhold the Rain, that it shall not rain upon the the Earth, and to turn the
Waters into Blood; both which were in old time imputed to the said Prophets.
Moses turned the Waters into Blood, and Elias had power over the Rain;
therefore when those Prophets shall come into the World, they shall likewise
produce these Signs and Miracles literally understood.

116. And indeed that Moses was not to live on Earth in the future Millenium,
seems to be clearly figured from hence: that he should not ent^r the Land of
Promise, but die in the Land of Moab; of whom nevertheless, it was said, when
he died, that his Eye was not darkened, nor his strength o^ Nature impaired. And
although God seemed to exclude Moses from entering into the Land of Promise,
because he spoke unadvisedly at the Waters of Meribah, and so was thus
chastised for it; yet God out of his infinite Goodness and Mercy did transfer
that Chastisement into a greater Favor and Blessing to him.

117. Then as touching Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, they indeed did s^arce posse^s
that Land of Promise, but only conversed therein ^or a little time, as
Strangers and Pilgrims; for that Land was rather promised to their Seed, than
to the Fathers themselves. See Deuteronomy. 34.4. which also was a Figure of this
My^tery; that neither Abraham, Isaac n^r Jacob should dwell on Earth in the
Millenium, but during the Millenium should remain together in Heaven.

118. It remains now, that we produce certain promises and Prophesies, and
other Testimonies of the Holy Ghost out of the Scrip^ures, whereby may be
proved, that all the Saints shall be yet placed upon the Earth, ( viz. in the
Millenium) to live together a most Holy and Bles^ed Life, except those three
extraordinary Men, who instead of that reward on Earth, obtain a more worthy
and excellent Reward in Heaven. The places of Scripture, both of the Old and
New Testament, are these following; Exodus 20.12. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother, that thy Days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee. Which promise Paul applies to the Gospel. Ephesians. 6.2. Numb. 14.12. The
whole Earth shall be filled with the Glory of (...) Jehovah. Deuteronomy. 32.39. See
now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: I kill, and I make
alive; I wound, and I heal, etc. v. 43. Rei^yce O ye Nations with his People,
for he will revenge the Blood of his Servants, and render Vengeance to his
Adversaries, and will be merciful to his Land, and to his People.

Moreover in the second Book of Samuel, chap. 23. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. There is
extant a famous Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ, to come in the end of the
World, and the destruction of the Kingdom of the Ungodly. Likewise Job has
attested his Belief, that he hoped he should be raised up in the last day, to
live again in the Flesh, chapter 19.26. He likewise affirmed that he should enter
naked into his Mother's Womb, as he came naked out, chapter 1.21. But the Book of
Psalms contains many famous Prophesies of Christ's Kingdom before the end of
the World. See Psalm. 1. 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 2. 8, 9. Psalm. 8. Psalm. 37. 29. Psalm.
45.14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 46.9, 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 68.31, 32, 33. Psalm. 72.3, 4,
5, ^. Psalm. 90.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 110. ^a^a^ (...) is almost wholly
taken up in the Description of this happy Age, and in a manner ^ll the Prophets
do abundantly testify o^ the same. And so Iesse in these following ^^^^ces,
chap. 2. ver. 10. to ver. 22. c 4. v. ^, ^. c. 6. v. 13. c. 11. from v. 4. to
v. 9. c. ^^ c. 23. v. 21, 22, 23. c. 24. c. 25. from v. ^^ to 12. c. 26. v. 1.
c. 27. from v. 13. to 2^ c. 51^ 11. c. 52. c. 54. c. 58. v. 14. c. 60, 61 62,
65. from v. 17. to the end of c. 66. See also these places of Jeremiah, c, 12.
v. 15. c. 30. v. 17, 18, 19. etc. c. 46. v. 27. Ezekiel, c. 36, 37, 47, 48.
Daniel, c. ^. v. 13, 14, 27. c. 8. v. 14^ c. 12. v. 2, 13, 14. Hosea, c. 6. v.
2. c. 13. v. 14. c. 14. v. 7. Joel, c. 3. v. 15, 16, 17. Amos, c. 9. v. 11. to
15. Obed. v. 17. to the end. Mich. c. 4. c. 5. c. 7. v. 20. Neh. c. 1. v. 15.
Hab. c. ^. ^ 4. Zeph. c^ 3^ from v. 8. to the end, H^g. c. 2. v. 21, 22, 23.
Zach. c. 12. v. 8. c. 14. v. 9. Malach. c. 4. v. 1, 2, 3, 5:

Some of which Pl^ces have been alre^dy fulfilled, and are now a ful^illing in
some Degree, in Relation to the first Fruits; but the Final and Total
accomplishment of all these things appertains to the Millenium.

See ^^so the following places of the New Testament, Matt^. c. 15, v. 5, c. 19.
from v. 28. to v. 30. Mar. c. 10. v. 29.30. The words, with Persecutions are to
be transferred with the following. Luc. c. 18. v. 30. Acts c. 3. v. 21. Romans c.
13. v. 11.12. 1 Cor. 15. from v. 42 to v. 52. 1 Thessalonians. c. 5. v. 15.16.17. Heb.
c. 4. v. 9, 10, 11. 2 Pet. c. 3. v. 13. Iud. v. 14. Revel. c. 11. v. 15. to 19.
c. 20. v. 4, 5, 6, 7. c. 21. v 1, 2, 3.

119. Those seven Churches of As^a to whom St. John wrote his Revelations, do
most certainly signifiy the seven Intervals of the Universal Church, from the
Death and Resurrection of Christ, to the end of the World. Now the Interval of
Philadelphia (whose Seeds is not only now in the World, but her first Fruits
also) begins from the Year 1702, and continues to the Year of Christ's Nativity
1777. At what time the Millenium shall begin, for the promise of New Jerusalem
on Earth was chiefly exhibited to the Church of Philadelphia; lastly, the
Millenium being almost expi^'d, follows the Interval of the Church of Laodicea,
but this Church belongs not to the Saints of New-Ierusalem, but is of another
Order, and of a different kind, who will have the profession of the Christian
Religion, but without sincerity, And because God has invited them to
Repentance, it is possible they may Repent, and yet for all that, not enjoy the
Millenial Happiness, nor the Resurrection of the Just in this World. But their
Salvation and Happiness will be deferred to the next succeding World. But those
that do not Repent, will be cast into Hell Fire, with other Wicked and ungodly
Men, where they shall suffer most Tremenduous and Inexpre^sible Torments, at
least for the space of 7000 Years. And they are such, whose Sins Christ said
should neither be forgiven in this World, nor that which is to come.

Certain Annotati^ns to be Added.
1- Because the number of the Beast Revel. 13. is said to be 666, and is called
the number of a Man, this very well agrees with what has been said before; for
every Face contains 333 Years, and because the second Face is of a Man,
therefore the number (666) is the number of a Man, to wit, containing 666
Years, from the Year sin^e Christ's Nativity 1036, to the Year 1702, for about
the said Year 1036 the second Beast (whose number is here computed) Ascended
out of the Earth; vix. in the time when Gregory the seventh flourish't, who
Exalted himself above the Emperor.

2, Seeing the Intrerval of every Seal (except the seventh) contains 333 Years;
hence it appears that from the Death and Resurrection of Christ, to the first
part of the Millenium there are about 2000 Years: and therefore from Christ's
Death and Resurrection, to the end of the World there are about 3000 Years,
which confirms the aforesaid Chronology, the same is also confirmed by the
Intervals of the Trumpets.

3. Now whereas the Interval of each Trumpet is 260 Years, this does not seem
to want a mystery, for so many days, as it were, does the Infant remain in his
Mothers Womb; and in Esdras, the Lodging Rooms or Chambers of the Soul, are
likened to the Womb of a W^man; because then exactly in 260 Years the Soul is
recalled to live again in a Body of Flesh, as it were at the sound of the
Trumpet of God himself; therefore the Interval of every Trumpet is 260 Years,
to which, if 73 Years be added, for the age of M^n in a Body of Flesh, the sum
will be 333 Years aforesaid.

4. Mor^over God out of his great Goodn^ss and Wisdom, has so decreed, that Men
should not live altogether, and at one time, a thousand Years complete in the
corrupt ^tate of a Carnal Body, and it stands with the justice of God that they
shall live the said thousand Years by parts, for by the frequent Death of Men,
Mankind is better provided for, and their Benefit and Advantage consulted; for
thus God often cuts off Men, to plant and ingraft them anew. Whereas if Men
should at once live a thousand Years completely in the State of Corruption they
would so degenerate; that their Repentance and Salvation wo^ld be far more
difficult.

5. But if any should demand, to what purpose God should call his Saints to
live in a Terrestrial and Carnal Body a thousand Years, and whether it were not
better for them, and more desirable to them to remain with God in the Heavens;
I answer, God knows better than we what is most conducive to our Profit and
Advantage. And therefore the Saints ought to live a thousand Years on Earth,
partly that they may receive a visible Reward from God, in the sight of the
Wicked and Ungodly, to their greater shame, confusion and Condemnation, and
partly, and indeed chiefly that they may be prepared, and quali^ied in that
Millenium, or thousand Years of Life, to obtain so much, and so great Glory, as
they shall be invested with, when they shall ascend Bodily into Heaven.

A FEW QUESTIONS BY Way of Exposition, ON Each Chapter of the Revelations of
St. John.
Wherein little, or in a manner nothing (except what pertains to the History)
is positively concluded, but all are left to the free and Impartial Iu^gment
and Ezamination of the lovers of Truth.

CHAP. I.
QU^st. 1. What may we understand by the seven Churches of Asia. By Churches
seven States of the Vniveersal Chapter
to whom John wrote? Whether seven Churches then in being? Or rather whether
they were not seven States of the Universal Church, from the time of our
Savior Christ's Resurrection, to that so famous and noted time of the
Restoration of all things, called in sundry places of Scripture a Sabbath. And
in the old Testament prefigured under the common Sabbath of Days and Years?
Which if John had intended of particular Churches then in Being, why did he
confine himself to a septenary Number^ were there not in Asia more than seven
Churches? Again, seeing he termed that which he wrote unto them a Prophecy,
which has respect to the time to come; this does not seem to agree so well
with certa^n particular Churches then in being, as with the Universal Church,
understood by seven States or Conditions, this Church was in for the space of
2000 Years, and seeing a septenary number, is a mystical Number, whether or no
this does not seem to be adapted to the Mystery of the seven Spirits, Stars or
Angels?

Quest. 2. Who are we to understand by the seven Angels of the seven Churches?
Whether are they Presidents or Pastors, or Angels properly so called, having
distinct Administrations over those Churches? For it appears from D^niel and
other places of Scripture, that they were set over Kingdoms and Nations as
God`s Vicegerents. Why not then over Churches? Seeing they are called
mi^^^t^^ng Spi^its, sent out to minister t^ all those who shall be Heirs of
Salvation, He^. 1.14. And Heb. 2.5. it is (...) unto the Angels, he has not as
yet put in subjection the World to come. Whether or no this does not intimate
that this present World is subject to Angels, but the World to come, only
subject to God and Christ? And lastly seeing the Kingdoms of this World have
their Ages and periods of time, the Church will likewise have her Ages and
Periods. And why may not peculiar Angels be understood to preside and govern in
particular Ages of the Church, appointed and ordained by the most high, to
execute that Function.

CHAP. II.
QUest. 3. Whether or no the interval of the Church The Church of Ephesus from
the year 1^ to the year ^^^, since Christ's Resu^rection.
of Ephesus, (according to the a^ores^id Hypoth^sis) will not contain 33^^
years from the Resurrection of Christ, and in like manner the Church of Smyrna
the same, and so understand o^ the rest, except the Church of Laodic^a,
concerning which it may be qu^stioned, whether it does no^ belong to the
interval of the Church of Philadelphia? For in respect of its State and
Condition, where^of John gave an excellent description, it extends to the
Sabbath of the World. Then whether the Church of Laodicea will no^ have the
same interval of time with it, tho^ it be not the same with the said Church,
but widely different from it? Who are to be understood by the Church of
Laodicea^ but certain lukewarm professors of the Christian Religion having a
great notion and profession of the truth, but possessing in a manner nothing of
the Life and Power of it? And does not this clearly appear from the
signification of the Words Philad^lphia and Laodice^? For Philadelphia
signifies the love of the Brethren, including certain Christian Virtues, but
Laodicea imports as much as popular Justice, which for the most part is in a
manner none at all^ Furthermore by the same Reason, the whole interval of two
thousand years may be distributed into six equal parts^ whereof each will
contain 333 years and of a year. Whether is it not more consentaneous to
reason, that those intervals of the Churches be equally divided, if the
Historical events of them do better agree with these equal intervals or
distances than with others that are unequal?

Quest. 4. Do not the names of the seven Churches symbolically intima^e some
certain marks and properties of the said Churches? and whether or no that Term
or Title of Asia signifies only that part of the World so called, or rather the
whole Globe of the Earth or visible World, which by some learned Men is called
Asia, from the Hebrew Root, Gnasa, that is, he made, as dis^inguished from
those superior Worlds, Iezirah Briah and Aziluth so called: all which names of
Wo^lds a^e to be found in Scripture.

Quest. 5. Whether or no the Name, Title or Character of the Church The
Ephesian Church.
of Ephesus, does not properly agree to the State of the Church from the time
of Christ's R^s^rrection, to the year of his Ascension 333, which is the three
Hundred si^ty and sixth year Anno 366.
from his Nativity, for some render the Word in Latin, Desiderabilis,
desirable, or Amabilis, Lovely, and certainly such was the primitive Church
from ^he days of the Apostles, or as others read it, Remittens, Relaxatus,
importing to slack^n, and r^l^nt, as the Holy Ghost complains in John, ^aying,
They have f^rsaken their first Love, for quickly after the Apos^l^s Days, the
love of many waxed cold, yet in many things that Church was to be commended, as
in their Works, Labor, and Patience, not giving toleration to evil Men, nor
such who boasted that they were Apostles, but were not, when they came to the
Trial.

Quest. 6. Was not that threat of the Lord against them, clearly fulfilled in
the following the Interval of 333 years and, that unless they did timely
repent, the Lord himself would shortly come, and remove their Candlestick from
them? For in many places where Christianity flourished heretofore, in the next,
and succeeding Intervals there was scarce any visible Profession of it to be
seen. For the same places where anciently the Christian Religion flourished,
were afterward under the Power and Dominion of foul and abominable Heathenism
and Mahometism.

Quest. 7. And does not the Name, Title, or Character of the Church Smyrna.
of Smyrna aptly agree to the State of the Church from the year 333 since
Christ's Resurrection unto the year Anno 7000 from the
666? Now Smyrna in Latin signifies Myrrh, and truly the small number of the
faithful, and sincere were (as I may so say) in comparison of the vast
multitude of false and unsound Christians, that swarmed in the following
Interval, like unto a handful of Myrrh, as well retaining their own purity, as
serving to purify others, and keeping themselves from the height of Corruption
and Uncleanness. And although the state of this Church happened in an exceeding
Bad, and most corrupt Age in ^espect of the former; yet was the said Church
blamed in nothing, but comm^^ded for her Works, and is said to be ri^^
notwithstanding her Poverty and Tribulation. For God mightily comforted and
^upported her under her Afflictions, that she was to undergo, and foretells her
the ten days of Tribulations which he would bring upon her, and that Satan
should cast some of them into Prison. And here also the Lord has plainly
painted out this false Church that arose in this second interval, saying, `I
know their Blasphemy, who said they were Jews, and are not, but of the
Synagogue of Satan.

Quest. 8. What was meant by those ten days of Tribulation, which this Church
was to undergo? Are they ten natural or common days, or rather ten certain
times or days of persecution? For the time of persecution is commonly called a
day wherein that scorching Sun of the persecutors arises. And lastly, what are
those The ten persecutions conti^ued as it were but one.
ten days of Persecution? For indeed, it is commonly affirmed that there were
ten persecutions which disquieted the Church within 300 years after Christ`s
Resurrection, and seeing they for the most part followed one another, hence it
is, they rather merit the name of one continued persecution, than ten, but in
the second Interval, to wit, from the year 33 to 66 6/^, after Christ's
Resurrection the Church enjoyed some bright and glorious intervals, and had a
time of Respit, Peace and Tranquillity, and that too under the shelter and
protection of certain pious Kings and Emperors, such as were Theodosius the
first and the second, and others; yet this Church suffered many sharp
persecutions in this second Interval, p^rtly by Heathen Kings, and partly by
^mperours infected with the Arrian and Eu^ychian Heresies. And ^inally what
added most to the weight of her Af^liction, was that she was fo^c'd to feel a
far more grievous persecution under the Christians so called, than she had
suffered in the former Interval under the Heathens. Moreover if any has, or
will take the pains to read the ^i^^ory of this Ecclesiastical Interval, and
especially Lucas O^^andrus, Alstedius, or any other ancient ^cclesia^tical
Writer, he will find, that ten very considerable persecutions o^ the Church
truly happened in this Interval. And if any more were found to have happened in
certain particular places, or to private Persons, ^hey may be referred to the
ten aforemen^ioned, whereby the number ^en will be the mo^e complete.

Quest. 9, Does not the Name and Cha^acter of the Church of Pergamus.
Pergamus, seem to agree well enough wi^h the third Interval of the Church from
the Year after Chri^t's Resurrection 66 6/7, from the year 700, to 1666.
to the Year 1000? For as Pergamus was ^he Metropolis, or chief City of Asia,
abounding with lofty Towers, and Magnificent Buildings; so in the third
Interval, the outward form^ and visible Face of the Church seemed exceeding
high, and stately in ^ime of Peace, and the Popes of Rome became very proud and
am^itious, insomuch, that it was at that time made no less than a capital Crime
to ^esist their Authority; yea, and some were put to death for it. Also in the
same Interval, there were diverse Popes, who were Magicians and Necromancers,
and therefore it might be well said^ That Satan fixed his Sea^ at Rome, or in
the Roman Chapter signified by the Church of Pergamus, where Antipas was slain; and
is not the whole number of the faithful Witnesses of God compr^hended under the
figure of Antipas, who either in this or the succeeding Intervals were put to
death for opposing the Antichristian Tyranny and Ambition of the Popes, as the
word Antipas seems plainly to intimate?

Quest. 10. And was not the Idolatry and Spiritual ^ornication of this third
Interval, wherein the Adoration of Images and worshipping of Saints, was
Ins^ituted by the Popes of Rome, but especially by the second Nicaean Council,
predicted in these words, which were s^oken to the Church of Pergamus, chapter 2.
v. 14. Thou have there such as hold the Doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to
^ay an offense before the People of Israel, that they should ^at things offered
to Idol; and commit Fornication; also thou have such as ^mbrace the Doctrine of
the Nicola^^ans, which I have abhorred?

And indeed within this Interval, there did not only mightily abound the
Spiritual Fornication of Idolatry and Superstition; but Carnal, and Corporal
also, for then ^er^ the Popes and Priests of the Romis^ Church p^ohibited
Matrimony.

Quest. 11. Where^ore was that hidden Man^a promised to those that overcame in
this Interval, unless it was designed for the state of the Church then fled
into the Wilderness, or a solitary place? For as God in times past ^ed the
Child^en o^ Isra^l in the outward Wilderness with Manna from Heaven, when the
means of obtaining outward Bread was wanting, so does God promise to feed his
fai^hful People in this third Interval with his hidden Manna, which is the word
of Life in their Hearts, which shall be mo^e largely communicated to them, when
they shall not have the f^ee liberty o^ hearing the faithful Mini^ters of
Christ. Moreover why in the first Interval was it promised to those that
overcame to partake o^ ^he Fruit of the Tree of Life in the mids^ of Paradise;
but because in this first Interval the Kingdom of God was manifestly and
clearly laid open, like the celestial Paradise, the Church of God also
flourished in this first Interval, like the said Paradi^e, in the middle
whereof, Christ the Tree of Li^e, brought forth in the Hearts of the Faithful
his most amiable and saluti^erous Fruits of Divine Life. B^t in the second
Interval, by reason of the great Apostasy of the Pro^essors of the Christ^^n
Re^igion, this Paradise of God was absconded and hidden; and nevertheless it
was promised to such as overcame, that they should not be hurt by the second
Death, which by inverting the words, is all one, as to say they should eat of
the Fruit of the Tree o^ Life, therefore was a Promise made unto them, that
they should not be hurt by the second Death, because in this interval the
greatest part of Christians so called, by reason of their Apostasy from the
primitive purity, were to suffer the punishment of the second Death.

Quest. 12. Does not the Name or Character of the Church of Thyatira.
of Thyatira, ^uitably ag^ee with the Church within the fourth interval, to
wit, from the year of Chris^s Resurrection 1000, to the year 33 31/43.
1332? Now Thyatira signifies a Sacrifice of Labor, and indeed this Church is
commended for her Works, her Charity, Minist^ry, Faith and P^tience, and the
latter exceeded the former, which Praise or Commendation certainly was only
applicable to a small number of the faith^ul in the said Interval, which lay
hid as a little Wheat in a great heap of Chaff, or as a little Gold is hid in
much Dross. And was not the Idolat^y and Superstition of this Age, which more
abounded in this than in the prec^eding Ages, plainly foretold in the en^uing
Wo^ds, viz. that the Church of Thyatira permitted this Woman called Iezabel,
who called her self a Prophetess, to teach, which indeed did seduce the
servants of God to commit Fornica^ion, and to eat things o^^ered to Idols?

Now what may we understand by the Woman Iezabel, except it be the Universal
Body of false Teachers and Preachers, who Taught the People their foul and
abominable Superstition, and Idolatry, to wit, the Adoration of Images,
worshipping of Saints Angels and Men departed? And though diverse in many places
did protest and contend against such impieties, nevertheless many winked too
much at it, and tolerated those things, yea imitated others therein for ^ear:
And they that bare witness against such things, remained nevertheless in
Society with those that committed them, for the most part; neither did they
distinguish and separate themselves from them as they ought, and therefore are
polluted by them, and so made partakers with them in their Sins.

Quest. 13. Wherefore, in this fourth inte^val, is the Morning Star promised to
such as shall overcome; and power over the Nations to rule them with a rod of
Iron, and to break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel, unless it were to
signify that the obscure and long expected Ruin and Destruction of
Antichristian Darkness, which had over-shadowed the Earth for almost 1^00 Ye.
draws toward a Pe^iod, for three quarters of the night as it were, three
Watches were then elapsed, and there remained but one fourth part to come. And
even as the Morning Star appears in the East before the rising of the Sun,
bringing the good tidings of the approaching Day, so there was a divine Morning
Star given according to the promise of the Blessed God, made to the faithful
within this Interval, touching Mundane affairs, many of whom prophes^ed of this
day, and of the approaching Glory of the Lord, which was to be revealed. And
wha^ ^lashing, and ruptures o^ Nations happened in the following Interval,
occasioned by Horrible and Bloody Wars, the History of our present times do
partly, and partly what we have seen with our Eyes do clearly enough
demonstrate, and more will follow in a short time, which clashings and ruptures
of Nations are not to be imputed to any carnal Sword which the faithful
Servants of God shall use, for the faithful will in no wise use a Sword or
carnal Power, for the power and might of God in his faithful Saints, together
with their Light and Life which they shall in a full degree exert, will ^ffect
it, and confound the World and worldly Men, and raise them up one against
another, and hence it is that great and terrible Wars shall ^ollow the larger
mani^e^^acion of Divine Light and Knowledge.

CHAP. III.
QUest. 14. Does not the Name or Character of the Church of Sardis excellently
agree to the State of the Church in the fifth Interval, viz. from the year
after Christ's Resurrection 1333 1/^ to the year 1666 2/^? For Sardis Sardis
what
signifies as much as a precious Stone of a Flesh color; now was not the
Churches Reformation, which began about the year of Christ's Nativity, 1366
hereby described? And does not the Flesh color of this Stone evidently declare
unto us that Church called the reformed Church had in her too much Flesh, or
too much of a fleshly nature, and would be for the most part more of a Carnal
than of a Spiritual Nature, and more in the Profession of the truth than in the
real possession of it. And therefore it is argued, she has a name, that she
lives, and yet is dead, and that her Works were not perfect before God, however
there are some few who are said not to have defiled their Garments, and to them
the Lord has promised they shall walk with him in white, because they are
worthy, but the public and visible Reformation of the Church, began about the
Year of Christ's Resurrection 1333, which was from the year of his Nativity
1366/7, for then was John Wickliffe, an Englishman, of Oxford, raised up, who
preached against the Corruptions of the Romish Church; and about Anno 1400.
the Year 1400, followed him John Huss, amd Ierom of Prague. Now the said John
Wickliffe translated the Holy Bible into the English Tongue, and wrote many
Books against the Pope, to the number of two hundred, as it is reported; whose
Books, after they came into Germany, became instrumental (through God's Blessing)
to the enlightening of many, so that their Hearts and Minds were more opened to
enquire after, and search out the truth, and especially Jerome and Huss. About
Anno 1364.
the Year 1364. Charles the V. called the wise King of France, caused the Holy
Scriptures to be Translated into the Vulgar Tongue; and he also wrote against
the Pope. Moreover it is affirmed that Wickliff, Ierom and Huss, restored the
Doctrine of the Waldenses. These Waldenses were so called from one Waldo of
Lions, in France, who began to teach the People, and open the Scriptures unto
them; who notwithstanding was no Priest, neither had received any outward
Authority, but was only a Layman, and as to his manner of Life, a Merchant.

And these Waldenses appeared about the year 1160, who were succeeded by the
Albigenses, a People inhabiting near the Alps, about the Anno 1190. The
Albigenses.
year 1190, professing the same Doctrine with the Waldenses; and therefore these
Waldenses and Albigenses belong to the chiefest, to wit, the fourth Interval.
And those among them, who were of the most Sincerity, were described under the
name of those of the Church of Thyatira, to whom the Morning Star was promised.
Again, the said Ierom and Huss were succeeded by Luther, Luther about the year
1517.
about the year 1517, who began to teach and preach against the Indulgences of
Pope Leo, which were exposed to Sale, and a little after that he disputed
against many other principles of the Roman Church and Religion, and many others
followed, and accompanied him, every one in his order, with a greater Evidence
and Authority of Light and Truth, whose true Testimonies (except some certain
errors, which they were guilty of as Men) are to be held in great esteem, and
principally theirs, who for the Love of the Truth in England, Scotland, France,
Germany, and other p^aces, were slain, and suffer^d Martyrdom within the said
Interval.

Quest. 15. Does not the Name or Character of the Philadelphian Church The
Church of Philadelphia.
most nearly agree to the State of the Church in the ^ixth ensuing Interval,
viz. from the year after Christ's Resurrection 166 ^/7, to the year 2000, or
from the year of Christ's Birth Ann^ 17^0, to 2034.
1700, to the year 2034.

Now the What Church of Philadelphia signifies.
Name Philadelphia signifies love of the Brethren, comprehending all Christian
Virtues whatsoever. For although true fraternal Love did dwell in all the sincere
and ^ai^hful Christians of the early Ages of the Church; yet whether or no the
Christians o^ this Interval will not surpass one another in the strength of
this Brotherly Love and Affection? (...), or in a more excellent degree, which
Church had nothing laid to her Charge, but was commended for her Works, to wit,
for her Patience and Fidelity, and to her chiefly were the promises made, also
a Door was opened to her that no Man could shut; and does not this plainly
signify, that the Hearts of many in all Nations, should be opened to receive
the Testimony of this Church, so that within this Interval, a great Conversion
of many Souls to the true Faith of Christ, as well of Jews as Gentiles, may be
expected.

Quest. 16. And though the Interval of the Philadelphian Church' be not as yet
strictly begun, yet are not the Seeds thereof already sown and sprung u^? even
as the Seed of the Church of Sardis was planted and prepared, within the
Interval of the Church of Thyatira, which immediately went before. And what are
all those Sects and Professions of the Christian Religion at this day, among
whom the seed o^ the Philadelphian Church greatly appears?

Quest. 17. Will not that happy Millennium, or Age of a thousand Years, begin
within this Church's Interval? for it seems to be clearly enough hinted in the
promise made to those that overcome in this Interval viz. That God will write
upon them, the^ name of God, and the name of the City of God, viz. new
Jerusalem, which shall descend from Heaven; and therefore is not the State of
the L^odicean Church, (as before was said) Contemporary with this Church, and
happening at the same Inte^val of time? the one describing as well the true
po^^es^ours, as pro^esso^rs of Christianity; the other only the naked and
Titular pro^essours.

Q^est^ 18. Are The Church of L^o^icea
they not extremely mistaken, who ^^ink it ^oin^s out the degenerating state of
the Church, after the expiration of a thousand Years? When it plainly appears
from Scripture, that after the Church shall be once restored and freed from
Apostasy, that it shall never fall from the Truth into Delinquency or Apostasy
any more; and then also the same promise is given to such as are truly
Penitent, and whose Hearts are kindled with the Zeal of Divine Love in the
Church of Laodicea, as was given to those of the Church of Philadelphia, to
wit, that such as are Conquerors also in the Laodicean Church, shall sit down
with Christ upon his Throne; which is equivalent in all respects to that
Felicity, promised to all the faithful in the Millennium.

CHAP. IV.
QUest. 19: What are we to understand by John's Vision of a Throne What the
Throne in Heaven is.
placed^ in Heaven? Is it not the place or seat of God, in the Hearts of the
Faithful living on Earth? And that it was placed in Heaven, does not this
signify that it is fixed and immovable, so that no power of Men or Devils, can
ever remove or shake it?

Quest. 20 What are those What the Lamps are^
Lamps that burn before the Throne, which are said to be the seven Spirits of
God? are they not (as it were) seven Effluvia or Emanations of one, and the
same Spirit of the Deity, which some reckon ten Emanations or out goings, but
John only seven? Is it because 10 may be reduced unto 7, and 7 unto 3, and 3
unto 1? Or else because only 3 of those 10 would have more fully demonstrated
its force and energy, and from Christ to the Millennium, other seven would have
discovered themselves more fully; but all the ten Virtues, and Riches of the
Divine Spirit, will be most amply demonstrated in the Millennium.

Moreover the names of these ten Emanations in H^brew, and Latin, are as
follow^; 1. Kether, Corona. 2. Cochma, Sapientia. 3. Bina, Prudentia. 4.
Gedula, Magnificentia. 5. Gebhurah, Fortitudo. 6. Tiphereth, Puchritudo. ^.
Nezack, Victoria. 8. Hod, Gl^ria. 9. Iesod, Fundamentum. 10. Malcuth, Regnum.
Which sounds thus in our English Dialect: 1. A Crown. 2. Wisdom. 3. Prudence.
4. Magnificence. 5. Fortitude. 6. Beauty. 7. Victory. 8. Glory. 9. a
Foundation. 10. a Kingdom. And it is the Opinion of some Mystical Men, that
when we are come to Malcu^h^ that Blessed age of the Millennium will begin, and
the greatest part of those Hebrew names, are found written in 1 Chronicles. 29.1^.
and others in other places of Scripture.

Quest. 21. What is that Sea of Glass like unto What the Sea of Glass is.
Crystal which stood before the Throne? Is it not the ab^nd^nce of the Spirit,
for the Souls of the Faithful, to Wash and Bath therein, and to drink
abundantly thereof, and be filled? for the Water of this Sea is not salt but
sweet, to wit, the Water of eternal Life; and was not that Sea which Solomon
placed in the Temple, a Type hereof?

Quest. 22. What are those 4 Beasts, and What the 4 Beasts and 24 Elders are.
24 Elders before the Throne? Whether really the Order and Hierarchy of Angels,
as some think? Or whether not rather the very Church of God, or number of the
Faithful, redeemed to God by Christ, as it appear^ Chap. 5. v. 9. which has it
thus, and the Elders, and the Beasts Sung a new Song unto God, saying Thou have
Redeemed us to God, by thy Blood, from among every Tribe, and from every
Lan^guage, Nation and People?

Qust. 23. What may we What are the Eyes of the ^easts.
understand by the many Eyes of those Beas^^? Whether not the manifold
Und^rs^anding, and Wisdom of the Faithful in Spiritual things? And do not their
Eyes, within and without, or in the Circum^erence, signify that these Beasts
have not only most intrinsic Knowledge of themselves^ but also are endued with
great Judgment and Discretion, whereby they clearly understand what is to be
done in any case or emergency of A^^airs whatsoever? Again, what is to be
understood by their Wings? Whether so many Divine and Celestial Vertues^ by
which they can asc^nd with Expedition and Alacrity (as it were in ^light) unto
God, and so readily and speedily execute his Divine Will? finally wherefore are
they said in times past, to wit, under the Law, to have four Wings, and
a^terwards, under the Gospel six? Was it not by reason of greater Grace
afterward communicated under the Gospel?

Qu^st 24. What are those Faces of ^he Bea^^s, whereof every one is said to
have ^our, viz. the Face of a Bull on the Le^t ^and, and the Face o^ a Man and
a Lion on the Right side, and a last of all the Face o^ an ^agl^? Do not these
fo^r Faces signify the Souls or Lives of Men derived from the four Wo^lds
afore-mentioned, as the ^o Neph^sh ^^om Asia, To Ruach from Iezi^ah, To
Nischmah from Briah, To Chaja from Aziluth? Now Nephesh or P^yche seems to be
^ro^erly sig^i^ied, b^ that of ^ B^ll^ Ru^^h by a Lion, Nischmah by a Man; and
lastly, Chaja by an Eagle. And wher^fore are they said to be four, but by
reason of those 4 Faces? Moreover, what is to be understood by the 4 Wheels The
4 Wheels of the 4 Beasts.
of those four Beasts? Does not each Wheel signify the Revolution of some Age.
For the Hebrew word Gilgal, which is rendered Rota in Latin, in English a
Wheel, is translated by the Hebrews Revolutio, or Revolution; therefore will
not the aforesaid Revolution of an Age contain a Thousand Years, which is one
Day mys^ically taken, according to Psalm. 90. and 2 Pet. 3. For what is a Day
more than the Revolution of the Sun in the space of 12 Hours? And because
according to the 90th Psalm. before cited, a Thousand Years are as a Watch of
the Night, and every Night contained 4 Watches, and every Watch ^ Hours;
therefore does not the whole Night (c) contain 4000 Years, and each Hour one
third part of a Thousand Yea^s, that is ( d) ^33? ^
Therefore will not the Wheels contain ^our Thousand Years? as also why are
they called Watches? is it because every one of those ^aces in their proper
Hours is excited, and (as it were) aw^kened in every respective Watch?

Quest. 25. Wherefore are there said to be the number of 24 Elders? Does not
this number respect the 12 Patriarchs, who were to remain as 12 Junctures or
Seams of the Ancient Church; together with the 12 Apostles, who are likewise
the 12 Junctures or uniting Bands of the Evangelical Church, to signify the
highest, and strictest union of both Churches, under one Head the Lord Jesus
Christ? For (as it is said) there are 12 great Junctures o^ connexions in the
Body of Man, and 70 small ones, with which perhaps the 70 Disciples under the
Gospel do correspond; and 70 Souls of the House of Jacob under the Law, who
came into Egypt, from whom afterward so vast a Multitude of People arose.

CHAP. V.
QUest. 26. What is meant by the right Hand of The right Hand of God.
God? Has God a right and left Hand according to the manner of Men; which if
he has not, as certainly he has not, yet seeing the Scripture here and
elsewhere, speaks of God's right Hand, is not something intended by this
word, bearing a certain Analogy to a Man's right Hand? In which respect some do
thus distinguish the aforesaid Divine Emanations; viz. that some have an
Analogy to the right Hand as Cochma, Gedula, Nezach; others to the left Hand,
as Binah, Geb^urah, Hod; others are in a mean, as Kether, Tiphereth, Iesod,
Malcuth.

Quest. 27. What may we understand by the Book What is meant by the Book Sealed
with seven Seals,
sealed with seven Seals, which was in his Hand, who sat on the Throne? Whether
the knowledge of great Events to come to pass in the World, from the time of
Christ's Ascension, to the end of the World, even as other parts of Sacred
Writ, do either Historically, or Prophetically declare unto us all the great
Events and Transactions past, from Adam unto Christ.

Quest. 28 Why does John distinguish the 7 Seals in that order, The 7 Seals.
that 6 immediately follow one another, and the sixth seems to reach to the
Sabbath of the World, but the seventh proceeds in an other Order, as
comprehending the half Hours silence, and the Intervals o^ the 7 Trumpets The ^
Trumpets
? has he not designedly and purposely done it, to show us that the seventh
Seal does not entirely follow the other six; bu^ signifies a new Order from
Christ's Ascen^ion to the end of the World, or 200 Years? Therefore do not the
Intervals of the six Seals divide the said space of 2000 Years into six equal
parts, whereof each will contain 333? And thus indeed the six Seals will denote
the same Intervals of time with the seven Churches aforementioned, and so make
a Synchronism: For most confess that there were diverse Visions in this Book,
which were Synchronical, or happened at one and the same time, represented by
distinct Visions, even as those seven Years of Famine in Egypt was proposed to
the King in two Visions, although the said Visions happened in the same Intervals
of time, yet many of them were attended with different consequences, others
with very ^ike Events, as will appear from the ensuing ^ines.

Quest. 29. Wherefore did John say at the opening of every of the ^our first
Seals, that he heard one of the Beasts say, Come see, why.
Come and see; except it were, to show us that the Interval of every Seal, (the
seventh only excepted) comprehends the space of a mystical Hour, viz. 333
Years? For is not the Face of some Animal, stirred up, or awakened in every
Mystical Hour, (which may be therefore said to be on the Watch) Veni^ vide,
Come and s^e.

Quest. 30. If the Events, which were to come to pass, and are in great measure
elapsed from the time of our Lord's Ascension to this present day, do better
answer to the Intervals of 333 Years assigned to each of the first six Seals
than to any other whatsoever; does not this elegantly prove the truth of the
said Intervals?

Quest. ^1. What may we understand by John's Vision of a White Horse, and him
that sat thereon, who held a Bow in his Hand, and went out at the opening of
the f^^st Seal, conquering and to conquer? Is not he He that sat thereon.
that sat thereon our Lord Jesus Christ? And does not the The White Horse.
white Horse mean h^s Ministers, arrayed in the white Robes of Righteousness, and
inward Holiness, bringing the Gospel, unto Men, viz. the glad Tidings o^ P^ace?
What was the Bow in his Hand
and does not the Bow in his Hand, signify the Power and Energy of his Heav^nly
Gospel and Doctrine? Which Gospel indeed in those Primitive times, Conquer`d
many thousands of Men, and subjected them to the Obedience, and Faith of
Christ. From the Year of Christ's Bi^th 366
And moreover, did not this pu^e and exceeding prevalent Dispensation of the
Gospel, remain on Earth, at least the space of 333 Years and after ou^ Lords's
Ascension, or from his ^^carnation 366, which Interval indeed reached beyond
Constanti^e and his Sons; nay, beyond Julian the Apostate, Jordan, Valens,
Valentinian, and indeed the power and purity of the Evangelical Doctrine did
still prevail in the World, notwithstanding the sottish Superstitions, foolish
Traditions, and wrangling debates of some, concerning Arrius and his Disciples?

Quest. 32. What may we understand by John's Vision of a red Horse, What the
red Horse is
at the opening of the second The second Seal.
Seal? Is it not Soldiers, and Captains of Armies, and such as stir up terrible
Wars in the World, to the shedding o^ much Blood; and who is he that rides upon
this red Horse, He that rides upon the Horse.
but some great Angel or Demon, who by God's permission inspires, and prompts
Men to Bloody Wars, which Wars doubtless, came chiefly in those parts of the
World, where the Gospel had been Preached, and were sent by the most hol^ God,
as a Just Punishment on Men for dispising the Gospel. And indeed they who
delivered the faithful Servants of God, to various kinds of Death, in the first
Interval, because they believed in God and Christ, are slain themselves,
together with their Children, by others in the second Interval, God punishing
the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the Children, even to the third and fourth
Generation. Besides do not the events or historical effects, plainly answer to
this second Interval, to wit, from the Year of our Savior Christ's
Resurrection 333, to the 666 or from the Year of his Birth 366, to the Year
700, for within that Interval of time was not the whole West^rn Empire
miserably torn, and at last almost totally erased, and aboli^hed in the said
Interval? Moreover also Rome her self, as it were ^he Empress of the World, was
often taken, and after some Revolutions,, she was burnt within the same
Interval; b^t the chief Authors of these terrible Wars, were the Go^hs,
Vandals, Hunnes and Persians, with th^i^ Kings and Leaders. Then about the
latter end of this Interval, viz. about 600 and odd Years after the Birth of
Christ, comes Mahome^ with his follow^rs, who were at that time called
Saracens, and these indeed were the Authors of dreadful W^rs in many places.

Quest. 33. What ^s to be understood by Iohn`s Vision of a black What he ^lack
Horse was^
^or^e, and him that sat thereon, holding a Balance in his Hand, when the third
Seal was to be opened? Is not te^rible Famine hereby signified, and indeed that
which is natural an^ exte^nal, as well as that which is spi^it^al an^ internal?
And indeed both ^f these completely happened within the third Interval of time,
to wit, from the year of Christ's Resurrection, 666 to the year 1000, as the
History of those times do clearly evince; for in this Interval there was a
great Spiritual F^mine, or Want of the Celestial Bread of Life, and the time of
this Interval was the same with that of the Church of Pergamus above recited;
within which Interval, God promised to feed the Faith^ul with hidden Manna,
Rev. 2.17. for all that whole Interval was full of Ignorance, in the extremity
of Darkness, and very few famous Men flourished in it. Lastly, as to what
pertains to natural or outward Famine, that indeed in a manner continually
attends horrid and bloody Wars.

Quest. 34. What is meant by the The pale Horse.
pal^ Horse, and him that sat thereon, whose name was Death, whom Hell
followed; having power to kill with the Sword, with Famine, and with Death, and
with the Beas^s of the Earth, which was to come to pass when the four^h Seal
The 4 th Seal opened
was opened? Does it not seem to be the whole and entire Body of all the Wick
that have gone before with Addition of many others? For what does the killing
with the Sword signify, but W^r, Scarcit^ and Famine? And was no^ Death (which
was the name of him that sat thereon) the Devi^ himself, whom Hell followed?
Lastly, what is signified by the Beasts of the ^arth, but foul and unclean
Spirits, or Terrestrial Demons, which miserably beguile and deceive the
Ignorant and Unthinking Mobile with their Cheats and Delusions: For in Holy
Writ, the Devil and unclean Spirits are called Beasts of the Field, or Beasts
of the Earth as it is said of the Serpent in Genesis, that he was more subtle
than any Beast of the Field, which doubtless could not be understood of common
Beasts. Moreover does not the event, or Historical effect, apparently answer
this Inter^val, viz. from the Year From the year of the Resurrection 1000, to
1333.
o^ Christ's Resurrection 1000, to the year 1333, within which time, the
foulest Superstitions, and most detestable Idolatry abounded among Christians,
falsely so called; also the Pride, Covetousness, and Luxury of the Antichristian
Clergy, within this Interval, exceeded all bounds, besides many damnable
Opinions and Here^ies, were preached and published by the Antichris^ian
Emissaries, to wit, the several orders of Scholars and Students, called by the
name of Monks and Friars, which were received and believed on by the ignorant
Multitude, as so many divine Oracles: Moreover also the Locus^^ that ascended
out of the Bottomless Pit, seem to belong to this Interval of time, of which
hereafter in its proper place.

Now these two last Intervals, to wit, the third and the fourth, seem to have a
very near relation and affinity one to another, in respect of Ignorance,
Blindness, Idolatry, Superstition, and many other abominable Evils. Yet the
fourth Interval was not so destitute of good Men, nor so full of Ignorance and
Darkness as the third; for in the fourth Interval God raised up some Eminent
and famous Men, as were Bernardus, Clarevallensis, and Malachias; also the
Waldenses and Albigenses, with whom do agree those of the Church of Thyatira.
Moreover also in this very Interval began the Turkish Empire, when their
Captains or Calaphi were constituted Emperors over them, who were miraculously
strong in many parts of the World, and the first of these was Ottoman, Ottoman,
about the year 1297.
about the year 1297.

Quest. 35. What are those effects or events that happen when the fifth Seal is
opened, and what may be principally understood by them? are they not the Souls
of such as were slain for the word of God, and the Testimony which they bore,
whom John saw under the Altar, meaning the Souls of all that were slain, for
their firm and constant Profession of the true Faith from the beginning of the
World to the time of the fifth Interval, viz. unto the year of Christ^s
Resurrection 333? And why did they desire of God so earnestly, that he would
revenge their Blood upon the Dwellers on Earth? Was it because the Justice of
God is as well glorified in revenging as his Mercy is in pitying and forgiving,
and was it not also, because they knew that the time when the Blood of the
Righteous that were slain, should be revenged upon the Ungodly, was to be
joined with that time in which all the Righteous were to receive an hundred
fold Reward, which Christ promised them in the first Resurrection, when they
should be restored, and raised to Life again? Now why it should stand with
God's Justice to revenge the Blood of those that were slain for many Ages past,
not only three or four Generations (as in Deuteronomy.) but more than an hundred
Generations ago, upon the Inhabitants of the Earth, who are not as yet born, or
in being upon the Earth, is a question that demands a clear Explanation?

Quest. 36. Wherefore was it said to those Souls, that they should rest, ( viz.
under the Altar, and was not that Altar Christ?) until the number of their
Brethren, yet to be slain should be fulfilled? And does not this fifth Interval
signifi^ that there shall come a time of much and great T^ibulation to the
Servants and People of God, and that many shall be put to Death within this
Interval, in a manner during the whole space from the year of Christ's
Resurrection 1333, to the year 1666, or from the year of his Nativity 1366, to
the year 1700. And has not this happened so, in reference to the time past of
this Interval? And is it probable, that near the same number of good Christians
were slain by the Papists and Turks, from the year 1366, to this present day, (
viz. from the days of John Wickliff) as were heretofore slain from Christ's
Resurrection, to the aforesaid term of years 1366? And whereas there yet remain
some odd years of the said Interval to be fulfilled; some think 18, others 16,
and again other some 14, viz. from the year 1366, to the true year of Christ's
Nativity 1700, whether or no we are not yet to expect more Tribulations and
Persecutions will come upon the Servants of God till the said year 1700?

Qu^st. 37. But the fifth Interval being expired, whose end draws nigh, may we
not expect the true Church will enjoy some serene Interval and time of Rest and
Tranquillity, until the la^t and greatest, but shortest Pe^secution, under the
seventh Head of the Beast, not as yet fully to be accomplished till about the
year 1774?

Quest. 38. What are those effects or events which must be fulfilled in the
World, when the sixth Seal is opened, that great Earth^quake, the Sun darkened,
the Moon turn'^ like Blood, the Stars falling from Heaven^ the Heavens rolled
up like a Scroll, the Mountains and Islands passing away? D^ not all these
things clearly signify the en^ and downfall of every Unjust, Ungodly and
Tyrannical Government and Domini^on whatsoever, that so at last the Kingdom^ of
Holiness, and Righteousness may be se^ up and established, and God and his
Christ rule and govern by the holy Ghost in the Hearts of Men, in every Nation
of the World? And is not this thing plainly signi^^ed by John him self in his
following words And will not the time of this Interval, under the opening of
the sixth Seal, contain the common space of 333 Y. from the year of Christ's
Resur^^^ction 1666^ to From the year 1666, to the year 2000.
the year 203^ wherein God will fully r^^venge the Blood of his Servants that
we^^ slain, and are now in Heaven above, upon the Dwellers on Earth, and so the
Praye^ and Petitions of the Souls that cried under the Altar in the former
Interval will be a^^swered? But some re^err the I^terval of t^^ sixth Seal to
Constan^ine's time; and this the^ do without any Authority; for it appe^^ by
many weighty Reasons and Circumstances, that the sixth Seal was not as yet
opened in the World, neither was the Interval of this Seal begun.

CHAP. VI.
QUest. 39. Do not those other events and effects, which will be produced at
the opening of the sixth Seal, plainly demonstrate, that the sixth Seal will
reach even to the 1000 Years Sabbath of the World? What are the 144000 which
were sealed in their Foreheads from every Tribe of the Children of Israel? Are
they not the first Fruits of the Saints, who attain the first Resurrection from
the Dead in the future Millennium? and finally, are not the 144000 the same
with those mentioned in the 14th. Chapter? Moreover, are they not really
Israelites, as to their Race or Stock, 12000 being taken from every Tribe of
Israel; although many other of the Israelitish Race, together with many other of
the Servants of God, shall hereafter receive the same Reward and Felicity of
the first Resurrection? And again, What is that great Multitude of all Nations,
Tongues and People, which no Man could number standing before the Throne and
the ^amb, which were clothed in white Garments, and bore Palms in their Hands?
Are they not all the Saints raised to Life again within the sixth Interval, not
only those who lived in the preceding Intervals since Christ's Resurrection,
but even all that have ever lived since the beginning of the World, who came
out of great Tribulation, which they suffered in their preceding Lives; but
then they shall never hunger nor thirst any more, neither shall the Sun, or the
heat thereof touch them; for the Lamb, who is in the midst of the Throne, shall
feed them, and lead them to Fountains of Living Water, and God shall wipe away
all Tears from their Eyes? And does not this State belong to that place in the
Revelations, chapter 21, and 22? And are not both States the same, both that which
is here, and that which is there described, which will be the State of such as
have attained to the Resurrection before described?

Quest. 40. Wherefore is that number o^ 148000, which is the 12000 of every
Tribe of Israel distinguished from that great mul^titude, as well of Jews as of
other Nations, who shall hereafter obtain the same kind of Reward? Is it
because those 14400^ ( Rev. 14.4.) are the ^^rst Fruits, who will have the
chiefest place in the first Resurrection of the Dead, and after the first
Fruits will follow a great Multitude of God's Elect of all Nations, every one
in his order, as it shall please God to ordain it, according to the
determination of his infinite Wisdom; for does not Paul say positively, That
every one shall be raised in his own order? and therefore all are not to be
raised up, or recalled unto life at once, even as Men now do not come into the
World all at once, but in a successive order, one after another, according to
their proper Generations, best of all known to God.

Quest. 41. Will not all the Saints of God, or first Fruits Prophesyed of, and
all others that follow afterward, attain this first Resurrection from the Dead,
within the sixth Interval, viz. from the Year after Christ's Resurrection 1666,
to the Year 2000? And so all live completely 1000 Years after their first
Resurrection before the end of the World, the whole Age of the World,
containing 7000 years. Whereas if any of them should be raised before the sixth
Interval, the end of the World would come before that Age o^ a 10^0 years,
which they were to live, which is contrary to the Scriptures. And was not this
Mystery prefigured by the Sabbath under the Law, which began in the evening, or
in the latter part of the sixth day, and which was also shadowed out by the
Manna, which was to be gathered on the sixth day, but on the seventh day, it
was unlawful to gather any Manna?

Quest. 42 Who are those four Angels, whom John saw standing on the four
corners of the Earth, to whom power was given to hurt the Earth and the Sea;
which yet they could not do, 'till that number 144000 was sealed? Are they not
Angels, in a proper sense, to whom power is given from God to execute his most
Holy and Righteous Judgments on the Earth?

And may not those corners of the Earth, peradventure signify four parts of
the World, Ex. gr. Asia, Europe, Africa, and America, whereof each may have his
Angel? And what are those four Winds or Spirits which the four Angels aforesaid
withheld, What are the Winds or Spirits?
by which Restriction the Earth was to be hurt? Whether or no by these four
Winds or Spirits, good Angels may not be meant, and by the 4 first, evil
Angels? And thus does it not appear, that different parts of the World have
their proper A^gels, as well good, as evil, attending them, one contending
against another: The good to benefit Men, the evil to injure them, even as Men
have lived, either well, or ill? And are not these good or bad Angels sent, and
appointed as Guardians, and Governors over them?

CHAP. VIII.
QUest. 43. What is to be understood by that half Hours The half Hours silence
Silence? and by those seven Trumpets, which the seven Angels sounded
successively at the opening of the seventh Seal? Moreover, whether or no the
seventh Seal might not begin at Christ's Resurrection; for otherwise, would not
the seven Woes, and P^agues of the Trumpets, happen in that most blessed Age,
the Sabbath of the World? which is very absurd, and contrary to the words of
Scripture, in the Revelations; when as The seventh Trumpet.
the seventh Trumpet will bring us unto the 1000 years Reign of the Saints, as
is very evident from Revel. chap. 11. v. 1, 16, 17, 18, 19. And will not every
Trumpet have an equal and distinct Interval of time? Which seven Intervals of
the Trumpets, and half hours silence added together, do they not make up 2000
years, from the Resurrection of Christ?

Now if it appears from the best computed Chronology, that the seventh Trumpet
commences at the year of Christ's Resurrection 1740, and reaches to the year
2000, after his Resurrection, so as to contain the space of 260 Years; and will
not every one of the seven Trumpets contain the same space fo years, viz, 26^,
and so the whole time of the Trumpets will contain 1820 years, which
subtracted from 2000, the remainder will be 180, the number of years, that
ought to make up the half hours silence? ^
And it was upon a good reason, that John said, that space of silence was as it
were half an hour, for he did not term it a precise, or just half hour; for a
precise or j^st mystical half hour is 166, because an entire mystical hour is
333: But this term of Year, exceeds that precise half hour, by 14 common Years,
which are of small moment, viz. about two Minutes, and a little more.

Quest. 44. Do not the Effects, or Historical Events completely concur with the
aforesaid Intervals, of the Semihorary silence, and the 7 Trumpet? for if to
that time of silence which lasted as it were half an hour, we add 1^0 Years
from Chri^^'s Resurrection, ^
which from his Nativity makes 214, may not all that time be called a time o^
silence, as to the inward State of the Church, though she did suffer some
Persecution outwardly? for within that time did not the Angel offer much
Incense, with the Prayers of Saints, as John declared; notwithstanding the hard
Debates that arose about the year 198 between certain Bishops about the time of
celebrating the Passover? for that was in a manner little or nothing in
comparison of those great Calamities, which afterward invaded the very Heart
of the Church. And within the space of 200 Years after the Birth of Christ,
there was a time of great inward Peace and Tranquillity among true Christians,
even when they were outwardly pressed with grievous Persecution; and in those
days there was a signal Zeal of Piety and Devotion, and their Prayers flowed
from the Hear^ assisted by the Holy Ghost; witness Ter^ulli^n, who lived at
that time: Therefore those dead and empty Forms of P^ayer, drawn from Books,
and appointed to be read^ was not as yet known to the Church.

Quest. 45. What may we under^^and by the Hail What the Hail was.
and Fire mixed with Blood, and sent upon the Earth at the sound of the first
Trumpet? Does not the Fire and Hail signify great Strife and Contention that
arose among the Members of the Church within this Interval, which indeed did
very much injure and prejudice the tender Branches of Celestial and Divine Life
among Christians, as John said; the third part of the Trees were consumed with
Fire, and all the green Grass.
Grass was burnt up? Now by the Trees.
Trees, are not the stronger, and (as it were) ^ounder Christians to be
understood, and by the Grass such as are more feeble and unsound? And how
exactly do these Predictions agree with the first Interval of the seven
Trumpets, viz. from the year of Christ's Nativity 214, to the year 474?

For how miserably during all this time was the Church afflicted with the
Debates and Controversies of diverse Bishops and Presbyters that erred from the
true Faith of Christ; such as were Novatus, Sabellius, Samosatenus, Authors of
Heresy.
Manes, Arrius, Donatus, Macedonius, Apollinaris, Pelagius, Nestorius,
Eutyches; all these were so many principal Authors of Sects and Heresies,
within this Interval, whose Heresies and false Opinions, wherewith they broke
the peace of the Church, would be too tedious here to recite? Fire mixed with
Blood.
And was it not Fire mixed with Blood, when many of those Sects and Heresies
killed others called Christians, and their Brethren with the Sword?

Quest. 46. What ought we to understand by the great The Mountain cast into the
Sea.
Mountain cast into the Sea, by which the third part of the Sea turned into
Blood within the Interval of the second The second Trumpet.
Trumpet, from the year 474, to the year 734? Does not this apparently signify
the Defection and Apostasy of many from the Christian Faith, which seemed like
some great Mountain, as the Roman Church was at that time? And behold how this
great Mountain burns with the Fire of Envy and Malice, and tumbles into the
Sea, and turns the third part thereof into Blood, involving a great part of the
Roman Empire in Destruction, War, and Bloodshed, as indeed it f^ll out: For in
the greatest part of this Interval much Blood was spilt, insomuch, that Rome
was burnt and pillaged about the year 550 by Totila, and all Italy about that
time was miserably wasted and destroyed by the Goths and Lombards: are not all
these most just punishments in^licted by God on the Roman Church for their
Apostasy? And that she lifted her self above all other Churches, and set up
her Bishops above all other Bishops of the World; and this proud Usurpation of
the Roman Bishops over others, quickly began after the days of Zosimus,
Boniface the first, and Coele^tine the first, who assumed to themselves this
P^eheminence and Authority over their Brethren a little mo^e than 400 Years
after the Birth of Christ, yet could not absolutely obtain it, until the Year
606, when Boniface the third was constituted the first Universal Bishop over
all Churches, by the Authority of Phocas; who killed his Master the Emperor
Mauritius; and by villainy assumed his place.

Quest. 47. What may we understand by the great Star What the great Star mean^:
falling from Heaven, on the Rivers of Water, and turning the Waters into
Wormwood, within the Interval of the third Trumpet, viz. From the Year 734, to
the Year 994, was it not a greater degree of Apostasy; the great Star that
fell from Heaven on the Rive^s, signifying some evil Angel, inspiring the
Doctors and Preachers of the Roman Church, with the worst and most pernicious
Doctrines, which Doctrines, certainly were like to Wormwood for bitternes^? And
did not this evidently come to pass, at what time the Bishops and Doctors of
the Roman Church, eagerly preached up the Pope's Supremacy and Jurisdiction,
above all other Bishops? likewise, they set up, and established a multitude of
humane Traditions, as Masses to be said for the Dead, that Men should be
confined by an Oath or a Vow, to a Monastical Life; that Priests ought not to
Marry; with many more of the like nature. Besides, also within this Interval
the Popes and Bishops of Rome did mightily promote the Adoration and Worship of
Images; and thus, not without great reason was the third part of the Waters,
said to be turned into Wormwood, and it is affirmed that many dyed by drinking
those bitter waters.

But some there were preserved alive, who did not drink of those bitter waters,
but of the pure Water of the word of eternal Life, and sound Doctrine, and
indeed these were the Witnesses of God, in those corrupt times, such as were
Adelbertus a Frenchman, Clement and Samson Scotch-Men, with sundry others in
diverse Kindoms, and Provinces of the World.

Quest. 48. How must we understand that the third part of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, were smitten within the Interval of the fourth Trumpet, viz. From the
Year 994, to the Year 1254? Does not this signify that the Grandeur and
Majesty of Emperors, and Christian Kings should be very much eclipsed, within
this Interval? And did not this certainly come to pass, when the Pope
challenged to himself, and proudly usurped Power and Authority over diverse
Emperors, Kings and Princes, in the whole Christian World: And indeed obtained
it? Gregory the seventh (otherw^se called Hildebrand) excommunicates an^
deposes the Emperor, Henry the fourth, about the year of Christ 1073. About the
yea^ 1100, Paschal the second ceases to recko^ the date by the years of the
Empire; b^^ contra^y to the ancient custom, begins ^ new Account from the
Popes, ex. gr. Sayin^ in this year of th^s or that Pope, instead o^ this or
that Emperor. Pope Hadrian the fourth bestowed ^reland upon Henry the se^cond,
King of England, as a Gift, for which the said Henry became tributary to the
Pope^ and every Family in the whole Kingdom, wa^ obliged to pay to the Pope one
Penny per ann^ Pope Alexand^^, (alias Barbarossa) set hi^ Foot upon the Neck of
Fr^derick the Emperor, Innocent the third takes care to constitute Otho
Emperor, and afterward ex^communicates him. John, King of Englan^ was deposed
by the Pope, and as some affirm, poisoned at last by some o^ the Pope's
Emissaries. Gregory the Ninth, Gregory the Ninth. An. 1233.
who was Pope about the year 12^3, said there were two great Lights, the Pope
and the Em^pe^or; the Pope like the Sun, and the Em^peror as the Moon; this so
vexed the Em^peror, that he called the Pope Antichrist.

Likewise, about the year 124^, Frederi^^ was deposed by the Pope's Authority.
(...) not all these Transactions, wi^h many mo^^ clearly explain to us the
effects of the The fourth Trumpet.
fourth Trumpet?

Quest. 49. What may we understand by the Star that A Star falling on the
Earth; The fi^th Trumpet.
fell from Heaven to the Earth within the Interval of the fifth Trumpet, to
which was given the Key of the bottomless Pit; and after the bottomless P^t was
opened, there arose a smoke from thence, etc. And what may be thought the
meaning of the Locusts proceeding from the Smoke upon the Earth? Is not this
some evil Angel or Genius, to whom permission was given to open the Infernal
Pit it self, whereby he set at liberty a great multitude of lying and seducing
Spirits, and sent 'em into the World, to deceive all such as had not the Seal
of God in their Foreheads? And does not this Interval or State of Affairs very
aptly agree with that vast multitude of Scholars, and orders of Monks, that
mightily swarmed within this Interval; to wit, from the year of Christ 1254, to
the year 1514, and most intolerably vexed and tormented the Conscience; of
many, with the pungent Stings and Thorns of their School-Debates? and of Rank
were chie^ly Thomas Aquinas, Bonaventure, Henricus Gandavensis. John of Paris,
John Dun, a Scotch-man, Durandus Occamus^ with many others, who lived within
this Interval: For though some notable Sayings may be found among them, yet were
they miserably deceived in many other things by those^ unclean Spirits and
Demons; and wherefore are those Locusts said to have Faces, as it were the
Faces of Men; but to signify the subtilty of wit, which seemed to be in them?
And finally, What do their Hairs like the Hairs of Women denote? Is it not that
persuasive way of reasoning, by which they draw P^oselytes to themselves? And
whereas they had Teeth, as it were the Teeth of Lions; this intimates that they
were like Lions in fierceness, to destroy and tear in pieces all that dissented
from them.

Quest. 50. Wherefore is it said, that there was power given to these Locusts,
not to kill Men, but only to torment them with their Stings? Is it not hereby
meant that these Locusts were not Soldiers that fought themselves with a carnal
weapon, but only certain orders of Scholars, Monks and Friars, who with their
pe^nicious Doctrine^ ambiguous Q^estions and Disputations, miserably divided,
and pe^plex'd the Souls and Consciences of Men; insomuch, that it is said, that
it should come to pass in those days, Men should seek Death, and should not
find it, and should desire to die, and D^a^h should ^^y from them?

Quest. 51. Why is it said, these Locusts should have power to hurt Men five
Months? The time of the Locusts five Months.
Does it ^llude to the usual time of their ^ontinuance, or rather unto ^ome
certain Mystery; for we are to under^tand that those Locusts were to ^ontinue ^
5/^ parts of the whole ^^me, wherein the mystery of I^^quity was to prevail,
viz. 520 (...). even as it were to the end of (...) six^h Trumpet, which
contains ^^e Interval of two Trumpets? ^


Qu^st. 52. What are those ^ngels which were loosed at ^^e great River
Euphrates, What the Angels are which are b^und at Euphrates.
^ithin the Interval of the sixth Trumpet, viz. from the year of Christ's ^irth
1514, to the year 1774? Are they ^ot certain powerful Angels, de^uted Go^ernors
or Guardians over the Provinces of ^^e Earth, bordering on the Rive^ Eu^hrates?
And what are those Horsemen, ^^e number whereof was twenty thousand ^^mes ten
thousand? Are they not Turks? ^or these inhabit the Provinces situated a^out
the River Euphrates, who within the ^^xth Interval, under which we now are viz.
^^om the year 1514, powerfully invaded ^urope, the third part of the Eastern
Hemi^^here, and slew many thousands of Christians so called (for indeed they
were not all true Christians) which man be said to be the third part of Men.
And are not the Guns, which the Turks used in their Wars against the Christia^^
described he^e, which being but of a la^e Invention, were no^ found out before
the In^e^val of the sixth Trumpet, which kill Men with Fire, Brimstone, and
Smoke, seeming to flow out of the Horses mo^ths, though it proceeds from the
mouths of the Guns? Again, do not these Horses Allegorically signify Empire,
and Dominion? And whereas the best part of the Interval of this sixth Trumpet
is not as yet begun, neither will end till the Year 1774, if therefore those
Christians (though falsely so called) do not Repent, must they not expect a
^art^^r Stroke, and a more fatal Blow from those Armies of Horsemen? And
e^pecially such as ar^ guilty of abominable Idolatry, and worship Devils, and
Idols of Gold, Silver, Brass, Stone, and Wood, as chap. 9. v. 20. has it? And
why is it said, that those four Angels were ready at a^ Hour, and a Day, and a
Month, and a Y^a^? Was it not to signi^ie that the Power of the Turks, was in a
continual readiness, for near 391 years ago, and increased before the Interval
of the sixth Trumpet, as may be gathered from History?

CHAP. X.
QUest. 53. Does not the whole tenth Chapter of the Revela^ions, and from the
beginning of the eleventh Cha^. to verse the fifteenth, cont^in the ^ffects or
events of the sixth Tr^m^et, viz. from 1514, to the Year 15^4? From An^ 1514 t^
1574
And is not the migh^^ Angel, whom John saw coming down from Heaven, etc. and
^olding a little Book in his Hand, the A^gel of the Philadelphian Church before
mentioned, whose Interval begins at the Year of Christ's Nativity 1700? 1^00.
And do not the Interval^ of ^he seven Thunders also, The 7 Thunde^^
belong unto the sixth Trumpet, or some part thereof? And whereas John was
^^^^manded to conceal what the seven Thu^ders had uttered, will it not be great
Presumption for any one to attem^t t^ reveal it, before its due time? For ^ow
can any one unfold them before they are ^^vealed?

Quest. 54. Wherefore was it said ^o John, after that he had eaten the ^o^k,
that he must Prophecy again, before many People, Nations, Tongues, and Kings,
must he not live again within this Int^^^^al, viz. before the Year 1774? And
therefore will he not belong to the 144000, that were Sealed, who shall be the
first Fruits of the first Resurrection above cited?

CHAP. XI.
QUest. 55. And shall not John, living again sometime before the Millennium,
measure the Temple of God, the Altar and them that worship therein, with a
Reed, or with a Rod, as it is said in chap. 11. v. 1?

Quest. 56. What is that Court without the Temple, which John at his coming
shall leave out, and measure it not, but is to be given to the Gentiles? Are
not the lukewarm P^ofessours of the Church of Laodicea above cited, signified
by it? Lastly, What are those Gentiles, or Nations, What the Gentiles or
Nation^ are.
to whom this outward Court is to be given? Are they not Turks or other
Heathenish People, to whom permission shall be given miserably to afflict those
carnal, and merely titular Christians, and that too in a manner over the whole
World, after which God shall gather together his Elect, and faithful Servants,
from that Mass of Hypocrites?

Quest. 57. What is that Holy City, to be trodden under foot by the Gentiles,
for the space^ of forty two Months? And how are those Months to be understood,
whether properly or mystically, as some think? Is not this Holy City the true
Church of God, purely reformed and purged from all Antichristian Pollutions,
which is signified by Philadelphia? Moreover, will not the Jews and Israelites,
after their conversion to the Christian Faith, make up a good part of this
Church of Philadelphia, and who peradventure will have a great, or, it may be,
the chiefest share in these sufferings? And beca^se the 42 Months belong unto
the Interval of the sixth Trump^^ as is evident from the Revelations, is it not
impossible for those Months to signify so many Years, as there are days
contained in all the sa^d Months, viz: 12^0. whereas the whole Interval of the
sixth Trumpet, contains but 260 Years? Again, if those 42 Months should contain
1260 Years, they would certainly make this great Persecution to be inflicted on
the Church within the seventh Mill^nn^um of the World, which is very absurd:
therefore are not those 42 Months p^operly to be understood of common Months,
making up three Years and an half, which indeed is a short, but a sharp time,
in which will happen the last Persecution, the Church shall ever undergo? And
does not Daniel at the end of the eleventh Chapter, and beginning of the
eighteenth plainly touch upon the manner of this P^rsecution? And will not the
chief Author of this Persecution be that King described Daniel, T^^ King
descr^b^d in Daniel.
16.36. to the end of the Chapter, whom John in his Revelations calls the
seventh King, yet to come, and it is said of him when he com^th that he shall
remain but a short time?

Quest. 58. What are those two Witnesses, clothed in Sackcloth, who shall
prophecy during the whole time of the last Persecution, 12^0 Days? Sh^l they
not be Moses and Elias raised up to live again in a Body upon Earth? And is not
this clearly enough hinted in these words of John, Chapter 11. viz. that they shall
have Power to shut up Heaven, Their Power.
that it shall not rain in the days of their P^ophecy, (as they did in times
past) and to turn the Waters into Blood, and to smite the Earth with Plagues as
often as they li^t, even as Moses did heretofore?

Quest. 59. And why should it be thought incredible, that Moses and Elias
should come again into the World, when as it sufficiently appears from
Scripture, as well from the Book of Revelations, as from other places of
Scripture; that all the Saints shall come again into the World within the
Millennium? And whereas John says 144000 Isra^^lites were to be the fir^^
Fruits of this Kingdom, and glorious State, will not Moses and Elias belong
unto those first Fruits? Moreover, as touchi^^ Elias, did not Christ ^ay that
Elias should come, or that he came and restored ^ll things after the ^eath o^
John the Baptist^ whom he called E^ias? And finally, why were Moses and Elias
^een with Christ in the Moun^ at his Transfiguration before he had suffered
death? Was it not to signify that they should be nearest to Christ, and the
very next after him, who should obtain the Resurrection from the Dead, and in
like manner ascend into Heaven unto him?

Quest. 60. Shall not those two Prophets be really slain, and suffer a corporal
Death (as Christ really did) and after three days and an half, shall they not
rise again from the Dead, even as Christ arose on the third day? And why should
Men betake themselves to a mee^ Allegoral Sense of the words, touching the
Death and Resurrection of these two Witnesses, when as the proper and literal
Sense of the words is sound, and contains no Absurdity, but tends greatly to
demonstrate divine Glory and Omnipotence?

Quest. 61. What is that great City, spiritually called Sodom and Eg^pt, What
Sodo^ and ^gypt is.
where also our Lord was Crucified, wherein the Bodies of the t^o Witnesses
which were slain, lay unburied th^ee days and an half? May not thi^ be the
place where Christ was externally Crucified? And may not ^ome great City be
built the^e, and stand in the ^ame place at that time? And may not some great
Mystery be coucht under it, viz. That Moses and Elias should be slain in the
same place, where Christ was slain, and afterward to be rai^ed up again, though
they were killed about 1740 years apart? And it appears from History, that
Elias Adrian, built there a City upon the Mountain, to wit, Golgotha, where
Christ was Crucified, and called it Elias, but the Chr^st^ans called it
Jerusalem, and so it is called to this day, now under the power of the Turks.
And does it not also appear from Dan. 11. v. 4. That the King who shall
immedia^ely follow upon the Jews Conversion to the Chri^^ian Faith, shall
inhabit Jerusalem, which he calls the Holy Mountain of Beauty and Delight,
Situated between the Seas, for this place was commonly held as an Holy place,
and really seated between the Sea^?

Quest. 62. To what time is the killing of the two VVitnesses, and their
Resurrection to be Referred? Is it not to be Referred to the three last Years
and an half, immediat^ly preceedi^g the Millennium, because the Resurrection,
and Ascension of the two VVitnesses, is joined with the Sound of the seventh
Trumpet; also in Dan. 12. that time wherein Michael shall stand up for the
Salvation of the Jewish People, is joined with the first Resurrection of the
Dead?

Quest. 63. Will not the Sound of the seventh Trumpet introduce that famous
and renouned Millennium, The Sound of the seventh Trumpet.
and the first Resurrection from the Dead, in its due order, viz. From the Year
of Christ's Resurrection 1740, From 1740, to 2000, viz. From the Resurrection
of the Dead.
to about the Year 2000, the Interval of the seventh and last Trumpe^,
containing the same number of Years, as the rest above cited, to wit, 260, and
all the Intervals of the seven Trumpets, together with the half hours silence
do comprehend 2000 years? For 260 multiplied by 7, produces 1820; The duration
of every Trumpet is 260 Years. ^
to which if 180, the said number as it were of the half hours silence, be
added, the Sum is 2000. And do not the words of John, in chap. 11. v. 15.
manifestly declare that the beginning of the Millennium, and the first
Resurrection is to be taken from the beginning of the seventh Trumpet? For he
says in the place here cited, The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great
Voic^s in Heaven; saying, The Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of
our Lord and his Christ, who shall reign for ever and ever, etc. Read to the
end of the Cha^ter, and especially Verse 18. And the Nati^ns were angry, and
thy Wrath is c^m^, and the time of the Dead that they should be judged, and
that thou sh^uldst give Reward unto thy ^ervan^s the P^ophe^s and to thy
Saints, and to them that fear thy name, small and great, and sh^uld'st destroy
them that d^st^^y the Earth, etc.

Quest. 64. Was not that Vision des^rib'd by John, chapter 12. The Vision, Chapter 12.
Contemporary with chapter 8.
Synchronical, or happening at the same Interval of time with the aforesaid
Vision of the half Hours silence, and the seven Trumpets? And is not the Woman
here described the Church, and her Male-Child the Life of Christ, or the true
Spirit o^ Christianity brought forth in the New Birth, or Spiritual
Regeneration? And was not this Spirit (or Life) of Christ, most clearly
revealed and brought forth in those Primitive times, for the space of 300 Years
and more, after Christ's Resurrection and Ascens^on into Heaven? And is not
that great red Dragon the Devil? And are not his seven Heads seven Monarchies,
or Kingdoms, orderly succeeding each other^ whereof five were elapsed before
I^hn's time? And finally, Does not the Tail of this Dragon signify the false
Prophets, even as that true Prophet had said: The Pr^phet that teaches Lies is
the Tail? Moreover this Tail drew the third part of the Stars of Heaven^ and
cast them on the Earth: Does not this signify some great number of Professors
of the Christian Religion, but of little Stability, who did not persist or
remain in the Truth or Life of what they professed?

Quest. 65. What is signified by the Woman ^lying into the Wilderness? Is it
not a ce^tain, solitary, and obscure State the Church of God shall come into,
wherein the true Champions and Defenders of Christianity were very much
dispersed, and as it were in the Wilderness, or hid in a Wood, and making but
little outward Show or Appearance, and but little obvious to the external
Observation, as it was in the days of Elias, who thought himself to be left
alone, but God told him he had 7000 who had not bowed the Knee to Baal?

Quest. 66. How much is that time of 1260 Days, wherein the Woman fled into the
Wilderness? Does it not contain 1260 common Years? For in Scripture a day is
sometimes taken for a year in a Prophetical or a Mystical Se^c^? And does not
experience it self and Ecclesiastical Histories, conspicuously demonstrate for
some Ages back, that this solita^y and obscure State of the Church has been
continued for above 120^ Years already past, and that by reason of
Antichristian Darkness and Tyranny? And does not that time of 1260 Years expire
at the beginning of the Interval of the Philadelphian Church, which falls in
the year of Christ's Resu^rection 1^6^, o^ in the year of his Nativity 1700? ^
Therefore will not the afo^esaid time of 1260 Years begin ^t the year of
Christ's Nativity 440? And indeed about the same time, viz. 440 Years after
Christ's Nativity, the W^st^rn Empire almo^^ totally fell together, and in the
Fall of it was divide^ into ten le^ser Empires or Kingdoms, which are called by
John, the ten Horns of the Beast, and these Horns miserably smote the Servants
of God, here and there dispersed.

Q^est. 67. About what time shall Michael and his Angels overcome the Dragon
and his Angels? And when will that Dragon and his Angels be cast down to the
Earth, and the Saints overcome them in the Blood of the Lamb, and the word of
his Testimony? Will not that time be about the end of the 1260 Years
aforementioned? And that the Dragon shall be cast down from Heaven unto the
Earth, does not this signify that the Church is here pu^ for Heaven, and shall
enjoy both outward and inward Peace and Tranquillity, and be f^ee from
Calamities ^or a considerable time after the ^erm of 1260 Years is expired? And
does not the casting of the Dragon down unto the Earth signify his power which
he will have over Carnal Men, and such only as are Earthly wise, whereby he
will cause horrid and detestable Wars to arise among them? And finally, will
not the Church about this time appear going out of the Wilderness, and Satan
the Accuser of the Brethren be cast down, that he may not accuse them of
Heresy, Sedition, and other crimes of the like nature, as he has formerly
done? Moreover shall not this time, during which the Church shall enjoy outward
Peace, remain for some time as it were about 70 Years, whilst the remaining
part of Mortals shall be exceedingly pressed with Wars, and many, and great
Calamities.

Quest. 68. And shall not the Church after she is returned ou^ of the
Wilderness, and has for a good season enjoyed outward Peace and Tranquillity,
fly the second time into the Wildernes^? And is not this second ^light of the
Church cl^arly enough described, v. 14? And wherefore is it said, that in her
second flight ^^e had two Wings of an Eagle given her; unless it be to denote
the v^locity or swiftness of her flight and return? And therefore will no^ the
time of this second flight be of a short continuance, viz. 1260 Days, even as
the ti^e of her first flight had been long and tedious, to wit, 1260 Years;
whereas i^ both times had consisted of 1260 Years, it would certainly have made
the last flight of the Church to have happened within that most happy age of
the World, the future Millennium, which is very absurd? Moreover, is not the
time of this second flight, ( viz) 1260 Days, the very same with that, wherein
the two Prophet^ should Prophecy, clothed in Sack cloth, and the Holy City be
trodden under foot?

Quest. 69. What is signified by that, where the Earth helped the Woman, and
opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the Flood, which the Dragon cast out of his
Mouth? Is it not thus to be understood, to wit, that the Flood of the Dragon's
Wrath fell on some other People, and those, as well Heathens, and professed
In^idels, as Christians falsely so called that were only nominal and titular,
who made War one upon another, that so the Church might with more ease and
facility, slip out of the Jaws of the Dragon?

CHAP. XIII.
QUest. ^0. What is that Beast which John saw arise out of the Sea, having
seven Heads and ten Horn^? Does not this Bea^t signify the Body of 7 great
Monarchies, whereof 5 Heads we^e even then expired before John's time, ( Revel.
17.) and two remained to come? Moreover, are not those which were already past
before John's time, these ^ollowing; that is to say, the first, the Egyptian
M^narchy under which the Jewish Church or Israelitish People suffered much in
times past, and therefore the Subversion and Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Army
in the red Sea, is called in Scri^ture the wounding of the Dragon; the second,
the Assyrian Monarchy^ under which the ten T^ibes were put ^n^o Exile; the
third, the Babylonish M^narchy, whereof Nebuchadnezzar was Head, who led the
other two Tribes Captive into Babylon, and destroyed the Temple and City of
Jerusalem; the ^ourth, the Monarchy of the Medes and Persians; the fifth was
the Grecian Monarchy, whose Head was Alexander called the Great; which five
Heads or Monarchies fell before John's time: Therefore is not the sixth Head
the Roman Monarchy, which in John's time only remained?

The seventh Head
Quest. 71. Now what is the seventh Head, whose coming John foretold? Is it yet
come, or is it rather to come? And how is the eighth Head distinguished from
the seventh? And why does Daniel number no more than four Kings, and John
seven? Does not the seventh Head seem to be some new Monarchy, which is not as
yet come, but is now very near, under which will fall the last Persecution of
the Church, which will be the greatest of all, and shall last but three Years
and an half, and therefore it is said it shall continue but a short time?
Lastly, is not the eighth Head one of the seven, and only in certain
Circumstances distin^guished; and one of the ten Ho^ns of the Beast, which will
at length prevail over the other Horns, according to Daniel 7. v. 20, 21? And
whereas Daniel numbers four Kings, and John reckons two; was it not, because
Daniel looked no high^r than Nebuchadnezzar, but John to the first King of all,
that Pe^secuted the Church of God, and this was Pharaoh King of Egypt? And why
should these seven Monarchies be called one Beast; but because, though these Men
were personally distinct, in such and such Ages of the World, yet were they
Acted by one and the same Spirit to P^rsecute the Church?

Quest. 72. Does not Johannes Slei^anus, in his Treatise of the four
Monarchies, truly distinguish and com^ute the number of the ten Kingdoms, which
John called the Horns of the Beast, into the which the Roman Monarchy was at
last divided in the following order, 1 Syria, 2 Egypt, 3 Asia, 4 Greece, 5
Africa, 6 Spain, 7 France, 8 Italy, 9 Germany, 10 Britain? And why is it
said that those ten Horns or Kings (in John's time) had received no Kingdom,
chap 17 12. but had Power given them as Kings with the Beast, for the space o^
one hour? Was it not because for the space of a Mystical hour, or 333 years
a^^er Io^n's time, those Kings were not to have a distinct, but a j^ynt Power
to Reign with the Beast, but after the expiration of that hour, the ten Kings
aforesaid, arose up having their Kingdoms divided, and as it were plucked by
^orce from the Roman Monarchy^ and these indeed did more vehemently Persecute
the Church of God?

Quest. ^3. What is to be unders^ood by that passage, where one of the Heads of
the seven Beasts is said to be smitten with a mortal wound, and was made whole
again? May not this prope^ly signifi^ that the R^man Emperors received this
wound, after the Empire was transferred from the Heathens to the Ch^is^i^ns;
then that bit^er Spirit of Persecution, that dwelt in the preceding Emperors,
was afflicted, as it were, with a mortal wound ^or some considerable time, as
appears in the case of Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, who
granted to all Liberty of Conscience, and suddenly after Constantine, his
Successor under the name and prof^ssion of Christianity, as severely persecuted
the true Servants of God, as the Heathen Emperors had done before? And in this
respect may it not be truly said, that the deadly wound of the Beast was healed
again when the S^irit of Persecution had recovered fresh strength in new
Christian Emperors so called?

Quest. ^4. What a^^ those 42 Months in which ^^wer is given (...) the Beast,
that he should continu^ during all that time, and make War wi^h ^h^ ^^i^ts, and
overcome them? Is not the ^^ore-mentioned number of 12^0 Y^^rs to be understood
by those Months? M^reover does not the too certain and ^^^^ntable experience of
the aforesaid ^^ges, as appears from History, sufficiently prove, that this
Spirit of Antichrist flourishing in the Christian Kings and Emperor^ so called,
did persecute the true Servants of God, and faithful Followers of Christ almost
1^60 Years? And is not that space of 1260 Years almost come to an end? And
shall not he that lives to the Year of Christ 1700 or there-abouts, see the
total end and period o^ i^?

Quest. 75. How are those wo^ds to be understood, chap. 13. v. 10. He that
leads into Captivity shall go into Cap^ivi^y, and he that kills with the Sw^rd
shall be kill^d with the Sword? And why are those following words added, which
run thus, Here is the Faith and Pati^nce of ^he Saints? For did not a great
many Persecutors Die a natural Death in their Bed^, and in their own Houses,
and we have not a^ yet he^rd any thing o^ their Captivi^y? Did he not the^e^ore
say, this is the Patience and Faith of the Saints? Because that Judgment was to
be fulfilled upon the Persecuto^s, after some long tract of time, which how it
shall come to pass, deserves an Explanation; o^ which in another place.

Quest. ^6. What is the Beast which John saw arising out of the ^arth, (for the
first Beast rose out of the Sea) having two Horns like a Lamb, but spe^king
like the Dragon, and exercising all the power of the first Beast? And ^inally,
why is his numb^r ^^id to be 666, and he that is endued with unde^standing, was
bid to compute the number? Is not this second B^a^t the Papal power, arising
out o^ the Earth? For the Popes are very o^^^n of a low extraction, and of an
inferior Race and Descent, even as the Earth is inferior to the Sea, and other
Elements? And do not his two Horns like a Lamb, plainly denote the twofold
Authority, which the Popes pretend is commit^ to them, to wit, both Spiritual
and Temporal? And whereas he spoke as a Dragon, does not this eminently express
the Pope's Bulls, and Sentences of Excommunications, which he thundered out
against Men of all Ranks and Degrees, that were not Obedient to his Decrees?
And from the Year of Christ's Nativity 1034, An. 1034
which is from his Resu^rection 1000, did not the Popes exercise all the Power
of the first Beast, advancing and li^ting themselves above Emperors, and all
Kings and making them Instruments, and Ministers of his Wrath and Malice,
against the Elect Servants of God? And whereas it is said he had power to give
Life to the Image of the Beast; what else can be hereby signified^ but that the
Popes have snatched all their power and Authority from the Emperors, and
settled it upon themselves, leaving in a manner nothing but a kind of an Image
or Shadow of an Empire? For it is manifest, that from the time the ^econd Beast
arose, the Christian Kings and Emperors, derived all the Life and Power they
had to Rule or Command, from the ^econd Beast, to wit^ the Pope. For whereas
anciently the Popes where dependent on the Emperors, after the Popes were
arrived to that greatness, the Emperors became dependent on the Popes.
Moreover, does not this papal number 666 point out so many Years, An. 666
which signify two Mystical Hours or Revolutions, beginning at the Year of
Christ's Resurrection 100^, and ending at the Year 1666, or at the Year of his
Nativity 1700? An. 1700
And indeed within this time, the Popes of Rome thus advanced themselves above
Kings and Emperors; and the first papal Usurpation was observed in Benedict the
ninth, who attempted to depose the Emperor from his Imperial Seat, and dispose
of the Crown to whom he pleased, about the Year of Christ's Nativity 1034, as
Histories confirm, and especially Lucas Osiander in Epitom. Hist. Eccles. Which
was afterward more vigorously followed by Gregory the seventh, alias
Hildebrand, about the Year 1073, An. 1073
and in succeeding Ages continued to this day.

Quest. 77. Does not that number of 144000 whom John saw upon Sion, standing
with the Lamb, and Singing a new Song etc. signify the same described in the
like number, Chap 7. who shall be the first Fruits of the first Resurrection
above cited? When they shall be plainly distinguished, from the four Beast^^
and fo^r and twenty ^lders, because they shall Sing a new Song before the
Beasts and Elders, and none was able to learn that Song, except the 144000^ and
yet God will most certainly have other faithful Servants on Earth at that time
also^ though they cannot as yet learn the aforesaid Song, which s^^ms to be some
peculiar Property in those only, that obtain the first Resurrection.

Quest. 78. Will not the time wh^r^i^ the 144000 will appear, be after the
expiration of 42 Months or 1260 Years, which are the Years of the first Beas^?
And the latter 666 years, b^longing to the s^con^ Beast, will have the ^ame End
and P^riod, ending about the Year of Christ's Nativity 1700, The Year 1700 in
true Chronol^gy differs from the common.
respect being ha^ to true Chronology, which many think differs some years from
the vulgar computation, so as that the true is by some though^ to preceed the
vulgar by the space of two Years, others think four years.

Quest. 79. About the time when the number of those that are Sealed, 14400^,
shall appear, will not an Angel fly through the midst of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach to the Inhabitants o^ the Earth; to every Nation,
People, Tongue, and Kindred? And who is this Angel? Is it not Jesus Christ? Or
some Angel having his Conmission? And how shall this Angel preach the Gospel to
all every where? Shall he not do it by inspiring Good and Holy Men, and
stirring them up to go into other Nations, whereby they shall declare and
publish the Gospel of Christ over the whole Earth? And so indeed there shall
not be a Nation, or People upon the whole Globe of the Earth, to whom the
Gospel shall not be both externally and internally preached and declared (as
Christ had foretold) all the elect Children of God wheresoever dispersed, shall
be gathered together, and the rest shall be left without excuse. And does not
this time belong to the Church of P^i^^delphia, to whom the Lord had promised,
that he would open a door before her which no Man should shut? And therefore
shall not the Ears and Hearts of sundry in all Nations be effectually opened,
(by Divine Power, operating in the Ministers sent from God) to believe and obey
the holy Gospel, whereby there shall be a great Conversion of many People of
every Kindred, Stock and Family, unto Christ after this universal Publication
of the Gospel? And shall not also the Gift of Tongues and Miracles, with diverse
other noble and excellent Gifts of the Divine Spirit once communicated to the
Apostles be again restored to the Church, which being restored, shall be again
produced, when that time shall come?

Quest. 80. Shall not Babylon (that great City) fall suddenly after the
P^omulgation of the Gospel in all Nations, in the order and manner described by
the Prophet, John, chapter 14. where he first speaks of the 144000^ s^anding with
the Lamb upon Mount Sion; Secondly, of the general Publication of the Gospel to
all Nation; and thirdly and lastly, of the Fall of Babylon?

Quest. 81. Is not the first Resurrection of all the Saints, and that happy and
glorious Sabbath, which they shall enjoy upon Earth after the first
Resurrection, clearl^ pointed out Chapter 1^. Verse 1^. Blessed are the Dead
that die in the Lord, from henceforth says the Spirit, that they rest from
their Lab^urs, and their Works follow them. And why does he say, from
henceforth, but to intimate to us that excellent Sabbath of the Saints, for
although the Saints are perpetually blessed, and do rest in Christ after Death;
yet is not some peculiar degree of Felicity intended in these words, viz. That
most noble and excellent Sabbath, which the Saints shall enjoy in the
Millennium.

Quest. 82. What signifies the reaping of the Earth, and the gathering together
of the Grapes of the Vineyards of the Earth? Are not the fearful and terrible
Judgments of God upon the unbelieving and disobedient to be understood by it,
after God shall have bountifully rewa^ded his faithf^l Servants?

Quest. 83. How are those Words to be understood, Chap. 14.20. And the
Wine Press was trodden without the City^ and Blood came ^ut of the Wine Press,
even unto the H^rses Bridles^ by the space of a th^usand and six hundred
Furlongs? Does not this belong to the time of the Ba^^le of Armageddon, under
the seventh (...) when Gog and Magog, or the Ungodly (...) ^ll ^orts, shall
join themselves in great A^mi^^ against God's People, who follow the ^amb; but
at this time, more especiall^ against the Jews and Israelites now inhabiting
their own Land? Of which Bat^le, see Ez^kiel, chapter 38 v. ^1, 12.

CHAP. XV.
QU^st. 84. To what Interval or space of time belongs the Vision of the seven
The seven Angels, with their seven Phials belonging to the seventh Trumpe^.
Angels, pouring out their seven Phials of Divine Wrath? Do they not seem
manifestly to belong to the time of the seventh Trumpet, to wit, from the Year
of Christ's Resurrection 1740, to the Year 2000? ^
For those Phials are said to contain the seven last Plagues; and in them is
the Divine Wrath fulfilled. And therefore will they not belong to the seventh
Trumpet, which contains Horrible and Tremendous Plagues? And finally, before
any of these Phials shall be poured fourth, the Temple of God will be opened in
Heaven; and all such as have obtained Victory over the Beast and his Image, and
over the Mark and Number of his Name, viz. after the expiration of 1666 years,
since the Death of Christ, shall stand upon the Glassy Sea, which is mixed with
Fire, Singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb, and Prophesying of almost a
general Conversion of the Nations. And does not this opening of the Temple
belong to the beginning of the Interval of the Philadelphian Church? And
certainly if we well consider how great power the Antichristian Kingdom has had
in the World to this very day; it seems an Argument strong enough to conclude
that no Phials have been as yet poured out.

Quest. 85. Who are those whom John saw standing upon the Sea of Glass mingled
with Fire, having obtained Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, Mark and
Number, having the Harps of God, and singing the Song of Moses and the Lamb?
Are not they the 144000, and with them all the rest of the Saints, who have
attained to the first Res^rrection before all others? And is not this Sea of
Glass this visible World, full of perplexing Cares and C^lamities, upon which,
notwithstanding shall stand the Saints, as it were upon a Sea ^esembling Glass
in Solidity, who have gotten Victory over the Beast, not only singing M^ses's
Song for a Testimony of deliverance, ^^t the Song of the Lamb also?

Quest^ 8^. ^ow are ^^ose words to be und^^^tood Revel. 15.^. And ^he T^mple
was ^i^le^ ^ith (...) the Glory of God, and no M^n was a (...) ^nter into the
Temple, ^il^ the se^en Plagues of the seven Angels were fulfi^led? Does not
this signifie^ tha^ ^he Church of God ^^all li^ open du^ing the whole In^erval
of the seven Phials, shining with ex^eeding splendor, and investe^ with Divine
Glory, which shall so con^ou^d her Ad^ersaries, that none of them shall be able
^o enter there into, or do her the lea^t injury during all that time? And
peradventure about the end of the seventh Phial those enemies of the Church,
will attempt something upon her; and hitherto the Battle of Armageddon seems to
be referred, where at last they shall all perish by Fire and Hail sent from
Heaven?

Quest. 87. Do not the seven Thunders belonging to the sixth Trumpet, The seven
Thunders belong to the sixth Trumpet.
and the seven Phials belonging to the seventh Trumpet, The seven Phials belong
to the seventh Trumpet. The Duration of the Trumpet. 260 Years 1/^
contain something analogous?

Quest. 88. Does not the effu^ion or pouring out of the seven Phials denote the
Fall of Babylon, as it were by so many degrees succeeding one another, every
Phial's Interval including 37 Years and 1/^, which is 1/7 of the n^mber 260,
the Interval of each Trumpet? Therefore are they not mightily deceived, who
think that either Babylon is already fallen, or else that her Fall is exceeding
near? Are not they also mistaken, who think the four Phials are already poured
forth, when it is more proba^le, that not one of them is as yet poured out; for
the first Phial will begin from the year of Chris^'s Resurrection 1740; ^or the
opening of the Temple, and the Vision of the 144000 sealed, must precede the
effusion, or pouring forth of all the Phials, as evidently appears from the
very Series, or Order of Prophecies in this Book?

Quest. 89. What is signified by the Earth, upon which the first Phial was to
be poured out? Is it not the lowest order of Antichristian Hierarchy, of which
sort are Priests and Clerks of inferior rank, with all their train? And what is
signified by the ^^a? Is it not some supe^iour degree of the same Hierarchy (as
the Sea is superior to the Earth) of which sort are chief Priests, or Bishops,
with their Seats, which they call Seas; and whereas these Seas are to be turned
into B^ood, does not this signify some mighty Slaughter and Destruction to
fall upon these Men by War? And then what may be understood by Fountains and
Rivers, whether not others again of an higher Order and Rank, such as are
chie^, or Archbishops, commonly called Cardinals, and Metropolitans of the
Antichristian Hierarchy, who spilt the Blood of Saints and P^ophe^s; and
therefore they shall then have their own Blood spilt, not indeed by any Saints,
but by other instruments raised up against them by God's most just judgment?
But how, and when those that are to be slain under the third Phial did spill
the Blood of the Saints, is a question well worth Explanation, seeing none of
the Saints were killed by any after the Interval of the sixth Trumpet? Moreover
does not the pouring out o^ the other four Phial^ denote the Fall and utter
Ruin of Babylon, or the false and Antichristian Church by various degrees,
together with the final Period and Destruction of the Kingdoms, and corrupt
Dominions of Men? And finally, does not this great River Euphrates, subject to
the sixth Phial, signify the Turk^, or other People, inhabiting some other
Countries bordering upon Euphrates, to make a way for the Kings of the East?
And who are those Kings of the East? Are they not the Saints raised to Life
again in the future Millennium?

CHAP. XVII.
QUest. 90. Does not the Mystery Babylon so fully described in this Chapter
signi^ie the whole and entire Body of the false and Antichristian Ch^^ch, and
indeed chiefly the Church of Rome, who Apostatized for many Ages back, and
drank of the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of God? And is not th^^ Beast,
upon whom this great Who^e sat, the Roman Monarchy, which is the sixth Head?
But this sixth Head falling, will not a seventh ^ead a^ise, and after that, an
eighth, which nevertheless belongs to the seventh, and is ^s it were an
Appendix of it? An^ does not Daniel expressly describe those two Kings; the one
of the South, and the other of the North? And lastly, will not these Kings, or
one of these Kings rise up against the Saints, together with the false Prophet,
who is to be raised up with him, with a purpose to kill them under the Interval
of the seventh Phial? But will not God miraculously guard and protect his
Saints, and destroy their Adversaries with Fire and Hail from Heaven?

And is not the Battle of Armageddon (which seems to belong to the last Phial)
clearly enough described by Ezekiel, and also the aforesaid Kings, called by
the names of Gog and Magog, Chap. 38, and 39?

CHAP. XVIII.
QUest. 91. Does not that Fall and Destruction of Baby^on by Fire, or B^rning,
so fully described, chap. 18. signi^ie that the false and Antichristian Church
shall be totally destroyed and abolished? And what are those Daughters of
Babylon but Hypocrites in every Sect and Profession of Christianity, although
they may gild it over with the specious name o^ Re^ormation, whilst they
continue Strangers to the Spirit and Life o^ the Christian Religion?

Quest. 92. How are we to understand that in Babylon was found not only the
Blood of the Prophets and Saints, but of all that were slain upon the Earth?
Does not the effu^ion of so much Blood, respect all that space of 4000 years
past from Noa^'s Flood; from which time Babylon began to be ^uilt externally,
comprehending the entire Revolution of one great Day or Night, consisting of
twelve hours? Therefore will not all those Murderers and Shedders of Humane
Blood, even from Noahs's Flood to the Year of the World's Creation 5740, or of
Christ's Resurrection from the Dead 1740, together make up one and the same
City of Babylon, and receive their Punishment therein, in case they do not
tr^ly and sincerely R^p^nt? And how this shall come to pass is ^lso well worth
an explanation? Moreover^ will not that hour wherein Babylon shall be Lash^d
with those Ter^ible and Tremendous Judgments of God, consist of 333 1/^ Years,
or ^ of 1000 Years, after ^he ^ate of 1000 years to one Watch of the Nig^t, as
it is P^al. 90. v. 4. each Watch consisting of thre^ hours, and 12 hours making
^p one entire Night or Day?

CHAP. XIX.
QUest. 93. What is that multitude of People, whom John saw in ^eaven, crying
^allelujah, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power to our Lo^d God? Do not
these signi^ie that ^ast Multi^ude which shall be Converted, as well of Jews as
of Gentiles, over the whole Globe of the Earth, under the Interval of the sixth
Seal, and the seventh and last Trumpet, together with the Saints raised to Life
again, under the seventh Trumpet? Therefore in the same hour of 2^^ years, viz.
from the year of Christ's Nativity 1^0^, to the year 2^33, or from the year of
His R^^u^rec^ion 1666, to the year 2000. Will not the City Babylon be
destroyed, and the City, or Church of God Glori^^^^y ^^ilt? Whether or no, that
very hour is not that which is said, ( Rev. ^.8.^ to be the hour o^ Tr^al or
Tem^ta^ion which shall come over the whole ^arth, from w^^ch^ viz. from the
Dan^^r and Evil of this ^our God has p^omised to preserve the Church of
P^^^ad^^phia aforesaid?

Quest. 94. What i^ the Marriage of the Lamb, which I^^n (...) to come at the
^^me af^^^^aid? And again, what is that ^^pper of the L^m^, to w^^ch whoso^^^r
were called, were Blessed v. 7, 9? Do not both the Marriage, and Supper of the
Lamb, denote the first Resurrection of the Saints unto Life; among whom all
Matrimony, with the carnal use of it, shall cease among Men and Women,
agreeable to Christ`s saying, that in the Resurrection, they neither Marry nor
are given in Marriage. But the Souls of the Saints are Married to the Lamb,
remaining in the mean time pure and chaste Virgins?

Quest. 95. Does it not clearly appear from chap. 18. v. 14, 15. that the Army
of the Lamb was to use no carnal Weapons? For their Captain whom they followed
Arrayed in white Garments, and on white Horses will smite their Enemies with a
Sword proceeding out of his Mouth? And what are those white Horses, which the
Saints shall have? Are they not pure Bodies, Bodies of the first Resurrection
above cited?

CHAP. XXI.
QVest. 96. What is that Angel which John sa^ coming down from Heaven, having
the Key of the Bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand, who lay hold of
the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him for
a thousand Years? Is not this Angel Christ? But whethe^ he shall descend
corporally in his Glorified Body, or only Spiritually, I leave to be farther
determined.

Quest. 97. Do not the 1000 Years six times mentioned in this Chapter signify
1^00 Years properly so called? And did not that Sabbath of Days, and Y^ars,
made under the Law, pr^^igure this Sabbath of the World, to be in the seven
thousandth year of it, even as the six preceding thousand Years of the World
were figured out, or typified under the six Work-days? And do not ^hese places
of Scripture, Psalm. 90. v. 4. 2 Pet. 3. v. 8 r^late unto the mystery of 1000
Years put for a day? And have not the Prophets prophesied of many great and
glorious things, touc^ing this ^amous time, or gl^rious day of the Lord? Also
does not that of Psalm. 92. w^ere it is treated of the Sabbath, relate also unto
that renowned tim^? Moreover is not that day the same, whereof Es^ias
prophesied, saying, The Light of o^e day shall be as the Light of seven Days,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted and magnified in that da^? Besides also,
not only the more Learned among the I^ws, but many also of the Fathers among
the C^ristians in the Primitive Ag^s of the Church, have declared and asserted
their Faith and Hope concerning this Glorious Sabbath and Millennium to come,
wherein all the Saints being recalled from Death unto Li^e, shall lead a most
Ble^^ed, and also a most Holy L^fe upon Earth, in the firm Belief and
Persuasion, wher^o^ they rejoiced and triumphed in the greatest Suff^rin^s and
Dang^rs of this mortal Li^e?

Quest. ^8 Shall not all the Saints that ever lived from the beginning of the
World, whethe^ they were killed for the Testimony of God, o^ died ^ natural
Death, be raised up to live a Corpor^al Life in the fu^ure Millennium? And is
not this Resurrection some part of the Saints Reward, both of sma^l and gre^^,
according to Rev. 11. v. 13. and E^^d. 20. v. 2.

Quest 9^ Shall not the Saints when they shall be rais^d to Life, have Bodies
of ^lesh, not indeed such as Men now have, but far more excellent, such as was
Adam's Body whilst he lived in the Earthly Paradise before the Fall, and such
also as was the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ before his Death, which Bodies of
the Saints shall at length in the end of the seventh Millennium be changed into
Spiritual Bodies, in which they shall ascend into H^aven to meet the Lord? And
did not Paul touch upon that Mystery, 1 Cor. 15. saying, As we have born the
Imag^ of the Earthly Adam, ( viz. as he was before the Fal^) we shall also bear
the Image of the Heavenly now glorified in the Heavens? And did not the
Prophets prophecy of such a Resurrection, and especially Hosea and Daniel,
Dan. 12. v. 2. Hos. 6. v. 2. and finally, does not Paul, 1 Cor. 15. plainly
describe the s^ate of a twofold Body; the first indeed natural, and then after
the Expiration of the Millennium, and the end of the Worlds Ages is come, a
Spiritual Body; but that is not first which is Spiritual, b^t that which is
Natural, and then that which is Spiritual; and is not that Reward one of the
Promises of Christ, in that Age when he shall come in the Glory ^f his Father?

Quest. 100. And as the Jews Sabbath began in the end or evening of ^he sixth
day, will not also this most blessed Sabbath o^ the World begin in the end of
the sixth Millennium, to wit, before the sixth Milennium of the World is
expired? And seeing the whole time of this Worlds duration seems to be a Week,
consist^ng of 7000 Yea^s, th^re would be no Rem^inder of Years after the end of
the Millennium, if this h^ppy Age of 1^^0 Years did not commence b^^ore the
6^00 Years were expired? And that th^re is some Remaind^r of Years after the
Millennium, plainly appears from the Revelations, which John calls a little
Season, Rev. 20 v. 3. Now whither or no that little Season may not contain 260
Years, making that most happy Age of the World to begin about the year of the
World 5740, and of Christ's Resurrection 1^4^, I leave to be determined by any
on^, to w^om God shall vouchsafe to open these things by a purer Chronology?

Quest. 101. How shall the Saints be raised up again to live a Corporeal Life
on Earth, seeing Matrimony and carnal Conjunction of Male and Female shall
cease; whether all the Saints shall be born of Virgins, or whether, as God
formed Adam out of the Clay of the Earth, or any other way suitable to the
Majesty of the thing, is a matter highly worthy, to be explained, if there be
any, to whom God shall reveal it?

Quest. 102. Do not the two last Chapters of the Revelations contain a
Description of that most splendid and glorious State of the Saints or Church of
God during the whole Interval, or space of the Millennium, even unto the end of
the World?

Quest. 103. Shall th^re not new Heavens and a new Earth be made and prepared
at the beginning of the Millennium? Chap. 21.1. Isaiah 65.17.66.2. and 2 Pet.
3.13. And how shall this first Heaven and first Earth pass away? Shall they be
reduced to nothing, or rather shall not the first or old Heaven and Earth,
alter their nature and quality, and so be changed into new? And whereas Peter
said, that Justice shall dwell in this new Earth, does not this sufficiently
intimate that Righteous M^n shall inhabit the same; ^or both he and all the
Saints expected this new Earth?

Quest. 104. Shall not there remain some Seed of Sinners in the time of the
^uture Millennium, as appe^rs from Isaiah, chapter 65. v. 20, 25. and out of that
remaining Seed of Sinners will not the Armies of Gog and Magog be multiplied
after the end of the Millennium? And shall not these Sinners during the whole
Millennium, be totally subject to the Saints?

Quest. 105. Shall the Conflagration of the World be made at once, or by parts,
of which see 2 Pet. 8. v. 10. Isa. 66. v. 15, 16. Mal. 4. v. 1. And finally
will it destroy all, or for the most part only Sinners, and will not certain
Sinners escape the Flames (whilst Babylon shall be totally destroyed and
exterminated) even as in Noah's Ark, Ham and his Wife were preserved from the
Flood, as well as the Righteous, from whom afterward sprang the worst sort of
Sinners?

Quest. 106. Will there not be found two sorts of Saints living upon Earth
within the Interval of the sixth Seal, viz. from the year of Christ's
Resurrection 1666, to the year 2000. One whereof has attained to the first
Resurrection, the other has not as yet obtained it, but has an infallible
Hope and Assurance after Death to obtain the same also within the time
aforesaid? And are not the words of Isaiah to be understood of the latter, Isa.
65. v. 20. He that dies at an hundred years of age, dies in Youth, or
Childhood; but such shall die as Moses died, whose Eye was not darkened, nor
his natural Strength diminished when he died, Deuteronomy. 3^. v. 7. For Moses did not
die by reason of any Sickness or Decay of Strength, but only to fulfill Divine
Pleasure, and will not also all the mortal Saints die after the same manner,
who have not as yet attained the first Resurrection, that so by this way of
dying they may obtain it?

Quest. 107. And will not the Children of the first Resurrection be in all
respects the Children of God; to wit, both externally and internally, as it
were begotten of him their only Father? And is not this clearly enough hinted
to us in those words of Isa. 66. v. 9. Shall I be barren who give Generation to
others, says the Lord, as it is in the vulgar Translation?

Quest. 108. Do not those words of Revel. 21.4. And there shall be no more
Death, nor Mourning, nor Tears; plainly intimate that the Saints who have
obtained the first Resurrection, shall never die any more, neither internally,
nor externally, but shall live during the whole Millennium a most Holy, and a
most Blessed Life on Earth: but at the end of the Millennium, to wit, after all
the Saints have lived completely a thousand Years on Earth, shall they not be
changed, and ascend together, to meet Christ in the Heavens, even as Christ
ascended into Heaven after his Resurrection? And is not the Saints Life for a
thousand Years apparently signified in these words, Isa. 65. v. 22. which
Justin Martyr reads thus, As are the days of the tree of Life, so shall be the
days of my People, thereby signifying Man's return to that state of Holiness
and Felicity, wherein Adam stood before the Fall, whilst he was permitted to
Feed on the Tree of Life, when as yet, he knew not Death, neither had yet
tasted of the forbidden Fruit?

Quest. 109. How are those words to be understood Revel. 21.1. And there was no
more Sea? Is Sea pu^ here Allegorically for worldly Afflictions and
Tribulations? Or may it not also be understood of some outward Mediterranean
Sea, dividing as well the Islands one from another, as other Continents of the
Earth? So as that all the dry Land may remain together in one place, as it is
probable it did before the Flood.

Quest. 110. Why is that Holy City of God, said to come down from Heaven,
Revel. 21. v. 2? Does not this plainly in^imate, that all the Saints whatsoever
now in Heaven, shall descend from Heaven in the time of the Millennium, to live
a most Divine and Heavenly Life on Earth, during the space of a thousand Years:
As before was said, that at last they may be fitted and prepared for greater
Glory, which they shall enjoy in Heaven after the 1000 Years are finished to
all Ete^nity: For God shall be with them, and in them, whilst they Live here,
so that they shall suffer no Injury or Damage in this their Descen^, but be
greater Gainers by it?

Quest. 111. Do not those Words ( Revel. 21.6, 7.) I will give to Him that
Thirsts of the Fountain of Living Water freely. He that overcomes^ shall
Inherit all Things, and I will be to Him a God, and He shall be to me a Son.)
relate unto those, which have not yet obtained the first Resurrection, who yet
S^rive and Wrestle with E^emies, and Spiritual Temptations? And all such shall
have an Opportunity to Attain this first Res^rrection of the Saints, at the
Year of Christ's Resurrection 2000.

Quest. 112. Do not the twelve Doors or Gates of the Holy City, whereon are
inscribed the Names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, clearly intimate, that all
the Gentiles who are true Believers, shall be gathered together into one Body
with the Faithful Israelites, and all the Gentiles who are to be Saved, will
belong some to one, and some to another of the twelve Tribes of Israel?

Quest. 113. And lastly, do not the Names of the twelve Apostles inscribed upon
the twelve Found^tions of this City signify, that this very City was gathered
together, and Built by the Doctrine and Ministry of Saints and Apostl^s? And
that the Apostles themselves, were the chief Members, and as it were, the
Foundations of it Christ remaining above all, and in all the Principal
Foundation and Chief Cornerstone?

Quest. 114. Why is thi^ City said to be Square in the Form of a Cube, and not
of a G^obe? Does not this signify the Stable Condition, and S^ate of this
City, as the Roundness and Orbicular Form of the Earth d^notes its voluble and
unconstant State and Condition; together with Mortals that dwell therein?

Quest. 115. Will not certain other Holy Souls descend into Bodies in the
Millennium, who Lived not before on Earth in the preceding Ages of the World?

Quest. 116. Will not the Rate or Proportion of the Holy City compared to the
whole Earth, be as 52 is to 12, assigning to each De^ree of the Terrestrial
Globe above 60 Miles, and under 61, which is the Proportion that one Week bears
to a whol^ Year? Moreover, does not the whol^ Age of this World, from the
Beginning to the End, seem like a Week? And does it not seem worth a Sober and
Modest Inquiry, what Mystery may be couched under the Similitude of these two
Proportions?

Quest. 117. Shall those who Inhabit this City, need the use of Meats and
Drinks? Or what shall be their Food? Shall it not be such Food as Adam Eat in
the Earthly Paradise before the Fall?

Quest. 118. Are not those words of Revel. 21.23. ( And the City shall not
stand in need of the Light of the Sun, nor of the Moon) to be understood
according to the Letter? For although the Sun, Moon, and Stars, shall then
Shine and Impart their Virtues and Influences to other Animals or living
Creatures, yet the Saints of the first Resurrection, shall not seem to stand in
need of their Light or Virtue.

FINIS.
AN APPENDIX. CONTAINING Some Emendations and Explanations of diverse Passages
in the two foregoi^g Treatises, out of the Autho^'s Original Manuscripts and
Papers.
Friendly Reader,
IT was thought fit to let thee know, that the following Emendations,
Corrections, and Explanations, are according to the mind of the Author, as
appears out of another Copy of his Manuscript, and his other Papers, that
have been faithfully preserved; it is therefore probable, that the Author
himself, upon his second Thoughts, which are commonly the more solid, has
himself corrected diverse things in these Treatises, which ought not to be
charged upon him as any blame, but rather in so doing, to deserve praise. But
it is most certain, that diverse considerable Mistakes have crept into the
printed Copies, both Latin and English, by the unskilfulness and in advertency
of the Transcribers, through whose Hands the Original Copy has come: The which
Original Cop^, I can assu^e thee, Reader, I have seen in a Latin Manuscript
many years ago; but who the Author is, is not easy to judge. For diverse
reasons, best known to himself, he thought it not convenient to make his Name
known to the World, as many worthy Authors of B^oks have concea^ed their Names.
The Reader is ^urther to be advertised, that some words in this printed English
Copy, here corrected, are the Errors of the Press, incident to all Books. It
must needs be confessed, that many things in these Treatises, especially in the
former, will seem strange and surprising to many, because of their cressing the
common Notions and Sentiments, generally received, both in Philosophy and
Divinit^, so called. But whatever Truth or Untruth may be in these things,
that may seem to many most incredible, it is the Readers wisdom, not to be
hasty to judge, so as to conclude ^or or against, without mature Judgment, and
a good Understanding, as Plato (called by some the Divine Philosopher) well
said, Non est sapientis de obscuris de^erminare, i. e. It is not a wise Man's
part to determine of things obscure or unclear to his Understanding. The
Authors Modesty and Discretion is to be commended, ^ho for the most part
profes^eth but to handle these things Historically, or Hypothetically, not
Dogma^ically, nor Positively, his design being (as it manifestly appears) to
give some hints of the Mystic Learning of the Iew^, and of other Christian
Mystic Writers, to ordinary and vulgar Scholars, that had not heard of such
things, so much perhaps as by Fame, and also to such sincere Christians, as
have a real Divine Hunger and Thirst begot in them after a greater degree of
the Living Knowledge of God, and of Christ, and the Mysteries of the Kingdom of
God, so far as they are traceable in the Holy Scriptures, as God shall be
pleased to work by his Holy Spirit, to give the Understanding of them: For though
the Jews in great part are blinded, especially, as concerning the true Messiah,
yet in many things it is acknowledged by Pious Christian Writers, that their
ancient Mystic Learning contains many things, not only very agreeable to
Christian Doctrine, but very conducing, to help us to understand many places of
Scripture in the New Testament, as well as in the Old. And if sincere Christian
Professors did but well understand the great Advantage and Help that the Jewish
M^stick Learning (with which this Author seems to have been in good measure
acquainted) does afford to convince the Jews of the Truth of Christianity, so
as to enable and furnish them, to right them with their own W^apons, they would
be more willing to read with an Impartial Mind, such Books as would help them
in such ^ort of Learning, few of which sort as yet, if any, are extant in the
English Language.

The second Treatise, added unto the first, was done by the same Author. It is
hoped that it will be favorably received and entertained by the Reader, the
rather that it is proposed only by way of Qu^ry^ yet so far explanatory, as in
many things at lest, it may, by the blessing of God, be made serviceable to the
better understanding many things in the Book of the Re^elations, further than
what they have formerly known, by the help of other Commentaries.

The Emendations, and Explicati^ns in the first Treatise follow.
PAge 10. ad fin. the Explication. The Author is not so to be understood, as
if, because he has an Allegorical Sense of Christ's Flesh and Blood,
Allegorically and Figuratively so understood, as the Scripture abounds with
such allegories and figurative Speeches, as Water, Wine, Milk, Honey, Oil,
Marrow and Fatness; that therefore he did not sincerely believe that Christ's
outward. Flesh was real Flesh, and his Blood real Blood, which he gave for the
Life of the World, the which Body and Blood of Christ, though it is not to be
received by the Mouth, as Papists say, yet spiritually by Faith it is fed upon
by all sincere Christians. And in this sense, to eat Christ's Flesh, and to
drink his Blood, is sincerely to believe, that Christ gave His Body of Flesh to
be broken for u^, and His Blood to be shed for us, for the Remission of Sin; by
which sincere Faith (whereof Christ is the Work^r) we partake o^ the Life and
Spirit of christ, that is the Soul's immediate Nourishm^nt.

Page 16. ad med. Expl. Let none misconstrue the Author, because he only
expressly names G^d and Christ to be the Author and Original of the Creation,
as if he did not understand the Holy Ghost, who is one and the same God with
the Father and the Son, to be the Author and Crea^or ^f al^ things.

Page 17. ad med. Expl. L^^ none infer from th^se words, as if when God m^d^
^an, Genesis 1. He did not at once endue him with (...) three degrees, making up
one en^ir^ Soul of Man, and a^^o what the high^st and most noble, to wit, the
principle of the divine Life, out of the Azi^utick System.

Page 19. ad fin. Expl. Adam's Body, as originally made by God, was not gross
and thick, as it became afterwar^s by Sin. It was originally, Or, Heb. i.e.
Light. but after his Fall it became Y^ r, i. e. a Skin; but within the thick
gross Body, called Skin, Genesis 3.21. the true lucid Par^disiacal Body li^th hid,
and will not appear until the Resurrection of the Dead.

Page 24. Expl. The Author only delivers this Hypothetically; th^re^ore l 6.
dele c^rtainly, and read, may signify. The Fi^tieth year has a respect to
another great M^st^ry, which is the opening the 50 Divine Gates of Binah, i. e.
The Divine Intelligence, which shall be fully done at the Resurrection of the
Dead, and beginning of the Thousand Years.

Page 25. at the beginning, Explic. and Emend. Cain was but to be avenged 7
Fold, and Lamech 77 Fold, all which Punishments might have been performed on
them both, according to the Hypothesis of the Revolutions within the Ages of
this World, in order to the Melloration and Restitution of them, and all elect
Souls belonging to them.

Page 25. Line 16. Expl. and Emend. D^le on Earth. Where note, that these so
many Worlds, viz. 5214^, do not respect humane Souls that have lived, or shall
live on Earth, within the compas^ of the Ages of this World, but other Souls,
belonging to following Worlds.

Page 29. l. 22. for by but, read but by.

Page 30. ad m^d. Explic. and Emend. The 42 Sojournings o^ the People of
Israel, seem to have a nearer respect unto the Spiritual Travel o^ the Souls of
Men, out of Satan's Kingdom of Darkness into the Kingdom of the dear Son of
God; as ^or that other, it seems more remote and ^^reign, but if it be true,
what Jewish Mystic Write^^ (...), that the ^aw was given in 70 Languages, and
in 7^ S^nces, it i^ possible that may be one of them.

Page 36. ad med. Emend. Where the number of Years, from Adam, to Christ's
Resurrection, is frequently in this Treatise comput^d to be (...), proce^deth
from the taking the words in Da^^ 9.27. the midst of the Week, in a strict
lit^ral Sense; but the Hebrew word in Dani^l signifies the dividing the We^k,
which may be understood of the last Year of the last Week, not complea^, bu^
current, therefore it is most probable, that the Years from Adam, to Christ's
Resurrection, are 4000 ^urrent, and from that, to the end of the World 3000
Years.

Page 39. l. 2. Correct 333 is 1/^^2 of 4000 Years, there^^re 333 multiplied by
12, pr^duceth 4000 Years.

Page 42. l. 17. Correct as above in p. 36.

Page 50. l. 12. at the Margin, for 356 read 556, and for 400 read 409.

Page 52, 53. Correct the number 1777, it should rather be 1774, because the
middle of the last Week of Daniel, as is said, needs not be strictly taken, but
for the last Year of the Week current, according to which Chronogical Account,
the first Period of An^ichrist's Reign, will expire about the Year from
Christ's Birth 1700.

Page 54. l. 18. For 652 read 1650, and for 1702 read 1700. Note, whether the
first Fruits, mentioned Revel. chapter 14. have not a relation to 144000 Saints
that shall be raised from the Dead, as a first Fruits, and appear with Christ
before the general Resurrection of the Saints, is worthy of further enquiry.

Page 55. l. 15. Emend. and Explic. That the Saints shall be raised up to Life
in a Carnal and Terrestrial Body, must not be understood, such as we now have,
as is well said, lin. 16. but such as Adam had in Paradise, which being
compared with such Bodies, as we now have, may be said to be Spiritual, and yet
may well he allowed to be capable of a far greater degree of Spirituality^
after the 1000 Years are expired, when they shall ascend together with Christ
into the Heavens. But it is not to be supposed, that the Saints raised up in
their Bodi^s, such as Adam had, shall eith^r need or use the Meats and Dri^ks
of this World, or the Light and I^fluence of the Sun, Moon and Stars^ for it is
most probable, that Adam ne^ded none of these things in Paradise, for that
supplied him all that he needed.

Page 57. l. 5. Correct. That place of Scripture, 1 Cor. 15.51. seems not
proper to be understood of Paul, or any of the deceased Saints, but of the
Saints th^^ shall be found living in Mortal Bodies at Christ's coming without
us, in his glorified Body; the word we being put for they, by an ordinary
figure, called Enallage Personae. The Saints, the Gog and Magog's Army shall
attempt to slay, shall not be the raised Saints, but the other Saints that
shall live in the 1000 Years, and have not as yet attained the Resurrection;
and such Saints shall marry, and have Children. But it is improper to think
that the raised Saints shall marry, to wit, as Men now do, and have Children by
Women; but the manner how Adam would have propagated his Kind, is best to leave
to a further opening; for many think it is apparent from Scripture, that Adam
before the Fall, was Male and Female in one Body, and so would have increased
without Distinction of Sex.

Page 58, 59, 60. Correct. That Marrying, Building, Planting, etc. shall belong
to the Saints, not raised within the Thousand Years, ought to be granted, but
is no wise proper to grant it to the raised Saints, whether their Resurrection
be called first or second; for it seems to contradict the words of Christ,
and the Divine Order of things. But all the time of the Thousand Years new
Conver^s, and Saints will be added to the Church daily, by the preaching of the
Gospel; who without dying or sleeping, will be changed, and the mortal and
corruptible Body shall put on Immortality and Incorruption. Moreover, that the
deceased Saints shall obtain the Resurrection of the Body by being born of
Women, as Men are now born into the World, must not be granted; for not Earthly
and Mortal Women, whether married or Virgins, but our Heavenly and Immortal
Mother, Jerusalem from above, shall bring us all forth, and the deceased Saints
generally, as her Children, with respect to the Resurrection or Regeneration of
our Bodies at the time appointed, as she has now brought us forth, and all the
Saints, with respect to the inward Resurrection and inward Regeneration of our
Souls. And only Christ shall be our Heavenly Father, and Jerusalem from above,
our Heavenly Mother, with respect to the Resurrection of the Dead; and
therefore the Children of the Resurrection in Scripture are called the Children
of God, but shall not be the Children of Men, born o^ Flesh and Blood. And though
it may be granted that the Hypothesis of the Revolutions may some way
illustrate the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, as Minutius Felix
improved it to that purpose, to convince the Heathen Philosophers of the verity
of the Resurrection; yet the Resurrection of the Dead, though it be called a
Revolution, is not like those other Revolutions, wherein Men's Souls are
supposed after Death to revolve into other Bodies by humane Generation.

Page 71. ad fin. Emend. That none had finished their Revolutions according to
that Hypothesis before the Death of Christ, must be granted; but that all Souls
had begun their Revolutions before Solomon's time, unless it be restrained to
the Souls of the Jews, is not so apparent, but rather according to the Mystic
Writers of the Jews, many Souls do still begin their Revolutions until 6^00
Years be ^xpired, from the beginning of this World.

Page 81. ad med. Emend. That it is more probable those 144000 mentioned,
Re^el. chapter 7. and c^. 14. are to be understood of the first Fruits of the
raised Saints, sometime before the beginning of the 1000 Years, viz. about the
time of the opening of the sixth Seal.

Page 88. l. 22. Emend. and Explic. This is only to be understood of all such
Souls, to whom the Period of 4000 Year^ is given, because of the dark times
preceding, but in the Ages of more Light under Christ, less time is given; the
shortness of time, being supplied sufficiently wi^h the greater Light.

Page 93. l. 20. Emend. and Explic. This present time is the last to any, that
have had sufficient time formerly giv^n them, but not to others that have not
had their ^ull day and time given them.

Page 95. l. 5. Emend. and Explic. That Souls revolve but thrice in the space
of 1000 Years, and consequently but once in the space of 333 Years^ is to be
understood of such Souls as have committed such heinous Crimes; as for which,
they deserved to be ejected or cast out for so long a time, which Ejection is
called by Mystic Writers Excision, that is either for such a long time, as 333
Years; or if they do not amend, may prove at last a final Excision. But such
Souls (...) do amend, the Mystic Writers say, do quickly revolve, in order to
their perfect Restitution; so that the Soul of the deceased Father may revolve
in his Grandchild, (which is only but Historically related, but not
Dogmatically a^serted) yet not so, that the Father is the Grandchild, for that
would be great Confusion; but that as they say, the Soul of the Deceased
Grandfather does revolve, to cohabit and live together wi^h the Soul of the
Grandchild in the same Body, even as the Soul of the Grandchild did live
together, and cohabit with the Soul of the Grandfather in the Grand-father's
Body, out of whose Loins he did at last proceed; according to which Hypothesis,
it may be understood, how the Souls ^f Er and Onan, who died in the Land of
Canaan, yet went with their Brethren into Egypt, making in all, together with
Er and Onan, but 70 Souls, as pl^inly appe^reth from Genesis 46.12, 27. it being
granted that they revolved in P^a^ez and Zerah, their younger Brethren, who had
also their own proper distinct Souls; all which were great distinct Roots of
their r^spe^tive Families.

Page 105. lin. 1. Correct. The Years from Chris^'s Resurrection, to the
beginning of the first Trumpet, are 180; to which, adding the Y^ars from
Christ's Bir^h, ^o his Death and Resurrection, viz. 34 Years current, make 214,
and therefore correct the Intervals of the Trumpets thus;
214.474.734.9^4.1254.1514.1774.^034. The occasion o^ the difference of four
Years is above-noted, and corrected at Page ^6.

Page 1^8, 109. Emendat. and Explic. If the seven Thunders and seven Vials have
some Analogy, as is ^robable, th^se Intervals of Numbers, Page 108. may ^ather
be referred to the seven Thunders, than to the ^even Vials^ And it is rather
more probable, that the (...) of the seven Vials begins not to be poured out
until (...) year from Christ's ^^rth 1^0^; and if we allow ten Years to each
Vial, the last shall be poured out (...) the year 1770, after which, allowing
three Years and to the personal Antichrist, that is then to come; whose time^
according to the general Sense of Antiquity, is limited to that short space of
three Years and an^ who, at the end of that short space, is to be destroyed by
Christ's coming, it brings us to the beginning (...) the 1000 Years, about the
year 1774^ which yet (...) not Dogmatically a^^^r^ed, but by way of a probabl^
Hy^othesi^, and modest conjecture. But that the Papal Hi^rarch^ will not expire
a^out the year 1700, (...) apparent from M^^^chi^^'s Prophec. An Irish A^^^^
who lived abo^t (...) Y^ars ago, and had a Vision of (...) the Popes that
should be, from hi^ time, to the (...) See Fl^re's (...) according to which,
Fifteen (...) Sixteen Popes are yet to come, but they may all happen to come
and p^^s before the year 1^5^ be (...) expired. But a^ou^ the year 1^^^, which
is th^^g^^ by strict account to (...) or 16^^, some gre^^ change may be
probably expected, in (...) to a (...) Reformation in the World, tha^ very
(...) being (...) beginning of the sixth Seal, according to this Ch^^^^^logical
H^po^hesis. The seventh Seal may either (...) supposed to comprehend in a
^^ner^^ way^ all the (...) Seals and Intervals of ^he ^rumpets and V^^^s, ^r
wi^^out any change of the Chronological Per^ods, (...) numbers of Years, the
seventh Seal may ^e supp^^^ to be Synchronous, or Contemporal with the (...)
Seal, and consequently the half hour's silence may (...) re^erred to that time
to great Peace and Quiet, (...) the Church of Christ shall enjoy, from the year
1^^^ to the year 17^0; ^ithin which space of ^0 Yea^^ the seven Via^s, called
the seven last Plagues^ are to poured out upon the false Church, (the Whore
^^^bylon) and chie^ly the R^m^^ ^ierarch^ and Pap^^^

Page 110. a^ ^ed. (...) It is a great mista^^ that needs C^rrec^i^n, (...)
which the Author (...) had corre^ted in ^is Manus^^p^s, a^ if the Prophe^s
(...) Apostles, or any other of (...) d^^e^sed Saint^ shall born again into the
World of Women, Virgins, or any others. But all the deceased Saints shall ^e
raised up^ and ^eceive their Resurrection Bodies, by ^he immediate Power of God
and Christ. And t^o' it is called in Scripture Re^eneration, yet it is properly
and truly a real Resurrection, as well as Re^enera^^on; w^ereb^, according to
the Body, th^^ shall be the Children of God, as well as according to the Soul
and ^^^rit. Mor^over, as ^oncerning the order of t^^ R^su^^e^^ion, the
Scripture is plain: First, (...), the first Fr^its, after they that are Christ,
a^ (...) Co^i^g: But i^ is worthy ^o be conside^^d w^ether ^here ^^y no^ be a
first Fruits of the R^s^r^^^^^on, before the general Re^^rrection o^ the (...)
to the R^v^lati^ns, Chap. 7. an^ Chap. 14.

Page 11^ an^ from (...) Explic. It ^^s well th(...)tion^d of ^a^c, etc. is
s^^d ^xpre^l^, ((...)) not to be (...) time, the A^t^^r (as ^^p^^r (...) ou^ o^
his own M^nu^crip^s ^^d Paper^ (...)stion ne^^^iv^ly, (...) a pos^^ive an(...)
That Isa^c was (...) the Woman, which Christ (...) when ^e c^use i^ the Flesh,
and that ^or (...). To (...) I^aa^ ^^s the promis^d (...) Christ (...) into
that mos^ (...) Un^^^ wi^h himself, is ^o ^ay, (...) I^^ac ^^com^ Christ, and
so wa^ (...) own S^vi^ur, b^t that is a^^u^^d for Is^ac; ^o ^ll ^^^^r Men
need^d another to ^ave them from their ^i^^, and t^a^ ^t^^r was Christ. 2. It
is the Tes^im^n^ of (...), that all M^n d^s^^nded o^ A^am (^^r^st (...)) have
sin^ed; and t^^r^f^re I^aac, as we^^ as A^raham and Ia^^^^ ^^ve sinned so^e
^ime ^r ^the^; but if Isaac ^^d ^^en Christ, to wit, the Man Christ, th^n
Christ h^d d^^d ^^r his own Sin^; but Christ died not for his (...), that ^ver
a^ any time ^e h^d, for he ne^^^ ^a^^ any Sin. D^n. ^.2^. compared with Isaia^
53.5. 1 Cor. 15.2. 2 Cor. 15.21. 3. Isaac was to be saved, justified, and
pardoned by Faith in the Man Christ, but Isaac was not to believe, or have
Faith in himself. 4. That promised Seed of the Woman that descended out of the
Loins of all the Fathers in a straight Line of Succession, from Adam to Christ,
and from Eve to Mary, was no part of the defiled Nature of Man, though it was
conveyed or transmitted through them that had been defiled with Sin; as David and
Solomon were great Sinners, and yet their Seed was conveyed, and transmi^t^d
through them. And this is easy to understand, how an holy and undefiled Seed
or Principle can pass through them that have been defiled, and be no more
defiled therewith, than how the Sunbeams can shine on an unclean place, and
not be defiled ther^with. Now that the Seed of the Woman so conveyed and
transmitted, from Adam to Christ, was never defiled with Sin, and so was no
part of the fallen Nature of Man is clear, because to signify his Primitive
Purity and Holiness, he was conceived of the Holy Ghost, and born of a Virgin,
and not after the ordina^y manner of Humane Generation. And it is written of
him, Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, etc. Psalm. 45.7. 5.
That of our Nature, which Christ assumed, if it had been defiled at any time
with Sin, how could it have been cleansed, o^ how could it ^leanse other parts
of Man's Nature, that had been defiled by Sin: For it is the clean that
cleanses the unclean, and the cleansing must begin in that which is clean;
that is the Root, and Original to cure^ and cleanse that which is unclean; and
by ^aith in the promised Seed of the Woman, all they who were saved from the
beginning of the World, were cleansed and sanctified. But if it be enqui^ed,
was this Seed of the Woman conv^yed from Adam to the Man Christ, the Seed of
Christ, or only a Bodily Seed, or Principle. To this it is answered^ That the
hig^er degree of the Soul of Christ was not that Seed that was conveyed through
the Loins o^ Abraham and David, to wit, that degree of his Soul called the
Spirt and Mind in Hebrew, Ruach, and Neshamah; for that was in Heaven, and came
down from Heaven, when the Child Jesus was conceived in the Womb of the Virgin,
as Christ himself said, Ioh. 6.38. For I came down from Heaven, not to do my
own Will, but the Will of him that sent me: This was not the Godhead of Christ,
but that Superior or Higher degree of his Soul, called Ru^ch and Neshamah; but
the inferior degree, or Animal part, called N^^h^sh in Heb. may be well
allowed to have been in that Seed of the Woman, which Christ assumed, together
with the Bodily Seed, and Principle of Christ's Body; and though it was conveyed
and transmitted through all these Generations, from Adam to Christ, mentioned
in Luke, chapter 3. yet that is not in the common sense of the word Revoluti^n,
because R^^olution in the common sense of the word, used by M^^tick Writ^r^, is
used to signify the returning of the Souls of deceas^d Men, to live again in
other Bodies of their Posterity or Kindred: But when a Man begets a Son, and
the Soul of his Son comes out of ^is Loins, as it is said the Souls of Jacob's
Children came ^ut of his Loins, that is not called Rev^lution in the common
sense of the Mys^ick Writers. Beside, that Souls revolved are sa^d to suffer
the Bodily Pains and Affliction^, that the Body suffers, into which it
revolveth, and Death also; and therefore the S^^l of Christ did not after this
manner revolve, for then he would have often died, whereas Christ died but
once; and having once died, he dies no more Death^ has no more Dominion over
him, Romans 6.9. Nor is there any cause to suppose that Isaac's Soul needed any
Revolution, more than the Soul of any ^f the holi^st Men; for these holy Men,
being perfected in Faith, Love and Holiness, according to the H^pothesis of the
Revolutions after Death, need no Revolution, but rest in perfect Peace and Joy,
until the Resurrection of the Dead. But what is the mystery of these 76 or 77
Generations from Adam to Christ, described by Luke, Chap. 3. i^ best to leave
to God's further opening, and no^ t^ intrude in^o things not s^en.

P^g^^ 119, 120, 121, 122. Emend. That the two Witn^s^es shall be M^ses and
Elias, that shall be slain, and ris^ again from ^he De^d, I find to be the
opinion of some of the A^cie^ts, particularly of H. Cozi^s; ^^t they who did
not h^ld that Opi^ion, did not think they s^^uld be born again of Women, but
that they sh^^^d c^m^ and s^ffer in these very Bodies, wherein they ^ormer^y
^^v^d, and should rise again: But these two Wi^nesses shall not (...) M^s^^ and
Eli^s, as some s^y, or (...) and E^^^s, as others sa^; it is certain that they
shall be ^wo excellent and eminent Serv^nt^ of G^d, endu^d wi^h such a
Prophetic and w^nd^r w^^^i^g spirit, as M^ses and Elias had. No^ (...) appear
that any of the deceased Sai^ts ^h^ll by (...) be b^rn ag^in of Women, ^ut they
sh^^l ^e immediately raised up, by the power of God and Christ.

Pag^ 122. ad ^i^em ^^^nd. a^^ (...). That the S^in^s shall be ra^sed up t^
live and reign with Christ on ^r over the ^^rth^ is no^ ^o be understood, as i^
they should n^ed or (...) the Meats or Drinks o^ the Ea^^h, or any (...)
E^r^hly Convenience^, b^t t^a^ the^ shall appear ^o ^h^ S^ints not yet (...)
livi^g (...) Animal (...) to their great (...) and h^v^ that Rule and
Government over ^^l the E^rth, that the Angels now have, i^ clear from Heb.
^.5. 1 Cor. 6.2.

Page 125. ad ^in^m. Emend. That the Church of (...) shall ^ollow the latter
part of the Thousand Yea^s, is n^^ ^^o^able, but rather that it shall be
contemp^rary (...) the Church of Philadelphia, for some c^nsid^r^ble t^me; the
one being a pure holy Church, exactly a^^wering to the Church in the Apostle's
days, in Puri^y of Doctrine, Holiness of Life, and Plenty of S^iritual Gi^ts,
to wit, that of Philadelphia; the other, to wit, that of La^^icea, having a
form of Godlines^, very ^^ar resembling the true Church, but l^cking the Power
and Life of Christianity. See the second Treatise, Page 132.

The Emendations and Explications in the second T^e^^ise; with the Corrections
of the Err^rs o^ the Press.
MOST of the Emendations and Explications b^longing to this second Treatise,
are already noted in the first, beside that it will be obvious ^o the Reader,
that the second Treatise does it self correct diverse things in the former,
whereby it is mani^es^ly apparent, that as the second Treatise was d^ne by the
Author, sometime after the first, the Auth^r himself had come to a more mature
and rip^ understanding in many things of great weight, at his w^i^ing the
second Treatise, than he had at first.

Page 131. l. 21. read 333 1/^, and page 134. tow^rds the end, r^ad on the
Margin, Ann^ 700 from the Birth of Christ. Page 137. lin. 12. read 666, and on
the Margin read, from the year 700, to 1^34.

Page 154. t^wards the end, Emend. and Explic. As the sixth and seventh
Churches are esteemed contemporary, so may the sixth and seventh Seals. See the
Emendation in the first Treatise, Page 125.

Page 157. l. 2. Dele Io^^on, and read to Valens and V^lentinian.

(...) 1^2 l. 4. read 1333.

P^^e 167. That the Saints in the Resurrection shall be raised up in a
successive order, as Men are born into the World in a successive order, is no
wise probable, and has no Ground from 1 Cor. 15.23. For the orde^ there
described, as it ^ath relation to time, is thus. Christ, the first Fruits,
afterward they that are Christ's at his coming, then comes the end, when the
unjust shall be raised at the end; but order may also relat^ to the several
degrees of Glory, that the Saints shall have, some above others, according to
their higher seize in Holiness: For as one Star differs from another
Star in Glory, so is also the Resurrection of the Dead. 1 Cor. 15.41, 42.

Page 170. Emend. and Expli^. It is noted above at p^g. 109, that the half
Hour's Silence may be referred to that time of great Peace and Quiet, that the
Church shall enjoy from the year of Christ's Birth 1700, to the year 1770;
though if it be referred to that time of Peace from Christ's Resurr^ction, to
the year 180, following, it makes no considerable Alteration in the
Chronology, or order of things; but the great Peace and Flourishing of the
Church, from about the year 1700, to 1770, (co^taining 70 Years, the number of
the Years of the Desolation, and Devastation of the ^a^se Church, mystically
designed by Cyrus, Isaiah 23.15. as elsewhere by Babyl^n) seems to suite best
with the half Hours silence, and then that space of 180 Years from Ch^^st's
Resurrection, before the first Trumpet sound, shall signify the time of the
seven Ang^ls, preparing t^^ms^lves to sound, Rev. 8.6.

Page 181. l. 7. for 1574 read 1774.

Page 185. l. 6. Correct the error of the Press thus, according to the Latin
Copy. Did not Christ sa^, after the death of John Baptist, Elias comes, and
shall r^store all things? But this was not done in John Baptist's time, but
remains yet to be done at Elias's coming.

Page 194^ l. 21. For Two, r^ad Se^en.

Page 196. l. 8. read Su^^^ss^rs. p. 199. l. 2. read were. p. 201. l. 15. read
that all.

Page 204. Emend. and Explic. Whereas the Author in this place r^ferreth the
times of the seven Vials to the seventh Trumpet, viz. from the year of Christ's
Resurrection 1740, to the year ^^00, which some may judge a probable
H^p^th^sis, the same Author, in some of his Manuscripts, has set down another
probable Hypoth^^is, to which he seems most inclined, viz. That the tim^s of
the seven Vials belong to the last 70 Years of the sixth Trumpet; the first
Vial beginning at the y^ar of Christ's Birth 1700, allowing to each Vial ten
Years, succ^ssively to the last; according to which r^ckoning, the Papal
Hi^rarchy, (and pe^haps Rome it self) signified by the Throne or Seat of the
Beast, shall be destroyed, by the pouring of the fifth Vial, about the year of
Christ's Birth 1750. but which of these two Hypotheses is nearest to the Truth,
seeing the Author pretends not to a Spirit of Prophecy in the case, Time and
Event will determine.

Page 206. See the former Emendation. See also the Emendation, P. 109.

Page. At Question 9^, 99. Emend. The Saints Bodies in the first Resurrection,
and Adam's Body before the Fall, do most resemble the Body of Christ, as it
appeared at the Transfiguration before his Death, which was indeed glori^us,
and so will the Saints Bodies appear in the first Resurrection^ so that in
respect of our gross Bodies, they may be said to be Spiritual yet capable of a
far higher degree of Spirituality at the last.

Page. At Questi^n 101. See this Question answered in the Emendations, in the
first Treatise^ ad P. 110.

Page. At Quest^ 106, 107. Explic. It is clear from Scripture, that the mortal
Bodies of the Saints, after the Thous^nd Years begin, shall not die as M^n now
die, so as to need any Burial, but they shall be changed in a moment, when duly
sitted for that Change, according to 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.

Page. At Quest. 1^8. ^xplic. It is no^ to be und^rs^ood^ that the raised
Saints living on Earth in the Thousand Years, shall need or use any of the
Meats o^ Drinks, or other Re^reshments and Conveniences, that this material or
visible Earth affords; but they shall live rather above the Earth, than on
it; for then shall the Paradisiacal Earth be revealed, and given to them, to
live in, that was given to Adam to live in, which since the Fall h^th been hid,
but shall then be opened, which is most properly that new Earth, that is called
new, because it never waxes old, as for the same reason, the new Heavens are
s^ called, whereas the visible Heavens and Earth grow old, and shall be changed.

Page. At Quest. 186. Corr. read, as 52 to 1.

Note, That whereas diverse times in both these Trea^is^s, mention is made of
the number 333 1/^^ Years, as being a mystical Hour, containing the Interv^^s
of the seven Churches, and the seven Seals, the Mystery of this number 333 1/^;
(being one third part of 1000) seems further to be confirmed by this, that
333 1/^; solar Years, being reduced to Lunar Years, (each Lunar Year containing
355 Days, as each Solar Year contains 365 Days) make 343 Lunar Years, which
are seven Jubilee Years, accounting each Jubilee Year to contain 49 common
Years, within which compass of time, viz. of 333 Years, efforts both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, are observed to h^ve great Changes and Revolutions. Note also,
that the Years mentioned in the Old Testament^ in the Chronology of the World,
from Adam, to Christ's Re^urrection, seem to be Lunar Years, each Year
concontaining 355 Days, as the Hebrew w^rd signifying Ye^r, does co^tain the
number 355, but the Years from Christ's Resurrection are not Lunar Years, but
Solar, and that shadowy and chang^able Dispens^tion under the Law, and Types
and Figures in use, both before and under the Law, suites with the Lu^ar Years,
the Moon being a S^mbol or Figure of that shadowy Dispensation; but nothing as
to this is positively asserted, but left to a ^urther Search and In^uiry.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Sarah Howkins, in George-yard.
AN Apology for the true Christian Divinity. Quarto. By Robert Bar^lay. Dr.
Weidenfield's Chemistry. Quarto, price 5 s. The Spirit of the Martyrs. Quarto,
price 4 s. The Pen's most Easy and Exact Improvement. Quarto, price 1 s. The
Experienced Instructor. Twelves, price 6 d. Medicina Practica; or Practical
Physic. By William Salmon; Octavo, price 5 s. Humane Prudence; or the Complete
Statesman. Addressed to the Earl of Nottingham. Oct. price 1 s. 6 d. The
Conquest of Eloquence. Octavo, price 3 s. Osborn's Spelling Book. Octavo, price
1 d. The Art of Short and Swift Writing, without Characters, Oct. price 4 d.
The Marrow of Measuring: By Venterus Mundy. Octavo, price 4 s. The Divine
Being, and its Attributes: By F. M. B. of Helmont. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d.
Mythologia Ethica: Or Three Centuries of Aesopian Fables, in English Prose. By
Philip Airs, Esquire Octavo, price 2 s. 6 d. Narrow Path of Divine Truth. Twelves,
price 1 s. 6 d. True Christian Faith and Experience. Twelves, price 1 s.
Collection of George Fox, Jun. Octavo, price 1 s. 6 d. George Keith's Divine
Immediate Revelation. Price 1 s. 6 d. George Fox's Instructions. Twel. price 6
d.
With Paper and Paper-Books of all sorts, Blank-Bonds and Releases, and the
best Ink for Records.


