THE TOUCHSTONE OF THE Reformed Gospel: Wherein The principal Heads and
Tenants of the Protestant Doctrine (objected against Catholics) are briefly
refuted, By the express Texts of the Protestants own Bible, set forth and
approved by the Church of England.

With the ancient Fathers judgments thereon, in confirmation of the Catholic
Doctrine.

The last Edition exactly Corrected.

Luke. 19.22. Out of thy own mouth will I judge thee. Permissu Superiorum.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

To the Catholic READER Health, and encouragement in his Holy Faith.
Courteous READER,
BEfore thou peruse this little Book, I would entreat thee to read these
ensuing Points which are very necessary for thy better instruction.

1. The first is, that in the Text of Scripture alleged throughout this
Treatise, it is not specified out of which English Bible the said passages are
extracted, for as much, as this were over ^roublesome unto thee, since England
^ath set forth within these few years ^ast, a great number of several sorts ^f
Bibles, far different one from another; So that our Adversaries (to whom I wish
from my heart, as I do (...) thee, that this little Book may prove profitable)
have not all one sor^ of Bibles themselves. Notwithstanding know for certain,
that they are a faithfully taken out of the Bibles i^quarto; and Octavo,
printed at London by Robert Barker, anno 1615. S^^ as if by chance any one
shall show the some other Bible, wherein they are n^^ set down, word for word,
as here the are; yet rest assured, that thou sha^^ find them so written, and
faithful^ cited out of the foresaid Edition Robert Barker, set forth by his
M^jesties special commandment.

2. The second is, That thou a mire the splendour of Truth, which such, and so
refulgent, that notwit^standing our Adversaries main a serious endeavors to
obscure (...) same, by so many varieties of Tra^slations, and by such a number
of gr^^^ corruptions and falsifications; yet the condemnation is so expressly
set do^ in this their own Bible, and is so cl^^ to all the world, that nothing
else needful hereto, but that thou know read, and have thine eyes to behold
same, at the opening of this their Book, This cannot choose but be an exceeding
^omfort to Catholics, concerning the ^prightness of their cause, to offer
themselves to be tried, and to confound their advers^ries by their own Bible:
^he translation whereof notwithstanding, does in a number of places, and
^articularly in many of those that are ^n question, swerve and differ
notoriously from the authentical Latin, and to the incredible disparagement,
and obscuring of the Catholic cause. Never did yet (nor I presume dare) our
Adversaries offer to give the like ad^antage unto us, as to stand to be tried
^^y our Translations, and that in above ^^fty Heads, and Points of Doctrine.
that are this day in controversy be^ween us.

3. The third is, That when thou ^alt urge, or allege any passage, ^^n ^avour
of thine own faith and doctrine; ^f any one return their charge, be it either
by way of recrimination and blam^ng of the Roman Church, or by al^dging some
obscure texts, and those ill understood, to counterpoyze such as are brought by
thee; do thou show them amiably, that this is not to proceed in due order, nor
to deal with thee as they ought, in opposing a passage dark, and obscure, to
confound another that i^ most clear and evident. For example when we set before
their eyes these few words (as clear as the Sun at noone day) Take, eat, this
is my body, this is my blood which shall be shed for you, etc. (Mark 14.25.)
they will straight suppose to have found another importan^ place, yea, and to
have given us the overthrow, if they presently reply, tha^ our Savior says in
S. John 6.63 The flesh profits nothing, the word that I speak unto you, they
are spirit and they are life; a passage far more obscure than that which is in
question and which affirms nothing less, tha^ that which they pretend to prove
there by. For how absurd were it to say, tha^ the flesh of Christ profits
nothing And if (as they themselves say) w^^ must interpret one passage by
another thou doubtless it is better to explicat^ an obscure one, by one that
is clear, than one that is clear, by a passage obscure; and that one Text give
place to many, rather than many to one.

4. The fourth is, That if they shall reject any of the passages which thou
producest, pretending the same to be Apocryphal; know, that to prevent this
objection, no such Scriptures, as they call Apocryphal are here produced alone,
but that always there go accompanied with them, others that are Canonical,
even by their own confession: And so far as Apocryphal Scriptures shall, and do
agree with Canonical, they themselves by their own Rule, are bound to receive
them. Which will also stop their mouth in their common pretense of Conference
of places; for rarely have thou here less then three, or four several passages
cited at large (besides references) for the proof of every several Point: All
our Adversaries put together, being never able in their defense to do the like;
that is, to produce so many in number, so express and clear, and for so great
a number of Controversies, as are here disputed and couched in so little a
Treatise.

5. The fifth is, that if they shall contend with thee, not about the words
themselves, as being clear, but about the sense and meaning of them; for such
places, I say, as may be subject to this cavil, thou shall forthwith have
recourse unto that which the Scriptures call, the Rule of faith, that is, to
the ever-constant and uniform Judgment of the Church, and Ancient Fathers, who,
in every Age since Christ, have understood the point in question, in that sense
which Catholics do. An example whereof thou may lay down before them out of
that learned Treatise, entitled. A Manuel of Controversies, debating the
question of the Blessed Sacrament. Which having done, bid them do the like, and
thou will yield unto them; (a thing which they can never peform.) So as no man
of reason will reject this Rule, grounded so clearly in holy Scripture, and
prefer the private interpretation of some silly Cobbler before S. Chrysostom, of
a Baker before S. Basil, of some Tinker before Tertullian, or of any Novelist
whatsoever, before the judgment of the the Church, and the whole stream of the
Holy Fathers.

This point therefore being so important, shall be the first, which I will
fortify, and prove by the word of God in this present Treatise, I mean this
Rule; and therefore in no wise forget, always to involve thine Adversary
within this Rule, as often as he shall prove so unruly, and thou shall be sure
to get the victory.

The sixth and last point is, That I here protest, in the presence of God (whom
I call to witness in this behalf, and pray thee also to call upon, for the
salvation and reduction of all those that walk astray) that it is not in the
power of any one, no not of all our Adversaries that are in England, to find in
their own Bible, one only express Text, I say, one only, in their own Bible,
by which they can possibly prove, one only point of their false Doctrine^
without their usual art of adding, diminishing, chopping or changing it by some
interpretation, or other: which yet should be to alter the Text it self, and to
employ man's fancy, instead of the pure word; a thing by their own confession,
flatly forbidden them, protesting, that the Word of God, does in such sort
contain all that which is necessary to salvation, that it is not lawful neither
for men, nor Angels, to add, diminish, or alter any part thereof; and
commanding their followers and adherents, utterly to renounce all Antiquity,
Custom, Multitude, humane wisdom, Judgment, Decrees, Edicts, Counsels, Visions,
yea, and Miracles themselves, to the contrary.

THE TOUCHSTONE Of the REFORMED GOSPEL.
The Protestants affirm. I. That there is not in the Church one, and that an
infallible Rule, for understanding the Holy Scriptures, and conserving of Unity
in matters of Faith.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Romans 12.6. Having then
gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether Prophecy
(that is interpretation) according to the proportion (or Rule) of faith, Whence
we gather, that Prophecy, according to the Rule of faith, is one of the gifts
which God bestows on his Church. Therefore there is in the Church one, and
that an infallible Rule, to understand the holy Scriptures by.

Philip 3.16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained. Let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same thing. Lo how plainly the Apostle speaks in
this second place, of a certain Rule to walk by: clearly presupposing, that in
matters of faith, we can never be of the same mind, unless we walk by the
same Rule.

Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and
mercy. And 2. Cor. 10.15. Having hope when your faith is increased, that we
shall be enlarged by you, according to our Rule, abundantly to preach the
Gosple in the Regions beyond you, and not to boast in another man's line. Here
again, because every man is to direct, and order his belief, according to the
doctrine of the Church, therefore it is called by S. Paul, both the Rule, and
Line of our holy faith.

Again 1 Cor. 11.16. But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
Custom, nor the Churches of God. Lo how S. Paul still pleads the Rule and
Custom of the Church against the contentious: which if it could, then by the
sole prescription of twenty or thirty years, and by the authority of so few
Pastors, stop the mouths of new Sect-masters, what ought not the Custom of
sixteen hundred years, and the decrees of so many hundred Pastors gain of
reasonable, modest and humble men?

And here I would have it to be noted, that this Analogy, or Rule of faith
(besides the titles already recited) the holy Scripture in other places, calls
by the name of Form of Doctrine, Romans 6.17. A thing made ready to our hand, 2.
Cor. 10.16. The Depositum (or Treasure) committed to the Churches trust, and
ever most carefully to be kept by her. 1. Tim. 6.20. And withal in the very
self same places, always styles that which is contrary to this Rule, by the
name of Disunion, Discord, Disobedience, forsaking of our first Vocation,
Division, Contention, Profane and vain babbling, Opposition of sciences, etc.
Whence plainly appear how great the necessity is for every Christian to keep
this Rule; the least breach whereof, does presently crack his Christian credit
with the Church of God, and with all good Christians.

See more Romans 6.17. Gal. 1.6. Romans 16.17. Acts 15 2. 1. Tim. 6.10. Romans 12.16.

According to this very Rule, the Ancient Fathers affirm the same. S. Irenaus
l. 4. Cap. 45. Tert. de praesor. And Vincent. Lyr. in suo Commonitorio, says:
It is very needful in regard of so many errors proceeding from the
mis-interpretation of Scriptures, that the Line of Prophetical and Apostolical
exposition should be directed according to the Rule of the Ecclesiastical and
Catholic sense. Thus writes this most worthy witness. Tertul^ Praescrip.
Adv. Haeres. Cap. 15, and Cap. 19. Says. We do not admit our Adversaries to
dispute out of Scripture, till they can show who their Ancestors were, and from
whom they received the Scriptures. For the orderly course of doctrine requires,
that the first Question be, whose the Scriptures are by right, from whom, and
by whom, and to whom the Form of Christian Religion was delivered? Otherwise
prescribing against him as a stranger etc. Thus he.

Behold, how these two last ancient Fathers, lay hold of, and urge these two
very terms, Rule, and Form of Faith; and Religion even as before the Holy
Scripture did, from whence doubtless they took the phrase. And with very great
reason, for the knowledge of Tradition (which is the Form or Rule) goes before
the knowledge of the Scripture for the Rule must be first known, before the
thing ruled can be assuredly known; as the Carpenter cannot know certainly,
that he has ^^easured his timber, nor the Tailor, that he has measured his
cloth aright, except he first assuredly know, that is measure be both true and
right: but ^he Rule of Faith, to wit, the Sum ^f those points that every
Christian is bound expressly to know, as delivered to him from hand to hand, is
the knowledge of Tradition.

The Protestants affirm. II. That in matters of Faith we must not rely upon the
Judgment of the Church and of her Pastors, but only upon the written Word.
COntrary to the express words o^ their own Bible, Mat. 23.2. The Scribes and
the Pharisees sit in Mose^ seat, all therefore whatsoever they bi^ you observe,
that observe and do. I^ which words, Christ not only commands us in matters of
Faith, to have recourse to somewhat else besides the only written words (to
wit, to the Pastors of the Church), but bids more over, to obey them: and that
not only in some principal matters, but in al^ whatsoever, without distinction
o^^^ limitation. Therefore in matters o^^^ faith, we are not tied to rely onel^
upon the written word.

Luke, 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that dispiseth me, dispiseth him that sent me. Here again
Christ our Lord honors and gives as much authority to the Preachers of the
Word, as he can possibly do to the word it self, saying: He that hears you,
etc.

Matthew, 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven:
and whatsoever thou shall loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven. Where it
is to be noted, that he does not say whosoever but whatsoever; giving us
thereby to understand, that not only the bonds of sins, but as ^ell all other
knots and difficulties in ^atters of faith, are to be loosed by (...) Peter,
and by the Pastors that suc^eed him in the Church.

See more Deuteronomy. 17.8. Aggeus 2.1. 2. Cron. 19.8. Unto the end. 2. ^hes. 2.15.

The holy Fathers that affirm the ^^me, are S. Gregory NaZ In orat. ^^cus^t.
Tertul. lib. de praescrip. adversus har. S, Cyprian lib. 1. epist. 3. S. Aug.
lib. 1. cont. Crosc. cap. 33. and lib. cont. Fund. cap. 5. Vincent. Lyr. in suo
commonit. And S. Anselm lib. de incar. cap. 1. writing to Pope Urban. says
thus unto him: Unto n^ other is more rightly referred to be corrected,
whatsoever arises in the Church against the Catholic faith, etc.

They affirm. III. That the Scriptures are easy to be understood, and that
therefore non^ ought to be restrained from readin^ of them.
COntrary to the express words otheir own Bible, 2. Pet. 3.1^ Where S. Peter,
speaking of S. Pau^ Epistles, says: In which are some things hard to be
understood, whi^^ they that are unlearned, and unstabl^^ wrest, as they do also
the other Scri^tures, unto their own destruction. B^ all unlearned Reformers,
both rea^ and are allowed to read those hard things (yea, the Book of Apocalypse
also yet harder) without any restraint to man, or woman, which yet they
understand not: therefore they wrest them, as also other Scriptures, to their
own destruction.

Acts 8.30. And Philip said, understandest thou what thou read? And he said:
How can I, except some man should guide me? Where first may be noted, that this
Noble Eunuch freely confessed, he could not understand the Scriptures without
an interpreter to expound them, albeit he was a great, and serious student in
them, and withal a holy and humble man, as S. Hierom notes of him, Epist. ad
Paulin. de stud. Script. And next that he says, Except some man guide me: So
as he fled not to his private spirit, nor yet to conferring of place with
place, as our Adversaries do. Therefore the Scriptures ^re not easy.

Luke 24.25. and 27. Christ called ^wo of his Disciples fools, and slow of
^eart, etc. And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto
them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself. How then are the
Scriptures so easily to be understood of the unlearned, when Christ's Disciples
themselves could not understand them, till first they were expounded to them?

Rev. 5.1. etc, The Angel speaking of the Book sealed with seven seals, wept
much, because no man in heaven nor in earth, was able to open the Book, neither
to look thereon. A strange case! to read in Scripture it self, that the book of
Scripture should be shut with so many seals: but much more strange, that even
in S. John and the Apostles time, none could be found, neither in heaven, nor
earth, able to open the same, nor to look thereon, which every Apprentice now
adays, without (...) difficulty will undertake to do.

See more 2 Pet. 1.20. Mat. 13.11 and 36. Luke 24..45. 1 Cor. 12.10 Luke 8.10.
and 54. Luke 2.50. 2 Timothy 3 7. 1 John 4.6. John 5.35. Psalm. 119 18. and 34.
Rev. 5.1. etc.

The holy Fathers that affirm the same are, S. Iraenus l. 2. Cap. 27. Origin l.
cont. Cells. S. Amb. Epist. 44. ad Constant. Where he calls it: A sea, and
depth of prophetical riddles, S. Jer. in praefat. comment. in Ephesians. 5. And S.
Aug. epist. 119. cap. 21. says: The things of Scripture that I knew not, are
many more then those that I know, So S. Greg. hom. 6. in Ezech. and many other
Fathers confess the same of themselves. S. Denis Bishop of Corinth, cited by
Euscbius lib. 7. hist. Eccl. 20. says: Of this Book (of Scripture) this is my
opinion, that the matter thereof is far more profound then my wit can reach
unto.

They affirm. IV. That Apostolical Traditions, and ancient Customs of the
Church, (not found in the written word) are not to be received, nor to oblige
us.
Contrary to the express word of their own Bible 2 These. 2.15. Therefore
Brethren stand fast, and hold the Traditions, which ye have been taught,
whether by word or by Epistle. Hence it is clear, that some Traditions were
delivered to the Thessalonians by word of mouth, and those of equal authority
with what was written, if not of more: for the holy Ghost does name them first,
as they were indeed the first in being,) yea it is certain, that before the new
Testament was written, the Apostles delivered all by Tradition, and word of
mouth. Therefore Apostolical Traditions are to be received, and do oblige us.

2 These. 3.6. N^w I command you brethen, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that ye with draw your selves from every brother that walks disorderly, and
not after the Tradition which he received of us. He says not, I council you,
but I command you. But these men, rejecting all Traditions, walk disordered:
therefore they break the Apostles commandment. Yea, they stand not, but are
fallen; they let go, what the word it self does will them to hold: and
therefore in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, let all good men withdraw from
them.

1. Cor. 11.2. Now I praise you bre^hren, that you remember me in all things,
and keep the Traditions, as I ^ave delivered them unto you. But these ^eject
all Traditions: therefore needs must S. Paul speak thus unto them: Now (none of
my brethren) I dispraise you, for that you forget me in all things, and keep
not the Traditions, as (...) have delivered them unto you.

Lastly, if nothing at all be to be be^ieved, but only that which is left us
written, wherein should the Church ^ave exercised herself from Adam to Moses,
the space of two thousand six ^undred years?

See more 1 Timothy 6.3.20. and 2 Timothy ^.13. 2 Timothy 2.2. John 20.30 and ^1.25. and
16.12. 1 Cor. 11.16.34. (...). ep. John. 12.3 ep. of S. John 13. Acts 16.4. and
15.28.

The Fathers that affirm the same, ^re S. Iraeneus l. 3. c. 4. Origin. in cap.
^. ad Romans S. Damas. l. 4. c. 17. S. Chrysostom. in 2 These. 2. And S. Basil. de
Spiritu sancto says: some things (...) have from Scripture. (other things fr^^
the Apostles, both which have (...) force unto Godliness. S. Chrysostom 4. in
2. These. faith It is a Traditi^^ seek thou no further.

They affirm. V. That a man, by his own understandi^^ or private spirit, may
rightly jud^^ and interpret Scripture.
COntrary to the express words their own Bible 1. Cor 12.8. a^^ 10. To one is
given by the spirit, (...) word of wisdom: to another the wo^^^ of knowledge
by the same spirit: to another the working of miracles: to another Prophecy,
to another discerni^^ of spirits: to another kinds of tongue^ to another the
interpretation of tongu^^ but all these works that one (...) the self same
spirit, dividing to ev^^^ man severally, as he will. Where (...) Apostle in
express words, opposes (...) refelleth this unsavory doctrine, tea^^ing that
the gift of prophesying, or truly to interpret the holy Scripture, is not given
to all the faithful, but to some only in particular: yea, he presupposes that
one may have the gift, even to work miracles, and yet may want the gift truly
to interpret the Word of God. Therefore a man by his own private spirit cannot
rightly interpret Scripture.

2 Peter 1.20. Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any
private interpretation, for the Prophecy came not in old time (in the Margent,
or at any time) by the will of man, ^ut holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. See how clear^y the Apostle takes this faculty and
^uthority from a private and profane man, restraining the same to a company
and society of men, and those also of ^ome special note for their sanctity and
holiness, assuring us, that they ^pake, as they were moved by the ho^^ Ghost.

1 John 4.1. Beloved, believe not very spirit, but try the spirits, whether
they are God. By which words we a^^ taught, that the spirits of others are t^
be examined, whether they proce^^ from God or not: but this Caveat cannot be
understood of the spirit of th^^ whole Church, since then it would fo^low, that
there should be none left t^ try the said spirit of the Church (eve^^
particular man being included therei^). If then it be to be meant of priva^^
men (as needs it must) it follows, th^^ a private spirit cannot be this Judg^^
since it self is to undergo the Judgment and examination of some other^

The Fathers, that affirm the sa^^ are S. Aug. epist. 16.2. and l. de B^^ptismo
cap. 18. ad Epictetum. S. Ba^^ epist. 78. S. Amb epist. 32. S. L^^ epist. 53.
S. Hier. lib. cont. Lucifer^ nos. Vincent. Lyr. cont. prophan. her^ novitates.
Yea, Martin Luther himself (the Protestants great Grand-F^ther) says lib. de
potestate Papae: (...) are not certain of any private pers^^ whether he has
the revelation of the ^^ther or no: but that the Church has (...) we ought not
to doubt.

They affirm. VI. That S Peter's faith has failed.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Luke 22.31.32. ^imon, behold
Satan has desired to ^ave you, that he may sift you as wheat: ^ut I have
prayed for thee, that thy ^aith fail not. Satan required to sift them all (the
Apostles) but our Lord ^ere prayed for Peter only, that his ^aith principally
might not fail. Therefor S. Peter's faith has not failed.

Matthew. 16.18. And I say unto thee, ^^at thou art Peter, and upon this rock
(...) will build my Church, and the gates (...) hell shall not prevail against
it. But ^^d S. Peter's faith failed, the gates of ^^ll had long ago no doubt
prevailed.

Matthew. 23.2. The Scr^bes and the ^harises sit in M^ses seat, all therefore
^hatsoever they bid you observe, that ^^serve and do. How could Christ bid ^^e
people of the old Law, ^o all what^^ever he should bid them, by those that sat
in Moses chair, if they could err^ But God has no less preserved the truth of
Christian Religion, in the cha^ of S. Peter, which is in the new La^ answerable
to that of Moses in the o^ Therefore neither S. Peter's Faith, n^ Chair has
failed.

John 11, 49, 51. Speaking of Caip^ the High Priest, says: And this he spa^^^
not of himself, but being High priest the year he prophesied, that Jesus should
for that Nation. See, how in this m^ wicked time of the Sinagogue, the ve^^
Dregs and outcast of that disobedie^ people, yet speaking forth of that Cha^^
which Christ had commanded to heard and obeyed, touching matters faith, answer
truly, and their chief shops prophecy.

So Leo ser. 3. de assump. sua affir^ the same: The danger was common all the
Apostles, but our Lord took spe^^ care of Peter, that the state of all the
might be more sure, if the Head were vincible.

They affirm. VII. That the Church can err, and has erred.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Isai. 59.21. As ^or me, this
is my Covenant with them, says the Lord. My spirit that is upon thee, and my
words, which I have but in thy mouth, shall not depant out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy ^eed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, from
henceforth, and for ever. Therefore the Church cannot err.

John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever, even the spirit of truth. But the Apostles
themselves lived not for ever: therefore this is to be understood of the
perpetual abode of the spirit of truth with their Successors.

Matthew. 18.17. And if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee ^as
an heathen man, and a Publican. Whence is clearly to be gathered, tha^ the
Church in her Censure cannot er^ Isai. 35.8. And a high way shall (...) there,
and a way, and it shall be call the way of Holiness, the unclean sha^^ not
press over it, but it shall be for those the waifaring men, though fools, sha^^
not err therein. How far deceive then are many simple souls, who do a^firm,
that the whole Church, and a^ holy men that ever have been there^^ for these
thousand years (how wi^^ soever) have all erred.

Ephesians. 5.27. That he might prese^^ it to himself a glorious Church, n^ having
spot, or wrincle, or any su^^ thing, but that it should be holy a^ without
blemish. Note well these word without spot, wrincle, or any blemis^ and tell me
now if it be possible, tha^ reading this, thou can ever believ^ that she has
ever taught such horrib^^ blasphemies and abominations, as a^ this day she is
charged with?

See more John 16.13. Ephesians. 5.2^ Isai. 9.7. Ezech. 37.26. Luke 22.3^ Mat.
22.3. 1. Pet. 2.9. John 17.1^ Cor. 11.25. Psalm. 10.25.29. Ephesians. 2.10. John
10.16. Acts 4.32. Eph^s. 4.5.11. Luke 10.16, Deuteronomy. 17.8. Jerem. 3.15. Malac.
27. M^t. 16.18. Acts 15.28. 2. Cor. 13.8. 1. Tim. 3.15.

The Fathers a firm the same expressly S. Aug. cont. Cres^on. lib. 1. cap. 3.
Also upon the 118. Isal. the place begins: Ne auferas de ere meo verbum
veritatis usquequaque. S. Cypr. Epist. 55. ad Cornel. number. 3. S. Irenaeus lib.
3. cap. 4. with many others.

They affirm. VIII. That the Church has been hidden and invisible.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 5.14.15. Ye are the
light of the world, a City that is set on a hill, cannot be hid. Neither do men
light a candle, and put it under a bushel, but on a candlestick, and it gives
light to all that are in the house. But the Catholic Church is such a light,
such a candle, and such a City built upon Christ, as upon (...) mountain,
therefore had not, nor ca^ be hidden, nor is invisible.

Mat. 18.17. Tell the Church, if (...) neglected to hear thee: but if he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto the as a heathen man, and a
Publican. Bu^ it were a very hard case to be condemned as a Heathen, for not
telling, (...) hearing a Church, which has so closely lain hid, that no man
could here see, feel, or understand it for a thousand years.

2 Cor. 4.3. But if our Gospel be hia^ it is hid to them that are lost. Lo the
censure of S. Paul upon all such as affirm that the Church, or her Gospel ca^
be hid.

Isai. 2.2. And it shall come to pas^ in the last days, that the mountain (...)
the Lords house shall be established i^ the top of the mountains, and shall b^
exalted above the hills, and all nation shall flow unto it. In hundreds of
place do the Prophesies mention this Kingdom of Christ, as Dan. 7.14. Mich^
4.7. etc. Which should be all in vain if this his kingdom could be invisible;
for a Prophecy must be of things, which may be seen and perceived by our
senses; otherwise every man might be a Prophet, and foretell of things to come,
which if they should not come to pass, he might answer, that they had come to
pass in very deed as he had prophesied, but that they were invisible to the
world. Lo the visible absurdities of this invisible Church.

See more Psa. 27.8. Romans 19.14. 1 Cor. 11.19. Psa. 19.3, 4. Isai 60.20. Act.
20.21. Isa. 61.9.

The Fathers commonly affirmed the same. Origin. hom. 30. in Matthew. The Church
is full of light, even from the East to the West. S. Chrysostom. hom. 4. in. 6.
of Isai. It is easier for the sun to be extinguished, then the Church to be
darkened. S. Aug. tract. in John calls those blind, that do not see so great a
mountain. S. Cyp. de Vnitate Ecclesiae, to the same purpose.

They maintain. IX. That the Church was not always to remain Catholic or
universal, and that the Church of Rome is not such a Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Psalm 2.8. Ask of me, and I
shall gi^e thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for thy possession. And Luke 1.33. He shall reign over the h^use of
Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. But none of these
promises have been any where else so much verified, as in the Church of Rome;
therefore both the Church had been always universal, and the Church of Rome
only such a Church

Colos. 1.3. etc. We give thanks to God for you, etc. Since we heard your
faith, etc. For the hope which is laid up for you in heaven, whereof ye heard
before in the word of the truth of the Gospel, which is come unto you, as it is
in all the world, and brings forth fruit, as it does also in you, since the
day, you heard of it, and knew the grace of God in truth. But no Faith, or
Gospel has, or is, so dilated in all the world, nor has fructified, and grown
(for so we read) as the faith of the Roman Church has done, as appears more
plainly by this which follows.

Romans 1.8. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of throughout the whole world. Where in express terms, S. Paul
calls the faith of the whole world (or Catholic faith) the faith of the
Romans, that is, of the Church of Rome. Therefore the Church of Rome, and no
other, is truly, and indeed such a Church.

See more Colos. 1.32. Gone. 22.18. Mat. 24.46. Acts 1.8. Dan. 2.25. Luke
24.4.7. Psalm. 46.9. Psalm. 72.8. (we 71.) Mark 16.20. Ezech. 13.3. Mat. 21.19.
Acts 1.8.

All which places are to be understood, not that the whole world should be
Catholic at one and the same time, but that the whole should be converted to
Christ at sundry times, and that it should comprehend a greater part of the
world, then any Sect of heretics should ever do: and this is the true sense of
being Catholic, or Universal.

And to follow still our former Rule, hear the Fathers that affirm the same. S.
Cypr. ep. 57. writing to Cornelius, Pope of Rome, says: Whilst with you there
is one mind and one voice, the whole Church is confessed to be the Roman
Church. S. Aug. de unitat. Eccles. cap. 4. says. Who so dissent from the body
of Christ, which is the Church, that they do not communicate with all the whole
corpse of Christendom, certain it is, that they are not in the Catholic Church.
S. Hierom in his Apology against Ruffinus, and in other places, says, that it
is all one to say Roman faith, and the Catholic faith. Again, S. Aug. upon the
Psalm. 45. (we 44.) but much more excellently in ep. 161. ad Honorat. The place
begins: Dignere ergo rescribere nobis. As also cont. lib. Petil. l. 2. cap. 16.

The Reformers hold. X. That the Churches Unity is not necessary in all points
of faith.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Ephesians. 4.5. One Lord, One
Faith, One Baptism: Therefore Unity is necessary in all points of faith. The
reason is, for that the Church, being a Congregation of the faithful, one Faith
is necessary to make one Church, but our Adversaries differ in matters of
faith, therefore they have not the Unity requisite to one Church.

James 2.10. Wh^soever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point,
he is guilty of all. And even so it is in our faith, for who so denies one
Article denies all.

Acts 4.32. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of
one soul. And again 1 Cor. 1.10. New I beseech you Brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no
divisions among you, that ye be perfectly joined together the same mind, and
in the same judgment. Whereas our Adversaries are a hundred several minds and
judgments, there being an infinity of Se^ among them, without any the le^^^
show of Unity; And therefore ca^^^ not be the true believers mentioned (...)
the Apostles.

See more Jerem. 32.39. Cant. 2.^ Psalm. 67.7. Mat. 12.25. Mark. 24. Luk 11.1.
Mat. 18.19. Ephe^^^ 2.14, 15, 16.8.22. Ephesians. 5.2^ Philip. 3.16. Philip. 1.26,
27. Ga^^ 5.9. and 1.8. Colos. 3.15. John. 1.11. 2 Cor. 13.11. Psalm. 121.3.

And lastly to check, by our common Rule, the breakers of this Uni^ and Rule,
S. Aug. (eited by the M^nuduc. p. 134.) says: In Cathedra un^tatis, posuit
Deus doctrinam verstatis In the chair of Unity, God has place the Doctrine of
verity. As also cont^^ Par. l. 3. cap. 5. The place begin Qui non vult sedere,
S. Cyprian li^^ de unitat. Eccles. nu. 3. says: Thi^unity of the Church, he
that h^ldeth not, ^oth he think he holds the faith; S. ^ilary lib. ad
Constantinum Augu^um, and many others.

XI that S. Peter was not ordained by Christ the first Head, or Chief among the
Apostles, and that among the twelve, none was greater, or lesser than other.
Contrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 10.2. Now he names of
the twelve Apostles are ^hese: The first Simon who is called Peter. All the
Evangelists do put Pe^er in the first place, and wicked Judas in the last. And
wherefore this, but because the one was first in dignity and worthiest of the
rest; and contrari wise; the other last, and unworthiest of all his fellows?
Again, why, as Peter is called First, are not the rest called, Second, Third
etc. But to show thereby, that they did not therefore call Peter first, because
he occurred first to be named; but because he was the First, both in dignity
and authority whom therefore they all number First and call the First?

Mat. 16.18. And I say also un^^thee, that thou art Peter, and upon the reck I
will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Words
clearly insinuating S. Peter Supremacy in the Church of God; for according to
the Greek and Syria^ text (as our Doctors note) these words Thou art Peter,
sound thus: Thou ar^ a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build my Church. So
that, to say, that Peter is the rock of the Church, is as much, as to call him
chief, or head of the Church.

Neither without special mystery, did our Lord impose upon him this new name,
the name Peter (a Rock o^ Stone) being one of the most excellent names of Jesus
Christ, who is many times in holy Scripture, termed by the name of a Rock or
Stone, as Psalm. 117.22. Isai. 28.6. Dan. 24. Mat. 21.42. Romans 9.33. So that
this Sovereign, and absolute Pastor of the Church, did communicate this new
name unto his Vicat, to represent the more lively the supreme authority, which
he would give him over his flock.

And note, that Christ says not, I have built, or, I do build, but I will
build; the Church being built upon himself from his Incarnation: and so as
these words reserred to Christ (as our Reformers use to do) do not well agree,
to the building of the Church upon Christ, as head thereof for the time to
come; but most fitly agree to S. Peter, as Head thereof, for the time to come.

Matthew. 16.19. And I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,
etc. By these words also, no less than by the former, is clearly signified S.
Peter's Supremacy. For none has the government or commandment of the keys of
any Town, or City, but the Prince, Governor, or Magistrates of the same. And
that sovereign Power signified by the Keys, is likewise proved by that of our
Savior Christ: I have the keys of hell, and of death. Apoc. 1.18. As also by
the key of David, which opens, and no man shuts, shuts and no man
opens.

Now add to this that has been said the correspondency of the words of ou^
Savior to S. Peter, with the words of S. Peter again to him, and how clear
will this doctrine appear? For when our Lord asked his disciples Matthew. 16.15.
Whom say ye that I am? he demanded not, how they called his name* which was
Jesus (for that they knew full well before) but what his quality, office, and
dignity was? And S. Peter answering: Thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
Jesus told him not his Name (which was Simon) but gave him another name, and
such an one, as likewise signified the office, quality, and dignity, that he
bestowed upon him, saying: Thou art Cephas; or Petrus, that is to say, Rock or
Peter. Therefore he ordained him Head, etc,

1 Cor. 3.4 22. For while one says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I of Cephas,
I of Christ, etc. See, how from those he would have esteemed lesser, he ascends
to those whom he would have esteemed greater, and places Peter next to Christ.

Luke 22.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, etc. When thou art con^erted,
strengthen (we read confirm) thy brethren. Now what other things is it for
Peter, to strengthen (or confirm) his brethren, but to practice and exercise
his greatness over them? For he that does strengthen (or confirm) others, is
the greater: and they who are strengthened (or confirmed) are made thereby
inferior to him, who does strengthen; (or confirm) them.

Luke 22.26. He that is greatest amongst you, let him be, as the younger: and he
that is the chief, as he that does serve; Where the words, (He that is
greatest, is chief) do evidently show, that amongst the twelve, one was greater
than another, and was so accounted even by Christ himself.

John 21.15.16.17. Jesus said to Simon Peter: Simon love thou me more than
these? Feed my Lambs: feed my sheep (where the Greek has in the second place
for feed, govern or rule.) Hence it follows, that either the Apostles were not
accounted to be in the flock of Christ, or else they were subject to S. Peter,
as to their head, when Christ commanded him to feed or govern, not only his
Lambs (to wit, the lay people) but his sheep also, that is, the Apostles and
Pastors themselves: for besides Lambs and Sheep, there is nothing in the Church
of God. Again, if S. Peter loved our Lord more than all his fellow-Apostles
did; it follows necessarily, that he received more power to feed, than all the
rest did. For it cannot be conceived, that he is willed to love, more than to
feed: but he loves more than others, therefore he is willed to feed more than
the others; and consequently, to be head of the others.

Matthew. 12.25, 26. Every kingdom divided against it self, is brought to
des^lation. And if Satan can cast out Satan, etc. Satan therefore has a
Kingdom, whereof he is the chief. If then there be not only a visible Head of
the Church triumphant in heaven, but also a visible head even in hell; why not
a visible head also on earth?

See more Psa. 18, 43. Psa. 45.16. (we 49.) Wark 2.16. Act. 1.13. Luke 1.33. 2
Cor. 11.5.

The Holy Fathers do commonly affirm the same. Theophilactus in Luke 22. calls
Peter Prince of the Disciples. Eusebius in Chron. calls him the First Bishop of
Christians: S. Cyril of Hier. cat. 2. Prince and most excellent of all the
Apostles. S. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in Matthew. Pastor and head of the Church.
Euthym. in cap. ult. John. Master of the whole world. S. Leo epist. 89. Head
and chief of the Apostles.

They also hold. XII. That a woman may he Head, or supreme Governess of the
Church in all causes, as the late Queen Elizabeth was.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Timothy 11.12. Let the woman
learn in silence, with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor
to usurp authority over the man. Therefore a woman cannot be Head of the
Church.

1 Cor. 14.34. Let women hold their peace in the Churches, for it is not
permitted them to speak, but to be subject, as all the Law says, Therefore, etc,

I produce no Fathers for disproof of this point, for never was any woman so
presumptuous in our Forefathers days, as to take upon her such authority: but
will content my self to refute the folly, (...) this evident and convincing
argument.

Whatsoever power an inferior Minister of the Church has, that the head of
the same Church has, (at the least) if not much more. But every inferior
Minister of their Church, has power to Baptize, to give the Communion, to
marry, to bury, and to preach in the Pulpit; Therefore Queen Elizabeth could
Baptize, give the Communion, marry, bury, and preach in the Pulpit.

And who now is so simple, as not to see the ridiculous sequel of this
doctrine? For the denial of which notwithstanding, hundreds of Catholics heve
been hanged, drawn and quartered, as Traitors to her person, and the State.

But that no secular King can be this Head, an infinity of Fathers do affirm,
S. John Dam^scen. ser. 1. The place begins Tibi O Rex. And again. Non
assentior: I consent not that the Church of God be governed by Kings. Theod.
hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 28. makes mention of one Eulogius, who (being told by an
officer of the Emperor Valens, that the Emperor would have it so, answered
thus, What? was he mad^ a Bishop that day that he was crowned Emperor? The
place begins: Tumille. S. Ignatius Epist. ad Philadelph^ Wills all men without
exception, ever the Emperor himself, to be obedient unto the Bishop; the place
begins, Principes obedite Caesari. S. Chrysostom. hom. 5. de verhis Isaiae
calls the Bishop, a Prince as well as the King: yea, and that a greater also.
And hom. 38. in Mat. 21. The place begins, Quia in rebus spiritualibus.

XIII. That Antichrist shall not be a particular man; and that the Pope is
Antichrist.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 2 Thessal. 2.3. Let no man
deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come, except there come a
falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition.
Where these words, man of sin, and son of perdition, do plainly prove, that a
succession of men (as the Popes are) cannot be this man of sin: for so S. Peter
also should be Antichrist, for he was Pope, and the very first of all the
Popes. Therefore Antichrist shall be a particular man.

Rev. 13.18. Let him that has understanding count the number of a man:
therefore the great Antichrist, that egregious Apostata, or notable enemy of
Jesus Christ, shall be a particular man.

1 John 2.22. Who is a liar, but he that denies that Jesus is Christ? This is
Antichrist, which denies the Father, and the son. But the Pope denies neither
of both: Therefore the Pope is not Antichrist.

Again in 2. These. 2. Before alleged verse. 4. The Scripture says, that
Antichrist shall be extolled above all that is called God: and verse 8. That
our Lord Jesus shall kill him with the spirit of his mouth at his coming: But
none of all these agree to the Pope, no more than that our Lord Jesus is come
the second time.

John 5.43. I am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another
shall come in his own name, him ye will receive. He means especially the wicked
Antichrist: how then can the Pope be he, seeing the Jews receive him not?

See more Dan. 7.7. and cap. 12.11. Revel. 13.17. and cap. 17.8, 11. Luke
13.13. Mat. 24.15.

To follow our common Rule, the Fathers that affirm the same are S. Chrysostom.
and S. Cyril. who do both thus understand this very place last alleged. S.
Amb. upon the 2. These. 2. Hier. in ep. ad Algas. quaest. ^1. S. Aug. 29. tract.
in Joan. S. Irenaeus. l. 5. cont. here is. Valentin. Theodoret in his epitome of
the divine decrees, cap. de Antichristo.

XIV. That no man, nor any but God, can forgive, or retain sins.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, John 20.21. As my Father
has sent me, even so send I you. Now Christ was sent by his Father, not only
to Teach, Preach, Administer Sacraments, and to work miracles; but also to
forgive sins: but the Disciples were sent with power to Teach, Preach,
Administer Sacraments and to work miracles: Therefore also to forgive sins.

Ibid. verse. 22.23. When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said unto
them. Receive ye the holy Ghost: whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them, and whose sins ye retain, they are retained. Christ having first showed
his own commission, which was to pardon sins, presently gives his Apostles
power to do the same, breathing upon them the holy Ghost. He therefore that
denies man to have his power, either denies that the holy Ghost can forgive
sins, or that Christ gave not his Disciples the holy Ghost to this end and
purpose: both which are clearly false, and against the Scripture.

Mat. 9.3.8. but when the multitude saw it, they marvelled, and glorified God
who had given such power unto men, as to forgive sins. Which though they knew
to appertain to God only by nature, yet they perceived that it might be done
by man's ministry on earth, to the glory of God. Yea, those who affirm God only
so to remit sins that the ministerial power thereof cannot be communicated to
men; deny the one part of Christ distinct, or double manner of remitting of
sins, to wit, only in heaven and not in earth.

See more Mat. 16.19. and Mat. 18.1. Cor. 5.5. 1. Tim. 1.20. 2. Cor. 2.10.2.
Cor. 5.19. Number. 5.6.

The ancient Fathers, who affirm the same, are S. Aug. tract. 49. in Joan. And
in his book of fifty homilies hom. 9. S. Chrisost, de sacerdotio l. 3. S. Amb.
l. 3. de poenitentia, S. Cyril. l. 12. cap. 50. in Joan says: It is absurd,
that they should remit man's sins who have not in them the holy Ghost, Basil. l.
5. cont. Eunom. Proves the holy Ghost to be God (which that detestable Heretic
denied) because he forgiveth sins by the Apostles. S. Irenaeus l. 5. cap. 13.
S. Greg. hom. 6. in Evang.

XV. That we ought not to confess our sins to any man, but to God only.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Matthew. 3.5.6. Then went out
to him (to wit, to S. John Baptist) Jerusalem, and all Judea, etc. and were
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins. Not by acknowledging
themselves, but every man to utter, and tell his particular and secret sins.
Therefore we may confess our sins, not only to God but also to man.

Acts 19.18.19. And many that believed, came and confessed, and showed their
deeds (behold confession) Many also of them which used curious Arts, brought
their books together, and burned them before all men: and they counted the
price of them, and found it five thousand pieces of silver (behold
Satissaction) Therefore we may confess our sins to man.

Number. 5, 6. When a man, or woman shall commit any sin that men commit. etc.
Then they shall confess their sin, which they have done, etc. And that this is
not understood to be confessed to God in heaven, but also to his Priest on
earth, the whole Chapter, from verse. 12. unto the end, does clearly testify.
Add hereto, that he says not, they shall confess their sins (to wit, in
general) but their sin, to wit in particular.

See more Mark. 1.4. James 5.16. Mat. 18.18. Mat. 17.14.

See the holy Fathers that affirm the same. S. Iren. l. 1. cap. 9. Tertul. l.
de poenitentia, where he reprehend's some, who for humane shamefastness
neglected to go to confession. It is written of S. Amb. that he himself sat to
hear confessions, Amb. ex Paulino S. Clement S. Peter's successors, speaks
wonderfully pithily to this purpose, ep. ad fratr. Dom. But of all others
Origin is most plain for this point. l. 3. Periar. S. Chrysostom. l. 3. de Sacerd.
and hom. 85. in Joan. S. Aug. cited as before. S. Amb. oret. in muliere
peccatrice says, Confess freely to the Priest the hidden secrets of thy soul.

XVI. That Pardons, and Indulgences, were not in the Apostles times.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 2. Cor. 2.10. To whom ye
forgive any thing, I forgive also: for if I forgave any thing to whom I forgave
it, for your sake forgave I it, in the person of Christ. The Corinthian
aforesaid, was excommunicated, and put to penance by the Apostle, as plainly
appears 1 Cor. 5.3. and here in 2 Cor. 2. cited above, he gives order for
his pardon. A plain proof of the Apostles power, there of binding, here of
loosing, there of punishing, here of pardoning. Therefore pardons were in use
in the Apostles times.

2 Cor. 2.6. Sufficient to such a man, is this punishment (or Censure) which
was inflicted of many. Whence it is clear, that it lies in the hands of the
spiritual Magistrates, to measure the time of such punishment, or penance
imposed.

See more Matthew. 18.18. and Matthew. 16.19.

As also the Fathers that affirm the same. Tertul. lib. ad Mart. cap. 1.5. S.
Syp. lib. 3. ep. 15. and sermon. de lapsis. Council. Lateran. Can. 62. The degrees
of Innocentius 3. and 4. de poenitent. and remis. cap. Quod autem. S. Amb. l.
1. de poenit. cap. 2. the place begins; Dominus per jus. S. Aug. ep. 75. ad
Auxil. Episcop. The place begins, spiritualis poena. S. Chrysostom. l. 3. de
sacerdot. The place begins, Si rex aliquis. Lastly Pope Urban the 2. granted a
plenary Indulgence to such, as went unto the Holy War.

The Protestants hold. XVII. That the actions, and passions of the Saints, do
serve for nothing to the Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Colos. 1.24. I now rejoice in
my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind (we read, wanting) of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies s^ke, which is the Church.
Hence has ground been always taken of Indulgences (but much more principally,
from the super abundant merit of Jesus Christ;) There the actions and passions
of the Saints, do serve for something to the Church.

Philip. 2.30. Because for the work of Christ, he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his life, to supply your lack of service toward me.

Contrary also to an Article of our Creed, I believe the Communion of Saints.
For to what purpose believe we this, If their actions and passions may not be
imparted to us, nor serve to any purpose to the Church?

See more Psalm. 119.63. (we 118.) 1 Cor. 12.12. 2 Cor. 11.28. Psa. 53. (we 52.)
9.2. Mac. 15.16. Mat. 17.3. Luke 9.30, 31. Mat. 27.52. Apoc. 5.8. Genesis 26.5.
and 48.16. Exodus 32.13. Job 5.1. Hier. 15.1. Isa. 37.35. Mark. 14.36. Luke
8.44. Act. 5.15.

All these passages contain actions, or prayers of the Church triumphant^ for
the militant or p^tient, or for both, I care not which they grant, and yet one
they must needs confess.

See the Fathers that affirm the same, S. August. lib. de cura promort. cap. 2.
The place begins: Etsi nusquam. And again the same Saints in the same book, S.
Maximus ser. de sanctis Octavio and Adventio, the place begins, Cuncti
Martyrs. S. Bid hist. Eccles. Angliae, l. 3. cap. 19. S. Aug. in Pfa. 61. the
place begins, Vnus enim homo: as also S. Anselm upon the same Psalm.

XVIII. That no man can do works of supererrogation.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 19.21. If thou will be
perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. Hence it plainly appears, that man,
by the assistance of Gods grace, may do some things counseled, which are of
more perfection then the things commanded: and these we call, Works of
Supererrogation.

1 Cor. 7.25. Now concerning Virgins, I have no Commandment of the Lord, yet I
give my judgment) we read Counsel) as one that has obtained mercy of the
Lord to be faithful. And verse 38. He that gives her in marriage does well,
but he that gives her not in Marriage does better. To do that which is
counseled is not necessary, because one may nevertheless be saved: but he who
omits what is commanded (unless he do penance) cannot escape eternal pains.

Matt. 19.12. There be Eunuchs which have made themselves Eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven, he that is able to receive it (we read take it) let him
receive it. But this cannot properly be said of precepts, as S. August. notes
upon this place, ser. 61. de temp. for of precepts it is not said, keep them
who is able, but keep them absolutely.

See more Luke 10.25. 1 Cor. 7.1. Rev. 3.3. Acts 2.44. Acts 4.34.

And the holy Fathers affirm the same, S. Ambr. l. de viduit. Origan in which
we do over and above our duty, Eusebius. 1. Demonstrat. cap. 8. S. Chrysostom. hom.
8. de act. poenit. Blame not our Lord, he commands nothing impossible; yea,
many do no more then they are commanded. S. Greg. Nicen. 1. Moral. cap 5.

XIX. That by the fall of Adam, we have all lost our Free Will, and that it is
not in our power to choose good, but only evil.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Cor. 37. He that stands
steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own will,
and has so decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, does well. But
if a man have not freedom of will, as well to the one as to the other, why does
the holy Ghost ( Prove. 23.26.) require of us to give him our heart, if we
cannot consent but unto evil? Therefore it is in our power to choose good or
evil.

John 1.11, 12. He came unto his own, and his own received him not: but as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; words which
plainly imply a liberty of will: For when he says, some received him, and some
not, who sees not the libetty both of the one, and of the other; for these
would not receive him, and those would.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call heaven and earth to record this d^y against you, that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose
life, that both thou, and thy seed may live. And rightly may we call heaven and
earth to witness against them, who commit the same fault touching Grace, which
the Turks do touching Nature, For the Turks believe that the fire burns not,
nor water wets not, but that God does it, by the fire and water. And so our
adversaries say, that a man desires no good, nor does no good, but only that
God does all by man: but this is false. Therefore, etc.

Luke 13.34. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. How often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a Hen does gather her brood under her wings, and ye would
not. I would, (says Christ) and ye would not. What, for Gods sake, can be
spoken more plainly?

See more Luke 10.42. Act. 5.4. Ad Philem. verse 14. 1 Cor. 7.37. and 9.1.13. 2
Cor. 9.7. Hosea 3.9. Number. 30.14. Josua 14.13. 2 Reg. 24.12. 3 Reg. 3.5. Eccles.
15.15. Matthew. 19.17. Jos. 24.15. 2 Samuel 12. Prove. 11, 24. Revel. 3.20. Is^i
1.19, 20.

See the ancient Fathers, Eus. Caesar. de praep. l. 1. c. 7. says, that those
who hold this opinion, do pervert and overthrow, Vniversam vitam humanam, all
the whole life of man. And in very deed his reason is good, for upon this
consideration of man's free will, are grounded all political laws, precepts and
prohibitions, pains and rewards, which else were merely superfluous and against
reason. S. Hilary, 1. Trinitate, says: He would not there should be a
necessity for men to be the Sons of God, but a power. S. Aug. l 1. ad Simpl. q.
4. says: To consent, or not to consent unto Gods vocation, lies in a man's own
will. So teaches S. Ambr. in Luke cap. 12. S. Chrysostom. hom. 19. in Genes. S.
Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 27. S. Cyril. lib. 4. in Joan. cap. 7. We cannot in any
wise deny freedom of will in man. And S. Aug. afore-cited, says, lib. 2. cap.
4. de Act. cum Felic. Manich. How should our Savior reward every one according
to their works, if there were no free will.

XX. That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, though assisted
with his Grace, and the holy Ghost.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Phil. 4.13. I can do all
things, through Christ that strengthens me. Therefore it is possible to keep
the Commandments, or else it is false, that he could do all things.

Luke 1.5, 6. The Scripture speaking of Zachary and Elizabeth, says: And they
were both righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments, and
ordinances of the Lord, blameless. Yet Protestants usually say, that none are
so righteous as that they can keep any of them: but these two were so righteous
as they kept all of them: now whether of these will thou believe S. Luke or our
Reformers?

Luke 11.27, 28. Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou
have sucked. But he said; Yea, rather blessed are they that hear the Word of
God, and keep it. Christ pronounces them blessed, who hear the word of God and
keep it: but the commandments are the word of God, (which they affirm no man
can keep) therefore they affirm that no man can be blessed. And like unto this
is that of John 13.17. Matthew. 12.50. John 14.23. With an infinite number of
such like places, in their own Bible: all which this their false doctrine does
in plain terms contradict.

Luke 11.2. Thy will be done as in heaven, so in earth. In this petition,
either we demand a thing impossible; or else the Saints in Heaven fulfill not
the will of God in all things; else it may be fulfilled also by us on earth,
(one of the three) But the two first are great absurdities; therefore the
latter is to be granted.

1 John 5.3. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous. If the commandments were impossible, they
could bind no man: for it is not to be conceived how one should sin in a thing,
which he could not possibly avoid. And (if this were admitted) Christ saying to
the young man in the Gospel: If thou will enter into heaven, keep the
commandments, were as much as if he had said; If thou will enter into heaven,
take hold of the Moon between thy teeth.

See more Ezech. 36.27. Matthew. 11.30. and 19.17. Eccles. 15.15. Romans 13.8.10.
and 73. Josua 11.15. and 22.5. Psalm. 17.3. Deuteronomy. 30.11.1. John 2.4. Job. 27.6.
and 1.22. Romans 2.27. Luke 10.28 etc. 15.7.3. Reg. 14.8. and 15.5. Ephs. 1.4.
Galat. 5.14. Genesis 6.9.

See Origin. hom. 9. in Josue. S. Cyril l. 4. cont. Julian. S. Hilar. in Psalm.
118. S. Hier. l. 3. cont. Pelag. S. Basil, who says: It is an impious thing to
say, that the commandments of God are impossible.

They maintain. XXI. That faith only justifies; and that good Works are not
absolutely necessary to salvation.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible 1 Cor. 13.2. And though I
have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge;
and although I have all faith so that I could remove mountains, and have no
charity, I am nothing. Therefore faith only does not justify: yet, this
plainly proves that faith is nothing to salvation, without good works.

James 2.24. Ye see therefore how that by works a man is justified, and not by
faith only. Wherefore S. Aug. lib. de fide and operibus, cap. 14. writes, that
this Heresy, was an old Heresy, even in the Apostles times. And in the
preface of his comment. upon the 32. Psalm. He warns all men, that this
deduction upon this speech of S. Paul, Abraham was justified by faith,
therefore works be not necessary to salvation, is the right way to hell and
damnation. See the Rhemes Testament upon this place.

Jac. 2.14. What does it profit my brethren, though a man say, he has faith,
and not works? Can faith save him? This proposition (but especially the former)
is directly opposite to that which our Adversaries hold. Neither can they
pretend, that there is the like opposition or contradiction, betwixt S. James
speeches and S. Paul's: for though S. Paul say, Man is justified by faith, yet
he never says, by faith only.

Gal. 5 6. For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision, avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by l^ve. Note well this place: for if
^u Adversaries (who pretend Conference of places, to be the only Rule to
explicate the hard passages of holy Scripture) had followed but this their own
Rule, this one text would have cleared unto them all other, wherein Justice and
salvation might seem to be attributed to faith alone.

See more Mat. 7.21, 22. Mat. 5.21. Mat. 19.17. and 11.26. Mat. 12.33. Mat.
16.16. Gal. 3.12. 1 Timothy 5.8. 1. Joan 2.4. 1. Joan. 3.22. Romans 3.31. Phil. 2.12.

The Fathers that affirm this are, Origin in 5. Romans S. Hilar. cap. 7. in Mat.
And S. Ambr. in 4. ad Heb. says: Faith alone suffices not. S. Aug. de fide
and operibus cap. 51. says: I see not, why Christ should say. If thou will
have life everlasting, keep the commandments, if without observing of them, by
only Faith, one might be saved.

XXII. That no good Works are meritorious.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 16.17. For the Son of
man shall come in the glory of his Father, with his Angels, and then he shall
reward every man according to his works. He says not that he shall reward
every man according to his mercy, or their faith, So S. August. de verbis
Apost. sermon. 35. does interpret.

Mat. 5.12. Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. The word
Reward, in Latin and Greek, signifies wages and hire, due for works, and so
presupposes a meritorious deed, as the Rhemish Testament notes upon this
place.

Again Mat. 10.42. Whosoever shall give to drink, a cup of cold water only, in
the name of a Disciple, verily, I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his
reward. Therefore good works are meritorious.

2 Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that
every one may receive the things in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it be good, or bad; Words most clear, that Heaven is as well the reward
of good works, as hell is the stipend of evil Therefore they must needs be
enemies of a good life, and of all good works, who teach the contrary.

See more 1 Cor. 19.17. and 18.25 Heb. 11.26. Psalm. 18.20. 1 Cor. 4.5. and 3.8.
2. Esdras 15.19. Apo^. 22.12. Apoc. 16.6. Apoc. 3.4. and 22.12. Romans 26.
Eccles. 12.2. Colos. 3.23. Luke 16.9. and 6.38. Genesis 15.1. Jerem. 31.16. Sap.
5.16. 1. Tim. 4.8. 2 These. 1.6. Romans 11.21.

The holy Fathers unanimously affirm the same, S. Amb de apolog. David cap. 6.
S. Hier. l. 3. cont. Pelag. S. Aug. de spiritu and lit. cap. ult. and others.

XXIII. That faith once had, cannot possibly be lost.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luke 8.13. They on the
rock, are they, which when they hear, receive the word with joy, which for a
while believe, and in the time of tentation fall away. Therefore faith once
had, may afterward be lost.

1 Timothy 1.18.19. This charge I commit unto thee, Son Timothy, according to the
prophesies which went before on thee, that thou by them, might war a good
warfare, holding faith and a good conscience, which some having put away,
concerning faith have made shipwreck. Both which places do plainly reprove this
false doctrine. That no man can fall from the faith, which he once truly had.

2 Timothy 2.16. etc. Shun profane and vain bablings, for they will increase unto
more ungodliness. And their word will eat as does a canker, of whom is
Hymeneus, and Philetus, who concerning the truth have erred, saying, that the
resurrection is past already, and overthrow the faith of some. If faith once
had could not be lost, this saying of the Apostle should be false.

See more 1 Timothy 6.20. Rev. 2.5. Luke 19.24. Matthew. 23.8., etc. Romans 11 20.

The Fathers affirm the same frequently, and among the rest S. August. de
gratia and lib. de correp. and gratia, and ad articulo falso impositos. council.
Trid. less. 6. cap. 9.12.13. and others.

They maintain. XXIV. That God by his will, and inevitable Decree, has
ordained from all eternity, who shall be damned, and who saved.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Timothy 2.3, 4. God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth. Meaning, by his conditional will, that is to say, if men will
themselves, by accepting, doing, or having done all things requisite by Gods
Law: for God uses not his absolute will, or power toward us in this case.
Therefore he has not willed, and inevitably decreed any at all to be damned,
as our Adversaries hold.

2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his promise, etc. not willing
that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, Therefore he is
far from ever making any such decree, as our Adversaries would persuade us.

Wisdom 1.13. For God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the
destruction of the living. The reasons, which conclude this truth, are
manifest; for we must assure nothing of those things, which depend upon the
only will of God, without clear and evident revelation. But predestination is
such. Therefore, etc.

See more Ose 13.9. Ezech. 18.32. Wis. 11.24. Joan. 3.16. Romans 11.20.32. Prove.
20.9. and 28.14. Phil. 2.12. 1 Cor. 4.4. and 9.27. and 10.12. Eccles. 5.5. Job
9.2. Joel 2.14. Jonas 3.9. Act. 8.20. Ier. 17.9. 2 Joan. 1.8.

See the Fathers that affirm the same in particular, S. Aug. l. 1. civit.
Tertul. orat. c. 8. S. Cypr. lib. 4. epist. 2. And S. Amb. lib. 2. de Cain and
Abel, will not that we refer unto God the prevari^ation of Adam, or the treason
of Judas, though he knew the sin before it was committed.

Further they hold. XXV. They every one ought infallibly to assure himself of
his Salvation, and to believe, that he is of the number of the Predestinate.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Cor. 9.27. I keep under
my body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I my self should be a cast away. A man would think, that S.
Paul might be as sure, and as confident of Gods grace and salvation, as any one
of our Protestants be; and yet you see he durst not adhere unto their
presumptuous, and unhappy security.

Romans 11. 20 21. Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear, for if
God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee.
Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God, on them which fell,
severity; but toward thee goodness, if thou continue in his goodness,
otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

And Philip. 2.12. Work out your own salvation, with fear and trembling. Most
plain forcible places against the vain security of salvation.

See more, Prove. 28.14. Eccles. 9.1, 2. 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Pet. 1.10. Tob. 12.2.
13. Prove. 20.9. Eccles. 5.5. Job 9.20. Psa. 18.13. 1 Cor. 4.4. Deuteronomy. 4.29. 2
Cor. 10.18. 1 Pet. 1.17.

See S. Amb. ser 5. in Psa. 118. S. Basil in constit. monast. c. 2. S. Hier. l.
2. advers. Pelagianos, and l. 3. in Ierem. cap. 13. S. Chrysostom. hom. 87. in
Joan. And S. Aug. in Psa. 40. says: I know full well that the justice of my
God remains; Whether my own justice remain or no, I know not; for the Apostle
terrifieth me, saying. He that thinks himself to stand, let him take heed
lest he fall: S. Bern. ser. 3. de Adven. and ser. 1. de Septuages. says, Who
can say, I am one of the Elect, etc.

XXVI. That every man has not an Angel-Guardian, or keeper.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mat. 18.10. Take heed that
ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, that in heaven,
their Angels do always behold the face of my Father, which is in heaven.
Therefore they have their Angel-keeper. A thing so plain, that John Calvin
durst not deny it, although he would seem to make a doubt of it. lib. 1.
Instit. cap. 14. sect. 7.

Psa. 91. (we 90) 11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash
thy foot against a stone. This very passage, S. Cyril of Alexandria lib. 4.
cont. Julian, applies to our Angel-keeper.

Acts 12.13. etc. S. Peter knocking at the door, they said, It is his Angel.
Lo, how apparently the faith of the primitive Church appears concerning this
point.

See more, 1 Cor. 11.10. Zachary 3.10. Luke 15.10. Luke 16.22. Tob. 5.15.20.
Tob. 12.12. Tob. 5.27. Exodus 23.23. Joshue 5.13. Nun. 22.22.31. Genesis 24.40.
Dan. 9.22.

See S. Greg. dial. 4. cap. 58. S. Athanas. do communi Essentia. S. Chrysostom.
hom. 3. in ep. ad Colos. lib. 6. de sacerd. Greg. Turonens. lib. de gloria.
mart. S. Aug. ep. ad Probam cap. 9. and epist. 69. ad fratres in eremo lib. 11.
cap. 31. civit. S. Hier. upon these words, Their Angels, etc. Mat. 18.10.
teaches; That it is a great dignity, and marvelous benefit, that every one
has from his nativity, an Angel for his custody and patronage.

XXVII. That the holy Angels pray not for us, nor know our thoughts, and
desires on earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Zachary 1.9.10.11.12. Then
the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou
not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of suda, against which thou
have had indignation these threescore, and ten years, And what, I pray you, is
a prayer, if this be not? Therefore the holy Angels pray for us.

Tob. 12.12. Now therefore, when thou did pray, and Sarah thy daughterin-law,
I did bring the remembrance of your prayers before the holy One. He who
pleases to read the whole Chapter, shall clearly see the manifold benefits
besides this one, which men receive at the hands of Angels: for which see the
Annotations of the Catholic Bible upon this place.

Revel. 8.4. And the smoke of the incenses of the prayers of the Saints,
ascended from the hand of the Angel before God. What can be possibly spoken
more plain, to prove that Angels offer up prayers before God? yea this very
place is so understood by S. Irenaeus l. 4. cap. 34. toward the end.

See more Genesis 19.18.19.20. Dan. 8.15. Dan. 9.20. Acts. 5.19.

See also S. Hilary in Psalm. 129. who says: The intercession of Angels Gods
nature needs not, but our infirmity does. S. Amb. lib. de viduis. Victor.
utic. lib. 3. de persecut. Vandal.

XXVIII. That we may not pray to them.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible Genesis 48.16. The Angel which
redeemed me (we read, delivered me) from all evil, bless these lads, etc. Here
some perhaps will say, that this was God, and not an Angel. This is but a sorry
shift; for God had not then redeemed man, but long after. Yea this very passage
is applied by S. Chrysostom. to our Angel-Gardian hom. 3. upon the 1. to the
Colos. And by S. Hierom. upon the 66. of Isa. Also S. Basil. l. 3. cont. Eunom.
affirms, that this was spoken of a true Angel, and not of God: which being
so, who can with reason say he prayed not unto him?

Tob. 5.16. And when his son, had prepared all things for the journey, his
father said, Go thou with this man, and God which dwells in heaven prosper
your journey, and the Angel of God keep you company. Both God is here prayed
unto, and his Angel also at the same instant, saying, God prosper you in your
journey, and the Angel of God keep you company.

Ose 12.4. Yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed; he wept, and made
supplication unto him. Lo, what is plain, if this be not, for proof of prayer
to the blessed Angels?

But some perhaps will say; I could be persuaded to pray to Angels, if I could
assure my self that they could hear me, and knew what passes here on earth. To
this I answer likewise out of their own Bible, Luke 15.10. There is joy in the
presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents. Now what more
plain then that the Angels in heaven know what we do on earth; which if they
did not, how could they tejoyce at the conversion of a sinner? Therefore we may
pray lawfully unto them.

See more, Hos. 12.4. Song of the three Children verse. 36. Psalm. 14.8. Number.
22.34. Genesis 19.18.19.20. Psalm. 148.2.

S. Augustine expounding those words of Job. 19.21. Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me, says
expressly, that holy Job addressed them to the Angels. As also those other of
Job 5.1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, etc. the same S. Aug.
expounds of praying to Angels, in his Annot. upon Job.

Protestants hold XXIX. That the Angels cannot help us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Dan. 10.13. Michael one of
the chief Princes came to help me. which is further verified Revel. 12.7.10.
Where the self-same Angel, with his fellow- Angels, sought a battle with the
Dragon, and with his Angels. Therefore they can help us.

Ibid. verse. 21. And there is none that holds with me in these things, but
Michael your Prince. Therefore the Angels can help us.

Acts 12. from verse 7. to verse 12. Now I know of a surety, that the Lord has
sent his Angel and has delivered me.

See more Mat. 2.13. Mat. 4.6. Ps. 91. (we 90) 11, 12. Act. 5.19. Act. 27.23.
Psa. 104. (we 103.) 4. Heb. 1.7. Luke 16.22. Genesis 19.10, 15, 16. Genesis 2.17.
Isa. 63.9.

The ancient Fathers affirm the same. S. Justtn. Apol. 2. S. Amb. lib. d^ vid.
Victor. Vticens. l. 3. de per sec. V and. And S. Aug. de civit. l. 12. c. 31.
says. The holy Angels do help us without all difficulty, because with their
spiritual motions (pure and free) they labor or travel not. Again in Psa. 62.
he says: The Angels wait upon us pilgrims, and by the commandments of God, do
help us: the place begins, Attendunt nos peregrinos.

XXX. That no Saint deccased, has afterward appeared to any upon earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Matthew. 17.3. And behold
there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talking with them. Therefore Saints
deecased, have afterward appeared to some on earth.

Matthew. 27.52. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which
slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the holy City, and appeared unto many, etc.

2 Maccab. 15.12. Onias the High Priest, after he was dead, appeared to Indas
Macchabaeus alive. The like did Samuel unto Saul. What shall we say then to
those, that will deny a truth so clear? For some such my self have met withal.

See more Luke 16.27, 28. Joan. 11.44. Luke 7.15. and 22. Matthew. 9.25. Mark
5.42.

See S. Bid l. 5. cap. 13. hist. of England, and S. Gregory in his book of
Morals, in sunory places.

XXXI. That the Saints deceased, know not what passes here on earth.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luke 16.29. Where Abraham
knew that there were Moses and the Prophets Books here on earth, which he
himself had never seen when he was alive, as S. Aug. witnesses, lib. de cura
pro mortuis, cap. 24. Therefore the Saints deceased, know what passes here on
earth.

John 5.45. Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father, there is one
that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust. But, how could Moses (dead two
thousand years before) accuse those that were then living, if the Saints
deceased know not what passes here on earth?

Like unto this, is that Revelat. 12.10. And I heard a loud voice, saying in
heaven, etc. The accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accuses them
before our God day and night. Now the devils cannot accuse men day and night
before God, but they must first know whereof: who then will for shame deny that
to Saints and Angels, which must needs be granted to the very devils?

2 Kings 6.12. (we 4. Kings) O King Elisha, the Prophet that is in Israel,
tells the King of Israel the words, that thou speak in thy bedchamber.
Hence I thus argue, if the light of Prophecy could extend it self so far, as to
make known, see, and understand things so secret, yea, even to inward thoughts:
who can with reason deny, that the light of glory can do the same in the souls
of the blessed?

The like is proved out of many other places of Holy Scripture, as 2 Reg. 5.26.
where the Prophet Elizeus, being afar off, saw all that passed betwixt Naaman,
and Giesi his servant. Saint Paul was wrapped into the third Heaven, and saw that
which was not to be told to man, 1 Cor. 12. S. Stephen saw from earth Christ
sitting at the right hand of his Father, Acts 7. The richglutton saw from hell
to heaven (as Protestants confess;) how then say they, that the Saints cannot
know or see from heaven to earth?

And without some reciprocal knowledge, there could be no communion at all,
between the Saints in Heaven, and the saithful on earth (the which is an
article of our Creed) which notwithstanding the continual passage of souls
thither, does convince.

See more Matthew. 19.38. Revel. 2.26. Luke 22.30. Acts 5.3. 1 Kings 28.14.
Eccles. 4.6.23.

See Eusebius sermon. de Annunt. S. Hier. in epitaph. Paul. S. Maximus sorm. de
S. Agnete.

XXXII. That the Saints pray not for us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Revel. 5.8. The four and
twenty Elders fell down before the Lamb, having every one of them harps and
golden vials, full of odours, which are the prayers of Saints. Lo, how among so
many divine and unsearchable mysteries set down in holy Writ without
exposition, it pleased God, that the Apostle himself should clearly open this
point unto us, saying, which (odours) are the prayers of Saints, that so our
adversaries may have no excuse of their error. Therefore the Saints pray for
us.

2 Machab. 15.14. Then Onias answered, saying, This is a lover of the brethren,
who prays much for the people, and for the holy City, to wir, Jeremiah the
Prophet of God. Ancient Origin hom. 18. in Joan. says, it appears that
Saints departed from this life, have care of the people, as it is written in
the Acts of the Macchabees, many years after the death of Jeremy.

Jeremiah 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind could not
be toward this people. Hence S. Hierom. in his Commentaries, and S. Greg. lib.
9. of his Morals. cap. 12. do gather, that Moses and Samuel after their death,
both could, and did sometimes, pray for the same people: for otherwise it
should be absurd to say: Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, etc.

Baruch 3, 4. O Lord almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now the prayers of the
dead Israelites (we read, of the dead of Israel.) And Theodoret paraphrasing
upon the Prophet Baruch, interprets this place as Catholics do. Therefore
the dead of Israel, prayed for the living.

Revel. 2.26.27. And he that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to
him will I give power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of
Iron. Since Jesus Christ therefore imparteth his power unto them upon nations,
therefore they may with Jesus Christ, pray for those over whom they are thus
established. So S. Augustine expounds the same; writing upon the 2. Psalm.

We read also in the 16. of S. Luke. that the rich Glutton in hell, prayed for
his brethren that were on earth. If therefore the Saints in Heaven pray not for
us their brethren on earth, then we may say, that greater is the charity of the
damned, then of the saved. But this were too absurd to say. A conclusion which
S. Aug. draws from this very place.

See S. Aug. ser. 15. de verbis Apost. S. Hilar. in Psalm. 129. S. Damascen
lib. 4. de fide cap. 16. With many others.

XXXIII. That we ought not to beseech God to grant our prayers in favor of the
Saints, or their merits: nor do we receive any benefit thereby.
TWo ways there are of praying by the mediation of the blessed Saints. The one
by beseeching God to grant our desires in favor of them, and their merits. The
other, by expressly praying them, to intercede, and pray to God for us. Both
being impugned by our Reformers, we will prove them out of their own Bible.

The proof of the first is contrary to the express words of their own text,
Exodus 22.13. Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou
swarest by thine own self, and said unto them, I will multiply your seed, as
the stars of heaven, etc. And our Lord repented (we read, was pacified) of the
evil which he thought to do unto his people. See how plainly Moses prayed to
God, by the mediation of the holy Patriarchs. A form of prayer so pleasing to
him, as having said a little before, that for their sin of Idolatry, he would
consume them, the memory of his holy Servants being but laid before him, he
presently pardoned them. Therefore we may beseech God to grant us our prayers
in favor of them. Theod. quaest. 67. in Exodus writes, that Moses not thinking
himself sufficient to appease God by himself; added the intercession of the
holy Patriarchs. And the like does S. Aug. quaest. 149. in Exodus

2 Chronicles. 6.16. Now therefore, O Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant
David, that which thou have promised him. And Psalm. 1^2. (we 131) Lord remember
David, and all his afflictions. Lo, again the faith of the ancient Church of
God, before the coming of Jesus Christ, and how servent they were in this
devotion, still alleging the memories and merits of their Saints deceased,
thereby to move Gods mercy toward them. So prayed Solomon. 2 Chronicles. 1.9. So
prayed Isai 63.17. So prayed Hester 13, 14. So prayed David 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
naming Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, for his Intercessours. Who ever heard a
Protestant to say; Lord remember thine own mother, and all her afflictions, or
Peter and Paul and their persecutions: Nay, they desire the Papists to hold
them blameless for fear (forsooth) lest they should blaspheme.

Exodus 20.5. I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
Fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me, and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments. Here again God threatens to punish the demerits of wicked men,
deceased, unto the fourth generation of their children alive: and to reward the
merits of goodmen deceased, unto the thousand generation of their children
alive. Therefore we at this very day, receive benefits by means of our godly
Ancestors deceased a thousand generations ago. Thus much proof of the first
point, and to pass unto the second.

XXXIIII. That we ought not expressly to pray them to pray, or intercede to God
for us.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luke 16.24. Father Abraham,
have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he he may dip the tip of his finger in
water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Lo, two Saints are
here prayed unto, and besought in one ver. and yet our Reformers usually bid us
show them so much as one place in all the Bible for proof hereof. Where then,
for Gods sake, are their eyes?

But they will reply, and say, that this is a Parable and not a Prayer: which
we deny, offering to be tried by the voice of ten renowned and ancient Fathers,
all affirming this to be a true History, and not a Parable, as Theophylact,
Tertullian, Clemens Alex. S. Chrysostom, S. Irenaeus, S. Ambr. S. Augustine, S.
Gregory, Euthymius, and our Countreyman Venerable Bede.

But grant it to be a Parable: what does this make, either for them, or against
us? For every Parable is either true in it self, and in the persons named, or
at least is, or may be true in some other; or else it were a flat lie, or at
least a fiction or fable, which I presume they will never deny.

Whereupon I thus conclude as S. Augustine did a little before upon the
self-same History; If the rich Glutton in Hell, prayed to Abraham, who (as our
Reformers say) was in heaven, why may not we, who are on earth, pray to them
who are in heaven.

Job 5.1. Call now, if there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? (we read and turn to some of the Saints.) Now if it had
not been the custom in the time of Job, to invocate the holy Saints, it had
been frivolous for Eliphas, to have asked Job, to which of the Saints he would
turn him. Whereto I add, that S. August. expounds this very place in his
Annotations upon Job, in the same sense that Catholics do; yea, and long
before him the Seventy Interpreters. See more 2 Pet. 1.15. Dan. 3.28. Hester
13.15. 1 Chronicles. 29.18. Luke 16.9. and 15.10.

The Fathers that affirm the same, are, S. Dionysius cap. 7. Eccles. Hier. S.
Athanasius sermon. de Annun. S. Basil. orat. in 44. Mart. S. Chrysostom. hom. 66.
ad popul. Finally, S. Hier. prayed to S. Paula, in Epi. S. Paula. S. Maximus to
S. Agnes, sermon. de S. Bernard to our B. Lady and the like.

XXXV. That the Bones, or Relics of Saints, are not to be kept, or reserved,
no virtue proceeding from them, after they be once dead.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 2 Kings 4.13.22. where it
is written, that the bones of Eliseus, being touched by one that was dead, did
revive him. But this could not be, had not some virtue proceeded from them.

Acts 5.14, 15. And believers were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both
of men and women; insomuch that they brought forth the sick into the streets,
and laid them on Beds and Couches, that at the least the shadow of Peter
passing by, might overshadow some of them. It follows in ours (and that they
all might be delivered from their infirmities) which is quite, left out in the
English Bibles, though those set forth in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
reign have it as ours, in particular, that of Anno 1560. Whereupon S. Aug. ser.
39. de Sanctis, says: If the shadow of S. Peter's body could help them, how
much more now the fullness of his power? Wherein he supposes two things. The
one; that the shadow of his body being here on earth, did both help and heal
infirmities (which the late English Bibles all leave out, as I said, because it
makes not for them.) The other; that being in Heaven, he can still help us by
his power.

Acts 19.11.12. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, so that,
from his body were brought unto the sick, hand-kerchiefs, or aprons, and the
diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them. S.
Chrysostom. tom. 5. cont. Gentiles, Quod Christus sit Deus, in a whole book
proves hereby, and by the like virtue of other Saints, and their Relics, that
Christ their Lord and Master is God, whose servants shadows, and napkins could
do no such wonders.

See more Exodus 13.19. 2 Reg. 2.8.14. John 1.27. Where S. John had a reverend
esteem of the very latchet of our Saviors shoe, as of a Relick, which he was
not worthy to unbuckle, or touch with his hand: And the woman with the bloody
flux, of the hem of his holy garment.

See the ancient Fathers that affirm the same. Eusebius. l. 7. hist. cap. 15. S.
Athanasius, in vita S. Antonii. S. Basil in Psalm. 115. S. Chrysostom. ser. de
sanctis Juventio and Maximo. And S. Amb. says, But if you ask me, what I
honor in flesh dissolved, I honor in the Martyrs flesh his wounds, received
for Christ's Name. And, I honor his ashes, made holy by the confession of
Christ.

Protestants hold. XXXVI. That creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more
holy then they are already of their own nature.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Timothy 4.4. For every
creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with
thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God, and prayer. Yea, it was
a common use in the primitive Church, to bring bread to Priests to be hallowed,
Author oper. imp. hom. 14. in Matthew. and being blessed, to send it for sacred
tokens from one Christian to another, as S. Aug. witnesses, ep. 31.34.35.36.

Mat. 23.17. Ye fools and blind, whether is greater, the gold, or the temple
that sanctifies the gold?

Mat. 23.19. Ye fools and blind whether is greater, the gift, or the Altar that
sanctifies the gift? Lo, how plainly our Lord affirms in both these places,
that the Temple sanctifies the Gold, and the Altar the Gift: and generally all
creatures, severed from common and profane use to religion and worship of God,
are thereby made sacred and holy. Are not they therefore much to be blamed, who
keep such a scoffing at Holy water, Holy ashes, and the like?

See more 2 Reg. 2. (we 4.2.) where the Prophet Eliseus applied salt to the
healing and purifying of the waters. Toby 6.8. where the Angel Raphael used the
Liver of a Fish, to drive away the Devil. 1 Samuel (we 1 Kings) 16. Where
David's, Harp and Psalmody keep the evil spirit away from Saul.

See S. Greg. l. 1. dial. cap. 4. S. Aug. lib. 18. de civit. Dei. S. Hier. in
the the life of Hilarion, post medium S. Bid, lib. 1. cap. 30. hist. Angliae.

XXXVII. That children may be saved by their Parents faith, without the
Sacrament of holy Baptism.
COntrary to the express words, both of truth it self, and also of their own
Bible, Joh. 3.5. Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born of water,
and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. Therefore they
cannot be saved without Baptism.

Tit. 3.5. Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but according to
his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy
Ghost.

Marc. 16.16. He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved: but he that
believes not, shall be damned. Seeing Infants therefore cannot believe, they
must at the last be baptized, or else they cannot be saved.

Here they will object against us that of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. That the
children of the faithful are sanctified. But if they understand by their
sanctification, that they are born without sin, they do directly oppugn S.
Paul. who affirms ( Ephesians. 1.) that we are all born the Sons of wrath. Yea, S.
Paul. in the self-same place says, that the unbelieving Women is sanctified by
the believing Man: and yet I hope they will not say, that she obtains thereby
the full remission of her sins.

Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised Manchilde, whose flesh of his foreskin is not
circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from his people. But Circumcision was
not more necessary to the Israelites, than Baptism to the Christians; therefore,
etc.

See S. Aug. lib. 1. de peccat. merit. and remiss. c. 30. ep. 90.91. S. Leo.
epist. 80. ad Episcop. Campaniae. S. Irenaeus. l. 3. c. 19. S. Cyp. l. 3. ep. 8
ad Fidum.

XXXVIII. That the Sacrament of Confirmation is not necessary, nor to be used.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Act. 8.14. Peter and John
prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost (for as yet he was
fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in the Name of the Lord
Jesus.) Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.
Thus the holy Ghost is given in Confirmation, which was not given in Baptism:
how then is it not necessary, nor to be used?

Hebr. 6.1. Therefore leaving the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us
go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead
works, and of Faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on
of hands. Confirmation is here called one of the Principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, and a foundation of repentance: How then not necessary, nor to be used?

See the Fathers that affirm the same. Tertul. lib. de Resur. carnis. S.
Pacianus lib. de Baptismo. S. Ambr. lib. de Sacram. S. Hierom. contra Lucifer.
And lastly, S. Cypr. lib. 2. epist. 1. speaking both of baptism and
confirmation, says, That they may be sanctified, and be the sons of God, if
they be born in both Sacraments.

XXXIX. That the bread of the Supper of our Lord, was but a figure, or
remembrance of the body of Christ received by faith, and not his true, and very
body.
COntrary both to the express words and truth of their own Bible, Luke 22.15.
With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer: Now
to refer these words to a figurative eating only by Faith, were most absurd:
for we cannot say, that Jesus Christ could receive or eat himself in this sense
since all Divinity forbids us to admit Faith in the Son of God; Therefore that
Pasche, which he so greatly desired to eat with his disciples before he
suffered. was the Pasche of his own true body.

Luke 22.16. For I say unto you, I will not any more drink of the fruit of the
vine, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God. Words of wonderful force,
and which cannot be understood figuratively, no more than the former; it being
a thing as clear as the Sun, that of material bread and drink, there is no use
at all above in Heaven.

John 6.51. I am the living bread which came down from Heaven: if any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever: And the bread that I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. Beza is very angry, when we
ask him, If the bread that came down from Heaven, be living, or life-giving
bread? He willingly grants us the latter, but cannot endure to hear tell of the
former, and therefore translateth life-giving, instead of living. But this is
absurd, for the Sun is life-giving, but is not living: and being granted to be
living, what else is it but his body?

And note withal, that thus our Lord spoke of this blessed bread, before he
gave it.

Matthew. 26.26. Take, eat, this is my body. And Luke 22.19. This is my body,
which is given for you. What I pray can be spoken more plain? Notwithstanding,
they will needs maintain and affirm, that what he gave, and they received, was
nothing else but bare bread.

Note also, that our Lord spoke this at the very giving thereof, 1 Cor. 10.16.
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the Communion of the body of
Christ? And 1 Cor. 11. he adds: He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body. Thus
both before our Lord gave it; at the very giving of it, and his Apostles and
Disciples after he had given it unto them, and they to others, all of them call
it expressly our Lords B^dy.

Finally, against their true and real receiving of Christ by Faith, I say:
Either the Soul ascends to Heaven, there to feed on Christ by faith (which
Calvin confesses:) or else Christ descends to earth to feed the same. Not
the first, for so the unglorified Soul of man should be in two places at once;
which yet they deny even to the glorified body of Jesus Christ. Not the second,
for so Christ should be in two places at once, whom yet they say the Heavens
must contain till the day of Judgment, Act. 3.

See the ancient Fathers that affirm the same, S. Ignat. in ^p. ad Smyr. S.
Justin Apol. 2. ad Antoninum. S. Cyprian ser. 4. de lapsis. S. Ambr. l. 4. de
Sacram. says, It is bread before the words of the Sacrament, but after, etc.
of bread it is made the flesh of Christ. S. Remigius says, The flesh which the
Word of God took in the Virgins womb, and the bread consecrated in the Church,
are one Body.

XL. That we ought to receive under both kinds; and that one alone suffices
not.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, John 6.51. If any man eat
of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the bread which I will give, is my
flesh. Here everlasting life is promised by our Lord himself, to him that eats
of this bread only: Therefore one kind does suffice.

Luke 24.30.8.35. Christ at Emaus communicated to his Disciples under one
kind. Both S. Augustine and Theophilact expound this place of the B. Sacrament
in the same sense, lib. de consens. Evang, cap. 35. S. Chrysostom. hom. 17.
operis imperfecti. S. Thomas of Aquin, and many others.

But they will allege to the contrary that of S. John, Unless you eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you,
The answer hereto is very easy, which is, that the conjunction and, is there
taken disjunctively instead of or, as is learnedly observed by Doctor
Kellison, in his reply to M. Sutcliff, p. 189. Again, Christ in those words,
teaches us the precept, and not the manner of the precept; that is to say, he
commands us to receive his body and his blood, without determining whether
under one kind, or under both, as the Counsel of Trent declares. For he that
said; Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you
shall not have life in you, has also said, If any one eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever. And he that said, He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has life everlasting, has also said; The bread which I will give, is
my flesh for the life of the World. He that said; Who so eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him, has likewise said; He that
eats this bread, shall live for ever. Therefore one alone does suffice.

See more Acts 2.42.

They further hold. XLI. That there is not in the Church, a true and proper
Sacrifice; and that the Mass is not a Sacrifice.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Mac. 1.11. From the rising
of the sun even to the going down of the same, my Name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered to my Name, and a pure
offering. But this Sacrifice, or pure Offering cannot be understood of Christ
upon the Cross (as they would have it) which was offered only once, and in one
place, and then also not among the Gentiles, nor yet can be ever iterated:
therefore neither is, nor can be other, than the daily Sacrifice of the Mass.

Psalm. 110. (we 109.) 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. But Melchisedechs Sacrifice
was made in bread and wine: therefore it must either be granted, that our
Savior does now sacrifice (yea, and ever shall) in bread and wine above in
Heaven (which were absurd to say:) or else that this is meant of the sacrifice
of the Mass, whereon the Eternity of his Priesthood does depend on earth. Nor
can this be in a spiritual sort only, for that would not make him a Priest of
any certain order, as Melchisedech was.

Luke 22.19. This is my body, which is given for you. Which words do plainly
prove, not only that Christ's body is truly present, but withal so present, as
that it is given, offered, and sacrificed for us. For Christ says not, which
is given to you, broken to you, or shed to you, but, for you; Which clearly
shows it to be a sacrifice: it being evident, that one would never say of the
Sacrament (in the quality of a Sacrament) that it is given for man, but to man;
that is to say, that a man receives it: and contrariwise of a Sacrifice, that
it is offered, not to man, but for man.

See more Heb. 7.15, 16, 17. Heb. 8.1.3. He. 9.11.

The Fathers that affirm the same, are S. Clement. Apost. cont. lib. 6. cap.
23. who called it: A reasonable, unbloudy, and mistycal Sacrifice. S. Aug. A
singular, or most excellent sacrifice. lib. 1. cont. advers. leg. and Prophet.
cap. 18.19. S. Chrysostom. hom. in Psalm. 95. The mystical table, a pure and
unbloudy host, a heavenly and most reverend Sacrifice. Isichius in Levit. cap.
4. says; that Christ, preventing his enemies, first sacrificed himself in his
mystical supper, and afterward on the Cross. S. Greg. Nissen. orat. 4. de
Resurrectione, proving that our Savior gave his body and blood in sacrifice
for us in his last supper, says excellently; That a man cannot eat the sheep,
unless the slaughter go before; and yet averreth this to have been done by
Christ in his last supper.

XLII. That Sacramental Unction is not to be used to the sick.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, James 5.14. Is any sick
among you? Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let them pray over
him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord: and the prayer of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him. Hardly is there any Sacrament whereof the
matter, the minister, and the effect, are more expressly specified in all the
Scripture, then of this. The form is the prayer, Let them pray over him. The
matter, the oil, Anointing him with oil. The Minister, a Priest, or Elder of
the Church, Let him call for the Elders of the Church. The primary effect is,
the forgiveness of sins, and the secondary, the easing of the sick in body,
saying: And the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed sins, they
shall be forgiven him. Therefore Sacramental Unction, is to be used to the sick.

Mark 6.13. And they anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.
Where it is clear, that the Apostles themselves, put in practice this holy
Unction. Which Beza confesses in his Annotations; saying, that it was a
Symbol of admirable and supernatural virtue. And had he not reason so to say?
For oil of it self, could not be naturally the Antidote of all diseases: and
albeit it were, yet the Apostles were not sent to practice Physic, but to
preach the Gospel; Yea, it were a thing both ridiculous, and impious to make
them Trayclears, Carriers of Drugs, or Paracelsians.

Mark 16.18. They shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover. But
first, our Reformers are no true Priests. Secondly, they lay not their hands
upon the sick. Thirdly, they anoint them not with oil in the name of the Lord,
as S. James wills. Let them say the truth then and shame the devil, are not
they sick in their wits, who will oppose so plain Scriptures?

See the Fathers that affirm the same. Origin. hom. 2. in Levit. S. Chrysostom.
lib. 3. de sacerd. S. Aug. in Speculo. and sermon. 215. de temp. Venerable Bede
in 6. Mark and 5. Jac. with many others.

XLIII. That no interior Grace is given by imposition of hands, in Holy
Orders. And that ordinary Vocation, and mission of Pastors, is not necessary in
the Church.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not
the gift (we read grace) that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy,
with the laying on the hands of the Presbytery. See how plain it is that holy
Orders do give place. D. Kellison handling this Question touching the Mission
of the Reformers, proves learnedly (in his Reply page 7. and 44.) that this
foundation being disproved, the whole frame of their Church and Religion falls:
yea, that they have neither true faith, nor worship of God; and his reason is
this: if faith depend of hearing, hearing of Preaching, Preaching, and
administration of Sacraments of Ministers and Preachers, and Preachers and
Ministers of their mission, where there is no mission (as they have none) there
can be no true faith, nor lawful administration of Sacraments, and consequently
no Religion. Therefore vocation is necessary in the Church.

1 Timothy 1.6. Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of
God which is in thee, by the putting on thy hands. How plain the Holy Scripture
is against them. But they reply, that laying on of hands is not needful to
them, who have already in them the spirit of God, and inward anointing of the
holy Ghost. To which very question Theodoret makes answer, that God commanded
Moses ( Number. 27.) to lay his hands upon Josue, whereas by the Testimony of God
himself, Josue had already in him the spirit of God: S. Paul, although he were
called immediately from Heaven, yet was afterward sent with laying on of hands,
Act. 13.3.

Heb. 5.4. And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of
God, as was Aaron. Here our adversaries reply again, that Aaron had no external
vocation; but this is easily solved, for Aaron was the first of his Order, and
therefore could not have his calling by succession, and whose case is far
unlike to our Reformers, unless they will confess also that they are the
first of their Order; wherein they shall be easily believed.

See more Acts 13. 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 5.22. 2 Timothy 1.8. Number. 27.23.

See also the holy Fathers that affirm the same, S. Aug. lib. 4. quaest. super.
Number. S. Cyp. ep. ad Magnum. Optatus Milevit. the place begins; Ne quis Miretur.
Tertullian in praescript. the place begins, Edant origines.

XLIV. That the Priests, and other Religious persons, who have vowed their
chastity of God, may freely marry, notwithstanding their vow.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Deuteronomy. 23.22. When thou
shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; for the
Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee: but
if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. Out of which words,
two things are clearly proved; The one, that it is both lawful and laudable to
make Vows; the other, that Vows being once made, do bind, where otherwise
there was no obligation before, therefore such as have vowed Chastity, may not,
nor ought not afterward, attempt to marry; which if they do, they break their
Vow.

1 Timothy 5.11, 12. But the younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to
wax wanton against Christ, they will marry, having damnation, because they have
cast off their first faith. All the ancient Fathers that write upon this place,
expound these words of the Apostle, of the Vow of Chastity, or of the faith and
promise made to Christ, to live continently; as is abundantly proved in the
Rhemes Testament upon this place.

1 Timothy 5.15. For some already turned aside after Satan, To marry, after the
vow of chastity once made, is here termed by the Apostle himself, turning aside
after Satan. And hereupon it is, that we call the Religious that after marry
(as Luther, Bucer, Peter Martyr, and the rest of that lascivious rabble)
Apostates, Gods adulterers, incestuous, sacrilegious and the like.

See more Psalm. 66.16. Numb. 6.2.18. Josue 21.26. Ierem. 35.18. Eccl. 5.3. Acts
21.23.

See also the Fathers in confirmation thereof. S. Aug. lib. de bono viduit. c.
9. Athanasius lib. de virginitat. S. Epiphanius haeres. 48. S. Hier. cont. Jov.
l. 1. c. 7. What is to break their first faith (says S. Aug?) They vowed and
performed not, in Psa. 75. The place begins; Quid est, primam fidem, etc.

XLV. That fasting, and abstinence from certain meats is not grounded on holy
Scripture, nor causes any spiritual good.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Jerem. 35.5. And I set
before the Sons of the house of the Rechabites, pots full of Wine, and
Wine-cups, and I said unto them, drink ye Wine. But they said, we will drink no
Wine, for Jonadab the Son of Rechab, our Father, commanded us, saying; Ye shall
drink no Wine, neither ye, nor your sons for ever. Thus have we obeyed Jonadab
our Father, in all that he has charged us. Therefore fasting is grounded upon
holy Scripture.

Luke 1.15. For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink
neither Wine nor strong drink. Thus was abstinence, not only foretold, but
also prescribed by the Angel; which plainly proves that it was both a worthy
thing, and also an act of religion in S. John Bapt. as it was in the Nazarites
and Rechabites aforementioned.

Acts 13.3. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them,
they sent them away. Hence the Church of God has sufficient ground and warrant
for the using and prescribing of public fasts (which was not fasting from sin,
as our Reformers (forsooth) pretend, for such fasting they were ever bound to
keep) and that at such times, or seasons as the Church pleased to prescribe (as
in Lent, or the like) and not when every man lists, or the toy takes him in the
head, as Arius and other Heretics did teach, testified by S. Aug. Haeres 53.

Matt. 17.21. Howbeit, this kind of devils, goes not out, but by prayer and
fasting. Behold the great force of prayer and fasting, able to expel the very
devil. Therefore it causes great spiritual good.

See more Joel 2.12. Matthew. 6.16. Matthew. 9.15.29. Toby 12.8. Luke 2.37. Act.
14.22. 2 Corinthians. 11.37. 2 Cor. 6.5. Number. 30.14.1. Tim. 4.3.

And the Fathers. S. Ignat. ad Philip. S. Basil orat. de jejunio. S. Chrysostom.
orat. in sanct. Lavacrum. and hom. 1. in Genesis S. Ambr. ser. 4. S Hier. in cap.
18. Isa. and many others.

XLVI. That Jesus Christ descended not into hell, nor delivered thence the
souls of the Fathers.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended
up on high, he led Captivity captive (in their margent, or a multitude of
captives) and gave gifts unto men. Now that he ascended, what is it, but that
he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? These freed Captives
to be the souls of the glorified, no man in his right wits will say; nor the
souls of the damned, for so the devils should be brought again into heaven;
therefore they were the souls of the Fathers which Christ delivered out of
Limbus.

Acts 20.27. Because thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou
suffer thine holy one to see corruption. These very words S. Aug. applies to
the proof of a third place, and says: Who but an infidel, will deny Christ to
have descended into hell? Epist. 99. ad Exodus

1 Pet. 3.18.19. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the spirit,
by which also he went, and preached unto the spirits in prison. Now to
understand by the word prison, heaven there is no sense, since it is called the
seat of God, and not the prison of God. To understand it of the wicked, Calvin
himself opposes this opinion, and maintains that S. Peter speaks of the good,
who were known from the days of Noah. And hereto, that this doctrine
destroieth an article of our Creed Therefore Christ descended into hell.

Heb. 11.38.39.40. And those all having obtained a good report, through faith
received not the promise: (to wit of heaven) God having provided some better
thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect: to wit, in their
perfect and complete glory. Whence it follows necessary that they must needs
grant another place, distinct as well from the Heaven of the saved, as from the
Hell of the damned, wherein these holy souls were detained.

Mat. 12.40. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly,
so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights, in the heart of the
earth. But how I pray, is this Figure fulfilled, if Christ were not as many
days and nights in the heart of the earth, as Jonas was, who was not in the
whales belly in body only, but also in soul? Whence it follows, that either
Christ's holy soul, was three days, and three nights in the heart of the earth,
as well as his body, or that this place of Scripture, is either false, or
unfulfilled. Which were most absurd to affirm.

Matthew. 27.52.53. And the graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which
slept, arose, and came out of the graves after his resurrection, and went into
the holy City, and appeared unto many. Understood by S. Ignatius Bishop of
Antioch, of Limbus Patrum, writing to the Citizens of Trallis thus: many arose
with our Lord, for the Scripture says, that many of the bodies that slep arose
with our Lord. He descended alone, returned with a multitude.

Zach. 9.11. As for thee also by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent (we
read let) forth thy prisoners, out of the pit, wherein is no water. Both S.
Hier, and S. Cyril, understand this pit, to be meant of Limbus Patrum. And with
very great reason, for how absurd were it to say, that the damned have their
share in the blood of the Covenant? Or that they are set forth of their
infernal pit? Or that they may be said to be thy prisoners (that is Christ) but
rather the prisoners of the devils? Yea, where I pray (to speak properly) has
Christ had any prisoners at all (which he has let forth) if not out of this
place? Therefore, either Christ let forth prisoners out of Limbus Patrum, or
this place likewise as the former, is either false, or not yet fulfilled.

Like unto this, is that of 1. Samuel 2.6. The Lord kills, and makes alive,
he brings down to the grave (we read, hell) and brings up (we read back
again.) See how plain and conform the faith of that old Church was, and is to
this of ours, brings down to hell or bring-back again, which hardly in any
clear sense can be averred, if Limbus Patrum be denied. As for the word (grave)
which they erroneously have added in stead of Hell, to diminish the force of so
plain a place; why do they not as well foist the same into their Creed, in
stead of Hell, as here they have done, and say, Was crucified, dead an buried,
he descended into the grave? Who does not see this absurdity?

See more Osee 6.3. Psalm. 16.10. 2 Pet. 3 19. Zach. 9.11. Romans 10.6. Eccl. 24
45. Psalm. 23.7. Genesis 37.35.

See also the Fathers that affirms the same. S. Hier. in 4. and Ephesians. S. Greg.
lib. 13. Moral. cap. 20. S. Aug. in Psalm. 37. verse. 1. The place begins:
Futurum est enim, etc.

XLVII. That there is no Purgatory fire, or other prison, wherein sins may be
satisfied for after this life.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, 1 Cor. 3.13.25. The fire
shall try every man's work; of what sort it is. If any man's work shall be burnt,
he shall suffer loss, but he himself shall be saved, yet so, as by fire. S.
Augustine writing upon the 37. Psalm. and drawing these very words of the
Apostle into his discourse says: Because it is said (he himself shall be safe)
that fire is therefore condemned. Yea verily, though safe by fire, yet that
fire shall be more grievous than whotsoever a man can suffer in his life. Thus
he. Therefore there is a Purgatory fire, wherein sins may be satisfied for
after this life.

John 11.22. But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou will ask of God, God
will give it thee. S. Martha, the sister of S. Ma. Magdalen believed, that our
Lord (whom then, she held only for a holy man, or Prophet, and not for the Son
of God, could obtain of God, something profitable to her brother Lazarus, who
was deceased. For having said: Lord if thou had been here, my brother had not
been dead, she presently added: But I know that even now whatsoever thou will
ask of God, God will give it thee. Which speech she could never have used in
any good sense, if she had not learned this doctrine of the Synagogue, who
offered sacrifices, alms and prayers for the departed, and unless she had known
and believed, that the dead might be helped by the piety of the living; as
Cardinal Allen learnedly concludes in his Treatise of Purgatory.

Acts 2.14. Whom God has raised up losing the sorrows of hell. In which words
two things are to be noted, which clearly make for the proof of Purgatory. The
one, that in this place, where Christ was, there were certain sorrows and
pains. The other, that some there were inflicted for sin, upon whom he bestowed
that gracious benefit as to discharge and free them of those pains. For as the
Rhemes testament very well notes, Christ was not in pains himself, but losed
other men out of their pains.

1 Cor. 15.29. Otherwise what shall they do, that are baptized for the dead?
From this place an evident proof is drawn touching the help which the souls
departed out of this world may receive by the Church on earth, and consequently
proves Purgatory; understanding the pains and afflictions, which voluntarily
we do inflict upon our selves, to exempt those that are therein: for to
baptize, signifies to afflict ones self, to do penance, to suffer death, etc.
as is evident in S. Luke 12.30. But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and
Mark 10.38.

Luke 16.9. And I say unto you, make to your selves friends of the Mammon of
unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
habitation: S. Ambrose upon this place, and S. Aug. lib. 21. de Civit. Dei,
cap. 27. say, that it is to receive succor after death, according as the word
(fail) enforces.

Luke 23.42. Lord, remember me when thou come into thy kingdom. S. August.
says in his fifth Book against Julian about the midst) that the good Thief
in this prayer, presupposed, that (according to the common opinion) souls might
be helped after death.

2 Mac. 12.44, 45. For if he had not hoped, that they that were slain should
have risen again, it had been superfluous and vain to pray for the dead. And in
the next verse he concludes, That it was an holy and good thought, etc. This
place of holy Scripture, is most clear for prayer for the dead: for had it not
been the continual doctrine and practice of the Church to pray for the dead,
neither could Judas Macchabaeus (who was himself a Priest) have ever thought of
any such remedy, as to gather twelve thousand drachms of silver to send to
Jerusalem, to have prayers made for the relief of the souls slain in the wars:
neither would the multitude of people have either contributed, or the Priests
of the Temple, received the same, and they thought (as these men do) that it
had been superstition to pray for the departed, or, that there had been no
other place than the hell of the damned, or the heaven of the saved.

See more 2 Timothy 1.18. 1. John 5.16. Isa. 4.4. Isa. 9.18. Acts 24. Mat. 3.11.
Mat. 12.32. Mat. 5.26. Micheas 7.8. Psalm. 66.12. Toby 4.18. Philip. 2.10. Zach.
9.11.

As also the Fathers that affirm the same. S. Ambr. upon the 1 Cor. 3. and
sermon. 20. in Psalm. 118. S. Hier. lib. 2. cap. 13. advers. Jovin S. Greg. li^.
4. Dialog. cap. 39. Origin. hom. 6. in cap. 15. Exodus with many others.

XLVIII. That it is not lawful to make, or have Images.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Exodus 25.18. And thou shall
make two Cherubims of God, of beaten work shall thou make them, in the two ends
of the Mercy seat. These graven Angels were Images of the highest order of
Angels (one excepted) which is in heaven, and were made with faces of
beautiful young men, and commanded to be set up by God himself in the Holy of
Holies; which S. Hierom witnesses the Jews to have worshipped, epist. ad
Marcellam. Therefore it is lawful to make Images.

1 Kings 6.35. And he carved thereon Cherubims; and Palm-ir^es, and open
Flowers, and covered them with gold, fitted upon the carved work. Hence is to
be gathered, that the precept of not making graven Idols, does nothing at all
concern Images, that is to say, the true representation of things mecrly
imaginary and not subsisting, for as S. Paul says, 1 Cor. 8. An Idol is
nothing. So that the Idol represents that which is not, the Image that which
is; a most remarkable difference.

Again, seeing an Idol is that properly, which being nothing (as S. Paul says)
is represented to be something, or that which represents the thing that is not;
if our Reformers believe the images of Christ crucified to be an idol, they
then believe that Christ was never crucified; for it would follow necessarily,
that the image of Christ crucified, being an idol, therefore Christ was never
crucified.

Heb. 9 1.5. Then verily, the first Covenant had also ordinances of Divine
service, and a worldly sanctuary, etc. and over it, the Cherubi^ns of glory,
shadowing the Mercy-seat. Here S. Paul calls the images of the Cherubims, which
Solomon made, an ordinance of divine service, which our Reformers call the
making of idols; whom shall we sooner believe, Blessed S. Paul, or a Reformed
brother?

To conclude, an image is of such Divine and natural right, that all
understanding, imagination, and sense, as well interior, as exterior is made
by way of images, called species sensib^les, and insensibiles. The body cannot
be in light, without its shadow: the Moon and the Stars imprint their image in
the water: a man cannot look in a glass without making his Image, Therefore
either God and nature it self does break this Commandment as well as we, or
else it is absurd to say, that we break it in making of Images.

See more, 1 Kings 7.36.42.44. Numb. 21.8. Mat. 22.20. Exodus 31.2. Exodus 35.30.
where painting and engraving of Images, is so far from being counted Idolatry,
that it is proved to be a science Divinely insused into Bezaleel by God
himself; and so the invention of good Images came first from God.

The Fathers that affirm the same are Tert. lib. 2. de pudicitia, S. Greg. Naz.
ep. 49. ad Olymp. S. Basil. orat. in S. Barlaam. S. Aug. lib. 1. de consens
avang. cap. 10. witnesses, that in his time Christ was to be seen painted in
many places, between S. Peter and S. Paul.

XLIX. That it is not lawful to reverence Images, nor to give any honor, to
insensible things.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Exodus 3.5. And he said,
Draw not nigh hither, put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place
whereon thou stand, is holy ground. How clear a place is here produced
against our Reformers, wherein an insensible Creature was commanded by God
himself to be honored: for the refraining to tread upon it, was the doing of
honor to it. Therefore all dead Images, representing unto us a holy thing may
be honored.

Psalm. 99.5. Adore ye the footstool of his feet. Which place is spoken
literally of the Ark of the Testament, according to that of 1 Chronicles. 28.2. I
had in my heart to build a house of the rest for the Ark of the Covenant of the
Lord, and for the footstool of our God. Now the principal reason; why the Ark
was worshipped, was in regard of the images that were set upon it, which the
Jews did worship, as S. Hierom witnesses in his Epistle ad Marcellam.

Philip. 2.20. That at the Name of Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. Now, that is the Name
of Jesus, which either is pronounced by another mouth, printed in a book, or
painted and engraven in an image: but at any of these we are commanded to bow
the knee.

Again, if images ought not to be worshipped, we may not (whatsoever the
Apostle says) bow our knee at the Name of Jesus; seeing words, (as Aristoile
says, and as the truth is) are signs representative of the things they
signify, and are the images of the ears, as the others are of the eyes.

Number. 21.8. And the Lord said unto Moses: Make thee a fiery Serpent, and set it
up upon a pole: and it shall come to pass that every one that is bit, when he
looks upon it, shall live. Hence are evidently proved diverse things against
our Reformers. 1. That God commanded the making of this image. 2. The setting
of it up for a sign. 3. He promised that the lookers thereon should assuredly
receive succor and help. 4. He warranted the making, the setting up, the
beholding, and the reverencing thereof to be exempted from breach of the first
Commandment, by working so many, and so manifest miracles, at and before the
presence thereof. Therefore an image may be made, may be set up, may be looked
on, and reverenced, as Doctor Saunders most learnedly concludes, in his
Treatise of Images.

See Fathers that affirm the same. S. Amb. sermon. 1. in Psalm. ^ 18. S. Aug. lib.
3. de Trinit. S. Greg. lib. 7. epist. 5 ad Joan. Finally. S. Basil says ( in
Julian. citat. in 7. Sinod.) I honor the Histories of Images, and do publicly
worship them, for this being delivered us from the holy Apostles, is not to be
forbidden. S. Chrysostom in his Mass, turned into Latin by Erasmus, says: The
Priest boweth his head to the Image of Christ. S. Damascen. lib. 4. cap. 17.
says: The worshipping of the Cross, and of Images, is a Tradition of the
Apostles.

But before I conclude this point, I desire to solve a few objections, which
usually our Reformers bring against the Honor of holy Images.

The 1. Objection.

Is taken out of 2 Kings (we 4.) 18. where King Ezechias broke down the brazen
Serpent (whereof we last made mention) seeing it to be the cause of Idolatry.

Answer.

This indeed is a common place, from whence our Adversaries collect sundry
false and sophistical arguments, to wit, from the abuse of any good thing, to
destroy it utterly, together with the right use thereof. But by the same
Argument, they may as well collect, that the Sun and the Moon should be taken
out of the Firmament, because they were worshipped by the Gentiles for Gods.
Likewise that the holy Bible should be burnt, because many a one draws
damnable Heresies forth of the same, to his own perdition. Yea, this silly
Argument borrowed from the abuse of things, serves very fitly to prove the
quite contrary, thus: Images have been sometimes abused, therefore they were
good in themselves: for those things which are evil by abuse only, must needs
be good, being well used.

Their 2. Objection.

You give that honor to Images, which is due to God alone; worshipping,
adoring, and creeping to them, as to God.

Answer.

We say the contrary, which thus we prove. The difference of honor proceeds
principally from the mind, and not from the exterior bowing, or demeanor of
the body: For if I prostrate my self before an Image, or kiss the same, well
knowing the while, that it is no God, nor reasonable Creature, but only a
remembrance of God, toward whom I desire to show mine affection; God knows
how far off mine honor is, from that honor which is due to him alone. As
contrariwise, If I lay prostrate at Christ's feet indeed, kissed them, knocked
my breast, held up my hands unto him, called him the Son of God; yet all this
while, think him not to be so in my heart, mine honor truly should be no
honor at all, but a very contumely and affront unto Christ. Add hereto, that
the words which betoken honor, adoration, worship, and the like, are in a
manner confounded in all languages: but the heart from whence the honor
proceeds, knows well the difference of every thing. D. Saunders de Imag.
page 10.

Their 3. Objection.

It is expressly forbidden by God himself, to fall down before any Image, or to
worship it.

Answer.

Some of our Reformers themselves do honor the Sacrament of Christ's Supper,
which they teach to be an Image, or representation of Christ's body and blood.
And seeing they believe no other substance to be in the Sacrament, besides
bread and wine, nor will give the honor of latria (as we call it) thereunto;
it follows invincibly that they do worship, or honor some Image. Now, as they
would not for all this have us to judge, or call them Idolaters: even so, let
it please them (for their own sakes) to spare us. For as they do not place, or
stay this honor in the bread and wine, but from thence refer it to Christ
himself: so do we transfer all our honor from all Images, unto the first form,
or pattern, nor suffering the same to rest, or end in the Image which we
honor. Sander. ibid. page 52.

Their 4. Objection.

An Image is a Creature, and no God; and to set up a Creature to be worshipped,
or adored is flat Idolatry.

Images are set up in Churches, not specially to the intent that the people
should worship, or adore them, but partly to stir up our minds to follow the
example of those holy men, whose Images we do there behold. So that the worship
and reverence which is there given to Images, is given as it were by a
consequence, and rather, because it may be lawfully given, than because it is
principally sought to be given. As for the Idolatry, which is objected, we are
to understand, that the word is compounded of Latria, and Idolum, and is as
much to say, as the giving of Latria, or of Gods honor unto an Idol. But our
Images are no Idols, nor the honor we give unto them, that of Latria; how then
can it be said that Images are set up to be used to Idolatry?

Besides, for further eviction of a Reformer, that should charge me with
Idolatry, for reverencing a Picture, or Image, I would before his face break a
Crucifix, or tear a Picture of any Saint in pieces, and throw the pieces into
the fire, and this not out of any contempt, or scorn of what the Crucifix, or
Picture represents, but to satisfy him, that I gave them only an inferior
relative kind of honor, and used them as helps to my memory. And then would
show him the Council of Trent. Session 25. in these words.

Images are not to be venerated for any virtue, or Divinity is believed to be
in them, or for any thing that is to be Petitioned of them, or for any trust,
or confidence, that is to be put in them, as the Gentiles did of old, who
reposed their hope and trust in their Idols, but because the honor that is
exhibited to them, is referred to the Prototypes represented by them, etc. Thus
for the Council. And who can be so ignorant, or malicious, as to say this is
Idolatry?

Thus much have I thought good to add in this place, for the instruction of the
ignorant and unlearned people, who use to stumble at the doctrine of the
worship of Images, because indeed they understand it not. And what is said for
the worship of them, may also serve for the lawfulness of making them, since
the one supposes the proof of the other.

L. That no man has seen God in any form, and that therefore his Picture, or
Image cannot be made.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Genesis 3.8. where God
appeared unto Adam, walking in the garden of Paradise, in a corporal form. And
Genesis 28.12.13. to Jacob, standing above the ladder, whereon the Angels
ascended, and descended. For we must know, that it is only the outward shape
and form of the thing, which is expressed, either in this, or the like Image,
and not the inward substance thereof, which is not possible for any Painter, or
Carver to express; which though it express not all that is therein, yet that
which it expresses is a truth: and thus may God be expressed to us. Yea, why
may not God be expressed by Picture, or Image in the same form and manner,
wherein he has manifested himself to mortal eyes?

Ezod. 32.11. God appeared, and spoke unto Moses face to face, as one man
speaks to another. To the Prophet Isa. 6.1.5. Sitting upon a Throne. To
Daniel 7.9. Sitting, wearing garments, and having hair on his head like pure
wool. How then can any wise man, doubt, but that, that thing may be lawfully
set forth, or expressed in an outward Image, which necessarily must be
conceived by an inward?

1 Kings (we 3.) 22.19. I saw the Lord sitting on his Throne, and all the Host
of Heaven, standing by him on his right hand; and on his left. But perhaps they
will say, that God commands us to hear his word, and the Histories which spoke
of his apparitions, but not to paint them. I answer, That seeing we learn by
our eyes, as well as by our ears, there is no reason, why that may not be
painted before our eyes, which may be preached to our ears. Again, seeing we
may find the aforesaid Visions and Histories in the Bible; why may we not as
well see them painted in pictures, as written in a Book of white paper?

LI. That blessing, or signing with the sign of the Cross, is not founded on
holy Scripture.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Revelation 7.3. Where one
Angel said to four other Angels: Hurt not the earth, neither the Sea, nor the
Trees, till we have sealed (we read. signed) the servants of our God in their
foreheads.

Again, Mark. 10.16. And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them,
and blessed them. Therefore signing and blessing is founded in holy Scripture.

Luke 24.50. And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lift up his
hands, and blessed them. Therefore, etc.

See the Fathers that affirm the same, Dionys. Areopagita, cap. 4.5.6. Eccles.
Hier. Tertul. lib. de corona milit. Origin. in Exodus cap. 5. hom 6.^. S. Cyril.
Cat. 1. S. Basil. lib. de spirsanct. cap. 38. S. Chrysostom. bom. 55. in Mat.
cap. 16.

LII. That the public service of the Church ought not to be said, but in a
language that all the people may understaend.
COntrary to the express words of their own Bible, Luke 1.8. And it came to
pass, that while he executed the Priests Office before God, in the order of his
course according to the custom of the Priests Office, his lot was to burn
Incense in the Temple of the Lord; and the whole multitude of people were
praying without at the time of Incense. Where it is to be noted. 1. 1. That
this was then the common custom. 2. All the people were without, and the Priest
within; how then did they understand him?
Therefore the public service of the Church may be so said, as all the people
understand it not.

Levit. 16.17. And there shall be no man in the Tabernacle of the congregation,
when he goes in to make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out,
and have made an atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the
Congregation of Israel. Therefore etc.

I shall not need to produce the authorities of Fathers for this point, when
the practice of the whole Christian world, for these many hundred years
together has been directly contrary to our Reformers herein, against which to
dispute (as S. Aug. says) were insolent madness. See the The. Test. 463. But
against this they will object out of Scripture this their probablest place, 1
Cor. 14.16. When thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall be that occupies
the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? For thou verily give thanks, but the
other is not edified.

Hereto I answer, that there be two kinds of prayer, or giving of thanks in the
Church. The one Private, which every man says by himself alone. The other
Public, which the Priest says, in the name and person of the whole Church. As
concerning private prayer, no Catholic denies, but it is very expedient, that
every man pray in his own tongue, to the end he may understand what he says.
But for the public prayers of the Church, it is not necessary that the common
people understand them, because it is not they who pray, but the Priest in the
name of the whole Church For as it was enough for the people of the old Law to
know and understand, that in such a Sacrifice consisted the worship of God,
although they had not so clear an understanding of every thing that was done
therein (as has been said:) even so in the new Law, when the people assist at
the Sacrifice of the Mass, acknowledging thereby that God is worshipped and
that it is instituted for the rememb^rance of Christ's death and passion,
although they understand not the Latin tongue, yet are they not distitute of
the utility and fruit thereof; besides the help of the pious ceremonies
therein, which do instruct them in the whole.

And indeed this place by them alleged serves nothing to the purpose, but
rather against them, seeing it proves, that the common service of the Church,
was not then in a tongue which every man understood, but in another language,
which was not so common unto all. For S. Paul saying, How shall he that
occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at the giving of thanks, seeing
he understands not what thou say, shows that such giving of thanks, was
not accustomed to be made in the vulgar tongue; and requires, or rather
supposes that in the service of the Church, there should be some other to
supply the place of the unlearned, that is, one that should have further
understanding of that tongue, in which the service of the Church is said. But
had the service been in the vulgar tongue, there needed no man to have supplied
the place of the Idiot, that understands not So that, S. Paul shows most
clearly, that such service was not exercised in a vulgar tongue, but in another
which was not common to the whole people (such as the Latin tongue is now in
England, as also throughout the whole East) and yet was not in the contrary
extreme, that is to say, wholly strange, or utterly barbarous.

And seeing our Adversaries have this place continually in their mouths, and
thereby deceive the simple people, I would have them to know that this Text of
S. Paul, is greatly perverted by the Reformers themselves. For whereas the
Greek and Latin Text has, He who supplies the place of an Idiot, how shall he
say Amen? the Ministers of Geneva, in many of their Bibles, have turned the
same most deceitfully and maliciously, thus: He that is an Idiot, how shall he
say Amen? As if there were no difference betwixt an Idiot, and he who supplies
the place of an Idiot?

Moreover, the thanksgiving to which S. Paul says Amen should be answered, is
not at all practiced in many of our Reformed Churches, where neither Idiots,
nor those that supply the place of Idiots, do answer Amen, as S. Paul wills;
seeing they have altered Amen, into So be it, which is plainly repugnant to his
meaning, as also to the practice of the whole Church. For they cannot say for
their excuse, that S. Paul wrote to those, who spoke in the Hebrew tongue (for
Amen is Hebrew) since he wrote to the Corinthians, who had their public
service in Greek, and not in Hebrew: A main Argument, that the word (Amen)
ought to be retained in all languages, as it hitherto has ever been amongst
all Christians, before the days of our Reformers; insomuch that the most
learned S. Aug. writes, that it is not lawful to turn Amen, into any other
vulgar language, without the scandal of the whole Church. Aug. epist. 18. and
2. de D^ct. cap. 20.

To conclude, I cannot but much merveil at the simplicity of the common people,
who notwithstanding the great light of their reformed gospel, see not the
looseness and vanity of this their Leaders cavil. For neither the Masters, or
Scholars, are so senseless, I hope as to say, that their own service
consisting partly of the Psalms of David (the hardest part of all the Bible)
and partly of lessons taken out of the Old and New Testament, is understood of
all the people present thereat; since the greatest Divines that ever were,
durst never say so much of themselves. How wrongfully then do they wrangle with
us about this matter? But perhaps they will say, that though the simple people
understand not the hard places, contained in the Psalms and Service, yet (to
their great comfort) they understand at least some part thereof: The same say
we of our Mass, and of our simple people who assist thereat: and so I conclude
as I began in the Title of this book. By thine own mouth I judge thee, naughty
servant.

A TABLE OF THE CONTROVERSIES.
1. OF the Rule of Faith. page 1 2. Of the judge of Controversies in matters of
Faith. page 6 3. Of the Scriptures difficulty. page 8 4. Of Traditions. page 11
5. Of the private spirit. page 14 6. If S. Peter's Faith has failed. page 17 7.
If the Church can err. page 19 8. Of the Churches invisibility. page 21 9. Of
her Universality. page 24 10. Of her Unity. page 27 11. Of S. Peter's Headship.
page 29 12. Of a secular Princes Headship. page 36 13. Of Antichrist. page 37
14. Whether none but God, can forgive sins. page 39 15. Whether we ought to
confess to none but of God. page 42 16. Of Pardons. page 44 17. Whether the
actions and passions of the Saints, are profitable to us. page 45 18. Of works
of Supererogation. page 47 19. Of Free will. page 49 20. Of keeping the
Commandments. page 52 21. Of Faith and good works. page 55 22. Whether good
works are meritorious. page 57 23. Whether Faith once had, cannot be lost. page
59 24. Of Gods inevitable decree who shall be damned, and who saved. page 62
25. Whether we ought to assure our selves of our salvation. page 64 26. Whether
every one has his Angel-keeper. page 66 27. Whether Angels pray not for us.
page 67 28. Whether we may not pray to them. page 69 29. Whether they can help
us, or no. page 71 30. Of Saints apparitions. page 73 31. Whether they know
what passes in earth. page 74 32. Whether they pray not for us. page 70 33.
Whether we may allege their merits, in favor of our selves. page 79 34.
Whether we may not pray unto them. page 82 35. Of the Relics of Saints. page
85 36. Of hallowing of Creatures. page 87 37. Of the necessity of Baptism. page
89 38. Of Confirmation. page 91 39. Of the last supper. page 92 40. Of
receiving under one kind. page 96 41. Of the sacrifice of the Mass. page 98 42.
Of extreme Unction. page 101 43. Of holy Orders. page 103 44. Of Religious
vows. page 106 45. Of fasting, and abstinence from meats. page 108 46. Of
Limbus Patrum. page 110 47. Of Purgatory. page 115 48. Of making of Images.
page 119 49. Of worshipping Images. page 123 50. Of making of the picture of
God. page 131 51. Of blessing with the sign of the Cross. page 134 52. Of
service in an unknown tongue. page 135
FINIS.

