PRAECIPIOLVM: OR THE Immature-Mineral-Electrum.

THE FIRST METAL: Which is the MINERA OF MERCVRY.

By Joh. Bapt. Van-Helmont.

LONDON, Printed for William Cooper, at the Pelican in Little Britain. 1683.

Electum Minerale Immaturum (id est) Metallus primus est Minera Mercurii.
TAKE of the best Argentum vivum, which you shall Distill from its own Minera,
that is of the best Hungarian Minera which shall hold abundance of Argentum
vivum, one pound will hold twelve, thirteen or fourteen ounces of Quicksilver,
you shall distill this Minera, (first pulverized) in a Glass Retort with a
Receiver, then you shall squeeze the Mercury diverse times through Leather. If
you cannot get any Minera Mercurii Hungarici, take Spanish Mercury, which is
the best after the Hungarian, squeeze it through Leather diverse times. If you
cannot get this Spanish Mercury, take of the best Argentum vivum, that is to
say, if you put a little of it into a Silver Spoon, and hold the Spoon over
glowing Coals, and when the Mercury flies away it leaves a yellow or white spot
in the Spoon, this Mercury will serve, but if the Mercury leave a black spot,
it is not good for any Work. Take the Mercury which leaves a yellow or white
spot in the Spoon, wash it ten or twelve times with Salt and Vinegar, and then
squeeze it as many times through Leather, that it may be purged from its
outward foulness, the Hungarian and Spanish Mercury are clean of themselves and
need no washing.

Imprimis, y^u are to separate the Mercurium coagulatum from the Mercurius
Vivus, without any corrosiveness, and that the Mercurius Vivus shall be alive
still, and so clear as a Venice Looking-gloss: Which Mercury coagulate
Paracelsus, and Helmont calls Praecipiolum or Mercurius Coagulatus, and that it
shall be separated dead from its own Minera, and that the Mercury Vivus shall
be still alive after that the Praecipiolum is separate from it, and that the
Corpus Mercurii vivi is the Praecipiolum Minera, and that the Electrum Minerale
immaturum* is the Mercurii vivi Minera. Item Helmont and Paracelsus mentions
that when the Argentum Vivum or Mercurius Vivus shall come to his loca
destinata, that then the Argentum vivum shall leave his Praecipiolum behind him
in the form of a coagulated Mercury, and the Mercurius Vivus will go away alive
and remain a Mercurius Vivus.

The loca destinata, where the Argentum vivum shall leave the Semen Mercurii,
and the Praecipiolum is Gold and Silver, Gold is the best place, by reason of
the Fixation and Purity, and next to Gold is Silver.

In this Praecipiolum lies hidden the whole Art of the true Chemistry. If a
Chemist know not how to make or separate that Praecipiolum from Mercurius
vivus, he will fail of the whole Art.

This Praecipiolum is the matter whereof shall be made the Philosophers
Mercury, that is, when it is reduced to his first matter, that is in a clear
Water, like the Water which runs out of our Eyes now and then, and is slippery:
This Water will eat and drink his own Flesh and Blood, and multiply it self
with it ad infinitum, and this Water will bring all Gold and Silver into their
first matter, before Praecipiolum is brought into his first matter, (it is when
it is prepared Philosophically without Corrosiveness) it will cure triplicem
Hydropem, podagram, morbum venerium and also many more sicknesses.

The Philosophers call Argentum vivum their Wine, and the Praecipiolum they
call their Tartar, both makes the Philosophers Spiritum vini Philosophicum,
which they call now and then, Astrum Mercurii, Spiritum Mercurii, their Fire
their Sal Minerale and Sal Armoniacum, their Horse-dung their, Balneum Mariae,
and an hundred more names to deceive the People.

Processus compositus Praecipioli.

Take in the Lords Name of the Mercury which is well purged: ten parts of our
Gold or of our Silver, (not common Gold or Silver as the common people make use
of it) take ours, that is to say, Gold which is well refined through Antimony,
or if you will make it with Silver refine it with Lead, and purge those both
very well from their Dross and foulness: If you have ten parts of our Mercury.

Take one part of our Gold or Silver made to fine leaves or made into fine
Powder with a File, and make an Amalgama of them both in a warm Glazen or
Marbel Mortar, and with a Pestel of Glass mix it well, and then put this
Amalgama into a Retort (as I shall give you direction below) and put it into an
Earthen Copel or Earthen Pan, with one part of clear Sand, and three times as
much sifted Ashes, and cover it with another Earthen Pan, and put to it a
little Receiver, without luting, and then make Fire in your Furnace, and give
an indifferent heat, and distill the Mercurium from our Gold and Silver with an
indifferent heat, now and then, then take the Pan from it: If you see the
Mercury is distilled from the Gold or Silver, cover it again and let the Fire
go out.

The next morning take your Retort and Receiver from the Furnace or out of the
Sand, your Mercury will lie some part in the Receiver, and some part will hang
in the Neck of the Retort, which you shall wipe off with a Feather, to the
other Mercury which is in the Receiver.

If you will, you may now and then hold a glowing Coal under the Neck of the
Retort that the Mercury may run into the Receiver.

When you have separated the Mercurium, then scrape the Gold which will lie at
the bottom of the Retort with a crooked Iron, from the bottom of the Retort,
and take it out, and put it into a Glass Mortar and powder it small, then
mingle or Amalgamate your Mercury with it again by degrees or by little and
little, and put your Amalgama again into the Retort, and if you shall find any
Powder that will not go into the Mercury, do not cast it away, but put it with
the Amalgama into the Retort (or else you will lose your Praecipiolum) and
distill it again as it is mentioned. Now and then take the Earthen Pan from it
to see if the Mercury be almost gone over, and if it be almost gone over, let
the Fire go out, and cover with the Earthen Pan again, and let it stand until
the next morning, and then take the Retort and the Recipient again from the
Furnace or out of the Sand, and wipe your Mercury again with a Feather out of
the Neck of the Retort into the other Mercury in the Recipient, and scrape
again with your crooked Iron, your Gold out of the Retort as you did before,
and put it again into your Glass Mortar, (observe you shall distill so that the
Argent vive go from the Gold, and that not any Mercury may be found nor be seen
by your Gold which remains at the bottom of the Retort.) And then take your
Glass Pestel, and Powder again your Gold very small, and Amalgame your Mercury
again with your Gold, by little and little, as before is mentioned.

You will find that the Gold and Mercury will not well mix together as it did
in the first and second time.

Then take it and put it again in the Retort and distill it again as it is
mentioned, not casting any Powder away, which you will think to be faeces, if
you do cast it away, you will I say lose your Praecipiolum. And when the
Mercury is distilled away from the Gold again, take your Glass out of the
Furnace or out of the Sand copel, scrape your Gold with the crooked Iron, again
out of your Retort and you shall find that your Gold is much increased, if you
should weigh it; the reason is your Gold is the Lodestone, which has
attracted the Praecipiolum, or your Gold is the Cask wherein the Philosophers
Wine has let fall its Tartar which Paracelsus and Helmont calls Praecipiolum.

Now how shall the Philosophical Tartar or Praecipiolum be separated from our
Gold?

Take your Gold which you have scraped out of the Retort, and put it into your
Glassen Mortar, and powder it very small with your Glass Pestel and mingle your
Mercury by degrees as by little and little.

Your Mercury will hardly mix with the Gold, the reason is, the Gold is full of
the Praecipiolum, and then it is time to separate the Praecipiolum from the
Gold and Mercury, which is a Woman's work, when her Clothes, are foul, she
washes them from their foulness. The same way you must cleanse your
Praecipiolum from your Gold and Mercury as follows.

When you have the sign that your Mercury will hardly mix with your Gold, and
your Gold will not enter into your Mercurium vivum, then power on it the
clearest and fairest Water (distilled is best) that it may go over three
Fingers breadth your Gold and Mercury, then wash it well, stirring it with your
Pestel the Gold and the Mercury and the Water together which is in the Mortar,
I say you shall wash it together very well, until you see your Water is
discolored bluish black: Then is the sign that the Gold does let fall the
Tartarum or Praecipiolum in the Water and makes it bluish black, then power
off the Water into a Glass (observe that not any Mercury may fall with the
pouring out the bluish Water) then power more fresh Water upon your Gold and
Mercury, and wash it again as is mentioned, and when your Water is blew again
power off the Water to the former Water in the Glass, and thus continue washing
till your Water remain white, then power this Water to the other Water in the
Glass, and cover your Glass very close, that not any foulness may fall into the
Glass. Observe that your Gold will go again into the Mercury, when that
Praecipiolum is washed away as Wax goes in melted Butter.

Take your Amalgama abovesaid, make it dry upon warm Ashes very softly with a
Sponge, and by a little heat that the Amalgama may be dried and when it is dry
put it again in the Retort, and distill it as is before mentioned with the
Mercury as with cohobating; that is to say in distilling your Mercury, so often
from the Gold that the Gold will hardly mix with the Mercury, and this is the
sign that the Gold has attracted enough from the Praecipiolum, and then it is
time to separate with washing your Praecipiolum from your Amalgama.

Now observe, I gave you Charge that you should keep your Glass wherein you put
your bluish Water: which will be clear, and a Powder settled at the bottom,
which is some of the Praecipiolum.

Then power off the clear Water from the Praecipiolum without disturbing the
Water, as soon as you can into another Glass: Now when you have that sign, that
your Gold will not mix well with your Mercury, or not without great Trouble,
then power the same Water, which you powered off from your Praecipiolum into
another Glass, as it is mentioned upon your Amalgama, and wash it again, and
when your Water is bluish power off the Water to your Praecipiolum into
another Glass, as it is before mentioned, upon your Amalgama, and wash it again,
till all your Water has washed away the Praecipiolum, and then stop your Glass
again that no foulness fall into it, then take your Amalgama and dry it again
very gently, and distill again, as is mentioned, till you have the sign, and
then you shall wash it again with the first Water, and you shall find that your
Praecipiolum will Augment or increase daily. Thus stilling and washing shall
you continue till the Mercury is freed from its Mercury coagulated or
Praecipiolum.

Observe if the Water should grow less add to it now and then fresh Water.

Now the sign is when the Mercurius has lost all its Sperm, or its Tartar, or
its Mercury coagulate, or its Praecipiolum: The Mercury and the Gold will mix
always well together, and if you should distill it a thousand times that Gold
and Mercury the one from the other, and if you should wash it a thousand times
the one from the other with fresh Water, the Water will be clear, not bluish
and so long as the Praecipiolum is in the Mercury, the Gold and Mercury will
hardly mingle one with another, and then when you would have it mix together
you must wash it, and then it will lovingly mix again when it is washed: So I
say when your Praecipiolum is all separated from the Mercury, if you should a
thousand times distill your Mercury from your Gold, it will mingle always
lovingly together, and you will not find any Powder left, it will go all into
the Mercury and your Water remain clear and white.

Now further to our intent, as to make or prepare your Praecipiolum for a
Medicine, power your clear Water, from the Powder which lies at the bottom, in
the Glass that no Water may be left by the Powder.

Put the Glass upon a little warm Ashes that the Powder may be dried, the
Powder will look bluish yellow; also, put the powder into a little Cucurbit
Glass, and distill five or six times Spiritus vini from it, then your
Praecipiolum is made ready for a Medicine.

The Dose two Grains, or three at the most*

Compositio Aquae Albuminum Ovorum.
Take a good quantity of Eggs, boil them very hard, then take the Whites and
cut them very small, and distill them per Cineres per Alembicum very softly,
till you have gotten all the Water from the Whites, then take the Egg-shels,
burn them to Ashes, and put those in a Retort, and power upon them their own
Water, and distill it per arenam very strongly, and then power this Water upon
the Ashes again, and distill it again, thus continue five or six times, the
Water is ready for the Praecipiolum, the Mercurys coagulated Salt.

You may remember I gave you Instruction, that you should pour off the clear
Water from the Praecipiolum, and you should make dry the Praecipiolum, and that
Praecipiolum bring to a Medicinal Powder, or you shall bring all Metals,
Principally his own Body into his first matter, which cannot be done without
the Praecipiolum Salt, which is hidden in the Water you powered from the
Praecipiolum, the same Water filter through a gray paper, and set the Water to
evaporate in a round Glass very softly in Ashes, when the Water is evaporated
away, you shall find at the bottom of the Glass a yellow whitish Salt, which is
the Salt of the Praecipiolum, and the Clavis of the Philosophers, wherewith
they do unlock the Lock of the Praecipioli, and brings the same to his first
matter.

If you know not this Salt, you know nothing of the true Chemistry: This Salt
does decrease in the decrease of the Moon, and increases at the full-Moon, and
one Grain will Purge very softly all Podagrous, Venomous and Hydropical Humors
with two Grains of your Praecipioli prepared.

How to bring the Praecipiolum into his first or slippery matter.
Take your Salt and twice as much of your Praecipolum, when it is made dry
first dissolve your Salt in fair warm Water, and power it upon the
Praecipiolum, and evaporate it away very gently in warm Ashes with a gentle
Fire; then take your Praecipiolum with its one Salt and put it into a little
Retort, nip the Neck of the Retort very close, or melt it together, or Seal it
with Hermes Seal, then put it into Balneum vaperosum and let it stand six Weeks
in digestion or to putrify, and it will turn to a slimy Water, then take your
Retort, and open the Neck, then lay your Retort in a Sand Furnace and cover
your Retort with an Earthen Pan, and lay a Receiver well luted, and first give
a slow Fire, then a stronger, and this continue till your Spirits be well
resolved into Water, first your Spirit will come in form of a white Cloud, and
at last in the form of red Clouds or red Smoke, and give Fire so long till all
your Spirits be come over into clear white Water, and when you have this sign,
take your Receiver from the Retort, and stop the Receiver very well with Wax
that no Spirit may fly away: Then let your Fire go out, then take the matter
which remains in the Retort out of the Retort, and put the same into a
Bolthead and stop it well, and set it in a warm place, then take your Spirits
which are in the Receiver and rectify them once, and keep those Spirits very
carefully. Observe this* you may remember, when the Praecipiolon has lost its
Mercury that the same Mercury, will be so bright, as a Venus Lookinglass; take
the same bright Mercury and dissolve him in your beforementioned Spirit, as
now follows.

Take one part of your bright Mercury and put it into a Bolthead, and power
upon it two parts of your Spirit of Mercury, and stop it very close and let it
stand in a little warmth, and the Mercury will dissolve or melt in your Spirit,
and then distill it together through a Retort in Sand, and again take one part
of your bright Mercury and put it into a Bolthead, and power upon it two parts
of your Spirit and set it in a warm place and the Mercury will melt in the
Spirit; then distill again through a Retort in Sand, and it will come over in
the form of Water; this continue as long until the half part of your bright
Mercury is brought to a clear Water, when you have this clear Water, keep it
very close stopped with Wax, and take your Powder, which I gave you to keep in
a Bolt-head, and place it very deep in a Sand Copel, and give it a very strong
Fire for twenty and four Hours, then let the Fire go out of the said Copel, and
stir the Powder with a Wooden-stick, and power upon it the half part of your
clean Mercurial Water, and stop the Glass or melt the Glass-mouth together;
then shake it, and let it stand in a warm place for three or four days in
digestion, power off this into another Glass, and power upon the remainder of the
Powder another half of the Water and stop or melt the mouth of the Glass again,
and let it stand again for three or four days in a warm place in digestion;
then power it out to the former Water, and stop the Glass, or melt the mouth of
the Glass very close, that no Spirit may fly out or fly away, and let it stand
in your Balneo Vaporoso eight days, and then distill it through a Retort, and if
any stuff shall remain in the Retort, which will be very little, power upon it
your Spirit again, and distill it over until all is gone over.

Now is the Salt with his own Spirit mixed together and brought into the first
matter, keep it very well stopped.

This is the Water that the Philosophers have given diverse, yea above a hundred
Names unto it as their Horse-dung, their Balneum Mariae, their Calx Vive, and
in short, this is the Philosophers true Fire, without this Fire or Water no man
can do any true Work in Chimistry.

The Philosophers having brought forth this Salamander, which Salamander will
never waste in the Fire, the longer the stronger.

This Water will increase or multiply per Infinitum, that is to say, if all the
Sea should be Mercury it will turn the same into the first matter.

First you must wash your Mercury with Salt and Vinegar diverse times, and at
last with Water to wash away the Salt, then mix this Mercury with Calx Vive and
calcined Tartar, and distill it in a Retort in a Sand Furnace, and lay to it a
Receiver, filled almost half full with Water, and when your Mercury is dry,
then squeeze him eight or ten times through Leather, and then is your Mercury
well purged from his uncleanness.

This is the Mercury you shall use in multiplying your Spirit or Astrum
Mercurii.

Take of this Mercury purged one part, and of your Spirit or Astrum Mercurii
two parts, put them together mixed into a Bolt-head, stop well the Bolt-head,
and let it stand in a warm place one Night, and your Mercury will melt in your
Spirit or Astrum Mercurii, and turn it into Water, and then distill it through a
Retort, and thus you may do by repeating your Water with fresh Mercury as long
as you please. This Water will bring or dissolve all Stones and Gold and Silver
into their first matter, Item, it will bring Gold and Silver over with him,
through a Retort, and that Gold and Silver will never be separated one from the
other.

The reason is, Gold and Silver and all metals be of the same Nature, and have
beginning from the same Water; there is nothing in the World, but has its
beginning from it.

The Universal Medicine.
Take of fine Gold that is made fine Powder (that is to say, take the same
Gold, which did remain, when you made your Praecipiolum) one part of your
finest Silver, made to fine Powder two parts, put every metal by it self into a
Glass, power upon each your Astrum Mercurii, that it may go over it one finger
breadth, and stop each Glass very close, and let it stand in a warm place for
eight days together, and your Gold and Silver will be almost dissolved into
Water, then power off the Water every one by it self in a Glass, and power more
Water to the Gold and Silver which did remain, and let it stand eight days in a
warm place, and then power your Waters off to your former Waters, and all your
Gold and Silver will be dissolved into Water, and there will remain some
faeces; then take of both these Waters of each the fourth part, and put them
together in a Bolt-head, that no more of the Bolt-head be empty then three
parts, and Seal your Bolt-head or melt your Bolt-head mouth very close, and put
your Bolt-head into an Athanor with your matter into a continual warm heat
until it do come to a fixed red Stone or Powder; before it do come to a red
Powder, will appear in your Bolt-head many Colors, as black, green, yellow and
red, and when it is red and a Powder, then take your Bolt-head and bury it in a
Sand Copel very deep and give by degrees Fire, and at last a very strong Fire,
and it will melt as Wax, and let it stand one whole week, or the longer the
better, then take it out and let it cool, and break your Glass and you will
find a fixed Stone, or Powder as red as Scarlet, I did give you Charge that you
should keep three parts of your Gold and Silver which was dissolved into Water,
put both these Waters together in a Retort, distill them, and both the Gold and
Silver will go with the Water over through the Retort, with which Water you
shall multiply your Medicine.

Now take one part of your Medicine made into fine Powder, and put it into a
little Bolt-head, and pour upon it twice as much of your Water, as of Gold and
Silver, and Seal it again, and set it into your Athanor again, until it do come
into a red Powder, and then put it again into the Sand, for to give him the
Fixation, that he may melt like Wax: Upon such a way you may multiply your
Medicine ad Infinitum, and your Powder will dissolve in any Liquor.

Now as to make your Astrum Horizontale, or your Golden fixed Praecipitate.

Take the Gold that remains over in the working of your Praecipiolum, and
make it into a Powder, dissolve it in your Astrum Mercurii as much as you will,
distill through the Retort once or twice, and your Gold will go over along with
your Water, and will never be separated one from the other, they are both of
one Nature.

Now take your Praecipiolum which is made dry, (I do not mean your Praecipiolum
which is made already dry to a Medicine) put it into a little Glass Cucurbit,
and pour upon it your Golden Astrum Mercurii, and distill it from it three or
four times very slowly, and at last very strong, and your Praecipiolum will be
red and fixed, if you will you may do the same with Mercury purged, it will fix
the same to a red Powder, and you may do this work with Silver, and with your
Praecipiolum or Argentum vivum purgatum. No man can find out all those Secrets
which are hidden in this Philosophical Menstruum.

The Oil of Gold.
Take one part of Gold, five or six parts of the best Mercury, mix them both
together, and then distill the Mercury from the Gold, and then mix the same
Mercury again with the Gold, and this continue until your Gold will not mix
with your Mercury, then take the Gold and grind it, and put it into a clean
Crusible and Calcine it, till it be almost red-hot, and then extinguish your
Gold in the best rectified Spirit of Vinegar, when it is extinguished pour off
your Vinegar from the Gold: make your Gold dry, and then make it hot again,
then again extinguish it in your former Vinegar, and this repeat five or six
times, and then, take your Gold and make it dry, and Amalgame it again with the
aforementioned Mercury, and distill it again as at the first, and this do so
long until the Gold will not mix with your Mercury, and then Calcine your Gold
again, and extinguish it in the former Vinegar five or six times, if your
Vinegar decay or waste you may add to it some more fresh Vinegar. And this you
may continue until you think there is no strength left in your Mercury: Then
you must take fresh Mercury and go to work as before, and so continue, till you
think you have enough from the Gold.

Then take your Vinegar which is impregnated with the whole Essence of Gold,
Evaporate it, or distill it very softly off, and it will lie at the bottom, like
a yellow Salt, which you shall dissolve in fair distilled Rain Water; filter it
and evaporate it again softly, and then put it into a little Retort, and place
it in Sand, with an indifferent large Receiver for it, and give a Fire by
degrees and it will come over in a white Spirit like Smoke, and then it will
come over red like Saffron, and when it is resolved into a red Liquor, let the
Fire go out and keep it for use, the Dose is three or four drops.

This is (says the Author) one of the greatest Medicines under the Sun, and
you can hardly get a better.

Three drops, are able to extinguish any sickness, and in this Oil of Gold is
the greatest Secret of Nature.

With this Liquor Reymond Lully figureth Mercury in Exenterata Natura.

These Processes was by a German given to Mr. Richard Pratt, who lived some
time in Hantshire and cured the German of a Sickness, for which Kindness the
German gave him these Processes, protesting that they were some of
Van-Helmonts, and Mr. Pratt gave them to Mr. Yalden minister of Compton near
Godlyman in Surry, who sent them to Dr. Salmon to Print, which he neglecting,
some Years they were sent with Dr. Antonies's Recipe of his Aurum potabile to
William Cooper to Print for the benefit of the Public, and since I received
them, I find Dr. Salmon has newly Printed them in his Doron Medicum called
Liquor Aureus, Lib. 2 d. Book 11. Sect. 2. page 520 to 523. As for the Electrum
minerale Immaturum which he calls Idea, vide Doron lib. 1. Cap. 27. page 315.
to 326. But so very much mangled and altered by putting in feigned Names, when
indeed he received all of them in their proper known Names as you have them
here Printed one purpose to prevent men's being deceived, for Mr. Yalden is a
Man of so Christian a Temper, that he thirsts to do all the good he could in
this World, the Truth hereof his poor Parishioners and Neighbors will
sufficiently testify. Therefore to undeceive the World, and to save men from
false Broyleries and Chargeable Expenses, I have here Printed the true Copy as
Mr. Yalden sent it to me, W. C. B.

FINIS.

