A Cabbalistical DIALOGUE IN ANSWER To the Opinion of a Learned Doctor in
Philosophy and Theology, THAT THE WORLD WAS MADE OF NOTHING.

As it is Contained in the Second Part of the Cabbala Denudata and Apparatus in
Lib. Sohar, p. 308. etc. Printed in Latin at Sultsbach, Anno 1677. To which is
subjoyned A Rabbinical and Paraphrastical Exposition of Genesis 1. written in
High Dutch by the Author of the foregoing Dialogue, first done into Latin, but
now made English.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street,
Bookseller, MDCLXXXII.

A Cabbalistical Dialogue in Answer to the Opinion of a Learned Doctor in
Philosophy and Theology, That the World was made of Nothing. To which is
Subjoined a Rabbinical and Paraphrastical Exposition of the First Chapter of
Genesis.
Compiler. THE Marts and Fairs drawing near, I cannot possibly enquire of thee
concerning all those things which I once was determined to enquire of: Only
tell me briefly for the present; Are these the Fundamentals of thy Cabbala,
which are proposed in the Aeto-paedo-melissaean Dream?


Cabbal No, no; But what answer shall I give to one that is ^n have; unless
thou do allow me to defer until another time those things, which are more
amply to be added to those three Treatises, called, A further Disquisition, the
Exposition of the Mercava, and the Cabbalistical Catechism?


Compil. Be it so. This is all I ask in the first place, Whether do thou deny
all Creation, properly so called? Or what is Creation, according to thy
Hypothesis or doctrinal Supposition?


Cabb. I will answer Paradox^s with Paradoxes; and because I perceive thou
examinest all things so strictly in the Balance of Reason, which for the most
part is stark blind in these more sublime matters; I shall answer
problematically, so as ye may be able to judge, whether our Cabbalistical
ter^^s do not also admit of another interpretation, according to the dictate of
reason, than such a one as may be said to labor under an absurdity. But as for
our Hypothesis it self, I shall more freely expatiate on that another time. Now
therefore to answer thy question, I know one, who is of our number, who
defines Creation, properly so called, to be the effection of an infinite
efficient, whereby a separable Being is constituted, or made. This definition
of Active Creation, may also be easily applied to Passive Creation; or to that
which is Relative, that is, to that respect which the Creator has to the
Creature, or on the contrary: As also to that Creation which is mediate,
whether it be so in regard of the Efficient, or in regard of the Effect. And
what absurdity is there in all this?


Compil. But why, in this definition, do thou omit that, which we call the
formal reason of Creation, viz. that it is done out of Nothing?


Cabb Because the Particle [Ex] out of does only denote or properly belong to
matter; nor can it Properly belong to Spirit; which yet is the most proper
Subject of Creation, properly so called: and of this [Spirit] it can no wise be
said, that it is, or is not [Ex] out of another, but only that it is [ab] or
from another: just as we say, not that an Idaea or conception is made out of
the Soul, or out of the Mind, but from the Soul, or from the Mind: or that the
beams or rays of a Created Spirit are made out of its Center (unless
peradventure with regard to place) but from the Center: or that the Hands, or
other formal Members of an Angel, when he appears, are made out of the Angel,
but are made from him.


Compil. But thus thou seem to shut out matter from Creation.


Cabb. No, but only from such a Creation as is immediate. For these are our
Positions. 1. That the Creator first brings into being a spiritual Nature. 2.
And that either arbitrarily [when he pleas^d;] or continually, as he
continually understands, generates, etc. 3. That some of these Spirits, for
some certain cause or reason, are slipped down from the state of knowing, of
Penetrating, or of moving into a state of impenetration. 4. That these Monades
or single Beings being now become spiritless or dull, did cling or come
together after various manners. 5. That this coalition or clinging together, so
long as is remains such, is called matter. 6. That, out of this matter^, all
things material do consist, which yet shall in time return again to a more
loosned and free state. No contradiction is involved in all these. Hence the
Creator may also be said to be the efficient cause of all things materiated or
made material, although not immediately.



Comp. After this rate, the Creature would be coeternal, and co-existent with
God.


Cabb. No otherwise, than as the beam or light is said to be co-existent with
the Sun; a Conception, Idaea, or thought with the mind; a Mode, Manner, or
Accident of a Being is coexisient with its Being; a thing dependent with that
on which it depends; the effect with its positive actual efficient cause; and
a many such like. For thus may Unity be always better conceived to be in God,
because thus he will always have Pluralities as his oppo^ites* In like manner
will his Goodness be better thus conceived by reason of his incessant
communication to his Creatures Also that he is the supreme Act, because he will
always actuate other B^ings* Also that he is the Beginning and the Cause,
because he will always influence his Creatures as their cause. Also that he is
the Subject, because he will always have Adjuncts* Also that he is the
Measure, because he will always commensurate others. Also that he is Priority,
because he will always have all else to be Posterior to, or after, him. Also
that he is the Substance, because he will always bear up all things. Also that
he is the Crown, because he will encompass or comprehend all others. And so of
all the Rest of his Names and Numbers, and therefore also belongs to him the
No^ion of a Kingdom, because he will always have Subjects.


Comp. Why thus it will follow that God did Create by intrinsecal necessity.


Cabb. There will be no absurdity in that, if Creation be understood to be
immediate in regard of its Subject: and therefore to be only of a spiritual
nature, which in a certain respect is immanent, or working within its own self,
just as motion is from Fire, Cogitation or thinking from the Soul, Volition or
Willing proceeding from God: whence also Creation is very little different from
Conservation, according to the Sentiments of our People But in that Creation
that is Mediate or Transient, or working ad extia without himself, he acts
freely, so that, for Example, he, one day, creates out of the Chaos or confused
mass, the Heavens; another day, the Earth; another the Stars.


Compiler. But how, I pray, after this manner, will the Effect be posterior to,
or after its cause?


Cabbal. In the order of Nature, though not in the order of Time.


Compil. But at this rate, Spiritual Natures will differ little from the very
Creator himself; and because it is supposed that matter is from their
Stupefaction or Dispiritedness, it will follow that the Divine Essence is, as
it were, a kind of bodily Spirit.


Cabb. In the first place indeed, some of the Ancients seem to have asserted,
That the Soul is a Particle of the Divine Air, or Breath, and that men are
called the Offspring of God, ( Acts 17.28.) Yet is this warily and wisely to
be understood: that the Air or Breath of God does at least differ from God
himself, as the thing principiated or principled differs from its principle:
now for things to agree generically or in kind, does not infer or allow that
they are the same in Essence, or do agree essentially. Whence none do assert
the Divine Essence to be Bodily-spiritual, but those who deny all nature of
Spirits; though perhaps it may be more truly said that there is that in God, (if
may so say) which may be called (...), or an affect, or moving (as it were)
sufferingly to Create, rather than in Spiits an (...), or an affect or moving
sufferingly to become Matter* However from this Hypothesis, or doctrinal
supposition, the Nature of God is established to be much more Spiritual, than
from the Vulgar Hypothesis; because by this Vulgar one, Matter, as such, is not
allowed to be so much as a Substance, but to be only a certain extrinsecal and
accidental Modification of a Spiritual Substance, from which God is most vastly
distant; insomuch, as he is the most wise and chief Mover of all things.


Comp. But however the Material World will be thus, after a sort, determined to
be a Spirit.


Cabb. Matter, as such, is not a Spirit; by only that very Substance it self,
which appears under the form of Matter, viz. in its blindness or darkness, to
wit, in that its dull rest, and privation of its former happiness, that was in
sometimes past a Spirit, and as yet is fundamentally and radically such, and
will sometime hereafter be such again formally, as it is said ( Romans 8.19, 20,
21, 22, 23. Ephesians 1.10.1 Cor. 15, 28.) Examples hereof may be a Man Living, and a
Man Dead; a thin Vapor, and Ice, etc.


Comp. Do thou therefore conclude positively, that out of nothing, nothing
can be Created?


Cabb. Indeed having positively determined that Matter is made by a Coalition
of Clinging together of Spiritual degenerate dull Monades or single Beings, and
that this Coalition is called Creation, I should not speak accurately if I
should say that Matter is made out of Nothing. But I should assert that a
Spirit is produced neither out of nothing, nor out of something; because the
very Particle Ex (out of) respects a material cause, which is by no means
admitted to be in Spirits. But the Inferences with which the first Axiom is
loaded, do not touch my Hypothesis. But these Absurdities, and Incongruities do
flow from the vulgar Opinion, viz. that Matter is Created by God out of
nothing, viz. 1. That from a Being supreamly perfect, supreamly intelligent,
supreamly free, having motion in and by it self in the highest degree,
supreamly penetrating, supreamly immutable, supreamly positive, supreamly
living, etc. should be produced a Being most absolutely imperfect, in the
highest degree void of all Science, Understanding and Knowledge; under the
highest necessity and force imaginable, bound in the highest degree to the Laws
of Passive Motion, and by consequence destitute altogether of all liberty and
willing, wanting in it self in the utmost degree all motion, and subjected only
to the motions and impressions of others, and therefore of and in it self in
the highest degree quiet and immovable, wanting in it self all penetration as
well active as passive; most highly mutable, most highly privative, and
despoiled of all happiness, and the possession of all real good, and therefore
most highly dull, sluggish and dead, and by consequence enjoying nothing at all
of those things which are contained in the cause; whence also many have said
that nature is plainly contrary unto God: whereas an efficient cause as it
cannot produce any thing that is altogether like unto it self: so neither can
it produce any thing altogether unlike unto it self. 2. And yet this Subject so
vile and void, which is by us deservedly said to occupy the least part of the
Universe, is, notwithstanding in this vulgar Hypothesis, concluded to be
co-extended, yea, co-existing, and coordinate with God, and therefore is
lifted up into so high an estimation, that all the doctrine in the whole Pagan
Philosophy is exhausted or drawn from this Subject alone: which also is
established the measure of all Theorems, Maxims, and Conclusions concerning
Spirits, or concerning God; (which they call a Demonstration a posteriori, that
is, from effects, or posterior Considerations) whence it becomes an accursed
Materialism, and consequently Atheism. 3. As, To be, and not to be, done imply
a contradiction, so^^t is a consequent of this contradiction, out of Not-being,
to be; if we should speak accurately, and according to the Laws of the
Essential Descriptions of Causes. 4. After the same manner, God must be said to
have Created Death, Sin, Shadows or Darkness, Monsters, Evils, etc. which are
privations, as Matter is the privation of spiritual nature, inasmuch as in
whose definition, not one only positive term ought truly and rightly to be made
an ingredient; because neither is discerpibility or divisibleness, or
separableness to be allowed to it in the abstract, and as considered in an
Atome or indivisible Being. 5. The Creation of matter out of nothing, does
directly and perfectly oppose, or is repugnant to the Wisdom of God: inasmuch
as in the case thus stated, when he might have done that which was best, as for
Example, he might have made every Creature a Spirit, yet some and so many he
would make to be no Spirit, and not the best. 6. It is contrary to His
Goodness, because he would Create something without any Communication at all of
most of His good things. 7. It is contrary to His Beauty; because Matter is
quite opposite directly contrary to and distant from the first Fair One. Yea.
8. Hereby would be a progress or passage from one extreme to another
immediately Whence, 9. it would be absurd, for the avoiding of uncertain
absurdities, which flow not necessarily for an Hypothesis, to admit of many
more other absurdities, which are highly hurtful to the nature of the Soul and
Kingdom of the Messiah, and are such as plunge the Mind so into material dirty
Gulphs, that by reason of the utter blotting out of its Spiritual nature in it,
it at length plainly becomes a material thing as it were, which God forbid!


Compil. Do thou therefore assert that matter cannot be Created?


Cabb. Not immediately; But after that a Spirit is immediately Created, it does
for certain assignable Causes, and which are elsewhere to be remembered,
descend into that state of Death, that it admits of the Qualities and name
of matter, being now a natural Monade or single Being, and a very Atome: then
out of these a further mediate Creation may be made and done, even as out of a
Dead Sinner, a New Creature is made by and through the Messiah. Therefore as to
the Third, Fourth and Fifth Axioms, I answer, that matter as such, or as it is
considered formally, does not only not exist by and of it self, but in truth
does not so much as exist positively, but privatively only, just as does a
shadow, or rest, etc. And whatever is, is a Spirit, whether it be only
fundamentally so as a dead man is a man, or whether it be also formally and
really so, as is a Soul, an Angel, God.


Comp. What therefore do thou Reply to the rest?


Cabb The rest fall of themselves. For every Spirit is not the Divine Essence
(which by the Sixth and Seventh Axioms seems to be insinuated) in a numerical
Identity, but only in a specifical, or a generical Identity. Hence is expressly
concluded by us, that there is (...) a Systeme of separate Beings, which
comprehends the Briathick, the Jezirathick and Asiathick, Isa. 43.7. And
these in as much as they are products; (for they exclude not the concurrent
Divinity also) do not exist of and by themselves, but from the Author of
Emanations, who only existeth of and by himself, according to the Eighth
Axiom. But that the Divine Essence can be divided (as the Ninth Axiom would
have it) that we admit not of, but most highly adore the Unity which is in it.
Just, as for Example, when in some most Limpid and clear Fountain, there
secretly lurk some earthly and stony Particles, and these at length do cling
and grow together, and are separated from the Water, no man asserts and says
that the Fountain is divided into small Pebles, but that the Pebles are
separated from it; so in truth the Creator produced first of all infinite
Myriads of Spirits united to him, and with him, in the supreme degree of most
happy perfection (in which the Messiah did still abide) so that God might be
all in all: But then, by reason of the various degrees of the exercise of their
proper Free Will, there comes to be a secretion or separation made amongst
these, and that of as many degrees, as there are degrees of Knowledge, even
unto the very last extremity, which is the privation thereof; and therefore
this death must again, some time hereafter, be swallowed up, Isa. 25.8. Now
although (according to the Tenth Axiom) single Particles cannot be infinite, yet
a Spirit considered in it self, is, to us, indefinite, and its amplitude, or
extension is such and so great, as the degree of its Knowledge and Union does
admit. The Divine Essence it self therefore it not constringed, but that which
was Analogous to it, viz. a Created Spirit: and these Particles out of which
the material World consists, cannot be said to be of the Divine Essence, but
of that Nature which was Effected, Constituted, Produced, Made, Created, and
brought outward from the Divine Essence. And this constriction may be called a
Sleep, according to the Thirteenth Axiom, or a Death, etc. And the awakening,
(of which mention is made in the Fourteenth, Fifteenth, and Sixteenth Axioms,
which is by us termed a Secretion, or Separation of Sparks) has so many
degrees of Ascent, as can be assigned of Descent; the extremities of which are,
however, no other than the last contraposition or opposition to God in the
state of Death; and a supreme Union (though not an Unity) with God, and that
indeed so, that (not the primary power of Creating, which is (...) to produce
Spirits, but) the Secondary, which is to form or make (not out of a Negative
Nothing, but out of a pre-existing rude Subject, or a privative Nothing,
concerning which see 2 Macc. 7.28.) as for Example, by (...) the Vehicles of
Angels, etc. by (...) it can communicate thereunto the grosser Natures, which
we deny not concerning the Messiah, from Isa. 65.17, 18. But in the
Commentaries upon the Twelfthe Axiom, the derivation of the Soul from the
material World is unduly imputed unto us: because every Spirit is not sunk down
to this low degree, but many of them did stop at some of the intermediate
degrees, amongst which also were Souls. Nor do we to these Particles ascribe
pains (as the Comment on the Thirteenth Axiom insinuates) because we say, that
they want even a sensual Knowledge: yet some such like thing, and what is
Analogous thereunto, even the Scriptures do ascribe unto them, Romans 8.12. The
rest I pass by, and do appeal to them of your own number, who refute the vulgar
Philosophy, if they be duly and soundly understood.


Compil. I am afraid that by making too much have, thou have brought forth
Blind Whelps.


Cabb. These Doctrines I propose Accademically, and for Experiment sake; nor do
I require assent to them from any whatever. However, I shall in due time
explain more fully the Cabbalistical Hypothesis, in its own proper Terms.


Comp. At least, let the Glory of all our Writings be ascribed unto our God,
and to His Christ.


A PARAPHRASTICAL EXPOSITION Of the First Chapter of GENESIS, WRITTEN In
High-Duth by the Author of the foregoing Dialogue; first done into Latin, but
now made English.
Verse 1. IN or by the Beginning of the Creatures [or Creation] of God, as in
Rev. 3.14. Col. 1.15, 16. John 1.3.1 Cor 8.6. Ephesians. 3 9. Heb. 1.2. viz. by the
Soul of the Messiah, which was already conjoined with the Divinity: God or
Elohim [or the dijudicating, or judging Divinity, with which the Soul of the
Messiah had conjoined it self, and remained together therewith in an
inseparable conjunction] Created or manifested, or presented Celestial Beings,
or the Heaven, viz. Spirits who remained in a sta e of motion, as Job 38.7.
Col. 1.16. to which sort or kind, Souls also are referred, or do belong: Also
Terrestrial Beings, or the Earth, viz. those Spirits who laid down or put off
the State of motion, and are vulgarly called Matter, as Romans 8.20. now these
two sorts or kinds of Spirits, even before this formation and preparation, did
all flow forth from God.

Verse. 2 And this Terrestrial Being, or the Earth, viz. Matter, was a plainly
unmoved Mass, inasmuch as it was gross thick Matter, and partly was capable of
motion, but altogether without form and void. And Darkness, that is, Spirits,
who had departed from the Union of the Light, Luke 22.53 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Ephesians.
6.12. Col 1.13.2 Pet 2.4. Jude verse. 6. were extended upon and in the parts of
the Abyss, or upon the face of the Deep, Genesis 1.2. that is, they were present
in, and adherent to those places which were most remote from the manifestation
of the Original, Luke 8.31. Rev. 20.3. But the Spirit of God or Elohim indeed,
or of the dijudicating or judging Divinity, that is, the good Spirit moved it
self, and distributed its motion, or moved upon or in the parts, or face of the
Waters, which encompassed round, or all over the Abyss or Deep.

Verse. 3. And Elohim or God, or the dijudicating or judging Divinity, said,
(that is, suffered the Word or Soul of the Messiah to operate, or Work, John
1.1, 2, etc) Let the Light appear (or let there be Light) that is, let the
Spirit of Nature give a most strong motion to the most subtle Matter, and the
Light did appear (or there was Light) from this impressed motion, viz. that
which the Son of God, by the Soul of the Messiah brought into the Spirit of
Nature, and into this most thin, fine Matter.

Verse. 4. And Elohim or God, or the dijudicating or judging Divinity, saw the
Idaea (or measure, or Notion) of the Light, viz not only beheld the extension
it self of the most subtle matter, but also that the most Noble of the Spirits
and Souls began to cloth themselves with this Light, which was good, not only
because it was fit to make such Vestments, but for other holy uses and services
also. And Elohim or the dijudicating or judging Divinity, or God made a
separation, or divided between the Light, together with the Spirits and Souls
invested therewith, and between or from the Darkness, or Spirits of darkness

Verse 5. And Elohim, or the dijudicating or judging Divinity, or God, called
the Light, together with the Spirits and Souls invested therewith, the Idaea or
measure of the Day, as in Romans 13.12, 13. 1 These. 5.5, 8. 2 Pet. 1.19. and the
Darkness, viz. of such Spirits who dwelt and lived in the darkness, and in the
Abyss he called the Idaea or measure of the Night, 1 These. 5.1. And it was the
Evening, that is, a certain Essence mixed with more gross thick Matter, and
which was next unto darkness whilst, viz. the gloomy dark Spirits do also mix
themselves with some sort of such matter; and it was Morning, that is, there
were also such Natures which only did incline to the Idaea or measure of the
day, to which also the Matter of the second Element is to be referred: and this
was the first Day, that is, the first Class, Order, or sort of Creatures.

Verse 6. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity or God said (see more about
it at v. 3.) Let there arise up a thin and extended Essence or let there be a
Firmament) of the Air and of Heaven, in the midst of, or between the Waters,
that the middle Spirits may have wherewith to invest themselves, and let it
make a separation, or divide between the inferior Waters, and between or from
the superior Waters, which are sometimes found in Clouds above, and other
times under the form of Vapors.

Verse 7. And Elohim or God, or the dijudicating divinity made or spread abroad
out of the Matter of the third kind or sort (for as the word [Create] [or to be
Created] belongs to Spirits, so the term of [making or of being made] belongs
to Matter) a thin and extended Essence of Heaven, and of the Air or the
Firmament, viz. not only of the grosser Aerial Atoms, which may be compressed
and extended like a sheet of Paper (or a Bow; but also of the Ethereal
Globules contained in the Cells or Pores of those Atoms, as also the most
subtle Matter which is found in their Pores, together with Salt-watry Vapors:
And this he made the dictinction, or divided between the waters which were
beneath the extension, or under the Firmament (and which afterward were
distributed into Seas and Rivers, which were above or on the surface of the
Earth, and very much also within the very Bowels thereof) and between, or from
those waters placed above the extension, or which were above the Firmament, out
of which afterward did arise Clouds, and other Aereal Meteors, and it remained
so or it was so.

V.8. And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God called the extension, or
the Firmament, or Air, Heaven, which name is elsewhere commonly used for the
Air, as Gen 1.20, 26, 28. Genesis 2.19, 20 Genesis 7.11. Genesis 8.2. and by it properly
is understood the The Atmosphere is that part of or in the Air, which being
always opposite to the Sun, reaches up as far as the shadow or darkness of
the Earth reaches.
Atmosphere, which encompasseth round the Globe of the Earth: and it was the
Evening; by which is meant a middle Nature betwixt Air and Water, coming near
to the likeness of Water: and it was the Morning, that is a middle nature of a
most subtle Essence, which was the Second Day, or the second Class, Order or
sort of Creatures.

Verse 9. And Elohim, or the dijudicating and combining divinity, or God said,
Let the waters which are under the Heaven (or the Air) be gathered together
(for at that time, they as yet quite covered over all the whole Earth) by the
means of certain deeply hollowed Gulphs, and of highly exalted Mountains,
congregate themselves into one place, though in diverse distinct Regions, or
Countries, and let the dry Land appear, that from thence a third sort or kind
of Spirits may get their vestments, and dwelling places, and it was so.

Ver. 10. And Elohim or the dijudicating divinity, or God called the dry-land,
Earth, according to its diverse Scituations, such also as are Continents,
Isthme, Islands, and Peninsules or almost Islands: and the gathering together
of the waters, called be Seas, such as also are standing Pools according to all
their diverse sorts; as are Oceans, Creeks, Arms of the Sea, and Lakes or
standing Waters: and Elohim, or the dijucating Divinity, or God saw, or judged
that it was good, to transplant into it diverse living Souls.

Verse 11. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity, or God said, Let the Earth
bring forth diverse Plants, or grass, which commonly proceed to a further
growth, and in which, even as in all Plants, the inferior Souls or Psyches
(vulgarly termed vegetable) do obtain their springing forth and their increase:
to which Class, Order, or sort also are referred all Metals in their
underground places, which, according to the Chaldeans, are nothing else but
Portal; or Entries of Vegetables; and the Herb yielding seed, and the Fruit
tree yielding Fruit after his kind, whose seed is in it self upon the Earth,
and it was so.

Verse. 12. And the Earth brought forth various Plants, or grass (and
Vegetables) both within and without its Bowels, or Womb, and Herb yielding seed
after his kind, and the tree yielding fruit, whose seed was in its self after
his kind; And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God saw that it was
good, viz. for to be a variety of food for the Creatures which were to come
afterward.

Verse. 13. And the Evening was, that is, there existed diverse sorts or kinds of
intermediate inanimate bodies Terrestrial, and Metallic; And the Morning was,
that is, various intermediate kinds of Beings, which declined toward Sense,
such as are the Zoophytes, or half Herbs, half Animals, viz. the third day, or
the third Classis, Order, or sort of Creatures.

Verse. 14. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity, or God said, now at last
after the production of Vegetables, lest that men prone to Idolatry, should
ascribe the Creation of them to the Stars; Let Lights arise out of, or let
there be Lights in that thin Essence, or in the firmament of the Heaven, the
most subtle Matter being thickened or thrust close together into a constant
place, which afterward may cast forth their beams to a great distance, to make
distinction, or to divide between the day, in which shines one only sort of
light, and which is proper only to lucid natures: and between or from the
Night, in which the greater Light is absent, and the dark Natures are
strengthened; and let them be for Signs concerning diverse natural accidents,
such as are Droughts, Frosts, and various seasons; and for certain times or
seasons of the year, of Festival Days, and of Months, and for Days and Years.

Verse. 15. And let them be for burning Torches, (or Lights) in that same thin
Essence, or in the firmament of Heaven to give light upon the Earth, and it was
so.

Verse. 16. And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God made two great
Lights, so called and vulgarly esteemed, which, viz. to men in this Earth seem
greater than the others, and have greater operation in their round motions: and
one of them the greater light, with his greater circumvolution to rule the day,
and the other lesser light, with his lesser compass, rolling it self about the
Earth to rule the night, as well in respect of its light it self, as of its
influence upon moist humors, he made the stars also, which afterward partly
disappeared, and were transmuted into Comets and Planets, or wandering Stars.

Verse. 17. And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God set them into that
same thin Essence, or Firmament of the Heavens, to give light upon the Earth.

Verse. 18. And to rule over the day, and over the night, and to constitute a
difference between, or to divide the light from the darkness, which are found
no where more than in the shaddows of the grosser bodies. And Elohim, or the
dijudicating divinity, or God saw that for this end and purpose it was good

Verse. 19 And the evening was, that is, these were middle natures to which
belong both fiery. Meteors, and Aereal Spheres: and the morning was, that is,
these are those middle Natures, to which are referred blazing Stars and the
lesser Planets; this was the fourth days, or the fourth Class, Order or sort of
Creatures.

Verse. 20. And Elohim, or the dijudicating-Divinity, or God said, let the
waters bring forth by Troops, or abundantly diverse Animals moving themselves,
or the moving Creature, as are those of the water-kind, those that live both on
Land and in the water, those that creep, and those that have wings, in whom
there is a Psyche, or a living Soul, or that has life, together with an
intermediate Soul or Spirit: and the Fowls that may fly (about) above the
Earth, in the midst of that thin Essence, or in the open Firmament of Heaven.

Verse. 21. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity, or God Created, that is,
transplaced Souls into the several Terrestrial Animals following, viz. diverse
of the greater Serpents, such as are Dragons, great Whales, Monsters, the
larger Snakes, Crocodile, Sea-Buffalloes, and all Psyches, or inferior Souls
of living Creatures creeping with feet or every living Creature, that moves,
which the waters brought forth by Troops, or abundantly after their kind, and
every winged Fowl after his kind, and God saw that it was good, for diverse
sorts of food, viz. for Man and Beast.

Verse. 22. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity, or God blessed them, and
gave unto them an influential capacity, that those of them, which were created
in pairs, were able to propagate and enlarge their kind, and he said [the World
or Soul of the Messiah co-operating] couple together, be fruitful and multiply,
and fill the waters in the Seas, and let Fowl multiply in the Earth.

Verse. 23. And it was the Evening, these were those intermediate Natures, which
tend unto the nature of Fishes: and it was the morning, these were the middle
Natures which became flying Creatures, and this was the fifth day, or the fifth
Class, Order, or sort of Creatures.

Verse. 24 And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God said, let the Earth
bring forth various Psyches or the living Creature after his kind, viz Cattle
and Flocks, and Worms, or creeping things, and wild Beasts, or beast of the
Eath after his kind: and it was so, or so done.

Verse. 25 And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God made diverse wild
Beasts, or the Beast of the Earth after his kind, and diverse Herds of Cattle
after his kind, and diverse Worms cre^ping with feet on the Earth, or every
thing that creeps upon the Earth after his kind: and Elohim, or the
dijudicating divinity, or God saw that it was good, and that every thing had
its uses.

Verse 26. And Elohim, or God said to the Soul of the Messiah, Let us make
Mankind, that is, let us transplace the superior human Soul into a certain
Matter destinated for it, in our Image, after our likeness, that as there is a
communion betwixt us, or our selves, so also betwixt them and this same subtle
Matter let somewhat arise, or spring forth, our of which afterward may follow
like effects; and let them, viz. these Souls which are called Men, have
dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowl of the Air, or of Heaven,
and over the Cattle, or Flocks, and over all the Earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the Earth, or over all wild Beasts, and over all Worms
which creep with feet upon the Earth.

Verse 27. And so Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God Created, and
changed the state of the Soul that from thence might be made mankind in his
own Image, in the Image of God or Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity created
he him, or it, Male in the forepart, and Female in the hinder-part, created he
them, viz. all and every one of the Souls which do at present exist in the
whole Universality of Mankind, he transplaced into a certain subtle Matter, and
co-ordained, or put them into an order under the person of Adam the Protoplast,
or the first Parent, as a Regiment of Soldiers, under their Colonel, or
General.

Verse. 28 And Elohim, or the dijudicating divinity, or God blessed them, and
gave unto them the faculty or capacity of turning their faces to one another:
and Elohim, or God said unto them, apply your selves that you may be fruitful,
and multiply, and replenish the Earth, or fill the Terrestrial, or the material
Being in all the parts thereof; and subdue it to your selves, that your bodies
may take thence their nourishment, and have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea,
and over the Fowl of the Heaven, or of the Air, and over every living thing
that moves, or creeps with feet upon the Earth.

Verse 29. And Elohim, or God said, I have given you every Herb, in their
Superior and Inferior qualities, bearing, seed which is upon the face of all
the Earth, and (...) Trees, of every Tree which bears Fruit, or in the which
is the Fruit of a Tree yielding seed, or his seed, all these shall be for food,
or to you (...) shall be for Meat, to repair the decaies of you bodies.

Verse 30. And to every Beast of the Earth, or wild Beast, and to every Fowl of
the Air, or of Heaven, and to every thing that creeps, or that goes with
feet upon the Earth, wherein there is life, or a living Psych^ or Soul, I have
given every green Herb, or all Plants and Herbs, fon Meat, and it was so.

Verse 31. And Elohim, or God saw all, or every thing that he had made in the
matter, and behold it was very and supereminently; (Deuteronomy 6.5.) good. And the
Evening was, that is, the middle Natures descending down to the brute Animals:
and the morning was, that is, there were also middle Natures which were exalted
above humane condition; and this was the sixth day, or the sixth Class, Order;
or sort of Creatures.

Chap. II.
Verse 1. THus the Heavens and the Earth were (together with the Air) brought
to perfection, and finished, and all the Host (or Troops) of them, viz. in the
Heavens multitudes of Thrones and of Angels; and in the Earth, multitudes of
well ordered sublunary Creatures.

Verse 2. And Elohim, or the dijudicating Divinity, or God on the seventh day
ended his Work which he had made; and he rested, or ceased from further
creating, on the seventh day from all his Work which he had made.

Verse 3. And Elohim, or God blessed the seventh day and sanctified it: even
as, and for which cause the seventh number is said to be holy and pure, because
that amongst the first numbers none is formed out of it, nor is it formed out
of any of them, as if it did hint that the happiness of the Creatures did
consist only in it, not being mixed with any other Creatures, they were at
quiet in God: Because that in it (in that day) he rested from all his Work;
which Elohim, or God had created therein all kinds of Spirits and Souls, so
that from thence he had made something in a material representation,
manifestation, or appearance, by and thorough which, other Spirits were
presented it this or the other matter, etc.

FINIS.

