A New Method OF CURING All Sorts of FEVERS, Without taking any thing by the
Mouth. Discovered and presented to the King by Mr. Ad. Helvetius, Doctor of
Physic in Paris.

Translated out of French, by P. M.

LONDON, Printed for J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Church yard, 1694.

TO THE KING.
THE new Use I have discovered of the Bark, to cure infallibly all sorts of
Fevers, without taking any thing by the Mouth, has been approved of by your
Majesty, with a Goodness so obliging, when I had the Honor to present it, that
I should have all the reason in the world to believe, the Public would give it
a no less favorable Reception, if I offer it my self. But, Sir, after what
manner will it not be received by all your Subjects, when they know it is Your
Majesty, that has been graciously pleased to impart this Discovery, through the
Paternal Care which Your Royal Goodness is pleased to take of their Health?
Yes, Sir, it is this extreme Goodness, that after having made Your Majesty
condescend to enquire into the particular Wants of the Sick, which are some of
those that have the Happiness to serve in Your Household, and: which Your
Majesty has done me the Honor to recommend to my Care, obliged Your Majesty
thereupon to command me to publish my Remedy; to the intent, that no person in
Your Kingdom might be deprived of the Advantage of making use of it. I obey,
Sir, not only with the most humble Respect, and the most profound Submission,
which I owe to the Commands of my King, but also with a particular.
Satisfaction and Joy, that I have been able to enrich, and bring the Art of
Physic to perfection for the good of France, which your Heroic Virtues have
advanced so far above the rest of the Nations of the World; and which is my
true Country, since it has pleased Your Majesty in Naturalizing me, to honor
me with the quality of one of Your Majesty's Subjects. But at the same time,
Sir, I take the Liberty which Your Majesty has given me, to put under the
Protection of Your August Name, this which I have published to the World; it
being Justice, that after the singular Grace Your Majesty did me, (when I had
the Honor to present my Specific against the Dysenter) in granting me the
power to have Laboratories throughout the whole Kingdom all the Fruits of my
future Labors should be devoted, as of Right belonging to Your Majesty, and
should serve me as a means to testify a lively and hearty Acknowledgment of
Your Majestys Favors, and my ardent Zeal to sacrifice to Your Service during
my whole Life, with an entire Devotion, all that my mean Capacity and weak
Endeavors are capable of.

I am, Sir, Your Majesty's most Humble and most Obedient Servant and Subject,
A. Helvetius, M.D.

ERRATA.
PAge 2^ ^ for (...) Animal.

A New Method Of Curing all Sorts of FEVERS.
OF all the Febrifuges yet known to the World, without doubt the Bark must be
allowed to be the best. It Is what all of our faculty grant; I have particularly
studied the point, with all the care and exactness possible, and am thoroughly
convinced of its excellency. It Is true, from the manner hitherto observed in
giving it, many inconveniences arise; it is this has put me upon the search
after some better way, by which, we might be exempt from the ill circumstances,
and enjoy only the good of this wonderful Remedy.

Without dispute, many Physicians before me, have endeavored the same; which
is the reason, that within these thirty or forty years last past, you have seen
so many different preparations of the Bark, which are every day in use all over
Europe.

Some give it in Infusion; others in Substance; there are others that make a
Tincture of it; some prepare it in Syrup; others order it in an Extract; and in
a word, they disguise it in an hundred different forms, But after all that,
they are not yet arrived to that method of prescribing it, so as the Patient
may have no reason to be dissatisfyed.

For in truth, after taking it, one complains of an intolerable weight and pain
in his Stomach: another, that there is a disturbanee in his Breast; a third,
that he feels an extraordinary heat, another that he is scorcht up by it. In
fine, we see some every day, tho cured by its means, yet resolve never to make
use of it any more; whether or no, the Bark it self is the cause of their
complaint, or rather the management of themselves in the taking of it, that
produces those ill effects, may be a question; for considering how often it is
to be repeated, and with what caution, it is no difficult matter for the Patient
to transgress in some point or other.

I mention not the complaints generally made by the sick, nor the
inconveniences most known; besides these particular ones which I am going to
speak of, viz. the Illness of Taste, the Nauseousness and Bitterness which
always attend it, if taken by the mouth, vary how you can in the manner of
giving it; that which is so much the greater pain and trouble to the Patient,
notwithstanding the greatest aversion after the first taking it, is the
absolute necessity of repeating it every day, sometimes for the space of six
weeks or more, and after all, in case of relapse, the vexation of being forced
to begin all again.

It was upon weighing seriously these disagreeable circumstances, which attend
the Remedy, that I thought upon the discovery of a more proper way of giving
it, that the Patient might receive the benefit of it without the pain.

The way is only by giving it in Clyster.

For that, you must take one ounce of the best Bark pulverized, and mix it well
in a pint of warm water without putting any thing to it besides.

In intermitting Fevers this Clyster ought to be given just after the fit, and
to be repeated three times a day till the Patient is thoroughly well; which
will not be long first, for it is extraordinary if another fit returns, very rare
if two; and I never saw a third.

After the cure the person must take care to continue the same Clysters for the
space of twelve days, viz. the first six days one in the morning and another in
the evening; the six last days one in the morning only.

As the chief and necessary point in the matter, is to hold the Clyster in as
long as possibly may be, and considering there are a great many persons that
can do that but a very little while, for such you must add to the Powder half
an ounce of the Syrup of White Poppies, which will easily make it stay without
pain.

In continual Fevers, the Clyster must be made of a strong decoction of the
Bark with simple water, with which decoction you shall also mix one ounce of
the Powder. And the Syrup of White Poppies shall be used upon occasion as
before.

This Clyster must be given upon the declining of the Paroxysme; but if there
be nothing of a Paroxysme, you must give it when the Fever is least violent.

Instead of giving it as you do in intermitting Fevers three times a day, in
this you must give it every fourth hour; till the Patient has lost his Fever.

After he is well, you must remember to continue still the same Clyster for
twelve days, in the same order as before, that is to say, the first six days
twice a day, the other six but once only.

This Remedy is proper for all sorts of persons of any age of sex, allowing
only for the difference of the dose.

For Infants that suck, and till they are four years of age, the dose of powder
must be two drachms. From the age of four to ten the dose three drachms.

From ten to fifteen half an ounce; from fifteen to twenty six drachms; from
twenty to sixty you must give the whole dose of an ounce; the same to Women
with Child; for the Remedy has its effect without causing the least disturbance.

Nevertheless, persons of a very weak constitution, whose Fibers are very
delicate, shall take but half a Dose, viz. half an ounce.

You must observe that those that keep in the Clyster but a little time, ought
to continue the taking it much longer, that the frequent repetition may make
amends, for the deficiency of every particular one, and by the number perform
the cure. Which is to be understood, as well of those that take the whole dose,
as of those that take but part.

You must observe also, that for those that find themselves dozed, as generally
most are in Malignant Fevers; you must make use of no Syrup of white Poppies,
but endeavor to make 'em hold the Clyster, as long as possible you can without
it. On the contrary, you must observe in all Fevers accompanied with a
looseness, that you ought never to fail mixing the half ounce of Syrup of white
Poppies in the Clyster.

In fine, you must observe that in all complicated Distempers, as defluctions
upon the Lungs, Deliriums, Plurisies, all sorts of wounds, and the like, this
remedy is always given with success, and never fails to take off the Fever,
leaving all things in a better condition to be the more easily cured.

There is but one thing which can accompany a Fever, wherein you must deny your
self the use of the Bark, and that is, in the extraordinary tensions of the
Abdomen.

I have one thing more to give caution of, which is, as there are a great many
that cannot keep in a Clyster, so there are a great many that don't give it
back again when taken, and so feel themselves inflated.

For such I think it convenient to take a purgative Clyster toward night for
two days, which will soon carry off the other; upon which account it would not
be amiss to inform the Patients that these Clysters have nothing of a purging
quality, neither are given for that intent; that they may not be frighted and
disturbed, as a great many are, unless they see a large evacuation of Choler
and other humors, as is usual from ordinary Clysters.

As for management of the Diet, I shall prescribe nothing extraordinary. Let
the Patient live upon Broths as long as the Fever continues; after that let him
eat sparingly without overcharging his stomach, and avoid every thing that is
hard of digestion. During the Fever let the Patient drink Barley Broth, made
palataable as he shall think fit. Every one knows very well, that the root of
Scorzoner with Hartshorn is of great use in Malignant Fevers; that the root of
Sorrel, Agrimony, Succory, Dogs Grass are used for refreshment; that
Marshmallows, Liquorice, Sebesten, Jujubes, Narbone Honey, are very good
pectorals.

When the Fever's gone, I am not for denying a moderate use of Wine to those
that desire it; for I take it to be one of the best maxims in Physic, to
satisfy the Patient upon all occasions as far as you can.

It Is according to this maxim, that if I find any at the first beginning of
their Fever, unwilling to make use of the Bark, either in Clyster, or by the
Mouth, I am not against it; so far from it, that I should think 'em very much
in the right, to endeavor first by a little Bleeding and Purging to recover
their health; which oftentimes has success. For that intent I Will give 'em this
excellent Purgative. In half a pint of water boil one ounce of Tamarinds, two
drachms of salt Polychreste, one ounce of purified Cassia, one ounce and an
half of Manna, a little Cinnamon, and the White of an Egg beaten.

After you have boiled it altogether seven or eight turns, squeeze into it a
little juice of Citron, then let it cool, and strain it through a cloth for
use; three hours after you have taken it, drink a good dish of broth.

Those that have a mind to add, or diminish, or alter any thing in this
Receipt, may do it if they please; and provided they observe the manner I have
set before them, they will never fail of a very agreeable Medicine.

If there be any likewise that have an inclination to vomiting, and there be a
sufficient indication for a vomit, as is in all Fevers where there is a
reaching, which by that means goes off, without any other remedy; yet I would
willingly give 'em a preparation, which is the best and easiest that can be
taken for that purpose.

Take of purified Nitre and crude Antimony each one pound, beat 'em into a very
fine Powder and searce it; put a Crucible upon fresh coals, and when it is red
hot, throw in this powder by little spoonfuls, and let it make a detonation,
leave it in fusion for one half hour; after that let the fire go out, and the
Crucible grow cold, then break it to take out the vitrified matter, and reduce
it again into a subtle powder; then add to it double its weight of Cremor
Tartar also pulverized, mix it all together and searce it; throw it in by
little and little into a sufficient quantity of boiling water, to make a
dissolution of the salt this powder contains; filtre the water through
Cap-paper, after that evaporate it till no moisture's left, and you will have a
salt, without dispute, the best of all Emeticks.

The Dose is from eight grains to twelve.

The manner of taking it is to warm a Glass of Wine, and pour a little out into
a spoon where you have put the powder, and swallow it down; then put a little
more warm Wine into the spoon, and drink down that, and leave none of the
powder behind, then drink off the remains of the Glass.

The Patient will have an inclination to vomit a quarter or half an hour after:
As Soon as he has vomited once, let him drink a large glass of warm water, that
it may operate the more easily, and repeat it three or four times during the
operation. Three hours after he has taken the powder you may give him some
broth, the remaining part of the day let him live temperately.

It is not the same thing with Cordials, as with Catharticks and Emeticks, for
I not only approve of their use in Fevers, if the Patients desire it before the
Bark is given; but I advise in the time of taking their Clysters, that they
neglect not the use of 'em; not that they are absolutely necessary for the
cure, but because they are of wonderful efficacy for strengthening and keeping
up a good heart, driving off its heaviness, and preventing disorders in the
head.

For a Cordial I would have 'em take in intermitting Fevers, one ounce of
Cinnamon water, two ounces of Borrage water, as many of Wallnut water, the same
quantity of Balm water, two drachms of the confection of Alchermes, one ounce
and an half of Syrup of Lemons, or Pomegranate, mix 'em all together, and drop
in some drops of Spirit of Sulphur, to give it an agreeable acidity.

It has an extraordinary pleasant taste. Let 'em take one or two spoonfuls
every hour.

Those that have a vomiting or looseness with an intermitting Fever, let 'em
make use of this for their Cordial; take of Plantain and Knotgrass water each
four ounces, Diaphoretick Mineral, and Hartshorn prepared each two scruples,
Confection of Hyacinth 2 drachms, Syrup of Diacodium, and Syrup of Quinces each
one ounce, mix 'em all together, and take of it every hour as before.

In Fevers continual and malignant, I would accordingly advise a Cordial Julep
to purify the blood, and resist the malignity, by causing a gentle
perspiration; let it be this; take one ounce of Treacle water, two ounces of
Scorzoneer water, Carduus Benedictus and Scabious water the same quantity each,
twenty grains of powder of Vipers, two scruples of Bezoard Mineral, half a
dram of Venice Treacle, one dram of the Confection of Hyacinth, the same
quantity of Alchermes, one ounce of the Syrup of Cloves; mix it all together as
before.

These sorts of Cordial Juleps cannot fail of good success; those that instead
of the powder of Vipers, had rather make use of its Volatile Salt, and Bezoar
Stone, if they can get it, may put in ten or twelve grains of each, if the
Fever be very malignant.

It Is thus providing against the troublesome accidents that usually attend the
most dangerous and malignant Fevers, and the Bark taken in Clyster, which has
nothing more to do but to take off the ferment of the Fever, will do it so
easily, that it will be a pleasant surprise to the Patient, and will give
satisfaction to the world of its usefulness in Clysters, which we here treat of.

I think by this manner of giving the Bark, I have avoided all the
inconveniences which have hitherto accompanied it in the ordinary method of
taking it.

It Is plain, the Patients cannot complain of the bitter taste, because they do
not take it by the mouth.

It Is also evident, there will be no more a weight felt in the stomach, because
it is not received there.

As to the heat, it is certain the grosser parts of the Bark, which are the sole
cause of it, stay in the body no longer than it is just requisite for the
natural heat to digest it, and extract the volative and wholesome parts, the
remaining dregs being soon carried off, without taking so long a course as it
necessarily must, if taken by the mouth; it must of necessity have a very good
effect upon the body, which otherwise would be incommoded with that noxious and
uneasy weight which is the cause of those heats so much complained of.

There are only those Patients that are troubled with the Piles, that can
suffer any pain in giving back the Clyster, the powder as it passes fretting
the part; so I advise 'em to diminish the dose, and put but half an ounce of
the powder, or rather no powder at all, but take a strong decoction of the
Bark, which will cause no pain at all, and at the same time perform the cure as
well; only with this difference, that 'twill cost the more, because you must
use a larger quantity of the Bark; which I remark here so much the more
willingly, because this advice may be serviceable to all sorts of People, that
for what reason so ever, shall think fit rather to make use of a strong
decoction than of the Powder it self: tho to speak the truth, except for so
important a reason as that of the Piles, I should always give the Bark in
substance the preference; I can affirm that within these three years, since I
first made the discovery of the manner of giving it, I have made use of it in
the cure of above two thousand Patients, of every Age and Sex, who never
perceived any inconvenience, notwithstanding the great number of Clysters they
have taken: and some have taken a great many more than others, by reason of the
relapses they have had from the extraordinary malignity and stubbornness of
their Fevers.

I don't question but that this remedy will find so good a reception, that the
more it is known to the Physicians the more 'twill be esteemed by 'em; and I
dare say the Patients will own themselves obliged to me, for having first
discovered the way to the most convenient, easy, and certain cure, that has
been hitherto in practice: for who is not sensible, that abundance of sick have
died because they have not been able to get down the Bark? And considering
there are many that have an invincible antipathy to the taking of other Drugs
which would be for their health, this manner of giving by Clyster, what they
refuse to take by Mouth, will be of more general use than it appeared to be at
first; and perhaps one day or other some will acknowledge that I have in some
measure contributed toward the perfection of Physic. I have had the
experience of it in my remedies against a dysentery; having met with many
Patients, whose tenderness of constitution has put me to a great deal of
trouble, in giving my specific by Mouth, by reason of the vomiting it causes.
and I have happily succeeded by using it in Clyster.

I have also communicated the manner of giving this to M. the first Physician,
who did me the honor to approve of it, as well as that of the Bark, and every
one knows of what an authority his approbation is.

As to what I said, relating to the quickness of the cure, which is perfectly
and much sooner performed this way, than by taking the Bark by the Mouth; the
reason of it is very plain.

First they give it in a much larger quantity by Clyster, than can be given by
Mouth.

In the second place, they give it always in substance, and consequently it
must have the better effect.

Thirdly, Its subtle parts which act only upon the ferment of the Fever, and
make its ebullition to cease, get very easily into the mass of Blood by the
mouths of those numerous vessels which center in the intestin's: even so broths
given in Clysters pass into the blood with the same ease, for the nourishment
of the sick; as also we see Tobacco Clysters carry their volatile parts with a
wonderful quickness, by means of the Circulation even to the Stomach, and so
cause a vomiting.

In fine, experience gives a perfect confirmation of the speediness and
certainty of of this way of curing; for in all the Fevers, wherever I made
use of this remedy, the most obstinate could never hold out beyond two fits.
And if it be necessary to produce instances of those that are well known to the
world, the sick which were put under my care at Versails, by the command of the
King, are authentic and undeniable testimonies.

I present you with all their Names, Qualities, Distempers and their Symptoms.

The Lady Abbess of the Monastery of Charity, relapsed into a double tertian
continual Fever, with a great pain in her head, as also delirious at the return
of the fit.

Mr. Hurant, one of the Kings Guards, aged thirty years, taken with a double
tertian, accompanied with disorders in the head, and intolerable pains in the
back; it began with a cold fit, which lasted twelve hours at least, and went
off in a great sweat, which weakened him extremely.

Mr. Gueri, another of the Kings Guards, forty eight years of age, that had
been seized fifteen days before, with a double tertian continual Fever,
together with an extreme pain in his head, and very delirious.

Mr. Varenne, of the Kings Guards forty five years old, that lay sick ten days
of a double tertian; its mildest Symptoms were an oppression of the lungs,
restlesness and great pains of the head.

Mr Case, another of the Kings Guards, aged thirty five years, that had been
sick twelve days of a double tertian, and by a defluction upon the lungs in
great danger of his life.

One Langlois, Groom of the great Stables, seven and twenty years of age, that
had a continual Fever for seven days with a paroxysm, nauseousness, vomiting
and Frenzy.

One Chistal, Postilion to Mr. the Abbot of la Roche, twenty years of age,
seized with a Tertian five days before; the fit lasted the space of twelve
hours, during which time he strained very much to vomit, was all in a fire and
very near being delirious.

One Jenot, Under-Gardener in the Trianon, aged twenty six years, sick of a
double Tertian, continual Fever, without sleep and delirious.

One Crespin, an Under-Clerk in the Office at my Lord Duke of Burgundy's,
eighteen years of age, that had been for six days in a continual Fever, with
periodick vomitings, pains at the heart, and fainting fits.

One Valere, a Switzer, belonging to the Appartments, aged thirty four years,
tormented twenty days with a Tertian; the fit lasted twenty four hours: and
after that he was taken with excessive vomitings, and an intolerable pain of
the head.

One Saint Germain, Groom of the great Stables, thirty years of age, that lay
sick for twenty six days of a continual Fever, delirious, always tossing and
turning.

All these Patients; to whom I have given my remedy out of Charity, by Mr.
Regnault Master Apothecary at Paris, who for that intent was constantly with
'em during their sickness, were cured without any relapse, except two,
whose^ever returned, whom I was forced to begin again withal.

Also the Son of Mr. Simon, the King's Coachman in the little Stables, sixteen
years of age, after he had had a double tertian twenty days.

A Valet de Chamber of Mr. Cantin, sick of a Tertian.

Mr. Lapierre, Valet de Chamber to and Officer of the Kings Wardrobe, who had a
double Tertian for fifteen days, and all with the same dangerous accidents, as
the others we just now spoke of.

It Is not worth while to produce any more instances: I could easily write a
volume of them, but there are so many already, that have cured themselves by
this method, since the King has made it public, that they speak sufficiently
for me, without any further enlargement.

From what I have said, it ought not to be concluded, that by the means of this
discovery, I pretend to make a man immortal: but what is evident from it is,
that abundance of accidents may be prevented, which otherwise happen in a
tedious Fever, and we may easily see the error of bleeding, which not only
prolongs the distemper, but oftentimes is the cause of many a Patients Death.
Not that I obstinately and without reason am against once or twice bleeding, or
thrice upon occasion, where we see a great plethory; neither am I against
bleeding in the foot, when we are afraid the Patient will be delirious. I have
nothing to say against it, neither can I perceive, that it will hinder the
effect of any other remedy, the Physicians shall think sufficiently indicated:
but I cannot bear that so great a quantity of blood should be taken away, which
is only prescribed by custom, and by which a Patient is exhausted, for a Fever,
which may be cured in three of four days at most, without the loss of one drop.

As to what remains, I could wish that the discovery of this manner of giving
the Bark, was a kindly and generally received, as it would be of general
advantage to the whole world, and I should think my self too well recompensed
for the pains I have been at, for so long time before I could arrive to it, and
for the continual labor and care I have taken for these three years to examine
into it, to be thoroughly convinced of those advantages, which appeared to me
at first: If I could communicate the fruits of my labor, without raising the
envy and malice of a certain sort of Men, that dishonor the Profession, and
deserve not the name of Physicians. But as a man ought not to be discouraged
from doing good, by the jealousi and mean spirit of those that approve of
nothing, but what they do themselves; so I shall always cheerfully employ my
self as long as I live, in the search after something that may be profitable to
Mankind, either in preserving their Health or curing their distempers. And in
the mean time, I can so far vouch for the infallibility of what I now present
to the world, that I durst say, you will never fail curing any Fever, continual
or intermitting, provided you follow exactly my Method.

There is but one case where the Bark, given after this manner, fails of taking
off the Fever; and that is when there is an Imposthume in the body. Therefore
you ought to look upon it as a very ill sign, if the Fever cannot be stopped. In
any other case besides this you may assure your self of success.

I thought to have finished my writing here, and to have added nothing more to
it, but I perceived this passion of envy, which I have already mentioned; and
which I imagined might have ended only in denying to these Clysters, an
approbation which they stood in no need of. This malice ran so high, that they
scrupled not to raise lies, to take away the reputation of this remedy: Not
contented to deprive me of the the advantage of discovering so good a thing,
but also endeavoring to rob the public of what might be useful to it from my
discovery; for they spread it abroad, wherever they could gain hearing, that
Clysters of the Bark were the cause of Ulcers in some; in others of Imposthumes
in the Intestines, in others Fistula's, Abortions to Women with Child, and a
thousand the like Disorders.

To confute so gross a Calumny, I could easily bring Arguments which cannot be
answered. As for example, if it be true that the Bark swallowed down in
substance, produces no other ill effects than those I have already remarkt, how
comes it to pass, that when it is taken in Clyster there should happen such
terrible accidents, when at the same time it does not stay in any of the
delicate parts of the Body, as it does when it is taken by the mouth.

There Is no Physician but what knows, that an Emetick taken by the mouth is a
very powerful remedy, and yet at the same time, when treble the dose of the
same Remedy is given in Clyster, it has but a moderate operation; which plainly
proves, that the violence of the remedy is beyond all comparison much less when
it is given in a Clyster, than when it is taken by the Mouth.

Besides, make an Analysis of all the parts of the Bark, you will find none of it
cause the least pain or disturbance in the Intestines.

But I am willing to show these ignorant Detractors, that I can produce
something more convincing and stronger than argument; I mean matter of fact,
examples, experiences both of young Children, and Women with Child; for if it
was true, that these troublesome accidents did arise from the use of these
Clysters, without doubt it would be most severe with little Infants, that are
so tender and weak; and if they cause Abortion, the Women big with Child that
have taken 'em, have reason to know something of it; and all these persons that
I am going to instance, had not recovered their perfect health, as they did, by
the use of 'em.

Mademoiselle duChatel, Granddaughter of Monsieur Marshall de Bellefond, 18
months old, had a Fever, and was perfectly recovered by twelve Clysters.

The Sons of the Marquis of St. Germain Beaupre, one eight years of age, seized
with a double Tertian and Malignant Fever with Convulsions; the other twelve
years old, that had a double Tertain, whose fit lasted for eighteen hours; each
of 'em took twenty five, or thirty Clysters, and both were perfectly cured.

The Son of the Marquis de Novion, three years of age, that had fits of a
double Tertian, that held him for fifteen hours, was cured by these Clysters in
a very few days.

The Son of Monsieur Nicolai, the first President, 20 months old, taken with a
continual Fever, accompanied with a violent Colic, that made him cry out day
and night; was also cured in a very little time.

The Son of the Marquis de Lavergne, twelve months old, seized with a very
strong double Tertian, together with a continual pain in his belly, and
frequent dejections, was cured by twelve Clysters.

The Daughter of Monsieur de Beloy, Farmer general, eighteen months old,
reduced to the last extremity by a vast number of fits of a double Tertian,
took about twenty Clysters, and was perfectly well.

The Son of Mr. Coipel, Painter in ordinary to Monsieur, six months old, taken
with a Tertian, together with a defluxion upon the lungs, was perfectly
recovered by twenty Clysters.

The Daughter of Monsieur Beinval, Master of the Horse to Monsieur the Count d'
Auvergne, three years of age, that had been seized with a double Tertian a
month before, whose fits were very tedious, took ten or twelve Clysters, and
was perfectly cured.

The Daughter of Madam de Gassien, the Widow of Monsieur de Gassien, Councellor
in the Parliament, eight years of age, taken with a continual Fever, with a
Paroxysm accompanied with Colic pains and a looseness; took eighteen Clysters
and was well.

The Daughter of Monsieur de Logni in Platriere-street, seven years of age,
seized with a malignant Fever, with violent Paroxysms every six hours, by the
means of fifty Clysters was perfectly cured.

The Daughter of Monsieur de Lamet, Secretary to the King, five years of age,
taken with a double Tertian, whose fit lasted eighteen hours, was cured with
two and twenty Clysters.

The Son of Monsieur Colat, Secretary to the King, three years of age, taken
with a continual Fever, was recovered by eight Clysters,

The Son of Monsieur Bertrand, Secretary to the King, two years and an half
old, taken with a Dysentery and continual Fever, was cured immediately of the
Dysentery by my Specific, and afterward took sixteen Clysters which took off
the Fever. On which it is remarkable, that if there were any ill consequence
from these Clysters, without doubt it would be seen in this case; for there is
no person but what must know, that after a Dysentery the intestines are very
weak and feeble, and easily subject to any ill impression; I mean in old and
strong bodies, and much more in young tender Infants.

The Son of Monsieur Audiger, Auditor of the Accounts, a Relation of Mr.
Hermand, Physician, three years of age reduced to the last extremity, was set
upon his Legs again by these Clysters, contrary to the advice, and
notwithstanding the opposition of his Kinsman.

The Daughter of Monsieur Huglas, in Bourdonnois-street, aged seven years, who
had been very much afflicted, and near death for many days, with a continual
Fever and Defluxion upon the Lungs; was cured by this method alone. She took
about thirty Clysters.

The Son of Mr. Michalet, Bookseller, eight years of age, that had been sick of
a double Tertian six weeks, whose fit was very violent and tedious, took
eighteen Clysters and was perfectly cured.

The Son of Mr. Malet, Mercer, in Montmartre-street, four years old, that had
been many days afflicted with a continual Fever near death, was cured by
sixteen Clysters.

The Daughter of one Priou, Coachman to the lately deceased Monsieur Voisin,
Counselor of State, five years of age, seized with a malignant Fever,
delirious, and having at the same time a defluxion upon the Lungs, given over,
and upon the point of death, when I was sent for, took forty Clysters, and was
perfectly cured.

As to Women with Child, Madam the Countess of Flamanville, seven months gone,
was seized with a double Tertian continual Fever; who after she had taken the
Bark all manner of ways by the Mouth, and the Fever still grew worse, and the
Patient despaired of any relief; at last by my order took it in Clyster; which
gave her life again, and by that means she went her time out, and was safely
brought to Bed.

It is about two Months since, Monsieur des Forges the famous Man-Midwife, sent
for me to consult about Madam de Bellecour, Wife of Monsieur de Bellecour,
Play Master of the Rents, a Lady of a very nice constitution; she had been sick
for six weeks of a Tertian Ague and then a doulbe Tertian; she had taken the
Bark a great while by the Mouth, which had brought it to some intermission, but
not perfectly cured it. I satisfied Monsieur des Forges of the easiness and
excellency of the Bark by Clyster, he agreed to make use of it, and the Lady
was perfectly cured by its means.

I have given you Instances over and above, for the satisfaction of those whose
interest it is, to inform themselves of the manner of giving the Bark in
Clyster: should I endeavor to relate the like Cures I have performed I should
never come to an end without abusing the patience of the Reader. I have only
related this small number, because I thought my self obliged to give this proof
to the Public, since they endeavor to deceive the World, by their notorious
Lies and scandalous Discourses, unworthy of Men of honor.

All those I have just now mentioned, are persons very well known to the World:
any one may be easily satisfied from them, and all must acknowledge the worth
and innocence of a Remedy, which is of such use, that those that detract from
it, may be ashamed of their injustice, in stifling a Truch so beneficial to the
health of Mankind.

Yet if there are Physicians still of that malicious temper, I can vouch that
there are also a great many at Paris, that have done me justice, and the honor
to approve of these Clysters, by prescribing them to their Patients, and have
accordingly found success.

If any one has endeavored to make use of these Clysters, and they have not
answered expectation, it is without doubt either because they did not
understand thoroughly my way of giving them, or else because they have not
observed it. But I boldly defy any Man whatever, Physician or not, to bring
any one that I have managed after this way of practice within these three
years, that have had a Fistula, or any such like disaster, which can be imputed
to this Remedy. It is an easy matter to speak against a thing, and suppose it
to be false, but this is not sufficient to gain belief, they ought to prove
what they say.

All the world knows that I have prescribed these Clysters, to a great many
Patients in the utmost extremity. A great many have recovered, and some have
died, not from any ill effect of the remedy, but because we must all dye, and
when it Pleases God to take us out of this world, all our endeavors are but
vain.

I have already said, that I do not pretend to make a man immortal by this
method, neither do I oblige any man to it; I only publish it to discharge my
duty, who ever pleases may make use of it. If the Cures it performed were not
so speedy, and there were a greater formality than the thing requires in the
management of it, it would not be of so little repute.

However, if there be any, out of a strong antipathy to the Bark, absolutely
refuse to take it either in Clyster or by the Mouth, if they will do me the
honor to come to me for relief, I Will give 'em remedies which shall be as
innocent and effectual as the other.

The poor of all sorts shall be kindly received whenever they come, throughout
the whole year, viz. in the Summer time, from half an hour after five to half
an hour after six; in the Winter from seven a Clock in the morning to eight: I
shall take a great deal of care to hear and examine 'em, and will give 'em
remedies gratis, not only for Fevers and the Dysentery, but for all other
Distempers, excepting none; which I thought my self obliged to give notice of,
that the foolish modesty of some may be no hinderance to the cure of the
Distemper they are ashamed to own.

THE PRIVILEGE OF THE KING.
LOuis, by the Grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to our Beloved and Faithful Counselors, Gentlemen of our Courts of
Parliament, Master of the Ordinary Requests of our Court, Provosts, Bailiffs,
Seneschals, their Civil Lieutenants, and all other our Officers to whom it
shall belong greeting.
Our well beloved Adrien Helvetius Doctor of Physic, has humbly shown to us,
that-having discovered the manner of curing Fevers without taking any thing by
the mouth, he might present it to us, and receive Orders from us to make it
public, and accordingly might have it printed, under the Title of A Method of
curing all sorts of Fevers without taking any thing by the Mouth. Which he
being not in a capacity to do without our Letters of Permission and Privilege
requisite for it, he has humbly petitioned us, that we would grant him them.
For these Reasons, being willing to treat the said Mr. Helvetius kindly,
considering the Services he does every day to the Public, and the Cures he has
performed of most sorts of Fevers by his New Method, as well in the Hospital of
Versailles, as elsewhere.

We have given him License, and by these Presents do give him License to print
the said Method by such Bookseller or Printer, in such a Volume, Margent,
Character, and as often as he shall think fit, during the space of Ten Years
next ensuing, to begin from the day the said Method shall be finished at the
Press; to sell and distribute it throughout our Kingdom, by such Persons as he
shall advise with. We prohibit all Booksellers, and others, to print or cause
to be printed, sell or distribute the said Book under any pretense whatsoever,
either of a Foreign Impression or otherwise, without the consent of the said
Helvetius, or those that are in Commission under him, upon pain of Confiscation
of the counterfeit Copies, two thousand Livers mulct, and all costs, damages
and interests; upon condition that he shall put two Copies of it in our public
Library, one in our Cabinet of Books, at our Castle of Louvre, and the other in
that of our dearly beloved and faithful Chevalier, Commander of our orders, Mr.
Boucherat Chancellor of France; as also that he takes care to print the said
Book upon good Paper, and in a fair Character, according to the orders of the
Library and Printing; that the Impression of it be in our Kingdom and not
elsewhere, and that he causes these Presents to be registered in the Registry,
of the Company of the Merchant Booksellers and Printers at Paris, upon pain of
these Presents being void and of none effect; the contents of which we command
and enjoin you, that the said Helvetius enjoy with all its rights fully and
peaceably, ceasing and causing to cease all troubles and hindrances to the
contrary. Our Will is that in putting at the beginning or end of the said Book
the abstract of these Presents, they may be held authentic and duly signified,
and that to the Copies, compared by one of our beloved and faithful Counselors
and Secretaries, credit may be given as to the Original. We command our first
Apparitor or Sergeant upon this Summons to make for the execution of these
Presents all significations, and other acts of justice necessary, without
demanding any other permission: For so is our Will and Pleasure.

Given at Paris the eighth day of November, in the Year of our Lord One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Three, and in the Fifty First Year of our Reign.
Signed by the King in Council. Boucher.
Registered in the Book of the Company of Booksellers and Printers of Paris, the
18th of November 1693. Signed by Aubouyn Recorder.



The first Impression finished the 2d of January. 1694.

This Impression was just finished, when Monsieur d' Rouviere, very well known
by his personal merit, as well as by his composition of Treacle, the finest now
made; transmitted a Letter to me, which was writ to him by the learned Monsieur
Fovet; which my Friends thought convenient I should give an abstract of here,
that may be serviceable to the public, as a testimony; which is so much the
more considerable, because it came from a good hand, and was not sought after.
The abstract runs thus word for word.

The Abstract of a Letter from Monsieur Fovet, Physician to the King, Intendant
of the Waters of Vichi; to Mr. Rouviere the King's Apothecary.
Vichi the 30th of Novem. 1693.
-- If you see Monsieur Helvetius tell him, that I give him thanks, for his
invention of the way of curing Fevers by giving the Bark in Clyster; for it
never fails me, and before the Fever returns again I repeat it, or at least
cause it to be repeated, with very great success. Posterity will be very much
obliged to him. The last cure I performed was upon a woman, seventy two years
of age, who had a double Quartan with an unquenchable thirst without sleep; she
nauseated every thing, and was excessive weak; all this succeeded a continual
Fever she had for 6 weeks; in a word, all the Family, with the Patient her
self, looked upon this cure as un enchantment. If he publishes any writing
concerning it, whatever it costs, pray, Sir, let me have it.

FINIS.
BOOKS sold by J. Knapton, at the Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1694.
THE Memoirs of Monsieur Pontis, who served in the French Armies 56 Years,
under Hen. IV. Lewis XIII, and Lewis XIV. Kings of France. Containing many
remarkable Passages relating to the Court, the War, and the Government of those
Princes, translated at the desire of the late Duke of Ormond, by Charles
Cotton, Esquire; and dedicated to his Grace, the present Duke. Sir W. Temples
Memoirs of what past in Christendom from the War in 1672. to the Peace
concluded 1679. 2d edit. Processus integri in morbis fere omnibus curandis a D.
Tho. Sydenham conscripti, 12s. Scriveners directions to a holy Life, Oct. Dr.
Barrow of Contentment, Oct.

