A CALL To a General Reformation of Manners. AND Manifesting, in several
Particulars, the great Lets and Hindrances thereunto. Preached at the
Archdeacon of Sudbury's Visitation, holden at Kentford in Suffolk, in April
last, 1700.

By CLEMENT HEIGHAM, Esquire now Rector of Barrow in Suffolk.

Prove. XXVIII. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the Wicked; but such as
keep the Law, contend with them.

LONDON, Printed by John Darby for Richard Thurlbourn Bookseller in Cambridg,
1700.

To the Right Honorable, and truly Noble, CHARLES Lord Viscount Townshend.
Much Honored and Noble Lord,
HIS Majesty's Proclamation against Immoralities, and the Honorable Houses of
Parliament piously concurring, by some good Laws, to assist and strengthen the
Ministry, in the suppressing of Vice; as it gave me a secret Pleasure, so it
did encourage me to frame and preach this following Discourse, and for exposing
this Sermon in print to a more public View. I am not without hopes it may do
some good upon such as shall cast their Eye upon it (the Discourse being on an
Argument wherein all good Men do agree) but more especially it may let some
that are in great Authority see that there are great Lets and Hindrances
amongst us as to an universal Reformation of Manners; and some of them are such
Lets and Hindrances, as only the Wisdom of the Nation in Parliament can remove.

And I am the more emboldned to make use of Your Lordship's Name, and to crave
Your Patronage, not only upon the account of Your great Honor, eminent Parts,
and most agreeable Virtue (whereby You shine amongst our Nobility, and do
attract the Affections of all Good Men) but because great Examples are
powerful, and have a mighty Influence to bear down Vice, and to encourage
Goodness, And I am fully persuaded Your Lordship will in Your High Place
endeavor to promote that Great Design which this Discourse points at, which
is, to promote the true and lasting Happiness of our Church and State; and
which can be effected by no other means than by making the Almighty God our
Patron and Friend, which can only be by depressing Wickedness, and encouraging
Piety and universal Goodness.

And upon these accounts it is that I pray for Your Lordship's Health and
Happiness in this Life, and Your endless Glory hereafter; and shall always
approve my self

Your Lordship's most honoring, most Faithful, and most Obedient Kinsman, and
Humble Servant, CLEMENT HEIGHAM.

MATTHEW V. 16. Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your Good
Works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven.


THESE words have a reference to the three foregoing Verses, in which our
Savior applies himself to his Disciples, and all sorts of true Christians; and
requires them to set forth the Purity of their Doctrine, and the Purity and
Exactness of their Lives to that advantage, that by the authority and soundness
of their Doctrine and goodness of their Conversation, the Nation, or the World,
might be kept from putrefying or stinking. And he compares the Christian Church
to a City set upon a high illustrious place, which is easily seen by all that
travel near it; which City (if it be kept clean and beautiful) will attract and
draw Travelers to it; but if otherwise, it will make them shun and abhor it.
Wherefore our Savior requires them all to set forth such an eminent Light to
the World both by their Doctrine and suitable Life, that by their bright shining
Luster the thick Mists of Ignorance, and the grosser Darkness of Sin and
Wickedness might be dispelled; and that others seeing and beholding this
Glorious State of the Christian Church, might be invited thereby to glorify
their Father which is in Heaven.

These words then of our Savior, with respect to their Connection with the
former Verses, do contain,

First, A Precept or Command to all sorts of Christians to preserve pure and
sound Doctrine, and to lead exemplary Lives suitable to their holy Faith and
Doctrine.

Secondly, The words contain a powerful Argument to enforce good Christian
Practice, that others seeing your good Lives, may glorify your Heavenly Father;
or, that the ignorant sinful part of the World may receive saving Influences
(by virtue derived from the Purity of your Doctrine, and Goodness of your
Lives) and so Glory may redound to God.

First, For the Precept or Command in general to all sorts of Christians to
preserve pure and sound Doctrine, to see that their Copy be pure, and fair, and
good (and this is of great import) for if our Faith, or any allowed Doctrines
of our Christian Society be stained or corrupted (especially if ill Practice in
any kind be the natural consequence of such allowed Doctrines or matters of
Faith) this tends to destroy the great end of all Religion, But (God be
thanked) our Articles of Faith, and the allowed Doctrines of our Church, are
sound and good; neither is our Public Worship of God corrupted so, that the
public Assemblies are become Schools of Idolatry and Wickedness, as perhaps
may be with great truth said concerning some other Church that exalts it self,
and looks big in the eye of the World.

Here now (if time would permit me) I might take a very fair occasion to
represent the Faith, and Doctrine, and Government of our Church, which we all
own our selves Members of; and to set forth the Purity and Soundness of it, and
show the agreement of it to all that was owned by the Primitive Church in its
best estate; to convince how full it is to all the purposes of a good Christian
Life; and to manifest plainly that neither our Holy Worship and Services are
corrupted, nor does the Church of England give any one License to Sin.

But this is a large Field to enter into; and our Faith and Doctrine, and way
of Worship and Government, has been sufficiently set forth and justified by
many Learned Men of our own Communion, and sealed and confirmed by the Blood of
Holy Martyrs.

And therefore I shall say no more of the Copy; but I shall insist upon that
which our Faith and Doctrine and Discipline points at; which is to influence
all Christians so to live as our Faith and Doctrine and Government enjoins them
to do, and thereby to manifest to the eye of the World the Excellency and
Goodness of their Faith and Doctrine by their regular and holy Practices: For
what will a good Copy signify to them whose Lives do not write after it, and so
adorn it? What does it signify to talk of a good Way of Worship, if we do not
frequent it, and join in it as devout Worshippers too? What does it signify to
commend our holy Religion, which requires strict Sobriety, Chastity and Modesty
of Life, and a due Fear and Veneration of God; and yet at the same time to lie
wallowing in the Sins that are contrary to all this? What does it signify to
commend the Government of the Church, and yet at the same time to despise and
disobey it?

At the rate that most Christians live, they do but blot and disgrace their
Copy, tho otherwise never so very beautiful and comely.

Wherefore then to excite you all to manifest the Goodness of your Faith and
Doctrine by your exemplary Lives:

This I shall do in the following Method.

1st, I shall urge those Motives to Good Life, which our Common Christianity
affords us.

2ly, And that with respect to this solemn Occasion, I shall point out those
several Complaints that are made of some special Lets and Hindrances to an
universal good Practice amongst us; and I shall show what those Lets and
Hindrances are, and what must be the Cure and Remedy.

3ly, I shall show that to lead good Lives our selves, and to remove all those
Lets and Hindrances to others, is the only way to bring Glory to god, Honor
and Reputation to our Holy Church, with Safety and Prosperity to this Nation.

1st, Then for the Motives to Good Life, which our Common Christianity affords
us; and to comprize them as short as I can.

You all know, when you were Baptized, what strict Obligations that laid upon
you to live well; and some of you know what farther additions you have
voluntarily made by receiving Confirmation at the Bishop's hands, and after
that often receiving the Holy Communion. And who could now think that any
person having passed under all these means of Grace, should yet be only a
Christian in Title and Name? Let me persuade all such Christians (if there be
any such here present) that they live according to their Christian Profession:
For it is only so doing that can assure the sincerity of their Faith; it is
only so doing that must inspirit and enliven their hopes of another and better
Life; it is only so doing that can manifest their growth in Grace; it is only
so doing that can assure their Victory complete, and that the Seed of God
abides prevailingly in their Hearts: It is only a holy and regular Practice
that can discover the efficacy of all our means of Grace, and that the end of
Christ's Death is answered by us; and this alone will convince Beholders that
we are truly the Sons of God, and shall be Members of the Church Triumphant in
the next Life, as we are living Members of Christ here: It is this alone that
must dispel all our Fears and Doubts when we come to die; and a good Christian
Practice will do it beyond the best Confessor in the World. And besides all
this, a sincere good Christian Life will help you to find Truth, and to keep
close to it when you have it; for indeed it is a love to Sin that makes men
uncertain in a good Religion; and it is a godly Life that will prove the
excellency of your Doctrine to others beyond all the best penned Discourses in
the World: for a good Life is an Argument to sense, and convinces the eye of
the Beholder. Man cannot see the Heart; but we may read Men in their Lives: We
know the Tree is alive by the Fruit. Indeed there are many external Acts of
Worship and Duty, which a mere Hypocrite may perform with great applause; but
when there is a through Change wrought in our Manners from all that is bad to
all that is good, this is a visible demonstration that the Almighty Spirit of
God has been working in us, and that we are become the Children of God: When
from an intemperate Life we are become strictly sober; when from malicious,
haughty, and fierce and uncharitable, we are come meek, and humble, and
merciful; when from the love of the World we are become heavenly-minded; when
from impatience under Crosses and Troubles, we are become resigned and
submissive to the Will of God in all things, and so from all Vices to the
contrary Graces and Virtues; this is a visible demonstration of a mighty Change
wrought in us by the Power of God: This is a plain discovery that the very Body
of Sin grows weak, and is destroyed by a Divine Omnipotent Power; and that the
Grace of God is strong and lively, and prevails over all our Corruptions.

These are the Motives that might be enlarged upon to a Volume; but I can only
point at those Heads, which I doubt not but you can usefully improve in your
own private Thoughts and Meditations, which God grant you all may.

I now proceed to the Second thing proposed, which is to point out some special
great Lets and Hindrances to an universal Reformation of Manners amongst us:
And these I shall set forth by way of Complaints, and they are such as do
require redress; and the first Complaint that I shall mention, is,

1. Against the Guides of our Church; as if some of these Lights did not burn
so clear in their Conversations as they ought to do. So far as this may be
true, there ought to be speedy Remedies applied: Nam quo magis quisque eminet,
eo gravius nocet malo exemplo, si se perverse gerit. Vult ergo Christus
Apostolos eo majore studio intentos esse ad pie sancteque vivendum quam
quoslibet e vulgo obscuros homines; quia omnium oculi in eos quasi in lucernas
conjecti sunt; nec ullo modo ferendos esse, nisi vitae integritas doctrinae
cujus sunt ministri, respondeat. No doubt Ministers ought rather to the more
strict than other Men, because the consequence thereof is greater; for it the
Shepherd wanders, no doubt but the Sheep will go astray. And besides all this,
Cum Pastorum vita merito despicitur, eorum doctrina and verba consequenter
contemnentur. He that leads and idle Life may preach with Truth and Reason, as
did the Pharisees; but not as Christ, or as one having Authority.

Thus speaks the excellent Bishop Tailor, in his Rules and Advices to the
Clergy. But I come not here as an Informer against Men of the same sacred
Character with my self, and such as, generally speaking, are the greatest
Supporters of Religion in this Kingdom: I say the greatest Supporters of
Religion in this Nation; for with reverence be it spoken to a higher Order, it
is not a Triennial Light (tho shining never so clear) that will dispel our
Darkness; but it is these lesser Lamps, always burning and shining in our
Villages by holy Instructions and godly charitable Lives, that must dispel our
Fogs of Ignorance and practical Wickedness.

Second Complaint

Is of the want of constant catechizing of Children and Servants; or rather, I
think, there is a great want of a useful and profitable way of instructing
young people.

It is certainly a great mistake to think that merely the asking the Questions
of the Church Catechism, and receiving the Answers, will ever make any great
improvement; no nor reading an Exposition upon some Article of Faith or other
matters; This will not do; but it is applying our selves particularly to every
particular catechized Person by practical Questions, and receiving their
Answers, confirmed by them by Proofs of Scripture, that must settle firm
Grounds of Religion in the Hearts of the Instructed. And what if Ministers
would bestow one hour upon a Weekday upon this great Work, and at the same
time cast some Charity upon the poorer sort, to encourage them to come
constantly? I can assure from long experience, that they that do this, should
themselves feel the comfort of it, and see the great benefit of their Care and
Labors, to the Glory of God, and the good of many poor Christians committed to
their charge; and I do boldly say, there is no way like this to plant
substantial Goodness, and to undermine Schisms and Separations, and to preserve
the Church both pure and in Unity and Peace. And besides this good effect I
have seen, it encourages the common People to bring up their children to
reading; and by a sort of emulation amongst themselves, it makes young Persons
to thirst after and improve in divine practical Knowledge: It prepares them for
Confirmation, and makes them fit to come early to the Holy Communion; yea, it
cultivates their Manners betimes, and keeps them from the common Vices of the
World.

Third Complaint,

And that is concerning the Male-administrations of some Officers in our
Spiritual Courts, as that which greatly hinders a Reformation of Manners
amongst us. I do conceive it is of great moment to the true Interests of
Religion, and the Service of the Church, that the chief Governors of those
Courts should watchfully attend the management of business there, especially in
what concerns the exercise of Discipline against Offenders. I have made it my
observation for many years, that wherever I have lived, some tolerable care
has been taken for the cleansing and repairing of our Churches; but little or
no care has been taken about the living and walking Temples to scour off their
Defilements. Betwixt the Churchwardens gross negligence in discharging their
Oaths by making due Presentiments, and the Remissness, or much worse Practice of
some inferior Officers of those Courts, there has been done little service (so
far as I could see) either to the reclaiming of any Offenders, or to the
deterring any persons from the too customary Sins of the World: Nor do I see
how any great good can be expected, where Churchwardens seldom or never consult
their Ministers about their Presentiments. Nor do the Spiritual Courts consult
with the Ministers about the most proper way of dealing with lapsed Christians;
but matters relating to Offenders are either secretly hudled up (and it is to
be feared sometimes corruptly too) or if there be a public Penance, there is
such a trifling management in the execution of it, as that it carries no
weight, nor produces any effect, but turns all into a ridicule: but in
special, as to Commutations of Penance, there has been great swerving from the
Rule. I am not so vain as to censure and condemn in the general all private
Penances, or Commutations of Penance, when they are done as the Canon directs,
and thereby are made serviceable to the Interests of true Piety and Charity;
but when they are made use of only to scrue the Purse of the Offenders, and to
satisfy the private greedy humor of some inferior Officers, who suck no small
advantage to themselves by such secret Sin Offerings (as has been done) you
must give me leave to tell you, such Practices become not Christian Courts; but
so far as this Charge amounts to, they are Scandals and Grievances, and ought
to be reformed.

These Spiritual Courts ought to strengthen and assist the Ministry in their
great Work, that such as are too hard and rocky for our spiritual Weapons, may
be broken and subdued by them to Repentance, or cut off and cast out wholly, as
rotten Members, by the sacred and dreadful Censures of the Church.

Fourth Complaint.

The fourth great Complaint is against the main Body of Christians, as if there
were almost a total Eclipse, a general failure in the Morals of Persons in our
Christian Communion. The King and the Houses of Parliament do observe that
Wickedness has advanced amongst us; and they do wisely discern what Calamities
and Mischiefs a great Dissolution of Manners will bring upon this Church and
Nation; and therefore they are laboring by good Laws to stem the Tide, and to
stop the great Inundations of Wickedness that threaten to everflow and drown
us. And God knows our Danger is very great: for such whose Eyes can reach but
to a small compass, cannot but see the Drunkenness, the Uncleanness, the
Swearing, the Lying, the Killing, the Stealing, and what not, in some places or
other of the Nation; and therefore needs must the Land mourn, Hosea 4.2, 3. Yea
so deeply radicated are some Sins, so strengthened by Custom, so emboldned by
the Numbers offending, and so confirmed by Impunity, that could the Pulpit
breath Fire upon such as those, it could not melt them into better manners. And
besides all this, that which I take to be the completion of this Nation's
Misery, is this, That Parish Officers, Constables and Churchwardens especially,
whose Oaths oblige them to bring Delinquents to just Punishhment; they are
content to complement away their Oaths, and their Souls too, for good
Neighborhood sake: They can wipe their Mouths, and cry all is well, tho they
cannot but see and know, if they were not wilfully blind, how by the wicked
Lives of many under their Inspection, God is provoked, Christianity is wounded
and scandalized; and by the ill Examples of most, the good dispositions of
others are corrupted, and Wickedness is propagated, to the great dishonor of
God, and reproach of our holy Religion. Wherefore, as this Occasion invites me,
I will give my friendly advice to Church Officers; and I shall speak my mind
almost in the very words of that noble Divine Mr. George Herbert. In his Book
of Advices to the Country Ministers, amongst many other good Instructions, he
counsels all Ministers in their respective Cures to let their Churchwardens
know, that the great care and charge of the Parish lies upon them; and indeed
the whole Order and Discipline of the Parish is put into their hands. If the
Minister reforms any thing, it is out of the overflowing of his Conscience,
whereas the Churchwardens are to do it by Command and by Oath. By the Laws of
the Kingdom the Churchwardens are to levy Penalties for negligence in resorting
to Church, or for disorderly Carriage in time of Divine Service. And I may add,
that by your present Articles of Enquiry, you are to present the gross
Immoralities of Offenders.

But, as the same excellent Mr. Herbert goes on: It is the greatest Honor of
this World, says he, to do God and his Chosen service, or, as David says, to be
a Doorkeeper in the House of God.

Now the Canons being the Churchwardens Rule, you are to read, or hear them
read often, as also the Visitation Articles, which are grounded upon the
Canons; that so you may know your Duties, and keep your Oaths the better: in
which regard, considering the great consequence of your Places, and more of
your Oaths, you are by no means to spare any, tho never so great; but if, after
gentle and neighbourly Admonitions, they still persist in ill, you are to
present them: for your Obligations to God, and your own Souls, are above any
temporal Tie, any worldly Respects. Do well and right, and let the World sink.

And indeed, unless Parish-Officers will be watchful to discover Offenders, and
then perform their Oaths, all hopes of a General Reformation of Manners must be
at an end, and the Land must still groan under the burden of Wickedness.

Fifth Complaint

Is concerning the great want of Family-Religion among the Generality of
Christians, and the not employing the Lord's Day profitably in our Houses, as
well as in the Church.

Next to the sacred Ministry, there is nothing would conduce more to the
reforming a corrupt World, and to the keeping up a due sense of God and serious
Religion, than the due care of Masters and Mistresses and Parents to discharge
all that Duty which both Nature and Grace teaches them; that is, to pray in
and with their Families, and to instruct them; and to restrain and govern those
Children and Servants that are under their care and charge. And if those
Householders, whose daily necessities will not allow them much time for these
Employments upon the other days of the week, would employ the Lord's Day
carefully, both in the public Assemblies and in their private Houses, to
benefit themselves and those that belong to their care, we might then hope to
see Sin restrained, and Goodness universally planted: But until Families shall
become Nurseries of Religion and Good-manners, and shall become like little
Churches and sacred places both for good Instruction and holy Worship, no great
Reformation is to be expected. Some may perhaps call this Puritanism; but call
it what they will, I take it to be an infallible truth, that it is exemplary
Godliness that can only restore and preserve the Church.

Sixth Complaint

Is of the Sacrilegious Inclinations of Persons in our Communion: and that
which unavoidably follows the making the Church poor, is the contempt of the
Sacred Function. But this may seem to some a very remote Hinderance as to the
reforming the World: but it is not so; for what great things can be expected
where the Ministers Maintenance is either wholly precarious, or if it be
settled by Law, it is very strait, poor, and necessitous? And a mean or
precarious Livelihood too often cramps the Tongue of the Preacher, and makes it
afraid to speak plain; and what is worse, it hinders study, and begets servile
and base Compliances: And in plain English, scandalous Livings too often make
scandalous Priests; and where it is so, what Reformation can there be hoped for?

Our greatest and best Men saw this Mishief long ago, and that not only
Churchmen, but some others of Great Name.

And here I cannot but mention one, a great Light, and Prelate of our Church,
the famous Bishop Jewel. In a Sermon of his before the then Queen, we have
these words: What may be guessed at their Intent who decay the Provisions of
the House of God, and so basely esteem the Ministers of the Gospel, although in
other things they do well, although they seem to rejoice at the Prosperity of
Sion, and to seek the safety of the Lord's Anointed? yet needs must it be that
by these means foreign Power shall again be brought in upon us, such things
shall be done unto us as we before suffered in the times of Popery. And, says
the same Bishop Jewel, the Parsonages and Vicarages are the very Castles and
Towers of defense for the Lord's Temple; and if they be not better furnished
with a due Maintenance, and made more secure against Contempt, we must expect
God's Judgment upon us; and this noble Realm shall be subject to foreign
Nations.

These words to me are very remarkable, as falling from so great a Man; I wish
they were not prophetical: but yet when all is said, it is not to be expected
that the contempt of the Ministry should wholly cease. For the Sacred Order by
their Office being bound to cry down the ways of Sin, which corrupt Nature
cries up; the work of the Ministry being to promote Sobriety, Righteousness and
Holiness, and to plant those Graces in the Hearts and Lives of Men, which
corrupt Nature and the Devil strive against: This is so unthankful a work, to
irritate and disturb Men's Consciences, as close and sound Preaching must needs
do, to press against the bent of Men's strong Inclinations, and to commend to
them what they most hate; this is a work which will not procure to him much
Honor and Esteem that is employed in it in this irreligious Age. And our
Savior has told us long ago what we must expect from a wicked World, if we
will be faithful in our places: The World cannot hate you, but me it hates,
because I testify of it that the Works thereof are evil.

I confess it may seem very strange to a thinking Man, that in a civilized
Nation a Man of God should be despised; a Man of God by his sacred Character
and Message, and whose Office it is to guide and conduct Souls to Heaven.
Little do Christians consider how much they owe to the main body of the
despised Clergy.

By them you are baptized, by them you are instructed in all saving Knowledge;
by their Prayers your Souls do receive aid and assistance from Heaven; by their
Prayers Judgments are kept off from a People; at their hands you often receive
the Bread of Life, and by them your departing Souls are commended to God; and
if there were any Magistrates here, I would tell them, and justify it too, that
the Peace and Prosperity of the Kingdom is more owing to the Pulpit and an
orthodox regular Clergy, than to all the Courts of Judicature. It Is not the
Magistrates Sword alone that would preserve you, if the daily and weekly
Labors of the Ministry did not instill good Principles, and keep the
Consciences of men awake, and make men more afraid of Sin than all your Axes
and Rods can do: It is the Ministers Labors that dispel that Ignorance, so far
as it is dispelled amongst us: It is the Ministers faithful Labors that break
the force of men's Corruptions, and make them more dutiful to God, and
submissive to their Governors.

And therefore if the Parsonages and Vicarages be the very Castles and Towers
of defense for the Lord's Temple, and the greatest security for the State too,
sure then it highly concerns all Orders of Men to assist and protect them, and
to contribute all they can to secure them from contempt, and to strengthen them
in their great work of promoting Religion, and depressing Vice and all manner
of Wickedness.

I have now done with the great Lets and Hindrances of an universal
Reformation of Manners, and it is no difficult thing to point out what must be
the Cure.

1. A devout, faithful and laborious Ministry, supported with a due
Maintenance, and made more secure against contempt. 2. The Officers of Parishes
must be such as fear God, and that understand the weight of an Oath, and the
great consequences of discharging it. 3. Family Religion must be kept up. 4.
Children and Servants must be well instructed. 5. The Spiritual Courts must
give their utmost assistance to the Ministry. 6. A Religious Magistracy must
give their helping hand to punish Vice, and encourage Goodness.
And when all these shall mutually conspire to promote the great ends of
Religion, we may then hope for a new face of things; we may then hope for a new
Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness; we shall then behold the Kingdom of our
Lord and Savior exalted amongst us, which is the hearty desire of all Good Men.

I proceed now to my third an last point, which is to show, That to lead good
Lives our selves, and to remove all those Lets and Hindrances which keep
others from doing the same, is the only way to bring Glory to God, Honor and
Reputation to our Holy Church, and true Happiness and Safety to our Church and
Nation.

1. Then, to promote universal Goodness by our living well, and discouraging
Vice, brings Glory to God, as it does sensibly and experimentally commend the
ways of God to a poor ignorant brutish World: It lets the World see that the
ways of Religion are ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. A good
Christian Life, as it gives inward joy to the Practiser, so it sweetly
insinuates a good liking into the Beholders; it strangely attracts the
Affections of others, and by a secret invisible force it charms the Passions,
and delights the Beholders. The glorious Attire of Christian Graces, such as
Meekness, Humility and Modesty of Mind; fervent Piety to God, and as fervent
Charity to Man; undisguised Friendship; Sincerity in all our Dealings; evenness
and equality of Mind in all conditions and estates of our Life; Conquest over
Passions; Contempt of the World; and Sollicitousness for nothing, but to keep
up and maintain a joyful Intercourse betwixt God and our Souls: Such a Divine
Temper as this does strangely affect and attract, and must insinuate a good
relish into all Beholders; and it is my firm belief that were Persons that are
of a good Communion but more exact in their Lives to the Reformed Copy that is
before them, it would mightily supercede the necessity of much writing to
justify and recommend our way of Worship: for were Men's inward Corruptions more
subdued by the force of that Religion which they profess, we should find little
to do but to love God, and love one another; and the sweet Relish which ever
attends a conscientious well-spent Life, would so confirm and settle good
Christians in their way, that they would never doubt or stagger, and many other
Beholders that are unsteddy and unresolved, would be more easily drawn to join
with that Communion of Christians where they see a Divine Presence and Force
(and so much Comfort as a good Life produces) than by all other Arguments in
the World.

And this leads to a second Consideration, to enforce good Christian Practice
in our selves, and to discourage Vice in others.

2. For it shows our Principles to be sound and good, and that we firmly assent
to them as such: It convinces the World that our Doctrine and way of Worship
is from God: This Men will be apt to believe, when they see the powerful and
visible Influences of it in the change of men's Manners from bad to good: This
satisfies men beyond all other Arguments, that there is a Divine Presence
amongst us, and that there is a special Assistance and Blessing concurring with
the means of Grace that we make use of; and it does most plainly evince that
God's Grace is not bestowed upon us in vain. I would to God that this most
excellent Argument (for so the Primitive Christians accounted it) were not so
much lost as it is, as to its due force upon Beholders, by the bad Examples of
too many Christian Professors. Those first and best Christians could boast of
the Truth, the Goodness and Excellency of their Religion, and Soundness of
their Doctrine, from the admirable Efficacy and Power it had upon the Hearts
and Lives of those that recieved it. All this is plain from some memorable
Passages in Lactantius's 3d Book de falsa Sapientia; and also in several places
of Origin, too long here to be recited.

But 3ly, It brings Glory to God, and great Good to others, as it demonstrates
our Religion to be a practicable thing, and that the hardest Duties may be
performed. Arguments alone will hardly invite the generality of People to
serious and strict Religion, where good Examples are wanting; yea Examples will
persuade more effectually than all the best framed Arguments in the World: for
men love to see whether the Ways be passable or no, before they adventure
themselves; especially where Flesh and Blood tells them there are some
Difficulties to encounter, some Rocks and Uneasinesses to climb over; and that
they may happen to meet with much ill usage too in their Journey to Heaven, even
from such as pretend to be Friends and Fellow-Travellers. But when men shall
see by the Courage and Victory and good Examples of others that commend these
ways of Religion, that the worst of Difficulties may be overcome, and are so,
by the same Flesh and Blood with themselves; this animates and enlivens their
Spirits, and takes off all Objections arising in their Minds from the
difficulty of the Attempt.

4. A good Life, and discouraging of Vice, brings Glory to God, as it declares
to the World that we steadfastly believe, that without a regular Piety and
strict Obedience to the Laws of Christ, none shall be saved. This will visibly
discover to the World what our Belief is, and what our Opinions are: This will
manifest that we entertain no corrupt and dangerous Principles; and we our
selves might appeal to this as a Test, if our Lives were but regularly pious
and uniformly good: for a Heresy, or dangerous Error in the Judgment, will for
the most part appear in the Practice of him that owns it. And let me tell you,
it will not be easy to convince any one that our Judgments in matters of
Religion are sound, if our Morals are bad; and of this I am sure, that few will
be convinced that we believe a good Life to be absolutely necessary to
Salvation, if we do not lead good Lives our selves, and show also, by our zeal,
our dislike of Wickedness in others.

5. and lastly, A through Reformation of Manners brings Glory to God, as it
gives the Almighty a free occasion to manifest himself in that great Attribute
he most delights in, which is in showing mercy to a sinful Nation, and
disposing all things for the Happiness and Safety of it. God will never look
favorably upon us, until our crying Sins be removed; and therefore if we do
believe that there is a Divine governing Providence, which blesses or
chastises a Nation according as they either fear or dishonor him, we must
then believe that all our private and public Happiness and Safety will depend
upon our holy living, and discountenancing Vice. Your very Safety and
Prosperity in any kind rests move upon this Basis than upon all our wisest
Counsels, or the force of Arms: and the very Safety and Reputation of our
Church, both at home and abroad, depends upon a through Reformation of Manners:
yea the Peace, and Honor, and Prosperity of your Families depends upon it; and
what is much more valuable, I am sure your inward Peace and comfortable hopes
of another Life rests upon your regular good Christian Practice. In a word,
your Baptism requires it, and the care of your Childrens Souls and others of
your Family exacts this Duty of you, to live well your selves, and to
discourage Sin in others. And for many of you that hear me, I must plainly tell
you, that your very Offices and solemn Oaths do bind you to prosecute the
wicked Doers; and to all of you I say, your Allegiance to God and the King
exacts all this at your hands.

Wherefore let the sum of our Thoughts bend this way; let this be the chief end
of all our Study, Learning and Reading: Let this be the end of all our
Preaching, and Praying, and counselling, and reproving, and correcting, to save
our own Souls, and the Souls of others. Then will the Almighty shine upon us,
and give us his Blessing; and all Europe shall behold and see that we are not
only mighty in Battle, but mighty in Prayer too, and shall be forced to confess
that God is with us, and on our side, because by due fearing and serving him we
are become a wise and understanding People.

But to conclude:

Since so august and puissant a Prince leads the way; since a Prince mighty in
Battle to defend and protect us, is neither afraid nor ashamed to engage
himself resolutely under the despised Banner of the Cross, and to fight
Christ's Battles against the Corruptions of a wicked World, and commands us all
not only to live well, but to attend and assist him in our several Offices and
Places to discourage and suppress the Corruptions of the Age we live in; I do
take it to be a special and signal Call from Heaven to you all to join
unanimously in this great work of endeavoring to amend a corrupt World. And if
any Magistrates or inferior Officers shall neglect to prosecute his Majesty's
pious Intentions, they will have a great deal to answer for, not only to the
King, but to the Great God the King of Kings; and they will bring the Guilt of
others Sins upon themselves and the whole Nation: For the Connivance of
Governors makes the Sins of private Persons the Sins of the Community; and
although the Punishment of private persons or particular men may be deferred to a
future State, yet Communities as such (as one well expresses it) having no
Resurrection in the World to come, they may justly expect the fruits of their
Delinquencies in this present Life.

But because it cannot be hoped or expected that so great a work as the
Reforming a polluted Age can be brought to any great effect, unless all that
have the least stamp of Authority upon them, shall put their helping hand to
this great Work; unless Parents and Masters of Families shall begin at home;
unless Ministers and Magistrates, and all inferior Parish-Officers shall
conspire and conjoin in this glorious Work: Let us therefore pray to Almighty
God that he would inspire the Hearts of all Orders and Estates of Men in this
our holy Church, that every Member of the same, in his Place and Office,
Spiritual or Civil, may gird themselves with a true Christian Zeal and Courage
to countenance Goodness, and to bring all Wickedness into a just shame and
contempt; that so God may be glorified, and many Souls saved, and that God may
delight to dwell amongst us, and that we may all rejoice and be glad in the
Peace and Prosperity of our Church and State.

DEO GLORIA.

Now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good Work to do his Will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be
Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Grant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, that the Words we have heard this day
with our outward Ears, may through thy Grace be so grafted inwardly in our
Hearts, that they may bring forth in us the fruit of Good Living, to the Honor
and Praise of thy Name, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

The Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, keep your Hearts and Minds
in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: And the
Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst
you, and remain with you always. Amen.

FINIS.

