THE OPPRESSED MAN'S OUTCRY; OR, An Epistle writ by John Hedworth of Harraton
in the County of Durham, Esquire the 13 Sept. 1651. unto the Honorable, Sir Henry
Vane, the elder, a Member of the Honorable Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England, William Vane his son, Lieut. Col. Paul Hobson, and John Middleton, Esquire
Members of the Com. of the Militia of the County of Durham by Authority of
Parliament.
Honorable and worthy Gentlemen,
THE great Lord Jehovah, the Creator of the world, In Scripture is styled a God
of Compassion, and of Truth and Justice, and a hearer of the sighs and groans
of the afflicted and oppressed; who in scripture has fully declared himself,
to be an angry and severe Judge, and punisher of tyrants and oppressors; yea,
and of those that shut their ears, and harden their hearts, against the
mournful, putiful, and just complaints of the afflicted and distressed. And he
by his special Providence, has put power, authority, and magistracy into your
hands, being Members of that Committee, that have the chiefests command of this
County (under the Parliament, the supreme) at your beck; And therefore by him
in Scripture are styled gods upon earth, and in that regard ye ought to be
like him not only in tender Compassion and mercy, but also in truth and
Justice, and hearers of the sighs, groans and mournful Lamentations of the
afflicted and oppressed. In the serious Consideration of which give me leave to
cry out unto you, and acquaint you, that I am the son and heir of a deceased
Knight, Sir John Hedworth, who was Lord, Owner, or Proprietor of the Lands of
Harraton in the County of Durham, and all the Cole Mines thereof, or thereunto
belonging, and left them unto me by an ancient and unblemished Intail, as
strong as the Laws of England (my undoubted birthright) could make any, as his
eldest son and heir. And being by his decease, left young in years, and
destitute of the support of powerful friends, and allies, and therefore fit to
become a prey to every devouring wolf, or greedy great man, that should have a
covetous eye to that inheritance that my forefathers strongly and Legally
intailed upon my father and my self: And it was my unhappy fate to live in the
age wherein Sir Arthur Hesilrig became Governor of New Castle, a man of a high
and covetous spirit, the whole County of Durham being (as by his constant
actions he declares) too little in Revenue to satisfy or content his greedy
appetite: And a man that will admit of no rule to walk by, but his own perverse
will and sword, who casting more then an Ahabs eye upon my poor Vineyard at
Harraton, abhorred to be so righteous unto me, as wicked Ahab desired and
proffered to be to poor Naboth, who proffered him for his Vineyard the worth of
it in money, or a better for it.

But Sir Arthur Hesilrig finding my land and Cole mines at Harraton, were
profitable and pleasant, and lay commodious for him to add to his newly com'd
by great Estate; yet though he were inferior in power to Ahab a King, would be
more unrighteous in practice to me, then he was to poor Naboth, and therefore
would take from me my Colyeries and Land, yea, and my Cattle too, and that
without so much as ever proffering me as good for them in exchange, or the
worth of them in money, or so much as one penny for them in consideration, yea,
or that so much as ever setting up and legally producing the least shadow, or
pretense of title against me, more then his will, pleasure, and sword; yea, and
to aggravate his covetousness and tyranny exercised to the height against me,
he would not only take my inheritance, goods, and cattle from me for nothing,
by his will; but he would do it in such a way, as that I should be left
destitute for ever hereafter, of all hopes of friends to recover it; and
therefore he would totally destroy and crush to pieces, not only in estate,
but also in good name, (which to an honest man ought to be more precious, then
much sweet ointment) my Father in Law M. George Gray, and my old friend M
George Lilburn, thereby for ever hoping to deter any man of power or interest
in the least, to meddle with me, to help to ease or redress me; and all this
done unto me at such a time, when the righteous and just God is abroad in the
world, in Power and Majesty, to destroy Kings and Princes, and the greatest of
their Followers, for tyranny, injustice, and oppression; yea, and at such a
time when the Parliament of England his Masters, have raised and maintained a
bloody and costly war, declaredly to defend the liberties and properties of the
people, yea, and at such a time when they themselves execute severe justice for
secret transgressions done in holes and corners, upon their own members,
witness my Lord Howards Bribery.

And that Sir Arthur has oppressed me, and taken from me, and my tenants, my
estate, is evident.

1. As to my Cole mines, the profits of which he and his under Commissioners,
in their Certificate printed in Lieutenant Colonel John Lilburns Letter to four
of the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall, dated the 30 of July 1651. page 11.
line 3, and 4: bath valued it at fifteen pounds a day in clear profit, which by
the year at that rate, reckoning 365 days to the year, amounts to full 5475 l
per an. the high injustice and tyranny in his taking away of which, and still
with a high and strong hand as unjustly detaining of it, is so fully set out
and proved in authentic Records, in ^he forementioned printed Epistle,
especially in my tenant M. Josiah Primates petition to the Parliament,
delivered at their door in print to their members, upon the 22 of July 1651.
and recorded there, page 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. that I need now say no more of it,
but refer you to the said Epistle, one of which I make bold herewith humbly to
present unto you all for your serious and careful perusal.

2. He and his under Commissioners has as arbitrarily and tyrannically taken
away from me almost three hundred pounds per annum, of my Land of Inheritance
at Harraton, and have let both Collieery and Land to Colonel Hacker, Lieutenant
Colonel Mayers, major Tolhurst, or other of his officers and soldiers, of which
Land I was (being neither Papist nor Delinquent) in legal and quiet
possession, for about three years together, before they pretended to sequester
it from me; and although I had an Order, dated the 12 of July 1650. recorded in
the 29 page of the foresaid Epistle, that requires, that in case I were in
actual possession at the time of the sequestring my said Land, and were no
Papist nor Delinquent, that then I should be restored by the Commissioners of
Durham to the possession taken from me, giving security to be responsible for
the profits of the estate, in case it should not prove mine; and although there
was never any pretense of my being either Papist, or Delinquent laid unto my
charge; and although I have fully proved by Authentic witnesses, viz. M. John
Clifton of Gateshead, and M. Thomas Petty of Durham (recorded in the said
Epistle, page 28.) that I was in quiet and peaceable possession of the said
Lands, at the time when they were sequestered, yet will not Sir Arthur suffer
the Commissioners of sequestrations of Durham, to obey the said Order, or do me
any manner of Justice or Right, but instead thereof has commanded one of them,
viz Col. Francis Wren, to go to the Judges of Assizes, and command them from
him, to suffer me to have no benefit nor privilege of the Law of England, (my
grand and undoubted inheritance and birth right.)

3. Sir Arthur Hesilrig and his said under Commissioners, who are solely at his
beck and Command, and dare do nothing against his will and directions, have
most illegally, arbitrarily and tyrannically robbed and taken from me almost
sixty head of my Cattle, some of which were well worth seven or eight pound a
piece, I having been bid for ten Oxen, then of that number, seven pound a piece
ready money, and six more of them were Stots, for some of which I was bid five
pound a piece, and these they took from me being my own proper goods, and no
man's else in the world, neither directly, nor indirectly. And my absolute
propriety in them all, I have fully proved by legal testimony. Copies of whose
Depositions are recorded in the foresaid Epistle, page 33, 34, 35. the height of
whose injustice to me in the two last particulars of my Land, and Cattle, I
cannot to your Honors better set forth, then is already done in my printed
petition delivered to the Parliament, upon July 23. 1651. and recorded in the
foresaid Epistle, page 31, 32, 33. to which I humbly refer you; all which
Cattle I valued at three hundred pounds. Its true, they pretended they were my
Father Greys, which if they were, (as in the least they were not at that time,
nor any one of them for almost twelve months before) yet he is neither Papist
or Delinquent, but is, and has been a zealous, active, well affected
Parliamenteer, and a Committee man for diverse years together, unspotted and
unblemished, as is very well known to you all four; but farther they say, my
Father Gray ought one John Jackson, a Delinquent, money, who had not paid his
Composition: what is that to me? But fullier to answer that, I say, my Father
Gray avers he owes him never a penny, nor never bought nor sold with him in his
life, for two pence, nor never took no land of him, nor Cole Pits, nor no such
like things; but its true, he confesses he took Land of his brother William
Jackson, who had a legal right to let it, for the payment of his portion and
his sisters, who had a Decree in Chancery, in 1639 to authorize him so to do,
and also had the Order of the Committee of the County of Durham, to enable him
so to do; which Order was procured and obtained, by the special desire and
petition of the wife of the said John Iackson, when his Land was under
sequestration; and yet for all this, has the said Sir Arthur Hesilrigg and his
obedient creatures, by his will and pleasure, taken the said Land from the said
William Iackson, (who was neither Papist, nor Delinquent) and his sisters, and
conferred it upon the said Delinquent John Iackson, who had no present right to
it; by means of which, those of them that are yet alive, are ready to famish
and starve through poverty and want.

But may it please your Honors; admit the said Cattle that I averr was mine,
had been my Father Greys, and admit the said John Iackson the Delinquent, had
pretended my Father had owed him money, yet upon what ground of Reason, or Law,
had the Commissioners at Durham, to believe the said Iackson, a Delinquents
bare averment, before my Father in Laws, who is no Delinquent, but every way an
honest man: But I farther answer, John Iackson the Delinquent, had compounded
and actually got off his sequestration about a year before the taking away my
cattle; and in that regard was in a sense in statu quo, and if any man owed him
money, his just and regular way was to go to Law for it, and there recover it as
other English people do, and not for Sir Arthur and his Commissioners to be
their own Carvers, to make that a pretense to ruin and destroy those who they
had a desire so to do unto, under pre^^nce they owed a Compounding Delinquent
money; which if they did, yet had Sir Arthur and his Commissioners, (neither by
Law nor Ordinance) any power at all to drive their goods, half starve them, and
then sell them at most for half the price of their first worth, and do with the
money what they pleased, as with me in my present case they did; nay, although
the said John Iackson had not paid in all his Composition, yet neither by Law,
nor Ordinance, they had no power to seize and sell the goods of those that
really owed him money, much less of those that he only pretended owed him money;
much less could they seize and sell the goods of those that he never pretended
owed him a penny, which is my case; for their regular and legal course, in case
of his wilful or negligent non-paiment of his fine, had been to have
re-sequestred his Lands again: but this high piece of injustice, as well to my
Father Gray, as my self, he assures me he will particularly and fully anatomize
in print; and therefore to him, I now leave this, and all his other and many
oppressions and wrongs, by Sir Arthur Hesilrig, which I believe the world will
shortly see in print by him in their colors.

4. I beseech you observe, here is to me out of my Colliery lost 40 s a week,
and 10 l at Christmas, and 10 l at Easter, for two years, amounts to 248 l
besides lost out of my Land at 300 l. per annum, or thereabouts, for 1 of a
year comes to 575 l lost by my said Cattle 300 l all three of which, put
together, comes to 1123 l, besides in several postings, and other Journies to
London, charges staying there, fees to Lawyers and Solicitors, with Clerks fees
for Orders, etc. charges for witnesses, several times to London and Durham, and
many other incident charges depending upon my almost two years troubles, above
300 l for I am sure of it, one Journey to London, and charges there, cost me
above three score pounds, besides the loss of my time for the said almost two
years, and improvement of my stock and land, with the denial of me the benefit
of the Law, and thereby with other ingredients the loss unto me of many
opportunities I have had, to re-gain and possess several large parcels of mine
inheritance at Sunderland, and several other places, and making me poor and
low, and forcing me to run into debt, with disgracing my reputation and credit;
yea, and add to all this, by his burying me alive as it were, if I had not by
Gods goodness found unexpected extraordinary choice, cordial and faithful
friends, by which means I am really damnified, I am confident of it, at least
5000 l besides the foresaid 1123 l or thereabouts, that I have lost by Sir
Arthurs matchless and unparelleled cruelty and tyranny. Over and above which,
if my Colliery be worth that rate of fifteen pound per diem, what Sir Arthur
and his Commissioners in their foresaid Certificate values it at, my tenants,
M. Primate, M. George Lilburn, and my brother M. Geonge Gray Junior, are
damnified by their almost two years loss of it, about ten thousand nine hundred
and fifty pounds, of all which cruelty and injustice exercised toward me, and
upon me, Colonel Francis Hacker, now a Colonel of Horse in the Army under his
Excellency the victorious Lord General Cromwell, has been no small Instrument
and principal Agent to execute upon me, arbitrarily and illegally sending his
Soldiers or Troupers with severe commands, to handle me rufly without pity or
compassion, when by their wills and swords they took my own from me, threating
them that if they did not execute his tyrannical and unjust commands
effectually upon me, he would cashier them out of his Troup and Regiment, as
some of themselves have confessed; and all this he did, as is evident, to make
himself rich and great, with my Colliery and Lands, of which Sir Arthurs
darling, the said Col. Francis Hacker, must needs become the chiefest Farmor,
which in the conclusion it may be, may have in some sense as sharp sauce
following it, as Naboths Vineyard had to, or for Ahab; which if it have, I hope
Sir Arthurs Lieutenant Col. Mayers, and his busy and late upstart Major
Tolhurst, with his pedling Lieutenant Bruine, the insolentest fellow of all the
rest, will not go scot-free. Thus most noble Gentlemen, have I most truly,
though briefly, laid open my wounds unto you; for which as yet, in this our
English Gilead, I can find no balm, although I have left no just and ordinary
means unassayed, that it is possible for the wit of man to attempt: as,

First, at the beginning, I and my relations at the Committee of Durham, did
what in us lay, to preserve our rights; but Sir Arthurs will, long sword,
threats, and bended fist, was too hard there for all our Law, Right, and
Reason; and then when by will and power, my right was carried from me there, I

Secondly, appealed to the chief Commissioners above at London, and there I
freely spent my money, amongst the Lawyers and Solicitors, to gain the best
advice I could thereby; but my business going on very heavily, I at last found
out two faithful Counselors, viz. Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, and Major John
Wildman, upon whose faithfulness, understanding, and valor, I cast all my said
affairs; and they played the parts of honest and faithful men for me, and had
many a sharp and bitter tug with Sir Arthur and the Commissioners above, as you
may partly and truly read in the foresaid Epistle of Lieutenant Col. John
Lilburns, which yet is far short of what I my self heard expressed there; and
when I was wearied, tired, and almost spent with charges and delays, and could
get no manner of justice from their hands, I

Thirdly, followed the advice of one of them especially, viz. Lieutenant Col.
John Lilburn, and Petitioned the Parliament, and had his personal and zealous
countenance in it; but they being full of weighty business, (for so at most I
must but say) had no time to read my Petition, although I staid at London so
long, till I was fain to ride post to come down to the expected Assizes at
Durham; and at my departure, I principally left the care of my business, with
my said faithful friend Lieu. Col John Lilburn, who it seems being in some
despair of getting my Petition at present read, and he as to me appears,
judging long delays to be my ruin: In the

Fourth place, he hazarded himself amongst other things he had occasion to
publish, to print my oppressions and cruel sufferings, in that forementioned
Epistle of his to four of the Commissioners at Haberdashers Hall, to which he
sets his hand three times; and although Sir Arthur Hesilrig at Durham, the
other day (as the Lieutenant Col. informs me) would have had some people to
believe he durst not, or would not own it; and therefore desired his brother
Gore, to deliver a message from him to the Lieutenant Col. which was, that if
he were a Gentleman, he desired him to own the late book called his, and to
send him one; which being delivered to the Lieutenant Col. by his brother Gore,
he desired him to tell Sir Arthur, that if he were a Gentleman, he entreated
him to be an instrument, that they both might appear face to face at the Bar of
the Parliament, and he would engage himself to him, to own so much of it, as he
was confident should make his very heart to ache; for as the Lieutenant Col.
says to me, the Book of Epistle contains in it a matter of a high charge
against Sir Arthur Hesilrig, and by the Law of England, and the practice of the
Parliament it self, in the Earl of Straffords case, (he says) it is at his own
choice, which piece of it he will begin with to make good against Sir Arthur
first, and not to be prescribed by him, or any else for him, to begin with what
in it they pleased; and I my self am sure of it, the main and principal part of
it, he has there sufficiently proved by authentic Records, which to my great
cost and expenses, I my self know to be true; but besides, Sir Arthur needs not
in the least to be afraid of the Lieutenant Col. not owning the Book; for I my
self, with many more, have heard him often do it, and he has told me, that (as
I remember) the very day he came out of London, he went to the Honorable, the
Speaker of the Parliament, for his Post Warrant, and told him to this effect,
that he had a Book at the Press, which would be finished and printed within a
few hours, against Sir Arthur Hesilrig, for his oppressions to his Uncle M.
George Lilburn, my self, and several others of his relations; and therefore
entreated his Honor, in case that in his absence, that Book (by reason of the
high language in it) came to be questioned in the Parliament, that he would be
pleased to oblige him so far to him, as to acquaint the House that it was his,
and he would justify it with his life; and therefore humbly besought him to
entreat the House to punish no body for writing, printing, or dispersing of it,
but to lay the whole load of it upon himself; and if he pleased, in case the
House were angry at the Lieutenant Col. for it, he entreated the Speaker to
send him but two lines by the meanest messenger in the world, and he engaged to
him to leave all his business in the North, and to come post to the House, and
to justify the truth of the said Book, with his life; and farther told the
Speaker, that seeing in ordinary ways, he and his friends could get no justice
against Sir, Arthur, he intended to go to the General to Scotland, and as Sir
Arthur was a Member of the Army, being a Colonel of a Regiment, and Governor
of a Garrison under the Generals power, he was resolved at a Council of War to
Article against him, and he was confident they would hear him, and do him
right; the first part of which, he told me he acquainted the Lord Gray of
Growby with, and earnestly begged of him, in case the said Book was questioned
at the Council of State, that he would answer for him, as he had entreated the
Speaker to do in the Parliament; and he farther told me, that before he took
Horse at London, he went to Haberdashers Hall, and gave, and caused his Books
to be given away, in the very face of the Commissioners there, and their
Officers; and that when he took his Journey, he brought many of the said Books
along with him, and at all, or most places where he came, gave away the said
Books with his own hands, as his own; and having but one left at York, at the
Post masters there, M. Pearson, Sir Arthur Hesilrigs Clerk or Secretary, came
into his room about twelve a clock at night, and he pulled one of the said
Books out of his pocket, and to M. Pearsons face, owned it for his, and read
him some of the smartest passages in it, and told him he had but one of many of
them left, or else he would have given it him to give to Sir Arthur Hesilrig;
but being he had but one; he was resolved to keep it till the morning, and give
it to his Noble and Honored friend M. Luke Robinson the Parliament man, and
did so, and entreated him seriously to read it all over, and as his Book to
show it (if he pleased) to Baron Thorp, then in person at his Inn: and also he
farther told me, that at his coming into the County of Durham, he waited upon
the General at his Quarters at Branspeth on purpose about it, having left order
at London to send several of them to the General, and the chief Officers of the
Army into Scotland, which arrived safe in their hands at Scotland: but the
General being very busy, and ready to march from Branspeth, he could have no
time to speak with him about it, but inquired after it of some of his
principal Officers, who told him the General had seen it, and as they thought
had read it, forasmuch as there was some discourse betwixt him and some of the
chief Officers about it; some in the Army apprehending the things laid to Sir
Arthurs charge, to be very foul and base, pressed that there might be a fair
hearing of it at a Council of War, which was promised after their great
business was over; at which tidings, the Lieut. Col. was very glad, and
engaged upon his life to make his said Book good: and when he had done, having
got a new recruit, he gave some of them away, as his Books, upon the very
place, to some of the Officers of the Army; and yet for all this, the Lieu.
Col. tells me since his coming from London, (his letters tells him) he was
posted up publicly (as he believes by some of Sir Arthurs Agents, on purpose
to disgrace him) for running away for printing the said Book, which he durst
not own, and that if any man would bring him in, he should have 700 l for his
pains; and by others, as he believes of the same Agents, he was publicly in
London posted up for running away to the King of Scotland with 500 Horse, and
if any could bring him in, they were proffered 500 l for their pains.

But fully understanding by the said Lieu. Col. how my business was above, and
how little hopes there was to get any speedy remedy there, and fearing the
length of time of getting a hearing in the Army, would be too long for my
pressing necessities to stay, they having in a manner taken all that ever I
have in the world from me, and allow me not one penny to live on, out of my
estate; so that if I had not some true friends to help me, I, my wife, and
small children (for any thing they afford me, might either starve or beg; and
besides, they suffer my Houses to be so, that they are ready to fall down upon
the ground, and force me to hire my own ground of them, to put in some Cows, to
give a little milk to feed my poor young babes; and my mother and her daughters
is in the like case, they having not for almost two years, received 30 l from
them to buy them bread, although my mothers title have bin the chiefest that
sometimes they have set up, to sequester the most of it upon pretense of her
Recusancy, and therefore whether she have a title or not, yet they sequestring
it upon that pretense, they ought by the Law of England, to allow her the
thirds out of it, but they are like greedy Cormorants, that will swallow all: I
say, considering and weighing all my necessities, and pondering in my own self,
and taking council what I had best to do, I did in the

Fifth place, upon the 23 of August, 1651. with some friends go to James Liddel
their Steward, and demanded of him the immediate payment of some rent, reserved
to me upon the Colliery; the which, he absolutely refusing to pay, I made a
formal reentry upon my Colliery, as by Law I might, upon which, a company of
men came violently upon me, that call themselves soldiers, and act upon my
ground like savage Bears and Wolves, or Thieves and Robbers, and will produce
unto me no written Order or Warrant, to give me a Rational ground to judge from
whence they come, or who they are; upon which, I the second day of this
September, 1651. repaired to Durham, to the Commissioners sitting there, and
they disclaim them, and avow they knew nothing of them till I told them; but
yet would grant me no Warrant to take them away, only they promised me to
speak with Major Tolhurst about them, who it seems is their Commander, as well
as his Soldiers; whereupon the next day, I writ a Letter to the Constable at
Harraton, and others of my neighbors, charging them at their perils, upon my
ground to harbor them no more, nor join with them any longer to rob and steal
from me my Coals by force and violence: and that they might all take notice of
their own danger, I caused the said Letter to be printed and delivered to them;
several copies of which, I make bold herewith to present unto you, for your
serious perusal; but diverse of my said neighbors persisting still in their
evil dealing with me, I have sent to London for Process for every one of them
that are tardy, as well Keel men, as others, and doubts not of a sufficient
remedy at law against them all, without interruption from the Committee of
Indemnity, where yet I should not be sorry to be brought into, being apt to
think I shall not get my complaints heard against Sir Arthur, till he or some
of his Agents be forced by me to turn complaints: But Process being in my own
understanding too short weapons to reach Soldiers withal, In the

Sixth place, upon the fourth of this present September, I went to Gateshead,
accompanied with my Father in Law M. George Gray, Richard Lilburn, Esquire Lieu.
Col. John Lilburn his son, and my brother M. Ralph Gray, on purpose to speak
with Sir Arthur about all these things; but he being busy with the
Commissioners of the Ministry, and so not to be spoken with, we all (saving
Lieu. Col. John Lilburn) went to Major Tolhurst, and acquainted him with the
substance of all passages at Harraton, and demanded of him the said reserved
rent of forty shillings per week, which he refused to pay, and acknowledged
that by a verbal command of his own, (which is not worth a button, not can be
no security to the soldiers he had sent) the said soldiers to keep the
possession of the said Colliery, adding he was betrusted by Col. Hacker,
Lieutenant Col. Mayers, and the rest of the Gentlemen that had taken it, to
keep it, and he would keep it; so receiving no satisfaction at New Castle, and
clearly finding Major Tolhurst durst not give unto the soldiers a written
Warrant or Order, to be their secuirty, rule, and guide: In the

Seventh place, I desired my Father Gray, and some other friends to hasten to
Sunderland, to disperse my said Letters there, and again to warn all the Keel
men at their perils to fetch none of my Coals, nor none of the ship masters to
buy any of them, and my self, with Lieu. Col. John Lilburn, rode away to M.
Timothy Whittingham, being a Justice of Peace, and read him the said Letter,
and fully acquainted him that a company of Rogues, who called themselves
soldiers, were come upon my ground, but could produce no Commission from any
body that sent them, nor the Commissioners at Durham, nor Major Tolhurst, would
not under their hands own them, and they like bloody Rogues, beat, and had
almost killed some of the peole, whom they forced to load away my Coals to the
water side, and some of the said soldiers, with their own hands, loaded my
Coals into Keels, and carried or sent them away; and thereby feloniously robbed
and stole from me my real and proper goods; for which, as he was a Justice of
Peace, forthwith we desired his Warrant, as Felons to bring them before him,
which we very much pressed upon him as his duty by his Oath, and the Law of
England to grant; but he refused, and desired time to consider of it, and speak
with Sir Arthur about it: upon which, Lieu Col. Lilburn desired him to tell
Sir Arthur from him, if he and those under him were afraid and ashamed, to
give the soldiers at Harraton under their hands a written Commission or Order
to act by, and that M. Whitingham refused to grant his Warrant to bring them
before him, upon our complaint; we would not be afraid nor ashamed, to do
the best we could to expel force with a stronger force, and if any of the
pretended soldiers were knocked on the head in the scuffle, for any thing we
know, from the Law of England, they had their mends in their own hands; but if
he would send his written Order for the soldiers Warrant, and let us copy it
out, we would not at all trouble or molest the soldiers any more; and so we
were content that he should take till Monday at night to talk with Sir Arthur
about it: and we being both at Durham upon Tuesday last being the ninth of
this present September, M. Whitinghams man brought to our Inn a sealed Letter,
the Copy of which thus follows;

For his very good Friend, Lieutenant Coloned John Lilburn, these.
Kind Sir,
UPon my more serious thoughts, and strict perusal of the Printed Letter you
left with me, upon Friday last, I plainly see a matter of title, and a meum and
tuum, in controversy, betwixt the state now in possession, and M. John
Hedworth, of which thing you well know the Law is the proper Judge, and can and
must decide it, and the Civil Magistrate no way concerned in the business: yet
Sir, I am so tender and careful of your safety, and my own duty, that if either
your self, or M. Hedworth be afraid of life, or know any man lie in wait to
rob you, or either of you, or if any Felony be committed, or Robbery done upon
your person, or persons, upon legal Information, I shall be very ready to serve
you, and grant my Warrant: also if there be any force either by Entry or
Detainer, I shall not in the least be wanting unto you, and the Public, to
join with another in Commission with my self, to view and remove as occasion
shall offer: In brief, this is all, but that I am

Holmside, the 9 Sept. 1651. Sir, your most affectionate friend to serve you,
Timothy Whitingham.


Now most hononred Gentlemen, I pray seriously observe M. Whitinghams Letter,
who if he had been a man according to that which God in Scripture requires
every Magistrate to be, viz: a man of Courage, I am apt to believe he would
scarce have written this answer, to our Legal demand; but I desire to be as
sparing of him as the nature of my business will permit me: but yet I beseech
you to take notice that I think the Civil Magistrate is the proper Judge of the
Law, and not the soldiers in the least, much less those that only pretend
themselves soldiers. And I beseech you observe, that in the eye of the Law,
Felony and Robbery may be as well committed upon my goods taken out of my house
or ground, as from my immediate and proper person, and so much we positively we
laid unto the charge of those sturdy rogues, that pretend themselves soldiers
upon my ground, who have no Formal nor Legal Commission to authorize them in
the least to do as they do; and upon our so serious laying Felony to their
charge, and offering by the Law to make it good, he ought by the Law without
any more dispute, to have granted us his Warrant, at least to have brought them
before him to have examined them: by means of which, I should either have known
some that Judicially and Formally would have owned them, or have had some
evident demonstration that these are the men Major Tolhurst by word of mouth
sent, or else have clapped them in that place that would have kept them safe,
till they were fully fit for the Gallows their deserved portion.

But most noble Gentlemen, by all the fore-recided dealing with me, you may
clearly see, I am made the most miserablest spectacle and object in England,
being robbed by Sir Arthur Hesilrig, etc. (by his will and power) of my Land,
Colliery, Goods and Cattle, and damm'd up that I can have Justice no where, to
obtain a little of my own to buy me bread, to keep me, my wife, and young and
tender infants alive; nay, that which is vvorst of all, I am expressly by Sir
Arthur Hesilrig himself, in the presence of my self, and my Brothers, M George,
and M. Richard Gray, and many others, absolutely commanded to be robbed, and
deprived before I have committed any crime) of all the privileges of an
English man, by being debarred to have the benefit of the Law against any of
those that detain other parts of my inheritance from me, then now is in the
possession of the State, in the detention of which, the State gets no benefit
at all: Wherefore hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, and if any bowels of
Compassion, Justice, or Mercy, be in you, pity, commissionate, and help to
relieve me, a most distressed, and cruelly oppressed young Gentleman; that with
grand oppression, and unparrelleld cruelty, is like to be destroyed by Sir
Arthur Hesilrig; even in England, at that time, when the Parliament thereof,
has many Armies in the field to fight for the Laws, liberties, and Properties
of the people; and therefore as ye are men, nay, men of Honor, Conscience, or
common honesty, or as ever you came from the bowels of women, O help, help,
help me, and my perishing family, in my transcendent and great distresses, and
put forth some of that power betrusted to you by the Parliament of England, as
you are Members of the chiefest power in this County, viz. Commanders, and
Disposers of all the Forces and Militia there, and send forth your Warrant, and
Soldiers to command before you, these Thieves and Robbers, now upon my ground,
that call themselves soldiers, and so being within you jurisdiction, are under
your immediate command, and compel them by your power, either to produce before
you a Formal and witten Warrant, to justify them in what they have already
done, or in default thereof, to send them to the Goal as Rogues, Thieves, and
Robbers; and as one of you is a Parliament man, and as either the spirit of
Honor, or an English man dwells in you, send I beseech you, this my Complaint,
to the Parliament, and earnestly entreat them in my behalf to read my
forementioned Petition depending before them, and do me right against all the
cruel oppressions of their own Member Sir Arthur Hesilrig, who is the greatest
dishonor unto them (by his oppression and tyranny) in all this Nation; and as
another of you has been a Member of the Army, in a place of Eminency there,
and as either the spirit of a Soldier, or a man of Magnanimity dwells within
you; send this my mournful Complaint, Lamentation, and Outcry, to his
Excellency the Lord General Cromwell, and the Honorable Officers of his Army,
and entreat of them in my behalf, to take Cognizance of my great oppressions,
by the Members of their own Army, viz. Sir Arthur Hesilrig, his Col. Hacker,
his Lieu. Col. Mayers, his Major Tolhurst, his Lieu. Bruine, and all the rest
of his Officers, that have unjustly oppressed me, and helped to rob me of my
estate. And also I pray put him in mind of the dishonor Sir Arthur Hesilrig
has done unto him, and the affront he has put upon him by his turning honest,
firm, and fast men to him, and the Commonwealth, out of places of authority
in this County, and his placing in as Governors thereof, not only Newters, but
known Delinquents, yea, and particularly his making Col. Francis Wren the only
man under him (as it were) to govern and rule this whole County, after his
Excellency had cashiered him in Scotland, for his unworthiness and baseness;
and for your noble favors manifested unto me in the things desired of you in
this the day of my great distress and calamity, I shall be very much obliged in
the presence of my friends, whose names as witnesses are hereunto subscribed,
to acknowledge my self to be engaged to remain.

From my own House at Harraton, this 13 of Sept. 1651. Gentlemen, Your greatly
distressed friend and most humble servant, heartily to serve you and this
Commonwealth, JOHN HEDVVORTH. Witness
George Gray. John Lilburn. Ralph Rookby. Ralph Gray. Roger Harper.


FINIS.

