Van Helmont's WORKS: Containing his most Excellent PHILOSOPHY, CHIRVRGERY,
PHYSIC, ANATOMY.

WHEREIN The Philosophy of the Schools is Examined, their Errors Refuted, and
the whole Body of Physic REFORMED and RECTIFIED.

Being a New rise and progress of PHILOSOPHY and MEDICINE for the Cure of
Diseases, and Lengthening of Life.

Made English by J. C. sometime of M. H. Oxon.

LONDON, Printed for Lodowick Hoyd, at the Castle in Cornhill, 1664.

ORIATRIKE OR, Physic Refined.

The common ERRORS therein REFUTED, And the whole ART Reformed and Rectified:
BEING A New Rise and Progress of PHILOSOPHY and MEDICINE, for the Destruction
of Diseases and Prolongation of Life.

Written By that most Learned, Famous, Profound, and Acute Philosopher, and
Chemical Physician, John Baptista Van Helmont, Toparch or Governor, in Morede,
Royenborch, Oorschot, Pellines, etc.

And now faithfully rendered into English, in tendency to a common good, and the
increase of true Science; By J. C. Sometime of M. H. Oxon.

Job 32. 8. There is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration of the Almighty
gives Understanding.

Pro. 8. 12. I Wisdom dwell with Prudence, and find out knowledge of witty
Inventions.

Aeternarum rerum seria contemplatio eo usque animum nostrum subvexit, ut
Divina loquuti videamur de rebus Naturae subjectis, quae tanto perfectiores
sunt, quanto propriores Aeternis, etc.

LONDON, Printed for Lodowick Loyd, and are to be sold at his Shop next the
Castle in Cornhill. 1662.

TO THE English READER.
AS the bare report of Solomon's Wisdom, was enough to attract the Eastern
Queens attention; and that, to travel her to the Fountainhead it self: (which
she relished at first, as precious Wine, but then as divine Nectar) so
doubtless, the loud Fame of Learned Helmont, ringing in the ears of our (as
well as other) Nations, must needs excite the attentions, and level the
Affections of those that can value the Wisdom found in the true knowledge of
Nature and Art; and so sharpen their Appetites, as to induce them to find where
the Fruit grows; and there to feed their fill: their fill of essential (not
formal) Learning; of experimental (not historical) Knowledge, of Hermetick (not
Culinary) Practice. So that, methinks it is sufficient to tell thee, that great
Helmont now dictates in thine own Dialect. Would thou then find a clear
efflux of pure (not fleshy) Ingenuity? here it is. Would thou behold acute
Invention, in its unmixt clarity? here it is. Would thou contemplate the
depth of exact and solid Judgment? here it is. Would thou be acquainted with
Arguments Impregnable, to the production of Truth, and conviction of Error?
here they are. Would thou understand the vanity of evolving unweldy Volumns
of Vegetables; and neglecting the utility of powerful Medicines? Would thou
discern the vast difference between the efficacious kernel and useless shell of
natural Products? between potential Essences, and impotent Superfluities?
between heterogeneal Co-mixtures, and artificial Separations, Purifications,
and Exaltations? In a word, would thou not dwell in the Circumference of
Knowledge, but dive into the very Center it self? here then employ thy
Faculties, here exercise thy Abilities, here impend thy Studies. Then will thou
moreover find (to omit his Humanity, Magnanimity, Piety, and Charity; wherein
he much excelled) his Disputes subtle, grave, and of great validity: his
Assertions soind, his Demonstrations clear, and his Conclusions infallible:
eradicating Error, and implanting of Truth; and that with rare Integrity, and
indefatigable Industry.

But (says Zoilus) Diruit quidem, non autem Aedificat. A Position well
becoming the owners of it; granting a Verity to infer a Fallacy. As how? as
thus; That Learned Helmont has demolished the feeble Fabric of an erroneous
Method, is apparently true; not only in it self, but confessed, even by his
adversaries; but that he has not rebuilt a stronger Structure on a firmer
Foundation, is as false: and that it is so, this his unparalled Works do
demonstrate, to any intelligent Reader, that is not drunk with envy; or
poisoned with malice; or infected with prejudice. His own Works indeed, do best
express his worth. Neither can I suppose, that another Pen can Preface any
addition to it. Can thou Reader, sum up the perfections required in a
Philosopher not Traditional; in a Christian not Hypocritical; in a Physician
not Verbal, not Superficial? then art thou nearest his true Character. But he
that shall attempt to tell thee the Summa totalis of him, or these his eminent
Emanations; may sooner want wind for his Words, than work for his Pen; and
whilst he recounteth their excellencies, seem to numerate the Sea's sand. I
therefore desist, and refer to thy experience, which may happily evidence thy
proficiency; that, thy industry; and both render thee gratefully joyful, for so
great a jewel: whose due rate and proportion,

That thou may rightly apprehend, Is wished by thy well-willing Friend. H.
BLUNDEN, Med. Lieentiat.

TO THE Unutterable WORD, THE AUTHOR Offers up a SACRIFICE in his Mother Tongue.
O Omnipotent, Eternal, and Incomprehensible Being! the Original of all Good.
Thou have committed unto me a Talent, the which I expose to open Usury: But I
acknowledge and confess my nothing impotency, my vile and abusive
unprofitableness. Thus being overwhelmed in the Abyss of my own nothingness; I
pray thee, O thou All-providing Good, that thou would clementiously accept
of this Book, O thou Eternal Beginning, and End of all Wisdom: Let thy saving
Will be done, O Lord, in the grace of thy Love, by this dry tree, this meat for
worms; this fuel for the flame, thy unprofitable servant, the son of thy
handmaid. Unless at length thou perfect me, and preserve all thy gifts they
shall perish in me for ever. This I ingeniously confess, from the knowledge of
my very innermost part, before thee, O Lord, unto whom all things are thoroughly
known in truth; and before the World, unto whom most of the most excellent
truths lay hid: I am amazed at the largeness and greatness of thy benefits
toward my nothingness. So being prostrated I celebrate thy most glorious Name,
and that Name I invoke from above, O Jebovah, thou most faithful lover of Men!
O holy and incomprehensible Name! at all times and alone to be sanctified, and
the only free Sanctifier of his Saints alone. Favorably behold from the
Throne of thy Omnipotency, the miseries of the living, help the sons of men,
seeing it is thy delight to be present with them. Remember the word of thy
Promise, no longer to be the God of our Fathers, as in times past, but now as a
God declared to be our Father: No longer the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac,
and the God of Israel; but as God, Jesus, the God of Mary our Mother, and who
art made our Brother in the love of thy grace. All the end and scope of my
desires tends to this, that thy incomprehensible Name may be sanctified, not
only because thou art called the Thrice most Great and Excellent; but also,
because thou only art All, unto whom every wish of sanctifying Love does
properly belong; seeing that thou stand in no need of us, neither can we
devote unto thee any thing else. The Prophet did accept, A, A, A, Lord, I
cannot speak, behold I am an Infant: but I reply to this Prophet, O, O, O,
Lord, my thoughts fail me, and do melt in a naked wish of Love, of the
sanctifying of thy Name; For lo, O Lord, I am naught but nothing, nor any
thing besides, but as it has pleased thee, that I may pertain unto thee. O
All, of All, and All my Desire; I deservedly seem to offer unto thee in my
Mother Tongue, and also to vow the Feude or Fee-farm of my Essence and
Property, wherewith I being invested by thee, I enjoy the use of them for the
help of my Neighbor. For although the first conception of the Soul consists
out of Words, and so is without a proper tongue: Yet I perceive that it is as
yet crude, and not sequestered, as long as it is not polished, and not being
joined to the mind, does depart into Cogitations, Words, and Writing. This
crudity, I perceive does make an infirm and unstable object of my first
Conception, and soon darkens it again: Therefore thy Eternal Wisdom has
granted that it should be carried further, even unto my Mind.

It Is true indeed, that thou will be worshipped by men in the Spirit, but not in
such a manner that it may remain in the undistinction of the first object: But
moreover, the Angels, and pure simple Spirits, although they nakedly adore thee
in Cogitation, as Spirits; yet they are busied by a certain, and unknown Song
to us, in sanctifying thy Sanctifying Name without intermission. Wherefore
also, thou command to be loved, not only from the whole Soul, and whole
Spirit, but also from the whole Heart, and with all our Strength: So that the
Prayer that is Spiritually framed, and naked Worship, do even exclude that
which is Verbal, which is unexperienced of the attention of the Mind.

Bestow on me, O most beloved Lord, that I may suggest that thing to my
Neighbors thy Servants by similitudes. An Organist hearing a new Tune or Song,
does not presently, at first, play it without difficulty: his Soul does in part
indeed perceive the Sound, but his Fingers (which are as it were the Framers of
Sounds, even as his other Members are the Formers of Words) do not so fitly
follow, neither is it granted unto them to attain an absolute perfection of the
Song, so speedily, quickly, and distinctly. He beholding indeed the Organ Table
or Book, does presently play it; to wit, his Capacity being wont to carry his
Fingers toward it at the first sight of the Book; but that Song being composed
according to the Laws of Music, but not turned into a Table, he as less
accustomed thereunto, does the more difficulty play it; seeing a Table is
accustomed to be first composed out of the Music, for his Spirit before he
plays: But as yet with a greater difficulty and rarity, the Table and Platform
of a Lute, is extemporarily expressed in the Organ, or that of the Organ in the
Lute. There has not seemed unto me to be an unlike reason of the first
conception of the Soul, as of a sound as yet crude or raw; and the Mind desires
to have it reduced into Words or Writings, through defect whereof, not a few do
stick in a good object, the which by reason of an undistinct Mind, vanishes
without fruit. But moreover, I perceive, that the first Idea of the Soul does
follow an accustomed instinct of the Mind, whereby it being even there polished
or corrected, is perceived by Words or Writings: but indeed, whereas man being
from the beginning, seasoned with the property of his Mother Tongue, does
obtain it as incorporated or inspired; and besides is wont to communicate unto
his Mind and Mother Tongue, his Cogitations which depart into Meditations,
Languages, or Writings; it seems an inconvenient thing, and a Wonder to the
Soul, to endow an object of the first conception (being decyphored in the Mind
by Words in the Mother Tongue) besides the inbred Custom, with a foreign
Idiome or Dialect; wherein the Understanding laboring by changing the Dialect,
it over-shadows, weakens, and wearies it self, and also does alienate the pure
and plainly Spiritual Conception of the first object. But in very deed, the
object of every first Cogitation, departing into Words, I have certainly found
to be always first had in the Mother Tongue; even in a man using none but tbe
Spanish Dialect, who also heard a Spaniard; he being mortally wounded, and weak
of Mind, spoke many things, but in Italian, and heing called on in Spanish,
scarce understood.

I have likewise seen a Germane that was sick, sitting, or lying, (even as they
placed him) like an Image, who never was capable of replying unto things asked
him, neither did he understand what Words either his Wife, or any one of his
Sons did pronounce; in any other than in his own proper Germane tongue; when as
notwithstanding, within the Walls of his House, he always used the Italian and
French Tongues: Yea, and which more is, he being a little after freed from this
waking Coma or Sleep, was scarce persuaded to believe the same.

And so, O Lord, I have cast down this poor Dedication of my Book in my Mother
Tongue, before thy most high Throne, to wit, the Song of my object, which
damage of my Neighbor, thou have not disdained to let down into me. Unto Thee
be all the Honor!

I now proceed to signify to my Neighbor the wretched ignorance of the
Heathens, whereby thy sick People have been hitherto seduced by the
Universities, and so, miserably slain, the Precept of the Prophet uttered in
thy Name, nothing hindering it; Thus says the Lord, do not ye teach like unto
the Gentiles.

Wherefore, O Lord, grant that my Soul may retain the gifts granted unto it,
unto thine Honor, whereby I may imprint thy Goodness, a part of my Debt, in
this Path of Death, on my Neighbor. Be thou unto me every Hinge, who alone art
the Way, the Truth, and the Life: This is the one only thing which it becomes
us to love. Thou my Angel, Defender, and Intercessor, who beholdest the
Omnipotent Good; Beg in my name, that which is wanting unto me, insist thou in
the steps of Raphael (the Divine Physician) who carried the Works of burial of
the dead, performed by night, unto God; thou diligent Curer, carry thou the
present Work, performed in the night of my darkness, unto God, that man may not
hereafter, be thus killed, nor so soon undergo Death: Offer up this my Work,
before the holy sacred Trinity, whereunto I dedicate it! So act thou for the
Glory of God.

THE Translators Premonition TO THE CANDID READER.
FRIEND,
WHoever thou art, know thou, that as the things contained in this Work, were
not at the first, written by the honest, conscientious, most learned and
judicious Author, from a vain ostentation, or to draw out Peoples minds after
the Tree of Knowledge, whereby they might have something to admire at, and talk
of, to deceive the time (as they say) and so to neglect the Tree of Life which
is appointed for the healing of the Nations: But rather that man having eaten
of the forbidden Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, and having experimentally
known evil (whereby he is expelled from the Tree of Life, which before the Fall
was his food, and is become captivated in Understanding, Will, and Affections,
from whatsoever may be known of God, either within in the light of his Immortal
Mind, which by Creation was in the very Image of its Creator; or without in his
visible Creation, in whose invisible Power and Unity all things consist and
subsist) might come to know himself and his Creator in the Unity of the Spirit,
and all other things in that Unity: so neither was it translated into our
Mother Tongue to any other end, than that naked and simple Uniform-Truth might
appear, to the confounding of that which appears to be Truth but is not; but is
masked, various, compounded and confused; whose false Plea is Antiquity, and
chief support, the self ends of Ambition and Avarice.

It is a saying in the Scriptures, He that is first in his own Cause, seems
just, but his Neighbor comes and searches him. Also, That the rich man is
wise in his own conceit: But the poor that has Understanding, searches him
out.

How truly these sayings may be applied unto this Author, with respect to the
Schools both of Logic, Natural Philosophy, Astrology, Theology, and in
particular those of Medicine, both as to the Theorie and Practick part thereof,
I may singly refer the judgment thereof unto him that has the least measure
of true Understanding, without any further enlargment; because such a one, who
with the Lamp or Candle of God being lighted in him (whereunto the Author bears
his Testimony in opposition to blind Reason, in the Chapter of the searching or
hunting out of Sciences) is able to see in his measure, eye to eye, or as Face
answers to Face in a glass: Nevertheless, for the sake of some simple-hearted
Reader, who though not yet come unto such a discerning, so as to separate the
light from the darkness, may notwithstanding, truly hunger and thirst after the
knowledge of the Truth, I shall speak somewhat.

That the Schools of the Gentiles have had their time, is well known, wherein
they have become vain in their imaginations, exercised themselves in vain
Philosophy, and opposition of Science, fasly so called, as the Apostle Paul
observes, and whereof he admonishes the true Christians, as to take heed they
were not deceived by it.

And although Histories mention, That at the coming of the Firstborn Son into
the World (whom all the Angels of God were to Worship) the Heathen Oracles at
Delphos, and elsewhere, were struck dumb and gave no Answer, as a sign, that
all Falsehood, false Voices, deceitful Juggles, vain Inventions, etc. were to
give way and be abolished at the appearance and rising of the Day Star, and Sun
of Righteousness, on and over the Earth; the Star of which Star the Wise men of
the East saw, and by its direction came to Worship the Child, laying down all
their wisdom at his Feet; for a lively token, that all true Wisdom and Science
was to be received from him, in whom all the treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge
dwell; and not by the dim and dark illustrations of man's own Reason and
Discourse: Yet such has been the subtilty of the fleshly Serpent, that under
the pretense of owning and professing the Name of Christ, he has taken up in
his, Paganish means and instruments to build withal, calling the dregs and
dross of the Minerva of the Heathenish Schools, Hand-maides unto Divinity, and
true Principles of Medicinal Science; but this counterfeit fiueness can no
longer dazzle or blind the eyes of those unto whom God has given eye salve
that they may see, and gold tried in the fire; for such are able to discern an
Image from a Man, and true and pure Metal from counterfeit Coin; so that the
abettors of such deceits shall proceed no further, but their folly shall be
made manifest to all men; forasmuch as that which alone tends to the healing of
the Maladies of man's Spirit, and the breaches there, which Sin has made, is
seated in the Invisible Life of God, as is applied thereunto as a Remedy, by
the virtue of Christ's Blood alone, who is the Lamb of God, and a quickening
Spirit: And so also, seeing that which tends to the Healing of any Disease
Radically, in the Body, is the Internal Faculty or Property, seated in the
first Being of Medicines; which by due preparation being uncloathed of their
gross corporeal cloathings, are made fit to be applied by the Wisdom of a true
Physician unto the Archeus or vital Air of the Body wherein its Diseases
Radically dwell, and not in Relolleous qualities, nor in feigned Elementary
complexions, as in the following Treatise is clearly manifested: And so that
nothing can be a true Handmaid unto Divinity, or Medicine, but the gift of him
who is Lord of the whole man. And that which gives the Children of Wisdom, an
ability to justify Wisdom her self, and a Power to judge and condemn the
Wisdom of this World, whether it be conversant about things Visible or
Invisible, things Temporal or Eternal, is the Son of God, by whom the World was
made, and all living Souls created, even the everlasting Father of Spirits, who
has committed all judgment to the Son, in whom they all subsist, who fills
all in all: this Son of God is the Eternal Eye of the Father, which runs
thorrow the whole Creation, beholding the evil and the good; it is that Eye
which knows and sees the essence and frame of all things: it does not behold
any thing in its essence to be evil; because every thing in its Essence and
Being is good, and that, because it is one, and true; but that which is double,
varie-form, seeming, or false, that it sees to be evil, and that is the fleshly
and sensual apprehension and desire in man, which vailes or taints his Spirit
of Understanding and Will, that they are not able to give a right tincture, or
rightly to apply themselves unto Objects intelligible or desirable, whereby
irregular and evil effects, in Word, Action, and Conversation, do visibly
appear; even as an Engine, whose innermost Spring or Wheel being defective, all
its other parts and motions are out of order; for the Body is but the Shell or
Vessel of the Spirit. That eye being opened in Man, or Candle lighted, so far
as it is lighted or opened, makes first to behold the evil and the good, and
the evil from the good in a man's self; and so far as he does this, he is truly
said to know himself; for he consists of darkness and light, till by a holy
war, the light has comprehended the darkness: The truth of this is not to be
disputed, for it has been experimentally known, and witnessed by all the
children of light, in all Generations.

This being granted to be true, it must needs be accounted the Christians
Epoche or stop of Time, from whence he is to reckon upon his progress in all,
or any other true Knowledge or Science whatsoever; For as the Father knows
all things, and no man knows the Father but the Son, and him to whom the Son
will reveal him; So, as the Son reveals the Father unto any one, according to
the measure and manner of his revelation, other things are known also; as in
the bulk of Unity, wherein the Almighty compasses all things in the hollow of
his hand, and swallows them up as out of sight; which is the knowledge of the
blessed; so also as from this blessedness, a reflex act goes forth with a pure
clear ray or Beam, toward particular things or objects, apprehending or
looking through them, according to their particular natures and properties
placed in them by the Word, the Creator: This kind of knowledge, is not the
fruit of the forbidden tree, but of the Tree of Life; for Life is its Root, and
Love is its Branches; first extended toward God the Creator, in the measure of
whose Image, the Understanding does apply it self by an intellectual act, unto
the particular thing understood, and so in that Image adoring his Wisdom and
Power therein. Secondly, toward the Neighbor, in directing such a particular
knowledge or knowledges, unto the use, service, benefit, necessity, and health
of the same, in this mortal Life.

Now to bring this home unto our present purpose; such a Root and Branches do I
judge, yea and feel to be, of this present Authors knowledge: For although he
was as to his visible profession of Religion, a member of the Romish Church,
after the Tradition of his Fathers, and so in that respect, was in the
captivity in some things, which may well be accounted hay, stubble, etc. Yet as
Daniel was a true Israelite, yea and a man of an excellent Spirit, though in
Babylon, who saw over the Babylonians, and was hated of them even to the death,
for his Wisdom, and Uprightness; So may it be said of this Author, who by a
Divine gift from God, in the light of sound Judgment and true Understanding,
out of love to his Neighbor, has as a Modern, come after the Schools, the
Sons of Antiquity (as they would be accounted) and so searched them out in
their principles, that being weighed in the Balance of true Science, they are
found lighter than Vanity. Neither has the Errors of the Chemical School in
diverse particulars, escaped his Pen: yet well observe thou, (whatever carping
self-ended partialists may say) that the Author does as well build up his own,
as pull down others Doctrine.

I do not speak this from a desire to boast in another man's Lines, or to glory
in man, or as thinking him infallible even in the Mysteries of Nature, for that
were not only to derogate from Gods Honor, to wrong my own Soul, but also to
wrong the deceased Author himself, while I should seem to own the gift of God
in him; for I find him in his Writings wholly renouncing all vain glory, self
exaltation and ambition, or to receive honor from man, as knowing that every
good gift descended from the Father of Lights, and so that he had nothing but
what he had received.

Therefore whosoever thou art, who desire to be bettered in the reading and
considering of this work, see that thy mind be somewhat stayed and composed out
of the giddiness, lightness, and wantonness; for Wisdom is too high for a Fool:
Desire above all things, and in the first place, the Fear of the Lord, for that
is the beginning of Wisdom, and a good Understanding have all they that do
thereafter; So may Wisdom pour forth her Words unto thee, and give thee
knowledge of wise Counsels, Secrets, and of witty Inventions; but the wicked
shall dwell in a dry land: For Friend, believe me, the hour is coming, and the
day hastens, wherein all things shall be seen and enjoyed in the root which
bears them, that all the Pots of Jerusalem may be holy to the Lord, and
holiness seen even upon the Horse Bridles: and this was the Word of the Lord to
Daniel concerning the last times; that he should stand up in his Lot at the end
of the days; and that before the end came, many should be purified and made
white, and tried; but the wicked should do wickedly, and none of the wicked
should understand, but the wise should understand: such are those who depart
from evil, and abide in Gods fear, as I have said. And as for the manner of
rendering the sense of the Author, I have been careful and faithful according to
my ability, to make himas plain to be understood by my Countrymen as the Work
would even possibly bear; therefore have I not studied for abstruse words, or
high flown language; For Veritatis simplex oration; the speech of Truth is
simple or plain; also that might have proved not a true genuine translation,
but a subversion to the Readers apprehension: It is not Words but Things, not
Names but Natures, not Resemblances but Realities, not Sublimities but
Simplicities, that the Sons of Truth do seek after. Yet the Jews seek a Sign,
and the Greeks seek after Wisdom, but all in the wrong part; and so wherein
they think to be Wise, they become Fools: So that I may truly apply that
ancient observation, unto the seeming Wise and Learned of this Age,

Satis eloquentiae, sapientiae parum, abunde fabularum audivimus. Enough of
Eloquence, Fables abound,
But of true Wisdom, little is to be found.
Wherefore be sober, be watchful, be humble, be gentle, be courteous, be
impartial, wait in silence, and desire of the Lord God, in Faith and Love
unfeigned unto the Truth, as Truth, that thou may receive it as it is in
Jesus; for there is no Truth out of him; For thou Lord in the beginning have
laid the Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands;
they shall perish, but thou shall remain, and as a Vesture shall thou fold them
up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same (Truth) and thy years
shall not fail. So the God of Peace and Truth be with all the upright in heart,
who seek the Lord with their whole hearts, in this backsliding generation; and
with every truly honesthearted Reader of this Book; that it may answer the
laborious ends of the Author, and the poor endeavor of thy real Friend.

John Chandler.

TO THE FRIENDLY READER S. D. FRANCIS MERCURIUS Van HELMONT, A Philosopher, by
that ONE in whom are all things; A Wandering HERMIT.
I Had at sometime concluded, by reason of many wandering thoughts, that it
would be hardly obtained of me to Write any thing to be published for the use
of my Neighbor, in this present Age; seeing that I have hated feigned,
varie-form, vain, and deceitful words, which the Men of the World do thirst
after. But now I being constrained by the Reasons and Letters of many moderate
wise Men, out of diverse Kingdoms and States here and there, who persuaded me
that I was devoutly engaged by the pledge of Health, to commit all the Writings
of my deceased Father unto the Press; and to annex thereunto, when, and after
what manner he closed his Day: Also in what State or Condition he left the
aforesaid Writings: And moreover, to supply those things which were lacking,
for the vindicating the Life of Mankind, from many Errors, Torments, and
Destruction. It is [That] which has extorted from me, to leave all other
things, and thoroughly to review the aforesaid Writings; which being finished, I
gave up my self to hearken to their Calls: I suspended my former purpose,
discoursing in plain and most simple Words, the following Narrative, in my
Mother Tongue, according to the tenor of the foregoing Dedication of my
Father, the which I also imitate, by following him in the very same intent
thereof.

The Death of my Father, happened on the Thirtieth Day of the Tenth Month,
December, of the Year one thousand six hundred forty four, at the sixth hour in
the Evening, when as he had as yet, a full use of Reason, and had first
required and obtained all his sacred Solemnities and Rights. His Life it self
was his Disease, which remained with him seven Weeks, beginning with him after
this manner: He at sometime returned home in have, on foot, at Noon, in a cold
and stinking Mist, which was a cause unto him, that when he endeavored to
write a small Epistle of about fifteen lines, or did indulge himself with too
large a discourse, his breathing so failed him, that he was constrained to rise
up, and to draw his breath through the nearest Window; whereby a Pleurisy was
provoked in him, at two several times, from the which notwithstanding, he
restored himself perfectly whole; yea the day before his Death, he being raised
upright, as yet wrote to a certain Friend of his in Paris, there being among
other, these following words; Praise and Glory be to God for evermore, who is
pleased to call me out of the World; and as I conjecture, my Life will not last
above four and twenty hours space: For truly I do to day sustain the first
assault of a Fever, by reason of the weakness of Life, and defect thereof,
whereby I must finish it. The which accordingly followed, after that he had
bestowed a special Benediction or Blessing on me, the which I esteem for a
great Legacy. I do not here more largely extend the property of his Disease, by
reason of the straitness of time; seeing that I am besides, to make mention of
him, in my Compendium, from all things unto the one thing, the which I
endeavor (God willing it) to publish in a short time.

A few days preceding his Death, he said unto me; Take all my Writtings, as
well those crude and uncorrected, as those that are thoroughly expurged, and join
them together; I now commit them to thy care, accomplish and digest all things
according to thy own judgment: It has so pleased the Lord Almighty, who
attempts all things powerfully and directs all things sweetly. Therefore
attentive Reader, I entreat thee, that thou do not at the first sight,
wrongfully judge me, because I have taken care to have the more Crude Writings
Printed, as being mixed with the more Digested ones, those not being Restored
or Corrected: Know thou, that the desire of promoting this great and laborious
Work, has been the cause thereof; at length thou may experience, that the
desirous Reader was to be by all means satisfied no less in this, than in the
aforesaid Writings, and then thou will judge, that I have well and faithfully
performed all things, seeking nothing for my own gain; the which shall more
clearly appear by this my Preface.

I call God to witness, that my Desire (unto whom it is known) does extend unto
the help of my Neighbor: Wherefore read thou, and read again this Writing, and
it shall not repent thee for ever; for I tell thee in the height of truth that
I have published these things from pity alone, as taking good notice, that men
by reason of their own Imaginations, are so little careful of or affected with,
the safety of an Eternal and Temporal Life.

Stop your ancient in and out-steps, enter ye into the Royal path Eternal,
dismiss ye those innumerable bypath, which I my self have with exceeding
labor and difficulty thoroughly beaten, in seeking whereby I might come unto the
knowledge of the Truth; endeavourm in the mean time, to find out the ordination
of all created things, and their harmony, and that by all the more internal and
external means, which I was able to imagine. I then bent all my Senses, whereby
I might make my self known unto Wise men so called, hoping at length, to find
some Wise Man, not learned according to the common manner, in all places where
I should pass through (which I might call Nations:) of whatsoever profession or
condition they were, I spoke to them according to their desire, that I might
join in friendship with them by discourse, and according to my abilities, I
imparted unto them the whole cause: by this and other means I touched at many
clear fundamental Knowledges and Arts; all which, I hear advisedly pass by:
And when I understood, all and every of them, to be only the esteemed
workmanship of a great Man, I discerned, that by how much the more a thing was
absurd, vain, and foolish or frivolous, by so much the more it was exalted, and
respected or honored; the which servitude I perceiving, became voluntarily
averse thereto, as being one who did prosecute plain simplicity.

I descending, ascended unto essential and occult or hidden properties, and for
my aid, the understanding of some Latin Books seemed to be desired; to this
end, I read over diverse times the New Testament, in the Latin Idiome, and the
Germane, that by that means I might in a few days, not only understand the
Latin style, but also, that in the aforesaid Testament, I might find the
perfect, and long wished for, simple, one only and Eternal Truth and Life,
which the one thing (to wit God) does only and alone earnestly require, and is
averse to all duallity or plurality; So also, whatsoever God has created, he
created all of it, in that one, and by that one thing, otherwise he had not
kept an order.

And by how much the more I knew this amiable, free, and one only thing in all
things, and did enjoy it; I addressed my self to a quiet study: I was outwardly
clothed with simple or homely raiment, and for the more inward contracting of
my mind, as also for curing thereof, I acted many things known to God alone, as
also for the preservation of my health, and increasing of my strongth, I lived
soberly for many Years together, I also abstained from fleshes, like as also
from Fishes, Wine, and Ale or Beer; and that so far, that I incurred the
contempt and disdain of my Kindred, who upbraided me as I conjecture, from a
good zeal: What unwonted thing does he again begin? He renders himself unfit
for every condition and function, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular: He will at
length become mad, when he shall no longer find any novelty for his Delight, or
shall adict himself to Magical Arts, or shall attempt a new Heresy: It is
become with him, as with other wise Men's Children, as to persist in obstinacy.

Others moreover, redoubled; His Father is in the fault, for he has rashly
educated all his Children, he admitted them from their tender years, unto the
Art of the Fire: This man being now become foolish, has lost the opportunity or
occasion of happiness; when Isabella Clara Eugenia, the Infanta of Spain,
received him, and appointed him for a noble service with her Nephew the chief
Cardinal, he refused it: it were better he had died instead of his Brethren,
some good might have been expected from them; this man is serviceable for no
employment: If he gapes after studies, let him submit himself to his Teachers,
as it is the manner of others to do; or he is to be induced to marry a Wife,
who may shake off these strange things from him.

On the contrary, others retorted; This is too late, replying by a mock, he is
a Philosopher, he is too stubborn, he is no where seen except in the company of
most unconstant, strange, and uncouth persons, of whatsoever profession and
employment; he will also incur a misfortune, for he knows not how to dissemble,
he spares none, neither great nor small, when he discerns that which is
unjust; we are now dejected from all hope, he must needs be reduced unto wants,
for he has yielded up all his Patrimony, both that which he did possess, and
what should have fallen to him, unto his Sister; and moreover, as joyful, he
has departed hence, far from home, as showing that he is never to return; Who
ever remembered the like! He must needs undergo some changes, notwithstanding,
it matters not us concerning what, so that he be not to be accounted foolish,
so as to cast off his old dresses, except better, and more certain ones should
supply him.

Conjectures fail us, seeing that he has entered into these things without our
counsel; let himself also look to what the end will be; when he shall stand in
need of us, let him be accounted as a stranger.

After that I had quietly, and joyfully overcome these, and many other chances,
I forthwith devised of the following course or process of unburthening my
Conscience, the which, at my Importunity, a Man unknown to the World, fearing
God, proposed unto me; the chief Heads whereof, I will deliver in a Compendium,
by Questions and Answers, the subsequent whereof shall at some time hint out
more, than is manifestly declared in the precedent Answers; the which is done
to the intent, that the Reader might likewise in the mean time, somewhat
earnestly endeavor, and that it might be manifest unto him, that the aforesaid
answers do abound.

At a certain time, a certain Man called a Friend, came to visit me; whom,
among other things, I asked, whether he did as yet remember his promise made
unto me, of administering some things to be joined unto my Fathers Work, for the
further instruction of the courteous Reader? To which he answered; Mind
Brother, I thoroughly weighing and meditating of thy Words all the night last
past, and also the new and unheard of deliberation of Mercurius, Trismegistus,
Poimander, my Lamp being extinguished, and natural Nourishment being first for
some time withdrawn from the Body, whereby I might wholly be at leisure in the
inner Man; hereupon, when I had sustained a great swooning fit, I am made to
see (the use of my Eyes being suspended) from a certain Light, transparent,
weighty, thick or dark, and compacted created Bodies, in their beginning,
middle, and end, and I my self also piercing my self; and at the very moment of
the Vision, I was found placed in a clear, living, circular, double Chair or
Pulpit, wanting a Foundation, being embracingly enlightened (toward its
Beginning) by the Stars, being engraven on every side with a circular Letter,
which some do call Zenith, others Nadir, the which also by its aspect spoke
unto me: Hear, See, understand, and talk thou with one in all, and all things
in one: The time has appeared, that all the Blind may see, and all that see
may remain blind: Follow ye me, and I will make manifest unto you, my
illumtnated Lights or Stars: my most stable Heart is created old and new, which
is hung up for every man as a prize, being as it were a thing unknown by an
express quality; proceed ye, earnestly endeavor ye, ye may reach the bottom of
my necessary Body, together with all its durable, quiet, and acting Members;
which parts are entire, praising their Creator singularly and universally by
their Effects, who has made me perfect, that I might help thee, and such as
thou art, in the moment of necessity; for I am subjected to thy service, and am
nothing besides.

I hearing these things, it was manifest that they were truths, and at that
very instant, I saw the Prize hung up, whereat I being as it were over furious,
attered these words: Thou art a young Man, as also thy Children which shall be
born of thee, for thy Brethren are like thee, who are equal unto thee in age,
thy Body was created most clean, ponderous, exceeding well compacted, and
conspicuous, thy one-two, or single-double colors, are sky colored and red,
which do contain all the Colors of the universe, and the which color has
transchanged thee into black darkness; thoubeing a white and red Virgin, shall
bring forth unto him even ten Children at every birth, with the unblemishing of
thy Virginity; for truly, thou, and thy Children do constitute a Light, whose
Parts are entire, neither heat nor cold, and not any the most ^^^arpest Sword,
shall loosen thy bond; for the Sun is thy Father, and the Moon thy Mother:
Therefore here thou all things as not seeing them, and see thou as not hearing
them, and speak thou within in the silence, that all things are in one; then
shall thou know a double co-united one thing in all things, as neither shall
thou be able to dissolve, as neither to knit the Eternal Band, without loss of
time.

These things being spoken, a great horror invaded me, and I soon converting
my self unto those like unto me, I there saw an innumerable company of Men of
all forts of Nations, learned, and unlearned, wise, noble, and ignoble, young
Men, together withold, who all were divided into strife among selves, for the
knowledge and science of the Truth; I well perceiving the ground of this
Division, attempted by my wish, to prepare my self for the implanting of a
mutual Concord.

First, I observed that a certain little Book, being a part of another to
follow after, entitled, Opuscula Medica Inaudita, or, Unheard of little Works
of Medicine, had in part raised this discord, the which had recalled the more
young, godly, studious, and other Reverencers of the Truth, out of the long and
obscure night, into the dawning of the Day, that they might believe, that a
Light more perfect, nor hitherto learned, did remain, from whence this dawning
did shine unto them; and by how much the more thoroughly they looked into the
aforesaid little Book, by so much the more they were glad, because they found
therein, the promises of the coming of a more perfect desired Light; it being
that which did so heighten their Mind, that a certain one of them, did not fear
publicly to propose this Parable with a shrill Voice, unto some eminent famous
Professors of Universities, and Christians, yet ungrateful ones, with
Interrogatives, and Admonitions: It is no wonder that these our Words do seem
the more hard to the Flesh, seeing they are spiritual, whereof the Flesh cannot
give Judgment; even as he spoke, who had never looked against the Light, by
reason of the sickness of his Sight, and when he saw the least Light, he
detested it, relating among other things, that it was the worst of Poisons,
because it brought an intolerable Pain upon him; so that therefore, he
remained uncurable, who could not through his obstinacy, endure any mention of
curing, seeing that he loved Darkness before Light, and so was made a Son of
the same Darkness. Some of the Professors took notice, that this similitude was
uttered concerning them, and not knowing how to moderate themselves, as being
possessed with fury, they flung out this; Ye Novices, and seditious Seeds-men
of Heresies, ye ought to be burnt alive, together with your Abettors. These
Words being spoken, they in a rage rushed forward toward the House of the
Seniour Professor, and there called a company together by night, that they
might foresee among themselves, what might be taken in hand, whereby this new
Doctrine might be subverted: The Patron of this Family was a most covetous old
Man, as also very aged, who after he had received them all with a solemn
Salutation, began his Speech, saying; My fellow Brethren, and my sworn Sons of
our Profession, it is very well known unto you, that our Doctrine has been
firmly established, whereof nothing is to be doubted, seeing it is so ancient,
nor ever has sustained any adversity of the Nations which might brand it with
a blemish: In our days, it is least of all to be granted, that by this
Schismatical Doctrine, it can go to the wall, or that the glory, esteem, and the
things suggested by us, eminently appearing in print, can altogether perish;
for the preserving of them, let us earnestly endeavor with all our Might; by
which deed, we shall render our selves immortal unto our successors, and shall
bear away a solemn reward for our famous Deeds; let us be unanimous, then shall
we perform many things; I will first produce my Opinion: If any one of us shall
be adverse to our purpose, let him be imposed upon with a Fine (by a plurality
of voices) agreeable to every ones Wealth or Ability; I as the first, will bind
my self to this, by a Copy; and as soon as any one shall come to be fined, let
the money rebounding from hence, he laid aside for the use of suppressing the
Enemies; and least discord should grow among us for the future, and that we may
fitly reach our seasonable conclusion, it is needful, that all things which
shall here be dispatched, be committed to writings; whom they presently obeyed
in every thing, and committed it to the Effect; besides they incited him, that
he might proceed as he had begun, saying, Both these Propositions are just and
equal; for truly, all of us have by this our Doctrine, gotten our wealth; And so
also, it is meet and just, that the Goods gotten thereby, should have respect
unto our Doctrine, and should defend it, whereby we may as yet attain to be more
wealthy. The aforesaid Seniour hearing these Words, with a very grateful, and
pleasant Countenance and Gesture, adjoined thereto; I hold it most exceeding
necessary; and also to procure other Wealth of the Schools, that they may join
with us, and enter into a mutual Covenant, because the Matter touches them
also; which being obtained, we will presently implore the Magistrate, to
condemn that seditious little Book to the Fire, under a further injunction,
that they which should make use of it, shall pay the punishment of Goods, and
Body. Secondly, it should be diligently endeavored by us, that we presently
setting upon the one only Son of the Author of the aforesaid little Book, by
subtilty, who possesses his other Writings, by an hereditary right, should
promise him a certain sum of Money, some third man interceding, as for a
congratulation or restoring of his Fathers Books unto us, the which we should
allege, were to be committed to the Press, as feigning to take part with his
Father, that by his means, we at least might understand, where he might keep
them in secret, whereby we might obtain the same to be burnt by the Fire; for
when these Books shall behold the Light, we shall suffer greater things;
neither should any other Remedy avail, than procure a Book to be set forth in
the Authors name, containing perverse Doctrine, or hellish Arts, and to disperse
it throughout the whole World: also that this thing might the better succeed,
the said Heir should be taken out of the way, least he should hinder our
purpose: all which things, it is lawful freely to commit without Sin, seeing
that we are able to demonstrate, and confirm these things, by a received
custom, and Doctrine of very many famous Writers, of a certain predominating
Order. These sayings being ended, he entreated the chief Doctor next unto
himself, no less to endeavor with all his might, to abolish so gainsay-ing a
Doctrine, and to preserve the profitable one; whereto he as the second, to the
first, replied, he was at this command. He was otherwise, an honest and sincere
Man, who had secretly recalled many miserable Sick from the Grave, through his
Integrity; whereby, as often as opportunity gave leave, he chastised Forms or
Sorts of Remedies, from the quantity and violence of his said Collegiates: This
Man also understood of, and expected the present coming of Elias the Artist,
the which he vehemently desired, and had learned many Years before, from a
certain studious Man of the Brethren of his Profession; and besides, he
excelled in the strength of reason, and in a firm health of Body, who dying,
seemed to know something beyond the common sort of Men.

He once before his Death, went to minister to the Poor freely out of Charity,
he wrought many Works of Mercy in the Hospitals and Prisons, until he brought
back with him, a common Disease, who presently sent for his Professors, who
much rejoiced, that he himself would make trial of the Fruits of their
professed Theory: these Professors calling a wonted counsel, withdrew Blood
largely from him, they gave him Purgative Medicines to drink, and so they
plainly prostrated his strength: But it opportunely happened, that his
remaining strength, and youth, overcame the Disease; he appeared to have
received his lost strength, whereby he was confirmed, that Professors and
Licensed Persons, were true Physicians, reckoning from their relation, that he
had deserved or was in danger of Death, and that he owed his Life unto their
Torments: hence they took of him a double reward, but not according to their
deserts. The young Man renewing his former pious steps, was the second time
oppressed with the very same malady; and he hoped by their endeavor, again to
escape the same cruelty; but alas, his spirit failed him, and from sound
Reason, and a knowledge of the Truth, he cried out unto this his Brother: It
has befallen me, as to all others, and it shall so long continue, until
Physicians so called, do in very deed feel and see this present time to be for
Eternity; but now they forget the time past, believing that they possess the
present time, they deny the time to come, seeing they cannot see that, and so
they take no care for a longer Life; for they have never been destitute
thereof, even as of any other frail or mortal good, whereof there is made a
repairing, but they possessing one only Life, and loosing that, all shall be
ended: It is a vain thing to employ ones self in Studies, when no necessity is
urgent upon us: The Servant who ought readily to serve us, is beaten, which
does perpetually provoke this Man whom he shall name his Master, by all his
qualities, he shall be ignorant of his thraldom, although all Men, except a
few, are bound up by his Servitude, the which for the most part, deprives of
Life both now and hereafter: I despair of a temporary Life; for they who are
said to bring help, do want the knowledge thereof, and they are first
constrained to obtain it by brawlings and discords, which will arise among
them, through hatred and envy, wherewith those called Doctors or Teachers have
never labored, seeing they are but few, who by running up and down day and
night, do excel in Wealth, whereby they scrape together an abundance of Money,
as well among the Healthy, and Sick, as those that are dead; and so they might
continue in concord, the which shall remain so long, until the last times
appear, which thou shall discern by that, when thou shall see the number of
Junior and Licensed Doctors of Medicine, so to increase, that they shall scarce
have employment: The Seniours shall be offended with the Juniours and Young
Beginners, because their daily revenues shall be diminished, and because they
shall find foreign or accidentary Juniours, being constrained to learn more
sure Principles, for to get their living, to cure some Sick, whose like, being
under their care, did undergo Death; which thing, the Seniours shall envy,
wishingly desiring, that all the Sick-folks might die, unto whom the Juniors
should be called: Lastly, they shall reproach them publicly before all the
People, saying; These wicked young Men do cure by Enchantments, they should of
necessity, be forbidden to practice. By these and the like means, they shall
labor to subvert them, and and they shall offend God, that it may add courage
unto other godly and industrious Juniours to perfect that, which they shall
propose to the Seniours, in these Words: When we have invited you, to suffer us
publicly to cure some Sick of an Hospital, appointing a Prize or Wager for the
benefit of the Poor, ye also to be solicitous or diligent on the other hand,
and that they who had not answered the effect, should pay the reward thereof,
ye have refused that thing; ye seek not the Poor, but [Give Ye] ye resemble
Beggars in that thing, who disdain their fellow Beggars, and are unwilling that
their number should increase; for they have a confidence in some rich Men's
houses and places, where a larger bounty befell them for their deceitful Words
and Tricks, that so they may leave their Arts, and these Houses to their
Children for a Dowry; which very thing also, ye cherish in your Mind, but it
shall have a bad success; because through this public discord, which shall
spring from Covetousness, that daily Deceit shall be made known to the World,
and they shall receive only true Doctors, who may be discerned by their good
Fruits, and who shall imitate the steps of the Samaritan.

These Words being finished, he felt his Life to fail; therefore, lifting up
his eyes toward Heaven, he with sorrow subjoyned; Oh most merciful Lord,
abbreviate thou the term of Man's Salvation, and change thou the frail Doctrine
of the Doctors their Flesh, into the natural or peculiar Love of the Spirit,
that the Innocent may finish their Life to thy Glory; I pray thee oh my
Savior, do not thou impute my Death to the Doctors, hereafter, for an Offense,
for truly they know not what they do commit; but vouchsafe thou to open their
eyes, that they may assent to the truth, and that the People may publish those
things of them, as in times past of holy Paul. Which saying being ended, he
wholly committed himself to the Divine Will, and breathed forth his last Breath
in the arms of this his Brother, who did always ponder these Words aforesaid.

This Man in his turn, uttered these following Words; We are all of us, being
Brethren in Christ, engaged to patronize the truth; the which, is not better
perfected than by opposing, and defending: Hence we will prosecute two things;
one is, that the strength of our Enemies may be made known unto us; the other
is, that we may add more strength to our own, and so, that we may be the more
confirmed in our purpose. After that they had heard all these Words, they
compelled [him] to undergo this charge, with the threatening of a Fine, for so
much as he had taken this voluntary Office on himself: And he alleged; I being
the second of the Seniours, am desirous to be instructed by any one, in this
difficult matter; I being a Servant of truth, do after some sort yield to the
two former Propositions; but unto the third, I can in no wise assent, to wit,
to subvert the aforesaid Books by interdictions and brands of Censures: for if
we should endeavor that, we should act altogether rashly, we thinking to
extinguish them in one place, should also again raise them up in a thousand
other places: Men are no longer so ignorant and unwary, as in times past, when
as all Examples or Patterns of religious obedience were published by favor:
which thing is chiefly manifest in Printers and Booksellers, they making gain
here and there, and it cannot be forbidden and hindered: Does not the thing it
self bespeak that? we need not go far: That Author himself, set forth a
Discourse, inscribed, Of the Magnetic or Attractive cure of Wounds, which was
stolen from him, and about five hundred of them printed in Letters, by his
Enemies; whereupon, they divulged three diverse Books, in great number, of the
Divines and Doctors of Medicine of all Europe, maintaining their Athiesm,
consisting of blasphemous Censures, the which Censures they had easily
collected, because they live in all Countries (under every kind of habit, and
countenance of Religion) where Money, or Merchandise abounds; and these
censorious Infamies, they did every where spread abroad in Temples, and other
public Places, whereby the little Book was made known, and was hunted after by
every one: I have known many seeking to compass it at a dear rate, neither
could they obtain it; for no Printer had any thing of it to be found, seeing
that they kept it only to themselves, it being so often printed, only for the
collecting of the Stripes of Censurers, they suffering the loss of above fifty
thousand Royals, whereby they might overthrow the Author thereof. Moreover,
because the aforesaid little Book or Discourse was approved of by some Wise,
Learned, and Moderate Men, great injury was done to the Author; God foresaw
otherwise, and blessed him that he should not be suppressed according to their
desire: And lo, in this restraint suffered from above, he published upon it,
another little Book, instead of a forerunner, and this other principal Book was
to follow after, that it may clearly be manifest, those Writings of his, are
not afraid of a Censors Rod.

Fourthly, that the Authors own original Copy of his Book or Writings, in the
Heirs Possession, should be by craft or prize, apprehended, it cannot be
accomplished to be abolished by the Fire, before that it be printed: for I
certainly know, that some disdainful Persons, have by sending a certain
Bookseller before them, offered to the fore-threatned Heir, a thousand Crowns
in hand, and besides, offering an Assurance of another thousand, on the
condition, that he would deliver up all the Writings of his Father, which were
in his Possession, no one piece being detained: the Heir smelt out the deceit,
as being void of the desire of Money; he heard him spoke, he asked him many
Questions, he enquired into all things, and plainly confounded him, so that at
last, he imprudently brake forth into reproaches, departing home with a vain
Journey. These and many such like Attempts being acted, which the Heir has had
experience of, do breed in him a distrust, so that he only requires a
preservation from him who aspireth unto those things, that he may not be
deceived. Besides I have understood, if I rightly remember, that himself has
taken care to have those Writings imprinted by an honest and faithful Man, who
will be diligent to sell them into all parts. Fifthly, to suborn ba^^ard Books
on the Author, containing strange and false Doctrine, that would be made
manifest; for the reason of Invention, does now every where plainly appear:
besides we should so awaken the Heir thereby, and according to the
signification of his name, he would so loudly exclaim, that it should be
perceived by all, unto whom means should not be wanting, although he wants a
Patrimony; for truly it is affirmed, and is the very truth, that he has found
Elias the Artist, and has made him his familiar Friend, by help of whom, he
shall propagate the Philosophy of Pythagoras, whose ultimate Tables he does by
unwearied Labor, dig up, with the signification of the Parent of the metallic
Rod. The matter being thus, let us not provoke him, let us spare our Pains, and
preserve our Charges or Expenses; for if this Doctrine does bear any evil intent
before it, it will soon go to ruin of its own accord; and if it descend from
God, and we resist it, we could not satisfy our purpose, and we should spend
our pains and costs in vain, bringing on our selves destruction both now and
hereafter. When as all the rest of the Doctors had now heard these solid
Reasons, they returned him great thanks, and esteemed his disprovement of what
the other had said, for a decision of the matter; except the aforesaid Seniour:
this man hearing those things, through grief and fear, was smitten with an
Apoplex^e, and so died an exceeding sudden Death: his Sons cried out with loud
howlings or lamentations, his Neighbors were awakened, and resorted thither
apace, being ignorant of what was done, they found all his Family exceedingly
perplexed: Whither likewise, a studious Man approached, who had observed this
rout, he presently sacrificed to his own profit; for when he saw all those
Writings there laying up and down, and left, he taking them up, hid them under
his Cloak, and presently withdrew himself: asson as the day shone forth, he did
his endeavor to read them unto every one of his Friends and Favorites, who
spread it abroad, and made it known: Hence it was further spread abroad, that
thou in digging, had obtained the Will or Testament of Pythagoras, and it was
declared by the Supreme Lord of hidden Treasures; this Lord did presently
commit thee to custody, because thou had not brought forth the Testament of
Pythagorus to light, the which ought not to be attained by theft, but by gift;
the Lord appointed three of his Wife Men (the Seekers or Lovers of peculiar
natural Science, whom many of all sorts of Nations and Conditions, yea and the
great Ones of the World, did follow or defend) to go thither where thou wast
detained, who thus spoke unto thee; Be of good cheer, this sentence shall be to
be sustained by thee, which our Lord has brought upon thee, the which begins
after this manner; By the command of thy Supreme Lord, unto whom it is
certainly known, that thou Mercurius Van Helmont, in digging, have found a
Treasure, which he had commanded to be enquired after by his Subjects, by whom,
thou being accused, and convicted by certain and full proofs, art condemned to
Death, unless thou shall bring forth that very patched and covered Testament of
Pythagoras, and likewise shall most fully discover, by what way and knowledge
thou have found that: These things being performed, a liberty shall be allotted
thee throughout all his Empire.

Thou hearing these things with a sorrowful Mind, and being again refreshed
with cheerfulness, did certainly know, that by proceeding in denyals, thou
could not escape Death; wherefore thou answeredst, unto those that were sent
in message unto thee, after this manner following: I entreat you oh ye Wise,
like as also Prudent Sirs, if I can prevail any thing with you, that ye
mutually attest my thankful mind unto our Lord, for so clementious a sentence,
wherewith he has vouchsafed to prosecute me, and to demonstrate unto him, that
I have imprudently retained that Testament, as being ignorant that it was to be
delivered: I now prepare my self to preform it, together with all the
Experience and Knowledge, whereby I have obtained it, and that indeed, unto
whom it shall please our Lord, so that his Goodness may grant me the space of a
whole Week, within which time, I am to satisfy our Lord, whereby I may
re-obtain my liberty, according to the tenor of his Sentence, hoping that that
will not be refused: For in very deed, and according to a just computation, I
stand in need of two days, to wit, that of Saturn, with that of Sol, whereby I
may with my self, begin and perfect every Enterprise, or that I may dispose of
all things, in order, which in the following day of Lune, and so afterward, in
the whole Week following, I shall distinctly signify: Whereto the wise Men
answered, Oh Mercurius, we are instructed with a full Command from our Lord, by
whose authority we condescend to thy Petition, as being supported with Equity;
thou shall perform all things according to thy own sentence, that the wise Sirs
being not learned after the common manner, and moderate or courteous Men, may
find no fault in thee, when they shall hear thee in the said day, or subject
thee to examination and even as thou have bound thy self to be kept in custody
for thy own, and that an ample limited term of days, until thy promises are
accomplished, we will always remain with thee, for an enquiry into thy
Conceptions, the which thou shall frame in this two precedent days space. Thou
rejoycedst in their Company; for whosoever he was that beheld them, gathered by
their habit and gestures, that they were godly; for truly, their Countenance,
did carry a divine gladness before it, and thou did say unto them: Seeing
that the day comes, for the winning whereof, my obediences are not in the
least to be contested, know ye, oh my wise Men, that I prefixed no time for the
recollecting of my Memory, nor any the like thing, because I have no need
thereof; but considering, that to day is the first day of the Week, but to
morrow the last day, the Lords day, the seventh day, wherein he had finished
all things, and wherein he had rested: It has seemed meet unto me, to
distribute and contain my Knowledge, according to the rate of the Days of the
week; I beginning the future day of Lune one the sixth day of the week, after
the custom of Mortals (for before God, all things are eternal and present) so
that unto us, as unto Mortals, the first day may be accounted the last; and I
beginning from Saturns day, to number backwards, have need of two and forty
days for the fulfilling of the whole week, that which would stir up a
weariness in many, through the largeness of time: In the mean time, I will
briefly rehearse all things.

I Mercurius, being from my tender years, brought up by my Father in the select
School of Hermes and there after some sort seasoned, my Spirit being unquiet,
was not content therewith, as desiringly desiring thoroughly to know the whole
sacred Art, or Tree of Life, and to enjoy it: Neither would I set my hands to
Work, unless I could certainly understand this, from the beginning to the end.
Moreover, I concluded in my mind, that through an approvement of the truth, I
might be brought thither at the last, without the help of outward Instruction.
I distributed with my self, all Creatures, first those External and Corporeal
(as I may so say;) and then those Internal, Spiritual, and Corporifying ones;
which Parts I did again refer or reduce toward and into one: I was not able to
subdivide and know those Creatures called Corporeal ones, without the adjoining
of the Spiritual Corporifying ones: I beheld those with an unwonted
Countenance; even as according to my Judgment, I had consequently placed all,
in every one his own order, as being free from the anticipated or
fore-possessed, false, and obstinate Opinions of the Heathens, who have never
frequented Universities, as by this my unpolished Style does sufficiently
appear. Nevertheless, well observe ye, I utter no Saying in vain, but that it
does signify something, and pertain to the whole.

My Spirit could perceive no delight or desire of study, in Temporary and
Frail or Mortal things; I did always thirst and breath after Perfect and
Eternal ones; I was taken up into admiration within my self from momentary
necessary created things, and from hence on God, who created Heaven and Earth
at once, the which the Profane Philosophers cannot apprehend: and they who
desire to come hitherto, they must worship God by a firm Faith, with an humble
Hope, and in true Love: then shall they obtain a perfect Knowledge of himself,
and of all other Creatures, before their Beginning, in their Being, or Essence,
and after their transchanging; the which I will more largely and manifestly
make out, so far as may be done by Words, for the Temporal, and Eternal Health,
and Preservation of the Soul, and Body, according to the measure of every ones
Capacity, which all have not alike, nor had they: And that they might be the
further helped toward Salvation. God out of his Goodness, raised up Moses of
the Prophets, who might be useful to them in a Type (which after the Dutch
Language, is also as much as to say, Books) and by his Writings; to wit, in his
first Book of Creations, which contains all of whatsoever can be desired, the
which I in part, as the whole, had sometimes learned by heart (according to
Jerome's Translation) the rather, because it comprehends all things, which man
in his Own-ness, Selfishness and My-ness, and the like Appropriations cannot
understand: For whatsoever God has created, he has created free, and at
liberty by One, and in One; and he that arrogates that thing to himself, makes
that very thing it self, his own, seperates himself from God, and does in
himself, enter into the way that leads toward utter Darkness: And as God is
an Incomprehensible, Eternal, Piercing, and a Filling Fire, Light, and Glory,
wanting Beginning, and Ending; such is he in the Men his Saints (Hy-lichten,
according to the Dutch, is as much as to say, He shines) in a co-united Love
and Glory; and in the Godly (Sa-lichten according to the Dutch, expresses, (He
ought to shine) he will be so, according to more and less or a greater and less
measure; but in evil Men, who are Eternal in the Dark, and separated, he is
also an Eternal burning Fire, even as it is said. Therefore, even as God is the
Eternal Good (in the Dutch Idiome, it expresses God;) so also, all whatsoever
was created, he created Good: The first Man was constituted into Light, and
Good, as being created of God; yet not united in Eternal Rest and Glory; but as
being created after the Image of God, in a freedom of Will; the which is now
become^ Property in us, through the seducement and transgression of the
Prohibition and Admonition of God, in the touching and eating of Death, or of
the Fruit of the forbidden Tree, which [Hevah, or Eve] the Mother of all
Living, touched and ate.

Those called the wise Men, did speak unto thee; Run thou not out so far,
before we perceive, whether thou have known thy self, and that thou have told
us what thy self art.

Mercurius; I am a Man, created by the Almighty God, after his own Image and
Likeness, possessing my Body of the Clay of the Earth, which in the Dutch
Idiome is (Litch-aem) as if to say (a Vessel of Light) having obtained a Spirit
and Soul from him; And one thing ought to be made of these, the Body, Spirit
and Soul ought to be sanctified (Hy-lichzijn (he shines) or Blessed,
Sal-lichzijn) he shall be shining) but if not, the Vessel and Spirit must needs
be damned.


Wise Men; We observe or take notice, that thou endeavourest to express thy
self to be threefold, but not a Unite, and thy Spirit to be Darksome, or
Lightsome, the darkening of it to proceed from the Flesh, which is earthly,
deadly, and obscure; the illumination, or enlightening of it, it shall attain by
the Spirit, by beaming in, emptying out, and subduing the Darkness: But we
covet to hear, whether there be a third thing; because thou namest the Light of
the Vessel, and a Soul; are there two diverse Lights, or at leastwise, do they
constitute or make one Light, of one Light?


Mercurius; there is one only Eternal Light, Entirely and Eternally,
Externally, and Internally in all Parts, because the Life Eternal, and the
whole Eternal Part, was inspired into Man by the Almighty God, even as Moses
testifies in the second Chapter of the Book of Genesis; Man was made into a
living Soul; which Soul, made or constituted the seventh Day, as is
demonstrated in the very same Chapter: Therefore the Heavens and the Earth were
perfected, and all the Ornament or Dress thereof: And God completed Work which
he had made, on the Seventh Day; and he rested on the Seventh Day from all his
Work which he had made; and he blessed the Seventh Day, and sanctified it:
Because therein God had ceased from all his Work which he had created, that he
might make, to wit, Man into a living Soul.


Wise Men; If this Light be the Seventh Day, what do thou think of the Six
foregoing Days, and of that which is extant in the eighteenth Chapter of
Ecclesiasticus; He who lives for ever created all things at once?


Mercurius; In the Beginning, God created all things, the Heaven and the Earth,
and whatsoever was created; the which Moses at the entrance of Genesis,
comprehends into the First Day, where he denotes the making of the other five
Days, Saying: In the Beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, but the
Earth was empty and void, and Darkness was upon the face of the Deep; and the
Spirit of God was carried upon the Waters: And God said let there be Light, and
Light was made: And God saw the Light, that it was good; and he divided the
Light from the Darkness; And he called the Light Day, and the Darkness Night.
And the Evening and Morning was made one Day.

Insomuch that Man does constitute the Sixth Day, which Days were distinct
from each other, whereby Man may know himself, what he is, what he is to do,
and what Power he has, or may have by his Spirit, as a Man (not likewise as a
Soul) over the foregoing Days, or created things, as it is found in the
aforesaid Chapter of Genesis; And God said, Let us make Man according to our
own Image and Likeness; and let him bear Rule over the Fishes of the Sea, and
over the Fowls of the Heaven, and over the Beasts of the whole Earth, and over
every creeping thing which is moved in the Earth.


Wise Men; Thou do satisfy us, and besides, do also over-signifie, that
Man was the sixth Day, and that he separated the Light from the Darkness on the
first Day, which Light or Spirit, he called Day, and his Blood, Flesh, or
Darkness, he called Night, which Evening, and Morning, constituted the sixth
Day; and so consequently, the other five, although according to every ones
peculiar Nature. But do thou make no mention of the seventh Day?


Mercurius; The seventh Morning, Light or Life, is the Spirit of God it self,
even as was said: And therefore in Moses his description of the seventh Day, it
is not expressed, that the Evening and Morning was made the seventh Day, as in
the six precedent Days; and that for this Cause, because there is no
Beginning, or Evening granted to be in God the Father, because he is he who [Is
what he is:] but it is so accounted, because on the seventh Day, he inspired
into Man his Face, the Breath of Life, and this man became into a living Soul;
so that of Man, and the Breath of God, the seventh Day was made.


Wise Men; From thy relation, we have fully understood the Beginning and Ending
of the first Day, and of the sixth Day following, with the seventh Day not
ended, that Man was conjoyntly made into a living Soul: But we desire to hear,
what Moses will have to be meant by the Word, In the Beginning?


Mercurius; The Beginning is God the Son, by whom, in whom, and from whom the
Heaven and Earth were created; as the Evangelist John does most exceeding
evidently testify, in his first Chapter, in these Words: In the Beginning was
the Word (which with the Dutch also sounds, Woort, that is Fiat or let it be
done) and the Word was with God, and God was the Word. This Word was in the
Beginning with God. All things were made by him, and without him was nothing
made. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of men; And the Light shines
in Darkness and the Darkness has not comprehended it. There was a Man sent
from God, whose name was John. This Man came for a Testimony, that he might
bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not
that Light, but that he might bear witness of the Light. That was the true
Light, which enlightneth every Man that comes into this Word: He was in the
World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not. He came into
his own, and his own received him not: But as many as received him, to them he
gave Power to become the Sons of God, to these who believe in his name; who
were born not of Bloods, nor of the Will of the Flesh, neither of the Will of
Man, but of God. And the Word was made Flesh, and dwelt in us, and we saw its
Glory, as the Glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of Grace, and
Truth. John gives his Testimony concerning him, and cries out saying: This was
he, whom I said; he which is to come after me, was made before me; because he
was before me: And of his fullness, we all have received, and Grace for Grace:
Because the Law was given by Moses, Grace, and Truth was made by Jesus Christ.
No Man has seen God at any time: The only begotten Son, who is in the bosom
of the Father, he has declared him.


Wise Men; Now we have perceived this Testimony of Saint John, that it contains
every thing serving to perfection: but deliver thy Opinion unto us, after what
manner thou art like unto Adam? and in what respect in him; and how thou have
proceeded from him?


Mercurius; Before that man was made into a living Soul, God spoke unto
himself, as the first Chapter of Genesis witnesses; And God created Man
according to his own Image (which Image is God the Son) After the Image of God
created he him, Male and Female created he them. And God blessed them, and
said, Increase and multiply.

Which command was enjoined to Adam, in respect of his Spirit, and Humanity,
but not as to his Soul; for this is Eternal and Immutable: So also, all his
Parts are like unto him, whereof I also possess the whole: Now even as man was
made of the Mud or Clay of the Ground; so also it behooves him to increase as
other terrestrial living Creatures, by a growing and uniting, and eating of
living Creatures, which Foods are required to die in the Stomach, and to be
changed from their Substance, if they ought to be converted from a more vile
Substance, into a more excellent one, or to be promoted by the Spirit of Man,
unto a united Life, from which co-nourishing and increasing, my Vessel or Body,
and Substance, I hold as Adam did; because I proceeded from him, after that he
was made into a living Soul, as it is found in the second Chapter of Genesis;
but for Adam, there was not found an helper like unto him: Therefore the Lord
God sent a deep Sleep into Adam; and when he had slept, he took one of his
Ribs, and filled up the Flesh in the room of it. And the Lord God framed the
Rib which he had taken from Adam, into a Woman; and he brought her unto Adam:
And Adam said, This now is Bone of my Bones, and Flesh of my Flesh, this shall
be called Virago or Wo-man, because she was taken from Man: Wherefore a Man
shall leave his Father and his Mother, and shall adhere to his Wife, and they
twain shall be in one Flesh.


Wise Men; Thou have explained unto us, what thou have been wholly in Adam,
according to thy Spirit and Soul, and in Eve according to thy Body: likewise,
that the Vessel has received the Spirit, and the Spirit the Soul. Now we could
desire to hear, in what respect Eve was produced by God out of Adam, and what
the sleep sent by God into Adam, before he framed her, does denote?


Mercurius; Adam from the Beginning was perfect in his Essence, as being the
first Man created by God, so his Spirit did shine through his Flesh and Vessel,
and did illustrate it; even as now, the Light did illuminate his Darkness, and
was able to subdue it, so it ought to excel and overcome the Darkness; because
it was Internal, Stable, Eternal, and good in its own Essence; the which Spirit
existing, Adam could not of his own accord produce his Like, without Sleep sent
into him; for he persisting in his Essence, was without sleep, and because he
had divided himself from himself, all his Parts had remained proper unto him,
and again, had returned unto the whole into one, as soon as he had listed,
because by his Spirit predominating, he had divided the Body subjected unto it
self; which Parts were inwardly and outwardly enlightened, from his own Light,
which gave an Essence unto all his Members.

But some may ask, how in the next place had it gone with Adam, if he had not
eaten the Poison from Eve? It is answered, there had always been in him a
combating with his Spirit or Light against his Darkness, the which on the first
Day God divided, of which two also Man was composed, even as the said Chapter
shows, which is further explained at the end of the same Chapter, on the
sixth Day, in these Words; And replenish ye the Earth, and subdue it: And when
they had fought to the utmost, they had filled the Earth and the Darkness, with
their Spirit or with their Light, and had so subdued it, that the former
Darkness had been supped up, and co-nourished, which was his proper and one
only Work, always to be done and perfected.

But some one may further query, seeing in Adam the said Light being separated
from the Darkness, had overcome the Darkness, as it was showed to be by the
very same Light; whether or no, according to a spiritual returned or restored
United Body, he had been entire and eternal in all his particular Parts and
Members? This being so, by that reason, he might have been divided into
Innumerable, Eternal, and Infinite men, without the aforesaid sleep preceding?
I answer; it is certain, that this Deified man, would have been entire in all
his Infinite Parts; likewise that all those Parts would again as one, have
constituted one Entire Body: He having himself in such a manner, had been
likewise to be one Deified Man; he being reduced hitherto by his necessary
strife, would by Grace in his Life, have enjoyed or rejoiced in the same, with
Christ our Savior after his Resurrection; Whereby many such men might now have
been begotten or brought forth; and whereby, all also of them might have
enjoyed that very same Grace, for which Adam was procreated, and whereby they
might have attained it by that very same strife: It pleased the Lord God to
send the aforesaid sleep into Adam, to show, that he soundly sleeping, had not
contributed any thing to the structure of Eve; but she was now founded in this
sleep by God.

Moreover, the curious might busily enquire, why Eve was framed of the Rib of
Adam, but not of his Flesh? I return an answer; the former Man was Adam, the
second Eve, made for his help, and conjoined Procreation; Now Propagation
consists partly in Man, as in other living Creatures, by conjunction, or
nourishing, as was said; and it is further to be observed in all increase of
created things in this World, before they are able to grow (because they
consist of two things) that the one ought first to die, to wit, the Body and
Form, which consist of Water and Earth, and do arise from the Light of the Moon
and Stars, as of the Lights of the Night, every thing according to their
different Nature, none excepted; and that this might be perfected in Adam, the
Lord God took a Rib out of Adam, which is a Bone, according to its being made
in Adam, a Progeny of Veins (the which, with the Dutch sounds also, a Progeny
of Vipers) which Bone is governed by the Moon, as shall be found, that when the
Moon increases, the Marrow likewise of the Bones does increase, like the
Waters, and together with it does decrease: It will further be found, that when
Flesh is burnt in the Fire, it loses that form, A Bone not so, yea that is so
stable; that the Examiners of the goodness of Coin do make their Crucibles
thereof, wherein they melt and search Gold and Silver: So that a Bone or Rib
is, and does retain nothing besides the humane Earth, as it is a second
Production in Man; like that of the Earth out of the Waters, so far it differs
from the first and one thing. Wherefore Eve, as she was procreated from hence,
she is likewise of a second and lesser thing, according to her Body, not
likewise according to her Spirit and Soul; For these she holds from Adam, which
are Eternal and Permanent, and a Part whereof Eve Possesses, and all that,
even as all their Parts, are Eternal, even as was said. Now in a further
consideration or avouching of the Premises, thou shall find, that Women do
therefore suffer monthly Issues or Menstrues, serving for Propagation, because
they ought to beget a man, as to the Body, in that respect as was said.


Wise Men; We acquiesce; and moreover, through occasion of two Words, which
thou from the Dutch Idiome, have considerately produced, thou recallest two
places of Scripture unto our remembrance; one rehearsed by the Evangelist
Matthew, in the twelfth Chapter, where Christ says to the Pharisees; He that is
not with me, is against me; and he that gathers not with me, scatters.
Therefore I say unto you; Every Sin and Blasphemy, shall be forgiven unto Men,
(Flesh) but the Blasphemy of the Spirit, shall not be forgiven. And whosoever
shall speak a Word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him: but he
that shall speak against the holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither
in this Age, nor in that to come. Either make ye the Tree good, and its Fruit
good; or make ye the Tree Evil, and its Fruit Evil: for truly, the Tree is
known by the Fruit. Ye Generation of Vipers, how can ye speak good things,
seeing ye are Evil? For from the abundance of the Heart the Mouth speaks. The
other is mentioned by Luke in the third Chapter, after the citing of a place of
the Prophet Jsaiah, who says; And all Flesh shall see the Salvation of God.
Therefore be (to wit John the Baptist) said unto the Multitude which went out
to be Baptized of him: Ye Generations of Vipers, who has shown you to flee
from the wrath to come? do ye therefore Fruits meet for repentance, and ye
shall not begin to say; We have Abraham for our Father. For I say unto you;
because God is able of those Stones, to raise up Sons unto Abraham. Which two.
Words are also repeated in these two Texts, not badly agreeing with the
signification of the Dutch Word; and thou showing unto us by all thy
demonstration, that the Serpent so called, which seduced Eve, and her Spirit,
was certainly her own Flesh and Blood, which desired the Fruits of the
forbidden Tree, and spoke to her Spirit for that end; so that the name of
Serpent, is not only accounted the Serpent, but as well the Serpent, a living
Creature, as a Man, according to the Flesh, the which is also, moreover seen in
the Infancy, or Old Age of a Man, or when the Spirit is weakened, that he is
and does become a Serpent.

Wherefore, after God had committed unto man the dominion over the living
Creatures, over all the Earth, and over every creeping Animal, which is moved
in the Earth, this last Dominion is the greatest, whereby he ought to work his
own blessedness, that which thou shall more clearly make manifest from the
Text, as soon as leisure shall permit; for now we hasten, because half of the
second day of those prefixed, has soon passed away, therefore proceed thou and
hasten, and declare unto us the difference between thee and Adam, when he was
to strive against his Darkness, whereby he as well as thou might have subdued
it.


Mercurius; In no other thing, besides that Darkness was increased in man, by
the touching of the Fruits, and eating of the forbidden Tree; in so much that
Darkness holds the prize against the Light, and does now possess it, even as in
Adam, the Light in Adam did possess his Darkness, and did illuminate it before
his Fall.


Wise Men; How comes this to pass?


Mercurius; This has come to pass, through a Fermenting or Leavening,
Contagious, Darksom, and Deadly or Destructive eating.


Wise Men; What will thou insinuate thereby, explain thy self by Similitudes.


Mercurius; As Darkness was in the face of the deep, before that the Spirit of
God was carried upon the Waters; in like manner, thou shall find a certain
Vessel, or place, which being shut up, or hoary and filthy, does even in a very
little time, render all that which is cast into it, alike stinking or rank, and
surther to infect it; neither does any thing of the first more principal
Ferment and Filthiness depart. Moreover, that it may be demonstrated, that this
filthy place is also darksom, is well learned by those that pertain to
Wine-cellars, who being desirous to know and experience, whether a Hogs-head be
hoary or filthy, or no, do open its mouth, and by an End do let in a burning
Candle, and when the Vessel shall be clean, and infected with no Muck or Filth,
the Candle being let down athwart it, will remain burning, until its own
begetting Vapor does choke it self: but if the Hogs-head be filthy, the Flame
or Light, cannot pierce through the Orifice of the Hogs-head unto the thickness
of the Wood. Therefore it manifestly appears, that the darkness does also
uncloath or discover it self, and make other things darksom, just even as the
Light does operate, and that, when the darkness does overcome the Light, or the
Light overcome the Darkness: These and the like Darknesses, must needs be
before all Light; and by how much the more stable they are, by so much the more
stable also, is the Body arisen from thence. Now it is further to be noted,
that as a temporal Light does illustrate out of it self, one thing more largely
than another, according to their stability, magnitude, or increasing; in the
like proportion and manner, the darkness powers forth its Beams out of it self,
as was shown: also as a burning and consuming Fire, can by its Light, inflame,
burn, and stir up many Seeds into a growth or increase, according to the rate
of their more stable Nature, that which I take notice of, thou shall evidently
perceive by this Experiment; it is seen and felt, that by how much the nearer a
Fire is kindled, by so much the more it shines or enlightens, and heats: now
this heat and brightness is one and the same thing, as long as it is in the
Fire, as by a collection of those hot beams through the help of a certain
burning glass, may be proved, whereby the hot beams are again collected, and
are made like unto those which exist in the Fire, to wit, hot and burning ones:
now when we permit a temporal, dispersed and decaying Fire freely to burn, we
shall discern by the Light which shines forth through the Fire, that other
created Bodies are burnt at diverse distances from hence, to wit, in the
nearest Body, the more stable and combustible one, and as the beams are
diffused, so far also the heat is diminished, and will inflame the less stable
created bodies: The reason is, because that which is soon made, must needs also
have that which soon perishes: wherefore cold and moist Regions do bring forth
larger Fruits than hot and dry Jurisdictions; yet are they less durable than
others which are less hot, because their Light which is in them, is more
divided, and that as well in-Bruits as in Men; Men of moist Coasts or Climates
are homely and big, neither can they undergo so much heat, as Men which live in
high, dry, and hot Countries, as also the thing it self does moreover testify:
Yea thou shall find that even dead Carcases which are slain by a violent Death,
even as Histories do declare, and we are able besides, daily to experience,
when a slaughter has been made, or shall be made of men who had gone out of
cold and watery Coasts, to wage War against those of the more hot Provinces,
that the Slain on both sides might be discerned a long time after, because they
of the more cold Regions did sooner putrify, these waxed dry, and remained
surviving, these did longer endure entire in the Heat, because their Balsam is
more durable than that of the other, even as they contain more or less of a
moist Matter, or do partake more or less of a Night Light, and they which are
the more destitute of that, those do more rejoice in a day Light: Now even as
the Sun is a perfect, and the greater day Light; so the Moon being the nearest
Planet unto us, is a perfect Night Light, which are perpetual in their Essence,
and likewise do render those Bodies perpetual and durable, which are born, and
renewed by their help. Furthermore, as there is one only Sun, and one only
Moon, their created Bodies, no otherwise than those like unto them, may be
compared thereunto, they being one only and also perfect, as Gold, which the
Philosophers have called Sol, and Silver, Lune, and the other five Metals
likewise according to the thing brought forth, after the rest of the Planets,
wherein they have rightly done, and have delivered the Truth, because, those
one only Bodies are perfect; the Fire cannot hurt them, they remain stable
therein, Gold lives in the Fire, therefore the Phylosoyhers have marked that,
with the name of Salamander, the which now is falsely accounted for a living
Creature: A temporary and frail Fire, possesses its Fire, only in part as was
said; but the Sun is a perpetual Fire and Life, and can live only in that which
is like it self, the which also must needs be a stable Body: And as there is a
temporary body in all things, except in these two aforesaid which are like
them, and do wholly participate of them, in what respect, bodies ought to be
returned, into their first Essence; by the same reason likewise, the Light
ought to be returned unto its Original; for a frail or mortal thing cannot
reach unto a perpetual thing: Furthermore, the stable Darkness must needs be
present, before the Light, wherein the Light is raised up; but if this Darkness
be perpetual, the Light also may perpetually dwell in it: first, according to
the Spirit, and then, according to the Soul; which Spirit, seeing it is
Eternal, does illuminate Eternal Darkness, and the Darkness grows together or
increases into Light, and is made Silver, which is twofold, constituting a
Body in the Flesh and Bones of Gold, which is threefold: Now as the Sun is a
great day Light, so it overcomes the Moon, and silver is altogether converted
into Gold, by that; the other five Earthly Planets, may be transchanged and
brought through unto a perfection like unto that of them, because they also are
Nocturnal Lights. Further, we must know, that there are many innumerable
Minerals, mutually differing like as do the Stars from each other, all which do
expect their Perfection, and some of these can more easily and swiftly attain
unto their last Perfection than others. Gold and Silver; how smally soever they
may be divided, they may be reunited without loss, because all their least
Parts are entire and perpetual: Notwithstanding, they may be rendered Mortal,
because they have not as yet co-met or con-joyned into one; but this Death
cannot begin of and from themselves, neither by reason of the Gold, nor of the
Silver, because they are stable Bodies.

Now some Lovers might ask, after what sort, or by what means that might
happen? I reply; After the same manner or means, whereby it happens in all
created things, whereby also it happened in Eve, through an increasing of the
Darkness, which draws its Original out of the principles of their Bodies, as
was shown; yea the Darkness may so grow up, that it may convert the whole
Spirit into Darkness: but it that Lune or the Spirit of Sol, does call the Soul
or Heat unto its aid, before it be subjected and overcome, the Spirit shall be
strengthened, not as it was before its Corruption, but by this strife and
victory, it shall be so strong, and the Spirit thereof shall be so greatly
multiplied, that it is able to render ten of the imperfect Brethren, stable;
but this Spirit has not by this contention attained unto a liberty even
entire, and an Eternal Union; but it ought so often to repeat this conflict,
which shall always more and more increase, according to the increase of the
Spirit, and Darkness, until it shall come unto the utmost, and can suffer no
more; and the watery Body or Darkness shall be plainly consumed, and then it is
a pure, everlasting, united, and double Light, which will illustrate all
things, without damage and diminishment, and will be able to perfect all its
Brethren into the likeness of it self, its own Virtue being retained; and when
this thing does happen in Sol, the Light of Lune is changed, and supped up into
Sol; so that it is equally made an Eternal, United, and Trine Sol, that which
is the last in Eternity (out of Man:) And hence it may be demonstrated, that
the Evangelist John, in the third Chapter of his Revelation, does use the same
Similitude, saying; I exhort thee to buy of me Gold tried in the Fire, that
thou may be made rich, and to be clothed with white Garments, and that the
confusion or shame of thy nakedness may not appear; and anoint thou thine eyes
with a Collyrium or Eye Salve, that thou may see. I whom I love, do reprove
and chastize: Be ye therefore zealous and repent. Behold I stand at the door
and knock; If any one shall hear my voice, and shall open unto me the Gate, I
will enter in unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me. He that shall
overcome, I will give unto him to sit with me in my Throne, as also I have
overcome, and have sit with my Father in his Throne. He that has an ear, let
him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.


Wise Men; We rejoice that we understand from thee, and do know the shining and
quickening Light; likewise the effluxing, acting, fermental, contagious, and
mortal Darkness; whereby we understand, how Eve has touched and eaten of the
Fruits of Darkness, and that she became darksom and contagious from thence;
through her effluxing Darkness, she delivered that which she had eaten, as she
who was to do that very thing in Adam, who did eat of the same: In like manner,
through the diversity of the shining Light, from the Darkness uncloathing it
self, we understand, after what manner the Ministers or Servants of God, are
able by the Light, to perform external, and everlasting Works, as to remove
Mountains, restore Sight to the Blind, hearing to the Deaf, to raise the Dead;
and likewise on the other hand, how Evil and Dark men, are able or powerful
only in committing or acting Works which are separated, and mortal or noysom,
through their Darkness issuing out of themselves: We have perceived also, that
the Tree of Life, was placed in the midst of the Garden, and likewise the Tree
of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, which we may collect out of the second and
third following Chapter of Moses. We also apprehend the Tree to be Good, but
its Fruits to have been Evil: besides, now we know this Tree, together with
Paradise, from thy Words, and the same from the second Chapter of Moses; But
the Lord God, had from the Beginning, planted a Paradise of Pleasure; wherein
he placed the Man, which he had formed. And the Lord God, produced from the
Ground, every Tree that was Beautiful to behold, and Sweet to eat: also the
Tree of Life in the midst of the Garden, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good
and Evil. And a River went out from the Place of Pleasure, to water the
Paradise, which was from thence divided into four Heads: The name of one is
Pison; he it is which runs about or encompasseth all the Land of Havtlah, where
Gold is bred; and the Gold of that Land is the best. Furthermore, we also
conceive of this which is found in the third Chapter; And when they had heard
the voice of the Lord walking in the Paradise, at the cool Air after noon day:
That which is further explained in the nineteenth Psalm of David; The Heavens
declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows the Works of his hands. Day
unto day utters the Word, and night unto night shows Knowledge. There are
no Languages, nor Speeches, of which, their voices may not be heard: Their
sound has gone out unto all the Earth, and their words into the Borders of the
Circle of the Earth. He has placed his Tabernacle in the Sun: and he as a
Bridegroom proceeding out of his Bride-chamber, has rejoiced as a Giant to
run his race or course: his going forth is from the highest Heaven, and his
encountering even unto the highest part thereof, neither is there he who can
hide himself from his heat. The Law of the Lord is unspotted, converting
Souls: the Testimony or Witness of the Lord is faithful, giving Wisdom to the
little Ones. The Righteousnesses of the Lord are right, making glad Hearts: The
Precept of the Lord is lightsom or clear, enlightening the Eyes. The Fear of the
Lord is holy, remaining for Age of Age. The Judgments of the Lord are true,
being justified for their very own sakes: they are to be desired above Gold,
and much Pretious-stone; and are sweeter than the Honey and the honey Comb.
For thy Servant keeps them, in keeping them there is much reward. Who
understands his Faults? Cleanse thou me from my secret Ones, and from strange
Ones, spare thy Servant; If they shall not have dominion over me, then I shall
be unspotted, and I shall be purged from the great Fault: And the Speeches or
Oracles of my Mouth shall be such as may be well pleasing: and the Meditation
of my Heart, always in thy sight, Oh Lord my Helper, and my Redeemer. We have
also known that mortal Man might reach to the Tree of Life, and enjoy it, when
he shall be a Cherub, and he may be made one, as Moses witnesses in the third
Chapter of Genesis; And he said, Behold, Adam has become as it were one of us,
knowing Good and Evil; now therefore, least happily, he stretch forth his hand,
and take also of the Tree of Life, and eat and live for ever. And the Lord God,
sent him out from the Paradise of Pleasure, that he might labor the Earth from
which he was taken: and he cast out Adam, and placed before the Paradise of
Pleasure, Cherubims, and a flaming Sword, and that which turned about to keep
the way of the Tree of Life.

Seeing that now, that two days limited space is slipped away, and that thou art
to be left by us in a short time, we first covet to hear, because thou art
instructed in the four lesser orders, whether likewise, thou do ambitiously
seek the other three, or to be promoted into a Doctor of Medicine?


Mercurius; The Priesthood is a great office, and requires many things, now
especially they ought to answer concerning many things, and to be perfect, when
they will rightly discharge their duty, the which I never should dare to
undertake but constrainedly.

The Doctorship of the Art of Medicine I deservedly shun, because the
Professors of the same, do for the most part foster other men's opinions, and do
the less follow the Truth: But I shall entreat God, that it would please him,
to grant me daily to perform his will, with all my might, even as long as Life
shall last.

The prosperous Wisemen of the Night, did bless thee with their Prayer,
exhorting; proceed thou in thy purpose, and act thou, that thou may (...)
(through the mediation of the day of Saturn, in the day of Lune, by the day of
Sol) liberty to thy self, as was said. And next, we commend thee to the
supplication of our followers, who have charged, accused, and convicted thee,
that thou might bring forth all the aforesaid things, or secrets to light:
Speak to them, and hear them gently, as they shall observe all things which
thou do put in practice; for this two days space, we have stood to our
Commission.

For these things, thou having performed thy due thanks toward these wise Sirs
and Masters, did say unto their followers; Ye lovers of the Truth, ye that
are most honored, together with ye that are less honored, noble, ignoble,
and ye who are present, I have known none of you apart (although I have been
pricked forward by you (because your countenance is now veiled unto me; Know
ye, that I do humbly beseech you all, known and unknown, not displeasantly to
receive my ready poor labor, and courteous affection, which devotes it self
readily to serve all and every one of you with all its might. Which words they
hearing, did aloft testify their acceptance, and a great number of those that
were known, did begin to undo their vails, some did read written, letters unto
thee, others sounded out Hymns in honor of thy Father and his Writings; they
being sent unto thee, whereby they might be prefixed unto thy Fathers Work:
This applause ceasing, after thy thanks being most perfectly performed, thou
did go on; I have known many of you, some by sight and talk, others by a
great celebration, Letters and Verses, which were taken from me by the Count of
Giline, when in my absence he had spoiled my Castle, where, amongst the rest of
my household stuff, he had discerned the aforesaid Books, Writings, and Hymns;
all which, together with his Galenical paultry Physician, he was not able to
endure to survive; this destruction I lament, as the one only cause, that they
could in no wise see the light: Whereupon thou did wish them all Prosperity
and health in the Lord, saying, I will from your earnest desire, commit all
things that have been rehearsed, unto the Press.

All which things, after that my intimate friend upon urgency, had declared
unto me, I contained in few words, and did show them unto him; the which being
seen, he counseled me to divulge in Print, subjoyning; if any one shall desire
more things, so he be fit for them, I shall never be wanting, but will serve
every one more fully according to the thing begun or brought forth in him.
Follow me, I walk through the whole World.


AN ACROSTICK Upon the Great PHILOSOPHER, John Baptista Van Helmont.
INcomparable Work (beyond the reach
Of humane praise) which justly does impeach
Huge Heaps and Volumns of largeful-cram'd sheets,
Nicely composed, where subtle Learning meets,
(Born up by lofty-winged Fame) which can
Ascend no higher now (since LEARNED VAN
Pres'd into the Crowd) but (as attached) must
Take Sanctuary in despised dust,
(Inevitable dis-esteem and shame
Surprising them) whilst, only, HELMONT'S NAME
Takes hold of meriting Transcendency;
Advancing by the hand of Truth, whereby
Virtue, unvails the blinded eye of Vice;
Ambition, Cruelty, and Avarice,
(Notorious Crimes) which with prevailing force,
Have long continued on the World a Curse;
Entering by Ignorance and Sloth, whence all
Lame, and imperfect Sciences did crall;
(Mustring, like Weeds, a multiplying Birth)
Ore-running the whole surface of the Earth,
None, knowing how, those Errors to unmask,
Till, Painful HELMONT, undertook this Task.
JOHN HEYMAN.

AN INDEX OF THE TREATISES Set forth by John Baptista Van Helmont.
1. Prophecy concerning the Author, expressed in a Poem. 2. The Authors
Promises. page 1 Column, 1. 2 Column, 2. 5 Column, 3. 6
3. The Authors Confession. 8 4. The Authors Studies. 11 5. The searching out
of Sciences. 15 6. The Causes and Beginnings of Natural things. 27 7. Archeus
Faber or the Master Workman. 35 8. Logic is unprofitable. 37 9. The ignorant
Natural Philosophy of Aristotle and Galen. 41 10. The Elements, 47 11. The
Earth. 50 12. The Water. 53 13. The Air. 57 14. The Essay of a Meteor. 63 15.
The Gas of the Water. 70 16. The Blas of Meteors. 78 17. A Vacuum of Nature. 81
18. An irregular Meteor. 87 19. The Earthquake. 92 20. The Fiction of
Elementary Complexions and Mixtures. 104 21. The Image of the Ferment begets
the Mass with child of a seed. p. 111 22. The Stars do necessitate; not
incline, nor signify of the Life, Body, or Fortunes of him that is born. 118
23. The Birth or Original of Forms. 128 24. Magnum Oportet, or a thing of great
necessity or concernment. 148 25. Nature is ignorant of contraries. 160 26. The
Blas of Man. 175 27. Endemicks. 188 28. The Spirit of Life. 192 29. Heat does
not digest efficiently, but excitingly only. 198 30. The threefold Digestion
of the Schools. 203 31. A sixfold Digestion of humane nourishment. 205 32.
Pylorus the Governor. 222 33. A History of Tartar. 229 34. A History of Tartar
of Wine. 232 35. The rash invention of Tartar in Diseases. 235 36. Nourishments
are guiltless of Tartar. 240 37. Tartar is not in drink. 249 38. An erring
Watchman or wandering Keeper. 254 39. The Image of the Mind. 262 40. A mad or
foolish Idea. 272 41. The seat of the Soul. 283 42. From the seat of the Soul
unto Diseases. 289 43. The authority of the Duumvirate. 296 44. The completing
or perfecting of the Mind. 310 45. The Scab and Ulcers of the Schools. 316 46.
An unknown action of Government. 324 47. The Duumvirate. 337 48. A Treatise of
the Soul. 341 49. The Distinction of the Mind from the sensitive Soul. 344 50.
Of the Immortality of the Soul. 346 51. The knitting of the sensitive Soul and
Mind. 351 52. The Asthma and Cough. 356 53. The humor Latex neglected. 373 54.
A Cauterie. 380 55. The Disease that was anciently reckoned that of delightful
Livers. 386 56. A mad or raging Pleura. 392 57. That the three first Principles
of the Chemists, nor the Essences of the same, are of the Army of Diseases. 401
58. Of Flatu's or windinesses in the Body. 416 59. The Toys of a Catarrh or
Rheum. 429 60. A Reason or Consideration of Diet. 450 61. A Modern
Pharmacopolium and Dispensatory. 456 62. The Power of Medicines. 469 63. A
Preface. 483 64. A Disease is an unknown Guest. 486 65. The Dropsy is unknown.
507 66. A childish Vindication of the Humourists. 522 67. The Author Answers.
524 A Treatise of Diseases. 68. A discernable Introduction. 528 69. The subject
of inhering of Diseases is in the point of Life. 531 70. A proceeding to the
knowledge of Diseases. 534 71. Of the Idea's of Diseases. 539 72. Of Archeal
Diseases. 547 73. The Original of a diseasie Image. 552 74. The passage unto
the Buttery of the Bowels is stopped up. 555 75. The Seat of Diseases in the
sensitive Soul is confirmed. 559 76. The Squaldron, and Division of Diseases.
565, 566
77. Things Received that are Injected. 568 78. Some more Imperfect Works. 574
79. In Words, Herbs, and Stones there is great Virtue. 575 80. Butler. 585 81.
Of Material things Injected. 597 82. The manner of entering of things Darted
into the Body. 604 83. Of things Conceived. 606 84. A Magnetical or Attractive
Power. 614 85. Of Sympathetical Medium's or Means. 616 86. Of things Inspired.
617 87. Things Suscepted or Undergon. 619 88. Things Retained. 620 89. A
Preface. 631 90. Of Time. 633 91. Life is Long, Art is Short. 645 92. The
entrance of Death into humane nature, the grace of Virgins. 648 93. A Position.
652 94. The Position is Demonstrated. 661 95. Of the Fountains of the Spaw: The
first Paradox. 687 96. A second Paradox. 691 97. A third. 693 98. A fourth. 696
99. A fifth. 699 100. A sixth. 702 101. A numerocritical Paradox of Supplies.
704 102. The Understanding of Adam. 711 103. The Image of God. 714 104. The
Property of External Things. 724 105. The Radical Moisture. 726 106. The Vital
Air. 731 107. A manifold Life in Man. 735 108. A Flux unto Generation. 736 109.
A Lunar Tribute. 740 110. Life. 744 111. Short Life. 747 112. Eternal Life. 750
113. The Occasions of Death, 752 114. Of the Magnetic curing of Wounds. 756
115 The Tabernacle in the Sun. 794 116. The nourishing of an Infant for Long
Life. 797 117. The Secrets of Paracelsus. p. 799 118. The Mountain of the Lord.
806 119. The Tree of Life. 807 Unheard of little Works of Medicine. 1. Of the
Disease of the Stone. 827 2. Of Fevers, 935 3. A passive deceiving and
ignorance of the Schools the Humourists. 1015 4. The Plague-grave. 1073



A PROPHESY Concerning the AUTHOR, Expressed in a POEM.
1. Medicine before Hippocrates, has appeared naked and wandering about. 2. A
saying of Hippocrates, inviting her unto the Cities. 3. She having admired,
answers to Hippocrates. 4. The Praise due to Hippocrates. 5. Hippocrates the
first of Physicians, after what manner he manured Medicine. 6. Galen gave an
ornament to her tongue, he nourished her not, therefore she grew not. 7. The
Arabians have done the same thing. 8. The followers of both these Sects have
done the same thing hitherto. 9. Paracelsus unhappily endeavored ambitiously
to compass the Title of the Monarch of Secrets, and Prince of Medicine. 10.
Medicine despises Paganish attire. 11. She desires a Looking Glass that she
may become the clearer by a reflex Light. 12. The Book of the Author shall
serve those that shall succeed, for a Looking Glass. 13. Medicine unfolds her
own and the Authors Destinies, by a Prophetic Poet. 14. Medicine praises the
Authors Studies. 15. The Prophet declares the wished Fruits of his Labors. 16.
The Judgment of Medicine concerning the Book of the Author.

THe doleful'st Daughter of a high born Birth, Medicine.

By chance does wander up and down the Earth,
In places strange, among wild Beasts so fierce,
And spiting her own Wishes, does rehearse
Then her Misfortunes: blames the Powers unkind,
As cruel Gods: she blames them in her mind,
Through troubled sense, and straies with ire too rife,
Whose cause of wandering was the cause of grief.
Thus here is a double slaughter; for she knew
Her wretched Brother did not Death eschew: Aesculapius.

But perished by vengeance from above
Of the scorching flame of iracundious Jove.
This Aepidaurius, while he boldly brake
The iron Statutes of three Sisters make,
Is said to perish by Ethereal fumes.
From hence, uncertain error straight presumes
To walk in doubtful steps; from hence proceeds
Much tears from checks, beclad in mourning weeds.
Cous saw her wandering fortune, who when seen Hippocrates.

Did love her straight, whose beauty pleased him;
Because it was em'lous of the snowie Rose,
He speaks unto her thus, Here Is I suppose
My Nymph, the Maiden Druides such are,
And jolly rout of the God Corniger.
For why, thy presence halloweth these fields
It hallow's them: which lofty fairness yields
A comely grace unto the Grecian Queen.
But what delights thee to visit I ween,
Valleys of Mountains? what the hilly tops
Assimilated unto stony Rocks?
Do not the City Palaces thee please,
With lofty Roofes, built up for Princes ease?
Art thou not pleased with the multitude
Of Citizens, men with great fame endis'de?
For a more tender life, apt habitation,
Is it not better in thy estimation?
And to enjoy a more sublimed state,
The unlearned rout may vilify thy rate:
Mean Peasants with their tects of rustic name,
And little houses, much disgrace the same.
The comely Nymph, was now astonished,
To see the look, majestic grace of head,
And gesture of this noble man that spoke.
Straight from her purple cheeks all tears did sla'ke,
And no complaint echoed, with mournful sound
She beamed her starry lights upon the ground
Which was so green; and uttered certain Votes
Of joyfulness co-mixt with merry notes.
She in a little moment meditated,
Touching the words which he to her related,
And such respondent answers she began,
To render unto Cous, the old man.
I am well pleased with these thy words, thou art
One of the mortals which affect my heart:
My proffer shall be like a gift to thee:
With thee I Will dwell; through thee, I Will make to flee
Both Plagues and Poxes; yea and all Disease,
When It shall but see thee, shall be ill at ease.
The bright Aurora, whereby Cynthius hill
Does rise above the waters, and does fill
Its drowned Horses in the western stream:
Yet shall thy glory climb more high, suprem
In every Kingdom; yea thy praises hie,
Shall gently touch the lofty starry sky.
Posterity hereafter shall declame
Thee the only Medel'-master of great fame,
Nor shall there be a fuel for thy praise,
Whereby it can it self more highly raise:
While fatal Goddesses shall break thy fate,
Thee, living fame shall plainly celebrate
Throughout the World. Cous returning due
Thanksgivings for so great a gift; (in lue)
Upon the naked Goddess does bestow
Such gifts as these: the Nymph as white as snow,
He does array in linen clean and fine,
Which does surpass white Lillies in their prime,
With snow be sprinkled. Whether Apollo rose
Whether his Chariots hot to rince he chose
In The western Ocean, yet his golden hair
Never saw the like, with which it might compair.
Medicine remained long with such trimmed grace,
The first aged Fathers did her thus embrace:
Until five ages after, Galen came
Wholly to deck her, not to feed the same:
For he bestowed on her, garments filled
With Tyrian die, the which a hem unskil'd
As being writhed with many knots, adorns
His neat gay bubbles, of his glistring horns
Of rings distinguish: his fair flags bespread,
Also enrich her Virgin daughter head.
Next comes Avicennas as the glory
Of the Sabaean Nation; and the story
Also reports, that he spent all his time
In decking her with robes as gay and fine.
After which two, did many more suceed
In their vast number, yet in very deed,
They were such men who acted nothing more,
Than t'garnish coats which those had made before.
And finally, from the Helvetian coasts
Comes Paracelsus, and he proudly boasts,
Himself to be the Monarch of the flock,
Saying he was the Goddess very stock.
Yet she contemns their glistring gems, and eke
Their precious Jewels hanging on her neck:
Those help not Goddesses she said. Beside
Ornaments breathing forth the ancient pride
Can bring no help, and that brings greater wrong
Which has the more of Art, it spent upon.
To what end are your thousand robes? I cry;
And ostentations of Luxury?
But certainly, this vain laborious toil,
Does not become my lofty Goddess style:
What! to have sought out ornaments alone,
For many hundred years forepast and gone:
Woe and alas! it may be shame enuff,
TO have watched so hard for faulty triffling stuff.
And would it might be lawful but for me,
My comely countenance once for to see:
For should I not in glass, appear more fair
Unto my self, than now my judgments are?
And is my Beauty now beheld indeed,
If Godesses be Judges of my weed?
And do all men 'prove of my Majesty?
But happily they do fear (oh Nymph) I spy
If thou should see thy face, thou may despise
All, and would live alone by beauties guise.
If thou beloved Narcissus had not seen
Thy proper figure in a well to gleen,
The crime, of water being looked into,
Would not have proved thy death thee to undo.
But he was mortal I a Goddess am,
God's Daughter, doing, what I desire can:
But he alone what the Godesses would.
Who gives to me a glass? Iun-contrould
Require a glass, than which I Will show more clear,
And it all to be-freckled shall appear.
Who gives to me a looking-glass? But stay
Thy just and mournful notes (Oh Nymph) I pray:
For lo there is one who does provide that mirror,
Which will direct thy visage, marred by error.
John Baptist will it give, who drew his name
From Helmont, whom Bruxels his pleasant dame
Has nourished in her bosom. But if this
Be true, which of a Sp'rit departing, is
Reported, from one vessel into another
To enter; then I do protest, moreover,
That I (most great Hipocrates) do find
Thy very Genius in this Authors mind.
Thy imitated form within this glass,
Thou will admire, whereto disease (alas,
Death, and the Destinies do greatly stoop:
Old age no longer with its wastful look,
Shall snatch away the wonted comely grace,
Nor oldish wrinkle be in ancient face.
Nor henceforth in a Labarinth reflex
Shall thou be interrupted, or shall vex:
Because a straight way is made manifest,
From every by-path where there is no rest.
The Nymph said to the Prophet, that the God
Of Heaven has determined with his Rod,
To scourge the World with unaccustomed griefs,
Throughout its circle, that mankind's beliefs
(Which is a wretched rout) may fixed be
In this, how great ignorance they do see,
In Med'c'nal Doctors of the common sort.
Choice ones, he would have famous of report,
Indeed by their withstanding of the new,
And barbarous number of Diseases crew.
And on the other hand, that vulgar ones
The cruel murderers of many sons,
He would they voluntarily decay,
By a discharge peculiar, in that day.
For every one of them sticking among
The beaten words of his own masters tongue,
Thinks that a touching of art Med'cinal
Is of that Art, the very top of all:
While they proceed by circuits or by rounds,
And do restore afresh their Parents grounds:
And into new Centuries them compose:
Therefore they have not durst, or have not chose
To walk in Co-us steps: for why they thought,
The Healing Art could be no further sought.
But what will mortals do, accustomed,
Now by this Med'c'nal law to be misled?
And suffer all things each in his own skin?
The cred'lous multitude still pressing in
The fixed footsteps of its ancient train,
By 'ts own deceit (alas) is sadly slain.
Long Academick robes (for Cities health)
Nor bubbles hallowed by the Commonwealth,
Were not as yet deposited, while he
The Author (young) required with instance-ee,
Our bride-beds, swiftly running (to those ends)
Through devious rough ways of old Fathers pens.
Indeed he had procured unto himself
Chief friends, who many prayers on his behalf,
Did pour abroad unto the God above;
And whereby he through suppliant words (from love)
Might nakedly behold sick bodies plight,
As Cous old by h's prayers, had had the sight.
He passed through many years with various cost;
His busy members with sore labor tossed:
Whether clear Phoebus drove his shining Carts,
Or Cynthia fair did shine in the brightsom parts
Of Heaven. He knowing of me Alchymie,
My abstruse heart (his household servant I)
The inward secret privy Chambers, there,
Have not lain lurking close, beyond his Sphere.
He sought her favor great, by many gifts,
And by strong prayers uttered with humble lips;
That so at length she might our love procure,
And join with us in sacred marriage sure,
Of grateful bed. He with a rest-less breast
Poured forth 'plaints, and sorrowful cheeks be-drest
With lukewarm showers. He would not that the great
Governor of the skiee Olympic seat,
Should from his Throne dismiss his deprecations
As being frustrate through deaf acclamations.
And thou prophetic Poet, this relate:
Promise, and things shall follow'f greater state.
Now whatsoere Disease or grief shall light,
To cure shall be of one and equal weight.
A dowry sure, I am ordained to give,
Unto the Author for his Labors hive:
That I a Woman worthy of such a Man,
May be conjoined in bride-bed and ban.
And he both bodies shall associate
In sacred bond of love. Do thou relate,
Such joyful messages to humane kind
As these: No sad contagions thou shall find
Of any malady, but such a one,
Has here conferred a Medicine for his moan.
The Plague, the Queen of sicknesses, the Gowt
Shall flee; the Stone shall be expelled out:
Ascites watery Conduits shall be bored;
And thin-jaw'd Phthisis shall be well restored.
And whatsoere distempers, Eve so bold,
In humane generations did unfold, Pandora.

After that she, not knowing what she ded,
Drew weapons on her own and husbands head.
Now therefore let my judgment of this glass
To the Book, as for a sign of wedlock pass:
So the bride-mistriss of the marriage bed.
(But soft, before our Poesy be sped)
Three R's occur. R, notes the ancient Latin, Er Greek, To Hebr. Res Errors.

Ausonia. R, Pelasgia Continent.
R, finally, an Hebraism does denote,
And Banks of witty Daedalus betoke.
Thus has S. D. d'A. Sung to his Uncle, in a prosperous Poem.

THE Authors Promises.
I Will show the Errors of the Schools, about things which they have rashly
judged to be the fundamentals or ground-works of nature; afterward, in the
decay of nature, I will show the defects, or diseases unknown to the Ancients:
to wit, that they do not arise from the co-mingling, fight, contrariety, or
unequal tempering of the Elements; nor also from the qualities, which they
feign to be the first, and proper to the Elements. Wherefore, that vain are
the meditations of Complexions, as well in temperate, as in intemperate bodies.
I will also teach, that the four humors are frivolous, and that whatsoever
has hitherto been attributed to them, has been devised by the Heathens; and
of these, the unhappy or evil spirit, to the destruction of mankind. To wit,
that the composition, connection, qualities, effects of humors, and the
diseases that are dreamed to arise from thence, are mere fictions: also that
the Lessons touching laxative Medicines, supposing the Elections or
seperations, with drawings, and lessenings of humors, are false. Indeed, that
vain hopes, uncertain healings, dangerous experiments, in so great a
sluggishness of ignorance, have not constituted the art of Medicine: but
uncertain conjectures, Students covering their errors by privy escapes, and in
the dust. At length, that hopes no less vain than pernicious, have been set to
sale instead of true; but that bloodletting never helps, unless it be by
accident, to wit, through want of art, and a more courteous or bountiful
Medicine: but, that cuttings of a vein do always take away long life. Also
that Cauteries or searing Remedies have been brought in without ground, after
that by the effect, they had already bewailed in vain, the uncertain and weak
help of their Remedies. Next I will make manifest, that neither are Tartarous
humors the causers or Patrons of infirmities. Likewise, that neither do
Diseases arise from three beginnings as neither out of the essentials, which
Che^neia or Chemistry boasts of. I will also discover the vanities or
fictions of a Catarrhe, or Rhume, that, that may not be a disease, which may be
begotten by this parent: at length, I will lay the ground work, that errors
have been diligently taught concerning Winds. Lastly, I will vindicate the
Heaven to be free, or harmless from seminal Diseases. The value of Medicines,
and also the abuse of Physicians, on both sides, for Charities sake, I will
explain. In the mean time, I will frame an Anatomy, or difecting of Diseases by
their true Roots, and now and then I will unfold some, under an occasion of
Discourse, by seperating them from the common error: to wit, the Apoplexy,
Leprosy, Asthma, the Dropsy Ascites, Gout, Disease of the Stone, silthinesses
of the Womb: at last, I have represented the Tragedies of Poisons, and of the
Plague that Medicines and healing Remedies may be appointed, not by contraries,
nor by alike things, but only by things that are endowed and appropriated:
which way indeed, was the work, to destroy the whole natural Philosophy of the
Ancients, and to make new the Doctrines of the Schools of natural Philosophy.
Last of all, I will treat of the Root of Life, whereof none has treated. I beg
of the Lord God, that he may vouchsafe to illustrate his free gifts sent into
the place of Medicinal Exercise with more able wits, to make them fruitful with
the large shower of his dew, and at length, speedily to perfect a cause of so
great concernment, in this Age, that is full of misery.

An Index or Summary, of the first Column or Section.
1. The intent of the Author. 2. The rise of Medicine, and the continual
succeeding corruption from thence. 3. The rise of Schools and Sects. 4. The
credulous sloth of the Europaeans of greater success. 5. Medicine which entered
through Galen, after it ran into a Circle, it was carried about like a Mill. 6.
The penurious blindenesses of the Schools. 7. A shamefaced composed Catalogue,
of incurable Difeases. 8. Against bloodletting from its indication, or that
which shows it. 9. The Errors of solutive, or loosening Medicines. 10. The
entrance of knaves into Medicine, 11. Some deceits of Galen. 12. With what case
Galen obtained the Chiefdom of healing. 13. That the sharpness of wit has
prevailed nothing, as neither the Schools of the Heathens. 14. How much any
one can profit in the Heathenish Schools. 15. Why Medicine is the highest, and
obscurest of Sciences. 16. The end of Medicine has continued neglects. 17. The
Errors of its ends are demonstrated.

COLUM. I.
ALthough self-love for the most part excludes the knowledge of truth, than
Hypecrates, a man of a most rare gift, and a partaker with Adeptists, has set
forth some tedious things of his own experience, without any false paint,
because there are a very few proper things of his extant: and those as yet,
forced afterward, to serve other men's pleasures, and Commentaries: although
most of his works are corrupted drogs. Therefore this his industry, others have
not boren; yea, such is the rottenness of days, that virtue and truth, have
presently, from their Galen (his junior by five hundred years) framed
suppositions of Complexions, humors and degrees, promising in an easy Method,
Mathematical demonstrations of those things, which nature only is able to
measure: which same things, he kept secret to himself, and at length, laid open
some things to Alchymists alone. Galen the mean while, dispersed his Theoremes
into a great Body, which afterward, the prattle of the Greeks increased into a
huge one, and which, the Schools even to this very day, do superstitiously
worship, because they have made themselves Trophies by others labors. Hence
therefore, Study has passed into Profession, and Universities, for as much as
it has not repented the Latins (whom the Greeks call Barbarians) Galens
followers, to propose this man as their Author. For from the word healing,
they have leaped over into Physicians, and erected Medicine, and so have erred
in the entrance: also even to this very day, they have written their misfortune
in their name: to wit, because they practiced Medicine, and were Physicians,
not from the work of healing; but from speaking only, should they be called
Physicians, and their Profession; Medicine: and their whole Medicinal Art, by
their own confession, should be hereafter, only talkative. Neither have they
pointed out by their diyining Etymology, that they can hope for reputation by
their art, who have gotten a name only from talking. The Moors afterward
promised the vittory, when as the Custom of the Greeks had almost lost the
Flower of Studies. But the Europeans despairing, as if the whole strength of
their mind were feeble, have held it sufficient for them, to stay in barbarous
inventions, and Hypocrates, has Medicine hitherto made any progress thereby:
but that which as yet returned through Galen, afterward was carried about into
a Circle: Galens delusions, imitating the Cutkow's note, always wheeled about
into the same Circle. For while Studies are set up for gain, Medicine is rolled
about the Mill. For seeing that besides cutting of a vein, and the shop of
laxatives, the Schools as yet to this day, do scarce acknowledge Plethora, or
the abounding of humors

When I exactly consider with my self, the so great sluggishness and blindeness
of

But Galen snatching the glory of his Predecessors into himself, extended his
own Diascorides, and the Elementary Degrees, he copied out their Seminal and
specifical power, neglecting on both sides, because not knowing either.

By what facility of Art indeed, he allured the chiefdom of healing to himself,
he crept into the Schools through the Doors of sloth; for the awakening
whereof, I would, God might take his honor, and morta^^ the experienced fruit
which I wish, by my labors.

Many I know well enough, will prate, grieving that themselves, and their
^iresome readings will be diminished, if I shall resign the sound truth of
Medicinal Science

The Heathenish Schools indeed, may have an Historical knowledge, the observer

Therefore the Science of healing is the last of all Sciences, and chiefly
hidden, so that it is no wonder, that its first beginnings are even at this day
desired from types

For the whole faculty of natural Philosophy is committed to man; and therefore

For the knowledge of Diseases contains the knowledge of the Causes, the
dependence and appropriating the same to our defensive faculties: in which
hitherto thing, to wit, understanding, and experience of selection or choosing
out, of Se^uestration or separation, of preparation, and graduation or
subliming: of which I will show, it has not as yet been treated of by the
Schools.

The Summary of the second Column.
1. An unwonted kind of Doctrine is to be required. 2. That Art has stood by
Conjectures hitherto. 3. The Author excuses his roundnesses. 4. He had no
light from Predecessors. 5. Why all things are new and unheard of. 6. The
Prerogative of Physicians before other Artists and Professions. 7. The signs
of a true Physician. 8. The Prerogatives of Physicians out of the holy
Scriptures. 9. The resigned liberty of the Author.

COLUM. II.
I Ought from the beginning, wholly to set upon Philosophy. A matter I say,
never

I know many will be angry with me, especially those who ascribe my roughness
and severity in reproving, to intolerable boasting. And then, as well those

Indeed it is believed, to be of great help, to have rolled over the Books of
many

But since I draw out all things new and unheard of, I will not interpret
others inventions, as neither will I contend with their Authorities: and I have
seemed to my marks and wounds, which the Father of mercies has inflicted: to
wit, he who appointed a Physician, or a Mediator between God and man from the
beginning: yea,

But of this sort are Physicians which are fitted from their Mothers womb (for
this, the word: The most High has created him, imports) exercising his gift,
with

Obey those that are set over you, is a Precept indeed: but, Honor thy
Parents, honor the Physician, is more strict than to obey, seeing we are
constrained even to

For God has so appointed, that new things do for the most part procure their
hard censurers, and ungrateful ones. For I have renounced with great God has
scattered the bones of them who please men: they are confounded, because God
has despised them. Therefore I certainly know, if the pleasure of the bestower
will suffer, he will send his Dew upon the Corn, he will give increase, and so
my Conceptions shall be profitable to the Commonwealth of Mankind, if the
fullness of days be come; but if not, He at leastwise, knows my inward parts,
and I will expect the rewards of his Clemency. Let God therefore, be between me
and the World, who is to judge both the one and the other. Let his Name be
thrice gloriously sanctified, and let his sanctifying Will alone, be done in
all.

Amen.
The Summary of the third Column.
1. By what means, understanding may be given. 2. How the Author has found
out falsehoods. 3. The Capital Ignorance of Physicians. 4. The hardships of
the Author (being as yet a Junior) with other Physicians. 5. He has forsaken
all Books. 6. What, and how little, he learned by traveling. 7. He thought
long ago, Medicine to be an Imposture or juggling deceit of the Greeks. 8. How
much he has profited by Paracelsus. 9. The Authors Ingenuity. 10. From whence
the Schools are to beg their Excuse.

COLUM. III.
CHarity entreats, desire seeks, and necessities do knock in the Soul, out of
Compassion. Thus is understanding given. Truly it shamed me, even from of the
Disease, and his strength as yet remaining, should suffer the same man to die.
For I being full of fear, believed, that it was not enough to say, It is not in
the Physician, that the siok party alwayes-be eased: and by a liberty springing
from thence, rashly to proceed, and continue in the work of a Physician, by
saying, I shall be excused, because I have done what I could, according to the
Maxims of Art: if I know my self every way defective, and that the suppositions
of Art themselves are rotten in their Root.

For indeed the ignorance of Physicians proceeding ill in healing, is almost
capital: because it is not to be blotted out with God, where, a man will give
skin for

Indeed Physicians demanded, why I less cured according to Galen, and refused
Galens Speculations, after I had beheld the very Maxims of the Schools
themselves, to be full of sores and defects; then at length, by little and
little, I more and more confirmed this conceit, by Discourse and Experience; to
wit, that every way, the Seeds of ignorance, by the same contagion, pierced
even into the Root of healing, and minds of the healers.

Therefore I straightway left off all Books of all, accurate Discourses, and
empty promises of the Schools, firmly believing every good gift to come down
from the

I have thoroughly viewed some foreign Nations, and I found almost the same
sluggishness

Therefore I long since considered with my self, that the Art of healing was a
Greeks: till at length, the holy Scriptures better instructed me; I considered,
that the Plague was a most miserable Disease, in which, every one forsook the
sick, and unfaithful helpers, distrusting their own Art, more swiftly fled,
than the unlearned common people, and the homely curers of the Plague:
therefore I proposed to my self, to dedicate one Salutation to the miserable
infected. Although then no Medicine was made known to me, but trivial ones; yet
God preserved my innocence from so cruel an enemy. For though I was not sent
for, I went of my own accord to see them; not so much to help them, as being
desirous to learn: yet all that saw me, seemed to be refreshed with hope and
joy; and I my self, being fraught with hope, persuaded my self, that by the
mere free gift of God, I should at sometime obtain the Science of the Adeptist.
But after ten years Travel, and Studies, from my Degree in the Art of Medicine,
taken at Lovaine: at length, in the year 1609, being now married, I withdrew my
self from the common people, to Viluord, that, being the less troubled, I
might proceed diligently to view the Kingdoms of Vegetables, Animalls, and
Minerals; by a curious Analysis, or unfolding, by opening Bodies, and by
senarating all things, I went about to search for full seven years. I searched
into the Books of Paracelsus, filled in all parts with a mocking obscurity or
difficulty, and I admired that man, and too much honored him: till at length,
understanding was given, of his Works, and Errors.

For not a Friend, the thief of days, never riotous feasting, or drinking
Bouts, detained me, who then as yet, could not bear Wine: but continual labor,
through extraordinary watching nights, did accompany my desircs. And at length,
being perfectly taught, that the corporeal faculties or powers, were bound up
in their principles or beginnings; and those not worthily to be known, without
an unlocking of their bolts, I sung a Hymn to my God, that it repented me not
of time, pains, costs, and gain neglected, being recompensed with the sweetness
of knowledge Adepticall. In the mean time, Reader, I am angry with my self,
because it is scarce lawful to open my conceptions, in the truth, without
hurting the esteem of Authors Galen to (...) ^^ished, yea to be praised,
although he frequently made Erostratus, (...), Protagoras, Erisistratus,
Herophilus, (I here make no mention of Moses) and many that were before him,
guilty of error: yea, and he has often carped at Quintius his Master, whom
notwithstanding (though an Emperick) he witnesses, that he has followed in
most things.

But what shall be for a damage to them that have trodden in the beaten way,
Hipocrates had knowledge to cure the devouring Plague, and with him, that
knowledge slept, the most High so willing it. Are those that come after,
therefore to be blamed? for it is not of him that wills, nor runs, but
alone of God that shows mercy: like as it is a fault of the despiser, not to
have rested quietly in the truth set before him, and to have lifted up his hand
unto him.

CHAP. I. The Authors Confession.
1. The muttering or murmuring of the Author. 2. The Physicians in Ireland,
are preferred before the Italians. 3. The Romans without Physicians, lived the
better. 4. A Dream shows to the Author, his Soul. 5. The manner of the mind
in understanding. 6. What is the Vicarship of the mind. 7. What is the
appearance of the Soul. 8. The mind has required from the Author, a disposed
or fit intention in writing of this Book. 9. The privy escape of selfishness in
the Author. 10. The answer of the mind. 11. A Confession of vanity that is
apt to happen. 12. That which the Author saw after Repentance. 13. Another
Vision intellectual. 14. The Authors Repentance.

WHen I had thoroughly read over this my Labor, and had (as it were in one Oh
the cares of men! Oh what emptiness there is in things! which way is it meet,
to pursue the Errors of the Schools? or what profit shall the Christian World
perceive? whether we have known Diseases to proceed from conceived Beings; or
at length from heats, or to overflow with feigned humors? for O wretched man,
have thou not labored in vain? For to what end is so great brightness of
speculation? have not all these things the fuel of presumption? For I remember
that a Nobleman of Ireland, gave Land to his Household Irish are more happily
cured, and are far more strong than the Italians, who have their paultry
Physicians in all Villages, living by the blood of miserable men. Therefore I
said to my self, What vain error has intieed thee? that thou lastly, have
meditated of a thing that will be of great moment, if the Universities shall
scoff at thy debates, and tread them under foot? And although thou have not
written, so much as for thy small glories sake, yet all things are vain in the
hands of men. Thou have thought indeed, if thou should do otherwise, that
thou had buried thy Talent granted unto thee.

Truly, lived not the Romans for five hundred years, without Physicians, and
in Greeks from whence they privily received Physicians. Would Age, if the
pricks of Speculation, together with the Thistles and Thorns of (...) were
burnt, and the Tares being left behind, that we should feed upon Whear alone?
Cerminly, I know not, whether through the tiresomeness of reading, or indeed,
by sleep creeping on me, these injuries of the truth, unworthy an answer, did
terrify my mind.

At leastwise, a great repose straightway invaded me, and I fell into an
intellectual

Then presently, I perceived, that we which are now together with the flesh,
are

But I have taken notice, that the former majesty, or greatness of the mind,
being the threatening of the Lord, who is to judge our righteousnesses, is
turned against my Soul. Because I had purposed to search into all things, which
are under the Sun; and because the thrice glorious God has given to every one
of the Sons of men, their peculiar occupation, Eccles.
that they may exercise themselves. 1. 11.


Therefore the Soul determined to examine it self in the Image set before it.
According to that saying, For who knows the things that are of man, but the
Spirit of a man that is in him? afterward then, the Soul opened the Eye-brow
of the right Eye, For it was not indeed, in the likeness of a man's Eye,
distinguished by Coats, the Apple, and diversity of humors: but the Eye was
the only, round, clear, even as the Seat of Venis seems to be afar off:
which Eye, although it was most exceeding beautiful in brightness: yet through
its unaccustomedness, it struck me to the heart. But it shone as well inwardly,
toward the bottom of the Soul, as without, through the whole Soul; and it sent
forth a beam into the splendour of that understanding, before hidden, which had
framed a selfishness, severed from it self.

But it desired an account from the animosity or sturdiness of the sensitive
Soul: to wit, whether in the composing of this Book, it had always with a
resigned will nakedly as besides the Body. Where ore it not being able to hide
it self from the ray of the Soul, which did shine through it, after a wholly
unaccustomed manner, it sought a crafty evasion: as though, for the bashfulness
of the thing, and newness of the place; it required a truce till the next day
after the morrow, hoping that perhaps, by one days delay, the understanding
might be unmindeful of its Enterprise.

But the Soul said, Every day has its burden, and desires its own account:
there is no

Which coming to me, another Eye at length opened it self. For then I saw, that

In the mean time, I decreed with a resolute mind, to bury this Book in the
fire: which very thing I had also performed, and was now ready to execute, had
not Solomon in his Throne: indeed of great expectations, if they shall remain
in the Tree. But if man does appropriate the gift to himself, or dares to crop
it off from its original, although the Flower does vanish from him: yet the
cropper remains the debtor of the promised Fruit.

Therefore I decreed hereafter, to leave the gift of God in its own Tree, nor
to arrogate any thing to my self by cropping it off; and I willingly confess my
aforepast have experienced how horrid a thing it may be in the Age to come, to
have attributed part of the whole glory due to God, to ones self, upon any
trifling account. Therefore I did desire, that this Book might issue out for
the common good, the name being suppressed, that I might testify that I do
hereafter despise the common Air or Applause. But the Decree of the Powers
hinders. Every Soul is subject to the Powers. Let God the Fountain of all
good light, help me, that I may proceed to scorn my self in good earnest, while
as sometimes behind, and anon on the side, vain presumption has in times past
crept in, that hereafter it may not any way trouble me. He will send his dew
upon the Corn; if happily it shall please him to increase, what I have sown
for the use of my Neighbor. In the mean time, I wish, Oh ye faithful in
Christ, that I be judged an unworthy, evil, ignorant, and rash man, so my
Neighbor shall not feel damage in healing, thereby. For he shall not esteem
me unprofitable and ignorant in vain: yea, if these things shall not become
guilt unto me, I attribute it to his bottomless clemency, which turns all
things into good to those that love him, for his great goodness sake: unto whom
I humbly offer, return, and lay down, my vain praises, from the weakness of my
confession and submission.

CHAP. II. The Authors Studies.
1. The Birth and Life of the Author. 2. The Author has laughed at the
masked Industries of Professors. 3. The nakedness of the Author. 4. He has
prosecuted more solid Sciences at leisure. 5. He did vilify Astrology. 6. He
despised a Canonship. 7. What furtherance there is of Studies among the
Jesuits at Lovaine. 8. Stoicisme displeased him. 9. Stoicisme is to be
despised from a Command. 10. The Author is snatched into Medicine, as it were
by chance. 11. The defect of Herbarists. 12. Medicine only flows down from
above, and therefore it cannot be delivered by Rules. 13. Those that are
instructed in an infused knowledge, are not to be taught by Authors. 14. The
juggle of a certain Professor of Medicine. 15. Why he left off the Study of
the Law. 16. How great the Authors barrenness and nakedness was, by studies.
17. What he has done for the beginning of Studies. 18. Practice has
discovered the nakedness of Physicians. 19. A Prayer for the Errors of the
Schools. 20. Raphael is promised in a Dream.

IN the year 1580, the most miserable one to all Belgium, or the Low Countries,
my Father died. I being the youngest, and of least esteem of my Brethren and
Lovaine to be made the sole disposer of my Right and Will. Wherefore I saw none
admitted to Examinations, but in a Gown, and masked with a Hood, as though the
Garment did promise Learning; I began to know, that Professors for sometime
past, did expose young men that were to take their degrees in Arts, to a mock:
I did admire at the certain kind of dotage in Professors, and so in the whole
World, as also the simplicity of the rash belief of young men. I drew my self
into an account or reasoning, that at leastwise I might know by my own
judgment, how much I was a Philosopher, I examined whether I had gotten truth
or knowledge.

I found for certainty, that I was brown up with the Letter, and (as it were
the forbidden Apple being eaten) to be plainly naked, save, that I had learned
artificially Astrolobe, the use of the Ring or Circle, and the speculations of
the Planets. Also I was diligent in the Art of Logic, and the Science
Mathematical, for delights sake, as often as the reading of other things had
brought a wearisomness on me.

Whereto I joined the Elements, or first Principles of Euclide; and this
Learning, I had made fociable to my Genius or natural wit, because it contained
truth; but by Cornesius Gemma, as of another Memphysick, came to my hand.
Which, seeing it only commended Nicholas Copernicus, I left not on, till I had
made the same familiar unto me. Whence I learned the vain excentricities, or
things not having one and the same Center, another circular motion of the
Heavens: and so I presumed, that whatsoever I had go^^^ concerning the Heavens,
with great pains, was not worthy of the time bestowed about it.

Therefore the Study of Astronomy, was of little, or no account with me,
because it promised little of certainty or truth, but very many vain things.
Therefore having

A wealthy Cannonship was promised me, so that I would make my self free to
Bernard affrighted me from it, because I should eat the sins of the people. But
I begged of the Lord Jesus, that he would vouchsafe to call me thither, where I
might most please him. For it was the year, wherein the Jesultes had begun to
teach Philosophy at Lovaine, the King, Nobles, and University, being against
it; and that thing, together with them, was forbidden by Clement the Eighth.
But their Scholars aspring to their Degree, they had assembled them to the
School houses; but others, and the more rich, they did allure with the pleasant
Study of Geography: and one of the Professors, Martine del Rio, who first being
the Judge of Turma in Spain, and afterward wearied in the Senate of Brabant,
being allured to the Society, and had resorted thither also, did expound the
disquisitions, or diligent examinations of Magic. Both the Readings I greedily
received. And at length, instead of a Harvest, I gathered only empty stubbles,
and most poor patcheries, void of judgment.

In the mean time, least an hour should vanish away without fruit, I rubbed
over L. Annaus Seneca, who greatly pleased me, and especially Epictetus.
Therefore I Pythagoras might require the strict Silences of so many years, an
excellent indgement, and therefore notable obedience. At length, a few years
being changed, I saw a Capuchin to be a Christian Stoic. Indeed Study for
Eternity, smiled on me; but for so great austereness, my more tender health was
a hinderance. I prayed the Prince of life diverse times, that he would give
strength, whereby I might contemplate of the naked truth, and immediately love
it. Thomas of Kempis, increased this desire in me, and afterward Taulerus. And
when I presumed, and certainly believed, that through Stoicisme, I did profit
in Christian perfection, at length, after some ^ay and weariness in that
exercise, I fell into a Dream.

I seemed to be made an empty Bubble, whose Diameter reached from the Earth
even to Heaven: for above hovered a flesh-eater; but below, in the place of the
And lend us not into temptation, etc. Indeed, understanding was given unto me,
that without special grace, to any actions, nothing but sin attends us. Which
being seen, and savourily known, I admited my former ignorances; and I knew,
that Stoicisme did retain me an empty and swollen Bubble, between the
bottomless pit of Hell, and the necessity of imminent death. I knew I say, that
by this Study, under the show of moderation, I was made most haughty: as if
trusting in the freedom of my will, I did renounce divine grace, and as though,
what we would, we might effect by ourselves. Let God forbid such wickedness, I
said. Wherefore I judged, that Blasphemy to be indulged by Paganism indeed;
but not to become a Christian: and so I judged Stoical Philosophy, with this
Title, hateful. In the mean time, when I was tired, and wearied with the too
much reading of other things, for recreation sake, I rouled over Mathiolus
Diascoxides, thinking with my self, nothing to be equally necessary for mortal
men, is by admiring the grace of God in Vegetables, to minister to their proper
necessities, and to crop the fruit of the same.

Straightway after, I certainly found, the art of Herbarisme to have nothing
increased Diascorides; but at this day, the Images of Herbs being delivered,
with the names and shapes of Plants, to be on both sides only disputed: but
nothing of their properties, virtues and uses, to have been added to the former
invention and Histories: except that those who came after, have mutually
feigned degrees of Elementary qualities, to which the temperature of the Herb
is to be attributed. But when I had certainly found, happily two hundred
Herbs, of one quality and degree, to have diverse properties, and some of
diverse qualities and degrees, to have a Symphony or Harmony (suppose it in
vulnerary or wound potions) in producing of the same effect; not indeed the
Herbs (the various Pledges of divine Love) but the Herbarists themselves began
to be of little esteem with me: and when I wondered at the cause of the
unstableness of the effects, and of so great darkness in applying and healing:
I inquired whether there were any Book, that delivered the Maxims and Rules of
Medicine? For I supposed, Medicine might be taught, and delivered by
Discipline,

At leastwise, seeing Medicine is a Science, a good gift coming down from the
Father of Lights, I did think, that it might have its Theoremes and chief
Authors, instructed Bazaleel, and Aholiab, the spirit of the Lord had inspired
the Causes and knowledge of all Diseases, and also the knowledge of the
properties of things. Therefore I thought these enlightened men to be the
Standard-defending Professors of healing. I inquired I say, whether there were
not another, who had described the Endowments, Properties, Applications, and
proportions of Vegetables, from the Hyssop, even to the Cedar of Libanus?

A certain Professor of Medicine answered me, none of these things might be
looked for in Galen or Avicen. But since I was not apt to believe, neither did
I find, among

Lastly, I knew, that the government of my self, was hard enough for me; but
the judgment concerning good men, and the life of others, to be dark, and
subject to a thousand vexatious difficulties: wherefore I wholly denied, the
Study of the Law, and government of others. On the other hand, the misery of
humane life was urgent, and the will of God, whereby every one may defend
himself so long as he can; but I more inclined with a singular greediness, unto
the most pleasing knowledge of natural things; and even as the Soul became
Servant to its own inclinations, I unsensibly slid, altogether into the
knowledge of natural things. Therefore I read the Institutions of Fuchius, and
Fernelius, whereby I knew that I had looked into the whole Science of Medicine,
as it were by an Epitome, and I smiled to my self. Is the knowledge of healing
thus delivered, without a Theoreme and Teacher, who has drawn the gift of
healing from the Adeptist? Is the whole History of natural properties, thus
shut up in Elementary qualities? Therefore I read the works of Galen twice,
once Hipocrates (whose Aphorisms I almost learned by heart) and all Avicen*
Greeks, Arabians, as Moderns, happily six hundred, I seriously, and attentively
read through, and taking notice by common places, of whatsoever might seem
singular to me in them, and worthy of the Quill. At length, reading again my
collected stuff, I knew my want, and it grieved me of my pains bestowed, and
years: When as indeed I observed, that all Books, with institutions, singing
the same Song, did promise nothing of soundness, nothing that might promise the
knowledge of truth, or the truth of knowledge.

In the mean time, even from the beginning, I had gotten from a Merchant, all
Clark of the Shops, or a Collector of simples, I had all the usual Plants of
our Country; and so I learned the knowledge of many by the looks of the same.
And also I thoroughly weighed with my self, that indeed I knew the face of
Simples, and their names: but, than their properties, nothing less.

Therefore I would accompany a practicing Physician, straightway it repented me
again, and again, of the insufficiency, uncertainty, and conjectures of
healing. I had

Lastly, I saw that Fevers and common Diseases were neither certainly, nor
knowingly, nor safely cured; but the more grievous ones, and those which cease
not of their own accord, for the most part were placed into the Catalogue of
incurable Diseases. Then it came into my mind, that the art of Medicine, was
found full of deceit, without which, the Romans lived happily, five hundred
years. I reckoned the Greeks art of healing to be false: but the Remedies
themselves, as being some experiments, no less to help without a Method: than
that the same Remedies, with a Method, did deceive most. On both sides, I
discerning the deceit and uncertainty of the Rules of Medicine in the
diversities of the founders of Complexions, I said with a sorrowful heart. Good
God! how long will thou be angry with mortal men? who hitherto have not
disclosed one truth, in healing, to thy Schools? how long will thou deny truth
to a people confessing Moloch pleasing to thee? will thou have the lives of the
poor, Widows, and Fatherless Children, consecrated to thy self, under the most
miserable torture, of incurable Diseases, and despair? How is it therefore,
that thou ceasest not to destroy so many Families, through the uncertainty and
ignorance of Physicians? I fell withal on my face, and said, Oh Lord, pardon
me, if favor toward my Neighbor, has snatched me away beyond my bounds.
Pardon, pardon, Oh Lord, my indiscreet Charity; for thou art the radical good
of goodness it self. Thou have known my sighs, and that I confess, that I am,
know, am worth, am able to do, and have nothing, that I am poor, naked, empty,
vain: give O Lord, give knowledge to thy Creature, that he may very
affectionately know thy Creature, himself first, other things besides himself,
for thy Command of Charity, all things, and more than all things, to be
ultimately in thee.

Which thing, when I had earnestly prayed from much tiresomness, and
wearisomness of mind, by chance I was led into a Dream, and I saw the whole
universe, in the Chaos or confused thing, without form, which was almost mere
nothing. And thence I drew the conceiving of one word; which did signify to
me, what follows. Behold thou, and what things thou see, are nothing:
whatsoever thou do urge, is less than nothing it self, in the sight of the
most high. He knows all the ends or bounds of things to be done; thou at
leastwise may apply thy self to thy own safety. Yea in that Conception, was
there an inward Precept, that I should be made a Physician, and that at
sometime, Raphael himself should be given unto me. Forthwith therefore, and for
thirty whole years after, and their nights following in order, I labored, to
my cost, and damage of my life, that I might obtain the Natures of Vegetables
and Mineralls, and the knowings of their properties. The mean while, I lived
not without prayer, reading, narrow search of things, sifting of my Errors,
and daily experiences written down together. At length, I knew with Solomon, I
had for the most part hitherto perplexed my Spirit in vain, and vain to be the
knowledge of all things, which are under the Sun: vain are the searchings out
of Curiosities. And whom the Lord Jesus shall call unto Wisdom, He, and no
other shall come; yea, he that has come to the top, shall as yet be able to do
very little, unless the bountiful favor of the Lord shall shine upon him. Lo,
thus have I waxed ripe of age, being become a man, and now also an old man,
unprofitable, and unacceptable to God, to whom be all Honor.

CHAP. III. The hunting, or searching out of Sciences.
1. The mind is not rational, if it be the Image of God. 2. The opinion of the
Schools concerning Reason. 3. A Vision in a Dream concerning Reason. 4. A
Dialogue or Discourse of the mind with Reason. 5. The chief juggle of Reason.
6. The mind has chosen understanding. 7. Reason becomes suspected by reason
of her juggling deceits. 8. The weariness of the mind concerning Reason. 9.
Reason began from sin. 10. What kind of knowledge there is of the Soul, being
separated from the Body. 11. The mind has withdrawn her Garments from Reason,
in her flight. 12. Reason enters into the counsel of the mind, from an abuse.
13. Reason burdens the mind. 14. Reason being reflexed toward it self, does
produce many Errors. 15. The great Art of Lullius is sifted. 16. The manner of
seperating Reason from it self. 17. An unutterable intellectual Light. 18. A
feeling of the immortality of the Soul. 19. Reason is not the Lamp of which
Solomon speaks. 20. In what part a Syllogism dwells. 21. Reason generateth a
dim knowledge. 22. Knowledges of the Premises are from the light of the Candle,
or Lamp. 23. The mind is not deceived, but by its own reason. 24. Reason
burieth the understanding. 25. Reason is known in its poorest nakedness. 26.
The understanding refuses the use of reason. 27. Reason and Truth, are unlike
in their Roots. 28. Reason does not agree with the knowledge of the conclusion.
29. A definition of Reason. 30. The most refined Reason, is as yet deceitful.
31. What Reasoning and Discourse are. 32. What intellectual Truth is. 33.
Imagination is a crooked manner of understanding. 34. Bruit Beasts are
discursive. 35. A rational Creature for man, is disgraceful. 36. A true
definition for a man. 37. The Schools hearken more to Aristotle than to Paul.
38. An Animal, or living Creature, in the definition of a man, belongs to
corrupted nature. 39. What kind of Skeleton or dry Carcass, that of reason is.
40. A progress to chase after Sciences. 41. Double Images, or likenesses in the
Soul. 42. Where the Progress of the mind is stayed. 43. How a truer Progress
may be made. 44. New understanding, or the labor of wisdom. 45. The
understanding does strike in, or co-agree with things understood, and how that
may be done. 46. Why there is made a transmigration or passing over of the
understanding. 47. The memory and will are supped up. 48. The thingliness or
Essence of an intellectual thought. 49. How the Image of God lightens or shines
all over. 50. How the mind beholds the understanding under an assumed form.
51. The Error of the Rabbis concerning this State of the Soul. 52. The
quality of the understanding, while it stands in that light. 53. Why, and after
what manner the understanding transformeth it self. 54. After what manner the
understanding beholds it self. 55. What intelligibility or understandingness
may be. 56. How the Soul understanding it self, shall understand any other
things. 57. Whence that difficulty of understanding is. 58. Why accidents
cannot be comprehended by the intellect. 59. The Errors of the Schools about
the dividing of the intellect. 60. In things pertaining to understanding, it is
more noble to suffer than to do. 61. Aristotle knew not a true understanding.
62. The Fantasy or Imagination does not pierce things, neither in like
manner, do things enter into it. 63. Eight Maxims touching the understanding,
which Aristotle knew nor. 64. A dividing of the Predicament of a substance.

The hunting or searching out of Sciences, begins from [Know thy Self.]
REason is accounted to be the life of the Soul, or the life of our life. But I
believe, that the Almighty is alone, the way, the truth, the life, the light,
of living Creatures, and of all things; but this is not reason. And therefore,
that our mind ought to be intellectual; but not rational, if it ought to show
forth the most immediate Image of God. That Paradox is to be cleared up, for
the searching out of all things knowable, and especially of things Adeptical,
or the attainment of great secrets. By my will, or according to my assertion,
all Philosophy begins and proceeds from the knowledge of ones self: whether it
be natural, or moral.

I will therefore propose, so far as I (through my slenderness) do attain, the
understanding,

Wherefore, Reason once showed it self to my Soul, in the form of a more thick
and dark little Cloud, or mist: and proposed; that it was the Nurse, Guide, and

Nevertheless, least it should offend through a gentleness of credulity, or
rash belief, it presently assaulted Reason with its own Weapons, saying, If
therefore O Reason, thou art ordained for my Service, I ought not to follow
thee, but thou me. Because thou art she, which affirmest, or demonstratest
nothing by Discourse, but I have first begotten that in thee. In what sort
therefore do thou, now being a Scholar, pretend a tutorship over thy
Mistress, thou being a Daughter, over thy Parent? That first Argument, arising
from my arrogance, taught me, that nothing is more nigh to the Soul than pride:
which lifting up, nevertheless, arisen from disobedience, it has covered with
the Cloak of virtue: to wit, least it should be led away by credulity. But
Reason answered, not indeed affirmatively; but only, that it might breed a
fear in the mind, and so, by scrupulousness, might draw it unto its desires.

For it said, there is no safety to the Soul, to be attained without Reason: to
wit, that Mortals would perish under the allurements of the senses, unless
vices should be restrained

Wherefore in the choice, my mind esteemed it meet, to magnify understanding
before undistinct, and uncertain in ignorances, the which notwithstanding, it
did promise to untie. Also, now and then, Reason has made Souls mad, who
trusting too much to its persuasions, had enslaved themselves unto it.

In the next ^lace, in others, through foolish, importunate, undiscreet, and
vain cares, it cuts off the thread of life. The mind therefore has drawn a
wearisomness

Indeed, the mind knows that it is, after death, to inhabit all its knowledge
at once,

Therefore the mind seized on frail Reasons Coat, she being also a fugitive
from the Soul, and has spoiled her of every Garment, even unto nakedness: But
then it was

Afterward therefore, my mind endeavored to depart; not indeed against, but

For truly, then I began to perceive, that reason did vex the Soul with a
multiplicity, with a vain complacency of Sciences, and did tempt with it a
ridiculous enquiry after

My mind therefore had often banished Reason, but it has always privily
entered afresh, against the endeavors of the mind, has discovered its learned
Hypocrisy, and

At length, my mind asked, what knowledge Reason could give? Whereto she
presently answered, she could effect by the great art of Lullius, that a man
may be Be gone wicked pratler: for first of all, I detest discursive matters,
therefore have I certainly known, that Reason does always forsake the Soul,
with an unsweetness of dryness, stumbling in the dark with disquietness,
uncertainty, and bitterness.

Last of all, as I knew, that there was no help to me in nature, nor separation
from so troublesome and tedious a guest, I hid my self within the Prayer of
silence, so that and all its appendices. It happened therefore, that without,
or at leastwise, besides those things, which may be known by reason, or be any
way conceived by its help, I came down as it were by a Dream, under an
unutterable light.

Of which, I have nothing to say further: because that envious reason has
presently

Nevertheless, from thenceforth, I felt my self changed from that which I was
before. Solomon calls the spirit of a man, the Lamp or Candle of God. But not
that God is in darkness, or that he has need of the splendour of the spirit of
a man. But altogether, because the hidden knowledges of things, are infused by
the Father of Lights into us, by means of this Candle.

I apprehended more certainly, daily, that Reason was not that spirit of a man,
and therefore neither that Candle of God. Yea neither the light of that Candle:
but that

Then in the next place, I knew, that neither did sense frame a Syllogism; but
that etc. and thou shall find, that, by how much the more clear any thing is,
by so much the reason thereof is the more stupid, remote, and dull. Then
therefore, I clearly beheld, that Reason is wallowed up and down, among thick
darknesses. And then, that, wheresoever there is no discourse, no premises;
there also no conclusion, consequence, or reason, is found. Notwithstanding a
knowledge of the premises, is more certain than of the conclusion: because,
seeing it is supposed from things that are firstly or chiefly true: also that
knowledge is in the Soul without Reason: because, before a demonstration.

Whence I concluded with my self, first, that reason does generate nothing but

Wherefore I straightway observed, that the discourse of Reason, does extenuate
or

Forasmuch as I have found, that the Soul wishing to know, by the hunting of

Therefore, I have seen and learned, Reason to be a naked thing, because
Reason, for every event, did bring forth nothing but a thinking or truth, by
which means, it did bury the intellectual understanding. Because that the
mind cannot at once embrace and follow two lights, which are so diverse. But
the World is every where miserably misled, and deluded by thinkings. And first
indeed, because every one thinks Reason to be the Image of God, and our best
Treasure, etc. I pray you, let a Reason be asked about a doubtful question, of
ten witty men apart: and mark, how much they differ from each other, every one
is deluded by his own reason, and how stoutly every one fights for his own
thought.

For truly, seeing my mind did spoil reason of its Garment, I observed, that
the

Because that when it makes use of reason, it plainly resembles the savore of a
corporeal Soil. Seeing the rational power is in the lower part of the Soul, as
being bound

When as notwithstanding, Reason and Truth are unlike, or disagreeing in their
Roots. For Truth is a real true Being; but reason is a mental, problematical,
or

Whence at length, I seriously considered, that reason did not agree with the
conformity of a thing proposed by discourse, and the knowledge of a conclusion
found by

But Reason, that Steward, reputed in the mind of so great worth, is nothing
else,

For therefore more Heretics are converted by the Examples of a Christian
life,

But reasoning, or Logisme (from whence is a Syllogism) is an act whereby the
conformity of the same disposition, is made to approach unto the Species,
co-begotten in which the understanding judges necessary, the which Reason
refuses as impossible: I knew from thenceforth, that reason did not dwell in
the possession of a true understanding; but without the same. Because that in
the understanding, truth is immediately, because truth being understood, is
nothing else, but a suiting of the intellect to the things themselves.

Indeed, the understanding knows things as they are; and therefore likewise,
the understanding

Therefore I have certainly known, that reason is not to be had in so high an
esteem, as hitherto it has been. And the rather, because Reason and Discourse,
do Fox is more crafty than a younger one, by rational discourse, does happen to
be confirmed by the remembrance of experience: yea, Bees do number: because if
there be 30 Hives placed in order, a small Be flying out in the morning,
numbers out of what Hive she went forth, and then, does not return nor enter,
unless she first re-number the rank: which is easily proved; For if the fifth
or sixth Hive be removed into the seventh, or any other place, and the number
being turned in and out, the Bees, which return laden with Honey and Wax,
thinking to lay up their fardle within their own Commonwealth, do reck on
again, upon the fifth or sixth numbered Hive: the Citizens whereof, seeing they
are strangers to that little Be, coming unto them, do kill the same. And in
this manner, (...) do in one night, destroy all the Hives. For the Serpent was
more crafty than the other living Creatures. And I will confirm by one example,
instead of a thousand, a rational Discourse in Beasts. A man of a neighboring
Village, brought up a House, the chief Watchman of the night-prey. But it
happened, that in full of the Moon, a Wolf, ran up and down about the Village,
at whom, that Dog, straightway barked, and followed the fleeing Wolf. But this
being impatient of hunger, reterted himself on the Dog, and follows him. But
the Dog running away, and leaping upon his Oven, retired himself in safety, and
from thence continually barked; and waking his Master, discovered the presence
of the Wolf. But the day following, the Wolf returned, whom the Dog, as he did
the day before, assaulted by barking. For the Wolf feigning a flight, until he
knew by conjecture, that his fellow Wolf, which he had brought with him, had
hidden himself under the Oven. When therefore, he turned himself toward the
Dog, who running away from the Wolf following him, and thinking to retire to
his Oven, as it were to a most safe Castle, another hidden Wolf bewrayed
himself, who laid hold on the Dog with a grinning mouth, and hindered his
leaping upon his Oven. Therefore I have noted a remarkable diligence in all
bruit Beasts, also in most insects.

I think it therefore a disgraceful definition, whereby a man is decyphered to
be a rational or reasonable living Creature, as it were from a description of
his Essence. For Aristotle. Wherefore, neither was the definition of a man, to
be begged from the Fountain of Paganism, which has been plainly ignorant of
Creation, and the ends thereof. For as my Philosophy is unknown to the Heathen,
so likewise their Philosophy is with me, of no value. Indeed, I write for the
sake of Christians, for whom it is a shame, to follow Heathens, contrary to
Gospel Truth. Neither also am I willing to be accounted a brawler about names,
as often as I treat of the ends, Prerogatives, choiceness, and Dignity of the
divine Image. I reject, first of all, the follies of Paganism, in-definitions,
especially those made concerning man. For truly, according to the Testimony of
St. Anthony, described by Blessed Jerome: Paul, the first of Anchorets, is
referred among the number of the Gods. Also by relation of the same Anthony,
Faunus is read to be a talking rational Creature: yea, knowing and worshipping
the God of Nature, and of the Christians, and beseeching Anthony, to pray for
him and his. It is manifest in the first place, that this Faunus was not a man,
from the assertion of Anthony, and his monstrous figure or shape. Next, neither
that he was an evil spirit, is gathered, because this is so proud, that if he
knew he might be saved by Prayer, he would not so much as ask, that any one
would pray for him, neither would he prostrate himself for to beg pardon. For
blessed Jerome calls Faunus, not a man, as neither an evil Spirit. Therefore
Faunus is neither of these, as the same man witnesses, by whom that Paul
obtained the first place among the Anchorets, and was reckoned among the
Saints. Therefore a Faunus is a living Creature, as a Being in reason, speaking
his own proper Country Dialect; but not a man. So in times past, a live Satyr,
and afterward seasoned with Salt, was shown for money, being carried
thorowout Egypt, Phrygia, and Greece. Finally, in Scotland and Zeland, and
elsewhere: there are fished Monsters, using Reason, yea, exercising mechanic
arts, in the half shapes of men. Indeed man alone was made after the Image of
God, with an excluding of all Creatures or things. But these rational bruits,
being in their own Elements, are also different among themselves: yet are they
the Images, or likenesses of us, and not the Images of God.

Man therefore, is a Creature living in a body, by an immortal mind, sealed to
the honor of God, according to the light, and Image of the Word, the first
example of Oh Lord, the light of thy countenance is imprinted upon us; for none
has perfectly known the Image, and whether it does well answer to its Type, if
he shall not first know or acknowledge the Type. Wherefore, as many as do badly
define a man, do not know or acknowledge God, as neither themselves in
essential things.

The Phylosophical Schools therefore, have rested more in the lessons of the
Heathens, than of Paul. Hence I contemplate, that they have meditated of a man,
only My Spirit shall not remain, or always strive with man, because he as
flesh. For the proper Genus or general kind of the thing defined, in the
definition of a Logic, which is altogether destitute of all definition, and
constitutive difference. But Reason being now stripped even unto a nakedness, I
got its every way displeasure, because it seemed to me an empty Skeleton, its
Masks and Coverings being taken away.

Lastly, I beheld the narrow poverty, and unquiet foulness thereof; especially,
when I was mindeful of the confusions and uncertainties, wherewith, it,
according to

I began therefore afterward to contemplate, that my intellect might more
profit by figures, likenesses, and visions of the phantafie in dreams, than by
the discourses identity or sameliness. And then I thus judged, because the
distinction between the Images of the Fantasy, and the Images of the
intellect, had not yet been made known unto me: the which, after their
abstractions, do remain in the very Center of the Soul; for I was for the most
part wearied all the day, about some knowable thing;

Under which, I once afterward, ere long, beholding that, in my imagination,
and as it were, talking to the same, I being at length, notably wearied with
study, fell asleep, Night unto night shows knowledge; and surely it is a
wonder, how much light, those kind of Visions unfolded unto me, especially, my
Body being not well fed for a good while before. For I do not deny, but that,
the essences of the thing sought for, which were for the most part, covered
under the Cloak of a Riddle; or confused; and as yet, very much subject to
pluralities, and interchangeable courses: I many times attained by this means
of knocking, especially, the helps of seeking having gone before, and the ayds
and wings of prayer, being adjoined. And a holy man (to whom, I had uncovered
every corner of my Conscience, and the wearisomnesses of labors and years
through restless nights) said unto me: Ah, I would to God, I had labored as
much, and had spent as much time in loving of God, as thou wretched man have
done, in the searching out of knowable things, whereof, the last day will not
require of thee a reason or account! Truly, I then praised the Lord, that he
had freely bestowed on me a certain nearer means of knowing and learning, than
reason could be: the which did never pierce unto the former, or cause, and
seldom unto the latter, or effect, and that, moreover, with much uncertainty.
For then, I believed, that the original misery of corrupted nature, could not
proceed further, unto the once tasted light, than by the aforesaid Images of
the fantasy.

By the persuasion therefore of that man, I desisted from a more narrow
wishing, seeking and searching into any thing, I stripped my self of all
curiosity and appetite of

But I straightway returned into my self, neither knew I, how long that light
had remained. That indeed I knew, that the newness, amazedness, and rejoicing
of the Aristotle, although he was wholly void of this light, yet he has seemed
from some other, to have described the perceivance of another, concerning the
labor of wisdom, or things Adeptical. It is better for a man to be disposed or
inclined, than to be knowing by description. To wit, by the deaf suggestion of
another, he calls it a better thing to have men disposed, than if they were
knowing: that is, by the help of demonstration. By means whereof alone, he
elsewhere always boasts, that all knowledge in man, does arise. I likewise
acknowledged, that we must bid farewell to Reason and Imagination, as unto
brutall faculties (and that by reason of the misery of our fall) if by hope, we
are drawn into the deep, for a sound knowledge of the truth.

I have known likewise, that an easy Translation of the understanding was
required, and a pleasing transchanging of it self into the form of the thing
intelligible; in which therefore I gathered that the understanding and things
understood, as such, ought to be, or to be made of the same nature; but this
ought to be done without labor, and disquietness: but with rest, in the light
proper to them, with the withdrawing, depriving, and wanting of any other
created help whatsoever. But if a foreign help does concur, now, it shall be
with the labor of a desire stirred up without the understanding. Furthermore,
that passing over and transfiguration of the understanding, otherwise natural
to it, they do signify to be sometimes subordinate Poets, the name of
Protheus, even as a Fable. But I have now known more clearly than that, that
that transchanging of the understanding ought to be made, because the intellect
is in it self, wholly pure, simple, one only, and undivided.

Wherefore, for that cause also, some only, simple, uniform, and single act,
should belong to it, plainly undivided from the understanding it self.
Otherwise, the understanding etc. And that not only by reason of an
accustomedness, whereby, we have been wont from a Child, by animal or
sensitive acts, to obey the Imagination: but much more, because the will it
self, together with the memory, ought for that space of motion, to be wholly
supt up, and as it were, annihilated in the understanding.

The which surely, is the weight of a great Mystery. For else, as soon as any
one does think of his Soul, or of any thing as of a third; with a separated
interchangeable course,

But when the Soul thinks of it self, or any other thing, as it self, without
an interchangeable course of the thinker, and of the thing thought of, without
an appendency, etc. in the Spirit: And thus it is unto God a delight, to be
with the Sons of men. Surely it is thus. Our understanding is as it were all to
be sprinkled with a new dew of perfection, as often as any thing that is
super-celestial or heavenly above, is intellectually contemplated of: because
for that moment, it passes over into that, and tastes down that.

Then indeed, the Image of God shines all over within, and becomes glorious.
Good etc. But one is not in the understanding without the other: neither
with-the other under an interchangeable course: neither also, even as it may be
conceived by Reason, or Imagination, or be thought by Imaginations or
likenesses. But in that state, now, here, sense, reason, imagination, memory,
and will, are at once melted into a mere understanding, and do stand obscured,
under darkness, by the light of understanding. Then, then I say, a certain
light falls upon the Soul. And that in my judgment, is all of whatsoever could
ever be declared by word, thought, speech, and writing. But whether that light
be altogether supernatural, or that the understanding be of its own nature thus
kindled, or enflamed, I had rather experience than determine. That one thing at
leastwise, I know, that it does not happen without grace. Wherefore, whether
the understanding be transformed, or whether it does transform it self into the
Image of the thing understood, surely it had need of help from God, and that
indeed a singular one, because then, at leastwise, the Soul beholds its own
understanding, under a form taken on it, in the said light: and in that its
glass, it

Indeed, some Rabbis do fear this state of the Soul, as dangerous. The
mystical School also fears the danger of arrogance, and spiritual adultery.
But both, as they Adeptists think, if it should often invade one, or long
continue, undoubted death would be brought, together with a sickness, which the
Rabbis call Binsica: which properly, is an unnourishment, or pining away of
the Organ of the fantasy. Notwithstanding I pray, let them pardon me, if I
shall think otherwise. First of all, because the Instruments of the Imagination
do not labor in this act: but they sleep unmoved, as if they were not.
Therefore likewise, they suffer nothing. Then, because that act, is not in our
power: for I believe that that principal act, is of Clemency. Which Clemency,
does never give, make, cause, or admit of that which is inordinate. Therefore,
although Clemency should the more often, and longer abound, yet neither
therefore, could it contain, or argue an inordinacy. I beseech therefore, that
the Father of Lights would vouch safe, to prevent, and follow me with his
clearness, that he may bring me unto the calling which is pleasing to him, in
his grace. The light therefore which falls from above, upon the Soul (when it
is less tied and bound to the Organs of the Body, and the which is in it self
not capable of suffering, and immortal) cannot also, hurt the life. For truly,
after the receiving of a small quantity of the light, I find a man scarce to
suffer any thing by three days fasting. Wherefore it comes into my mind, that
the friends might stand by Job, as Companions, for the full nine days, without
meat or drink. Moreover, according to my opinion, that light, does so dispose
of the understanding, without the help, endeavor, and labor of the
understanding, that it may come into its own freedom, which else, through the
slavery of the body, is plainly moveable, dark, and confused. Otherwise, the
understanding makes not use of Instruments, besides and without it self. And
therefore, neither is it wearied, as is the Imagination: neither is it of it
self, subject unto Diseases, changes, disturbances, alterations,
interchangeable courses, or co-mixtures.

For error, juggling, a lie, or deceit, does not fall on the understanding,
while it stands in that light. For neither do, drowsiness, sleep, or defect,
inhabit in it; neither

So that, as often as it conceives any foreign thing in it self, it ought of
necessity, to desist from the Being of a most simple light, of the divine
Image, or to transform it self

Therefore it is reputed for truth, that it is no Eye, except so far as it is
conceived in the intellect as such. Wherefore Aristotle was constrained to
confess, that the and the truth of an intellectual knowledge are one and the
same. And therefore, as a Being, or to be, true, good, and one, are
convertible: so essence, goodness and truth, ought to be co-melted with each
other, into the form of a Being, in the oneness of understanding. For truly, in
the understandingness of the understanding, there is not any interchangeable
course of the intellect which understands, and of the thing understood:
because that, before the act of understanding, every reciprocal or mutual
relation, rebounding, and reflection on each other, is first nullified. Seeing
the very understandingness of a thing, is nothing but a coming to, and
immediate

Therefore also, our Soul understanding it self, does after a sort, understand
all other things, because all other things, are in an intellectual manner in
the Soul, as in

But the difficulty of the aforesaid understandingness, does chiefly consist in
that, that it is the Image of God, which very Image also, as well in it self,
as in respect of non ens, or, a non-Being; but of a non-Being, no conception,
no figure, and no understanding, does answer. That is of a negative
abstraction, seeing its companion is privation; but negative and primitive
things are destitute of an Idea, or equivalent shape: therefore the light of
knowledge which the Soul has of it self, is of clemency, freely given, nor
ever at the full in this world or life. But if a happy Soul shall sometimes
conceive of God in it self, by the beatifical Vision, then by the same beam of
light, he shall behold and know God himself, and all other things inwardly. For
therefore, by how much the Soul does understand intellectually, of it self; by
so much it profits in the most profitable knowledge which can be had of
created things in this life. Because that in the light of its own light, it
does after a sort, behold the properties, essences, effects, interchangeable
courses, distinctions and defects of all things: whither therefore, that
knowledge has once brought, there, all the more clowdy speculation and aid of
Reason languisheth; even as on the other hand, a true understanding is
suppressed in us, under the precepts of Reason.

Wherefore, seeing the proper object of understanding, is the essence of things
it they depend; therefore accidents have not an essence, which does co-pass
unto the unity of the understanding, or into which essence, the understanding
may transport it self. But the Schools do divide the Intellect into the Agent
and Patient. For they will have that to be conversant about the invention of
means, and premises Ethiopian swiftly to roll a Reed about, in the hole of a
Plank, with a Towel placed between: and not long after, the Reed with the Towel
took fire. And then, I have hidden a Reed in a bright burning Furnace, and the
inflamed Reed, has more speedily, clearly, and perfectly shined. When as,
nevertheless, the Reed did act nothing: but only suffered an inflaming. So
that, although the acting principle, may now and then be more noble than the
suffering one, while the effect tends to perfection: or while the Patient ought
to be perfected by the Agent: Yet while a precious Pearl does putrify under
the Dunghill, I may not believe the Agent to be more perfect than the Patient.
I have sufficiently showed elsewhere, that in whole nature, the Doctrine of
Aristotle is vain, and mere trifles: how much less therefore could he subsist
in the Court of understanding? whose Being and operating do depend only on the
Soul? For we Christians, are constrained to believe, that our intellect or
understanding, is an immortal Spirit, Light, and Image of the Almighty, whose
beginning, as it exceedes Nature, so it cannot be fitted, or squared to its
Rules: Seeing it has a most simple Being, never to be divided into the strifes
of Agent and Patient, or into heterogeneals, or diverse kinds. Seeing also that
it depends immediately, totally, and continually on its original Type: and so
that without particular or special grace, it cannot understand any thing:
because the object of understanding is truth it self. Wherefore neither does it
understand with a perfect understanding, but by receiving. But that which
receives only, that suffers, but does not act therein: for neither is that
proper to the understanding, which comes to it by grace. The will also, while
it suffers, is more noble, than while it wills: to wit, while it is ruled by
the will of the Superior Powers. The Imagination indeed, knows by acting, and
therefore it is wearied, and this Aristotle knew: but not the understanding.
Because it is that which suffers (in understanding) by way of enlightening
only. For it is a more troublesome, servile, and obscure thing, to operate in
understanding, than to suffer: because, by suffering, it receives a more noble
light, freely conferred on it.

Lastly, seeing that in understanding, it always passes over into the form of

Therefore the understanding is always perfected, by suffering and receiving.
But Aristotle, beholds things only on the outside, and frames to it self
Images or likenesses thereof, according to its own thinking; and with all
wearisomness of labors, runs about them into a circle.

It sees indeed, the Rhines, and husks, but never reaches at the kernel:
because the

For how unjustly does it square, that the Schools should acknowledge the Soul
pertain to the knowledge of truth, but faith and understanding. Secondly, That
all truth does issue from one only and primitive truth. Thirdly, That all
understanding deriveth it self, from one only, and infinite understanding.
Fourthly, Even as all Light from one only Light. Fifthly, Therefore that the
Essence of truth does nothing differ from the Essence of the understanding.
Sixthly, That our understanding is vain, empty, poor, and dark. Seventhly, That
all its clearness, nobleness, fullness, light and truth, do come to it, by
receiving and suffering. Eighthly, That it is so much the more ennobled, by how
much the more it suffers by the light, which is beyond all nature.

Finally, the Schools of the Heathens have failed of the knowledge of a true
understanding. And therefore, man is not a rational living Creature. But the
predicament

CHAP. IV. The Causes and beginnings of Natural things.
1. The Author excuses himself, why he is Paradoxical. 2. Some Bodies want
causes in Nature. 3. A fourfold order of Causes, makes manifest the ignorance
of Nature in Aristotle. 4. Some Errors of Aristotle. 5. That the form, the
efficient cause, and the end of Aristotle, are not the causes of natural
things. 6. The Form is not the Act. 7. A false Maxim of Aristotle. 8. He erreth
in the attributes of the Form. 9. He knew not the true efficient cause. 10. The
Father is not the efficient cause of the Son. 11. There are two only causes in
Nature. 12. The End has no reason of a cause in nature. 13. That the three
beginnings of Bodies, of Paracelsus, have not the nature of causes. 14. Whence
the definition of any sort soever of natural things is to be required. 15. The
definition of a Horse. 16. The division of sublnnary bodies among the
Auntients, is dangerous or destructive. 17. The definition of Animalls, Plants,
and Mineralls. 18. The name of Subject, sounds improperly in Philosophy: why
it is to be called a co-worker. 19. Things without life, that are produced, how
they receive their ends. 20. Why the seminal Power is attributed to the Earth.
21. That there is not a conjunction of the Elements. 22. The Principles of the
Chemists, have not the power of principiating. 23. That there are two only
Principles, or beginnings of Bodies: to wit, that from which, and by which. 24.
What the Ferment or Leaven of things is. 25. What are Ferments in their kind.
26. What is immediately in places. 27. The Ferments of the Air and water. 28.
There is only a speculative distinction of the Ferment, and efficient cause.
29. The Ferment is the original of some seeds. 30. The principiating Ferment of
what sort it is, and where. 31. Ferments are immediately in places, in things
themselves, as if in places. 32. The name of matter is speculative; but that of
water is practical. 33. What the inward efficient cause is. 34. A false Maxim
of Aristotle. 35. The efficient cause in natural things is explained. 36. Fire
is not of the number of seminal efficient causes, as it has deceived the
Aristotelicks: neither is the influence of the Heavens among the number of
efficients. 37. The diversity of the efficient and effective cause. 38. The wit
of Aristotle is ambitious and idle. 39. A false Maxim of Aristotle. 40.
Aristotle was more able in the Mathematics, or learning by de monstration,
than in Nature. 41. How great has been the ignorance of the Schools in
natural things hitherto. 42. Aristotle is in the things of natural Philosophy
ridiculous and to himself contradictory.

I Come into a forsaken house, to re-melt the dross that is to be swept out by
me.

Lastly, and chiefly, I seriously admonish, that as often as I speak of the
causes Elements after the heathenish manner, and have tried by their lies, or
devises, to marry the Elements, and obey them. Therefore every natural Body,
requires no other than corporeal beginnings, for the most part subject to
change, and succeeding course of days; but Nature does not consist of an
undetermined hyle or matter, and an impossible one, neither has it need of
such a Principle, as neither of privation: but order, and life, are in the
efficient cause, of necessity. And every thing is empty, void, dead, and slow,
unless it has been constituted, or sometimes be constituted by a vital, or
seminal Principle present with it. And moreover, those Laws should rush down
together, unless there were a certain order in things, and which did interpose,
which might incline proper things to the support, or necessities of the common
good. Aristotle has declared four constitutive causes of things, which have
made also their own Author ignorant of Nature. For in the first place, he
confounds the Principle with the material cause, to wit, calling the first
cause an undetermined, or unlimited matter, or a corporeal subjected heap,
wanting a formal limitation. And then he confounds the other cause, even the
inward Essence, or form of a thing with another of his Principles. Next the
third, which is external, he calls the efficient cause; and at length the
fourth, he names the end, to wit, unto which every thing is directed.

But this cause, in the mind of the efficient, he would have to be the first
of the three former causes: and so natural things not only to be principiated,
or made to

Truly, I who have not been accustomed through the floath of consenting, to

Yea, more. For the Form, seeing it is the end of generation, is not merely the
in generation: but the matter, or subject of generation, as it is in act; so
also its act, is an inward worker or Agent, the efficient, or Archeus or chief
Workman. Therefore it is false, that by how much the more a thing has of the
form, by so much the more it has of the act, of the Entity or Beingness of
virtue and operation.

Because the form is not gotten or possessed by parts or degrees: neither
therefore

Therefore the form cannot be divided. For whatsoever Aristotle has attributed
to Aristotle, is external (as he says the Smith to be, in his view of the
Iron) I easily knew that he has set to sale his fictions, for true
foundations, and all his speculation, about artificial and external things of
Nature, to wander. The whole efficient cause in Nature is after another manner,
it is inward and essential.

And although the Father generating be effective: yet in order to causing, or
doing, Archeus or chief Workman. For that the Father in respect of the thing
generated, has the Reason of naught but an external cause, and occasionally
producing: for by accident alone, the effect of generation does follow,
although, the Agent applies himself to generation with his whole intent.
Therefore the constitutive constituter efficiently, causing inwardly,
perfectively, and by it self, is the chief seminal Workman it self, really
distinct from the Father, in Being, and properties. Even as in Vegetables.
Herbs indeed are the productresses of Seeds, but they are but the occasional
and remote causes of Herbs arising from that Seed; and therefore although they
are natural causes, yet not sufficient and necessary ones: for neither of every
Seed will therefore rise up a Plant. Therefore the seminal Being is in the
Seed, the immediate efficient cause efficiently, the internal, as also
essential, of the Herb proceeding from thence. But the Plant that goes before
that Seed, is the remote cause, the natural occasion indeed of the Seed, which
by it self, and immediately

Because that these two are abundantly sufficient to themselves, and to other

Lastly, Since the efficient contains all ends in it self, as it were the
instructions

But the three principles of bodies, so greatly boasted of by Paracelsus,
although follow, that those have the force of principiating, because those
three, seeing they are the fruits of Seeds, they do partake as it were, of a
specifical diversity: which they should necessarily be ignorant of, if they
should be true principles: that is, if they should be present before the
framing of the particular kind. Nor also could one thing pass into another,
which notwithstanding, is a thing natural or proper to the three first
principles of Paracelsus.

Moreover, since matter, and also the efficient cause do suffice to every thing
produced, it follows, that every natural definition is not to be fetched from
the general

Which thing truly, is to be understood of things without life, to things
having life, life is otherwise to be added over and above, or the Soul of the
Liver. For so a Horse

These again into Vegetables, Animals, and Minerals. So as every one of them
may shut up a peculiar Monarchy, secret from the other two. Therefore Minerals
and

But the subject which the Schools have called the Patient or sufferer, I call
the co-agent or co-worker. But in respect of both limits, or in the disposure
of the working

Therefore things that are produced without life, do not receive their forms,
through the makeable disposition of the working term or limit, but only they
do obtain the

For therefore the natural gift of increasing Seeds, durable throughout Ages,
is read their place: that they cannot obtain the Dignities of beginnings, which
cannot be found in all things, and which themselves are originally sprung from
the Element of water, and do fail, being dissolved again into water (as at
sometime I shall make to appear) for it behooves the nature of beginnings to be
stable, if they ought to bear the name and property of a Principle.

Therefore there are two chief or first beginnings of Bodies, and corporeal
Causes,

But the Ferment is a formal created Being, which is neither a substance nor
an accident, etc. that it may prepare, stir up, and go before the Seeds. This
is indeed a Ferment in general. But what things I here suppose, I will at
length evidently show every thing in its place. I will not treat of Fables, and
things that are not in being: but of Principles, and Causes, in order to their
ends, actions and generations: I consider Ferments existing truly and in act,
and individually by their kinds distinct.

Therefore Ferments are gifts, and Roots stablished by the Creator the Lord,
for the For Nature is subject to the Soil. Neither does every Land bring forth
all things. For there is in places a certain order Ferment created in that
place: Whence consequently diverse fruits do bud, and of their own accord break
forth in diverse places: whose Seeds being removed to another place, we see for
the most part, to come forth more weakly, as counterfeit young.

But that which I have said of the Ferment or Leaven placed in the Earth, that
very

Therefore the Ferment holds the Nature of a true Principle, diverse in this
from the Ferment, is often before the Seed, and does generate this from it self.

And the Ferment is the original beginning of things, a Power placed in the
Earth, Ferment which grows up in the things constituted or framed, together
with the properties of Seeds, has it self in manner of the efficient cause
unto the Seed of things: but the seminal Ferment, is not that which is one of
the two original Principles; but the product of the same, and the effect of the
individual Seed, and therefore frail, and perishing.

Whereas, otherwise, the principiating Ferment, laid up in the bosoms of the
Elements, continues unchangeable, and constant, nor subject to successive
change, or but by the virtue of the Ferment once drawn, which therefore cease
not in its own Places, uncessantly to send forth voluntary or more prosperous
fruits, by the Seed of the former Parents. These things are easy to be known,
in Mineralls sprung of their own accord: but in Plants, and living Creatures,
generating by a successive fruitfulness of the Seed, it is not alike easy, as
neither in things soulified, counterfetting indeed a confused Sex by
putrefaction; but straightway causing offspring also by a mutual joining. But
there is every where the same Reason of the Ferment, and so that the Ferment is
on both sides the same Principle. For in the Seed, it is placed by the Parent,
and undergoes an identity or sameliness with the same, or it is imprinted in
the matter elsewhere, from external causes; and at leastwise, it on either side
holds the place of a true inward efficient.

Because the framer of things, has ordained proper and stable places for some
Ferments in the Cup or bosom of the Elements, as it were the Storehouse of
the Ferments of places, should be as it were, the chief universal, simple, and
inchoative or beginning Beginnings of Seeds, or the efficients of natural
Causes: which indeed, should beget with Child the Element of Water in it self,
in the Air, or in the Earth. But that the sliding Ferments of frail Bodies, and
those Ferments drawn from the Parents, should only concern the matter
prepared, and should sit immediately in the bosom of the Seeds: and therefore
also that they should contain the inward necessity of death. Likewise the other
universal beginning of Bodies which is the water, is the only material cause
of things, as the water has the Nature of a beginning it self, in the manner,
purity, simpleness, and progress of beginning, even as also in the bound of
dissolution, unto which, all Bodies, through the reducing of the last matter,
do return.

Which thing, I will straightway in its place typically demonstrate. A
Beginning therefore differs from a cause, only speculatively; as that is an
actual initiating Aristotle, or that impossible non-Being.

But I consider the real beginnings of the efficient cause conceived, as the
first

Therefore first of all, they shall certainly find the Maxim of Aristotle
false: to wit, that the thing generating, cannot be a part of the thing
generated. Seeing that

Wherefore I do suppose in this place, what things I will demonstrate
elsewhere, to wit, that in the whole order of natural things, nothing of new,
does arise, which in the bound of the end, is nothing out the period or
conclusion of the Seeds, overcome with pains or ended: unless happily they may
be compelled by violence to depart.

Wherefore I except the fire; because, as being given not for generation; but
for destruction. Chiefly, because there is a peculiar, not a seminal beginning
of it. Indeed

Moreover of efficient and seminal Causes in Nature, some are efficiently
effecting: but others effectively effecting. Indeed of the former order, are
the Seeds themselves, Ferments, the disposers of the matter into the
interchangeableness of the passing over of one thing into another. Also hither
have the dispositive powers of circumstances regard, likewise the cherishing,
exciting, and promoting ones: because the Seed being given, yet not any things
promiscuously do thence proceed.

Besides, our young beginner shall learn, the wit of Aristotle, ready in
founding Maxims, that as often as he found any thing agreeable to his own
conceits, he would

For first, as soon as he saw the fire, an external Agent, to agree with
combustible matter: he showed hence also, that every other Agent in Nature,
ought to act by Aristotle to have revolted from his own Rules, which being at
first true, he erected into the premises of Scientifical demonstrations. He had
even become mad about the wondrous generatings of stones in us. And although,
before the Elements of Euclide sprang up, he was more ignorant of the
Mathematics: Aristotle being far more skilful in this, than in Nature,
endeavored to subdue Nature under the Rules of that Science. For he knew the
Circle to be the most capable of figures in a plain. Therefore he suddenly
forced it into a general Maxim, that also Ulcers, and wounds that are round,
were more hard to be cured, then any others that were alike in extension. But
truly, a piercing wound by a broad Dagger is more difficult, than a round one
in the flesh. But in Ulcers, the Fistula of the fundament, or weeping Fistula,
are more laboursome in healing, than any Ulcer of the shanks or legs, extended
into a Circuit. Indeed he thought, being deceived with the aptness of Rules,
the incarnating of a wound to promote it self only by an external working
Plaster, and that outsideness, not only to be in relation to the superficies
of our Body: but in a figural respect of the distance of the lips of the wound;
in order to its Center. I will relate a Story. A Trooper infects his Wife with
the Pox or foul Disease: but this through extreme want of a remedy, enlarged
it self into an eating sore or Ulcer. One at least I saw wasting the fleshy
membrane or coat, from the Ear into the neck, shoulder and elbow, behind
through the shoulder blades, the whole side of the ribs, and breast. Which
membrane, as it is fatter in Women, so it contains a deeper depth. She said she
had many other and less sores, through the bottom of the belly into the legs,
and she showed a humane body, almost without a skin. The Woman was carried by
my authority, into the Hospital of Vilvord, the Nuns refusing: but might
prevailing, also sometimes for a while commands the Nuns. The chief Chyrurgion,
Tow being steeped in Aqua fortis, with incredible pain touches the quick
muscles, and smites the house with a miserable howling. But passing by, I asked
why he had done that. He says, it is an ulcerated Cacner, and wholly so, and
by how much the sooner she died, by so much the happier she would be. The
complaining Nun hearing that, said, she was not bound by the rules of her
house, to entertain the Cancer, Leprosy, or Pox, etc. Forthwith therefore
before the twilight, they bring forth the Woman to the Suburbs, and laid her on
the Dunghill. But a poor Country man, pitying the unknown Woman, makes her a
little Cottage of boughs, against the Rain, but he applies some Colewort
leaves to the abounding or running filthy matter, and to drive away the
unkindeness of the Air. He tells the chance to me, I gives her the Corallate of
Paracelsus, prepared by the white of an Egg, and in twenty six days she was
wholly well. For the great Ulcers, with a hastened force, were covered with
skin, some exceeding small chaps, from the beginning, keeping a longer
continuance. A little after, a certain Kinsman dying, bequeaths to this most
poor Woman, a House and Land. Her Husband perished behind the hedges: She
marries the second time, being now rich in a Herd, a flock, and in Lands. For
I having admired in her Husband and the Chyrurgion, robbers or murderers: in
the Monks, lightness; in the Countryman, the Samaritane, and in the Woman, Job,
I knew the God of Job to be the same, and the continual almighty Ruler of the
Universe. From whom, although man has privily stolen the Titles of Majesty,
Highness, Excellency, Clemency, and Lordliness, he has reserved at least one
only perpetual one to himself, which is that of Eternity. In respect whereof,
man is a Mushrome of one night, on the morrow rotten.

Therefore let the Schools know, that the Rules of the Mathematics, or
Learning by demonstration, do ill square to Nature. For man does not measure
Nature; but vacuum or emptiness, and that

CHAP. V. The Chief or Master-Workman.
1. The Archeus or chief Workman is the efficient cause. 2. How it is in Seeds.
3. The properties and differences of the same. 4. The Composition of the
natural Air. 5. The Birth of seminal Idea's or shapes. 6. The seminal Garment
of the chief Workman. 7. The places of Hospitality, with Curers, appointed for
the Seed. 8. The Conjunction of the Stars imitated in Seeds. 9. The first mover
has not the Vicarship in a man.

I Have touched at the birth and Causes of Natural things, and least I may seem

Whatsoever therefore comes into the World by Nature, it must needs have the

Which air, although in some things it be more plentiful: yet in Vegetables it
is Archeus, or chief Workman, containing the fruitfulness of generations and
Seeds, as it were the internal efficient cause. I say, that Workman has the
likeness of the thing generated, unto the beginning whereof, he composeth the
appointments of things to be done.

But the chief Workman consists of the conjoyning of the vital air, as of the

A Cherry, I say in the flesh, true, green, pale, yellow, and red, according to
the stations, in which the Trees do promote their Cherries. And the same Cherry
sooner Spain, than in the Low Countries. Therefore a Cherry is made by
Imagination: So through the Imagination of lust, a vital Image of living
Creatures is brought over into the Spirit of the Seed, being about to unfold it
self by the course of generation.

But since every corporeal act is limited into a Body, hence it comes to pass,
that Archeus, the Workman and Governor of generation, does cloth himself
presently with a bodily clothing: For in things soulified, he walks through
all the Dens and retiring places of his Seed, and begins to transform the
matter, according to the perfect act of his own Image. For here he places the
heart, but there he appoints the brain, and he every where limiteth an
unmovable chief dweller, out of his whole Monarchy, according to the bounds of
requirance, of the parts, and of appointments.

At length, that President, remains the overseer; and inward ruler of his
bounds,

Moreover, as sublunary things, do express in themselves an Analogy or
proportion of things above: So every thing, by how much the more lively it is,
by so much the more perfectly it imitates the Stars, so that sick persons do
seem to carry in themselves sensible Ephemeries, or daily Registers, being
skilful of future seasons. Indeed in the bowels, the planetary Spirits do most
shine forth, even as also, in the whole influous Archeus, the courses and
forces of the Firmament do appear.

But the first mover, has no where had a member in men: but only under the
Archeus of the womb, it meets by meditating by way of similitude, as it were
in the last finishing of created things. For happily a Woman is therefore more
stirred, or troubled in her first Conceptions, as she draws with her, other
Orbs, by her first motions. As often as the womb being swollen, with the
ascending Rule of Imagination, does suffer an animosity, or angry heat, it
snatcheth the particular Archeusses of the bowels into the obedience of it
self, by striving to excel manly weaknesses, and for the most part, wretchedly
deludes Physicians with a feigned Image. The Archeusses of bruit Beasts, are
almost like unto man's. Neither shall we draw an unprofitable knowledge of the
shop of simples, from the difference of Plants, and their Sexes. Because
neither is it without a Mystery, that in creeping things and insects being born
in corruption alone, Nature invariously sporting her self, intends nothing so
seriously, as the proportionable differences of Sexes on both sides. Wherefore,
neither must we think the same things to have been neglected in Plants,
although they may make one only Seed blessed with a promiscuous Sex, and a
most fruitful offspring. But the most able effectress of the greater forces, is
discerned under the Signatures or Impressions of Venus: she being very bright,
there is a care of the Sexes, and now and then a hermaphroditical confused
mixture. For whatsoever Plants are femalls, they do allure or procure the
violent motion of the first mover. Therefore the Natural Astrology of the
humane Seed, frames its directions according to the general motion of the
Heaven, but it does not beg it abroad: for if every Vegetable could send forth
its seed, before the Creation of the Stars, surely it became man to rejoice in
no less privilege: to wit, to have his subsistence, moving, and his bearing
from above, from the inbred Seed, but not from the Stars; in the book of long
life, those things are at large cleared up, which are here desired, concerning
the Archeus or Master Workman of life.

CHAP. VI. Logic is unprofitable.
1. The Authors Protestation. 2. The Omen or Presage of this Book. 3. What
means he used in the composing of Philosophy. 4. The Author writes, as it
were from a command. 5. The distribution of Logic, by its parts. 6. The
ridiculous penury of differences for a definition. 7. The misery of division.
8. The method of dividing, deserves not the name of Philosophy. 9. The vain
boasting of discourse. 10. Logic brings forth only an opinion. 11. Why
nineteen Syllogismes do not bring forth knowledge. 12. The boasting
Syllogistical Pomp is examined. 13. Why every conclusion is annexed to a doubt.
14. Why the conclusion of Syllogismes is not of necessity. 15. In true
Premises, false conclusions, and on the contrary. 16. That the knowledge of
demonstration is not to be generated in a Learner. 17. Why a Syllogism does
not bring forth knowledge. 18. True Sciences cannot be demonstrated. 19. The
knowledge of Principles is not in reason. 20. What may be found out by Logic.
21. The Schools of Logic oppose themselves to the holy Scriptures. 22. By
Logic is only re-taken, what was before known. 23. A double, and almost an
unprofitable end of Logic. 24. No knowledge but it is from above. 25. To sell
Logic for Philosophy, contains a juggle or deceit.

I Shall be called a presumptuous brawler, it displeases any of those that
went before me, to understand, like the Boar, that utterly destroys the
Vineyard. But I

My Eye always directly beheld the calling, which (my Mother being against it)
I had made mine. But now I know, that I am compelled to teach the truth, and
therefore Book, although it self shall cease with the number of days, yet
that, that shall remain even to the end of the World. What if I shall show the
ignorance, sluggishness, impieties, and cruelties of Physicians, about things
that are to be had in the greatest esteem, and whose loss is irrepairable, and
lastly, most dangerous to Souls, and it shall be answered me with despite,
scoffing, and taunting: truly from this very time, I rejoice in my self, and am
contented with the living hope of that recompense. For it was needful, that in
the composing of new Philosophy, I should break down almost all things that
have been delivered by those that went before, and Jerome, in his Prologue of
Isaiah, Let them read first, and afterward despise, least they seem to condemn
things unknown, not from judgment, but from the presumption of hatred. But I
nothing esteem, whether I shall be read, and reproved, or not.

It is enough, that I have sufficiently yielded to the command. For neither was
there Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and Apothecaries speaking against me, that the
rest of the common people, might despise me as an Alchymist and a Philosophe, a
few only favoring me, and from whose favor I have hitherto withdrawn my self
what I could. Surely I have spent much time and labor, and have withdrawn much
more profitable leisure from my self, that I might satisfy the command of this
study. Let the praise be to the first truth, to which alone belongs the
recompense of well doers. In whose glass I have seen, and held it confirmed,
that the judgments of men do for the most part directly differ from the
judgments of God: That the common applause is foolish, full of Errors,
infamous, and always hurtful: but that the Universal Judge, knows no Error.

Therefore I will begin with things pertaining to discourse. Logic consists
of Logitian must needs fall, that has trusted in such a seat. Especially,
because division also is that we err less in Vniversals than in particulars:
Surely, Logic leading us by division unto singulars, it is so far from leading
to the knowledge of those things, according to Aristotle, that it rather
thrusts us down into errors.

Truly if we more fully consider of the member of division, it is able to
perfect no part of Philosophy, it is a certain naked method of dividing, so
rude and raw, that

Therefore Logic being barren, and deprived of two feet of the three, was long
since ruinous with me. For Philosophy is penurious, and worthy of pity, which
Boasts, that with such scanty Household Stuff, also with all necessaries so
small, it is the begetter of Sciences.

But the third member of Logic, being lifted on high, is accounted to be of
great weight with discursary men: although in the true uses of Nature, it is
alike inconvenient. Aristotle, because he boasts of Logic to be the Mother
of Sciences, nor that we do know otherwise than by demonstration. And least
Idiots should laugh at this boasting of the Boaster (most of whom are more
crafty and skilful than Logicians, and have known more things) he has made
Logic as it were native, and proper to us by nature. Therefore he finely
extolleth the method of disputing invented by himself, with many praises, and
he takes away all knowledge from man, as being a plained Table, unless he has
yielded himself to be instructed in Logic. Truly, I do even admire at this
vanity, and the credulities of the World: especially for that he has been
compelled to grant discourse, or natural Logic to men, by a native endowment.
And so he esteems his own Philosophy, his finder out of all Sciences, no more
a certain hidden Science, but a certain natural strife of scolding in words,
and a method composed to this end. Therefore in this place, we must enquire,
how much of truth, power, and profit it may have.

As to that which concerns my self, I know, that every dispute does at length,
bring forth a conclusion; but that every conclusion, brings in only an
opinion. Yea, that

Among 19 forms of Syllogismes, 12 do conclude negatively: But no negation

Lastly, since the foundation of every Syllogism is placed in that, that if
two things Aristotle himself dared not to deny. For otherwise, he which thus
should seek knowledge by Logic, has after some sort, and in some measure
known, what he seeks. For if he had not known that, and could not know it;
how should he know it when he had found it? unless Logitians had rather to have
knowledge that is sought for by demonstrations, to be found by chance.

To sum up all, the knowledge which we have by demonstration, was already
before Aristotle, we are not to dispute, but with those that do admit of
principles, and those which he thinks to be chiefly true; it comes to pass,
that from unlike principles, a strange conclusion may often follow, to wit,
from false premises. Nothing that

Wherefore B. Augustine says, Even as in false Sciences there may be true
conclusions, so in true Sciences there may be false ones. Moreover, where I
have more narrowly weighed the nature of demonstrations, I have found
demonstration, and the knowledge a Syllogism is not to find out Sciences, but
rather, that it may demonstrate to others, opinions found out. And seeing that
a Syllogism does cause a certain remembrance of that in the learner, which he
knows, and no other thing: but Sciences are not gotten by remembrance; as if
all knowledges of all things, had fore-existed in us: Hence, a Syllogism
cannot bring forth, or find out Sciences, which only makes knowledges found
out, and known, more clear. But I know, and confess, that Aristotle) those
immediate knowledges (that is intellectual

But according to Aristotle, the knowledge of principles is not in reason: but
altogether above it. Therefore to know by a Syllogism, cannot be an
intellectual, essential, Jerome does not unworthily compare the art of making
Syllogismes to the Plagues of Egypt: and he calls Logical demonstrations,
dog-like discourses. But On Psalm. 140. and 143.
the Apostle would have them to be wholly avoided; doing nothing through
contention, and to strive with words, profitable for nothing, but to the
subversion of the hearers. Because they are that which do quench Faith, and the
rewards of Faith.

But they say, Logic is the finder out of the means: to wit, it is for the
finding contentions. Which surely he had not done, if it were the Mother of
Sciences, the finder out of profitable means, or if it were profitable to
Christians. Therefore the Schools teaching and doing otherwise, supposing
Logic as necessary, and daily much using it, do oppose themselves to the
Command of the Apostle.

Therefore invention in Logic is not properly invention, as neither is
demonstrable lapis Calaminaris, the preparing of Cadmia or Brass Oar, the
content of, or what is contained in Copper, the mixture and uses of
Aurichalcum, or Copper and Gold, which things I knew not before, he teaches,
demonstrateth, and gives the knowledge of that, which before there was
ignorance of.

But such like things Logic never taught. Therefore Logical invention is a
mere re-taking of that which was known before. And therefore what is not known,
Logic Logic. Because it is impossible to know whether the premises are true,
appearing, or false, unless the knowledge of the terms shall be in us first,
with all knowledge of their matching, or suiting and confirming. Therefore the
whole service, office, and profit of Logic, consists only in two things: to
wit,

But Wisdom, the Son of the everlasting Father of Lights, only gives Sciences
or knowledges. But the means of obtaining Sciences, are only to pray, seek,
and knock. In the mean time, I wonder at the so great blindness of the Schools
on every fide, in so greatly extolling and magnifying Logic. Truly I could
desire to know let the Schools tell me, what Science Logic has ever brought
forth to light? whether happily Geometry? Music? making of Glass? Printing?
Husbandry? Medicine? drawing or conducting of Water? or Mineralls? of Warring?
of Arithmetique? of Building? or any profitable Science? verily none. Therefore
at length, with blushing, must the Schools of Logic confess, that the same
thing has befallen Logic, which has hitherto, the Doctrine of Galen. To wit,
that through boasting, deceits, and ignorances, it has deceived the credulous
World. But the Heathens, in setting demonstrations, and Sciences to sale, have
had no other light, than what has flowed from corrupted nature, seduced by
dark opinions, into disorder, and inordinatenesses, slavishly obeying the
changes of circumstances, and opinions springing from thence. These things
therefore have I communicated to learned men, who at length have confessed,
that Logic was given to be drunk by young men, at that age, wherein they could
not bear any other more sound meat, and that it served them for the sharpening
of their wit. (I would God that Logic did not serve for diverse abuses, and
that being once drawn in in youth, it did not afford a plentiful age of
pernicious wits, and of Logical deceipts.) To which I add. That deceit is not

CHAP. VII. The ignorant Natural Philosophy of Aristotle and Galen.
1. Aristotle is altogether ignorant of Nature. 2. That thing is proved. 3.
What Nature is, among Christians. 4. The same thing is again confirmed by
thirteen other Reasons. 5. In Nature, there is the Agent, the matter, the
disposing of instruments, and the effect, or thing produced. 6. That heat is
not an agent in seminal generation. 7. Why Aristotle has not known the truth
of Nature. 8. His Books of natural Philosophy, contain only tristes. 9. How
young men are to be instructed in the place or room of Schoole-Philosophy. 10.
Into what great Apolloes young men might climb. 11. The Prerogatives of the
fire. 12. What a young man so instructed, might judge. 13. Privations do not
succeed in the flowing of Seeds to generation. 14. There is no form of a dead
Carcass. 15. That generation and corruption do not receive each other. 16. The
Vulcan of life, vanishes, without the corrupting of it self. 17. Death is not
the corruption of life. 18. The distinction of privation and corruption. 19. Of
forms there is no corruption. 20. The ignorance of Galen. 21. His ridiculous
Volumes concerning the decrees of Hipocrates and Plato. 22. His books of
preserving of health are foolish.

THE Schools have so sworn constancy, and their end to their Aristotle, that
even to this day, they (by putting one name for another) do call him [the
Philosopher] whom notwithstanding. I certainly find to be altogether ignorant
of Nature, and it grieveth me not to write down some causes, which have
enforced me hereunto, and that for no other end, than that hereafter, as well
Professors, as young beginners, may not through an aptness to believe, and a
custom of assenting, be made to wander out of the way, nor may suffer
themselves hence-forward, to be led by a blind man into the ditch. For
otherwise I tell no man's tale; nor am I more displeased with Aristotle, than
with a (non ens) or [a non-being].

Therefore first of all, Aristotle defines Nature. It is the Principle, or
beginning of motion, as also of rest in Bodies, in whom it is in, by it self,
and not by accident. Wherein I find more errors and ignorances of the
definer, than words. First therefore Aristotle, presupposes the bound of
motion) there had now been a Creature, and not Nature. For God, in the
beginning, created the Heaven and the Earth. Now Nature was not understood by
Aristotle, to wit, there was sometimes a Creature, and it actually existed,
before, or on this side Nature, here defined. 7. Bodies, in which the beginning
of motion is external, and by accident (suppose thou, when (...) heat of the
Sun moves the Seed, to increase, or a Woman with Child, by accident,
transforms the imperfect Infant, by her own Imagination) should not be under
Nature, as neither that accidental beginning. 8. To rest, is not, not to be
moved, but to cease from motion, and so not to be moved is more general than
rest. Therefore Nature absolutely taken, should be only after the existence of
Nature. 9. If the beginning of motion in a moveable thing, be Nature, and the
efficient cause be properly called the beginning of motion, (as he says heat
not elementary to be) therefore it must needs be, that the efficient cause is
inward (which is against Aristotle) or that Nature, in as much as it is the
beginning of motion, is not in Bodies most nearly or inwardly by it self. 10.
Every outward efficient cause, is the beginning of motion in a thing, by
accident. But every efficient cause, according to Aristotle, is external:
therefore no efficient cause external, is natural, which is contrary to his
second Book of Physics. 11. Whatsoever things are moved by the Mathematics,
and also a Mill moved by the Wind, or a stream, should not be moved by Nature.

But I believe, that Nature is the Command of God, whereby a thing is that
which it is, and does that which it is commanded to do or act. This is a
Christian definition, taken out of the holy Scriptures. 12. But Aristotle,
contrary to his own

But Aristotle in another place, a like stumblingly touching on Nature, says:
Every power of the Soul seems to be a partaker of some other certain Body
(for neither dares he positively and simply to affirm it) than those which are
called Elements. This Precept, praised by the Schools, contains almost as
many Errors as Syllables. And at length, this Writer of natural instruction,
being exceeding doubtful, knows not, what he may call or ought to call Nature.
For first he says it to be, a Corporeal power of the Soul, and therefore he
banisheth the understanding out of the powers of the Soul. 2. He says, the
power of the Soul which he afterward calls heat, is a partaker of another
Body than those that are called Elements. As if it were a partaker only of a
Body above an Elementated one, and heavenly. 3. It is absolutely false, and an
ignorant thing, that any power of the Soul is a partaker of the body, although
it be tied to the body. For every power is an accident; and no accident, or
quality can be a partaker of a Body: but on the contrary, a Body is a partaker
of accidents. 4. That souls do not differ, but in respect of that body (which
at length he calls mere heat) notwithstanding that all Souls are a power,
partaking of a heavenly Body: therefore Souls do not differ in respect of that
Body, in which he has said, they all do agree: or if there be any difference
between Souls, let it be in respect of the matter of a Body, or of an unnamed
Client or retainer, being neglected by, and plainly unknown to Aristotle. And
so, in so great a dress of words, he has spoken nothing but trifles. 5. If
Souls do differ only for that bodies sake: the act shall be now limited by the
power, the Species or particular kind, by the matter, not by the form. 6. The
Seed contains the cause of fruitfulness; it is a Childish and triflous thing:
because the Seed cease to be Seed, if it be without the cause of
fruitfulness. 7. Every power of the Soul, is a partaker of some other body,
than those which are called the Elements. Yet he would have the bodies of all
soulified or living Creatures, to be of necessity mixed, of non: but actual
Elements. 8. The Seed is not fruitful, but by heat. As though Fishes were not
more fruitful than four footed Beasts; and as though Fishes were not actually
cold. 9. He knew not another moderate heat, from live Coals, which nourishes
Eggs, even unto a Chick. And he knows not that all heat is in one only most
special kind of quality, being distinguished, only by degree. 10. He is
ignorant, that heat, only makes hot by it self, and that it should make
fruitful by accident. And therefore, although that heat be the principle of
motion, and the power of the Soul (that is, Nature) by it self; yet as it
should make the Seeds fruitful by accident, it should be the beginning of
motion by accident. Therefore in respect of the same Nature, it should be a
beginning by it self, and by accident, or with relation to the same Nature, it
should be Nature, and not Nature. 11. He confounds the quality of heats, with
the spirit, and air of the froathy Seed, which notwithstanding, do differ no
less than in predicaments. 12. Heat is the spirit of the froathy body, and the
nature which is in that spirit, is heat. Therefore the spirit shall be in the
spirit. 13. Nature is in that spirit, and that spirit is not nature defined by
Aristotle for the subject of natural Philosophy (yet that spirit is the
Principle of motion in the Seed, and of life, in living Creatures) and he much
more strictly denies, the froathy body of the Seed, to be of the account of
nature (as though the seed of things were a froath, and not the more inward
invisible kernel, in a corporeal seed) but that only the power of Souls (which
with him, is nothing but heat) were nature. 14. Because every power of the Soul
is encompassed with heat, he excludes out of the account of nature, any other
bodies and accidents. 15. That power of Souls, for whose sake, Souls do differ,
is only heat, not indeed a fiery one, but agreeing in proportion with the
Element of the Stars, that is, it has not been understood by Aristotle, nor is
it to be any way to be understood by the Schools, how heat does agree with a
body, and with an Element: what agreement there can be, between such various
dependants of predicaments. 16. He denies this power of Souls, to be of the
race of Elements. That plural number, rejects not only one Element: but by
reason of the strength of negatives, all Elements. 17. Every power of the Soul
is, a mere heat, not indeed answering to the heat of the Element of the Stars,
but altogether to the Element it self. 18. For truly he acknowledges no other
heat, than that of fire: nor any other Element of fire, than that which is of
the kitchen, (because he distinguishes Elementary heat, from the Element of
the Stars) yet by his own authority, he has enclosed fire that is not of the
kitchen, between the Heaven and the Air. 19. At length, as often as he was
positively to tell what nature was, the privy shifter says, sometimes that it
is the power of the Soul, sometimes the fruitfulness of the Seed: and at last,
he neither perceived, nor ever knew, what the heat not fiery was, and makes a
fifth Element of the Firmament of the Stars, after he has cast away the other
four, by denying them. Therefore he runs about in denying, by far fetched
speeches, and least he should be laid hold on, he denies nature to be of the
race of Elements. As if it were enough to have said, there is a Chymera, or
certain fabulous Monster, not of the Elements, but of the fifth Element of the
Stars. It is not a body, not an accident: but a heat answering to the Element
of the Heavens, not to the heat of the same. 20. And he would not say that
indeed; these things are so, bur that they seem to him to be so. Seeing that
according to the same man, many things may seem to be, which yet are not. 21.
And if thou will not believe it, go to see, or expect it for ever. 22. As
though the whole action of nature were made by heat. 23. Also that Mettalls,
which elsewhere, he writes to be co-thickned or condensed by their own cold,
because they do abound with heat, should now be out of nature. 24. And as
though the seeds of Vegetables, because they are not froathy, should not be
endowed with fruitfulnesses, or should not contain nature in themselves. 25.
Therefore he denies the heat of living Creatures actually hot, to be
Elementary (the which notwithstanding, I shall at sometime, in its own place,
prove to be true) being unmindeful of his own maxim; that the cause is of the
same particular kind, with its thing caused. He knows not, I say, that our
heat does make any other things to be hot, by a naked Elementary heat. And
likewise, that since not only Elementary heat (which he places in the
sublunary fire, distinct from the common or kitchen fire) but also the kitchen
fire, do heat us in a degree fitted to us: Therefore they ought to be of one
and the same species, or particular kind. 26. At length he rashly affirms,
that nature, or the power of the Soul, or seminal truths, are nothing, besides
that heavenly heat. 27. Therefore, he acknowledges heat, actually cold in
Fishes, to be the cause of fruitfulness, seeing it distributes from every power
of the Soul. For that is to have sold trifles, instead of Philosophy. And as
often as he fears, his toys are not saleable, he provokes us to the Element of
the Stars: after that, he had provoked us, (it seems) by one affirmative, and
many trifles of denyalls, to the proportion of the Element of the Stars. Surely
it is a shame for Christians, as yet, to follow that Patron in natural
Philosophy; seeing that we believe by Faith, that Plants budded forth by a
seminal virtue, before the Stars arose. For in Nature, there is always found the
Agent, the matter, and thing brought forth, or the effect, the instrument, and
the disposition, But every Agent,

For seeing the knowledge of natural truth, does necessarily depend on nature,
and the essence thereof, Aristotle, who was ignorant of the thingliness of
nature, also Peripateticks has been ignorant of. I say the Principles of
nature are the matter and the Agent. But the Principles of Bodies are water,
and the seed, or vulcane, things answering to both Sexes: which thing I will by
and by, teach in its place.

Wherefore since Aristotle knows not the nature, properties, and likewise the
causes, and thingliness of generations, who shall not show, that the Schools
have hitherto drawn the waters of Philosophy out of dry Cisterns? For his eight
Books of natural Instructions, do expound Dreams, and privations, instead of
the knowledge of nature. I say they do suppose a matter, or impossible
corporeity or bodyliness, with Mathematical abstraction, for the principle,
prop, and seminary of nature: The which, as it never existeth: neither shall it
have the efficacy of beginning, or of causing.

Likewise privation is given to be drunk down as another Principle, which the
Schools themselves do rashly confess to be a mere [non ens,] or a non-Being.
And at length they diligently teach, surely by an over rash dotage, the form,
which is the end, top, and utmost aim of appointment, and the thing it self
produced, for a beginning of nature: to wit, they place the effect in the room
of a Beginning. But in another Book, he sets to sale the causes of nature, for
Principles: to wit, the matter and form, privation being omitted. As I shall
sometimes show, concerning causes. As though they were the Principles of
nature, or could principia^e by causing. But fortune and chance, as if they
were the proper passions of nature, are handled in a particular Book. For
events do not deserve a place in the contemplation and Doctrine of nature.

Lastly, a Vacuum or emptiness, and an Infinite, things not belonging to the
knowledge of nature, and well high privative things, or plainly negative, have
obtained his treatises. But time and place, the Schools do no less
ignorantly, than impertinently, reckon among the lessons of nature. And last of
all they bring in local motion, as it serves to Science Mathematical or
Learning by demonstration, alike foolishly, and with an undistinct
indiscretion, into nature.

Certainly I could wish, that in so short a space of life, the Spring of young
men,

And all those things, not indeed by a naked description of discourse, but by
handicraft demonstration of the fire. For truly, nature measures her works by
distilling,

First of all, he shall account it a shameful thing, for the Schools to be
ignorant (for dies, is there a certain essential form, and generation of the
dead Carcass. Because all generation in nature, is enclosed in an essential
form, which a dead Carcass wants, even as also a seed, and an Archeus, the
Governor, as shall be showed in its place. Even as the essence begins him with
the Vulcan of the Seed, and the same essence continues with the product, or
thing generated: so the same product failing, the same essence perishes. But
the essence perishing, the form, the Governor or President thereof, also goes
to ruin. For the Vulcan or Master-Workman forsaking the body, the flesh,
heart, veins, etc. do begin to putrify, for that they are now deprived of the
vital Balsam their leader. For under life, the flesh, and the bone, etc. were
distinguished. In its particular kind, and proper form, the flesh was flesh,
and was formally severed from the bone, in which form, in the dead Carcass,
they do forthwith appear. And so, through death, no form, or essential
thingliness, comes upon the dead Carcass, in the whole, or in any particular
parts. Only that which was vital, is separated.

Therefore let it be an erroneous thing: That the corruption of one thing is
the generation of another. Because the corruption of life happens only through
the quenching of the vital Balsam, or form, therefore without a new generation
of a Creature. Therefore no privation happens in things that have life, and so
neither can privation there, have the force of a Principle: Seeing that from
the seed, even unto the vital being, there is but one progress, promotion, and
ripeness; about the end whereof, the form is given. Therefore also, generation
does reciprocally or cursarily happen, without any corruption, as often as the
matter being now brought to the ripeness of its appointment, by the seminal
Vulcan, has obtained a form coming to it from elsewhere. Yea that Vulcan
through the departure of life, departs, flies away, and vanishes, without any
corrupting of it self, no otherwise, than as light perishes Vulcan, seeing it
is a certain vital Air, flees away. Both of them, without the corruption of
themselves; and the body, which is deprived of life, properly (for that very
cause) is not corrupted: although through the failing of the vital Balsam,
corruption does soon succeed. Which thing sufficiently appears in Mummies,
and also in Vegetables, which being dry, and deprived of life, are kept for
uses, yea they do very often, drive away all corruption. So far of is it, that
their life perishing, for that very cause they should be corrupted. Therefore
death in things Aristotle, confounds privation with corruption, and does not
distinguish his [non ens] or a non-being, from the [Being,] corruption.

Lastly, the forms of things are not subject to corruption, and therefore
neither are they corrupted: but annihilated or brought to nothing. Wherefore
neither can the Aristotle. But besides, if Aristotle be unskilful in nature,
and ignorant of all natural Philosphy, truly Galen has hitherto, every where
manifested a greater ignorance.

For first of all, I will make it manifest, that there is not a quaternary, or
a fourfold kind of Elements, nor a congress or conjunction of these, for
bodies which are believed Galen diligent in opinions, and a boasting Writer,
without judgment, or discretion. For neither has he better perceived of
Nature, Diseases, Causes, and defects, than of the decrees of Hipocrates and
Plato. For I profess, I have twice read over those Volumes of Galen with
attention, but I Galen, to fight with his rashness. For truly those Books, do
touch at nothing less than the Doctrine of Hipocrates or Plato. Neither also
has Hipocrates any thing common with Plato. And so that I have not found any
one, who has judged them worthy of a Commentary, as neither to have been
written concerning the preserving of health. This one thing is always to be
found in Galen, that the names of Authors being suppressed, he has willingly
snatched the Inventions of others to himself; a man wholly scanty, or very poor
in judgment, as often as he has expressed the conceptions of his own judgment.
I ought to declare these things concerning the two Standard-Defenders of
natural Philosophy: that the Schools may abstain from worshipping these
Masters.

CHAP. VIII. The Elements.
1. The Doctrine of the Elements, in healing, is wholly impertinent, and so
that in Galen, such a heap of those Books is ridiculous. 2. The vain opinions
of the Schools concerning the Elements. 3. The true beginnings of natural
Science, are delivered. 4. Six conclusions out of the holy Scriptures. 5. That
there are only three Elements. 6. The Content of the Heavens. 7. That there
are two firstborn Elements. 8. That Fire is not an Element. 9. The Error of
Paracelsus, touching the matter of the Heaven. 10. A Quaternary of Elements,
for the mixtures of Bodies, and for Diseases, falls to the ground. 11. A
Proposition; that all things which are believed to be mixed, are materially of
water only, with a mechanical or handicraft demonstration. 12. What the
Elementall, and Virgin Earth is. 13. From whence the two Elements may be
called, the firstborn. 14. An objection from artificial things. 15. The force
of the artificial fire of Hell. 16. Another objection from Arts. 17. Why the
Water may be reckoned the firstborn Element.

MY sight is carried on a useful good, but not on vain reasoning. Wherefore
Galen. Galen has delivered in many Volumes, and with a tedious boasting of the
Greeks, that every Body, the Earth, Water, Air, and Fire excepted, does consist
of the Wedlock of these four united together, and so from hence, that a Body is
to be called mixed. Moreover, that the whole likeness and diversity of bodies,
does arise from the unlike conflux or concurrence, and continual fight of four
Elements. But the Schools that came after, do as yet dispute it as undecided,
whether the Elements with their forms, do remain in the thing mixed; or indeed,
whether in every particular mixture they are deprived of their essential forms,
and the which, by a peculiar indulgence, they do re-take from the separation,
and general privation of the form of the thing mixed. At length, from the
unlikeness, and combat of the Elements, they bid all the infirmities, and
firstborn fewels of our mortality to descend. Surely, it is a wonder to see,
how much brawling and writing there has been about these things: and it is to
be pitied, how much these loose dreams of trifles, have hitherto circumvented
or beset the World: they have prostituted destructive vain talkings in the
faires of the Schools, instead of the knowledge of Medicine, and so, so
damnable a delusion, has thereby deceived the obedience of the sick, in
healing. Therefore the juggling deceipts of Pagans, being cast behind me, I
direct my experiences, and the light fteely given me, according to do fly away.
Therefore it is chiefly to be grieved at, that the light of truth being had,
darkness is as yet taught in the Schools of Christians. In the beginning
therefore, the Almighty created the Heaven and the Earth, before that the first
day had shone forth. Afterward in the first day, he created the light, and
divided it from the darkness. Secondly, he created the Firmament, which should
separate the inferior Waters from the waters that were above it self, and named
that, Heaven. Therefore it is hence plainly to be seen, that before the first
day, the waters were already created from the beginning, being partakers of a
certain heavenly disposition, because they were hidden under the Etymology of
the Word, Heaven. Yet they were a-kinne to these lower waters, to which they
were once conjoined, before their separation. In the next place, that darkness
covered the face of the deep, and that, that deep did point out the Waters:
because then, all the Waters above the Heaven, being as yet conjoined to ours,
upon the Earth, did make an Abyss of incomprehensible deepness, upon which,
the Spirit (whose name is Eternal) was carried, that he might with his
blessing, replenish his new Creature of water. Therefore it is manifest, that
the Creation Gentiles, has seemed to contain in one: But the Chrystalline, and
first mover, for another: and at length, the huge Heaven of an incomprehensible
greatness, wherein every righteous man shines Empyrean Heaven joined with its
two fellows, being taken for the second, perhaps another may remain for the
third. Which may be the bottomless retiring place of Fountain-light, full of
Divine Majesty, and unsearchable. At leastwise, the Firmament reaches from the
Moon, even to the conjoyning of the Starry Heaven, and seperateth the water
that is above it, from these lower ones, and therefore the Heaven, with the
Hebrews, sounds, [where there are waters.] But the Lights, and the Stars,
began on the fourth day, and were set in order in the Firmament. Therefore, in
the beginning, the Heaven, Earth: and Water, the matter of all Bodies that were
afterward to arise, was created. But in the Heaven were the Waters contained,
but not in the Earth; hence I think the Waters to be more noble than the Earth:
yea, the Water, to be more pure, simple, indivisible, Paracelsus, acknowledge
the fire, by the name of Lights and Stars, to be a superlunary Element, as
neither to have been framed from the beginning: the which notwithstandig, it
etc.) is changed into an actual Salt, equal in weight to its own body, from
whence it was made: and that, that Salt being sometimes forced to a mixture
with the Circulate Salt of Paracelsus, altogether loses its fixedness, and at
length may be changed into a Liquor, which also at length passes into an
un-savory water: and that, that water is of equal weight with its Salt, from
whence it sprang. But the Plant, fleshes, bones, Fishes, and every such like, I
have known how to reduce into its mere three things; whence afterward, I have
made an un-savory water. But that a Metal, by reason of the undissolveable
co-mixture of its own seed, and the Sand (quellem) are most hardly reduced into
Salt. I have learned therefore Quellem. Because it was the future Basis, or
foundation of Creatures, for man their Standard-defender: and therefore, in the
very beginning it ought to be created, although in its own nature, it was not
truly primo-genial, or firstborn. Wherefore I find two only primitive
Elements, although there is mention made of neither, in the holy Scriptures,
because they are comprehended under the Title of Heaven. But with the two, he
also created the Earth. Wherefore he created two great Lights; that the Moon,
and the less, by shining, might govern the Water: but that the greater, should
shine upon the Earth. But I shall by and by teach, that these firstborn
Elements, are never changed into each other.

Indeed the Water putrefying by continuance, in the Earth, does obtain a
local, or implanted Seed. And therefore it passes either into the Liquor
(Leffas) for every (Bur) according to the particular kinds, chosen by the
direction of the Seeds. Which Seeds, are replenished by the Ferment of the
Earth, at first, empty and void, and then straightway, by the blessing of the
Spirit boren upon the Waters. But my experience of the fire, has taught me, to
wit, that the three first Paracelsus would have the water, by evaporating, to
be wholly brought to nothing; let that be his own Idiotisme or property of
speech, at leastwise not to be winked at by the ingenious Distiller. Truly I
have certainly Mercury of the water, do show to us in the likeness of a Cloud.
But there is never made in the water a separation of the three former things,
and much less any essential transmutation or changing. For truly there is a
simple turning outward of the inward Quellem, be made. Which thing, I shall
hereafter more largely demonstrate.

CHAP. IX. The Earth.
1. That the Fire is neither an Element, nor co-mingled materially with Bodies,
nor that it is a matter, nor that it has a matter in it. 2. The Earth is not a
part of the thing mixed. 3. The Virgin-Earth is demonstrated by Handicraft
operation. 4. Grounds or Soils in the Earth, are distinguished. 5. The Water
within the Earth, does more than a thousand times exceed the water of the Sea,
and Rivers. 6. The true Original of Fountains. 7. How Waters do of their own
accord ascend. 8. The continuity or holding together of a thread is proved, in
the Waters. 9. By what chance, the Earth happens to Bodies, that are believed
to be mixed. 10. The number of Elements, and their temperaments, are most
destructive trifles, after that the same are translated into the art of
healing. 11. The Earth is the Womb, but not the Mother of Bodies, and that is
demonstrated by many Arguments. 12. Water and Air do not convert any other
thing into themselves. 13. What kind of thing mixture is, and what the
adjoining or application of Bodies. 14. Objections concerning Glass, and the
Tile or Brick are resolved. 15. The Operations of the Fire of Hell. 16. How out
of Glass, Sand may be safely separated from its Alcali or Lixiviall Salt. 17.
That the Center of the World is sometimes changed.

THerefore, neither is the Fire an Element, nor is it materially co-mixed in
Bodies; because I will show, the Fire neither to be a matter, nor to have it in
it self. Yea Quellem. And then, that thing also the Spade proves, because in
digging, truly diverse Soils do meet nigh the light, indeed made to differ in
colors, and thickness, and etc. yet they are fruits of the Earth, and do
consist of a Seed: under which, is a Sand, also elsewhere manifold in its
varieties of Soils, as well in one only, as in diverse places: at length, under
those, does the Sand reside, which our Countrymen call, Keybergh, or the
flinty Mountain, from whence do flow the original of Rocks and Mountains, and
the chief riches of Mines. At length (the last of them all) the white or
boiling Sand Quellem, does show it self in a living and vital Soil, which the
Spade or Mattock never pierces. For how much soever Sand, and Water thou shall
take away from thence, so much does there succeed in the room of that which was
taken away, filling up again the same place. This Sand I say being unmixt, is a
certain Hair-cloth, or sieve, and the foundation of nature, by which, all
waters are strained through, that all of them may keep a Communion among each
other, from the beginning of the Creation, unto the end, and from the
Superficies or upper part of the Earth, even to its Center. And moreover, the
water detained in this Soil of Sand, is perhaps, actually greater by a thousand
fold, than upon the Earth. For truly dry Sand, drinks up at least, about a
fourfold quantity of water, in the same extension of place: yet I will not have
it, that although, the Quellem be the last ground or Soil to the Digger, that
all subjected grounds are every where to be found by order. For the aforesaid
Sand, which sometimes overwhelms it self perhaps to a thousand paces beneath
the Horizon, elsewhere boils up with speed under the open Air, yea, and
oft-times in the top of Mountains. Of which thing the Schools, with their
Aristotle, being ignorant, do toughly hold, that all true springs

Surely, as long as waters do wander in the living and vital Soil of the
Earth, and are detained in the Sand Quellem, so long I say they are not
constrained to bring Quellem, they cease not to flow down by obeying the laws
of Scituations. Therefore the Sea in its own ground, does sup up the received
waters in the sieve of the Virgin-Sand. For so, according to the wise man;
however all waters do flow into the Sea, Quellem, and partly do snatch the Air.
So indeed does the Universe distribute its waters, and lay them aside for
diverse fruits. And therefore I have meditated with admiration, that the
Almighty has set before him the necessities of ungrateful immortal men, as the
aims of things. I return to the Earth. I have found for certain, that the
original Earth does no where

And therefore the reason of mixtures waxes lean, the number of Elements,
Qualities, etc. be it dust, or ashes that is left by the fire, yet Earth is
never drawn out: for else our burying places would soon swell. Therefore the
Earth is at least the remaining Elements that are so much more large,
co-touching with it, and more active. But the Father of the Universe, being a
lover of Concord, hates discord and brawlings, and chiefly in the Elements,
which, that they might be the stable props of nature, he has not created the
same, fighting ones. For he has also directed the Elements to their appointed
ends, and laws of continuance, to wit, that he may bring forth, and nourish
his own fruits, for his own honor, and the use of man. Notwithstanding,
neither the honor of God, nor man's necessity, did any where, or any way
require, the battles, devourings, strifes of the Elements; their trampling on
each other, as neither the exchanging, or nourishing of one by the other. Nor
lastly that at the end of an Element to increase it self by covetousness,
hunger, luxury, or necessity, with the destruction of anomer. For neither are
they guilty of the fault of coverousness, or hatred, as neither do they desire
to be nourished. Last of all; neither have the Elements obtained an Archeus, a
kitchen, or properties for that transchanging. Therefore the whole Doctrine of
the Schools concerning the elementary War, is an old Wives fable.

Therefore the earth is never taken, or of its own accord does materially run
out of it self, into the constitution of bodies. And there is by right, made no
mixture in Aqua Fortis, although the Eye has lost that thing, and it has
obtained a clearness like Crystal. Seeing therefore, the Sand or original
earth, does resist as well art, as nature, neither can it by any helps (the one
only fire of artificial Hellfire excepted) of nature or art, depart Alcali,
and shall set them forth in a moist place; he shall straightway find all the
glass to be resolved into water: on which, if Chrys^ca be powered, so much
being added as suffices to the filling or satisfying of the Alcali, he shall
presently find in the bottom, the Sand to settle, it being of the same weight,
which at first was fitted for the making of the glass. Therefore the Earth
remains unchanged, although it may seem throughout the whole World, to be
moveable, and to have been moved. Yea a mold, by digging through an heap, makes
an inundation of a great tract or space of Land, and so the Rekem, high the
passage of the River Mose, a Sea-ship was found under a sandy Hill, in the year
1594. In the Region of Peele, Pine-Tlees were found standing in rank, under the
Earth, which willingly grow not but in Mountains. In Hingsen nigh Scalds,
twelve foot under the Horizon, in a moist Meadow, was found an Elephants Tooth,
with the whole Cheek-bone, whose third part, being two foot long, I keep with
me. And so living Elephants were once in this Country. But, very lately,
Groenland has ceased to be found subverted by the Sea, whence the Center of
the Earth ought necessarily to be changed or removed.

CHAP. X. The Water.
1. The situation of the Earth and Water before the Flood. 2. The Authors
Meditation. 3. A Whirle-poole of Waters, or a Gulf. 4. The distributing of that
Whirle-poole. 5. The cutting of the veins of that Whirle-poole. 6. The fruit of
the Mineral Soil on Ground. 7. Salts do pass into Bur. 8. The progress of
Mineralls to their ripenesses. 9. From whence Fishes are dug out of the
Earth. 10. The right of the veins over their contained Liquor. 11. The scanty
place of the wise man Coheleth or the Preacher. 12. The rise of Fountains, were
unknown to Aristotle. 13. That the World is round from East to East: but from
South to South, that it is long and round. 14. A prevention of Objections. 15.
The Centrall property takes its limitation from necessity. 16. A Reason from
Springs. 17. From the motion of the Sun. 18. From the true figure of the
Heaven. 19. From the authority of the holy Scriptures. 20. From shadows, and
the quantity of the day. 21. From the sight of the Sun by Saylors.

IN like manner, after that the Firmament did separate the waters from the
waters,

Great God I thou intendest to cut off thy Vine from the unprofitable branch,
and

But although that one only Fountain now ceased, neither Lands being now rent
asunder, one alone was not enough yet perhaps the same entrance of waters
remained. Roest and Loefelt, according to the Table of Gothland, a Gulf of
waters is described by Olaus, whereinto Ships, Mariners being not aware, and
their endeavors being in vain, are supt up. For indeed it is the mouth, into
which the waters of that Ocean do fall, and by one only passage, were before
the Flood, carried thence unto the aforesaid Fountain. But afterward, that
passage like the hollow vein, was diversely distributed, and hedged in by a
Rock, by some thousands of veins ending upon the face of the Quellem, from
which, afterward, the waters being drunk up, do hasten from far, unto their
appointed offices. Moreover, that Whirle-poole or Gulf, if it ought to be any
where, and Olaus be a true Writer, or if not, at leastwise, it is fitly in the
Sea, as well for the sweetness of the Sea, as for the long and round figure of
the World, by me straightway to be proved. In the next Quellem longly and
largely laying open, which would be sufficient for the drinking up the water.
And the rather, because the Sea does sometimes wash upon, and rince the earth
on every side, and through many middle spaces. Therefore the Sea being supt up
in the said Whirle-poole, it is by little and little brought through stony
Channels, and hence by lesser pipes, through a great part of the earth:
Notwithstanding [Keyberch]: but as often as the veins of the Whirle-poole do
cut, or touch at the Quellem rising up through middle places, and rushing forth
into a Fountain, indeed the sweet veins do perish, and veins of Sea Salt, are
produced. Otherwise the briny Liquor, if there be also any in the Gothic Sea,
does through the lively Archeus of the Earth, lose by degrees, the nature
Ferments of Salts in places do any where exist, those very waters do put on the
seeds as well of diverse Salts, as of Stones and Mettalls, and are changed into
the same fruits. For so neat, gemme, nitre, aluminous, vitriolated, Sea, Salts
do grow of the water, they as it were promising the first birth of the water to
themselves. And then from hence they do decline or decay into [Bur,] or the
first offspring of Mineralls, and degenerate by the guidance of the seeds. So
some fruits of the water Ferments of places. Moreover, as that Northern
Whirlepoole or Gulf, does also sup up Fishes within it, so it sups up the same
exceeding small ones, the greater being detained within the Channels. Where
oft-times, they are either Quellem: the waters are at least, there endowed with
a lively and seminall property. For no otherwise than as a vein, even in a dead
Carease, preserves the blood contained in it, from coagulating or curdling
(which is a corruption of (Come let us worship the King, by whom all things
live) it knows not the Scituations of places, it easily ascends unto the
tops of Mountains without trouble, together with the Quellem, that it may from
thence send forth fountains without ceasing. Which things surely being unknown
to the Schools, they have left that place of the wise man Coheleth, or the all
Rivers hasten toward the Sea: the which notwithstanding does not therefore
re-gorgethem again. For truly, Rivers do return to the place from whence they
came forth, that they may flowagain. Which words, have been corrupted
heretofore with diverse modellings or qualifications. Because springs in the
tops of Mountains, were not seen to proceed from the Sea, whither they at
length do rush. Therefore Springs have been hitherto falsely judged by the
Schools to take their Beginnings and Causes, from Air condensed or co-thickned
by the force of cold, between the hollow places of Mountains, ready to fall
upon each other. The which, I, in a little Book concerning the Fountains of the
Spaw, printed in the year 1624 at Leidon, have shown, that they have
themselves after the manner now delivered in this place. Therefore the true
original of true Springs being manifested, it hitherto remains unknown to the
Schools. The Scripture-Text, entire, and cleared. But seeing the same Law,
course, and re-course of waters, from the Quellem into Fountains, and at length
from Fountains into the Sea, was kept, no less in days wherein it has not
rained for three years and more, than when the whole year does almost wax
barren with a continual shower: we must know, that it is sumcient for the
Earth, that it does not send forth such bountiful Springs through its
Water-pipes, and steep-running Brooks, as by the common besprinkling of Dew and
Rain. Moreover, before I shall come to the unchangeable substance of the water,
wherein the Schools do promise that Air is easily changed into water, and this
likewise into it, I will first clear up another Paradox. To wit, that the Globe
being composed of Earth and Water, is indeed round from the East through the
West into the East: yet not from North into the South: but long and round, or
of the figure of an Egg. Which thing, in the first place has much deceived
Saylors. Because the Waters do slide with a more swift course from North to
South, than otherwise from East to West. For very many Waters do always
descend by Rivers from the North, which do never run back unto the North. So
the River Danubius, with many others, does slide through the Hellespont or Greek
Sea, into the Archi-pelago or chief Sea: the Waters descend, neither does any
thing return from the Mediterranean Sea. Whatsoever does once descend into the
Mediterranean, is never spread into the Ocean. For the River Nilus, always
descending in a right line from the Mountains of the Moon, is wholly plunged
into the Zebunutican Sea with its dresses: neither does the Mediterranean Sea
in the mean time increase, nor become the salter. Which thing notwithstanding
should be altogether needful so to be, if in manner of a naked vapor, the
waters powered into it, should exhale out of the Sea. But the Eternal wisdom,
has in most places made the Mediterranean Sea deeper than the Ocean, that the
Virgin-Sand might drink up the Waters together with its Salts like a sieve. For
man's necessities (which do seem to have dictated a Law to God, out of his
goodness) did require Springs and Rivers falling down from the highest tops.
Lastly, the waters being turned forth of the Quellem, by Fountains do (by a
continuation) draw after them, the following waters, and therefore also, in the
bottom, do they drink up the Sea-waters by supping. Therefore properties are
added to places by Divine Providence, by reason of necessities. The flowing of
the North Sea about Kent of England, does prevent or go before the flowing of
the West Sea, almost for half an hour. Whence I conjecture, the Earth and Sea
to ascend in the Northern Climate or Coast. For the whole Northern Earth is
named Scandia from Scandendo or climbing. And the North Sea should not be
frozen to ice, if it were salt. If it be sweet, it points out, that the Salt of
the Ocean, cannot by ascendding be co-mingled with it, but that the Northern
waters, do uncessantly rush into a steep place. For it is likely to be true,
that, as well in the first mixture of the deep, as in the flood of the general
overflowing, all Waters were once again co-mixt, and that the co-mingling of
these, was therefore called Sea. Which waters therefore in the beginning were
once salt, and straight way afterward, were sweeter: it is certain, that those
waters have continually flowen downwards, because they are sweet at this day:
and so Scandia is far higher in Situation than Egypt. But let us imagine
only, earth of ten foot, to have framed a bank to the Sea, in the shoares on
every side, and let us keep an equal roundness: at least Nilus, which is
carried headlong in a straight line from the South, into the Mediterranean
Sea, for a thousand Leagues space, if besides the roundness of the Sphere,
which is not any where steep, it also has it self in manner of a plain, with
relation to its Center, it should have only ten foot fall at the highest, from
its rise, even into the Sea. Which is, to call Nilus a quiet pool, but not a
steep running River. For when a Ditch was devised at Gaudave Bruges, there was
found a declining height of 18 foot, the dimension being taken by night over
the flame of a Candle, and that by the withdrawn roundness of the Sphere. If
therefore by a slow rolling or running, there is 18 foot of fall or descent in
eight Leagues, Nilus flowing alike slowly, shall have need of 2230 foot in
height at least, in its beginning. But if it shall flow after the manner of
Nilus, it shall of necessity have need of four times as much at the least: or
of nine thousand foot. But if Nilus does measure this height of the Earth by 15
degrees from the Southern Tropic or turning point, unto the Mediterranean Sea,
where the figure of the Globe is as yet Sphericall or round, the which altitude
therefore, is it not lawful to conjecture to be from the Mountains of the Moon,
even to the South? An unwearied fall of the waters from the North, promises a
notable elevation of the Earth: so it is. But thence it is not granted to
collect, that all the waters (that being supposed) do forsake the North;
because the Laws of Scituations are silent, where the water falls down on
every side about the Center of the World. And so has been the necessity of the
Universe, and the rule of properties. For I feign habitation of Mortals, for
the needful nourishments of the heat of the Sun) and has always made that
which is far the best in all things: he has also limited an Oyall or Egg-like
figure to the waters, and the same respect to their Center. Or that the Ovall
figure, should keep almost the same intention to the Center, as a round figure
has. What if Fountains do ascend to the tops of Mountains: the Water of the
Pole might also hold the reason of an ovall Situation, no otherwise than of a
round one: otherwise, if the Heaven, as the adequate or suitable Aequinoctials,
than under the Tropicks. 2. The Aequinoctiall, than under the Tropic. 3. The
motion of the Sun, to be daily inordinate, and unequal to it self. 4.
Houreglasses, which do measure the motion of the Sun in order to slowness; and
the pins of Sun-Dialls, which measure motion, in order to the situation of the
Orb or Circle of the Sun, should not answer to each other. 5. If those
Instruments should agree under the Aequinoctial lines, they should vary at
leastwise, under the Sol-stices or Sun-steads. North, may be understood to have
been guilty of pride: Truly, if he were not higher in the same place, that
should not be imputed as a sign of arrogance: especially since in the places,
where the holy Scriptures were written, the Polestar Sun to have given a shadow
on the pin of the Dial, a little after the ninth June: but in the morning I
have seen the whole Body of the Sun above the Horizon, about the fourth hour:
for it did not as vet, cast a shadow, by reason of the thickness of the Air and
Vapors. Therefore the shor^est night is only of seven hours at the most: but
in the Winter Solstice, the Sun arises ^5 minutes before the eighth, but sets
27 minutes before the fourth. Therefore the shorest day; is at least 7 hours
and 42 minutes. But it d^rogates

CHAP. XI. The Air.
1. The Dreams of the Schools concerning the maystness of Air. 2. A foolish or
unsavory objection. 3. They pre^uppose impossibilities. 4. The Air is never
made Water through a condensing of its parts. 5. They beg the Principle. 6. A
ridicu^ous thing of the Schools, concerning the ^^tive heat of the Air. 7. The
old Wives fiction of an Antiper^st^si^ ^^ compassing about of the contrary. 8.
The deep stupidit^^^ of the Schools are discovered. 9. Arguments. 10. Another
alike st^pidity. 11. That the Air is colder than Snow. 12. An Exhortation of
the Author unto young beginners.

A Mathematical demonstration, that the Air and Water are primige^iall or
firstborn Elements, and ever unchangeable, by cold, or heat, into each other.
THE Schools with their Aristotle do hitherto endow the Air with eight
degrees, that is, to be most moist; but to be hot unto four degrees, or to a
mean: but they Airstotle for truth.

But the Schools will say, we must thus teach it for a Maxim: That by reason
whereof every thing is such, that thing it self is more such (as though that
for the honor belong to the nature of Glass, if it shall enclose water within
it? For I shall teach by and by, that it is impossible for Air and water to be
changed into each other.

And so by absurdities, the Schools do wholly suppose impossible speculations.
For it also contains an absurd and impossible thing, that Air condensed, should

It is also a ridiculous thing to prove the Air to be moist by the original of
Fountains:

Therefore they say, that the Air is slackly bot; because they will have it
near to Antiporistasis or a compassing about of the contrary. To wit, that the
Air in its uppermost part is hot by reason of a nearness of the fire (and so
they seign, not an essential heat, but a begged and improper one by accident)
and that nigh the Earth it is likewise hot, from the reflection of the
Sunbeams. Which heat is for a little space, a stranger by accident, and
therefore a seigned property of the Air. But they will have the middle Region
of the Air to be wonderful cold, by reason of an Antiperistasis: To wit,
because both parts of the hot air does compass it about. Whose like, they say
does happen to deep wells, they being cold in Summer, and lukewarm all the
Winter.

But I wonder at the deep or profound benummednesses of the Schools, and the
Therefore half a mile should be as nothing in respect of the middle Air. Oh ye
Schools, I pray you awake! For if the Air should of its own accord, and of its
own nature be hot, by what cause at length should it be cold in its middle
part? For is it because its Neighbor on both sides is hot? But then the Air
would not propose to it self wrathfulness, but rather joy, from the
agreeableness of its near nature. For why does the Air put off its natural
property, because it did on both sides touch the lukewarm Air, agreeable to it
self? For how shall lukewarm powered on lukewarm, wax cold, because it does
find luke-warmness on both sides? Or if cold be placed between two Colds,
shall it therefore wax hot in its middle? I cannot sufficiently wonder at the
unpolished rudeness of the Schools, who deliver the Doctrine of
Antiperistasis, which desires so great credulity, not judgment. For although
that fiction should please us, while the Air is hot about the Earth; but
certainly it could by no means, in the Winter seasons. For truly, neither then
indeed is that middle Region of the Air adorned with a native heat. 9. It is a
wonder I say, that such absurd falsehood and Doctrine has not yet breathed out
of the Alps. And so hence it is manifest, that the Peripateticks do even from a
study of obstinacy teach known falsehoods, least they should not swear in the
words of Aristotle: or that no judgment at all is left them, that they may
ingeniously perform their office: and that they may think they have done
enough, if they follow the herds of those that went before them. Therefore
Antiperistasis is a dream of his, who when he knew not the least thing in
nature; yet would seem to have known all things, and to be worshipped for a
Standard-defender by the Schools his followers. But because Aristotle flees
to the heat of Wells in Winter, for the demonstration of an Antiperistasis,
that shall straightway fall to the ground, through the instrument whereby we
measure the just temperature of the encompassing Air: Wherein we see by
handicraft-demonstration, that the Air in deep Wells and Cellers is stable in
the same point of heat, whether it shall please us to measure it in Winter, or
lastly in the greatest heats of Summer. 10. But it being granted, that there
were not an equal temperature in Wells: but yet surely it would be a foolish
thing, for the Air otherwise, naturally, moderately hot, sometimes to be cold,
sometimes again to be hot, as it were through despite, by reason of the
applied alteration of the encompassing air. 11. The holy Scriptures declare the
Snow to be colder than the water (because Snow is water, in which the utmost
power of cold is imprinted) and the Air to exceed the Snow in coldness: hence
it is read; He that spreads abroad the Snow and the Wool, that the Wheat may
be kept safe under the Snow, from the cruelty of the cold Air: as it were under
a woolly Covering. For we see by handicraft operation, that a member almost
frozen together, waxes hot again under the Snow, and is preserved from
putrefaction or blasting; because else the Air would straightway proceed wholly
to congeal it; or if it be suddenly brought to the fire, it dies by reason of
the hasty action of another extreme. Therefore this is to have gone through
[meanes] if it be to go from the cold air, through Snow, water, and then into a
slack luke-warmness. Therefore Snow is less cold than air. 12. But why, to the
moystness of the water, do they implore its thickness for moystening (which is
a ridiculous thing) does it not assume the same thickness of water, even by
reason of cold? For so they had at least spoken something likely to be true.

Give heed therefore whosoever thou art, that endeavourest by healing to work
out the salvation of thy Soul, what a Patron the Schools do hitherto defend.
By

Therefore the air, water and earth are cold by Creation, because without
light, him. But the air has emptinesses (as in its place else where) whereby
it drinks up and withholds vapors. This is the state, order, Complexion of the
Elements. And which belongs not to the profession of Medicine, unless by the
way. And so I will show, that in the Schools, that which least belongs, has
been very much searched into, as if it were of the greatest moment, and that
which is of the greatest moment has been hitherto neglected. Because the whole
pains of Physicians has given place to mockeries, and unprofitable brawlings.

Therefore if the Elements do not enter into mixed Bodies, vain is the Doctrine
of

1. The Air and Water, are Bodies not to be changed into each other.
ALthough I have plainly shown in the presence of many, that Here, in his
Apology or defense against my little Book concerning the Fountains of the
Spaw, had impertiuently made use of my Instrument: yet he has not been wanting
to mingle me with his stupidities or sottishnesses. For he says, that I would
set forth a continual motion. Neither indeed has he known, that in that, he
has contradicted himself. For the motion cease in the Instrument, after that
the water has ascended or descended, according to the temperament of the air
encompassing it. For neither can that motion be any more called perpetual, than
the vane of a Temple appointed for the changing of the winds. Therefore Here
has discovered, that he knows not what perpetual motion is. For I had
divulged my Instrument, that according to my Doctrine of the Fountains of the
Spaw, I might prove that the air did sustain its common rarefaction or making
thin, and compression or co-thickning, without the changing of its Element, For
Here says, that the Spirit of Vitrioll has pierced the Clavins in the
College of the Roman Society, had shut up water in a Glass of this Figure,
60 years before, whereof not the least drop had perished. That which the line
there signified by a Diamond shows. But Here boasted amongst Idiots, that he
had sometimes been a Professor of the Mathematics at Padua. Wherefore I would
demonstrate in paper, his every way ignorance of the Mathematics. But he was
made in my presence dumb. But thus have I proceeded to demonstration. For the
figure of the Glass being delineated, in which A and D are the two Spheres
filled with air. But A, and that the upper Sphere, is outwardly shut on every
side. But D is the inferior Globe open in the end of the Channel or Pipe F.
But A and D by one only Glass, are conjoined by the Channel B. C. E. in which
is the liquor of Vitrioll, the which, I had said to Here demanding of me, was
made red by the steeping of Roses, that it might be the more visible, that it
did not putrify through continuance. Therefore let that red Liquor be, B. C.
upon this figure: therefore I have framed this Problem or hard Question. The
Liquor B. C. cannot move it self through the temperament of the encompassing
air in the Channel, unless one of the Globes be open, but the other shut. The
explaining of the thing granted. Let the Glass with the Liquor, be as is above
described. The explaining of the thing required. We must show, That the Liquor
B. C. cannot be moved in the Pipe by the temperament of the encompassing air,
without the opening of F. The preparing of the demonstration. It is very great,
because the air suffers enlarging, and heaping together or straightning,
according to the qualities of heat and cold, and because the just extension of
quantity is not had in the air, unless when it is temperate.

The Demonstration. The air which is in A being made thin by the heat of that
which encompasseth it, increases by the increase of dimensions, and therefore
it takes up more room than before. Which thing notwithstanding cannot be,
unless it drives the Liquor B. C. into C. E. (otherwise a poriness or fullness
of little holes of the Vessel should be admitted, or a Rupture of A. Which
contradicts the supposition of Here) and successively the air which was in C.
E. into the Vessel D. But D. cannot receive that air, unless it drive away so
much air through the hole of the Pipe F.

The Conclusion. Therefore without the opening in F. the Liquor B. C. had not
been moved from its place. Therefore it is no wonder, that the Liquor of
Vitrioll has by little and little exhaled of its own accord, through the
necessary opening in F. Therefore the stupidity or dullness of N. is laid open;
to whom, when I had given many Instruments of like sort, yet he had never
observed the opening in F. Yea although I had plainly shown these things to
him (many being present) before that he had set forth his ridiculous fable
against me; yet he feigned afterward that he wondered: Because that Liquor had
perished by degrees. He says, that he found the whole Vessel most perfectly
shut (for neither does that which is not exactly shut deserve to be called
shut) yet he grants that a motion of the Liquor was made, which had shown the
temperature of the air. And that the Liquor was changed into air, the Glass
being shut. Therefore false observations being supposed, I will discover his
misfortunes.

It being granted, that the Vessel D. is as equally shut, as is the Vessel A,
according B. C. cannot be moved. Likewise that it cannot teach the temperature
of the air; also that it could not be dried up or exhale. Likewise that it
could not be turned into air. The preparing of an absurdity. For if he
admits of the motion and dryness of the water, he ought to admit absurdities
and contradictories, or to confess his errors. The preparing of the
demonstration. Let some heat be applied to the Vessel A. exceeding the
temperature of the air encompassing: for then the air included will enlarge it
self, according to the more or less heat, and according to, and as it
exceeds the true temperature of the air shut up in the Vessel D. against
which, it driving forward the water B. C. it shall destroy the equal tenor
through too much action. So that the air shall be pressed together, and
co-thickned by restraint, that it may yield to the enlargement made in A.

The Demonstration. Therefore according to the supposition of Here (that air
pressed together is turned into water) the Liquor had never failed in the
Vessel. Yet his own observation will have it: that the Glass being on every
side exactly shut, the water was nevertheless dried up and made air. But he
cannot admit of dryness in a Glass exactly shut, unless his own supposition be
destroyed (to wit, that air pressed together is changed into water) neither
again can that supposition subsist, unless he shall admit of the continuance of
the Liquor; which notwithstanding does contradict his own observation. Likewise
he cannot admit of the moving of the Liquor B. C. unless he shall grant the
Glass to be opened in F, and by consequence he confesses, he has erred in
his observation. And which thing, although by the force of demonstrations, he
was constrained to confess, before that he vomited forth his Apology with all
kind of reproaches against me, yet he has persisted therein, to discover his
own ignorances.

The Conclusion. Therefore it must needs be, if the water B. C. be moved
through some temperature of the air, that both the Vessels A and D, are not
shut. For else the Instrument should not be convenient for measuring of the
temperature of the air (which is contrary to his supposition) for seeing the
air is of the same heat about A, and about D; the Liquor B, C, shall also
necessarily take rest. Because the quality of the air which encompasseth, is
the moving cause of the water B. C. acting with an equal strength, and giving
an equal tenor. Now, through the supposition of that which is false, I will
demonstrate, what may follow upon his ignorance. Let I say the water B. C.
according to his observation, be changed into air. In the first place, this
observation cannot be admitted, without rarefying, caused by heat. Nor can that
rarefying be granted, without an increase of place, beside the heat. And the
increase of place cannot subsist without the enlarging or breaking of the
Vessel. Because he confesses the Glass to be exactly shut, with a
continuation of the Glass, without ruin, or poriness. 2. A transchanging of
the water into air cannot be granted, without co-thickning and restraining; and
restraint is not given without the addition of parts, by pressing together,
actually within the same space or magnitude. Which ought altogether to be named
a condensing of the air, which in this place, cannot be made but by cold alone;
which supposes the air to turn into water; therefore not the water into air.
Since therefore neither heat, nor cold, can turn water into air, much less
shall that which is temperate do that. For that, this does not beget an
alteration in those Elements. Likewise air is not turned into water, because
this conversion cannot be admitted, being made by rarefaction, because the
rarefying of the air does not happen in this place without the mediation of
heat. But Here will have it, that the air is co-thickned into water by cold.
Therefore water shall not be generated of air by heat. 2. That transchanging of
air into water, cannot be admitted, but by condensing and restraining, which
cannot happen in a Glass perfectly shut, but by cold. Which agent upon the air
being shut up within A and D, should change it into water, according to the
supposition of Here. For so water, had been increased by generation, in Vessels
perfectly shut. Which contradicts his own words. This precious Liquor
perished, it is no more, it has ceased to be, and that indeed in the raging
winter. Therefore, since neither heat nor cold can co-thicken air into water:
much less shall that do it which is temperate. Therefore never. It is a wonder
therefore, why it has not hindered the drying up of the Liquor in Vessels.
Since according to his own prattle, those should be only buried under the
Snow, that they might be filled with water. Now there shall not hereafter be
need of rain, if the Cave being perfectly shut and cold, continual Cisterns
should be made. And likewise, when the water should over-weigh the air, that
water shall fall into the bottom of a great Vessel very closely shut, from
whence, as often as one would list, the water should be drawn out. And so that
Vessel should be changed into a winter Fountain. For as Here says, The Vessel
was very closely shut, it wanted little holes, neither had it need of opening,
as well for the entrance, as the transpiration of the air. But if a new air
might afterward enter the same way, and by the same means, whereby the water
that was changed into air, the Glass being shut, flew out: Hereafter
therefore, sweet water shall not be wanting to Mariners in a Ship, if by the
cold of the night, the air grows together by drops into water. Venice and
Antwerp, shall frame Fountains in the belly of a Brass Cock, which in the
Pinnacle of the Temple shows the winds. For by the night-cold, the air shall
weep, being turned into water. And although the Pipe be moist to those that
play on Flutes; that is not from the air: Otherwise Organ-Pipes also should be
moist within, which is false. For the air utters the sound or tune, and the
salt vapor, drops water out of the Pipe. They having pressed air of one ell,
together, in a gun, to the space of 14 fingers, even in the cold of winter: and
so far is it, that the air so pressed together in excelling cold, was changed
into water; that it cast out a leaden Bullet through an Oken Plank, more
strongly than a hand-Gun or Pistollet. Now I will proceed to prove that thing
by positive Reasons. Because an applied esteem or thinking, has on every side
overshadowed the Schools with a manifold absurdity.

CHAP. XI. The Essay of a Meteor.
1. A vapor raised from the heat of water differs from that which is made by
cold. 2. That Air is not made of water. 3. That air can neither by art or
nature be brought into water. 4. That the Air does not subsist without an
actual vacuum or emptiness. 5. It is proved by Handicraft operation, that the
subtilizing or rarefying of Art, however exact or fine it be, is nothing but a
sifting. 6. By handy operation the same thing is shown in the sifting or
making of leaf-Gold. 7. The water is examined by three proportionable things,
and the Doctrine of necessity in the highest degrees of cold of the middle
Region of the Air is delivered. 8. The likeness of Mercury with water. 9. The
nature of Mercury. 10. The rashness of ancient Chemists, concerning Mercury.
11. That earth and water are never made one thing by any co-mixture. 12. How
art exceedes nature. 13. The Earth is properly the fruit of the two primary
Elements. 14. A near Reason of an uncapacity in Mercury, of being destroyed.
15. Aquae fortesses do not operate upon the Center of Mercury. 16. Nor the
Spirit of Sea Salt, upon the body of it. 17. The inward Sulphur of Mercury. 18.
How water may give a weight more weighty than it self. 19. After what manner
there is an ordinary piercing of Bodies in the way of nature. 20. In the way of
nature, there are not the three first things, although in its own simpleness
there is a conceivable difference of kind, which is to receive the Seeds. 21.
Smoke is mere water. 22. Why Clouds do stink. 23. What the Dew is. 24. What a
mist is. 25. Wherefore it behooved the Air in the middle Region of the Air to
be cold. 26. In this cold, all seeds separated by Atoms or Motes, do die, and
therefore the water returns into the simplicity of its own Element: but in
Earth and Water, if things are spoiled of their seed, they do not return unto
that simplicity: but do conceive a new seed. 27. By Handicraft operation the
error of Paracelsus is laid open. 28. The error of the Galenists about the
savours of things Elementated. 29. What the Gas of the water is. 30. The
unconstancy of Paracelsus concerning the separation of Elements from Elements.

IT is already sufficiently manifest, that the water by the force of heat, is
lifted up in manner of a vapor, which vapor nevertheless, is nothing but
water made Alembick, it returns into its ancient weight of water. Yet it may be
doubted, whether water consumed by the cold of the air, is not changed into the
nature and properties of air. Because after the flood, the Almighty sent the
winds, that they might dry the face of the Earth. And even unto this day,
water is sooner supt up under the most cold North, than in Summer heats. Also a
Fountain falling into a place or Vessel of Stone or Marble, under the most
chilled cold, with a continual Gulf, the motion of the steep falling Fountain,
hinders indeed the water from congealing; yet a certain vapor is seen to
ascend, which being straightway invisible, is snatched away in the Air.

That which is presupposed, is, that the every way nature of air, is at least,
consumed by cold, if not by heat. First of all I answer; that absurdity being
granted, the or bound [from which] and borrows the qualities of the thing
transchanging. For however, either the whole air was sometimes water, or that
only should be moist, which was born of water: but the other firstborn air,
should be dry from its Creation. And so there should be two aires essentially
different. But that the air in its own purity, is dry by an inward property, it
appears from the objection of the aforesaid cold: because if the air from its
Root were moist, winds had not been sent to dry the Earth. But if indeed
through the winds, the waters of the flood were truly changed into air, there
should be much more air after the flood than before. Consequently, either some
part of the World had been empty, or certainly, now by reason of a pressing
together, and thickning caused by a new air of so great an heap, we should be
choked (which thing shall hereafter be manifested, by the handicraft operation
of a Candle) or an equal part of air ought successively to had been
annihilated or brought to nothing, under the generation of so great a new air.
For the Text will have it, that so deep waters, and the whole superficies of
the Earth also, was dried by the winds. Or if before the flood, the waters had
been air in the floud-gates of Heaven; in like manner therefore in the whole
flood, there had been an emptiness in those floud-gates of Heaven: to wit, if
the water be thicker and more condensed by a hundred fold at least, than the
air.

Therefore, I lay it down for a position, That the water does never perish,
indeed not through cold, or that it can be changed, by any endeavors of nature
or art; and

But on the contrary, the air cannot subsist without a Vacuum or emptiness,
(which thing I will prove in its Chapter) and therefore it suffers an enlarging
minium or red Lead, and Salt, bring it into an impalpable, or exceeding fine
Powder; separate the minium by the fire, and wash away the Salt with water, and
repeat or renew it often as thou listest: At length, also with Sal ammoniac,
Stibium, and Mercury Sublimate, drive it through a retort; and renew that
seven times, that the whole Gold may be brought into the form of a flitting Oil
of a light red color. For it is a very smooth, yea and a hard, sound, that
which may be hammered, and a most fixed Body, which now seems to be turned
into the nature of an Oil. But truly that dissembled Liquor, is easily reduced
into its former weight and body of Gold. What if therefore Gold does not change
its ancient nature, by so many manglings; nor does by any means loose its own
seed; much less does water, a thing appointed for a simple Element by the Lord
of things, for the upholding of the Universe. Although water should be potent
in the three divulged Beginnings, and should truly consist in Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercury, mingled together: yet it suffers no separation of the same
things, by reason of the most exquisite simpleness of its nature, and the most
firm continuance of its constancy. For Bodies when they are made subtle or
fine to the utmost, that they could be no more fine; if they should continue in
making them fine, at length they depart into another substance; with a
retaining of their seminall properties. And in this respect, the Alkahest of
Paracelsus, by piercing all Bodies of nature, transchangeth them by making them
subtle. Which happens not in the Elements, Water and Air; because, by reason
of their highest simplicity, and priority of their appointment, they refuse to
pass, or to be transchanged into any thing that is before, or more simple than
themselves. Therefore when exhalations being gotten with child by the odours or
smells, and seeds of compound Bodies, are translated from the lower parts to
the middle Region of the air: there, through the most subtle dividing of the
vapors by cold, as much as is possible for nature to do, they are reduced
indeed, into their most simple and primitive purity of Elementary water: but in
that last sub-division of their finenesses and Atoms, all Seeds, Odours, and
Ferments, which they lifted upward with themselves, do dye together, and do
return into their first Element of water whence they were materially formed.
Hence Clouds, as long as they are Clouds, do stink in Mountains: but not
after they are by the greatest colds, there extenuated into the last division
of fineness. And this necessity has been in nature, that the middle Region of
the air should (not far of from us) be most cold. For therefore the water
always remains whole as it is, or without any dividing of the three
beginnings, it is transformed and goes into fruits, whither the Seeds do call
and withdraw it. Because an artificial diligent search has shown me indeed,
after what sort, the three first beginnings, and that in a proportionable
sense, are in the water, yet by no art, or corruption of days, are they to be
divided from each other. For an Element should cease to be a simple body, if it
be to be separated into any thing before, or more simple than it self. But
nothing in corporeal things is granted to be before, or more simple than an
Element.

The water therefore, is most like to the internal Mercury of Mettalls; the
which, Geber had occasion given him to say, that there is no moisture in the
order or course of things, like to Mercury, by reason of the Homogeneall or
samely kind of simplicity continually remaining with it in the torment of the
fire. For truly either it being wholly changed in its own nature, flees away
from the fire; or it wholly perseveres in the fire through the transchanging of
its seeds. I confess indeed that I learned the nature of the Element of water,
no otherwise than under the Ferule or Staff made of the white wand of Mercury.
But since I have from hence, with great pains and cost, thoroughly searched for
thirty whole years, and I have found out the adequate or suitable Mercury of
the water; I will therefore endeavor to explain its nature, so far as the
present speech requires, and the slenderness of my judgment suffers.

First of all, the Alchymists do confess, that the substance of Mercury is not
at all capable to endure any intrinsecall or inward division, and they show the
cause: because

In the first place, the error of the auntients has deluded them, concerning
the Alchymists: because they are those, who durst not enforce or comprise the
air and fire of Mercury, when as they treated of its constancy. And then,
because it was very easy for them to experience, that the water, after what
manner soever, either by art, or natural proportion, it was married to the
Earth, yet that it never obtains a constancy in the fire, as neither to be at
any time truly radically joined to the Earth: Because water, after what manner
soever it be co-mixed with Earth, cease not to be water. For neither shall
manner or proportion and so not defiled, with any spot of mixture, or otherwise
prevented by any disposition. For neither does the water carry a balance with
it, nor bears a respect as to weigh the Earth that is to be co-mixed with it,
that it may be the more toughly conjoined to the same. I greatly admire, that
the wan error of the co-mixing of Elements being received, has brought forth
such so^tish absurdities among all the Schools, and that they by that
absurdity alone, have locked the gate of finding out of Sciences and Cau^
Mercury does not indeed admit into it, or contain so much as the least of
earth, (...) is always the Son of water alone. Yea earth and water can never
be compelled into any natural body, or be subdued into an identity or
sameliness of form, by whatever skill that thing be attempted: For T^les or
Bricks, if from moist Earth they are boiled into a shelly stone, they do not
receive water, but for the guidance of the Clay: but earth has a seed in its
own Salt, whence the Clay becomes stony through the coction of Glasse-making.
Therefore of the water and earth, there is only a pouring on, and applying of
parts; but not an admixture of growing together. For whatsoever is meet to
depart into a compounded Body, and of diverse things, to be converted into [this
something] this must needs be done by the endeavor of the working Spirits,
and so far, of those things that do contain them, as they do promote the matter
by transchanging it into a new generation. But the Elements are Bodies, but not
spirits, and much less do they also act into each other. The Earth therefore,
ought first to loose its Being, and be reduced into a juice, before it should
marry the water, that by embracing this water gotten with child by the seed,
it might bring it over into the fruit ordained for the conceived seed. But what
agent should that be, which should transport the earth into a juice, and not
rather into water? since the earth being a simple body, should be changed into
nothing but into a simple body its neighbor? Surely another co-like Element
should not cause that; seeing nothing of like sort, has been hitherto seen to
agree with the water or air. Nor, at length, should the earth intend the
corruption of it self, since this resists the constancy of Creation.
Therefore

Let it be for a Lesson to Chemists; That the Earth, although it was in its
first constitution, created, yet properly it is even a fruit of the water.
Therefore neither Mercury. And Mercury it self, even as in the Elements, a
near reason of an uncapacity to be destroyed. For truly I have discerned in
Mercury, a certain outward Sulphur, containing the original spot of Metal;
the which, because it is original, therefore is it also taken away from it,
with difficulty. Which at length, nevertheless, being separated by art, skilful
men say, that the Mercury is cleansed of a superfluous Sulphur, and
superfluous moisture. Because afterward, it may not by any fire be
precipitated or cast into the form of Earth, by reason of its greatest
simpleness, whereby it is compared to the Element of water. For it has lost
its earth, that is its Sulphur, which earth in the center of its essence, is no
less from the Element of water, than its remaining refined Mercury, which
earth, albeit, it had from its first beginning most deeply co-mixed with it
self. If therefore the Mercury in its former state, had a suitable temperament
of earth and water: therefore at leastwise, after the taking away of that
Sulphurous earth, it had lost its an^ient uncapacity of being divided, the
which rather, by a contrary disposition of relation, it ha^h hence-forward
c^nfirmed far more firm to it self for ever. For Mercury, after it is spoiled
of that Sulphur, is found not to be changed by any fire: because it is the
Mercury of Mercury. But the Sulphur is death and life, or the dwelling place
of life in things: to wit, in the Sulphur, are the Fermen^s or leavens,
putrifactions by continuance, o ^ours, specificall savours of the seeds, for
any kind of transmutations. The Mercury therefore being cleansed of its
original spot, and being a Virgin, does not suffer it self to be any more laid
hold on by Sulphurs or seeds; but it straightway consumes, and as it were
slays these, except its own compeere. For other sublunary bodies, are to
weak, that they should subdue, pierce, change, or defile Mercury of so great
worth: Even as it well happens in other bodies, where the seed which lurketh in
the Sulphur, sends it self into water. But the Salt and Mercury of things, as
it were womanish juyces, do follow the conceptions of the Sulphur.

For Aqua fortis is not wrought upon Mettalls, or Mercury, but by the
beholding

Therefore there is another Sulphur of Mettalls, internal to Mercury it self,
and Aqua fortis may seem to have perished, as being in the form of a water; yet
it remains in its former essence: Even as Salt dissolved in water, is,
remains Salt, and is fetched from thence, without the changing of the Salt.
Which thing surely should not thus come to pass, if the thing dissolving,
should in the least be joined in dissolving, and should not be stayed by the
Mercury of that composed body. Therefore the inward kernel of the Mercury, is
not touched by dissolvers, and much less is it pierced by them.

But the ignorant being astonished at the novelty of the Paradox, will urge: If

Wherefore, so far is it, that the piercing of dimensions becomes impossible,
seeing that nothing is more natural or homebred to nature, than to co-thicken
the body to the three first things, yet also there is no hope that they should
be rent asunder from each other, because in the every way simplicity of the
water, an adequate or suitable Sulphur is after a certain sort hidden, which
cannot be separated from the other two, but they all do accompany together.
Those are not the three true Principles, which are abstracted or separated
only by the Imagination. The water therefore, since it does on every side vary
Offsprings according to the diversity of their seeds; thus so many kinds of
Earths, Mineralls, Salts, Liquors, Stones, Plants, living Creatures, and
Meteors, do rise up in their particular kinds, from the blast or inspiration
of the seeds. For the water putrifies by continuance, in the Earth, is made
the juice of the Earth, Gums, Oil, Rosin, Wood, Berries, etc. and that which of
late, was nothing but water materially, now burns, and sends forth a fume or
smoke.

Not indeed, that that fume is air, but is either a vapor, or a dry
exhalation, and a

Whatsoever exhalations therefore do from the Earth climb upward, and are
joined in Clouds; for this cause also, those Clouds do stink, no otherwise than
as Alps with me, have

The Air therefore is the place, where, all things being brought thither, are
consumed, subjected to the will of the Artificer, it consumes all seminall
things, but brings over their combustible matters into a Gas.

Paracelsus affirms, that three Beginnings are so united in all particular
principles, Samech, has affirmed, that which is contrary to his assertion, by
the Spirit of Wine being turned into an un-savoury water. And so neither can
that man cover his ignorance. Indeed the Spirit of Wine being wholly capable of
burning, made void of Phlegm or watery moisture, and Oil; it always for the
one half of it, passes into a simple, un-savoury, and Elementary water, by a
touching of the Salt of Tartar on it. Again, the same thing is made by
repetition, as to the other part. For that man was ignorant of the thingliness
of a Gas (to wit, my Invention) and next of the properties of cold in the Air;
yea he thought that the vapor of the water was plainly annihilated: which
sottishness of that his proper form of speech, is least of all to be winked at
in so great a Distiller. Especially, because he would have the Elements to be
seperable from feigned Elements, rather than the three first things. Wherefore
from the dissection of the water delivered, it now sufficiently appears, that
the simple water is not crude or raw, and that fire does not take away the
crudity from it, which it has not. Because the whole action of the fire, is
not into the water, but into that which is co-mixed with it by accident.

Galen according to his manner, transcribing Diascorides word for word, and
being Opium being bitter, hinders it, although Flammula or Scarrewort; (the
Glass being close shut) lays aside its tartness; as also Water-Pepper, and
the like. And what things are moist, do burn or sting, but dried things do
bind. Neither shall the Galenists easily find out a way, whereby they may
bring fire for water-Pepper, under dirt. For it has been unknown in the
Schools, that all properties, not only those which they call occult or
hidden, but also that any other properties, do flow out of the lap of seeds:
and all those which it pleases the Schools themselves also to call formal
ones. Surely I do experience four Elementary qualities, to be as in the outward
bark of things; the second qualities to be more dangerous or destructive: but
the most inward ones, to be immediately pressed in the Archeus. Yet all of them
to be from the bosom of the seed and forms: But no quality to come forth from
the first matter, as neither from the Wedlock of the Elements, because they are
both feigned Mothers. But because the water which is brought into a vapor by
cold, is of another condition, than a vapor raised by heat: therefore by the
License of a Paradox, for want of a name, I have called that vapor, Gas, being
not far severed from the Chaos of the ^^untients. In the mean time, it is
sufficient

Moreover, Paracelsus was altogether earnest in seperating four Elements out of
Paracelsus calls them so: the which he teaches, are by art to be separated
from pollutions. But this description receives the air in one Glass, common
water in another; but the Earth, either of the Garden, or the Field, in a
third; and at length, the flame of the fire in a fourth. But he shuts the
Vessels with Hermes's Seal, by melting of the neck: And the water for a month,
continually to boil in its Vessel. As though that thing could possibly be done,
and the Glass not the sooner leap asunder: especially, because he commands the
water to be shut up without air, unto the highest brim of the Vessel (and the
Glass to be melted, to wit, with the water.) Lastly, he conceives a flame in
the Glass, and in the very moment wherein it cease, it is no more fire, but
an aerie smoke: nor is the fire a substance. Last of all, nor can the fire be
detained within the compass of the Vessel. In another place, he denies any
Element of fire besides the Heaven; but now, he calls the fire, the Gas of the
thing burnt up. And he exalts these his trifles for causes of great moment, the
which notwithstanding, he dared not to name. Because the doubtful man has
exposed his Dreams to the World, in hope of deserving thereby, the name of the
Monarch of Secrets.

CHAP. XIII. The Gas of the Water.
1. The Gas of the water differs from a Vapor. 2. A Demonstration from
Creation. 3. That the Air in Genesis is signified by the Heaven. 4. That in the
Firmament is the operative Principle of dividing of the Waters. 5. The
seperating Powers of Waters in the air. 6. A History of a Vapor. 7. Gas
differs from the exhalation of the auntients. 8. A supposition of Principles.
9. The manner of making in a Vapor. 10. The Gas of the Water. 11. An example
in Gold. 12. The Gas of the Water is shown to the young beginner. 13. The
incrusting of the Water. 14. The heat of the Alps is great, yet not to be felt.
15. That Gold is not the absence or privation of heat. 16. Why Gas is an
invisible thing. 17. Why the Stars do twinckle. 18. Why the Heaven is of an
Azure color. 19. The Air knows not the motion of snatching. 20. Above all
Clouds, the Air is not void of all motion. 21. What quietness there may be in
that place. 22. Gas is the Mother of a Meteor. 23. Gas and Blas, do constitute
the whole re-publick of a Meteor. 24. The Sun is hot by it self. 25. The soils
of the Air are the folding doors of Heaven. 26. Why some are side-windes, but
others perpendicular or downright ones. 27. From whence the Blas of the air is
originally stirred up. 28. Two Causes of every Meteor. 29. The water is in the
same manner that it was from the beginning. 30. From whence there is a
stability in the quiet Perolede or Soil of the Air. 31. Peroledes are proved.
32. A solving of an objection. 33. The water is frozen of it self occasionally,
but not effectively, by cold. 34. Why Ice is lighter than water. 35. The
proportion of lightness in Ice, by Handicraft-operation. 36. The constancy and
simplicity of the water. 37. That all Beings do after some sort feel or
perceive. 38. A Vapor does sooner return into water than into Gas. 39. The
changing into a Vapor, in respect of the air the seperater, is oblique or
crooked. 40. The air is dry, and cold by it self. 41. In an elementated Body,
there is not a simple and an every way sameliness of kind. 42. The rarefying
of the Sulphur of water, gives smoothness to Ice: but not the immixing of a
strange air. 43. In the Patient or sufferer, re-acting differs from resistance.
44. It is proved by 17 Reasons, that air is never transchanged into water, nor
this into that.

GAS and Blas are indeed new names brought in by me, because the knowledge of
them has been unknown to the Ancients: notwithstanding, Gas and Blas do obtain
a necessary place among natural Beginnings. Therefore this Paradox is the more
largely to be explained. And first, after what sort Gas may be made of water,
and how different a manner it is, from that, wherein heat does elevate water
into a Vapor. And likewise we must know after what sort these things do
happen, by the dissection of the water.

I will therefore repeat, That the thrice glorious God, in the beginning,
created

Therefore the Heaven designeth or signifies the Air, and the matter of the
Heavens,

But by how much the nearer that air touches at the Chambers of the blessed,
it

For neither is Gas a dry, and Oily Body, which the Ancients have called an
exhalation:

I consider the body of the water, to contain in it an Elementary, and native
Astronomers do their excentrices, that I may go to meet the weakness of our
understanding.

Therefore the Salt of water, as it is moved, and waxes hot from the least
lukewarmness

By occasion whereof, the Mercury of the water is so frozen or congealed, that
it Atoms of the water, and a co-uniting them into greater drops: For a
changing of the essence does not interpose, where there is only a local
dividing; and turning of parts outward.

For example, yellow and malleable gold does not change its essence, while
being dissolved by Aqua Regis, it has the color of Iron rust, nor while it
waxes Chrysulca, and is beaten into the smallest powder.

Moreover, that thou may know Gas; in the first place, meditate, the air to
be

And so they co-thicken, arm, and incrust themselves in Ice, that they may the
more resist in soundness, which otherwise, being changed into Gas, are lifted
up (for Helvetia and Subandia, the Clouds do float under ones feet, and through
their holes, we behold the World downward, by reason of the cruel cold of the
place: but whatsoever is above the Clouds, is without a Cloud, because that
whole vapor is by degrees extenuated into Gas, and cease to be seen.

Indeed the Sun shines clear in that part, unless it do snow; but the heat
thereof is not to be perceived, although I have seen my Companion, on that side
whereon the Cantharides. And that, without the feeling of heat or pain. For
neither does this come to pass, through the too much subtility of the air and
heat. For truly degrees of heat, but not the fineness and purity thereof do
burn: yea the thicker body, as Iron, burns more fervently than the live Coal
that is thinner. And much less, by reason of the reflection of beams. For truly
he was burned in that part, whereon the Sun, but not the adverse reflection of
the Mountain did strike him. For the cold of the place causes, that the heat
of the Sun is the less felt.

Hence indeed it is manifest, that cold is not a mere absence or privation of
heat, or a [non-Being.] For truly here, both of them do stand, also distinctly
to be almost the sweetest in the whole world. Yet the Snow cannot be melted in
the Mountain by that heat of the Sun: because the cold of the Snow, and also of
the place, are both suitably equal to the heat of the Sun. But by how much a
man is hotter than the snow, by so much indeed the heat of the Sun does
prevail, and mightily burn; for that humane warmeth does almost wholly exclude
the cold of the place, and the heat of the Sun does almost act alone by it self.

While Vapors and Clouds are made Gas, they are made fine, and by how much

For Gas, which in its first division, I have said, to give a shadow, in a
thousand sub-divisions of it self, does not appear, unless that in much depth,
it, at least shows Canaries, which at this day is thought to be the highest
of the whole June, early in the morning, they went up: But they had scarce gone
an hours space, when as the cold offended them, and they complained all the
day, that about night, it would be so unwonted, that they ought to increase
their Garments. On the third day in the morning, about three hours after
Sunrising, they came to the top of the Mountain. For there in the Sand, were
the steps of Camels, imprinted a year before, being as it were new made, and
the names of certain persons written on the ground, as if it had been with a
yesterdayes finger. For, besides a most exceeding sweet air, they found no
Vegetable for want of rain. Therefore they hastened to descend, the Camels all
the five days space, being nothing at rest, except a little while, wherein
they might take their Fodder. But all the third day, they were distant perhaps
fifteen Italian miles from the Horizon. But although this Region of a quiet air
did not so feel the tempests of winds; yet notwithstanding, it must needs
have a sweet flowing air, and an alterative Blas; not only, because it suffers
day and night, cold and heat: but also because it transmitteth the Blas of the
Stars, receives the lower Gas, and suffers other Consequences from thence. And,
as that Region sends through it the alterations of the Stars, so also it
conceives and partaketh of them. For the Sun (let the same judgment be of the
other Stars) cannot but heat, which burns Bladders in the coldest Mountains,
and it is required, that this heat be there in the daytime: Because also the
night there wants this heat. Therefore those successive changes must needs
be in that very place entertained. After the same manner also, the beams of the
Stars, with their full forces, do pass through the vast Monarchy of the Air,
and in it do sow their alterations. For neither, although they do not produce
their proper effects, but in the bound of their scope into which they are
directed for the use of mortal men; yet they cease not to season the air (by
altering it) with their impressions, throughout the bounds where they pass.
And as yet the rather, because in this part are the Floud-gates of Heaven: that
is, in the huge space of the quiet air it self, is the Gas of the water, which
by the most exact rarefying of subdivision, is many times re-shaken and
sub-divided by the colds through which it has passed. This Gas at least should
never of its own accord return into its ancient water, nor should descend unto
the most cold places through which it escaped by climbing upward, unless the
uppermost Blas of the Stars should force its descent. And so the Region of the
still air is not void of successive changes, but that the Rain does not
coagulating, under the lukewarm blowing of the air. For a certain alteration
opposite to that place from which the Gas departed, ought to reduce the Gas
into water. For a sweet luke-warmth in the still air, makes the Atoms of Gas
being covered in their own Sulphur, to divide: which Sulphur (a skin being as
it were broken through) or like a Glass, that is brought suddenly from
luke-warmth into the cold) is broken; and so the Mercury of the water does
dissolve its Salt, at the dissolution whereof, the Sulphur it self may be
melted into its former water.

And that kind of inversion or turning in and out of the body of the water,
and that torture through the exact searching of the cold, is necessary, that
all the power

In like manner, I have learned by the examples cited, that the Sun does not
heat by accident, but by it self, and immediately. And that heat is as intimate
and proper Adeptists do call Peroledes. Therefore the invisible Gas is
entertained

For all the folding-doores do not promiscuously lay open to the Planets: but
all the Planets in particular, are by their own Blas, the Key-keepers of their
own

Indeed in this respect, do heavy things tend upward, and light things are
drawn downward. Hence it has seemed to me, that the Blas of the Stars is
disturbed into rain, The Stars shall be to you for times or seasons, days, and
years. This therefore is the unrestable appointment of the water, that by
proceeding continually upwards and

And so the water which existed from the beginning of the Universe is the same,
or Soils of the Air to be as it were the Bottles of the Stars, by which they do
unfold their Blas, (even through their determined or limited places) for the
uses and interchangeable courses of times or seasons. And chiefly, because the
upper and almost still Perolede, does contain the cause, why there are winds,
fruits, dewes, and especially things pertaining to Provinces.

For seeing that the wind is a flowing Air, and so has an unstableness in it,
we Scotland, scarce 12 foot broad, and deep 30, there is not some division of a
Perolede, (that in the mean time I may be silent concerning the Equinoctial
Line, and its wonderful properties)

From the aforesaid Doctrine of Gas, I at length object against my self. If the
Helvetia) but as a positive cause in a natural quality. For truly first of
all, it is without doubt, and is manifest by the sight, that the cold Air, does
by degrees consume Water, Snow and Ice: yet these two more slowly, and the
other, more swiftly. In the next place, it is easy to be seen, that whatsoever
the Air thus privily steals away, that presently, for that very cause, passes
over into an invisible Gas. If therefore the cold of the Air should harden
water into Ice, a further action of the Air, would also (the Ice being now
made) continually cease; but the consequent is false: therefore also the
Antecedent. For the Sulphur of the water does easily wax dry, and is divided by
the cold; wherefore the Mercury and Salt of the water, perceiving the frost of
the Air, that would separate the Waters from the Waters, and that they ought to
suffer the extension and drying up of their Sulphur, and so an altogether
violent impression of the seperater, and that they do desire to remain as they
are: Hence the whole water at once, does arm it self by a Crust, that it may
resist the seperater. Which thing indeed it could not accomplish, but that also
some part of the Sulphur, has already suffered an extenuating of it self, and
so also in this respect, the Ice does swim upon the water. But, that the
Sulphur of the water, although

Fill a glassen and great Bottle, with pieces of Ice, but let the neck be shut
with Hermes Seal, by the melting of the glass in the same place. Then let this
Bottle be put in a balance, the weight thereof being laid in the contrary
Scale; and thou shall see that the water, after the Ice is melted, shall be
weightier by almost an eighth part than it self being Ice. Which thing, since
it may be a thousand times done by the same water, reserving always the same
weight, it cannot be said, that any part thereof was turned into air.

For such is the continuance and constancy of the Elements, that although the
water departs into a vapor, into Gas, into Ice, yea into composed bodies; yet
the Relolleum of Paracellus, that is, without a seed. But from what has been
said before. Some remarkable things do arise. 1. That the water has a certain
kind of sense or feeling, and so, that all Beings do after Come let us worship
the King by whom all things live. 2. Seeing that the water does not incrust it
self in the fabric of a vapor; therefore a vapor as well in the cause, as in
the manner, is more acceptable to the water than a Gas is. And that thing does
argue in the water something like to choice. 3. And that therefore a vapor
does sooner return into water than into Gas. 4. That the changing of water into
a vapor, is, in respect of the seperater, oblique or crooked, and as it were
by That every thing, as much as in it lies, does desire to remain in it self.
5. Especially because air wants in it self, a dissolutive principle of it self,
caused by the rottenness and interchangeable course of parts. 6. If air should
at any time be made water; that thing should especially be, while air is
pressed beneath the water. And if in water there should be the action of water,
it should then chiefly obtain its effect upon that air. Therefore fill a Glass
Bottle half full of water, and stop its mouth with a Cork, that nothing may
breath out, then shake the vessel strongly a thousand times upwards and
downwards, that all the water may as it were froath into bubbles: At length
notwithstanding thy pains, thou shall not find air to have departed into
water, or water into air. 7. If therefore water does not change air into it
self (otherwise, a natural agent works to this end, that it may make the
Patient like it self) there is no other thing afterward, whereby the air may
be made water. Where, as it were by a Parenthesis, it comes to be noted, that
the aforesaid Maxim loses its universality and truth, not only in the
Elements; where a mutual action happens among each other without a desire of
changing one into themselves: but also in the Heavens: yea, and also in very
many compound bodies. For neither does Mercury in its whole and indivisible
substance, therefore kill lice, that it may make them like it self. So neither
does Amber draw Chafe, that thereby it may make it Amber. Therefore by a
strawie argument, the Maxim of the Schools falls to the ground, which
otherwise is blown away with a light wind. 8. For if air were changed into
water, that would chiefly happen where those two Elements are co-mixed with
each other in their smallest parts for that is in the Clouds: But in the Clouds
this comes not to pass: because, in whatsoever place, degree, manner, and
quality, the air has touched on the superficies of the water, the water is
always lessened by the air, never at any time increased. Therefore there is no
action of water into air: for if there were any, it should be in the hollow
superficies of the air, where the force of the Element of water, residing in
its native place is strongest, and most conjoined: but there the air consumes
the water, because it divides it into a vapor. Therefore air never departs
into water. 10. Seeing therefore no Element has in it self a Root, by which,
it being as it were affected with wearisomness, may change it self into another
Element: for truly, every transmutation, proceeds from a duality or a twofold
thingliness, elsewhere, but there is not a voluntary desire in an Element, of
dying, and converting into another; and an appetite, appointment, and necessity
of increasing, of nourishing, of exchanging it self, or of changing the nature
in which it was created of God, is wanting. 11. Vain therefore is the
contentious co-mingling of Elements in compound bodies, and frivolous is the
transmutation of one into another, seeing none of the Elements is careful for
the passing over of its being, from another, nor from it self. Wherefore I have
first concluded with my self, that the water and air are primary Elements, nor
that they can ever make a retrogression or return. 12. For the blessed Parent
of Nature would not that the Elements should be hostilely opposite and applied,
that they should breath forth mutual destruction and devouring continually,
and that they should be so often made, fail, and with so many daily formal
privations, should rise again from death unto their former state, without the
interposing of a more simple mean. Which mean surely should otherwise be
desired to be a partaker as well of air as water, and yet ought to be neither
of these. 13. Therefore the holy Scriptures do name the air, the seperater, but
not the destroyer or annihilater of the waters. Nor is it right, that the air
should be drawn to other offices, than those which are enjoined to it by the
Workman and Lord of things. 14. Finally, rarefying, or condensing, do not
change the essential form of the water, because they are material dispositions
destitute of an Archeus. 15. Moreover, if water having suddenly taken to it a
ferment and seed, be transchanged into a concrete or composed body: Yet that is
perpetual to it by an Elementary privilege, as neither therefore, that it
ever lays aside the matter of Elementary water. 16. It is granted indeed to
seeds, to frame their composed bodies out of water, and to act their Tragedy
(by the defluxion of forms) until death: But the forms of composed bodies do
not therefore destroy the simplicity of water, and sameliness of its form: Much
less than the Soul coming suddenly on a body, does destroy the form of flesh.
For subordinate forms, do every where, in composed bodies, suffer together with
each other: Therefore much more does the form of a composed body, suffer also
the form of its own Element to be untouched. Last of all, although the air by
its greatest coldness, does change the water into Gas, yet it never desisteth
from the office of Seperater of the waters. So that if its cold be restrained,
at least by its dryth, it cease not to raise a vapor out of the water. For
the action of the Heavens in their circumvolving, is uncessant, and next also
the obedience of the air and water is continual; yea, there is an interrupted
thread in the acting of all seminall things. For truly, created things do
always respect the will of their Creator, which man alone neglects.

CHAP. XIV. The Blas of Meteours.
1. What Blas is. 2. The Blas of a Star, works more famously by local
motion, than by light. 3. What the Motive Blas of the Stars is. 4. What the
Wind is, and whence it may be moved. 5. That the Stars are made for us. 6.
Diverse activities in Blas. 7. That the activities of the Stars are brought down
by Blas the executer of motions. 8. The error of Paracelsus. 9. The two great
Lights do work their own properties, 10. How the influences of the Stars may be
reduced under the two Lights. 11. The Births of rains and Meteors. 12.
Putrefactions by continuance do arise straightway after the sliding down of the
Waters, whence are the Ferments and seeds of things. 13. A History of Cyprus.
14. A resolving of a Question touching the rest or quiet of the Summer-air, and
the continual breathing of the Winter-air.

THE Stars are to us for signs, times or seasons, days and years. Therefore
they cause the changes, seasons, and successive courses or interchanges. To

Therefore let the Key-keeper of the folding-doores, be the motion of the
Stars. Which also moves the Peroledes or Pavements of the Air. Therefore all
heat is etc. do stir up cold and heat in men. And that thing the Stars have by
the gift of Creation.

The Wind according to Hypocrates, is a flowing Water of the Air: but I
defining it by its causes, say, that the Wind is a flowing Air, moved by the
Blas of the

But seeing nothing was for mooving of it self (except the Archeus granted to
seeds) it has well pleased the Eternal, to place in the Stars, a flatuous,
violent, as a Masculine thing in the Stars, is the general beginning of
motion; it seems no less to respect the Earth, than the Air and Water. For
the Moon according to the holy Scriptures rules the night, as the Sun does the
day: although the Moon

For neither is moisture to be considered in nature as naked quality without a
matter, and therefore neither is it brought down from the Stars unto us. For
all moisture

Therefore Paracelsus erreth, who says, that rains, snow, etc. are so the
fruits of

But heat and cold are rather qualities abstracted from a body. Therefore there
are only two great Lights, and therefore two only qualities of them are
spread

Hence indeed Blas heats after the same manner, through the soils of the air:
therefore Gas also, is either detained in its pavements or soils, or is brought
downward to Astrologers and Physicians shall be able from a founder ground, to
presage of some things. In the mean time, I leave the matters of presages
untouched, which God by his ministering Spirits has laid up among his signs of
good or ill. Only I will relate what Friar Stephen of Lusignan, the last of
the Family of the Kings of Cyprus, of the Order of S. Dominick, in his
description of Cyprus, printed at Paris in the year 1580, French to this
purpose. About the end of the year, an Earthquake happened at Famagusta, which
continued eight days. But afterward, raging or Whirle-windes arose, passing
over the Island, and entering into the Marketplace of Famagusta; for there by
beating down a great Palace, they presently take away very many Houses, with
some Men. So that if some Mariners had not by the chance of fortune, come
suddenly unlooked for; Famagusta had been destroyed. Therefore let the Reader
know, that the Eastern Mariners were wont, on the day that they do observe
such Winds, to take a great Knife, wherewith they make the Sign of the Cross
in the Air, and do utter these words. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and God was the Word; and suddenly all the Whirle-winde, and
tempest, seperates it self, and cease. For I have seen this experiment twice:
And on the second time, while I returned out of Cyprus into Italy. For neither
do I find any thing of Superstition therein, but that the Knife must have a
black handle: And so I can determine of nothing certainly. Thus far he. A
wonder at least: That this divelish tempest should cease, and the Devil spare
the whole City, perhaps for the sin of one sinner.

Moreover about Blas, this is as yet considerable. If in the great heat of
Summer thou hold a burning Candle about the hole of a Window, there is no
foot-step,

CHAP. XV. A Vacuum or emptiness of Nature.
1. The true definition of the Wind. 2. The undistinct sincerity of former
ages. 3. Whither the Authors invention tends. 4. An examining of the Air by
an Engine like to a Hand-Gun. 5. A Vacuum or emptiness in the Air is proved. 6.
A Vacuum is easier believed than a piercing of bodies. 7. A Handicraft
Demonstration, by fire, in behalf of a Vacuum, and five remarkable things of
it. 8. A Handicraft operation concerning a sulphurated Torch or Candle. 9.
Subsequent Collections from both the Handicraft Operations. 10. Pores of the
Air are demonstrated. 11. Opposite suspicions are taken away. 12. Inward heat
and inward fire being shut up together in a Glass, how they act diversely into
the Air. 13. That it acts more strongly by the pressing together of its smoke,
than by the enlarging of heat. 14. Of what sort the sense or feeling of the Air
is. 15. A new end of the Air. 16. That the fire lives not by the air, but only
is choked through penury. 17. Vacuities or emptinesses in the air are
needful. 18. That every thing has hated pressing together made by its guest,
by the laws of self-love. 19. A Vacuum being an impossible thing with
Aristotle, has now become a requisite thing in nature. 20. That there is given
in the Vacuum of the air, a middle thing between a body and an accident, and
so, a neutrality. 21. What the great Magnall may be. 22. How the Blas of the
Stars is communicated without Species or particular kinds. 23. The tristes of
the Aristotelicks, concerning the Wind. 24. A ridiculous multitude and plenty
of exhalations according to Aristotle. 25. The Opinion of Galen touching the
Winds, is hissed out. 26. The Opinion of Galen, concerning Quicksilver, badly
from Diascorides, and worse copied out. 27. The nature of rarefied air for the
confirming of a Vacuum. 28. While the air is commonly thought to be made thin,
it is indeed, pressed together by reason of the extension of of its Magnall or
Sheath. 29. The body of the air, has its just extension under cold. 30. Why in
a hotter Climate, the favors of the Heaven are the greater. 31. The Magnall is
proved to be increased and diminished: but not the air to be properly rarefied
or condensed.

IN the beginning of the Blas of a Meteor, I have defined the Wind, by a true
definition, that is, by its constitutive Causes.

Seeing that a thing without, or besides the containing of its Causes is
nothing, and is a flowing Air, moved by the Blas of the Stars. And that for
distinction from a prodigious or monstrous Wind, raised up by the malice of
evil spirits. Hypocrates calls the Wind a Blast; and saying, that all
Diseases are from blasts, he reckoueth up his [To Enormon] or forcible blast,
among the chief or first causes of Diseases. For such was the plainness, and
candor or simplicity of former times, wherein, because they being more
blessed, there was not yet, such knowledge, nor cruelty, nor frequency of
Diseases: For all things were not granted to Hypocrates. For it has well
pleased the Almighty, since Hypocrates, to have also created his Physicians. He
made known Hypocrates, that there is in us a Spirit, stirring up all things by
its Blas, which Spirit, he afterward by a microcosmicall analogy or the
proportion of a little World, compared to the blasts of the World, and
restrained into the order of a blast, whether they were partakers of life, or
indeed did contain the causes of death and destruction. Lastly, he left it
undecided, whether they being stirred up from the Heaven, they should show the
suitable proportions of the Heavenly Circle, or at length were stirred up by a
sublunary law. For the race or descent of the vital Spirits had not yet been
plainly made known. For none had hitherto learned by experience, that the
matter of Gas was water, and so it had not been as yet known, etc. But the
Handicraft operation is true; that air may be pressed together in an Iron Pipe
of an ell, about the length of fifteen fingers, at the expansion or enlarging
of which co-pressed air, the sending forth of a small Bullet through a Board or
Plank, should happen, no less than if it were driven out of a Hand-gun.

Which thing surely could not so come to pass, if the air by so great a
pressing together of it self, under the cold of wintery Iron, were to be
changed into

Many surely will with me, more easily admit of a vacuum, than of an existence

But besides, I again thus prove an ordinary vacuum in nature, in the air. Let
a piece of Candle be placed in the midst of the bottom of a dish, being
fastened to its but let there be some small quantity of water in the Bottle,
and let the Bottle be exactly stopped with the bark of the Cork-Tree, that
nothing breath out: Thou shall see the flame, and smoke of the Sulphur, to fill
up the whole floor or space of the Bottle in which the air is, and at length
the fire to be quenched: Yet that there is not made a lessening of the air, nor
a sucking of the water upwards, because the

Wherefore I have meditated, that the air has pores or little holes, which
should

And so it follows, that smoakes do more strongly act by pressing together,
than that all particular members of the Universe, have a certain sympatheticall
feeling.

And so, seeing the air essentially has porosities or little hollow spaces, it
grieveth it, that they should be filled up, and over-burdened by a strange Gas.
Yet unless

Therefore the air was created that it may be a receptacle of exhalations;
wherefore also it must needs have an emptiness in its pores: yet it receives
those exhalations,

These things have not as yet been thoroughly weighed by the Schools, and
therefore they have thought, the fire to live, and be nourished by the air,
neither have Burgundy, a plain Earthen pot being filled up with water, and
placed nigh the grate of a Furnace, does far sooner freeze, than any other
which is set out in the open air and frost, by reason of the continual Flux,
and passing over of the air, which by the Schools, has been rashly thought to
flow thither for the life, or nourishment of the flame. Therefore the empty
places of the Air are moderately filled: but if they are over-loaded, the space
of the air does presently straighten it self, and shuts it self up in a
narrower room, the empty porosites being consumed, that it may by stifling the
exhaling fire, divert it from its enterprise. That thing is inbred in all
created things, through selflove. For neither otherwise does water incrust it
self in Ice, than that it may not be snatched away by the cold of the air into
Gas.

There are therefore necessary vacuities or emptinesses in the Air, that
according to their capacity, they might entertain the fluide vapors that are
to be evaporated,

Wherefore they do beat the Burrowes very much, and do draw out the air that is
A, the air B, the neck C, the hole of the Bottle D, by which with a Sypho or
Pipe, the air may be strongly snuffed up. But then let the neck be rolled
about, that it may violently withhold the air under it. I say therefore, that
while the neck is again swiftly rolled about, that it gives utterance to the
air; For it shall not only snuff up the air B, that is pressed together, but
also together with it, A shall wholly fly upwards with a great force. The air
therefore, does sustain an unvoluntary co-pressing of its emptiness; therefore
it also brings up the water A, with it, which surely shows that a vacuum is
more pleasing than the pressing together of the air; because it is that which
approaches to the unvoluntary penetration of a body. Now therefore, of a
vacuum, an impossible thing with Aristotle, is made a thing ordinarily required
of nature.

Notwithstanding, those porosities of the air, however they may be actually
void of all matter: nevertheless they have in them a Being, a Creature; that
is, some real

The Magnall indeed, is not Light: but a certain form assisting the air, and as
it Magnum oportet. Now therefore the natures of Gas and Blas are sufficiently
manifest, and which way Blas may descend unto us. The Doctrines of the Schools
concerning the winds are to be added.

First of all, the Schools of Aristotle do teach, that the wind is a dry
exhalation, (but not an air) lifted up from the Earth by the virtue of heat;
the which, when Aristotle writes, that the Salt of the Sea (which
notwithstanding he thought to be co-eternall with the World) has its original
from an exhalation (he understood not an exhalation in the least) because it is
that which is volatile or swift of flight, and the Salt of the Sea a fixed
body: for neither can Sea water, otherwise sweet, fix the volatility or
swiftness of an exhalation any more, than Sal Ammoniac it self) also all
Metcors, and especially winds, yea the Earthquake, and Comets (whereof that of
the year 1618, was a thousand times bigger than the Earth) likewise small
Stones, Rocks, great Stones, he has dedicated to exhalations alone. A suitable
Storehouse whence so great exhalations should proceed, has been wanting to
his Dreams. And nevertheless, the Schools subscribe to those trifles, nor do
they awake out of their drowsy sleep, but while Aristotle does expressly spurn
against the faith.

But Galen thinks, the winder or blast, to be vapors lifted up out of the
water and Lakes, by the force of heat: but now and then, that it is an air
resolved out of a Galen, the art of distilling was not yet made known, who
never saw Rose Water, as neither Argentvive or Quicksilver. For he had badly
read Diascorides, together with Pliny; he writing, Galen must needs have been
deeply and heartily ignorant of the deepest things of Philosophy, and of the
most inward principles of nature, and of the seminall resolutions and
exhalations of any properties whatsoever. At length, to show an emptiness in
the air, it is convenient more deeply to search into the thingliness or nature
of its rarefying and condensing. For first of all, whatsoever I have hitherto
spoken concerning the rarefying of the air, that I confess has been done for
the capacity of the common sort: else, to speak properly, although the air may
seem to be pressed together, and to be enlarged in the space of place: yet
rarefying it self does not belong to the air its self; that is, that the very
body of the air may be made thinner than it self, in the may be reduced to
nothing: But not but against the will of the air; because it has need of this
vacuum. Alas! how nigh to nothing is all nature, which began of nothing. In the
aforesaid Instrument meating out the encompassing air by the heat, or cold of
the Sun, the place of the air is seen to be greater or less: but we perceive,
that at the rarefying of the thing contained, the air is expelled: whose
breathing place, if it then be shut up for want of air, a sucking is felt.
Therefore by more fully looking into the matter, the vacuum or Magnall of the
air, is increased and lessened; but the Air is not rarefied. So also the
condensing or pressing together of the Air, is not in respect of its body: but
only of its Magnall or Sheath.

CHAP. XVI. An Irregular Meteor.
1. The Mysteries of the Rainbow, and the Images of the Sun. 2. That before
the flood there was no Rainbow. 3. That the Rainbow was given for a sign of
the Covenant; yet that the cause thereof is not yet known. 4. Yet the Rainbow
does daily bring its own Covenant to remembrance. 5. The Mystery of the
Covenant is as yet under the Rainbow. 6. In what thing the Rainbow does
denote the end of the World. 7. The dotages or toys of the Schools concerning
the Rainbow. 8. Things required of the Schools. 9. That the Rainbow has not
its Colors immediately in a Cloud, but in a place. 10. That the Rainbow is of
the nature of Light. 11. The existence of Colors immediately in place, is
proved. 12. The Object of the sight is immediately in Place, the object of
hearing is immediately in the body of the Mean. 13. Creatures of neutrality do
subsist immediately in place, without a body. 14. Paracelsus concerning the
Rain bow is refuted. 15. The frequenoy of a Miraole does not reduce that
miracle into the number of nature. 16. Some supernatural things are ordinary.
17. An Atheistical, and childish opinion of the Schools, concerning Thunder
and Lightning. 18. Wonderful sights or visions in high mountains. 19. The
spirit all noise or cracking is the Blas of the evil spirit. 20. A History of
Thunder. 21. The noise of Thunder, how it putrifieth. 22. Outward Salt
preserves.

I Have said that Meteors do consist of their matter Gas, and their efficient
cause Blas, as well the Motive, as the altering. But the Rainbow is irregular,
a divine

For first I draw from thence, that the Rainbow was never seen before the
Flood* Otherwise mortals had justly complained: For we have oftentimes already
seen

Secondly, From hence I learn, that the Rainbow was given for a mere sign:
wherefore, neither that it has even to this day, any reason of a cause, with
relation

Thirdly, seeing now the World before the flood, had been about two thousand
years old, and yet there had been causes in nature, which to this day, the
Schools do attribute to the Rainbow; yet there was no Rainbow: Surely that
convinces of the falsehood of those causes. Whence at length in the fourth
place it follows: That unless the Rainbow be also at this day, for a sign of
the Covenant, and for the sake of its first appointment, it otherwise appears
for a frustrated purpose. Therefore also the Rainbow does now and then
remember us of the Covenant once stricken, that we may believe, and always be
mindful, that God the avenger on Rainbow might signify, that the World should
be no more drowned with waters, it was meet that it should bear before it, not
indeed a certain unwonted spectacle in the air, without difference to any other
thing: but the mystery of the promised Covenant, ought to lay hid in the
Rainbow, which might declare the promlse and belief of the thing promised, by a
Noah three colors in the Rainbow, and the pleasing splendours of three
Sulphurs shining forth in co-burnt Mineralls.

And so the Colors do give testimony, that the Earth being the womb of
Mineralls, is at length to satisfy the wrath of God, by the extreme melting of
the burning

The Schools ought at least to declare, why it should have always the figure
of a Bow, or Semicircle, but never the resemblance of a Glass. Why if it be
the Parelia shines like the Sun, with an undistinct and ruddie light? Why
should those two Clouds be always folded together with the equal form of a
Bow, and variety of Colors? Why does not the Glass that is against the Sun,
represent those Colors, if that double Cloud be in the room of a Glass? Why
does not that doubled Cloud, at least in its more outward and conjoined part,
change the wandering Latitude of the Clouds, if its hollow part be pierced with
an abounding light of the Sun declining or going down? Why does a Rainbow also
appear, the Sun being hid under the Clouds, and no where shining? Why does the
Sun I say, paint out always those uniform and various Colors, and so nearly
placed together, and not one only Color, according to the simplicity of its
own light? Wherefore do many Rainbowes now and then appear together in one
field? For truly, in so vast a Circle of the Air of the Horizon, the reflection
falls not in one or two miles: but the Cloud opposite to the Sun, has not its
reflection directly, unless on the opposite part answering to it self in the
Horizon; but not on the part near to its side. Lastly, it is absurd, that the
upper and thinner Cloud which is void of Color, and which the light of the Sun
does easily pierce, should fashion Colors in the other thicker Cloud, which
neither the Sun, nor either of those Clouds have in themselves. Surely I have
very much admired at these vain positions of the Schools, while as I should
handle a Rainbow with my hand, and should see no Cloud at all round about.
Wherefore I have noted that the Rainbow by a peculiar privilege, has its

For from hence it is, that the object of sight is at one only instant brought
etc.) but others they have surrendered into mere accidents (as the Rainbow,
Light, the Magnall, etc.)

The which notwithstanding I shall demonstrate in their place, to be created
things of a neither sort: But let it be enough to have said it, in this place.
But if the Paracelsus supposes the Rainbow to be the Evestrum of the Sun; but
the Evestrum he calls the Spirits or Ghosts of men. The which from the
absurdity of it self alone, as sufficiently Evestrum after its Burial. There
are some, who will laugh at me, for these daily Miracles.

But certainly, while I do more fully look into things, I see divine goodness
to be I am he, to wit, by whom ye are, live, and are moved, he withdrew only,
that his power whereby they were moved, and straightway all the Soldiers fell
on the ground. And although the Instrument in nature whereby we are moved, be
ordinary; yet there is another principal, total, and independent cause of our
motion, and the original thereof, being a miraculous hand, does concur in
every motion. So also in the Rainbow, the Sun, and place do concur as it were
second causes: Yet there is another independent, total, miraculous and
immediate cause, which has Noah and his Family; but with the Sons of men his
posterity, even to the end of the World. And so from the same original; and
for the same end for which the Rainbow began, it is promised to endure as long
as Mortals shall be: and seeing it is a sign of the Covenant with the Sons of
men, but not only with the Sons of Noah, it also includes a certain Covenant
or agreement. Therefore there is a miraculous thing in the Rainbow, that its
colors are not in any body; but immediately in place it self, like light, and
that immediately from the hand of God, without the concurrence of a second
cause: Nor is it a wonder, that from the condition of the Covenant, a
supernatural effect should interpose: Because that in many places, continual
miracles do offer themselves.

Therefore as the Rainbow is a sign of an everlasting Covenant, and a Messenger
of divine goodness; so Thunder causes an admiration and adoring of the power
The Voice af Thunder has stricken the Earth. For a sudden and monstrous Blas
is stirred up in the Air. The Heaven is oft-times clear, straightway also,
being without wind, it is suddenly bespotted with a black Cloud: For often
times it thunders, the Heaven being clear without any small Cloud: And so,
Thunder does not require a Cloud; but if it does suddenly stir up any, it is
made, as the cracking noise shakes the Peroledes, and as Gas settles downwards,
into a thick Cloud, being drawn together by the cold of the place. Therefore
the Doctrine of the Schools is frivolous, determining, that an exhalation is
kindled between the sheath of the Clouds, that it dasheth forth Lightning, and
that there are so many rentings of that Cloud, as there are sounds and cracking
noyses. For I have seen Vilvord and again at Bella in Flanders, a certain black
Sheath, as if it were a long Horsemans Boot, to fly among the Groves of Oaks or
Forests, with a great cracking noise, having behind it, a flame, as it were
of kindled straw: but great Snow succeeded it. Therefore, seeing Thunder has
no cause plainly natural in the Clouds of a Meteor, I believe that it has
wholly all its cause, not above, but besides nature; and so that it is a
monstrous effect.

For first of all, we are bound to believe, that the evil Spirit is the Prince
of this World, and that his Principality does not shine forth amongst the
faithful, unless only in the office of a tempter: For so it is said, that the
Adversary as a Roaring Lion, goes about, seeking whom he may devour: but
that, not from the office of his Principality. Therefore he has obtained the
Principality of this World, that he may be a certain Executer of the judgments
of the chief Monarch, and so that he may be the Umpire or Commissioner of
Thunder, and Lightning; yet under covenanted Conditions. For his Bolts being
shaken off, unless his Power were bridled by Divine goodness, he would shake
the Earth with one only stroke, and would destroy mortal men.

The cracking noise therefore, or Voice of Thunder, is a spiritual Blas of the
evil Spirit, surely an effect of great strength. But Thunder is not conjoined
with Jove or Jova (as much as to say with the Hebrews, Jehova) to be the God of
Thunder. Seeing the Lord and Father of things, does unfold his Thunder by the
bound hand of a tormenter; the evil Spirit thereupon, would not indeed be
contented with the Title of Prince of the World; but would have the name
Jehova, to belong unto himself. Therefore Thunder and Lightning, although they
may have concurting natural Causes; yet the moover of them is an incorporeall
Spirit. Atheists may laugh at my Philosophy, who believe, that there is no
Power, or God, and no abstracted Spirit: But at leastwise, they cannot but
admire at the effects of Thunder, and accuse themselves of the ignorance of its
causes.

One History at least I will tell, among a thousand. In the year 1554, in the
Coast of Leydon, the Tower of Curingia being taken away by Thunder, no where
appeared: after fifteen days, a Grave is opened in a Herbie Plot of Grass of
the Burying place, wherein a Shooemaker was buried, and behold under an
unmooved and green Turf, first the Brass Cock with the Iron Cross, appears,
and then a Pinnacle of the Tower, and at length the whole Tower is dug out. I
have seen, my self being present, by one only Thunderclap, some thousand of
Oaks and Hazels to be burnt up, in their first bud and leaves; to wit, the
whole Wood being named from a place near Vilvord, where the Birch, the Beech,
and Alder-Tree, being frequently co-mixed with other Trees, in a thick
confusion, had the mean while remained unhurt by the Thunder. But elsewhere, by
one only stroke, he strikes many things at once, that were far distant
asunder. For who can sufficiently unfold the thousand various crafts and wiles
of the cunning Workman? It suffices, that many spiritual actions do concur
being diverse from the ordinary course of Nature, they being also alike
powerful at a distance, as nigh at hand.

Therefore that terrible Voice of Thunder, strikes the Earth, kills
Silkworms, etc. But Salt applied without, to the brim of the Hogs-head, or
Earthen-pot, does turn away such kind of effects. Surely a weak resister for
such an agent, if in nature the thing resisting ought to prevail over the
agent. But why? the evil Spirit hates Salt, and therefore Salt is always
said to fail or be wanting in his Sabbaths of his Imps: he Moses in the Mount,
in continual Lightning and Thunder, environed the Mountain before Israel: Yea
rather it is thereby confirmed, that the cracking Thunder, and Lightnings, do
belong to Spirits his Ministers, to Spirits I say, his tormenters and
executioners: For truly, Israel was driven away from ascending the Mountain
under pain of death: For neither therefore were the Thunders in the top of the
Mountain, but beneath, round about the Mountain: neither also appeared the
Almighty to Eliah in the Whirle-winde, or in the strong Wind; but in the sweet
Air. As an addition I will hitherto refer the Decree of the Church, which in
the blessing of a Bell, does prescribe certain forms, wherein it confirms the
same Presidentship in Thunder, which I have prescribed in this Chapter. For in
the words of their adjurations, they have it. Let all layings in wait or
treacheries of the enemy be driven far away, the crashing of Hails, the storm
of Whirle-windes, the violence of Tempests: let troublesome or cruel Thunders,
Blasts of Winds, etc. beallayed. Let the right hand of thy power prostrate
Alery powers, and let them tremble and flee at this little Bell of the hearer.
Before the sound thereof, let the fiery darts of the enemy, the stroke of
Lightnings, the violence of Stones, the hurt of Tempests, etc. be chased far
away. Whence indeed, all adjurations do conspire against Tempests. For, Hail,
Wind, Rains, Clouds, etc. are Meteors of Nature: but a tempestuous darting,
exceeding the fall of a Body in grains and the flowing of the Wind, are
understood to be done by malignant powers. These things indeed, concerning
Tempests of the Air, Hail and the Sea, are thus confirmed: but in Thunder, not
only the very casting of the Thunderbolt, or Stones; but moreover, the
cracking noise of Thunder, does depend on the powers and enemies of the air:
because that no renting of the Clouds, or Air, can naturally utter such noyses,
and the effects of these, unless monstrous and hostile Powers do immingle
themselves, and play together.

CHAP. XVII. The trembling of the Earth, or Earthquake.
1. The name of the Moving of the Earth, is improper. 2. The opinion of
Copernicus. 3. A show of the Deed. 4. All Schools do agree with Aristotle in
Causes, for 21 Ages hitherto. 5. The Opinion of the Schools is demonstrated to
be unpossible, from a defect of the place. 6. The same thing may after a
certain manner be drawn from the force of exhalations. 7. Likewise by the Rules
of proportion and motion. 8. The rise or birth of exhalations, their quantity,
power, progress, manner of being made, entertainment, and swiftness, are all
ridiculous things. 9. All these are demonstrated to be impossible things. 10.
The cause of their Birth is wanting. 11. It is proved by the Rules of falsehood
and absurdities. 12. That those trifles being supposed according to the
pleasure of the Schools, the manner is (as yet) impossible. 13. That an
exhalation being granted according to their wish, yet an Earthquake from
thence is unpossible. 14. Rentings asunder or disruptions for fear of a
piercing of Bodies, do differ from that which might happen through the supposed
gentleness of exhalations. 15. An impossibility is proved, from the nature of
the composition of exhalations. 16. Those things are resisted, which were
granted from the connivance of a falsehood. 17. Wells and Caves, are all the
year, in their depth or bottom, of an equal temperature. 18. That there is no
fiery exhalation, as neither a fiery Gas. 19. An exhalation cannot lift up the
Earth with its lightness. 20. A Bladder filled with Air, does not spring up out
of the water efficiently, by reason of its lightness, but occasionally. 21.
Weightiness is an active quality; but lightness, seeing it has no weight, does
signify nothing. 22. Three remarkable things drawn from thence. 23. That the
manner of an Earthquake delivered by the Schools, is impossible. 24. The
ignorance of the Schools concerning the properties of lightness. 25. A faulty
Argument of the Schools, from ignorance. 26. After what sort the Schools are
deluded in this thing. 27. A new Sophistry by reason of errors. 28. An
Earthquake declares monstrous tokens. 29. The Earth trembles, being shaken by
God. 30. The one only cause of an Earthquake. 31. An objection of a certain
one, is resolved. 32. The Earth does not feel or perceive after an animal
manner. 33. What an Earthquake may properly portend. 34. Sacrifices for the
purging of offenses, do differ according to sins. 35. The proper inciting
cause. 36. What an Earthquake in the Lords Resurrection, denoted. 37. An
answer to a friendly objection.

I Being to speak of the Earthquake, its Causes, and ends, will first of all,
begin with its name. It is wont to be called, a Moving; but it seems to me, to
be a

Nicolas Copernicus, by very many fictions, does contend, the Earth to be
circularly to the Decree of the Church; therefore I have withdrawn the name of
Moving, from the Earth, and have changed it, to wit, that it being rather
fearful, is said to tremble. For truly the Earth being passively smitten, or
threatened by a certain huge force, it is as it were jogged or shaken through
fear and horror, but does not leap or skip for joy; because it seems to
undergo some cruel and horrid thing besides the ordinary course of nature.

Therefore the name of Quaking, being first established, next the show of the
deed comes to hand. For truly, there was a night, between the third and fourth
day of April, in the year 1640, indeed a quarter past the third hour after
midnight, the Moon being at full, two days after that time, and it being the
fourth day of the week called Wednesday, before Easter, when as Mecheline
(where I then was by reason of some occasions) notably trembled, and leaped
with three re-iterated approaches or fits, and at every onset the trembling
endured a little less than there might be of the space of repeating the
Apostles Creed; but a certain roaring in the Air, went immediately before every
fit, and as it were the action of Wheels whereby great Ordinance are carried
through the streets, shook the Earth. I say the night was fair, clear, void of
Winds. For truly, for the cause of the revisall then to be sifted, a little
before midnight, I returned home: But I rested nigh Dillie in the Commendatory
of Almaine, commonly called Pitzenborch (being received through the Courtesy
and humanity of the famous man, the Lord Wernher Spies of Bullensheim, of the
Teutonick order, he being Provincial Commendatour of the confluence of
Bullensheim, and Commendatour of Pitzenborch, Toparch or President in Elson,
Herren-nolhe, etc.) But I was removed for the space of seventy spaces from the
streets: And then, I learned of my friends, that almost at the same moments of
time, and with the same three re-iterated turns, separated by an equal
intervall, and the same roaring accompanying them, Bruxells, Antwerp, Lire,
Gaudan, the Mountains of Hannonia, Namurc, Camerac, trembled: Afterward we
heard; that the same thing happened in Holland, Zealand, Friesland, Luxemburg
and Gilderland; yea, that even Francford upon Menus, no less trembled. That at
Mentz, some Towers were beaten down, and that new Buildings nigh Theonpolis
fell down together: Also that Westphalia; yea Ambiave, and the nearest Coasts
of France trembled. Truly all these places trembled at the very same instant of
time, although by reason of the roundness of the Sphere, the Dialls, the
Messengers of days, did necessarily differ. It is a tract of Land, at least of
three hundred and sixty Leagues, in every one of the least places of its
Circle, the ground every where trembled with an equal fear. For neither was
the Watchman in the most vast Tower of the Temple of Mecheline, any otherwise
shaken, than any one that lay in a low Cottage: No otherwise, I say, a borderer
of Scalds, an Inhabitant of the Islands, and Citizen of the Medows, than they
which stayed in the more high Hill. Then was the fortune of all, and every one
alike. Lastly, I understood, that the Ships in the Havens of Holland and
Zealand were shaken in their Masts and Sails, without Wind. Concerning the
immediate Causes of so great an effect, there is much agreement among Writers.
The modern or late Writers, I say, supping up the Lessons of Aristotle, have
not gone back from Aristotle, to have been as it were left off from a further
diligent search. First therefore, I will show the impossibility of that
Doctrine; and then, I will perfectly teach my own opinion, not stablished by
heathenish Dreams, but confirmed by the Doctrine of a higher authority.

For first of all, the Earth is actually distinguished by certain Pavements,
Soils or grounds; for truly, the outward Soil of the Earth, is plainly Sandy,
Clayie white, elsewhere clayie-yellow, muddy, grisely or grayie, white,
yellow, black, red, etc. sporting with diverse varieties. Under which, for the
most part is a Sand, and this very Sand differenced every where with great
variety. But under this Soil, is at length the flinty Mountain (which they call
Keyberch) being the Pavement and Original of Rocks, and first Root of
Mineralls. And at length, every where under this Soil, is the living or quick
Sand, the boiling Sand, Drif, or Quellem, which is extended even into the
Center of the World, being thoroughly washed in its un-interrupted joining, with
waters. And although all the aforesaid Soils, do not every where succeed each
other in order; yet the Quellem is every where the last Pavement of the World,
although oftentimes, immediately exposed to the Air, and plain to be seen. (As,
concerning the Original of Fountains, in my Book of the Fountains of the
Spaw.) This therefore being once supposed, I say, that the place where the
exhalation should be, which is believed to be the cause of the Earthquake,
ought to be placed or appointed in some, or amongst some of the said Soils,
seeing that in the Earth, there is not a place out of the aforesaid Pavements.
But to the overthrowing of that Doctrine, a demonstration is required, which
from a sufficient enumcration of the Pavements, may show, that such an
impossible exhalation cannot be contained, or be raised up in any of the said
Soils; or if it should be there stirred up, yet that it has not the power of
forming an Earthquake. As to the first of the three members, (to wit, that not
any exhalation can be contained under the Earth, which may actively cause its
trembling) I prove. First of all, not under the outmost, Clayie, or first Soil
of the Earth next to the Air, and designed for the habitation of Mortals:
because so, S. Rumolds Tower, had not trembled, as neither Buildings built
immediately upon the Quellem. As neither had Ships, without the raging of
Winds, been removed, in deep Waters, far from the ground of the Sand. For it
being granted, that the bottom of the Sea, did tremble, just even as the Earth
elsewhere inhabited; yet the Superficies of the Water could not keep the
tenor of the same trembligg Sand, without wind and storm: which thing
notwithstanding, is discerned to be false: for flying Birds also, feeling the
trembling of the Earth, would not fall down, they being as it were sore smitten
or astonished; for a sign, that the Air it self does tremble. For the Elements
shall at sometime melt in the sight of the Judge. Therefore if the water does
tremble, no less than the quiet Earth it self, the cause thereof is signified
to be in the Globe, or because the Earth and water do at the same stroke of
smiting, together with the Air, feel a fear, or hand of the smiter. Secondly,
neither can an exhalation, the cause of an Earthquake, dwell in any of the
Soils of Sands: because then, Fens, Medows, and places wherein the Quellem is
immediately prostituted beneath the Clay, had not trembled: Which thing is as
equally different from the truth of the deed, as the former. Next in the third
place, neither can the same exhalation be hidden under the Keyberch: For in the
whole Circle, a few places excepted, wherein the Earth then trembled, at the
same moment of time, the ground Keyberch is not extant. At length, neither
could an exhalation arise or be detained between the Quellem, which is
sufficient to shake so great an heap with an equal fury: Because the Quellem
(that is oft-times next the Air, and conjoined even into the Center of the
Universe by its continual unity, and through mixture of exhalation, there could
not be an alike trembling of all places, which resists the thing done. For
before that the exhalation should lift up so great weights, through so vast,
and various spaces of ground and waters, at once, and at one moment, it had
sought, and had found out easy following, and the more weak places, through
which it had made a way for it self to break out at. For otherwise, the
exhalations should fight against the rules of nature, proportion, and motions,
which should lift up equally, and at once, all the parts of the Low Countries,
and a great part of Germany.

Especially where there is not an equal capacity of every place wherein the
exhalation should be entertained, not an equal fardle of the incumbent burden,
or resistance many Regions: Which is to say, that it is impossible that the
exhalation the Mover of the Earthquake, being granted, there should be an
equality in the sameliness of time, and power of motion, through so great a
space, through so great a difference and resistance of the Soil, and of the
Heaven, and diversity of weight; seeing such an acting exhalation, meating out
its efficacy by the variety of places, difference, greatness, activity,
swiftness of the Mover, being of necessity unlike, ought also to obey the
unlikenesses of places.

Therefore let the quantity, rise, power, entertainment, and swiftness of
exhalations be ridiculous, which should at one and the same moment, after a
like manner,

But now I coming to the second Member of proving; to wit, that in the
aforesaid Pavements of the Earth, the raising up of an exhalation is
impossible, which Aristotle, that is chiefly necessary for these bounds, is a
hot and dry flux, or Issue out of Bodies (for the most part also Oily) lifted
up from the dry parts, by a sharp heat into the form of Air, or a rising smoke.

But I could wish, that the Schools may answer, what therefore at length,
shall that actual, equal, and connexed heat, under the Sea, Rivers, pooles,
Meadows, and

But go to, let us feign by sporting, and grant a heat to be actually under the
Earth and Water, which is made by kindling: likewise, that great and stubborn
heat, and

But neither truly, under so many trifles, should all the Low Countries then
jogge any more than once, and it had gaped in the more slender, and less deep,
and Germany, had not therefore trembled: For once, and at once, the Earth had
some where rose up on the top, where it had gaped; but it had not often
trembled, as it were with an aguish rigor. For truly the supposed action of
inflaming, should be made only, that the piercing of Bodies might be hindered,

Therefore as to the third point; To wit, that also a sufficient exhalation
being granted to be under the Earth, nevertheless an Earthquake is impossible;
I have

For first of all, that it may more clearly appear, that the action and manner
of the action is diverse, when as for fear of a piercing of Bodies, a thing
leaps forth, and Aqua fortis, being prepared of Saltpeter, Alume, and Vitriol,
being dried apart. But cast into that water, one ounce of the Powder of Sal
Ammoniac, and straightway let the neck of the Glass be shut by melting it,
which is called Hermes Seal: As soon as the voluntary action shall begin, and
the Vessel is filled with a plentiful exhalation (yet an invisible one) and
however it may be feigned to be stronger than Iron, yet it straightway
dangerously leapeth asunder into broken pieces, for fear of piercing, but not
by reason of the lightness of many exhalations. For truly, although it
bursteth, by reason of the multitude, and the pressing together of most light
and invisible exhalations; yet the lightness of the same, in this things has
nothing of moment: Because if any of these things should happen for lightness
sake, the Glass Vessel it self, before its bursting, would be lifted up into
the Air, and fly upwards: Because it is a thing of less labor, to lift up a
weight of three or four pounds, than to break asunder a most strong Vessel.
Therefore the exhalations which do break the Glass, should much more
powerfully lift up the Glass, if the Schools did not beg the vain help of
lightness from exhalations, for an Earthquake. If therefore exhalations are
not able by their lightness, to lift up the Vessel wherein they are shut, much
less so great a quantity of Earth, and vast an heap.

Lastly, seeing that every exhalation is of some body, and every body if it be
to be separated, is divided into Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; and the Mercuriall
part be etc.

Therefore the absurdities, which I granted before in jest, I will now oppose
in earnest. First of all, I demand, what is that so unwonted heat, which from
the year Mecheline? as neither an Earthquake? wherefore not every year?
wherefore in the 2d month called April, under a most cold night, when as the
day before, it had snowed much? under the continual North Wind? and not under
the Dog Star? Is it because the more inward parts of the Earth are then hot?
Why therefore not every year in the eleventh month called January? But this
Argument of the Ancients cease, after that the Instrument meating out the
Degrees of the encompassing Air, is found.

For Wells and Caves are found, all the year, of an equal heat and cold.
Again, why does so great heat, the stirrer up of exhalations, cease so
suddenly? especially where it may stir up an exhalation, the moover of so great
an heap? by what fuel it is kindled under the water? by what Fodder does it
live and subsist? by what Law is it not in the same place stif^ed? by what
privilege does it despise the respects of bodies, places, and weights? at
length, by what Prerogative does it stir up an exhalation of so great a
vastness, out of moist Bodies, without moist vapors: or if it does also allure
or draw out vapors after the ordinary manner, why do not these mitigate a heat
of so great moment? do they extinguish? do they choke together with their
Sisters, and forthwith following exhalations? or what is that exhalation, which
shakes the vast Tower of Mecheline, with no greater respect than a low
Cottage? nor that respects any resistance of a huge weight? or which does in
a like manner operate near at hand, as at a distance? or which does at once,
every where, and alike, find throughout its whole Superficies, the collected
power of its own Center, that at once, every where alike, it may operate in one
moment, equally and alike strongly? Why through the necessity of natural
causes, is not the thread broken in the weaker part: but all things do at once
undergo, yea and sustain the same law of violence? Surely if these things be
rightly considered, there is found in the Earthquake, a certain operative
force, of an infinite power, which lifts up Mountains and Towers, without
respect of lightness, or weight, as if nothing were able to resist this moving
virtue.

But I have proved, that an exhalation, if in any there be an efficient moving
cause of an Mercuries (because that this is not an exhalation, but the vapor
of the watery parts.) Therefore it remains, that it is not an exhalation: but
Gas it self, not an eflux of Bodies stirred up by heat; but rather an effect
remaining after the fire: To wit, the Gas of the flame of the fire alone, or of
the smoke sprung from this. But neither of these exhalations also, can be the
effective cause of an Earthquake. Therefore if none of these exhalations be
the mover of the Earth, there shall be none at all (since another is not found)
and by consequence, it is a vain fiction of the Schools, which they will have
themselves to be believed in, in the Earthquake. But if indeed they thinking
of an escape, do say, that they do not understand an exhalation raised up by
heat, not brought forth by dryness, but an unnamed vapor constituted by its
causes: To wit, like as Aristotle writes, that all Rockie Stones, small
stones, Mineralls, and likewise the Salt of the Sea, Comets, although a hundred
fold bigger than the Globe of the Earth, and all Winds, do proceed from some
irregular and un-explained exhalations, distinguishing the Winds therein,
against the Air: This I say, is to be willing to dote with Aristotle, and to
remain ignorant of natural Philosophy, with the same Aristotle. Lastly, it is
an impertinent thing, for them to have cited Aristotle, and by his authority to
be willing to defend their errors. Notwithstanding, I will treat against the
Schools by reason, that seeing they do publish themselves to be so rational,
they may deliver up their weapons to reason.

I say therefore, that no exhalation can be more light, simple, or subtle,
than the Air: because, Flatus or blast, or of flowing, that is, by a Blas:
Which ceasing, the body which it lifted up, setleth. From whence I conclude,
that the Air or Wind, whether it be shut up or free, cannot lift up the Earth,
by reason of its lightness alone, unless it be by chance stricken by an
external and violent Mover: but in this case, the force of the exhalation
cease, seeing it is a constraining force which moves, but not the exhalation
it self: Because it is that which in such a case, is only the mean or
Instrument of motion, but not the chief motive force. And much less is that
agreeable to an exhalation; because it is that which is thicker and weightier
than the Air, as it contains water.

I prove it by Handicraft-operation. A Bladder stretched out with Air, springs
up out of the water; not primarily; because the Air is lighter than water: but
because the water is a any lightness of Air, of its own accord fly up into the
Air. If therefore much Air cannot lift up a Bladder; surely, much less shall
the Air rise up, being pressed down under the huge weight of the low Countries.
For indeed the Elements, do in the first place, and only respect themselves;
truly they act all things, for their own sake: And therefore, a Glasse-bottle
being filled with Air and buried, can never a whit endeavor to spring up out
of the Earth; because the Air is every where in its own natural place, as often
as the space of its place is not filled with another body, neither is it
careful for passage. Therefore if there are hollow places under the Earth, the
Air does naturally rest in those places, from all local motion: But in places
where Sands fall down as it were a fluide body, there, because the dust fills
up the empty place, and falls down through its weight, it also by accident
presses out the air. But that motion of the Earth or Water is not therefore
efficiently from the lightness of the Air; or, that the Air, by the proper
motion of its own lightness, does move it self, and climb upwards. But (mark)
in this thing, weightiness it self, is the active, primary, and total
efficient cause: seeing weightiness, has a real weight, and is an active
quality: but on the contrary,

1. That the lightness of the Air, works nothing: nor, that a Bladder, which
should be great, and weigh only six grains, could be of its own accord, lifted
up by the enclosed Air, how great soever, otherwise (which is false) the Air
should be lighter than that which has no weight.

2. That the Air does not appear out of the water, by reason of its lightness,
as it were the active, or the moving quality of swimming; but weightiness is
the real quality which expells the Air.

3. And therefore the position of the Schools is absurd, wherein Air, or an
exhalation is appointed for the efficient cause of an Earthquake, by reason of
its lightness, as if it should shake the Earth by lifting it up. Wherefore,
seeing it is now sufficiently proved. 1. That there is not a place in the
Pavements or Soils of the Earth, wherein any Aerie Body may be entertained,
whether that Body be a Wind, or an Aerie exhalation: but by how much the

Wherefore I will perfectly teach, that the manner of an Earthquake diligently
taught by the Schools, is altogether impossible. Let us therefore again feign
absurdities, that, as it Germany, under the foundation of Mountains, Cities,
Seas, and Rivers: But a thousand huge paires of Bellows, most firmly, and
excellently annexed thereto. Therefore that they may be able to lift up all the
low Countries at once, it must needs be, that those Bellows, and the Posts
and Axles of these, be so strong, as that they might be sufficient to lift up
the weight. And then, a hand should be required, or an Agent of so great
strength, that it might be able to lift up all the low Countries with its
Palm, or else it could not press together those Bellows which are full of
wind: But such an Agent is not in the Sublunary nature of things, although the
other granted absurdities should be present: therefore the vain lightness of
the Air or an exhalation, is frivolous, and the inbred desire of their breaking
forth. Therefore, I never a whit doubt to deny the natural cause rendered by
the Schools, invented by the Devil, that my God his own honor may be
over-clouded.

Because the Schools have been hitherto ignorant, that lightness is not an
active quality, and so much less should it be an overturner of Mountains: but
they have sometimes do always run back to the Stars, and causes afar of, (and
for Witnesses not to be cited) and no Bellows to be, as neither holes round
about. Then at leastwise, the Body of all the Low Countries, laying on it,
should so press the aforesaid Bladder with its weight, that, if it burst not,
it should at least, in its weaker; and less ponderous part, belch forth that
which is contained in it. Which thing being obtained, now indeed the cause of
the pressing together of the Bladder, and of the fall of the Low Countries,
together with the opening of some gap, is present. But the cause of the lifting
up of that Bladder, is not yet to be found, and much less, of the repeated
succession of trembling and quaking. Lastly, neither is such a Bladder, and its
substance possible to be, without which, although there should be room in the
Earth, yet it is not fit for nourishing, or receiving that exhalation. Yea the
bounds of the aforesaid Bladder being set or supposed, at leastwise, the Air,
or exhalation works nothing, that it may lift up the Earth by its lightness;
but if the Earth fall down or go to ruin, it finds not a cause for it self,
as to this thing, in the lightness of the detained Air; seeing it shuts up the
whole cause in the Fist of its weightiness; and the pressing out of the Air is
to be measured, according to the measure of the weight that lays on it.
Therefore the Bladder being again supposed, if any Wind or Air should blow
from without into the aforesaid Bladder, being pressed together, laying on the
ground, and void of every Body: however most strongly it should blow, yet it
could not at all blow up the Bladder, because, the low Countries laying on it,
should press it together. But if indeed, a fiery exhalation be sought for, in
the place of the Wind, or Air, I have already demonstrated before, that fire
to be impossible, and the exhalation of so great an effect throughout all the
low Countries, to be fabulous. At length, that continual Bladder, so strong,
and capable to be hammered thin, also fails, which may sustain, with its
back, the low Countries, Seas, Rivers, and far more: For although, I have
granted the same, it is not because I think it to be; but because, that Bladder
being supposed, so great absurdities may also follow, and the Schools at
length be squeezed to an impossibility.

Mountains, Sulphurous places, and the mansions of Mines, have afforded to
Country people (whence the Schools have them) the beginnings of this Dream.
Alas! is there Soma or Vesuvius, nigh Naples, has burned now for some Ages,
with Sulphur or Brimstone, and fire-Stones. But it has a gap in its top, large
enough, whereby the smoaks and flame might expire or breath out: To wit,
perhaps to the largeness of three filed measures or Acres of Land: But a Vault
that was next to the flame, as being now sufficiently roasted, and full of
chaps, at length, about the sixteenth day of the tenth Month or December, of
the year 1631, by one sudden fall, fell down into the Gulf of the flame: But it
is the property as well of some Metalls, as of bright shining Fire-stones,
while they are melting, that if any thing of water shall fall in among them,
they all leap asunder: therefore the Sulphurs with the Fire-stones being melted
in the bowels of Vesuvius, they did not endure the roasted fragment falling
down from the Rocks, without a great deluge, but the flame did vomit out all of
whatsoever had slidden down from above, and more. Neither was this sufficient:
But moreover, some Fountains were loosed from above, into the Chimney of the
fire: But what have the melted Sulphurs, or what the raging tempests of
smoakes, common with an Earthquake? Do Sulphurs thus burn throughout all the
low Countries? For an Earthquake had gone before at Naples, and did accompany
that danger of Sodom.

And although they shall happen together, they do not therefore partake of one
only root, the which do obey diverse causes: that Earthquake fore-shewing a
wonder, did also enclose

I would, the Schools has hearkened to their Pliny, that oft-times, at the
present time or urgency of an Earthquake, Birds, the wind being still, being
as it were sore smitten with fear, do fall down out of the Air: that in a quiet
Haven, the Oar Galleys do leap a Mary beyond Dilca of Mecheline was shown,
wherein he had written, that in the year 1540, once every day for three days
space, the Earth trembled, before that lightning inflamed its Sand-Port, and
also the Gunpowder contained therein: whence the City, by an un-thought of
slaughter, being almost utterly dashed in pieces, went to ruin. Lastly, in the
year 1580, the second hour after noon, the fury of the Winds ceasing, the
City trembled, two days before the English invaded Mecheline, and took it for
a prey. But what have those events (happening from a fatal necessity) common,
in the joining of causes, with a dreamed exhalation under the Earth? For what
could a supposed exhalation portend, besides or out of it self? For why should
it include a future signifying of a VVar-like invasion? or Lightning to come,
and to kindle the Vessels of Gunpowder there also kept, shaking the Sandy
Tower, and throwing down the whole City? For before that the Mountain Vesuvius,
belched out its bowels, and covered very many small Towns, with a Mineral
Clod, and denied hope to the Husbandman for the time to come, thick darkness
under the Sun went before, in the Air, lamentable howlings, and the Earth
trembled, things stirring up the required devotion of the Nation. Truly the
Earth trembled, from its own cause, for a foreknowledge of the future
slaughter threatened: But the slaughter it self followed by its natural
causes: But the foregoing signs, have never any thing common, with the event
of future fire.

Since therefore now it is certain, that there is no place among the Pavements
of the Earth, nor exhalation that lays under them; and if any should be under,
yet that it were impossible Italians is called Baleno. At length, I weighing
the cause of an Earthquake, do know, that in the first place, there is a
motive force in the Air, whereby the Air does commit to execution, the spur
conceived in the Stars: For the Stars shall be to you, for signs, times or
seasons, days and years. Moreover, I know, that in the Sea, and deep Lakes,
there is their motive force, whereby they suffer a raging heat without winds,
whereby, I say, our Ocean is rolled six hours, and elsewhere, six constant
months, with one only flowing. Lastly I know, that the Earth is at rest, nor
that it has a motive force actively proper to it self. Therefore, I believe,
that the Earth does quake and fear, as Behold a great Earthquake was made: for
the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven, Mat. 28. The word (For) among the
Hebrews, does contain a cause, as if he should say (Because.) For this is the
only cause of an Earthquake, whereby all things, do without resistance
equally tremble together, as it were a light Reed. In the Revelations, the
third part of Mortals, Trees, and Fishes perished at the very time, wherein
the Angel powered forth his Vial: For abstracted spirits do work by the divine
Power, and nothing can resist them. Evil spirits also, as often, as it is
granted them to act by a free power, they act without the resistance of bodies,
or a re-acting of resistance. For matter is the Client of, or dependant on
another Monarchy, and it cannot re-act into a spirit, which it by no means
touches, and with no object, affects. Even as the Angel uses the powered out
liquor of the Vial, unto the aforesaid slaughter; so, for the Earthquake, he
for the most part, makes use of a note or voice. For a wandering note was heard
in the Air, no otherwise, than as the creaking of Wheels driven: thereupon, as
it were a tempestuous murmuring sound succeeded (yet without Wind) and at that
very time, the whole tract of so great Provinces trembled at once, with a huge
horror: Which same note, accompanied the trembling of the Earth at every of
the three repeated turns. The same thing almost, happens in Lightning: Truly
the Lightning burns, and causes melting: but surely, it smites not: According
to that saying: The voice of Thunder shall strike the Earth, because it
smites. For Silkworms die, Milk is curdled, Ale or Beer waxes sour, a slain
Ox hanging up, retains flaggie flesh unfit to take Salt, and that only by the
Thunder-stroak, the Lightning doing no hurt there. Therefore let the voice of
Thunder, and the voice of the Earthquake, be the note or tone of ministering
spirits. But the Stars do not stir up a motive, and alterative force of the Air
or Water, through a note: but do act only by an Aspect, which they call an
Influence: And it has its action and direction in a moment, even as light,
sight, etc. For otherwise, there should be need of many years, before the
audible Species or resemblances that are to be heard, should come down from
Saturn to the places of a Meteor. And then, a note or sound, although it be
great; yet it fails by degrees in the way. But that the Earth does tremble,
with a Tempest of Winds, or that the Tempest does sometimes run successively
through Villages, Cities, and as it were through street by street in its wheeling
about: That is wholly by accident, and according to the will of him, who
shakes the Earth for a monstrous sign. Likewise, that elsewhere, it does
oft-times tremble; in quick Belgium, very seldom: that changes not the moving
cause: For it stands in the free will of him, who encloseth the Universe in his
Fist, who can shake the Earth at his pleasure, and alone do mavelous things:
At the beholding of whom, the Earth shall at sometime smoke, and the Mountains
being melted, shall go to ruin. But that in another place, gapings, chaps,
after an Earthquake, have sometimes appeared, and a filthy poison, and fumes
of arsenicall bodies have breathed forth, that is joined only to its natural
causes; Nor are they the effects of an Earthquake, but by accident, but not
the causes. But this blindness of causes of the Earthquake, has been
invented, the Devil being the Author, whereby mortal men might set apart all
fear of the power, and so, might prevent, if not wholly neglect the ends which
God has appointed to himself, for the serious reverencing of the power of his
Majesty, that they being mind-full of the faults of their fore-led life, might
repent.

Deh! qual possente man conforzze ignote
Il terreno a crollar si spesso riede
Non e chiuso vapor como altro creed
Ne sognato stridente il suol percuote.
Certo la terra si rissente, and scuote,
Perch del pe^cator sa aggrava il piede:
Et i nostri corpi impatiente chiede,
Per riemper se sue spelonche ^uote.
E linquaggio del ciel che l'huom riprende
Il turbo, il tuono, il fulmine, il baleno,
Hor parla anco la terra in note horrende,
Perch l'huom ch' esser vuol tutto terreno,
Ne del cielo il parlar straniero intend:
Il parlar della terra, intenda al meno.
Behold! with what a mighty, yet unknown
A force, the Earthy Body makes a noise,
And with so thick a rushing gives a groan:
It Is not a vapor hot shut up (they are toys)
Even as some believe, which beats the ground
[Or thumps its entrails] with a whistling sound.
Truly, the Earth it self does feel and quake,
Because the sinners foot does load its back
And our impatient [mortall] bodies fall
In, to fill up its own deep Vaults withal
The Language of the Heaven which reproves
Man, is the Whirle-winde, Thunder, Lightning flash,
And sp'ritous howling in the Air [Ecchoes.]
Now speaks the earth more-o're, with horride lash
Of signal tokens, 'cause since man which would
Be wholly earthly, does not understand,
The Linguo strange of Heaven, yet may or should
At least the Earth it is Language apprehend.
These things nothing hindering, there has not been one wanting, who said,
that from a most deep well of the Castle of Lovaine, he by a sure presage
foretold, an Earthquake was Belgium or the Low Countries. Therefore there is
no natural reason, why the water in that Well, should be more troubled by
Sulphur, than in its neighbour-wells, wherein no such thing was seen. Lastly,
we must know, that an Earthquake is not made by the long preparation of causes
from three days before: Because then the Earth could not be lifted up in one
manner, at once: Yea, if any exhalation of Sulphur, had now three days before,
fore-timely made a passage for it self, at that very time, it had now found a
passage for it self, and had sooner breathed forth that way through that Well,
before it had lifted up so great an heap on every side: yea, a passage being
found, it had made the water by its blast, and boiling up, to sound in the
boiling, and much more prosperously in the streets that were so much lower,
and the exhalation had broken forth in the more neighboring places, and had
burst in sunder the Hill it self more easily, by rising into an heap; but the
Earth had not trembled: Therefore I reject the example of the deed, as long as
the reasons opposed by me against it, from its impossibility, are not
overthrown. Therefore the Earth trembles, not because it feels or fears
after the manner of a living Creature: but it denounces

But the Earth is smitten, and trembles by the Command of God, pointing out,
that sin has ascended up to Heaven, crying out for vengeance before his
Throne: Indeed the smiting He that someth in the flesh, shall reap in
corruption. But pride of life is punished, by poverties, barrennesses, wars,
destructions, sudden death, a miserable loss of friends, etc. At length,
covetousness pays its punishments, by deceits, thefts, juggles, discommodities
of some member, etc. But if two or three sins do abound at once among a people,
then punishments are also co-mingled: to wit, in-clemencies, tyrannies,
breakings of a Vow or Oath, juggles or deceits, extorsions, plagues,
barrennesses, wars, etc. But if sins are conjoined in Powers or Princes, as
well of the Church, as in Secular ones and Judges, The Prophesies are full,
that for the injustice of the same, Kingdoms are translated from Nation to
Nation: Which things, if they happen, with the rise of Arch Heresies,
scandalls, and subversions of Altars, and especially, where the Poor suffer
together with them; it is a sign that these evils do proceed, from
filthinesses, in-clemencies, ambition, covetousness, breakings of a Vow, and
drunkennesses or gluttonies. For the Prophesies do abound with threatenings,
that Jerusalem shall be plowed as a field; the City shall be made as a heap of
stones; that the Pestilence, and Enemy shall take away all the prey, and shall
lead away the Chief of the Church bound; the holy place shall be defiled, that
they may be for a derision among the Nations. But if Wars do not touch
Religion, the sins only of Princes and Judges are taken notice of. But the
Earth trembles, being smitten especially, for the sins of blood, which cry out
for Heaven to be a revenger. Therefore after an Earthquake, punishments are to
be expected, Earth therefore, denotes naught but the judgments of God a
Revenger: To wit, a good thing from an evil cause; as it contains an
inflicting of punishment on the impenitent. Therefore from the Lords
Resurrection, the Earth trembled, signifying the desolation of the City, and of
the Jewish Monarchy, which the Gospel, together with the tears of the Lord
foretold, and which Josephus has written down at large. For no calamities are
without the Lords permission, nothing without its cause, neither does grief or
misery spring out of the ground. Job 5. Isai 45. Neither do calamities at any
time happen unto us by chance. It was the most rare or un-couth wickedness of
men, that slew the guiltless Son of God for his benefits: Daniel, Isaiah and
Psalm. 10. But when an Earthquake runs as it were through, street by street, a
tumult of a City against a City is signified, and the streets to be desolate
or forsaken. For a friend saw this Chapter, it being as yet in Writing; he
presently perceived that a natural cause was wanting, and he consented: Why
has not God (he said) done those things by Gunpowder, by Wind, an
exhalation, and a vapor? wherefore has not he said it or spoken it, and the
Earth was moved? with God there are a thousand ways, neither is it certain
what mean he has used. First of all, if I have given a reason, why the Earth
trembling does necessarily chap, by the example of a Bell which trembles after
the stroke; certainly, he ought not to be angry with me; For, neither intended
I, that he that exceedes every manner, does tie up himself to manner and
means: But in-as-much as that friend does inter-ject natural means; as are
the wind, a vapor, an exhalation, Gunpowder, laid under the Low Countries:
These things were already sufficiently refuted in my Writings, as to be
possible in nature: wherefore, they are again unseasonably alleged, as if God
should have need of those means; Because when God makes use of means in
working miraculously, he also oftentimes uses natural things; but he does
not then make use of things which are reckoned as fellow-causes: For those
means rather are, and do contain mysteries, than the vigor of any causality.
Therefore, I have drawn my conjecture of the smiting voice or tone (not that I
am a conscious or a fellow-knower of, or a searcher into divine Counsel) out of
that word. The Voice of Thunder shall strike the Earth. Moses smote the waters
of Egypt, and they were turned into blood, and the Frogs overcovered the Land
of Egypt: he smote the Sea with his Rod, and the waters stood still: he smote
the Rock, and it brought forth a Fountain. Elisha commanded the King, to smite
the Earth, and was wroth with him, because he had not smitten it oftener,
because the number of Commissionary smitings, did contain the number of
Victories, and repeated turns of the enemy as yet to be beaten. Therefore for
the keeping of peace with my friend, I have explained my self. I confess (I
say) willingly, that I would not search into Divine Mysteries: But the manner
and means which God uses in the Earthquake, I have attained only by
conjecture. But neither at length, have I desired to make these things known,
nor that I might be taken notice of as a brawler; but that the fear of the
Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom, may arise from the trembling of the
Earth. D. Streithagen Cannon of Hemsberg, in his Germane Flourish, has writ
down a Chronograph, or Verse of the time of this Earthly trembling, by reason
of its unwonted strangeness, and largeness of the places.

Smitten (the 4th of April) was the Earth with tumult wide,
From which unwonted slaughter, covered Bodies down do slide.
From the face of the Lord the Earth was moved, from the face of the God of
Jacob.

CHAP. XVIII. The fiction of Elementary Complexions and Mixtures.
1. Why the Earth has seemed not to be a primary Element. 2. That the fire is
neither a substance, nor an accident. 3. That all visible things are materially
of water only. 4. Why the place of the Air which is called the middle Region,
is cold. 5. What the three first things of the Chemists may be. 6. Some Bodies
are not reduced into the three first things. 7. The unconstancie of Paracelsus.
8. The error of the Chemists. 9. The reducing of the three first things, into
the water of a Cloud, is demonstrated. 10. The swift or volatile Salt of simple
Bodies, may be fixed by co-melting, 11. The three first things were not before,
but are made in seperating, and that indeed, a new Creature. 12. The Oil of
things is nothing but water, the seed of the compound Body being abstracted or
withdrawn. 13. The same thing is proved in a live Coal. 14. What the wild Gas
of things is. 15. How a Gas is bred in the Grape. 16. The Gas of Wines. 17. Why
much of the Grape may hurt. 18. That the Gas of new Wine, is not the Spirit of
Wine. 19. An erroneous opinion of Paracelsus. 20. A twofold Sulphur in Tin,
from whence, the lightness of the same. 21. Gunpowder proves Gas. 22. Some
things do mutually transchange themselves into Gas. 23. The mutual
unsufferableness of some things that are melted together. 24. That Gas,
materially is not Earth or Air. 25. The same thing, by a supposition of a
falsehood, and seven absurdities. 26. That a mixed Body is not converted into an
Element, by the force of an Element the Conqueror. 27. A Handicraft operation
of the Liquor Alkahest. 28. Gas is wholly of the Element of Water. 29. It is
proved by the Handicraft operation of a live Coal. 30. By Handicraft operation,
that every Vegetable is totally and materially of water alone. 31. So a stone
is wholly of water. 32. Fishes and all fatness, are wholly of water. 33. Every
smoke is only of water. 34. All Sulphurs are reduced into a smoke and Gas; but
these are reduced into water. 35. Why fire cannot make Air of Water. 36. Ashes
and Glass are of Water alone. 37. The Gas of Salts is nothing but an
un-savourie Water. 38. The Gas of fruits is nothing but water. 39. The Comments
or devises of Scholars concerning exhalations. 40. Natural Philosophy is in
darkness without the Art of the fire. 41. The spirit or breath of life, is
materially the Gas of the Water. 42. The sweat before death, is not sweat; but
the melting of a Liquor. 43. By an Endemicall or common Gas, we are easily
snatched away.

I Have said, that there are two primary Elements; the Air, and the Water;
because they do not return into each other: but, that the Earth is as it were
born of water; because it an Element and Substance; but to be death in the hand
of the Artificer, given for great uses. I say, an artificial Death for Arts,
which the Almighty has created, but not a natural

But now I take upon me to demonstrate, that Bodies which are believed to be
mixed are materially the fruits of water only; neither that they have need of
the Wedlock of another Element: to wit, that Bodies, whether they are dark, or
clear, sound, or fluide, bodies of one and the same kind^ or those that are
unlike; Suppose them to be Stones, Sulphurs, Mettalls, Honey, wax, Oils, a Bone,
the Brain, a Grisle, Wood, Bark, Leaves: lastly, that all things, and all
particular things, are wholly reduced into a water, altogether without savor,
and so that they do consist, and are contained in simple water only: For
indeed, most of those things are destroyed by fire, and do straightway of their
own accord, give their part to the water: which part, although it after some
sort resembles the nature of the composed body, at length, at leastwise, the
contagion of that composed Seed being taken away, that water, or Mercury of
things, returns into the simple and un-savoury water of rain: So Oils, and
fats, being separated by the fire, a little of the Alcali Salt being added to
them, do at length assume the nature of Soap, and depart into Elementary water:
yea, whatsoever things are inflamed by an open fire in the very entertainment
of the Clouds, are reduced voluntarily, into water: For such was the necessity
of the cold of that place (as I have already taught above) that whatsoever
things should rise up thither from the lower places, should forget their seeds,
by the

But some Bodies, do refuse to be divided into the three things; at length, the
Liquor Alkahest Paracelsus being adjoined, they decay into a Salt, and that
Salt is destroyed by passing over into an un-savory water. The Art of the fire
being despised, has made these things to be unknown in the Schools. But I
have not only a War with those that are ignorant of nature, the despisers of
the searching mistress of Philosophy, but also with Paracelsus, the
Standard-defender of the Chemists: for whom, when it was hard to have declined

He being unconstant to himself, has made himself ridiculous, and all those
particular Aqua vitae excellently well purified from its dregs, which burns
Oily bodies through its whole Homogeniety or sameliness of kind: for Aqua
vitae by Salt of Tartar which is near akin to it, is presently changed as to
its 16th part, into Salt, and all the rest becomes a simple Elementary water:
And one only part is made a Salt, although it be of the same kind with the
other, and so is equally reducible into water, because that in actions of
bodies and spirits, under their dissolving, there are made diverse coagulations
of the dissolver.

In like manner also in the operation of the fire, Salts which before were
volatile or swift Arsenick, being both volatile things, may be fixed by
co-melting. Therefore the three first things are not only separated, but are
sharpened, changed, do vary the nature of the composed body, and so are made by
the fire, a new creature, not indeed being created anew, but being brought
forth by the fire. So a sile, is no more the earth of the Potter: but now a
Stone: So ashes and smoke are no more Wood, nor an Alcali, nor Sand Glass:
Because the force of the fire does not produce seeds, but by consuming does
transchange them, and by seperating, alters all particular bodies.

Moreover, none dares to say, that the Salt of Tartar, in the case proposed,
does produce an Element out of that which is not an Element, as if a Salt were
the Father of the Element of Aqua vitae to be such as it is: But the part,
which may be fixed in the Salt of Tartar, which has taken to it the condition
of a Salt, was fat: it being before wholly capable of burning, volatile, and of
the same condition with its fellows. Immediately therefore after the
destruction of the seed of the Sulphur of the Wine, it is nothing but an
Elementary water.

So every Oil is materially simple water, which a small quantity of seed
translates into a combustible Mass, and plays the mask of a Sulphur: And
every seed is (according to a Alcali of its own accord, or by things adjoined
(for an Alcali is that which before was not a Salt, yet its combustion being
finished, it is a residing Salt.) So ashes is by its own proper Alcali made a
mere Salt: But every Alcali, the fatness being added, is reduced into a watery
Liquor, which at length, is made a mere and simple water (as is to be seen in
Soaps, the Azure-stone, etc.) as often as by fixed adjuncts, it lays aside the
seed of fatness. For otherwise, it is not proper to the fire to make a water
(rather a flame) but only to separate things of a different kind. Therefore,
if water may be made out of Sulphurs, and not by the proper transmutation of
fire; it must needs be, that Sulphurs are begotten of mere water: For truly,
neither is water separated from Oils, but that is truly made of these; because
the water was not in it by a formal act, but only materially: to wit, the
mask of the seeds being withdrawn.

Moreover, every coal which is made of the co-melting of Sulphur and Salt
(working among themselves in time of burning) although it be roasted even to
its last day in a bright

I call this Spirit, unknown hitherto, by the new name of Gas, which can
neither be constrained by Vessels, nor reduced into a visible body, unless the
seed being first extinguished. etc. Or by a strange addition, as I shall
sometime show concerning Sal Armoniack: or at length, by some alterative
disposition,

The Gas of Wines, if it be constrained by much force within Hogs-heads, makes
Wines Wine in new Wine. But vain trials have taught me, that the Gas of Grapes
and new Wine are in the way to Wine, but not the spirit of Wine. For the juice
of Grapes differs from Wine, no otherwise than the pulse of water and meal, do
from Ale or Beer: For a fermentall disposition coming between both, disposes
the foregoing matter into the transmutation of it self, that thereby another
Being may be made. For truly, I will at sometims teach, that every formal
transmutation does presuppose a corruptive ferment. Other more refined Writers
have thought, that Gas is a wind or Paracelsus supposed, that the air does
invisibly lurk under the three other Elements, in every body; but in time
only, that the Air is visible: but his own unconstancy reproves himself,
because, seeing that he shows in many places elsewhere, that bodies are
mixed of the three first things; but that the Elements are not Bodies, but the
mere wombs' of things.

But he observed not a twofold Sulphur in Tin (and therefore is it lighter
than other Mettalls:) Jupiter or Tin makes every Metal frangible or capable
of breaking, and brickle, it being but a little defiled with its odor only:
but that the other Sulphur is Oily. For Gunpowder does the most nearly express
the History of Gas: For it consists of Saltpeter (which they rashly think to
be the Nitre of the Ancients,) and the which is at this day Nilus) of Sulphur,
and a Coal, because they being joined, if they are enflamed, there is not a
Vessel in nature, which being close shut up, does not burst by reason of the
Gas. For if the Coal be kindled, the Vessel being shut, nothing of it
perishes: but Sulphur, if (the Glass being shut) it be sublimed, wholly
ascends from the bottom, without the changing of its Species or kind.
Saltpeter also being melted in a shut Vessel, as to one part of it, gives a
sharp Liquor that is watery; but as to the other part, it is changed into a
fixed Alcali.

Therefore fire sends forth an Air, or rather a Gas, out of all of them singly,
which else, if the air were within, it would ^end forth from the three things
being connexed. Therefore

For so Lead being roasted with Mercury and Sulphur, departs into a sudden
flame, a small lee or dreg being left, almost of no weight, yet enlarged to the
extension of the

Wherefore if the Gas were air, all the Gunpowder should be air, and the Lead
it self should be wholly air. But it is not possible for the fire to produce
out of the same Elementary cannot any more through humane cunning, return into
Earth or Air: it also follows, that the convertings of the Sulphur, Coal, and
Saltpeter, into a Gas, or into Earth, are not the ultimate, as neither the
true Elements of Air and Earth.

Lastly, let us measure these things in a rusticall sense: as if the aforesaid
simple bodies should be sometimes turned into Air, but sometimes into Earth,
because there was a mutual

2. Because a mixed body, consisting almost wholly of the Element of Air, the
same cannot almost wholly consist of the Element of Earth.

3. Because the conversion of the Elements, is made by the action of one
Element, and its superiority over the other.

4. But not that the forms of mixed bodies, or fruits, suffering by the inward
Elements, have power to turn one Element into another.

5. Next, because the fire cannot dispose the mixed body, that it should be
sometimes turned into Air, after inflaming, but another time wholly into the
shape of Earth.

6. At length, because that in the corrupting of mixed bodies, there is not an
immediate converting of one Element into another.

7. Last of all, because the variety of converting a mixed body into Elements,
does not depend on the will of man, who is able only to join active things to
passive: to wit, whose activity is in the victory it self of the superior
Element. Which kind of Element, man Alcalies being adjoined, it is wholly
reduced into an un-savory Elementary water: Neither indeed is that a wonder;
For I will show in its place, that all Vegetables do materially arise, wholly
out of the Element of water alone.

If therefore every mixed body does at length return into mere Rainwater; it
must needs be, that every Gas proceeding out of mixed bodies, is materially of
the Element of water. Gas, which by the fire exhaleth out of a live Coal,
although it be enflamed, yet materially it is nothing but water: which very
thing I have shown above in the handicraft-operation concerning Aqua vitae. 2
Macchab. 1. Nor elsewhere is there mention made in the holy Scriptures, of a
thick water, which should be a perpetual fire, perhaps not unlike to ours. For
I have put equal parts of an Oaken Coal, and of a certain water, in a glass
Hermetically shut: in the space of three days, the whole Coal was turned by
the luke-warmth of a Bath, into two transparent Liquors, diverse in their ground
and color; which

But I have learned by this handicraft-operation, that all Vegetables do
immediately, and materially proceed out of the Element of water only. For I
took an Earthen Vessel, in which

Therefore a Coal since it is wholly of water, if it be reduced in any
Fountain, into a stone, it shall not be able to be by water changed into a
stone, unless also that whole stone be materially Alcali Salt, is made a Soap,
which being afterward distilled, does return almost wholly into water, the
which, when as by adjuncts it is spoiled of the seed of the

But the fire does not prevail in that, as to exchange that which is in it self
materially water,

It is also sufficiently manifest before, that water is made air, or air water,
by no help of art nature. Therefore Wood, since it is wholly of water, its
ashes, and likewise Glass shall be of water. But that the Gas of Salts is
nothing but water, the following Handicraft-operation proves.

Take equal parts of Saltpeter, Vitriol, and Alume, all being dried and
conjoined together; Water, which is nothing else than a mere volatile Salt: Of
this, take four ounces, and join an ounce of Sal ammoniac, in a strong Glassen
Alembick confirmed by a Cement of Wax, Rosin, and Powder of Glass, being
powered most hotly on it; straightway, even in the cold, a Gas is stirred up,
and the Vessel, how strong soever it be, bursteth with a noise: But if indeed
thou shall leave a chap or chink in the juncture of the receiving Vessel, and
after voluntary boylings up, thou shall distill the residue, thou shall find a
water somewhat sharp, the which by a repeated distillation, and an additament
of Chalk, is turned into Rainwater. Therefore one part of the Salts yielded
into water, but the other part into Gas. But the Salts that fled away by a Gas,
are of the same kind of nature with those that were reduced into water:
therefore the Gas of Salts is materially nothing but water. But the Gas of
fruits, I have likewise already shown to be nothing but water, as arising
immediately out of water. So the Raisin of the Sun being distilled, is wholly
reduced by art into an Elementary water: which yet being new, and once wounded
or bruised, much new Wine and Gas is allured or fetched out. If therefore, the
whole Grape, before a ferment, be turned into a simple water; but the ferment
being brought, a Gas is stirred up: this Gas also must needs be water: Seeing
the disposition of the ferment cannot form air of that which is materially
nothing but water. Therefore the unrestrainable Gas of the Vessel, breaks forth
abroad into the air, until it being sufficiently confirmed, and by the cold of
the place spoiled also of the properties of its composed body, passes over
into its first matter, and in the air the seperater of the waters, it
recovereth its ancient, and full disposition of the Element of water.

But exhalations, which in the account of the Schools, are the daily matter of
Winds, Mists, Comets, Mineralls, Rockie Stones, saltness of the Sea,
Earthquakes, and of all Meteors, seeing they have no pen-case or receptacle in
nature, nor matter sufficient for so great daily things, and those for so great
an heap, they are wondrous dreams, and unskilfully proportioned to their
effects: And therefore I pass by these unsavourinesses or follies of the
Schools by pitying of them: At leastwise it follows, that if Rockie Stones,
if all Mineralls do proceed from exhalations, and being now fixed, do resist
the Agent which should bring them again into an exhalation, there shall be in
the remaining Earth, matter for new exhalations, producing effects of so great
moment: Especially because, scarce any thing exhaleth out of the saltness of
the Sea; and such is the aptness or disposition of heat, that it scarce stirs
up exhalations, unless it has first lifted up all the water by vapors.

What matter therefore, shall be sufficient even for daily Winds alone? Truly,
it is altogether impossible for the Schools to have known the nature, and
likewise the differences, Philosophy without the art of the fire, have been
hitherto deluded with Paganish Institutions. At length, I have written touching
long life, that the arteriall Spirit of our life is of the nature of a Gas:
Which thing is seen in the trembling of the heart, swooning and fainting: For
how much does it die to a lively color, to a vital light, and to a swollen or
full habit of flesh, and the countenance it Air, is changed. For truly, seeing
the Archeus is in it self, a Gas, of the nature of a Balsamic Salt, if it
shall find the air of another Salt to be against it, or in its way (even as
Sal ammoniac, when it meets with the Spirit of Saltpeter) it is subject too
easily, and forthwith to be blown away or dispersed through the pores, as
having forgotten to perform its duties and office of the Family: For neither is
it gathered into drops, because it is prepared of an arteriall bloudiness.

If any thing of sweat (at the time of faintings and death) does exhale, that
is the melting of the venall blood, but not of the arteriall blood. Therefore
the vital Gas, because it

Seeing that the Spirit of our life, since it is a Gas, is most mightily and
swiftly affected by any other Gas, to wit, by reason of their immediate
co-touchings. For neither therefore Sicilians, in the Plague, in burning Coals
that are smothered, and in persumes: for many and oftentimes, men are
straightway killed in the Burrowes of Mineralls; yea in Cellars, where strong
Ale or Beer belcheth forth its Gas, an easy sudden death and choking
Archeus, or they being rebellious and stubborn, do with anguish resist the
digestive powers. Notwithstanding, the Scripture might be opposed against me,
which says concerning man: Thou art Earth, and into Earth thou shall go. How
therefore, shall flesh, bone, etc. be materially of water alone? But I will say
this from the force of the same Argument: If man be Earth, how therefore do the
Schools affirm, that man materially is not one only Element, but four
Elements? therefore from that Text, those things which I have spoken above, are
confirmed: To wit, that the Earth is not in the holy Scriptures, a primary
Element; but every thing co-agulated of water, is called Earth, because by its
consistence, it is more likened to Earth than to Water; and so the veriest
Earth it self, the prop of nature, is of water, no less than Man, Wood, Ashes,
a Stone, etc.

CHAP. XIX. The Image of the Ferment, begets the Mass or lump with child of a
Seed.
1. There is no seminall successive change without a Ferment. 2. Handicraft
operation is brought into a Circle by Ale or Beer. 3. The Ferment makes
volatile that which otherwise is changed into a Coal. 4. It is proved by
handicraft-operation, in the venall Blood. 5. The Blood attains its own various
ferments in the Kitchins of the members. 6. The unconstancie of Paracelsus is
taken notice of. 7. The Beginnings of Paracelsus are made by the fire; but they
are not in Bodies. 8. There are double ferments, from whence are the seeds of
things. 9. The Birth of Insects. 10. It Is not sufficient to have said, that
Insects are born of putrefaction or corruption. 11. A twofold manner of
generation. 12. How seeds are made. 13. In what manner an odor or smell
causes a ferment and seed. 14. A Scorpion from Basil. 15. The ferment in
voluntary seeds, reaches to the Horizon or bound of life. 16. The ferment of
Diseases and healings. 17. Almost all Medicines do act by way of an odor
only. 18. Therefore seeds are strong only in a specificall odor. 19. An
odor and light do pierce the spirits. 20. Odours do cause or incite, and cure
the Plague and diverse Diseases. 21. Art having forgotten its perfume, is
translated into a servile rage or madness. 22. Unappeasable pains, are
presently appeased by the odor of an outward application. 23. The ferment is
the Parent of transmutations. 24. Of what quality the ferment of the stomach
is. 25. Why very many do abhor Cheese. 26. A sharp fermentall thing differs
from sour things. 27. From whence belching is. 28. The labor of Wisdom. 29.
All things which are believed to be mixed, are only of Water and a ferment. 30.
The ferment of the Equinoctial Line. 31. The progress of seeds and ferments
unto proPagation. 32. The original and progress of Vegetables. 33. Ferments do
sometimes operate more powerfully than Fire. 34. Paracelsus is noted.

AS no knowledge in the Schools is scantier than the knowledge of a Ferment,
so no knowledge is more profitable: The name of a Ferment or Leaven being

I will first of all explain a thing surely so paradoxall in natural
Philosophy, by an example: The purest of Ales or Beeres (which is deservedly
the nourishing juice or meat, away, all the Meal does melt into the Ale or
Beer, and the Water only supplies the place of the Bran. That Ale or Beer, by
a very little ferment or leaven being administered, does boil up by fermenting
in Cellars, it waxes clear by degrees, and the dreg falls down to the bottom:
at length something does fermentally wax sour, by which tartness it consumes
all its dreg: And then, it loses more and more, daily, its sharp, or pricking
soureness: At length it is deprived of the taste, virtues, and body of the
meal. And last of all, it, of its own accord, returns into water. That Ale or
Beer, being distilled, lays aside very much residence in the bottom, like a
Syrup, which at length by proceeding, Ale or Beer, by the degrees of the
ferment shall pass over into water, it leaves no more dregs in the bottom
while it is distilling, than otherwise, the water from whence it was boiled,
did contain, because the natall sediment of the waters is not subject to the
ferment of the Grain, since it is not the object thereof; but the Client of or
dependant on another Monarchy. Therefore the Grains do return unto their first
matter whereof they are, which is water, and that by the virtue of the ferment
only.

In the next place, every one of us does daily frame to himself, 7 or 10 ounces
of blood; but (at leastwise in our standing age) as much blood must needs be
consumed, as is anew, we are nourished by those things, whereof we consist.
But they will have this nourishment to be sprinkled on all the particular
members; in manner of a dew (but I believe it to be framed in all the least
Kitchins of the parts) whereby it may moysten the same, and for that cause,
defend them from dryness, the calamity of old age, as much and as long as it
can. At length, that dew does unperceiveably flee through the pores of the skin,
neither does it leave any thing of a solid sediment remaining behind it: For
so do nourishments at length exspire through the skin in the show of a Vapor,
and like water. But the Schools will have this secondary humor, after that it
has slidden like a dew into the parts, to be assimilated or made like them,
and to be informed by the Soul: But I permit it to be assimilated, only under
the growing of youth, but no longer afterward; seeing that neither is it any
longer turned into the substance of the similar parts. For which way should
that dew be assimilated to a Bone, in strength, hardness, and dryness, etc. if
the bones do now no longer receive an increase? Let the same judgment be of
the other parts: for all particular things in nature have a birth, an increase,
a state or standing, a declining, and a death.

This is therefore the Tragedy and Metamorphosis or transforming of the blood,
by the virtue of the seed. But otherwise, the blood being distilled, does at
length lay down much

I admire at Paracelsus, that he teaches, the blood to be the universal
Mercury of the body, as also of meats; yet that he will have sweat to be an
excrementitious Sulphur. Seeing Mercury, made Sulphur, unless he be unmindfull
of his own Doctrine; Although something of fatness, may infect our garments in
manner of sweat; for greases are not unchangeable, but they perish daily even
as they do increase. Surely I have hated the proportionable resemblance of the
principles of Paracelsus brought back into the three principles of nature:
because they are

There are therefore double Ferments in nature: one indeed contains in it a
flowable air, the seminall Archeus which aspireth by its flowing into a living
Soul: But the other does or contain the aims of things to be done; yet it
straightway obtains a vapor, which, as well the local ferments, as those
things which the disposition of the matter it self attaineth by external
nourishing warmth, do awaken: Whence something like an Archeus is made, which
changes, fitteth, and increases it self, and its own perceived entertainment:
Moreover, afterward it acts the other things unto a proportion of
perfection, and to what is required of that air: For this seed does at first
abound with a certain, and that a genericall largeness: For although it
rejoices to have directed the mass subjected under it, unto the scope of the
conceived ferment; yet oft-times it receives the fewels of a more hidden light
from elsewhere, and a rash boldness being taken, it aspireth also into a living
soul.

For from hence, not only lice, wall-lice or flies breeding in Wood, Gnats,
and Worms, become the guests and neighbors of our misery, and are as it were
bred or born of our inner ferment being drawn from the shirt, and changed by
the odor of the grain, the Wheat it self being incrusted in its own skin,
transchangeth into Mice: and it is therefore the more to be wondered at,
because such kind of insects being distinguished by the Signatures of the
Sexes, do generate with those which were born of the seed of Parents: That from
hence also, the likeness or quality of both the seeds, and a like vital
strength of the ferments may plainly appear: And which is more wonderful, out
of the Bread-corn, and the shirt, do leap forth, not indeed little, or sucking,
or very small, or abortive Mice: but those that are wholly or fully formed. Now
and then, the lousy evil arises in us, and a louse, man's upper skin being
opened, goes forth: he is also otherwise generated in the pores, being not
indeed enclosed in the Eggeshell of a nit; but small, and scarce to be beheld.
But the gnat is always not generated, but by the ferment being drawn more
outward. Neither has it been sufficient to have said in the Schools, that
such insects do proceed from putrified things:

For Birds Eggs also do notably putrify, and stink hugely, before the
constituting of a chick. Therefore life is in those putrified things, no less
than in Eggs: nor is it sufficient to have Archeus suffices, not indeed a
humane one, but such a one, which by a fermental virtue, and for identity or
sameliness sake, does always generate in excrements, such Insects of a like or
an equal form: And so, although in respect of us, it be a monstrous and
irregular generation, yet it is natural and ordinary in order to its causes,
to wit, we affording only a ferment and nourishing warmth: therefore the
ferment of the shirt being sprinkled on the Wheat, does resolve the matter by
going or entering backwards, and so a youthful mouse, but not a new one is born:
For that, it has respect unto another manner of making.

Therefore in the former, and vital seeds, the generater inspires the
Archeus, and the vital air, together with the mass of the seed, with his own
likeness: But in the latter, the Odor only of the ferment is snuffed in from
the containing Vessels, or from the contagion of the encompassing air: which
when they shall be rightly fitted together, they are straightway formed into a
Plant, or Insect, to wit, the Air being stirred up by the Odor, and ferment of
putrefaction by continuance, which afterward is exalted into a ruling Archeus:
Even as concerning forms elsewhere.

Therefore seeds are made by the conception of the generater, making his own
Image Odor of the ferment, which disposes the matter to the Idea or first
shape of a possible thing: For even as the matter draws from the Odor a
disposition of transmutation; so from the Image is afterward made a
disposition of the matter, which procures and promoteth a specificall ferment:
But in this the ferment differs from the seed: that, that is an Odor, or
quality of some putrefaction by continuance, apt to dispose unto an alterity or
successive alteration, and corruption of the mass: But the seed is a substance
wherein the Archeus already is, which is a spiritual Gas containing in it a
ferment, the Image of the thing, and moreover, a dispositive knowledge of
things to be done.

Therefore whatsoever things do contract a filthiness, or putrefaction by
continuance, from Odor, do also presently conceive Worms: and therefore also
Balsams know not how to putrify, or breed Worms: For the Odor of the Herb
Basil being enclosed in the seed, produces that Herb, together with an Air
that existeth within it; which Odor, if it be changed by a putrefaction
through continuance, it produces true Scorpions: For neither is it a fiction;
but in very deed, the Herb being bruised, and depressed between Bricks, and
exposed to the Sun, Aquitane after some days, has yielded unto us, Scorpions.
But the more curious one will say, That the Scorpion came from without, to the
sweet smell and food of the Herb: but that doubt is prevented. For truly, the
two bricks being mutually beaten together, did suitably touch each other, so
that they hindered the entrance of the Scorpion, as well by their co-touching
plainness, as by their weight: But a trench did contain the Herb in the middle.
The Ferment therefore in a voluntary seed, does after a near manner reach to
the Horizon or term of life: For neither is one thing changed into another
without a ferment and a seed.

Which things, as they have stood neglected hitherto, all things have been
ascribed to naked or bare heats, and the healings of many Diseases have
remained desperate: For truly fermentall odor from its self, on the part
whereon it sets.

Therefore healing for the most part, is perfected by Odours, as also,
contagions being imprinted odours: For because an odor does contain the
resembling mark of the ferment, and from hence the Seminary cause of
transmutation; I conclude, the virtues of things, and their masculine strength
to be from odours (even as in magnum oportet, in its place.) Yea, if the thing
it self be more fully looked into, even inward Medicines, as well solutive as
corrective, do work only by way of an odor: For hence it is, that the smell
of a Medicine being once put off, the faculties or virtues of the same do
perish. Quartane-Ague, over-flowings of the womb, melancholy, pains of the
Colic, etc. to be separated by Ointments alone: But it is certain, that not
the Ointment it self, but its odor only creepes and acts inward: For so one
that has the falling sickness, falls by an odor, yea the brain in the
falling-evill, which hears not, which perceives or feels not, nor which,
if it has fallen into the fire, does withdraw it self, obeys only Odours.
For so an Erisipelas or Anthonies fire, is healed by the odor of a towel dipped
in Hares blood, if it be bound on dry: So wounds, Ulcers, and Impostumes or
corrupt swellings, do through odours applied by anointings, wax mild, or are
exasperated or enraged.

Therefore if the seeds of voluntary living Creatures are to be born of odours,
and a putrefaction by continuance, nor do differ in the particular kind, from
others which are procreated Archeus to the matter, and the more easy obedience
for transchanging: From whence at length are made diversities of impressions
into any bowels Organs, and powers, and in the strength, and life: Surely
specificall odours do affect the matter, and subdue it into their own
protection: and an inclination, and self-love arises from the specificall
odor: Next, through custom, there is an easy receiving, and a more perfect
fitting: and at length, a love snatched into all desire of its self: Therefore
fragrant or sweet smelling things do delight: Even like as the light pleases
good natural inclinations, so it displeases reprobate ones; and that not,
because both do see alike well, without, or with light, or have need of the use
of a clear air, or not; but by reason of the abstracted, and Almighty light,
whose Image the light of the day is: For the spirits are delighted with an
odor and light, because light and odor do immediately touch and pierce them:
For the spirit of the blood in one that faints, ought to be more refreshed by
the smell of roasted flesh, than by a sweet smell, unless the fragrancy should
as soon as it touches the life, prepare Archeus with horror.

For there are odours which do move, and by their contagion imprint headaches,
loathings etc. And therefore there are others also, which in a co-like manner,
do cure the same, or at least do mitigate them, though they have taken a more
fast root: And there are some odours, which choke without a perceivable
astriction of the matter, and some are also convulsive or pulling together, and
there are some, which do likewise infatuate or befool, as it very often comes
to pass in affections of the womb.

For the Ancients worshipped their perfumes even unto superstition, whereby
they would drive a man as it were into an ecstasy, and they supposed that they
thereby profited the awakened: wholly rude or untilled. They had learned in the
Law, that sweet smelling Sacrifices were pleasing to the Gods above; and the
Israelite was enjoined in the Camps, daily to cover his excrements in the
ground, least it should grieve the Angel to go over, or compass the night
Camps: For I remember, that a certain man was well nigh consumed with a
grievous pain of the stomach: For four hours after meat, he wailed, howled,
and was drawn Paracelsus, a Canker of the stomach to be incurable: for it was
the place where the bastard ribs do approach the mouth of the stomach. This
man, I say, I saw cured in a few hours, by a fragrant emplaister extended
scarce to the breadth of the palm of ones hand.

After what manner the ferment is the parent of transmutations, I have not
better found out, than by the art of the fire: for I have known, that as often
as a Body is divided into finer

Very many do not eat Cheese: not indeed because it is a mere Tartar, or a mere
Salt, (both, by course, so Paracelsus wills;) but the new, waxes breachily
sharp, which does

And indeed, because the Schools have been ignorant of ferments, they ought
also to have Salmon. If therefore the Salmon be made of water only (even that
of Rivers) he is also nourished by it. So the Sturgeon wants a mouth, and
appears only with a little hole beneath in his throat, whereby the whole Fish
draws nothing besides water: therefore every Fish is nourished, and likewise
made of water; if not immediately, yet at least by seeds and ferments, if it be
great with young. From the Salt Sea, almost every sweet Fish is drawn:
Therefore it turns Salt, into not Salt, or at leastwise, water into it self,
not into water. Lastly, Shell-fishes do form to themselves stony shells of
water, instead of bones; even as also all kind of Snails: therefore the Salt
of the Sea, which scarce yields to bright burning fire, waxes sweet by the
ferment, in fishes, and their flesh is made volatile, and at the time of
nourishing it is also wholly dispersed, without a residence, or dreg. So also
Salt passes over into its original Element of water: and so the Sea, although
it receives salt streams, yet it is not every day the salter.

For the purest water, although it be free from all defilement, nevertheless
under the Equinoctial-line

So the most pure Fountain Water waxes filthy through a ferment of the Vessel
putrified by continuance, it conceives Worms, it brings sorth Gnats, yea is
covered with a skin. Fens etc. And moreover, swimming-herbs do cover the water,
being contented only with the drinking of water putrified through continuance.
And even as stones are from Fountains wherein there is a stony seed and ferment
existing; So the Earth stinking with metally ferments, does make out of water,
a metally or Mineral Bur. But the water being elsewhere shut up in the Earth,
if it be nigh the Air, and stirred by a little heat, it putrifieth by
continuance, which is no more water, but the juice Leffas or of Plants: by the
force of which hoary ferment, a power is conferred on the Earth of budding
forth Herbs: for that putrified juice, by the prick of a little heat does
ascend into a smoke, is made spongie, and encompassed with a skin, by reason of
the requirance of the ferments therein laying hid. Therefore that putrefaction
by continuance, has the office of a ferment, and the virtues of a seed,
hastening by degrees into the Archeusses, through its seminall virtues, into a
quantity of life. Therefore the juice of the Earth putrified through
continuance, is Leffas: From whence arises every kind of Plant wanting a
visible seed, and from whence seeds that are sown, are promoted into their
appointments: therefore there are as many rank or stinking smells of
putrefactions by continuance, as there are proper savours of things; for that,
odours are not only the messengers of savours, but also their promiscuous
parents. The smoke Leffas being now gathered together, does at first wax pale,
afterward wax yellowish, straightway it waxes a little whitishly green; And
at length it is fully green. And the power of the Species or particular kind
being unfolded, it assumeth diverse Colors and Signates: In which flowing, it
imitatets the leading of the water under the Equinoctial-line: yet in this it
differs, that these waters have borrowed too Spiritual a ferment from the Star
and place, without a corporeal hoary putrefaction; and therefore, through their
too frail seed, they straightway return into themselves: but Leffas is
constrained to perfect the Tragedy of the conceived seed. Therefore Rain
conceiving a hoary ferment, and being made Leffas, is drawn into the lustful
roots by a certain sucking. And it is experienced, that within this Ferment the
Tenant: by and by, it is brought from thence to the Bark or Liver, where it is
enriched with a new ferment of that bowel, and is made an Herby or woody juice,
and at length, a ripeness being conceived, it becomes Wood, becomes an Herb,
or departs into fruit: but the Trunk or Stem, if it sooner putrifies under the
Earth than the Bark or Rhine becomes dry, it cleaves asunder by its own
ferment, sends forth a smoke through the Bark, which in its beginning is
spongie, and at length hardens into a true root; and so planted branches become
Trees by the abridgement of art.

Therefore it is now evident, that there is no mixture of the Elements, that
all bodies primitively and materially, are made only of water through a seed
being attained by a ferment, ferments do sometimes work more strongly than
fire, because great Stones are turned into Lime, and Woods indeed into ashes,
and there the fire makes a stop: the which notwithstanding, a ferment in the
Earth being assumed, do of their own accord, return into the juice of Leffas,
and so also at length into simple water: For otherwise, Stones and Bricks do of
their own accord decline into Saltpeter. Lastly, Glass which is unconquered
by the fire, uncorrupted by the Air, in a few years putrifieth by continuance,
rots under the Earth, and undergoes the laws of water: for whatsoever things
may be melted in water, do forthwith return into water; but other things are
made volatile by the ferments, and what things soever were compacted, and not
to be thoroughly mingled, being brought by the ferments of putrefactions by
continuance, into a necessity of transmutation, are opened, and do hastily
consult of seperating. But the most clear Fountains, although they climb
through the Rocks and Sand, out of the un-savoury soil of nature, or the
Quellem, are purified far from the contagion of Clay, a ferment, and
corruption: neither do they also fall down by chance, but are appointed for
great uses: yet seeing they contract at least the hidden Odours of the Rockie
Stone, unperceivable by us, they hasten into other bounds. Therefore, Streams,
Springs, Rivers, Fens, Pooles, Seas, and whatsoever things are contained in the
belly of the water, do likewise, even from the very birth of the Fountains,
conceive their seeds, and in wantonizing, do ripen them by their course. Also
great storms of Rain, being struck down through the putrefaction of Thunder,
are fruitful; but sober rains are great with young of dew, or a conceived
exhalation: For I have perfectly learned by the fire, that the dew is rich in a
sweet Sugar. They deliver, that in Snow, Northern worms are bred: therefore the
Mountains to be covered over with a long Snow; and although their Grass be
sparing, yet that it is most apt for the fatting of lesser Cattle; so that
unless they are driven away in time, they will be choked with fat.

But the waters which contain a melting, Paracelsus does call corporeal ones,
and he ignorantly Ferments do by seeds play their universal part in the World,
under the one Element of water.

CHAP. XV. The Stars do necessitate, not incline, nor signify, of the life,
the body, or fortunes of him that is born.
1. Natural Philosophy without Medicine, wants its end. 2. The objects of the
Stars. 3. By what Argument the admittings of Ephemerides or Dayes-books may be
supported. 4. The error in admitting them. 5. However influences may be taken,
they do always include a necessity. 6. What the Works of the Lord in Psalm. 14.
are. 7. The foreknowledge of God is infallible as well in things freely
happening, as in those of necessity. 8. Death is foretold to Hannibal. 9. How
the Devil foreknoweth things to come. 10. The Confession of the Author. 11.
How much and from whence an evil Spirit has a foreknowledge of things to
come. 12. Which way foreshewing Signs may be made, which scarce any one
understands. 13. The foreshewings of the Stars determined out of the holy
Scriptures. 14. In what manner, or what thing the Stars may act. 15. The action
of government. 16. A diversity of government is shown from their motion, and
from their light. 17. Sick persons foreshew things to come. 18. Why Insects
have better known things to come, than men. 19. Why diseased persons do
fore-perceive Tempests. 20. Foreshewing does not take away a liberty of judging
or willing. 21. The figures of the winds are described in the Heaven. 22. The
knowledge of the signification of the Stars, is unknown to man. 23. The
Magitians or wise men of the East. 24. From new Wine, Soothsayers or Diviners
of God. 25. The Prophecy of Feasters was from new Wine. 26. That the drunken
or besotted gift of Paracelsus was made known to the Hebrews. 27. Three
histories of predictions. 28. The Stars only to incline, resists the
Scriptures. 29. The inclining of the Stars, how far it reaches. 30. The Stars
the solemn praises of God, do not necessitate as causes, but as signs
bewraying the will of the Lord. 31. A solving of an objection. 32. The common
explaining of the Proverb, derogates from the Grace of God. 33. That the Heaven
does not incline. 34. The seed of man does of its own accord deflux into a
living, animal, and dispersing soul. 35. What the seminall properties of
inclinations are. 36. A fourfold inclination. 37. The inclination of calling,
is only from God, but not from the Stars. 38. The moral inclination, is from
the seed, and from education. 39. The inclination vital or of the life, is
from the seed, and education. 40. The vain and proud presumption of
Astrologers. 41. The inclination of fortunes is immediately from the hand of
the Lord. 42. The Schools seduced by the evil spirit of Paganism. 43. The
sloathfull or careless negligence of Astrologers. 44. How the sensitive soul of
man differs from the soul of a bruit beast. 45. How custom brings forth
inclination. 46. How a wise man shall have dominion over the Stars. 47. Why
predictions from the Stars are fundamentally vain. 48. The error of the
Author. 49. Astrologers confess their deceipts. 50. They suppose astrall or
Starry effects from causes not in being.

HItherto concerning the Elements, their qualities, Complexions, and
contrarieties, in shall treat of the State politic, or of Warlike affairs:
For why, S. Paul drives every Sacrificer from the like things. No man (he
says) going a warfare, intangleth himself with the affairs of this life:
Therefore, the Studies of natural Philosophy; have I directed to a farther
end, to wit, to the profit of men, but not to the delighting of the Readers:
For this cause also I declame concerning the Stars, because they are thought to
be the causers of any kind of Diseases, Inclinations, and Fortunes. And
indeed, Paracelsus at length consented in this thing, although he be refractory
in all other things, to the Study of the Ancients.

First of all, I will take the Text: The Heavens declare the glory of God, and
the Firmament shows his handy works. For that sounds, that the Heavens were
chiefly created, that they Ephemerides; yet it will have those things to be
beheld, not as free contingencies, or arbitrall, and much less as necessary
ones; but nakedly, as it were the effects of the first Qualities and
Complexions. Wherein, how much they have erred, I have already demonstrated in
the premises: And moreover, how far they have in this thing gone back

Which thing is alike proper to all causes, neither does it include a
singularity for the Heaven: but if the Influences of Heaven are only after the
manner of a sign and fore-shewing; The Stars shall be unto you for Signs,
Times or Seasons, days and years. But these Works of the Lord showed from a
necessity, by the Stars, and by the Firmament, are not Alpha and Omega of all
things, He gives, and takes away Victories, Wars, Famine, and Pestilences;
also second, partaking causes, also free mediating con-causes, and occasional
ones accompanying them: over all which, notwithstanding God is, sits as chief,
as the total, immediate, and independent cause. Therefore the Firmament is a
preacher of all these Works: for neither does God more err in these free
contingent things, than in animal, accustomed, and necessary things, if the
Firmament was made by God, (the Mover and knower of all things) to foreshew.

The Land of Libyssa shall over-cover the dead Carcass of Hannibal, as Appian
relates it to have been foretold by an Oracle of the evil spirit. Hannibal
hoped (he says) that he should Lybia or Africa, who died in Bythinia near the
River Libyssus: For the Devil cannot foreknow the lots, or events of future
Wars, which are in the hand of the God of Armies, and as yet in the future will
or judgment of man, unless he shall first read them decyphered in a
foretelling Star.

Which Picture of the Stars; while they no where find mentioned, but cannot
deny but that the Devil declares things to come; they have meditated of a
privy shift, and do say, Adam. But I conceive with Dionysius, that the inferior
Angels are enlightened by the superior: but this light continually to beam forth
Hannibal took poison, Satan persuading him: But this he did not certainly know,
as neither could he foretell it, if man has free will, and therefore neither
did he know that Hannibal would certainly obey his persuasions: neither does
Hannibal die by the foolish persuasion of Satan, which could not be knit to its
causes depending on the divine will: For neither does he die by the poison, but
first he is a runaway from many adverse battles: But the Lord, the only God
of Armies, has Victories in his own hand, neither is the evil spirit chief in
Battles: Therefore to have foreknown the issue of Wars, is the same, as of free
contingencies: For truly, Victory does for the most part arise occasionally,
from a contingent thing not premeditated of: therefore I conclude, that the
infernal enemy does read the Pictures of the Stars, whereby the Firmament is
said to foretell the Handy works of the Lord.

But thou will say, whence do the Heavens make Predictions, which no mortal
men have known, and the which to be known by the evil spirit, is wickedness?
In the first place, it The Lord has not done a word, which he does not
signify to his servants the Prophets. Lastly, if the number of mortal men, be
scarce the hundredth of Angels that are good Spirits: it suffices, that these
at least, do read the foretokens of future things, and therefore do they praise
the Lord anew. Lucifer indeed has waxed proud by the much knowledge of things,
both of those that do exist, and of things afterward to be, and it was
natural to him, the which he breaths in without grace: But it does not
therefore follow, that he has known all mortal men to come, and their
fortunes, vices, defects, sins, grace, and whatsoever things should be
hereafter, like to a second cause; as neither the secret mysteries of God, that
are revealed in succession of days, and added to a connection of causes. But,
whether Plagues do arise, and rage, or Tyrannies, Wars, destructions, tumults,
or the beginnings of arch-Hereticks, the Lord permitting them, at leastwise
those things shall be as well connexed to their own necessary, and second
causes, although arbitrall and occasional ones, as otherwise, Meteors are to
theirs: For neither is the office of foreshewing the Handy works of the Lord to
be restrained to the changes of the Air alone; but absolutely unto all the
works of the Lords hands: Because if the Stars can be preachers of the
threatening effects of the wrath of God, which without second causes should be
committed to the smiting Angel: why shall they not also, in like manner, show
the works of the Lord deputed or reckoned to second and free causes? For truly,
what things soever God foreknoweth, he can also, if he will, show them by his
Instruments: but those proper Instruments of God are the Firmament, and the
Lights thereof, as the Scripture witnesses.

Yea truly, I have been bold to attribute more Authority to the Heaven, than
what has Stars are to us for foreshewing Signs, Seasons, or changes of the
Air; lastly, for days, and years: wherefore the Text takes away all power of
causes, besides in the abovesaid revolutions of seasons, days, and years:
Neither do they act, I say, but by a motive and alterative Blas. But the Stars
are said to act by motion and light only; but motion in the Schools is said
to act only by

Hence surely I ought to have borrowed other causes from the Blas of the
Heaven. There is a certain action indeed, hitherto unknown to the Schools,
which in the proper limit of

And moreover I may easily believe, if Insects do utter the foreshewing signs
of seasons, that we also at the time of health, might foreknow all things,
unless corruption had bespattered Adam knew the natures of living Creatures.
And although the Stars do foretell the effects depending on free, and
contingent causes; yet I would not be understood, that a gift is given to the
Stars of bringing in the causality of future things: for it is sufficient, that
in this thing they perform the office of a Preacher, as it were means
depending on the foreknowledge of God: for as the foreknowledge of God does
not take away from man a liberty of willing or judging, and his tie with the
foreknowledge does not take away the infallibility of events: nevertheless, it
least of all contains an unavoidableness: much less does the foretelling of
the Firmament induce any necessity of contingency, or accidental event on the
Ninivites: In which case, although the Stars do loose much of their certainty,
and strength: yet they do not forsake a certainty of necessity, as often as the
Signs do show forth the fore-tellings of Events.

Wherefore, I reckon with my self, that the figures of things, successive
throughout Ages, are decyphered in the Heavens, as it were in Tables (which
figures, they name the laws of destiny) and that, not indeed, by an Hebrew
Alphabet (as some of the Rabbis Dream) but that Provinces, Kingdoms, and men,
have their Stars, on which the Stage of things accidentally happening to their
Subject, appointed for every one of them in the revolutions of days, is
decyphered: wherefore neither is it a wonder, if evil Spirits shall know how
to foretell many of these things: And so much the less, if to every one of us,
are designed good Spirits our keepers. Even as the Mountain Garganus, Kingdoms,
and Commonwealths, have Spirits for their own Rulers, and Defenders. For so
the fore-shewings, not only of the rising, and period of Kingdoms are therein
painted forth; but also the races, and ends of all men are historically figured
out by their peculiar Star, which are also typically decyphered.

Which knowledge indeed, although it being known to Spirits, naturally
forbidden to man, I do oftentimes read it by its true name, the divining of the
Heaven, yet, I find it For your old men shall dream Dreams, and your young men
shall have Visions, and shall prophecy; for this which contains all things,
has the power of a voice, it opens future contingencies showed by their
Stars, only to whom, and when it will.

On some in the mean time, he bestows a figurative knowledge of the Stars,
even as to the wise men of the East: but to others, he gives Dreams, as to
Joseph, and the same wise Joseph, and to Daniel a man of desires. Also there
are some at this day, as mad men, and drunkards, foretelling things to come,
and not knowing, what, to whom, in what manner, or by what means, or why they
do presage: For so according to Josephus, Jesus, a certain man, foretold the
destruction of the holy City with a continual cry, and for that cause, he was
beaten. But the Apostles spa^^ from the Comforter, with the Tongues of all
Nations which were then under the Sun; but by the Hebrews and Pagans, they were
accounted to be drunk with new Wine. Although there was no new Wine then to be
found in Palestina: For they prophesying, glorified the Lord Jesus: for neither
is it read, that any was then preached unto, or converted. Therefore they were
Bacchus's Feasts, to Predictions.

Therefore Prophecy from new Wine, or otherwise foretelling, seems to be in
some Paracelsus calls a drunken or besotted gift, which was made known to the
Jews, and therefore falsely attributed to the Apostles.

Moreover, that I may demonstrate, the events of men to be described in the
Stars, I

First of all, Roderick the fourth, the last King of the Goths, reigning, the
Castle of Toletum which had now stood shut even from the days of King Bamba,
was through the curiosity of Roderick, opened; but there was nothing found in
it, besides one only Chest: But in the Chest, a Cotton Towel, rouled up,
showing the Garments, and Persons of the Africans. But there was in it thus
written, When this Castle and Chest shall be unlocked, a Nation shall break
into Spain, of this similitude and clothing, and shall obtain Victory over the
Spaniards. But the Moors were decyphered with a clothing, as it was to be
above 200 years after. Two others are modern examples. The Duke of Biron being
apprehended by his King, for the crime of Treason, straightway busily enquired,
of what Nation the tormenter or Executioner of Paris might arise: whom, when he
understood to be a Burgundian, he fearing, sighed, and said: Alas, I am
undone! for truly he had sometimes understood by a Soothsayer, that he was
only to beware of a mortal stroke, which a Burgundian was to give him in
days to come. The Earl of Loniguium was slain in a Duel nigh Bruxels, itching
with a desire of Combats, and being the more bold, because he had understood
by Fortune Tellers, that ^e should be mortally wounded by a Wolf. But there was
a young man, a Companion in the Duel, to the Earl de Sancto Amore, whose
Sur-name was Loup, or Wolf, who being deadlily pricked, thrust Loniguius
through. Let the Devil be the Author of these Predictions. But it is at
leastwise of Faith, that the Lots of every Victory, are in the hand of the
Lord. Let us grant, that the Devil stirred up Roderick to open the Chest, and
also to have pricked on very many Kings of the Moors to invade Spain; Yet he
could not know, that he was to obtain this, beyond the will of so many persons:
much less, that the Arabians should obtain Victory (which the Lord alone gives
to whom he will) unless he had first read the consent of the Lord, painted
forth in the Stars: for neither could the evil spirit have known this by the
motion and Light of the Stars, that was to come for two Ages from thence. In
the two other Histories, the Devil, besides the hour and place, had foretold
also the Nation of the killer, and his name: but at leastwise a name is not
shown by the Planets.

Moreover, the divulged Rule; The Stars do incline, but not necessitate, has
seemed to The Stars shall be to you for Signs, seasons, days, and years:
because it is not lawful for any mortal men to extend the bounds, effects, or
appointments of the Stars, above, without, or besides the intention of the
Creator. Whether therefore they are for fore-shewing Signs only, or at
length, for causes of seasons, days, and years: Seeing that they are means
for both ends, which God uses as second causes, they ought to have a relation
of necessity, by reason of the certainty and independency of him whose means
they are.

But so far as it has regard to inclination, which the Schools do grant to
the Stars: it no

And although they do not necessitate causatively, things to come, yet they do
necessitate as they show the will of the Lord. For free contingencies do depend
on their causes, also etc. inclination, does after some sort import a necessity
over free will, which I do not indeed grant, in the least point of it, to be
inclined by the Stars:

For even so as a friend is not the inclining cause of War, or the inciting
cause, if he does secretly declare to his Prince by an Epistle, that an enemy
does prepare War, and plot the A wise man shall rule or have dominion over the
Stars. As though, if the Stars should stir up any one to murders, thefts,
man-slaughters, adulteries, seditions, drunkenness, etc. yet a wise man, might
by the liberty of his own free will, make those inclinations void; and this
they call, to rule over the Stars. But surely the authority of the Scriptures
being badly understood, brings forth perverse consequences. For, first of all,
it is not in a wise man, to resist evil inclinations: but it is of grace: And
so, a wise man in this place, is not understood to be him which is fenced
signs, seasons, days, and years; and no more. In the next place, the Heaven
was created without spot: Therefore it is absurd, that it should be unto us in
the Out of the heart, are murders, Adulteries, and evil thoughts: surely not
from the Stars. Therefore according to a humble Protestation of my slenderness
or weakness, I do utterly renounce the opinion, teaching, that the Stars have a
power of infusing an inclination. For I was in the beginning, held in opinion
by diverse effects, that the seed of a Beast did of its own accord flow into a
living Soul, Embry^, or imperfect young, first of all a certain power does
clearly appear, as if it were a certain vegetative Soul; yet the same is at
length perfected, and arises into the degree of a sensitive soul. And seeing
that the seed of man is not more imperfect than a beasts, I did also suppose,
that to flow with the like pace, and at length to be perfected into a sensitive
soul; yet, not so, as that this sensitive soul does likewise pass into the
nature of man's mind: For since two Masters at once, not subordinate to each
other, no man can serve, but he must hate either of the two, because they are
unsufferably opposite: So in nature, one only body cannot serve two determined
or limited souls; and the sensitive soul is not a substance; nor lastly, an
accident (as I shall teach in the Chapter of forms) but the mind of man is a
Spirit, also a living substance in the abstract, and immortal: hence indeed it
comes to pass, that the sensitive Soul surviving, nature does also willingly
receive the humane Soul, or its perfectly ultimate act, and that both Souls do
peaceably suffer with each other within.

Which thing being premised, I began to consider, that a Dog is a devouring,
biting, envious, watchful, barking, and hunting living Creature, and for one
crust, unmindfull of all benefits, etc. All which things, as seminall
properties, and specificall ones, are in the seed of a Dog, but not imprinted
on him by the Stars; but I have known very many of those properties proper to
the kind; but some of them to be moreover, peculiar to them from their
Parents: Even so that from hence, the race of Dogs does differ in price or
esteem: Therefore, I have known the like conditions to be in a Dog from the
stock of the Seed, and not astrall or from the Stars; and so, where I have
beheld the like conditions in a man, I have also presently thought, that these
have from some Dog-like property lurked in the seed of man. Again, I have noted
some living Creatures, to be conjugall, but others to be born by a promiscuous,
and incestuous copulation: So I have noted, tame, wild or brutish, crafty,
incapable of learning, theevish, cruel, fugitive, fearful, mild, etc. living
creatures: which conditions, as being common to the whole kind, or dispersed
throughout famisies, I have learned, not to arise from the Stars, or from the
Planet that is Lord of their Nativity; but wholly, and only from the seed: And
therefore I have also likewise thought, that such inclinations of men do
increase in him that is born, from some brutish property of the seeds. I have
also found amongst men, oft-times, whole families to be furious, stupid or
blockish, crafty, insolent or proud, lascivious, etc. Whence some are called, a
viperous generation. Likewise, Tell ye (Herod) the Fox; wherefore I have begun
to remove wit, judgment, memory, manners, inclinations, yea, the dispositions
of death, and fortune, wholly from the Stars. Again, it is also in the hand of
the causer or begetter to generate a male, or a female; but masculine
conditions, inclinations, wits, properties, are far distinct from female ones:
For the Church prays for the devout femall Sex: wherefore moral inclination,
or devotion, is due to the Sex, not to the Stars: For Horses are judged by the
color of their hairs; but colors are varified in conception, by art.
Moreover, conditions, and inclinations are changed by ages: To wit, Children
are delighted with other things than men: For a sober young man sometimes
becomes an old drinker, and on the contrary. A liberal young man is often times
covetous when he grows old: Also a greedy desire of Seed (which he less
wants, and ought less to desire) does often accompany him: which surely do not
depend on the direction of the Stars, if the same Lord of the Nativity does
govern the whole life.

For truly, I have distinguished of inclinations: to wit, that one is that
whereby any one does naturally incline into Professions, Religions, Arts,
Sciences, Merchandise, or affairs of

Therefore the inclination of Calling, whereby any one is made a Physician, a
Geometrician, a Musician, etc. is given to the Soul by the Creator himself,
from whom every

But a moral inclination, as it is merely Beast-like, so, I have already
demonstrated before, that it depends on the Being of the seed: For truly, the
Stars should be simply evil goodness of the seed, the conception of the
Mother, education, etc. or on the contrary.

And therefore all inclinations seminall, do grow, are increased, or do
decrease according to the properties of the flowings of the seeds to increase,
or declining.

But that the third inclination, is from the weakness, or strength of the
seeds, and wholly Aholiab, and Bezaleel. Therefore as to the vital
inclination, I do praise the Proverb: Strong men are created, by strong, and
good seeds or Parents.

Moreover, so far as concerns the inclination of Fortunes, That in its very
Etymology has exceeded the Catalogue of inclinations: Therefore I think that
all the fortunes of

For truly this fore-signifying also, does plainly show, that those do depend
immediately on the will of the signifyer: For our lots or conditions are in thy
hands O Lord: Therefore

Never searching into the cause, why mankind is capable of many bestiall
inclinations: For they neglected to consider that bruit Beasts should have
their specificall inclinations from the Adam and his Posterity: Wherefore in a
late or young Nephew, do oft-times the manners, behaviors, and inclinations of
his Grandfather not before seen by him, rise again: Indeed the Schools also
are content that these should be given to the Being of the seed, and not to the
Stars: But being ^ulled asleep through a custom of assenting, and by the
importunities of Astrologers, they have neglected thoroughly to weigh, that the
aforesaid inclinations of the Grandfather are of no other dignity with, nor
separated from the company of the other inclinations; and therefore that they
are tied by the same Law, to the being of the seed: I know not how deservedly
they do as yet teach to this day, that a man is so subjected to the Stars, that
he is continually tempted by them, to wit, that the moral inclinations of
vices, and goodnesses are to be drawn from the hour of ones Nativity: But
surely, God has appointed man in the hand of his own will: For the sensitive
Soul, the vicaresse of the mind, does surely rejoice in a greater liberty than
the souls of bruit Beasts, by reason of the Seals ministered to it by the mind.

But the souls of bruit Beasts live contented with the inclinations of their
own particular kind, under a small latitude; but man's sensitive soul is
enlarged to all inclinations: for as a humane young, as soon as it begins to be
nourished in its own square or quarter, is not a plant of any kind, even as
neither a bruit of any kind, while the sensitive soul flows together with
the rational: So the sensitive humane soul being not tied to a brutall kind,
does wander through all the latitude of brutall inclinations, and easily
hearkeneth to the strange inclinations of the immortal mind brought into it
at its own pleasure: for the mind sliding into corrupted nature, does easily
fall into the motions and enticements hereof, and being always shaken out of
its place by an unbridled appetite, does serve as a Lackey or Chambermaid to
disturbance, which has driven it from its place: Whence, there is a strange
inclination: By the frequent use, or desire whereof, there is a strong custom,
which at length does imprison the mind. It likewise appears, that a moral
inclination is in the innermost properties Asthma or stoppage of breathing; yet
those things come to pass occasionally only, neither do they bring with them
any right to the Astrologer. Cease therefore for shame, hereafter to believe,
that the Stars were created to tempt, incline, destroy, make happy, infuse
Sciences, or to prevail by an acquired right or authority: for thus is the
power of desert or punishment taken away, also a way is opened to Athersme, and
the fatalities or destinies of appointments.

Therefore a wise man shall rule over the Stars: not indeed, that he can
hinder, change, suspend, and pervert the courses, or lights of the Stars; as
neither the successive changes of Astrologer with this authority, not exceeding
the bounds of a Meteor, is reckoned by the holy Scriptures, among wise men:
Which square, if Astrologicall Predictions shall through a rash boldness
exceed, they are not only vain, and conjectural; but driven out of both
Testaments of the holy Scriptures, with the name of Soothsayers of Heaven: So
that St. Ambrose does rightly compare them to Spiders Webs, which indeed do
serve to take flies, and gnats ensnaring themselves, but by a stronger living
Creature they are most easily broken asunder: So indeed these Predictions, do
catch only those that are apt to believe, and less firm in the faith. But
that they are vain in themselves, and framed by conjecturall Rules, I prove,
because they are supported with a double foundation, signs, seasons, days,
and years, but not for the causes of Predictions: And so, if those Predictions
do contradict divine appointment, for that very cause, they are null, and
false. Secondly, because it is not yet agreed among Astrologers hitherto,
concerning the Scheme, or order of the Heavens. To wit, whether Mercury, and
Venus are carried in particular Orbs beneath the Sun, according to Ptolomy, and
all the ancient Judiciaries; Or whether they are rolled about in like or equal
Circles, round about the Sun: Which thing, the Optick-Tube or Glass has thus
searched out: therefore the Aphorisms of Predictions supported by that
foundation, that those two Planets are always lower than the Sun, do fall to
the ground: And then, if two of the Planets (Venus being the greatest or
chiefest Star except the Sun) be carried about the Sun, and they are of so
great power in judgments, and so near to us, those spots, or Stars in the Sun,
or most near to it, shall likewise be of far greater authority to refell all
the Aphorisms of the Ancients: And the Stars which have lately been found to
be moved about Jupiter, shall conjecturally convince of the Rules of
Almegistus, whether they were written from a foundation. That in the mean time
I may be silent touching the opinion of Copernicus, which at this day does not
want its followers, and those of no small authority, although they do press
their consent under silence: which opinion notwithstanding, once breaking
forth, will ruin all apparitions in the Heaven, and Predictions. Fourthly, the
point of nativity is uncertain: and seeing that the Stars do vary in every
point, Every prediction is of necessity uncertain: I being sometimes deceived
in my younger years, have attributed very much to the significations of the
Stars; but when I could not satisfy my self, that by the remarkable accident
of him that is born, I could find the point of his Nativity; which is plainly
necessary, if those accidents do any way proceed from the Stars: at length, in
behalf of a great Nobleman, I described or wrote down his accidents, to wit,
That in the eleventh year of his age, a Wife of six years was married unto him,
he having obtained the degree of Knight of the Garter, having traveled far,
even to the nineteenth year, that he had received a wound in a Duel, that his
right thigh was broken by chance, in a Coach, the precise hours being
adjoined, with very many observations of things: The Country where he was
born, being added; on the ninth day of the fourth month called June, and the
hour, between seven, and ten in the forenoon, of the year 1604. I my self went
to the most skillful Judiciaries, the Question being also sent away into other
Countries, with a promise of 600 Crowns to him who could divine or tell the
point of his Nativity (to us known) from the aforesaid accidents: At length,
none touched at the true point, but he that came nearest, did differ as yet the
space of seven points above half an hour from thence. There were in the mean
time, Standard-defenders, who denied that such a point was between the seventh
and tenth hour, by which such accidents could be signified; but indeed, that
point was found to be presently before the fifth hour in the morning; yet in
the truth of the matter, he was born at London, I being present, seven points
after the ninth hour Solar or according to the Sun, and not horologiall or
according to the Dial or Clock. Afterward therefore, I with a notable
repentance, lamented my aptnesses of belief. Moreover, touching the falseness
of the foundation of Predictions, it as yet more clearly appears: For indeed,
they themselves do confess, that their Eccentricks or things not having one and
the same Center etc. to be mere fictions, and almost impossible to save or
preserve their speculations: which sounds, that they are ignorant of the Orbs
or Circles of the Heavens, and the carryings of the Stars: And so these absurd
fictions being supposed, its no wonder that many near akin to them do follow. I
have known a remedy whereby otherwise the young would stick in the birth for
the space of a day, and hours, and that drink being taken, the Woman brings
forth presently after a quarter of an hour; and so the point of Nativity is
deceived; and likewise Herms's Scale of Empsuchosis or quickening; but this
Remedy, I have written elsewhere, to consist in the Liver, and Gaul of an
Eele, being dried and powdered.

Lastly, the falsehood does more appear; for they say, that Saturn is a cold,
and dry, melancholy Planet, and therefore envious, and stirring up to thefts,
and treacheries, plainly evil, because Mars, because he is hot and dry, (not
the Sun) is evil, choleric, a Warrior, murderer, and cruel, because of the
nature of the Element of fire. But that Jupiter and Venus are of the nature of
Air, merry, sanguine, good, even as the Moon, and Mercury being cold and moist,
are of the nature of water, and phlegm: And so also therefore of a middle
nature. But a moderateness agrees to the most hot Sun, not a humor, nor an
Element. Wherefore, either the Sun shall languish by reason of injury, or the
feigned powers of the Elements are badly attributed as causes of the properties
of the Stars, whose property it is, not to change, but to give an alterative
Blas to these inferior Bodies. Wherein, many falsehoods come to hand.

For first of all, they do causatively ^ink evil within the Heaven.

Secondly, That the qualities of the Earth are evil or naught.

Thirdly, They place the fire among Elementary Bodies.

Fourthly, The Stars also, even the two Elements which God had made, were not
to be good.

5. They falsely compare the Stars in their causative property, to Elementary
qualities.

6. Therefore they do falsely attribute to the Stars a causall virtue of
fortune, wit, etc. with respect to the first qualities.

Wherefore, since there are in the judicial part of Astrology, so great
nakednesses, falsehoods, vanities, and in brief, nothing but conjectures
supported by mere lying Rules; it is Mica^ah. Therefore Reader, whosoever thou
art, be not (after my example) wise in things on high: but the Heaven, as well
in its Situation, as through the deep blindness of our ignorance, none
doubts to be high. Wherefore surely, I would not search into the secrets of
Heaven, who truly have not in the least known earthly ones: But if God do of
his own accord reveal them, sing to him praises with a thankful heart. I am
sure nothing is to be revealed, but what shall have respect unto his own glory,
and the useful fruit or benefit of men. I have written, in the Treatise of the
Plague, more things concerning Epidemical or Universal Diseases.

CHAP. XXI. The Birth or Original of Forms.
1. The Schools do abusively teach the birth of forms to be from the Heaven.
2. The belief of the Author. 3. It is proved. 4. What has deceived the
Schools. 5. An error about the causing or begetting lights of the Sun. 6. The
unconstancy of the Schools. 7. At length, they had rather that forms should
arise out of the power of the matter, but not from the causing light of the
Heavens. 8. The opinion of S. Thomas is refuted. 9. The contradiction of the
same Thomas. 10. The opinion of Scotus is refuted. 11. The dull opinion of the
School of others is refuted. 12. Atheism beginning. 13. The Schools do
conclude against themselves. 14. Augustine thought excellently well. 15. As often
as the Schools do stumble, they easily nod with doubting. 16. Seven Positions
of the Author. 17. How much the Creature can give to the producing of forms.
18. What kind of thing a fruitful seed may be. 19. The progress of the seed to
the wished light. 20. The like flowing of Mineralls. 21. A faculty in some sort
sensitive, is proved in Mineralls. 22. A heathenish error has seduced both
those Nobles into five absurdities. 23. And likewise they had knowingly learned
nine remarkable things. 24. That the fire is neither a substance, nor an
accident. 25. The demonstration of the proposition. 26. The proof of the
subsumption by handicraft-operation. 27. That Light wanders from subject into
subject. 28. What the flame is. 29. The definition is proved by handicraft
operation. 30. The fire is a positive artificial death. 31. Some positions
teaching the nature of the fire. 32. A conclusion out of the premises, and
positions. 33. A Mathematical demonstration. 34. The Schools do contradict
themselves in answering. 35. Some further proofs. 36. The Schools entangle
themselves. 37. They contradict the holy Scriptures. 38. What the vital spark
is. 39. How the Light of the Sun differs from that of the Moon. 40. The Light
of the Sun is plainly changed in the Stars. 41. Why the Moon, although less
than the other Stars, may be called a great Light. 42. The Moon rules the
nights by a night light, even while she accompanies the Sun upon the opposite
Horizon. 43. The Moon is not only a receiving, and reflecting Light. 44. She
is proved to have a Light proper to her self. 45. A cold Blas of the Moon is
from the property of her own proper Light. 46. Demonstrations upon that Light.
47. The difference of the Beams of the Sun, and Moon. 48. To rule the day and
the night, to separate the Light from the Darkness, and to separate the Day
from the Night, do differ. 49. The Moon by the Light borrowed from the Sun does
not rule the night. 50. How living Creatures that wander by night, do perfectly
see under the thickest darkness. 51. They do not send forth a Light out of
themselves. 52. What darknesses that may be felt, and what utter darknesses in
the superlative Degree are. 53. Why evil. Spirits do the more willingly make
tumults or noyses in a dark night. 54. A History of a Night-walker. 55. A wound
is hardly cured, if a Moon-Bea^^ has shone on it. 56. The Light of the Moon
cures excrescences or over-growings of flesh. 57. A whole Frog by a Blas of
the Moon-and cold, does return into a Chrystalline Muscilage. 58. Gluten de
aquatico, Or the Glue of the watery thing, is commended. 59. Why the Moon does
respect Plantations. 60. Why Plants are dug up, and cropped off before the
rising of the Sun. 61. That two great Lights are sufficient. 62. The manner,
and Progress of budding or springing. 63. A bright Lightning is at length in
the Archeus. 64. From whence the fruitfulness of Mineralls is. 65. Brightness
is not the form it self, as neither is the brightness of the Candle the form of
the flame. 66. Nature by it self, does not contain, nor reach to the form. 67.
A progress in hot bruit Beasts. 68. A fourfold form of things. 69. That no
substance is of right, to be brought to nothing. 70. The Schools fight against
their own Doctrine by a Maxim. 71. The Mystery of the Creation of man. 72.
There are more Species of Lights, than of material things. 73. How the
brightness of seeds differs from a formal Light. 74. The Light of the form
dissers from fire in its whole general kind. 75. The power of framing or
creating of forms, belongs to an infinite wisdom and power. 76. in what manner
the mind pierces other forms, according as its own sensitive form. 77.
Properties are inbred by a formal co-touching. 78. God touches and pierces
all forms; but is touched of no form but of a good mind. 79. The innocencies
of Aristotle are the blasphemies of Christians. 80. That the Soul suffers
nothing destructively from frail Bodies. 81. The sensitive Soul in us, is not
the specificall one of a bruit Beast. 82. How the sensitive Soul is limited or
disposed of by the mind. 83. The Vegetative form in a bruit Beast is not of
the Species of Plants. 84. Fire is made hotter than fire. 85. The vegetable
Soul is indeed vital, but it is not properly to be called, living. 86. The
offices of one soul are extinguished, those of another being unhurt. 87. The
differences of the Archeus. 88. The Solar light is in the Bird, and four-footed
Beast; but the Lunar light is in the Fish. 89. The Schools are ignorant of the
degrees of simples, so long as they know not the powers of formal Lights. 90.
The fire of Hell does separate the Archeall Being. 91. Quercetanus deceived in
Ice. 92. The error of Paracelsus in the degrees of Simples. 93. The Light of
the Sun is not the constituter of a Being. 94. The seeds of Solar, and Lunar
things are distinguished by the sight. 95. The two great Lights do answer to
the two primary Elements. 96. Light is drawn into a slint out of the light some
Body of the Sun, and is for some time kept in darkness. 97. The use of
breathing assigned by the Ancients, is fallacious.

HEathenisme does yet so remain with us, that we being diligently taught by the
Schools, do even still believe, that the whole governance, and successive
change of sublunary things do depend on a certain (that is, an unnamed,
unknown, conjectural, and uncertain) motion of the Heavens, on the situation,
light, and aspect of the Stars. Not considering, on the contrary, that the gift
of multiplying, or generation was powered forth before the Stars were born; and
therefore, that the blessing of generation, and of successive changes following
thereupon, would be after a sort frustrate, if the whole government of the
inferior things were from the Heaven; and that also should be true, That a man
and the Sun does generate a man: For the first man that was formed was made of
the mud or dust, and was endowed with a Soul by the in-breathing of the divine
Blast: But I have already sufficiently proved above, that the Heavens are
neither to confer manners, nor knowledge, nor fortunes. Now I will prove
moreover, that indeed they can neither give Life, nor Form: For truly these
opinions of the Schools have in times past so infatuated or befooled them,
that it has stood believed that the immortal mind it self is naturally
produced by the seed of man, and the influence of the Stars; and although the
Church has forbidden that thing, yet the Schools being even till now,
seasoned with the errors of the Heathen, do teach, that besides the mind of
man, all forms, essences, beginnings of all things, and consequently, that our
life, inclinations, perfection of properties, properties, and fortunes, do
proceed from the motion, and light of the Stars, and perhaps moreover from
their influence.

But I believe far otherwise; for I profess, that he who by the only word of
his good pleasure, made the Universe of nothing, is All in All, and at this day
also, the way, original,

For Creation has respect, and shows a disposition unto a thing existing in
perfection; but the perfection of a thing is the proper internal essential
form of every thing: therefore

The Schools therefore thinking the contrary, were deceived, when they saw the
light by it self, to make fire through a Glass. I say, they thought the light
to be an accident; but

And therefore they waxing blind at the natural light of the Sun, flee
together unto it, as it were the Creator of the substance of fire, doubting in
retiring, whether the Heaven should

But they stumble, and fall in the place of exercise, and being unconstant, do
run away: For when they thought that one essential form of the fire was
generated immediately by heat, putrefaction,

Straightway also, by the same right, that all seeds did contain a potential
form, and so far indeed, that at length, an actual form is brought and
procreated out of a potential disposition, Minerva the Daughter of Jupiter: it
was also doubtful, unconstant, without sense as to the subject of its
inherency, and soon rent a sunder into diverse Sects.

And indeed first of all, S. Thomas reaches, that accidents do in truth indeed
generate a substance; but that is only in respect of the substantial form,
whose Instruments they are. In the Thomas has forsaken his Aristotle, and will
have the efficient cause to be internal, sliding out of the bosom of the form,
and dependent on it, and in this respect the generating efficient cause
thereof. 2. He declares these intricacies: one substantial form, does not
cause another, of it self; but its accidents, do in truth, do that Likewise,
Accidents do not in very deed of themselves, cause substantial forms; but it is
the virtue of substantial forms, But surely, by the leave of so great a man, it
is not in the things of nature even as it is in humane affairs, where the
Judge, or Priest does work by the name or authority of an office, and not as
John: For such kind of respects, nature is ignorant of, and those she has
even hitherto willingly wanted: For every thing in her possession acts that
which it does act, without the relation of authorizing: To wit, an accident
does act as much, and such as it is in it self; but not as by the commission of
that whereof it is the Instrument: because nature is ignorant of
under-appointments, and every fallacy of right or authority: For a thing
operateth, as much as, and what it can, without a Commission. For what does it
belong to the effect of producing of forms, that accidents do act, in as much
as they are the Instruments of the substantial form, or in any other respect,
if in the mean time, essential forms are in very deed, and actually constituted
by accidents themselves? But surely an Instrument, although it may generate
something in Mathematical Science, yet in no true understanding is it a
generater in nature, because it is external to the thing generated, and
singularly, to its form, nor indeed containing the essential Idea or first
shape of the form, much less the Archeus thereof: For truly, Accidents as they
proceed from the generater for the intent of generating, ought to contain a
thingliness, and seminall properties requisite to generation: whereof,
accidents as they are such, are deprived: Because at the most, they are only
dispositive means of the matter to receive a form, but not to procreate it:
therefore it seems, according to D. Thomas, that accidents as they are the
Instruments of the form, should be as it were the Isntrumental pipes, by which
the form of the generater should breath a form into the thing generated, if the
matter hereof be first well disposed by other accidents, But then, the
immediate generation of the form should not agree, or belong to accidents: as
(indeed) accidents, are never (under the understanding of an Instrument)
substantial producers. But Scotus insisting on the same delusions drawn from
the producing of fire, declares, that accidents do no manner of way generate
substantial forms, but that one substantial form does in very deed actually
produce another out of it self. This saying, at leastwise, takes from the
Heaven, and Sun, the generation of forms.

Secondly, it makes every seed actually animated, to be endowed with a
substantial life, and form, with the doting Thomas Fienus, Physician at
Lovaine.

A third there is, which holds, that accidents by their own proper virtue, and
without the concourse of a substantial form, do immediately produce a
substantial form: For this man, increase and multiply, is given only to
accidents: For others like Africa, do always bring forth new Monsters out of
the presumption of humane knowledge; So that although the foregoing opinions
were absurd: yet these men do here set up as yet more superlative absurdities:
For indeed, if nature does require (as the Naturalists do suppose) a certain
seminal succession, and continuance of one flowing from another, as a principle
or beginning, con-substantial, and conjoined with the thing begun: how
therefore could accidents, being any way taken, procreate, or contain a
substantial form? they confess that every form is the inward perfection of the
thing, the essence, substance, and original of the accident of its composed
Body; yet they will have it to be born, produced, and as it were created of
nothing, by accidents, as it were dependances of the essential form its
Predecessor: But seeing that all natural things do produce their like in the
special kind: therefore it follows, that they will have the essential form to
be of the same Species with accidental forms: yea that accidents have have
snatched that Prerogative from substances, that accidents should produce
accidents, and moreover the essential forms of substances: But that substantial
forms as it were growing dull through rest, should keep holy day, and had
committed the whole weight of their business to accidents their Vicars; that
they might falsifye their own proper maxim, and that of Aristotle: That every
Agent, is naturally born to produce its like. Seeing accidents should not in
producing, be only accidental, but also substantial forms, and the which they
teach also to be substances. Therefore the maxim of the Schools, seems to me
to contain a falsehood, and something of Atheism; That every Agent which
disposes to a sorm, does also give that form: because if a substance differs
in its predicament from accidents, their principles ought not less to differ:
For the active, motive, dispositive, and essential principle of generation is
the very efficfent cause, and the Archeus Faber or Master-workman. Therefore
the glorious God, does at length, create the forms of substances: therefore,
whose principles are in the general kind and predicament, diverse, the effects
of those things do equally differ, even as the same like causes are like to the
like things caused. But it follows from what has been already said. That heat
produces heat, not fire; and much less by far, the form of a Chick: in the
next place, not any other thing besides heat, because seeing the efficient
cause is internal, and of the essence of the thing caused (which thing I will
afterward prove against Aristotle) therefore one and the same thing cannot be
constituted by high causes different in the particular kind; And much less by
things differing in the whole predicament: For neither is a thing granted to be
without its essential properties, as neither an Agent without an Instrument,
and mean. By what mean theresore, or at length, by what property out of it
self, shall heat be an agent in the producing of a form, or any substance? and
by what co-touching shall heat touch a form, that it may produce this form in
another general object, from the participation of its own Being?

For truly, according to the Schools seasoned with heathenish error, every
form of substances is a substance. From whence Christians ought to infer, That
the Heaven, as neither

Therefore B. Augustine rightly thought; if God contains all particular kinds
or Species, (yea and their individuals) in his eternal understanding, how
should he not make all things? Therefore, although the seed does contain the
Image of the Begetter, an Archeus proper to it self, with all things requisite
to generation; yet unless the essential Being of a form did depend originally,
wholly, exemplarily, perfectively, issuingly, and immediately on God, nature
could never work any thing to attain a form, because it should plainly want an
active power, if it should be deprived of that relative respect: Therefore in
the first place, the Heaven, or Stars, in no manner of understanding, by
motion, light, influence, concurrence, cooperation, or coupling, do
efficiently, and immediately produce the essential forms of things: which
indeed are only alone to us for signs, seasons, days, and years; and whose
offices, none may compel into new services. Jeremy: according to the ways of
the Gentiles do ye not learn, and be not afraid of the Signs of Heaven, which
the Nations fear. If not of the Signs, much less of the Stars, because they
have not the reason of causes, but as they are for seasons, days, and years.
Neither can a Christian without wickedness, give them other offices: For there
is according to Gregory, a power conferred on the Earth, of budding, from it
self; even as also I esteem it wickedness, to attribute the power of
increasing, and multiplying to living Creatures, as to the Heaven

But the Schools do easily go back from the Heaven to dispositive accidents.
But I on the contrary, state it for a position: That accidents neither by
themselves, nor as they are the

2. The Earth also, although it has received a power of budding, and the seeds
of fructifying, without the intervening of the seed of Heaven, or any other
cause; yet it is not the productive or effective cause of forms.

3. I suppose therefore, that God is the true, perfect, and actually all the
essence of all things.

4. But the essence which things have, belongs to the Being, or the Creature it
self: but is not God.

5. For although a Being has its essence from God dependently, for a Pledge,
Gift, League, or Talent: yet it is proper to the them by Creation.

6. But it agrees to a Being, with its essence, that it does, and operateth
something for the propagation of it self, according to the blessing, increase
and multiply. Hence indeed, it has the place of a second cause.

7. Therefore God concurreth to the generation of a Being, as the Universal,
Independent, total, essential, and efficiently efficient cause; but a created
Being concurreth, as the dependent, partial, particular, and dispositively
efficient cause. But what the Creature can contribute to the producing of a
form: Mark, That since Beings have nothing from themselves for generating, but
do possess all things from a borrowing, and freely: they do confess

Therefore in the beginning of generation, the Archeus is not as yet lightsome;
but it is

Which Air being greedy of the splendour felt in the generater, once, and
shadowily conceived etc. Air: Not indeed that it flows here, or wandereth
through that mass, even as it does in bruit Beasts, or that therefore it
dwells in a perpetual juice; but the Air is incorporated throughout the whole
Body, nor varying from the disposition of the fruit produced: yea in the number
or rank of Mineralls, that disposer is almost vital, and sensitive.

Because Chymicall Adeptists do with one voice deliver, that if the seed of the
Stone which makes Gold, being once kept warm in their Egg, be afterward, in
the least cooled Plato with his principle of the Gods, and Avicenna, with his
Cholcodea Panto-Morphe or goddess of Cholchis that gives a form to all things:
who nevertheless, have far nearer saluted the truth in this thing than
Christians, who maintain, that the very lives, substantial forms, and essential
thinglinesses of things are produced by the aspiration or influence of the
Heavens, by the endeavor of accidents, and the favor of material dispositions.

I set forth the blindness of the most rare men, made under or in a time of
light. For they think the fire to be a substance, and the light to be an
accident only: They have

1. They have been constrained, absolutely to deny the forms of things to be
lights.

2. That lives, or forms, and lights, are placed among substances: seeing they
acknowledged no middle Being between a substance, and an accident.

3. Matter, although it is a substance, to be constantly abiding, and always
remaining; but forms to be privative substances, yet to be annihilated like
accidents.

4. That matter does b^rrow its substantial essence from a form not constantly
abiding, but to be annihilated or brought to nothing.

5. That forms do yield to the matter in supporting, and subsisting: which
absurdities, unless they had been credulous, they had by looking back taken
notice of.

1. For they had known, that the mind only among forms, is a substance.

2. But all other forms to be of the rank or number of life, without an
accident, and substance.

3. That it is impossible for matter ever to be made an accident.

4. Because matter is not to be annihilated.

5. That it is impossible for an accident to be changed into a substance.

6. That an accident takes to it degrees, but not a substance.

7. And that therefore an accident being on both sides graduated, cannot lay
aside its graduality, that it may be made a substance.

8. That although light be accounted an accident, it shall never make fire of
it self, unless fire cease to be a substance.

9. That it is a frivolous Question, how an accident does make a substance,
seeing it presupposes an impossibility. Therefore an accident shall not
produce a substance from it self, seeing this is impossible: neither can an
accident make a substance of a substance: For also, the Question does not
press, how a substance is made of a substance; But how an accident does
produce a substance: For although a dispositive and accidental operation does
interpose in the producing of a substantial thing: yet the producing of a
substance it self does not any way respect an accident, as its productive
principle. Moreover, seeing the two chief leaders of the Schools, waxing blind
under the beholding of the light, and fire, have been made to wander from the
truth, I have judged it worth my labor, for me to demonstrate to the young
beginner of the art of the fire, that the fire is neither a substance, nor an
accident; but a Creature peculiar, and separated from both, which no where has
its like: But that first qualities; To wit, heat, and dryness: And likewise
other properties, as there is in it a force of seperating, destroying, burning
up, making glass of that which is not glass, of promoting, ripening, etc.

Thirdly, there is light in the fire, as it were a property more intimate, and
formal to it. But the first and second of the aforesaid qualities in the sire
are mere accidents, distinguished in themselves apart from the fire: to wit,
whose subject of inhering the fire it self is; but light does little differ in
essence from fire, although in a formal piercing, and congress, the light may
receive a degree requisite to the Being of fire. Therefore I will show, that
the fire is not a substance, or matter: yet it is the subject of inhering of
those accidents, or of its aforesaid properties: therefore the fire is a
certain true, and subsisting Being, the which notwithstanding, as it is not a
substance, so neither is it an accident, but a creature of a neither sort,
appointed by the Lord for the uses of men, and given under the leave or
pleasure of the same. Indeed I admire that the Schools have not hitherto
acknowledged, have not looked into, have not sifted out a thing so plainly to
be seen; but that they have believed it to be an Element, and by the only
beholding of the fire, have feigned it to be a fourth Element, and have
supported its subsistence with so many absurdities: Neither likewise have they
once heeded, that if the greatest heat should be fire, that heat should have
the other accidents of fire infolded in it; and therefore the heat of the fire
should cease to be a simple thing. Therefore the ignorance of the fire, and
that which St. Thomas, and Scotus have subscribed to the invented mockeries of
Pagans, has afforded the cause of the errors set down in the beginning of the
Chapter.

Therefore my proposition is; That all substantial forms (the soul of man
excepted) likewise the fire, light, place, the Magnall or sheath of the Air,
life, etc, are neutrall creatures between Vacuum: but I thus prove my
proposition; because they are actually something, and a Being; they likewise
act, and have Instruments, and properties; yet they are not substances, as
neither accidents: Therefore [neither] creatures. Which things, for the stating
or confirmation of so great a Paradox, are desired more liberally to be
explained.

Wherefore the Glass which sends through it all the conceived beams of the
light of the Sun, and gathers them together in the Air into the point of a Cone
or Crest, teaches, that etc. and it has the same means, and properties which
true fire has; but no accident does act by other means, or other properties,
out of it self: but light being knit together, is an agent by properties, and
other means out of it self: because it is the property of light, only to
inlighten: therefore light is not an accident. Neither does that show it so to
be, although the light being collected in the crest, lives without
nourishment: because it is sufficient, that the light of the Sun, or flame does
sustain that light in the crest, without any other corporal food: And so that
it lives, and subsisteth in the crest by the same privilege of the Sun, or
flame. Truly to be nourished, or nor, is an accidentary thing, and an effect as
to the essence; and so the question of nourishment is impertinent in the
question, whether the thing be. Therefore, there is true fire with all its own
properties, in the point of the Crest, but a little above, or beneath the
Crest, there is likewise light, not any longer burning fire. But since the same
thing cannot be in one place a substance, but in another an accident; and now
there is fire sound, which is nothing else but mere light knit together:
Therefore, there is now a creature found, which is not a substance, nor an
accident: Seeing there cannot be of one and the same thing, essences diverse in
the whole predicament, and that thing in speaking absolutely, and without any
respect, is thus true. Therefore, there is mere actual fire found, which is
nothing else but meet actual light connexed or knit together. Therefore all
fire wholly, is essentially nothing but light. Neither is there room for
supposing that light in its connection is made a compound Body diverse from it
self, being not connexed: for we should be thrust thither only for the
difference of fire wanting nourishment, and refusing it. Wherefore in looking
more fully into the matter, truly Kitchen fire is by no means nourished: For
nourishing does convert the thing which is to be eaten up, into it self, and
for it self, that it may convert that which it takes to it, for its own
subsistence, or increase: But that thing happens not to the fire, which acts
only for the necessary ends of its own appointment: which are to separate
seperable Heterogeneals, or things of a different kind that are to be
separated, to change by the flame, and the which otherwise, if they cannot be
inflamed, it only seperates. But the Fire has need of Air, that it be not
stifled:

First of all, surely that does not come to pass that it may be nourished by
the Air, or be sustained by the same, or in any wise convert the Air into it
self, but only that it may thrust forth its smoaks into the Air, which the
combustible matter has provided, by inflaming: But Fire is no where found,
which ever appropriated any thing of a combustible body to it self, which was
nourished, or increased thereby, which thing notwithstanding, the Schools have
even hitherto without any controversy supposed: To wit, that the fire is
necessarily fed, not only with Woods and Coals, but also with Air; and so that
it is always of necessity, to be nourished with a double food: Because it
shall beneath appear that the beams in a connexed Crest, do as yet keep their
own property, and essence, not thoroughly mixed.

In the next place, if connection should change the essence of Light, truly it
going from the Crest, should not be like to it self while it tended to the
Crest. And therefore, here is to be noted, that light is immediately in a
place, but not in the Air, or a Mean.

Lastly, the Beams do not only proceed in a straight line, from the light to
the object; but also they are sidewayes, and crookedly collected, and go
together, and do pass from subject by their fruits and works ye shall know
them: that is, the works of the fire do prove the fire to be true: But those
are, heat, drying up, raising up of vapors or exhalations, burning up,
melting, kindling or enflaming, or producing of another fire from it self, a
generating of its like, together with enlightening.

The flame indeed is the kindled, and enlightened smoke of a fat exhalation: be
it so; but as the flame is such, and true fire, it is not another matter, being
kindled, and not yet kindled,

Let two Candles be placed which have first burned a while, one indeed being
lower than the other by a span; but let the upper be of a little crooked
Situation: then let the

For the fire is a positive artificial death, but not a privative one, being
more than an accident, and less than a substance. Which thing since the
Schools are as yet ignorant of, we

Wherefore, that I may perfectly teach the diverse inclining nature of the fire,
I will suppose some positions.

1. That the fire in an inflamed Body, is so united to the inflamable matter,
that it is like an essential form to it; when as notwithstanding, it is the
destroyer of the same.

2. That the inflamed matter is converted into a smoakie Gas, which is not yet
water, because although the fire has consumed the seminall forces of the
thing; yet some first fermentall marks of the concrete Body do remain; which at
length being consumed and slain, that Gas returns into the Element of water.

3. That every essential form is as for the essence of the thing in which it by
it self is: And that the fire does destroy even the fat smoke, or Coal, the
which it inflameth, and converts into a wild Gas (of which in its place.)

4. That every essential form is so united to its own matter, that it being
once separated from thence, by extinguishing, or withdrawing, it returns no
more to the same habit, or formal act.

5. That every form coming upon a matter, is impatient of another total form:
But a Metal, or any other fixed Body, being fired, the presence of the bright
burning fire being withdrawn, returns always into its former state.

6. That every form of a substance has a specificall matter wherein it is: but
the fire has Wood, Wax, Pitch, and as many subjects as there are particular
fireable kinds.

7. That every substantial form does at length rise up in the matter disposed
by a foregoing seed: but the fire wants a seed, yea if there are any, it
consumes or wastes them away.

8. That the forms of substances, have not degrees, but the fire does admit of
a degree by the bellows.

From which particulars I conclude, that fire is not a substance, not the
essential form of substances; but a positive death of things, and their
destroyer, a singular creature second to no other: from whence I proceed thus
to demonstrate it.

There is no doubt, but that a Coal is far more porie than Iron, and that it
has less of soundness; but yet, Iron being fired does more burn than a Coal:
Therefore of necessity,

The Schools answer to this against themselves, to wit, that the matter is
more compact in Iron, than it is in a Coal; and therefore it burns the more
powerfully, as the Iron is capable Artificer; which things the Schools
themselves do utterly deny. But besides the aforesaid absurdities, another does
accompany; to wit, that heat in the fire does only make hot, but its dryness
dries up, and nothing else: So also, the kindling, enlightening power does
kindle and enlighten, the seperating power seperates, the destructive does
destroy, etc. All which properties should not only be generated by the form of
the fire, in the strange matter of Iron; but should also there subsist without
the proper subject of their inherence. Wherefore the fire that is infired, is
true fire not a substance, as neither an accident; but a neutral Creature,
having in it self diverse properties, after the manner of substantial Beings. If
the Schools, I say, had known this thing, they had known that light does
generate light and fire, not indeed as differing in the particular kind; but
only in uniting, dispersing, and so to be different only in degree: Neither
therefore that an accident does produce a substance in any respect: Indeed they
think that a fat smoke is the matter of fire, but the flame to be the form of
fire, and by that thought, they feign it to be a composed Body after the manner
of other things: But as many absurdities as I have before repeated do hinder
it: therefore the Iron remaining Iron, does receive into it self true fire,
together with its form. So the Air remaining Air, receives fire in the Crest of
the uniting Beams, with its forms, and all its properties: But Iron retaining
the ancient form of Iron, cannot at once be informed by the form of the fire,
if the form of the fire were any way substantial; that is, unless the form of
fire can leave its matter, that it may be only the assisting form of the Iron,
but not the informing: For neither can Air, remaining Air, be at once also
another Body, as one Body cannot be two, really distinct. But I pray you, if
Iron be not throughout its whole Body fireable, but a Coal altogether fireable;
what should move the fire, that having left its own matter, it should wander
into the Body of Iron which is incapable of fire? Therefore surely, the Iron is
fired, and it is capable of fire throughout its whole Body, and so, as it has
thicker parts than a Coal, so it self is capable of more fire: therefore it is
manifest that fire is not a matter. Lastly, it is not the property of Elements
presently to devour and consume other things (as I have elsewhere largely
taught:) But fire plotteth the destruction of the thing wherein it is:
therefore it is not an Element, not a matter, or a substance; but a destructive
Creature, and a death serving for crafts, and given for the great uses of
mortal men. None ever reckoned light among substances; therefore neither light
connexed: For truly to be knit together, or not, is an accidentary thing; which
substantial thing is not generated (as they think) by an accidentary Being.

It should also be the simplicity of the Schools admitting (although falsely)
simple light to be an accident, but connexed light to be a substance; seeing
connection shows only degree, A, into C, and from C, into B, let the Glass
be colored. I say therefore, that the beams from A into C, shall be clear
and lightsom; but from C into B, they shall be lightsom colored. And all of
them shall co-unite in the Crest F, and they shall be again separated: to wit,
from E into G, they shall be colored, and from G into D they shall be
lightsom, being void of color. If therefore, the connection of the beams in
the Crest F, (where the fire was) be not a uniting; but only accidentary, as
it were a pressing tegether into a bundle: Then that light of the Sun is in it
self merely fiery; but differing from fire in its connection only, or in the
complete degree of that Creamre. In the next place, the Schools have stumbled
in the fire: For truly they believed by faith, that on the first day the Light
was created, and nothing else; yet that Creation is not of accidents; which
indeed are not of the proper name of a

But moreover, the fire consisting in a slack degree of Light, is for the most
part the Companion of life. But Light being united, burns up things that have
life. It is the Vulcan or Smith of Arts, dedicated to humane necessities: For
it hasteneth ripenesses, it promoteth the seeds to their ends; it also
hasteneth the seperations of things, the closure or end whereof, shortness of
life could not else expect without grievous discommodity. For in this respect,
it opens, it teaches to dissolve secrets, or things hidden, to hasten the
operations of nature, otherwise oft-times, slow, drowsy, and buried. Next, it
seperateth and expels superfluities, it by the virtue of an adjoined
Ferment, removes the middle life of things, whence are, cheerfulnesses, and
increases of strength: It also seperateth the pure from the impure, the
precious from the vile, the hurtful from the profitable, and the crude or raw,
from the mature or ripe, yea, it ripeneth crudities themselves. And then, the
fire prepares the Instruments of Arts, which our life stands in need of.
Therefore let the Father of Lights, the Creator of the Light be highly exalted
throughout Ages, who has placed a Tabernacle in the Sun, that he might comfort
or supply all necessities by the Light of his Sun. Now I will conclude from
what has been said before.

1. That fire, and hot light, do not differ but by accident; to wit, in
connection and degree.

2. That the beams of Light do pierce each other.

3. That in piercing, they notwithstanding do keep their essence and
properties, not thoroughly mixed.

4. That Light is primarily in place; therefore also fire.

5. That Light and Fire do pierce their Mean.

6. That a thick, dark Body, seeing it cannot be pierced by the Light, is first
affected by Light in its Superficies, and then this heats the succeeding parts
even to its opposite Superficies.

7. That heat is heightened in an object by degrees, and that in every degree it
has singular operations.

8. That whatsoever the fire affects, it is by reason of the place which the
thing placed does occupy; and so, by accident; seeing the chief intention of
the fire is to heat by enlightening.

9. That the fire being at length the Conqueror, overcomes the difficulties
cast in between it, by the thick dark Body.

10. That fire, seeing that it acts immediately, and primarily acts into a
place, it burns all things indifferently, without respect to Bodies cast in
between, as it were removing the impediments.

11. That a thick, dark Body being fixed, and resisting kindling, is at length
enlightened by the fire.

12. That the fire or connexed Light finding a combustible matter, does remain
con-centrated or centred together in its degree of connexing, neither are the
beams of Light separated; because it continually increases new fire which
proceeds in consuming; but the old fire continually perishes so long as the
ascending does continue.

At the end whereof, the whole light perishes, since it has not light from
whence it may be enlightened.

Whatsoever therefore, has been hitherto spoken of united Light, I understand
it only of the Light of the Sun: For truly the Light of the Moon being sent
through a Glass, is so far fire in the Crest, that it is also felt to be colder
than the rest which environeth or goes about in the Crest: Therefore, I call
for touching to be the judge.

And that which is more wonderful than that, that the Splendour of the Sun which
is hot, being reflexed in the Glass of the Moon, does actually wax cold: For
the Almighty has created

First, That they might separate the day from the night.

Secondly, That they may shine upon the Earth.

Thirdly, That they might rule the day and night.

Fourthly, That the greater might rule the day, and the lesser the night.

Yet we learn from the Speculations of the Planets, that the Moon shines as
many hours upon the Horizon by day, as she does by night: Yet the Almighty
has appointed the Moon, to shine, and only to govern the night: And seeing
the Creator cannot err, it must needs be, that the whole Light, and
governance of every night does depend on the Moon as much as the day depends on
the Sun.

Therefore, the Moon was created to shine as well in the Heaven, as upon the
Earth, the full of all nights. Therefore the Moon is not like a receiving
Glass, reflecting on the light

For although our eye finds no proper Light in the Moor, be it little: For we
must give more credit to the Scripture, than to our eyes, according to that
saying; The Sun shall be darkened, and the Moon shall not give her own Light.
From another place this truth shall by and by appear. First of all, it is
manifest by the aforesaid Handicraft-operation of the Glass, that the Light of
the Sun being united, is made mere Fire, with every thing requisite thereunto.
And then, that the same Light of the Sun falling upon the Icy Glass of the
Moon, does loose the property of his own heat, and is made a cold light: Which
comes not to pass; if it shall fall upon Ice, Glass, Water, a white Wall,
etc. Therefore the Moon has powers or faculties, whereby she alters the
Sunbeams: And that cold Blas, ought to be of the nature of her own light, if
between the Agent and Patient a co-resemblance ought to interpose: For truly,
another cold object re-percussing or smiting back the Sunbeams, cannot
therefore change these into cold beams. Truly neither heat, cold, rough,
brickle, sweet, or bitter, do act on the Light; but only visible, and dark
objects: therefore the Moon has a lightsome force or power of her self, which
as it is such, does act upon the hot light, and changes it into a contrary
property. What if the Astrologer does foretell the future Colors of Eclipses,
do not those Colors promise some certain light proper to the Moon? For truly,
they are not conjectured of from a Mean or vapors: because color cannot be
foretold from the quantity of vapors, in the calculation of a future Eclipse.
Therefore let the Colors of the Moon failing of light, be the tokens of a
light proper unto her.

And in this the beams of both Lights do differ, That the Sun strikes his
light by beams in a right line; but the Moon does never respect the Center of
the World, or the Earth in a Dragons Head and Tail, are night-points, wherein
only the Sun is directly opposed to the Moon in an excentrical Diameter.
Therefore the Moon-beames, do not strike the Earth in a right line; but they
are dispersed into an excentricall space, and so she, by way of influence, or
by the action of government (of which in its place) displayes her forces on the
night, or on Nadir the point underneath the Horizon right opposite to our feet,
whether she accompany the Sun, or indeed be estranged from this Sun by a full
Diameter: For such is the appointment of the Moon, which the exundations or
Spring-Tides of the Sea do confirm, which are wont to be no less under the
Moon laying hidden, than at the full of the same. Therefore one end of the
Lights is to rule the day and night: next, another end is to separate the light
from the darkness; and another end to separate the day from the night. Neither
is that repetition to be imputed to a Solecisme or incongruity: For truly, the
Sun shining, or the Moon restoring her Light received from the Sun, the Light
indeed is sufficiently separated from the darkness; but the Light of the Sun
never rules the night, as neither does he shine in the night: therefore, that
the Moon likewise may satisfy her appointment, she can never rule the night by
a borrowed Light of the Sun.

Which thing sufficiently appears, at leastwise, while she runs with the Sun
by day, according Tycho: Yet so, that the action of government of light, and
influence operates more powerfully in the night, from whence the Sun is absent:
the which, that he may separate the day from the night, ought to separate the
properties of the Moon from his own, although the Moon be conjoined with him.
Diseases belonging to the Moon do prove that thing, which are exasperated a
little before night, also at the new of the Moon: And so she works through the
bones, and Marrowes of those who are shut up in their Bedchamber: which thing,
is not so proper or natural to the Sun. Therefore the Moon does sometimes make
a stronger influence on that part of the Sphere that is opposite unto her, than
on the part where she is placed. This light being unknown to the Ancients, has
been called an influence: But I had rather reserve the sense of the Scripture;
because it is said, The Moon was created to give light by night (that is, all
nights indifferently) even so as the Sun gives light by day. Therefore that
which they have called an influence, is the property of the Moons light, and
that is not to have named a thing from the effect, but from the causes.

The Bat, Dormouse, Mouse, Owl, and whatsoever Creatures do distinguish their
objects afar off in the night, under the thickest darkness, and do note the
swiftest motions of objects,

But that it may be plainly made known, that night-wandring Animalls do send no
light out of their eyes, which may be for the enlightening of a medium or mean,
to know distinctly an object placed afar off; and so that those Creatures do
see only for the light of the Moons sake. Let a Looking-glass be placed
between the Eye of a living Creature, and its object, and that under the
thickest darkness; and surely thou shall not find the least reflection of light
in the Glass: yet if thou shall put a small Candle at the utmost end of a
large Hall, but if in the other furthest end of the Hall there be a hole,
through which that feeble light may pass into another dark Hall or room, in
whose end let a Looking-glass be; truly that weak light being shaken by the
direct beam of the flame of the Candle, is received, and will appear in the
Glass; yet it is not sufficient for a man to discern any object. Therefore
much less shall the brightness or shining of the Eyes, a beam whereof does not
fall, and appear in a nigh Glass, be fit to enlighten the mean, that they may
perfectly discern all things.

For there is under the Earth a light even at midnight, whereby many eyes do
see; being Hebraisme wants the superlative degree) without the favor of the
Moon. For happily, abstracted spirits have something which for seeing, may
answer to our eyes, that it may not see wholly throughout the whole, of what
belongs to it self; and some of these Spirits are Seers by night, but others
being mute or silent like to Bats, may as it were wax dim or dark under the Sun
or in the day time; and therefore they do the more willingly appear to their
own in the dark, and mid night: therefore I will subscribe a History

I had in my time of being at the University, a Chamber-fellow born of honest
Citizens. This man, his eyes being shut, did for the most part rise, and wander
in the night; but he carried away the Key with him, and returning, opened the
Lock that he had shut after him. In the Evening therefore, I arise, and
secretly hide the Key under the Bolster; but he arising in his sleep, takes the
hidden Key, as if he had seen it, and goes his way. I taking my Coat, follows
him: But he climbed an ancient Wall, the bound of the College, beset with
Moss, and Hay: For there was an Arch, whereby, on the other side of the River,
the Wall did support the Wall of a Neighboring Garden. It was full Moon, and a
frosty night. I was amazed at the sight, and by reason of the cold returned.
But my Chamber-fellow by and by returning, he so quickly or cleverly, hid the
Key in a hole of the Cloister, that any one seeing, could scarce do that thing
so undelayingly at noon day: But in the morning, he was unmindefull of all that
he had done. For those walkers, their eyes being shut, do see clearly under the
thick darkness, they climb securely, without giddiness of the head, because
they do enjoy a Moon light.

A small wound becomes oft-times hard to be cured, because it is inflicted on a
member by

By occasion whereof, it is related among experiments, that if any one (the
light of the Moon being collected into a Cone or Crest) does cast her beams
through a Glass, upon

In the next place, if a Frog be at the full of the Moon, in a most sharp North
wind of winter, dug up, washed clean, and tied to a staff in a field, the
morrow morning a certain

Moreover, that first matter of a Frog does very much prevail in the healing of
a Cancer, life. and is called by Paracelsus, under a riddle, Gluten de aquatico
or the glue of the watery thing or Creature; Therefore the Sun does call forth
the flowing of seeds, unto the bound of the last Leffas, therefore a profitable
Mustromes and Pompions does show.

Neither is the gathering of Plants before Sunrising, superstitious: not
indeed because nature like unto Serpents or creeping things, cease from its
works by night; but because Adeptists do begin the labor of wisdom with the
light of the Moon, according to that saying; Night unto night shows knowledge
to those that seek it. Therefore two great Lights are sufficient for all
motions, and progresses of seeds, from the first into the last life, and from
this into that: For because they do abundantly suffice to the fruitful use of
nature; hence they do enroule the other Stars among their Bands: And therefore
the Scripture has made mention only of the two greater Lights. Thus far of
Fire, and Light. I being now about to speak of the birth of Forms, will
rehearse that the Mass of seeds do receive into them a corporal Air, the
Vulcan, which I name the Archeus or Master-Workman.

Some seeds of Woods, or Kernels, or Oil, do contain him in them, as Almonds,
Pine-kernels, Pistack-nuts, and the seeds of many Pot Herbs: or they are mealy
seeds, as Acorns, Archeus inhabits them, being drowsy, and sleeping in the
curd of the seeds, being content with his condition as long as he is negligent
of propagation: But when his seed is once committed to the Earth, he cannot but
drink in his liquor, and become swollen, and then contract a Situation, and
presently snatch to him a Ferment putrified by continuance: Which Odor, and
Savor, although it be putrified by continuance, yet in every seed it is
specificall, and therefore alters by its obtained Ferment, the proper savor
of the seed, and consequently, is disposed thereby into a transmutation of it
self: For through the putrefaction by continuance, that native or seedy
moisture as soon as may be thinks of its resolving, whence is a certain vapor,
and afterward an exhalation: A Gas (which indeed does easily ascend out of
putrefying things) is stirred up, and there arises out of them a heat at the
time of that putrefying, of what sort soever it be, such as plainly comes to
pass in Woods rotting by laying under the ground; and the which, do
straightway thrust forth a spongy smoke: because that smoakiness, the signifier
of the heat, and dissolved Body, does threaten a separation of things of a
different kind, and so that vital Air, although but even now more deeply shut
up, threatens a breaking forth out of its seminall Liquors, yet its reins being
loosed, it wanders first within: So new, and moist Hay has made the un-looked
for firings of houses: truly not tokens of a slack heat, but of heat rising to
a degree. Therefore the Air having once gotten a moderate heat, it by degrees
meditates of the perfection of an Archeus, does aspire it, and provokes the
lump of the Body placed under its charge, to the archieveable dispositions of
Forms. But what has been already said concerning Vegetables, that does more
plainly appear in the Eggs of Fishes, flying Birds, and creeping things, and
most manifestly of all, it shines forth in the seeds of four-footed Beasts.

At length therefore, the thin, shining, and twinkling or bright light does
kindle the aforesaid Air of the Archeus, so as thereby he may be made vital.

Furthermore, as Mineralls are not diminished, nor made great by the
substituting of offsprings, and their manifold propagation: yet because they do
contain in them their Beginnings etc. (For otherwise there should be of every
Plant the same Form in the Species, or particular kind) notwithstanding, there
is in the splendour it self, another specifical thingliness conceiving with
young by a specificall Odor, nor far different from the Splendour which limits
the light it self unto [this something,] or particular essential thing: So
indeed, that although that splendour be stirred up by the force of nature alone
(as putrified Woods, things salted, and the Sea it self do teach) yet it is
never made vital but by the Creator, the specifical form of a certain light
being added to it, the effectress of a thingliness or essence:

To wit, which alone draws the Odor, Splendour, and all the properties of the
enlightened

Moreover, the progress of generation in hot seeds, is of a more easy
conception: For the Archeus of those does easily borrow a Splendour, as the
betroathed Air of a greater light: For being not yet contented with the
obtained vegetative faculty of his own kind, he breaths further, and
proceeds to the light co-promised to his seed, and stays, and is quiet in the
sensitive soul, as not being able to climb beyond it.

But even as in the Systeme or constitution of things, there are only four
degrees; So also 1. The essential Form.
Salt, Sulphur, Liquors, Earths; likewise barren Vegetables, dry bones, etc.
whose form is a certain material light, a form containing, and giving a Being
to the thing, and therefore it is also deservedly called essential. But the
other rank of things, seems to contain a vital beginning, and character of a
Soul by the vigor of 2. The Vital Form.
nourishment and increasing: As are Plants, whose form varying from the
foregoing form, are graced with the Title of life: therefore is it to be
called the vital Form: Not indeed that such a Form is a living Soul; but
vital only, as it bears the entrances or flourishes of a sensitive and
living Soul. At length, the third 3. The substantial Form.
Order of things, obtains a living Form, not by Similitude, but truly motive
and sensitive: And therefore it is likewise called a substantial Form; not
indeed by an absolute name, a substance: but substantial only, as if it should
carry it self after the manner of a certain abstracted spiritual substance. And
lastly, the fourth 4. The formal substance.
is truly, and one only substance among them all: So it ought to be callod a
formal substance, never to perish through the infiniteness of its continuance.
But I have demonstrated, the light and fire to be a neutral Creature between a
substance and an accident. The same thing in this place, comes to be understood
concerning every natural Form, to wit, the essential, and substantial, as they
are of the race of Light. But that the Angel, and mind of man are formal
substances, and truly spiritual; their abstracted manner of existing does
prove: which is denied to other forms, who do subsist, and perish after the
manner of every light.

Whence I collect it into a new position for the Schools. That no substance is
to be annihilated

That by which every thing is such, that thing it self is more such. But the
consequence, into their former nothing. Notwithstanding, God created not man
immediately of nothing, but of the mud or dust of the Earth; and therefore his
Creation was far otherwise, than that of other things: For the Almighty took
dust from the Earth, not indeed that which was equal in weight to a man, like
an Image-maker (for of one only Rib, he formed the whole Body of the Woman)
that he might manifest the Mystery of this irregular Creation not to be after
the manner of other things; but substantial as to the Form:

I say, the whole Mystery directed to its ends, or to the Soul, manifesting
that the Soul of man was not only an outlaw, and one only substance among
other Forms; but also, that

But Forms are distinguished among themselves, not only by the degree of
Light, but in the whole Species: And therefore there are as many Species of
lights in nature, as there Archeus of Seeds, and so something like to a formal
light, which brings the matter to the suitable bounds of its particular kind:
yet that that Splendour does far differ from a formal light; for truly that is
forthwith, and immediately created by the Father of Lights; but the Splendour
proceeds out of the lap of nature.

And the largeness of the difference and unlikeness, is placed in this, that
amongst it or at the most, the Splendour of the seeds, is the effect of the
Master-Workman; but the formal Archeus as light does from matter, and
therefore the whole Being of the Splendour is terminated in shining; but the
light of the form is so annexed to the thingliness or essence of it, that they
are formally one and the same, being distinguished only by a relation: And so,
although the formal light does shine; yet its act is not terminated in
shining, but in an essentificall thingliness.

And therefore brightness and shining are indeed the beginnings of degrees to a
fireable light, and the heats thereof; whereas the formal light, differs in
the whole general kind

So the light of our Soul may touch, and immediately pierce all the forms of
all things, so it has but once lost the contagions of its Body: But as long as
it is the companion of the He has put under his feet the Birds of the Heaven,
the Cattle of the field, and the Fishes of the Sea. For whatsoever the
immortal Soul (I speak not of the sensitive) does issuingly think of, it also
reaches to that very thing, even as in the Treatise of the hunting or
searching out of Sciences; and in the Squaldron of Diseases. So likewise the
mind pierces also its sensitive Soul; and so they do derive the thoughts of
the Soul into the Body. On the other hand, the conceits of the sensitive Soul
(to wit, while a man being asleep, thirsts, is hungry, etc.) do ascend into
the heart, and oft-times do strike the immortal mind.

Hence therefore it follows, that all the properties of things, as well
hidden, as manifest, are imprinted on Bodies by reason of a formal
co-touching, so that at length they do also

But God, although he has an immediate co-touching of all Forms; yet he is not
likewise touched or reached by any form; but by the Soul actually mediating or
entreating in the Symbol or resembling mark of good; and that, as being his
Image, reflecteth it self upon God. But other forms as they are frail or
mortal, so they have no right of acting on the infinite, substantial, and
thrice glorious light. Therefore from what has been said before, it is
certain, that what things are innocence in Aristotle, are the blasphemies of
the Schools; in That if God should act any thing immediately, he ought also to
suffer are-acting. And that the immaterial God, does make use of immaterial
instruments, that he may work or do any thing. Moreover, seeing the mind of
man does most nearly show forth the Image of God, is immortal, and therefore
is not capable of suffering; I could not persuade my self that it is so
restrained to the laws of the Body, that it can suffer by this Body. I know
that this is true, that while health remains, the chief powers of the mind are
often troubled: Therefore I acknowledge one health in the Being, and another in
the Mind: yet I cannot comprehend that an immortal, spiritual substance can
suffer by an infamous excrement which in no wise reaches it: For whatsoever
suffers, that is made by a stronger Agent, and subjecteth it self unto it.

But a frail Agent, capable of sliding every hour, and every way limited,
cannot be stronger than an immortal and spiritual Being, with which it has no
resemblance, nor co-touching. Tarantula. Therefore madnesses, and the
alienations of reason are not proper to the mind: But this being afterward
afflicted by corrupted nature, through the weariness of the body, has
committed its Vicarship to the sensitive Soul, which it pierces only with a
vital beam, that it may be, and live, may be entertained, and rolled up in it;
but as to any thing else, it beholds it ill-favouredly, only crookedly or by
the by.

But the sensitive Soul in a man, is not the specifical form of any bruit
beast, and Archeus cannot give that which he has not, neither has he that
which is far narrower than his own nature. Therefore the Creator does enlighten
or illustrate the Archeus with a light of specifical essence of thingliness,
after an unutterable manner, and also co-knits it into the unity of a composed
body: And there is in the sensitive creatures a Soul, or sensitive life:
therefore in its moments of maturity, and period of appointment, the bruitall
conception is soulified with a specificall formal light: but seeing the seed
of man has not a specificall determination unto brutall dispositions (unless a
Woman with young does by chance through imagination, alienate the figure of
man's seed) and the Almighty has knowledge, whence, and whither all seeds do
flow; when now it is come to a life in man, it receives an undistinct
sensitive Soul, as to its brutality, in splendour, enjoying only life; and also
at the same instant, together with life, the Creator coupleth an Immortal
mind, that by this ultimate act

And that also, because the sensitive Soul is not a substance, or an accident,
but a neutrall while they might see light to ^ierce light, fire Iron, yea and
fire to be pierced (by the bellows) with adjoined fire.

Lastly, the sensitive Soul in bruit beasts is not a naked promotion of the
vegetative Soul, or a passage to a more perfect state of it self: that, that
coming to it, this should decay, or Anemony or Wind-flower being plainly dried
into wrinckles, does as yet wax green or revive again, etc. Therefore the
operations of Souls, and their effects do remain different; So that the
functions of one Soul may be extinguished, those of the other being unhurt:
Therefore the severed lights of the Soul, and the subordinate ones, are limited

Last of all, the Archeus of Mineralls is plainly material, liquid, covering a
hidden and drowsy brightness under thickness, which is more growing, and
liquid in Plants: but in the

Therefore the light of four-footed Beasts, and Birds is Sunny, no otherwise
than that of Fishes does prove it a Splendour of the Moon: For there is no
seldom example of the cold

And so, another judgment is hereafter to be given concerning the degrees of
Simples, according to their participation of more or less light from their
governing light. That which Ade^tists very easy: For by the fire of Hell,
which is the Liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus, Quercetanus, who when he had seen a
weak Lixivium or Lie to be congealed, thought the seminall Being of a nettle
after its turning to

Paracelsus also is deceived, because he writes that all Vegetables cannot
exceed a heat of the first degree. Indeed the great Lights have wonderfully
shone in Simples, and their that a man and the Sun does generate a man: Because
it is that which is stuffed with the Idiotisme or proper form of speech of
Heathenisme. In the next place, the seeds of Birds, and four-footed Beasts are
at first muckie or snivelly, because they are perfected by a very small help of
the light of the Sun: But they are contracted and thickened by little and
little, that they may be sufficient for the consistence of their generated
young. In the mean time, the Eggs of Fishes are at first more hard, and
straightway the light of the Moon assisting, they wax tender into a
snivelliness. Therefore there are two great Lights, and those sufficient, as
there

I have known indeed, the light of the Sun to betake it self into a Flint (to
wit, only by the preparation of the Flint) that without the presence of the
Sun, that attained light may remain God is the Father of Lights, or of vital
Forms. And there are as many of those diverse lights, as there are of vital
forms: For because Souls are not known by a notion from something before them,
or of a precedent thing: therefore, are they by a general Etymology, called
Lights, with a Son-like property, whose correlative is a Father: Yet so, as
that paternity is by way of proportion or similitude: For although he truly
creates all living Souls, yet Beasts do not assume the Sonship of a proper
name; because, neither the likeness of that their father: For their souls do
perish with their life, in manner of the flame of a Candle: Therefore the mind
of men only is an immortal substance, showing forth the Image of the Father
of Lights: and therefore power is given to him of becoming the Son of God.
Which things, seeing we believe by faith, I am angry that even still to this
day it is taught by Christians, that the forms of things, and souls of bruit
Beasts are true and spiritual substances; by consequence, that they are not
vital lights, nor created by the Father of Universal Lights, but are given and
made by the Sun, and likewise raised up out of the power of the seed. As though
a spiritual substance could be created by the power of a matter. For I esteem
that thing to be retained in the Schools among the sweepings or dross of
Heathenisme; but not without wronging the Divine Majesty: To whom all Filial or
Son-like love is due.

CHAP. XXII. Magnum Oportet, that is, it is a thing of great necessity, or
concernment.
1. The unconstancy of Paracelsus. 2. The birth of voluntary things by their
general kinds. 3. The disagreement of Archeusses. 4. Very many accidents do
remain in a new generated thing. 5. Species are to be added to, or diminished
by Oportet or necessity, contrary to Aristotle. 6. The error of Paracelsus in
Oportet it self. 7. Accidents do change their own proper formal objects. 8. A
contrary persuasion has hitherto overthrown natural Philosophy. 9. How the
same accident does wander with the middle life of a thing. 10. From whence
there are so many diversities of natures in a man. 11. That feigned whorish
appetite of the matter. 12. A demonstration of the error. 13. Whence the
necessity of things, really, and principiatively, is. 14. The Schools have not
taught true Beginnings. 15. Some things are corrupted in the Air, but other
things are preserved. 16. Whence the corruption of things is. 17. Corruption is
only of the matter. 18. What corruption is. 19. Corruption is not from
privative things, contrary to Aristotle. 20. Carruption and generation do not
reciprocally succeed. 21. The unadvisedness of the Schools. 22. What Magnum
Oportet may be. 23. The Earth, but not the Water shall bring forth Thistles and
Briars. 24. What kind of digestion there was before sin. 25. What is the
misery of Thistles. 26. Odours and Savours are fundamental Ferments. 27. The
error concerning the eight tastes. 28. The three lives, their flowings and
ebbings through the three Monarchies of things. 29. Why Warts do perish through
the touching of an Apple. 30. The foundation or ground of Sympathy. 31. The
going backwards of life. 32. A threefold life of Mineralls. 33. Properties are
in a place, and in the thing placed. 34. What the double nothing is, in the
words; The Earth was empty, or without form, and void. 35. It is proved by the
Handicraft-operation of a Flint, that Light is a Being without a shining light.
36. Perceivings are in the Instruments of the Senses. 37. Which way the Magnall
is serviceable. 38. Who are the immediate Citizens of places. 39. The
original, and progress of Metalls. 40. A more manifest progress of life in
Metals. 41. Whence Mineralls are of so great efficacy. 42. The dignity of the
Archeus before sin. 43. Which are the ambulatory or walking qualities. 44. That
which the Schools cry out to be impossible, is necessary in nature. 45. Whence
that error is. 46. Some absurdities following from thence. 47. A frivolous
Maxim. 48. The blindnesses of the Schools are to be pitied. 49. Why the
objects of sight do more work in one that is with young. 50. Adeptists do walk
through the objects of sight. 51. Some Speculations in the position of the
appearances of Spirits. 52. The distinctions of qualities by modern Writers or
Philosophers. 53. The occasions of Diseases. 54. The manner whereby a
Hydrophobiaor a Disease causing the fear of water is made. 55. The same
concerning other poisons. 56. The successive alterations of poisons. 57. The
manner whereby poisons do work. 58. Considerations about the activity of
poisons. 59. The blowing out or extinguishing of life, in what manner it
happens.

SUrely I have thus at unawares fallen from the Elements into the birth of
Forms, and there I have distinguished of a fourfold Form, diverse in kind from
each other.

1. To wit, an Essential Form.

2. A Vital Form.

3. Next a substantial Form.

4. And at length, the excellency of a formal Substance, I have added for the
end or top of nature. For when I had explained my Doctrine concerning the
Elements, I fell by degrees into the History of vital things, and consequently
also I perceived my self devolved into the necessities of Diseases and death;
indeed, that I might apply the beginnings of natural Philosophy to the end of
humane appointment: Therefore have I come to Magnum Oportet: To wit, I have
come down to the flowings and ebbings of life, and so to the hidden calamity of
death. Wherefore all our consideration of nature shall hereafter become
Medicinal. For truly, Paracelsus being not constant enough to himself,
stumbled in the finding out of the cause of a Disease, in the mean and manner
whereby every thing tends to a declining: (To the clearing up whereof, I have
already taught before, that the fruits which antiquity has believed to be a
heap of Elements, are the offsprings of the one Element of water, begotten
with child by the seed, which disposes the water to generate in places, as it
were in wombs: For wheresoever the water obtains an Odor, it straightway also
conceives in that very moment, a Ferment, and after that a seed, in the begun
disposition of the matter disposed by the Ferment: For truly most things are
made for the sake of the Odor alone. For oft-times, the Root, stalk, pith,
leaves, and History of a whole Plant, is born by reason of the flour of the
Odor, or Odor of the flour, and the Odor is the ultimate end of many
particular kinds, as well in Plants that are for Sauces, as in those for
Medicines. Because out of Sand, or simple Earth, and Water, does grow nothing
at first, but a moist filthiness or mouldiness, they contract a putrefaction
through continuance, or Odours. Leff as brings forth its Plants. If one part of
mud or dung do putrify in the Earth, it may beget the water with child in a
five fold weight of it self, and send forth fruit: For the water being void of
all Odor, unless it shall conceive the Ferment of an Odor in its Sulphur,
surely it remains in its ancient simplicity, as Rainwater, without fruit.
Therefore in the deep Pavements of the Earth, where there is a departure far
from filthiness, putrefying, and corruption, although there be no Leff as, yet
the waters are got with Child by a hidden Odor of the place; first of all, by
an unconceivable contagion of a certain Salt, straightway they do hasten to the
more wealthy Colonies of Fruits, and do break out. Indeed its own strange
fermentaceous Odor dwells every where, which may get the Sulphur of the water
with child, and sleeping within it, may at length grow together; As in
Mineralls: Or being grown together, and even overspread with a thicker Air,
may grow, as in Plants, and Creatures that bring for h Eggs: or wholly from the
beginning, the form of the Air does glister; Even as Archeus being now
conceived, remains every where the keeper of life, and the promoter of
transmutations, and by and by, a change of his life does follow the change
thereof, to wit, from his first life and matter, into his last. For the
Archeusses of things do agree in this; as being vital, they do possess a
certain Splendour: yet they differ, as they are unlike forerunners, and
Stewards of the Form. Yet they do not mutually receive each other, least their
government be disturbed; but for order sake (which they do badly explain by the
Title of self-love) he remains Master, who shall be the stronger: which way
indeed they liberally dispense the Impressions of their Ferment, that one may
restrain the foreign disquietnesses of his fellow Archeus, and may subdue him:
For even as under the immortal mind, the subordinate forms of a bone,
membrane, etc. do not perish: So also it happens in the transmutations of
things. Indeed, although the food does by an every way transmutation, obtain
the form of blood; Yet this keeps no obscure accidents of the former food,
which do therefore walk from one matter into another. I will presently prove by
an example of the deed: Nigh the Mountain at Zome, a Hog, the Sea departing, is
fed with Sea-Onions, shell-fishes, etc. His flesh savours of the grease of a
Fish, yet it is Hogsflesh, forbidden to the Hebrews.

Therefore it is vain, that the Species of things, are as it were the species
of numbers, whereto, not a unite is added, or subtracted, but the species it
self is continually changed. Irish Oak does so retain the properties of an
Antidote, that it chaseth Spiders from our Buildings: which property, our
Country Oak wants: For the passings over of accidents do not happen in
meats, through want of a perfect and essential transmutation: Neither also does
Urine smell of Terpentine, Mace, or Asparagus, as some excrementitious part of
the meat may remain with the blood in the flesh: For that less resists a
perfect transmutation, separation, and election in things due to the Archeus,
in whom, to wit, there is perfectly a transmutative, dispositive power of the
matter into figures, Odours, Colors, and every property of accidents.

For Paracelsus has now and then made mention of a middle life, and matter;
but he has not owned himself in the greatest necessity, whereby he dreamed of
Tartarous humors: Tartar, if he had obliquely or by the way immingled a
co-like Tartar in meats and drinks, to the finding out of the matter, and
original of Diseases, not yet discovered before. For neither has he
explained, from whence it is, that notable favors do survive after the true
transmutations of meats.

Wherefore it must needs be, that the same accident in number does pass from
its subject, that it is (I say) in the formal transchanged thing, which was
first in the thing to be transchanged, Archeus, no otherwise than the form of a
bone, a man being dead.

For although there be a fermentall virtue in the stomach which resolves
things carried into it, and afterward, the same things be perfectly
transchanged in the other shops or places

By which necessity indeed, the accustomed nourishment of diverse Climates does
imprint Oportet is a thing altogether necessary, whereby the qualities of the
middle life do remain in things that are transchanged: For unless that be
granted, there shall be no power of Medicines, as neither occasion of Diseases:
For nothing does more prosperously operate to heal, than that which has most
fully entered by the transmutation of it self, and is nearest united to that
which ought to be healed. So a grain dies in the Earth, that by its middle
life, it may stir up new offsprings for usury. Also in meats, although the
former forms of meats have wholly perished; yet the operative properties of
the former middle life have remained; and that into the second, and now and
then the third transmutation of the thing generated. For the native property of
the middle life sailing by degrees, under the dominion of the Archeus
ascending, to wit, of whose Ferment it is the subdued matter:

That indeed is Magnum Oportet in this Valley of successive changes; but it is
not the whorish appetite of an impossible matter: For Aristotle feigned a
matter deprived of every Chymera to himself for the Beginning of nature: And so
he constituted for a material principle, not indeed a natural Being existing
in act, or possible in power; but a Mathematical corporality or bodiliness;
but not [this something] or a principiating Beginning: For he thought that
nature was at an imaginary pleasure, to hearken to figures, and measures. In
the mean time, that that matter might be principiating, he feigned that a
certain motive principle did agree or belong to it, to wit, a universal
appetite unto any forms unknown to it self: Which Dreams, although they are
ridiculous, agreeable to no end, use, or necessity, and bringing forth many
absurdities from them; yet are they at this day adored by the Schools, who
have made themselves ridiculous thereby: Seeing there can be no appetite of
that corporiety, breathing to any perfection which it had not before in it
self: To wit, that it may be capable of forms, and figures.

For otherwise, in the consideration of nature, and indeed in a principiating
Being, every Archeus. For truly as learning by demonstration does propose to it
self a Body capable of all figures without any accident; So Aristotle has
brought this Speculation according to his pleasure, into nature, unknown to
him, and has introduced an appetite into this matter, the lover, and one only
cause of successive change: Even so that he reckoned the first matter to be
void of all quality and form; but endowed or given up to all and any forms,
only by a whorish appetite: Not knowing in the first place, that successive
change does proceed not from the appetite of the matter, but from the
instruction of the seeds. Neither have the Schools once looked back, that the
desire of remaining is more ancient, strong, and natural than the desire of
permutability or much changeableness; and that the Schools themselves do
contradict their own Aristotle, who will have every Being to desire to remain
from the proper endeavor of nature: Seeing it is of necessity a Being, before
it can think of a change, or wish for it. Therefore the matter ought to have
obtained to be perfect, before it should disdain to be old, and should desire a
successive change. For to be, is before, to please; and to please, is before,
to displease; and nothing can displease, or wish for a successive change, but
as a pleasure being gotten and known, something more perfect, possibly also
better, is shown. For in the more crude seeds which nave conceived their first
ferments by Odours, the Odor goes before the complacency or good pleasure; but
this does generate a desire of it self, and of a thing remaining: But in things
possible, desire causes the same appetite of remaining, but not of perishing,
by the changing of its Being. But if indeed by reason of the hidden impediments
of death, a permanency is not granted; there is made a dissolution in Bodies,
but thence a weariness: but from weariness there is a proceeding to a remove or
change through the ruling virtue by degrees declining, from whence at length
destruction is not intended, but following after through necessities. It
belonged to the Schools to have known, that to be, does always go before a
wearisomness unto a non-being: because this wearisomness is not of the intent
of nature, but rather an imaginary Metaphor or translation succeeding upon the
defects of things: At least, that this wearisomness ought to precede the desire
to a non-being: And much more a desire to a new Being, and unknown to it self;
Seeing a new Being is not granted before the death of the present Being. In
brief, because also the wearinesses of the displacency of the appetite do but
dreamingly agree to a non-being: And at length, because from dreaming
principles so absurd, nothing is to be exspected besides errors full of
confusion.

Therefore successive change in nature, is not from the desire of the matter,
but from the power of the efficient Vulcan: Wherein the Odor and Savor of the
middle life: do generate

For truly, Glass the last of things putrefiable, does in the Air: main as it
were for ever: But being buried, after some years it admits of a putrefying
through continuance, is covered

For truly, those things which do spinkle from themselves an Odor, do loose
the same by the flowing and snatching wind; or the Vessel being close shut,
they do retain the same within: because a new ferment thinks of a successive
change. Volatile, or exhalable and swift flying things do easily decay (because
for the most part, they have a diversity of kinds, through want whereof,
distilled things are scarce corrupted) one whereof does ferment or leaven
another, from their true Element they are even choked, and do putrify through
continuance, or do conceive an air as before. Therefore the ferment changes
the thing, as it alters its Odor according to the essence of the matter
imprinting of the Vessel of the place, or of the thing adjoined: which things I
prove by this Handicraft-operation: For truly, I do preserve the broaths of
fleshes, of Fruits, even as also any boiled things, (otherwise soon subject to
corrupt) for years, from corruption, so that I shall pour a balsamicall
ferment into the Air, and that ferment being continued, I shall restrain it.

With me therefore, corruption is thus, as I have said: Forms are never
corrupted: they Vulcan decaying.

For as the Body saileth its Ruler or Pilots being in good health, it being
safe does not

Neither is corruption therefore to be numbered among privative things, if it
consist of positive Aristotle in nature falls to the ground: For truly the
Archeus is not of his own accord taken away, dispersed, changed, or estranged,
unless by a new one troubling him under another ferment. Therefore strange
ferments are chief over all corruptions, and by the interchangeable courses of
ferments all corruption begins, does by little and little ascend unto a degree
and pitch, and at length having obtained its period, is terminated: For there
are some things in whom the proper lust of their seeds is wanton, and calls
them away from the tenor of constancy, to undergo the transmutations of
successive changes, not indeed by reason of a desire to another form; but
because the implanted Balsam of nature is easily blown away, and perishes; as
are fleshes, and Fishes: But others do change their Wedlock, not without a
putrefying being first stirred up, and do put on the careful governments of new
seeds: As are Woods, Stones, and Glass which is most constant in fire: Among
which, they do interpose in a middle degree, for whom the touchings of the
place do cover their Superficies with a hoary putrefaction or mouldiness: From
whence Odours being dispersed, they do disjoyn the Wedlocks of the ancient
seeds, and meditate of a new Generation by dissolving. It is a mark natural or
proper to the Air, uncessantly to separate the waters from the waters; and
there are many things which do not endure such a successive alteration without
a spot or corruption; hence therefore they do most immediately slide into a
sudden disorder: Therefore corruption, as it includes an extinguishing of the
natural Balsam; so the constancy of a thing desires its continuance: for in
such things whose Balsam does voluntarily flow forth or expire, it being joined
to fixed things, they are seasoned therewith, it sticks fast, is restrained by
the bolts of dryness, or at leastwise is nourished by a predominating ferment
that is no stranger to the disposition of a Balsam: For so, sweet things,
smoke, Salt, Pepper, Aqua vitae, Vinegar, distilled Oils, do preserve fleshes.
But at leastwise about the end of life, there is on every side a great
confusion of the thing, and a large loss of strength: So that seeds serving to
the lower conjunction, do oft-times die together, from whence the chief
assisting Vulcans of things being as it were sore affrighted with fear, and as
mercenaries, do first run away.

Therefore although corruption does induce a transmutation, with the death of
another thing, it is not a privation, neither does it therefore necessarily
follow generation, as neither

Truly when Aristotle was connived at, to put (by a large word) Privation
between a Being and a Being, he began by taking a liberty, to substitute
corruption in the room of privation.

Moreover, I have called Magnum Oportet, A necessary remaining of the
properties of the middle life, in the thing nourished and constituted. From
whence it follows, that the same remainder of the middle life, from meats and
drinks, are the Thistles and Thorns which the Earth was to bring forth after
the fall, or departure out of the right way: otherwise, Thistles and Thorns, as
they are Plants, are Creatures, made for the use and adorning of the World
before the fall. I have also sometimes vainly thought, that the tartarous
humors of meats and drinks were those Thistles and Thorns: Because the middle
life subsisting (but it subsisteth by a real and true act) it was in vain, to
feign foreign Tartarers, as shall be shown in its place.

But observingly, it is not included, that the water shall bring forth Thistles
and Thorns, although Archeus had not only perfectly transchanged meats after a
daily manner; but had supt up the whole properties of the middle life into his
own rule or jurisdiction, as Archeus; because the Companions of the middle life
do easily adhere to each other: Whence a Gate was laid open to duplicities,
interchangeable courses, successive change, and disorder. At length jarring,
the breaker of agreement, thus brought in the apple of discord.

For we afterward feel the perpetual Tyranny and multiplicity of Thistles and
Thorns. Archeusses are by little and little withdrawn from the obedience of the
seeds, and do hearken to the mockeries or enticements of a foreign ferment. In
brief, the remainders of the powers of the middle life, as well in
nourishments, as excrements, are almost the occasional Beginning of all
sicknesses, and in this respect to us, of the Thistle and Thorn.

For Odours and Savours do bring forth a desire, a dislike, or a neutrality in
the Bodies of Archeus, no otherwise than in the Young of one with child: which
Image is the invisible essence of seeds, stirring up to embrace, or abhor:
But the neutrall Odor serves for station and rest.

If therefore in the middle life, Savours do as yet remain in things
transchanged: it is frivolous, that things shall weigh their virtues, and
essences by eight material, and not specifical

The first shall be of the received and working seed seated in the Archeus, he
being endowed with a power of managing things: Which, when it has obtained
some maturity, as when the seed is a Body, having flesh, and tender bones,
according to the requirance of the Species; then is the middle life of a thing
present: For it is meet to measure the life it self by the Archeus, as it were
the Mediator, the Instrument of life. Therefore the first life does glister in
the seeds, but in the Embryo or imperfect young, the middle life: But the last
life is, when the total perfection of the constituted thing is present: which
indeed, although it be the last life of the thing, yet is it the middle life of
the Archeus, if the first life of the thing does begin with the last life of
the seeds: For in Herbs, although seeds may seem to begin their life when they
swell, and chap; yet they do then rather die in the last life of themselves,
that they may bud in the first life of the thing that is to be constituted.

Therefore the first life of the fruit is the last of the seed. In the middle
life, Herbs, Roots, and stalks do grow or increase: but Flowers, and Fruits do
threaten a period to the last life: Archeus from the beginning, married, may
unfold its virtues, to wit, by laying aside the Title and property of the last
life, that it may rise again to a middle one: Which death, is not an
exstinguishing, and a true death of the thing; but rather a transmutation:
which shall presently appear in an Apple. For grain is eaten: Truly at that
very moment, the last life of the grain dies within, is reduced into its own
life, the which our Archeus coming upon, over-shadoweth, and brings the
middle life into its first life, by transumption or translating it, but the
remaining properties of the former grain being dulled. In the death of the
grain, or the last life of the seed, the first life of a new Creature arises
together with it. To be brief: as often as the Archeus of a thing is transplanted
under a strange guide, so often is there a changing of life made from the last to
the first Being: which first Being is translated into a new life of the thing,
and a middle life of the Archeus the Conqueror, only the blunted property of
the middle life remaining, whereby the going backward is made.

Let an Apple be cut asunder, whose inward pulp let it be rubbed on Warts
until it shall be lukewarm, and the half pieces being tied fast by a thread,
until the Apple shall putrify: Archeus takes to himself: But in the death,
and extinguishing of the last life of the Apple by putrefaction, there is not a
preserving, nor a going backwards into the middle life: And so with the death
and extinguishing of the last life of the Apple, the absent Warts do perish
together with it, by a Sympatheticall action of government: for the resembling
mark of Sympathy is seated in this thing; Because the pulp Archeus: For the
death of the Apple does not intervene, if it be eaten by a Dormouse, as neither
a death of the added impression; because the middle life is preserved, being
transplanted under the preserved Archeus of the Apple, into the Archeus of the
living Creature. Wherefore, although the Schools have made mention of one
only corruption in general; yet there are diverse destructions: For some
things do return from the last life into the first; but others there are, which
go back unto the middle life: but those things which go not back unto any life,
do expect the last resolution of themselves, Leffas, or do first breed worms.

At length, Mineralls also do show three lives by a distinct order. It is thus:
Mineralls indeed, have not a seed, with the Image of their Predecessor, after
the manner of soulified

The wind indeed does uncessantly flow in a place; yet its property is in some
places stable: there are certain winds, and stated Tempests in Provinces:
which things I attribute

Thou may know that the light is in very deed, a Being without a shining
light: For I keep a Flint in my possession, which if I shall expose to the Air
(the Sun existing above the Horizon)

For seeing place is its subject, it finds not resistance in transparent
placed Bodies, but in

And the Magnall is a Case or Sheath, wherein every Gas is reduced into its
first matter of water. Therefore, not only lights and colors do inhabit in
places, as it were immediate Suevia is as rich in Copper, as Cyprus in times
past could be: Therefore cold is guiltless, as heat is vain, to the
constitutions of their seeds: For places which have wanted Mines in times past,
will at sometime in their day, their seed being ripe, restore Usuries not
unlike to the more rich ones; because the Roots or Ferments of Mineralls, do
sit immediately in place, and do breath without disdain, for fullness of days:
The which, when it has completed a seed, then the Gas environing the water in
the same place, receives a seed from the place, which afterward begets the
Sulphur of the water with child, condenseth the water, and by degrees
transplants it into a Mineral water. For it oft-times happens, that a digger
of Metalls in Mines breaking great Stones asunder, the Wall cleaves or gapes,
and affords a chink, from whence a small quantity of water of a whitish-green
color has sprung, which has presently grown together like to liquid Soap, (I
call it Bur) and afterward its greenish paleness being changed, it waxes
yellow, or grows white, or becomes more fully green: For thus that is seen,
which else without the wound of the stone, comes to pass within: because that
juice is perfected by an inward efficient. Therefore the first life of a
metallic seed, is in the Buttery or Cellar of the place, plainly unknown to
man. But when as the seed comes forth to light clothed with a Liquor, and Gas
has begun to defile the Sulphur of the water, there is the middle life of the
seed: But the last life is when it now waxes hard: But the last life of the
metallic seed, is the first life of the Metalls, or at leastwise very nearly
conjoined to it. But while that Mass does breath Sulphur, and shuts up its
Mercury within; then I say, is the middle life of Metalls: But their last life
is, when it has attained a fixedness, and the proper stability of a vein.

Wherefore there is a more manifest progress of a life, and seed in Metallic
Bodies, than

Hence also the seeds of Mineralls are not defiled with the filthiness and
wantonness of their begetters; nor therefore do they offer themselves as
monstrous: But because they are Eden: our Archeus was able fully to subdue all
the Archeusses as well of poisons as nourishments, into his own increase,
Archeus was immediately governed by the immortal Soul, and so also therefore
was not capable of suffering: For God not only made not death in Paradise; but
moreover, neither was there created a Medicine of destruction (that is a
poison) for man, in the Earth: But man being straightway cast out into the
Earth, this Earth clasped Thistles and Thorns: that is, although our Archeus
being Conqueror, does subdue the Archeusses of meats to himself; yet the
surviving Relics of strange properties do remain. For the last life indeed of
meats, departs, the middle life surviving: Wherefore the more weak stomach,
feels a greater load or grief about the end of digestion, than presently after
food; as if the Archeus were mindful of his ancient lost dignity. Therefore I
call these surviving of men badly be fetched: But if thou shall adjoyn the
Stars to the mind, these will soon forsake thee: And the far-fetcht aid does
faint in the journey, and fails before its striking upon it. It should also
go ill with the seeds, if from the form of a vital thing, which only comes to
it afterward, every property and efficacy of seeds were to be borrowed.
Therefore the opinion of the Schools brings a disagreement; that generation
does presuppose etc. That which the Nurse has took, casts a smell in the Urine
of the sucking Child; and so they are drunk down by the Nurse to that end: yet
they forbid the same accidents to remain safe in the thing born or begotten,
which was before in the thing corrupted: Notwithstanding, that rather in every
natural point of motion and alteration, or between one and another instant,
all accidents are renewed. Indeed the Schools had rather that the light from
the Firmament even to the Earth, should in every instant of places, and
motions, actually produce infinite kinds of light, propagating each other by a
continual thread in every Mathematical point of a Mean, than to grant that
light is immediately brought through a place by the shaking of its beam: They
had rather I say, that the smell of Asparagus should spring from the
specificall form of the Urine, than from the middle life: For they have not
known any Being but a Substance and an accident, nor a light subsisting, but
immediately within the substance of a mean. Neither do they observe that they
acknowledge an equivocall or double generation of accidents, while they
acknowledge one to be sprung from an accident, but another from the specificall
form.

But there are Reasons, why the objects of sight do more strongly move the
Imagination of Women with young, then the objects of the other Senses that are
more corporeal. The Salmon, is carried into a desire of eating: For then
whatsoever she shall take, affords her indeed actually the taste of Salmon, and
the taste serves the sight as its Master: but it falling down into the stomach,
nor she having Salmon really in a visible object, she perceives her deceit
which her appetite causes unto her; and therefore she has a loathing, and the
Woman is weakened, trembling or panting at the heart: For the appetite feigneth
the taste of Salmon, but the womb is angry at the deceit; but it cannot
transform the meat into Salmon, Yea, although she shall eat of another Fish,
and there is an easy passage in things that have a co-resemblance; yet she
cannot thereby form the longed for Salmon, because it is the object of taste,
but not of sight: Whereas otherwise, suddenly by the object Salmon, or Duck,
she easily transchangeth her Young into such a Monster: For the objects of
taste sitting immediately in some body, cannot by reason of their corporeal
thickness, form a tranchangeative Image.

Therefore they who study in Adepticall things, do strive to promote their
labor of wisdom by the objects of sight, and indeed by the light of the Moon;
That indeed the Soul night unto night may show knowledge. As touching the
Young, surely I consider it as a foreign branch implanted in the stock of a
Tree, which although it be nourished by its Mothers Liquor, yet it lives
presently within, in its own proper quarter: For neither is it within as an
entire part; but as it were an entertained Soldier, it snatcheth all things
into its pleasure or desire, and enlarges the Vessel it self for its own
command or government. But I consider the Womb as an empty house, possessed and
enlarged by a stranger: whereinto therefore, Pictures do more easily fall, than
into it being exactly shut. 3. The object of sight is more spiritual, and
therefore its Image more naked, spiritual, and more active. A fourth reason
is; the Father of Lights in this thing, does by a similitude manifest, that in
thinking only of the light, he created all things of nothing: I say, he brought
forth the particular kinds of things into a created essence, which he from
eternity comprehended in himself, only by cogitation or thinking. So also the
imagination of the lust of Souls, by the object of sight, poures forth its own
Image into seeds, that so they might be fruitful from the command of God.

It might here be said, how may the apparitions of Spirits be made immediately
in place, color, figure, and light, but not in a Body; and by consequence, why
may they be seen by other in place, the existence of every one being
nevertheless unchanged; after what sort may they pierce each other, and deceive
the Rules of the Optic Science: that is, how may a bewitching or charm be
made: How may a Color have a dark splendour, invisible in the middle or Mean,
visible in the repercussing or re-bounding bound: although that brightness be
no less in the mean, than in the said bound or term, nor in any beam, but in a
direct one only. But these things I leave to others, under the positions by me
framed I rather treat of natural Science. Modern Writers have distinguished of
qualities by their Ranks or Orders: to wit, that etc. keeping every one to its
own Species. The fourth therefore are more formal, and more remote from the
Body; such as is a poisonous quality in poisons, a solutive one in laxative or
loosening things, an attractive one of Iron in the Loadstone, a productive
quality of milk in Fennel, etc. The three former sorts at least, do operate
corporeally by virtue of the seeds, as they have espoused the matter to
themselves: But the two latter are plainly formal ones, and do act by a
lightsome, and an abstracted power tied fast to their composed Body, and
therefore they have a power to imprint their actions on vital forms. Indeed
the three former do scarce pierce other Bodies, and much less are they
co-mingled with them radically: And therefore they are transchanged by our
Archeus; So that although they may as yet carry with them from their being
transchanged, an obscure property of their middle life; yet they are subdued
into our protection, and are made our Citizens: Although many things at the
time of their transchanging, do remarkably disagree with the Archeus, because
they have an untamed valor, and other incapacities, I say, dregs and
impediments: To with, they are incorporated in us with a mark of their own
middle life, which they difficultly put off; yet are they subdued: But if

Therefore I long ago thought, whether the biting of a mad Dog might bring
down a certain Signal fantasy which might convert ours being as it were its
patient or sufferer, into

That which is now judged concerning the outward poison of a mad Dog, let the
same judgment be of a Cancer, and other things: For a formal poysonsome light
being budded Cancer, he wandering, transplants himself into suries, whereby he
locally troubles or vexes the flesh: For whether they are carried inwards by
an external chance, or indeed be raised up within, and so thus far, do in some
sort differ as to of Forms into Forms, by the penetration of a fermentall
uniting, with the transmutation of our Archeus. Therefore a new poison is not
properly stirred up in the Archeus, that it may form a poison to it self: Even
as otherwise elsewhere (as in a Fever) an occasional matter

CHAP. XXIII. Nature is ignorant of contraries.
1. The bruit Beasts were not in Paradise, that man might not see a brutall
coupling, but that he might remain innocent of shame. 2. The bruit Beasts were
brought from elsewhere to our first Parent, in Eden, that he might name them,
might thereby praise God, and acknowledge himself. 3. What kind of Trees were
there. 4. Many individuals were created in every particular kind, but not in
man. 5. Man always ate fleshes, and of the Sacrifices themselves, besides the
Turks, and Calvinists. 6. The first contemplative Philosophy of weeping Adam.
7. Tillage, the first of Arts. 8. Zoosophie or the wisdom of keeping living
Creatures, the second. 9. Meteoricall Astrology, the Chambermaid of Tillage.
10. The entrance of Medicine was the last. 11. They stand as yet, in the first
Principles. Galen has brought in a Method too easy, and therefore suspected.
12. Galen has feigned one only natural indication; to wit, by contraries.
13. The deceit of that Maxim is discovered. 14. Paracelsus being badly
constant to himself, scoffed at Galen: 15. He badly judged, that all healing is
made by like things. 16. That Seeds do not operate by contrariety; but by a
Command known from a former cause to the only Lord of things. 17. They know
not which way the necessities of Seeds may be directed. 18. The blindness of
Heathenisme is hidden in the Maxim of contrarieties. 19. The foolishness of
Aristotle concerning the first matter, is noted. 20. The Argument out of
Aristotle is retorted upon Galen. 21. Some Arguments concluding the same thing.
22. The Schools are deceived by a metaphorical, and hyperbolicall or
excessive introduced nature. 23. That in the Elements contraries are not to be
granted. 24. That the greatest cold does peaceably combine with the greatest
heat, in the same point of Air, and that without contrariety. 25. What a
Relolleum is. 26. Water does not wax hot by fire by reason of an introduced
contrariety. 27. Water does not quench fire by reason of contrariety. 28. It is
proved from the Elements, that fire is not a substance. 29. Moisture and
dryness are scarce qualities to be understood in the abstract. 30. Neither are
they Relolleum's, after the manner of heat and cold. 31. That there is not a
radical co-mixture of moist with dry. 32. One only Question of the Author
propounded to all the Learned, who believe a temperature of the Elements in a
mixed Body. 33. That the Elements are not contrary to each other. 34. That the
Elements do not waste or consume each other. 35. That the Elements do not
fight. 36. That things without life, have not contrariety. 37. It is proved
from Faith, and then by some Arguments, that the action of nature is void of
contrariety. 38. The same thing is shown in other things. 39. What Nature may
be. 40. The name of a Crisis is impertinent. 41. Paracelsus is noted, because
he will have a remedy to work by reason of likeness. 42. In what the virtue of
a Medicine may be seated. 43. Why hunger kills. 44. What things are required
for healing. 45. The Doctrine of Paracelsus is refuted. 46. A foolish
Objection. 47. Sin is not opposed to virtue, simply, in a privative manner. 48.
That the poison of a mad Dog, of Serpents, of a Bull, etc. have not at all a
contrariety of causes, from whence they are made. 49. A Declaration of what
went before.

I Having already sufficiently contemplated of the integrity of nature,
afterward, by little and little, I descended into the defects, and successive
alterations of the same, while I reach or aim at Medicine: To wit, I have
shown that there are not four Elements in nature, and especially that the fire
has not the thingliness of an accident, yea neither of a substance, much
less, the nature of an Element: Wherefore, the quaternary of Elements and
Complexions being broken asunder and made void; therefore also the constrained
knot of four humors. So that although from hence it be sufficiently manifest,
that the causes and essence of Diseases have been untouched in the Schools;
yet I would elsewhere demonstrate that very thing from their own positions, in
a peculiar Chapter. But in this place, I will demonstrate, that nature is
ignorant of, and likewise, that she does not admit of contraries in desire.

In the beginning, God created the Heaven and the Earth, and whatsoever is
contained in the Universe. But he placed the man in Paradise, after he was
created: For neither had Eden: Yea neither would the Almighty, that man should
behold the brutish copulation of the Sexes, whom he withed to live in the
purity of innocence (as elsewhere concerning long life.) But God brought even
one at least of all living Creatures of every Species, to Adam, even from the
remotest Coasts of the Earth (for truly the Ranging Creature remains not long
alive but in his own Climate) that Adam might give them their proper names: But
it was not of so great moment, to give a name to the bruit Beasts, that God
should without a further end, lay these before Adam for to name them.

But that was done, that he might know the knowledge of all things to be freely
given him from God, and that the Judgment or Umpire of so great an heap, might
constantly worship

There then, every Tree did look fresh and green, with a perpetual leaf, did
bear a successive flower: Lastly, a perpetual fruit, not wormy, nor falling
before ripeness; as neither Paradise: For even as Herbs fit for meats, are to
us for Corns, Pulses, Pot Herbs, and Spices; there the Trees also, did bring
forth one of these, if not the four, or some of them connexed at once: For
truly the manifold Acorn did there represent the diverse Corns: Olives, and Nuts
did note out as many Pulses; Even as the Apples also, so many Pot Herbs. The
Trees also, the Mother of Spices, did present Herbs fit for Sawces. And last of
all, many things stood connexed, under one only particular kind, even as now
also, the Apple does now and then consist of an Oily Kernel. Indeed, all things
did flatter man's Senses. But after that the majesty of man became of no value,
by reason of his departure from the right way or Fall, and his nature was now
polluted, he ought to die the same day; and the vigor or force of the declared
sentence had stood, unless he by whom all things were made, had impledged
himself a Surety before him who made all things, that he would die for man in
the fullness of times, that love might kiss his Justice: whence there was
peace. Man is to be cast out of Paradise into the earth, where the more barren
Trees offered themselves, nor those sufficient for the continual necessities of
foods. But before that he was driven away, when as now himself was ashamed of
his own nakedness, God clothed them both in Coats of skin. Indeed that great
Priest and Lamb, was offered up an unspotted Sacrifice, from the beginning of
his loving promise, who for a Mystery, therefore sacrificed two Lambs, without
spot to his eternal Father, before man: one indeed for the Burnt-offering of
his future passion: Another also, without the breaking of its bones, to be
(...) sacrificed, and partly to be eaten, for a Peace Offering; he gave both to
the Man and Woman that from the foundation of the World, the Lamb might be one
and the same, for a continual Sacrifice, oblation, and food: with the Skins of
which Lambs, our Parents were covered: Which first Tenor or right of
sacrificing, Heathenisme afterward imitated.

Although two Sexes only of every particular kind, entered as Companions into
the Ark; yet the Lion fasted not for a year, that he might divide the first
hope of the Flock together Noah by the Command of God, took food for himself,
and necessary foods for the other Creatures. Therefore it is a vain and foolish
question; why at this day there are more Sheep than Wolves?

Man therefore had fleshes from the beginning, wherewith he might be fed, and
might sacrifice; and the rite of sacrificing was even from the beginning of the
World, that the Sacrificers Mahometans, and Calvinists do fail, being as it
were destitute of a Sacrifice. Let them therefore give place, who write, that
mortal men before the Flood were not wont to eat flesh; because it was
written, Fleshes shall henceforward be like unto Pot Herbs: For otherwise Abel
had in vain led^ Flock and Herds; neither had another been slain in the hunting
of wild Beasts, and Nimrod should have a vain name. Therefore I may believe,
that Mortals used as well tame as wild Beasts; yet scarce Fishes before the
Flood: Because then, one only Fountain did water the whole Earth, and the Sea
stood on the other part of the Globe, whose other half was calfed dry Land: And
so Fishes were only of the Sea, while the whole World was an undivided
Continent: in the middle or heart whereof, one only Fountain being divided
into four Rivers, did water the whole Earth: Therefore Cock-boats or Skiffs,
had not as yet been made known: so fishing in the Sea, was unaccustomed.
Neither also did the Habitation of men occupy the shoares: For one only, and
vast Continent of the Earth gave pleasures enough to the Husbandmen, that they
detested the barren Sea, made frightfull by a thousand Tempests. Genesis chap. 1.
v. 28. It is read, that first of all, the Dominion of the Sea was given to man,
and then, over the Fowls of Heaven; and thirdly, over all living Creatures
which move upon the Earth: yet when as the speech is of meats, Chap. 1. v. 29.
Every Herb and Tree is given for meat. And Chap. 1. v. 30. All living Creatures
of the Earth, and Birds of Heaven, and whatsoever is moved upon the Earth,
having a living Soul, is given to men, that they might have that which they
might eat: Yet the Fishes are no where read to have been granted, as neither
the Fishes of the Sea to have been brought over to Adam, that they might obtain
their names. From which particulars, it is presently plain to be seen, that no
Herbs, Trees, or any creeping things, were contrary to man, or for a Medicine
of destruction unto him. Likewise the restriction, for Birds, and what things
do move themselves upon the Earth, does exclude the Fishes. Wherefore, as soon
as after the Flood, by the dividing of the one Continent, the Springs and
Floud-gates diffused themselves from the lowest bottom, Fishes being allured by
the sweetness of the down-sliding waters, some remained in Rivers, and Fens:
others in the mean time through a new thorow-mingling, and liberty of the
Flood, ascending out of the Sea: Therefore let Fishes be fleshes, although
before, not used by man: Fleshes I say which after the Flood should be like
unto Pot Herbs: otherwise, the flesh of flying Fouls, did nor repay or supply
the Rooms of Pot Herbs; but Corns, as four-footed Beasts, had now long since
from the beginning, supplied the place of pulses.

Therefore our first Parent being banished into the Earth, and being full of
miseries, weariness, and repentance, through the leisure of most ample Ages,
perceived his nature now to

(...) whence Agriculture or Tillage was the first Philosophy. The other Son
also, noted the properties and Societies of living Creatures; whence by the
undoubted hope of a Flock, a quiet life is led: This indeed, was Zoosophie or
the wisdom of keeping living Creatures together.

But their successors making afterward, a more plentiful progress, joining
the decrees of

Therefore Astrology, the Chambermaid of Tillage thus arose. Notwithstanding,
the dispensations of natural things have remained altogether obscure; even as
also, among all men, Hypocrates first laid up his Observations into a written
style or method: in which labor, he felt the divine assistance, which he had
not known: But Galen (as it were the North wind) having seemed to himself to
have dispersed the vain Clouds of desires, and having filched many things from
every place, boasted that he had raised up the Speculations of the Elements,
first qualities, Complexions, and humors: And dedicated all the works, and
fortunes, as well of found, as invalid nature, to these: which things
afterward, the Greek Nation plentifully increased: By which suppositions, the
Moors striving for the Victory, built loose experiments upon them.

This therefore was the Original, and condition of bringing forth Medicine;
and these were its inventers. At length, in these it was at a stand, neither
afterward made it a progress. Galen being instructed by his Elders, observing
that fire was quenched by water, and that water being heated by fire, did
vanish away, supposing that he held the Hare by the Ears, boldly constituted
almost all Diseases, and their Remedies in those first Bodies, and their
qualities: For he said, The fire was at enmity with the water, and this with
it: whence he established it by a general decree, that there is in us the
combat of four Elements, fighting in us by a continual War: And that there
does skirmish in us a continual and unexcusable strife of contraries:
Wherefore, although nothing should weary us from without, yet it would come to
pass, that sometimes a distemper, or Disease, and ruin should happen of their
own accord: That death I say, should break out of the composition of the
Elements. This indeed was to be winked at in Galen: But not in Christians, if
they do not teach, that in Adam, there was a like necessity of composition
before, as there was after sin: To wit, if the composition of Adam, stood
connexed unto four encountering Elements: Therefore all the Schools do
determine, that only contraries should be the remedies of contraries: To wit,
whereby every excess (being notably marked with the name of a Disease) might be
reduced into a mediocrity or mean. That plausible and stupid Doctrine easily
pleased all that were inclined to a sluggishness of subscribing: Because it was
that which might easily be conceived by a rusticall sense, a great compendium,
and in all places by any one; and, hence therefore it was most greedily drunk
in. Galen (the while) although he knew that cutting off or resection was
privately opposite to a Being that is born, yet he doubted not to reduce the
withdrawing of parts, or humors, in respect of the members, unto the order of
contraries: And he neglected the Family of privations, as born by an adulterous
congress: Hence all things universally, which should disagree in number,
situation, magnitude, proportion, afflux, or eflux, he took from their due
order, as though they were contraries, that he might make an establishment of
his own foolish Rule: As if Medicine did not work naturally, but stood by
learning by demonstration alone.

Hence at length, by a most general absurdity, he dictated the natural
indications or betokenings Crises or judicial periods, do mark out the beaten
path of healing: For it has so been credited, so wrote, and feigned hitherto,
and that, so without controversy; that nothing is thought to be alike
plausible, and fit for subscribing, and does through its own facility of
understanding deceive, by delighting, and captivating every unwary person.

But the knowledge of the Causes and Roots of healing, do grow from a far more
hidden Galen considered, that one contrary ought so often to be predicated of
(according to Aristotle) as often as another, because both of them stood under
the same general kind, and did rejoice in an equal privilege: wherefore
neither has he at any time diligently searched, what that general kind
should be, under which, positive coldness, or cold, might stand contrary to so
manifold a putrified heat as he seigned particular kinds of Fevers: To wit,
where he might find cold contrary to a Malignant, putrified, and hectic or
habitual heat; And resisting heat in so many excesses of spaces: Or what might
be that singular and individual action of cold; of so diverse Degrees and
Species, whereby as many heats being brought under the yoke, they should be
compelled to a due proportion: which thing surely, so long as it has been
neglected by the Galenists; also a just remedy for every Fever has remained
unknown, and Remedies have been administered, being prescribed by guess and
chance: For through Galenical scantinesses, they on both sides prostrate their
lies, conspiring for the death of mortals.

Paracelsus indeed scoffed at Galen with an Helvetian taunt, although as being
constrained, he now and then runs back to the same method, being unmindfull of
his own continual

But I under a Phylosophicall liberty, being addicted to no Master, do perceive
that if by Archeus (which do sometimes include in them a mere privation) do
oft-times complete the History of healing, without any contrariety, or likeness
of the Remedy to occasional causes: which very thing Paracelsus ought to have
remembered, if he had once looked back unto his own Arcanums or secrets: For he
had soon taken notice, that any one of those Arcanums do of right chase away
almost all Diseases, without any respect to likeness, or contrariety; but
through the besprinkling of a vital tincture alone, by a secret gift, that is,
by an overflowing of goodness: For indeed, whatsoever is made or born in
nature, is made from the necessity of efficient seeds:

But seeds themselves do in no wise operate for the scope of likeness, or
contrariety (as otherwise is commonly thought) but only because they are so
commanded to operate by the

Therefore even in the light, I do admire at the boldness of the Schools,
which have not acknowledged the seminall Beings of nature in Diseases; and have
placed qualities in the Aristotle to prostitute a matter wholly deprived of
every accident, for of a isease) for he thus prosperously begins from a
twofold, and every way privation of accidents, and forms, for the original
Beginning of things) Therefore that every accident as well inbred, as suddenly
happening, does also consequently depend, and issue out of the bosom of forms.

So indeed, that from the Form, and its first Essay, all activity in the
Archeus, as well of matter as accidents, does necessarily depend: in the mean
time, the Schools were through Aristotle (they support it even to this day) That
nothing can be contrary to Substances, as well those material, as formal: I do
not see therefore whence accidents shall beg their own contrariety to
themselves, especially those which are the naked, immediate, and mere
instruments of their own forms? For from whence had they drawn their own
contrariety, whose matter, and form (indeed the total principles of accidents)
do repulse all contrariety far from them: especially, because accidents being
considered in themselves, are not so much [Beings] as [of Beings]; and so that
of themselves they are nothing, do work or prevail nothing: Therefore it must
needs be, that if there be any intention of contrariety in nature, that is
primarily in the active Principle, that is in the bosom of the forms: So that
That nothing is contrary to substances, or it behooves accidents to have the
same contrariety, not depending on forms, and from their own proper nature,
without, and against the possibility of forms: That is, not to be the immediate
means, products, and instruments of forms; but to arise, stand, persevere, and
act of themselves, even against the will of forms, without, and besides forms;
To be I say, independent Beings, and no longer [of Beings]: Or Thirdly, At
length they must confess with me, That there is no contrariety in nature,
except among free and elective Agents. I add, If the equality of contraries
subsisteth according to the aforesaid Maxim, it must needs be, that the
relation of a relation to be founded between contraries, depends on a
substantial root, or on a radical respect of contrarieties, and an intimate
suitableness of proportion most fully present; which is as much as to say, That
the essence of the relation of contrarieties to be founded (otherwise more
former than the existence it self of forms can be) is altogether seated in the
most full, or innermost substantial principle of forms it self, wholly
incapable of contrariety: And that, whether thou do respect God himself, or
any other created substance: and so it must needs be, That contrariety in
nature does include a contradiction in its own Beginnings, and those of
Philosophy. But if thou considerest these things even as supernaturally, and in
God, they are not also therefore made contrary; and so, neither shall they flow
from God into nature, as contraries. And this very thing I say, I also urge
further, If one contrary may be declared so many ways, as often as also another;
Neither is there any thing contrary to substanstial forms; therefore there is
also no friendship, co-resemblance or likeness between forms, which is false:
For truly, from hence does appear a Character of things not to be blotted out,
because all things were created by God the Lover of Peace. For after that I
submitted my self to be instructed by better Beginnings, I seriously knew for
certainty, whether I should behold substances, or at length accidents, that
there is no contrariety in nature, unless among angryable or wrathful Beings,
and moveable living creatures: So far is it, that the action of every Agent on
its Patient, should only proceed from the term of relation of a contrary unto
its contrary. Therefore I have found contrariety only in the wrathful power of
Sensitive creatures, and not elsewhere: Whence perhaps by an improper
metaphor, or That nothing is contrary to substances; is equivalent to the
Position fore-placed in the Title of this Chapter: to wit, That nature is
ignorant of or knows no contraries. If there should be any power of contrariety
in nature, except in the wrathful faculty of sensitive creatures (for of Terms,
and applied Relations of Logic, I do not speak) surely that should be in the
manifest and primary qualities of the Elements; but in these there is no
contrariety; therefore in no place elsewhere.

The Assumption is proved, for that the Schools do draw the first qualities in
mixed bodies from the very contrarieties of the composing Elements: But the
Subsumption I have proved A young man in the morning descending from the Alps,
which are covered with continual Snow, yet on the side respecting the Sun, his
whole neck was burnt into Bubbles or Bladders: And there the air is exceeding
delightful, and poured all abroad, as it were with a new sky: (Learn thou
thence in the mean time, first of all, That Cold is not a privative absence of
Heat, but a true Being) Therefore Cold and Heat being there heightened at once
in the same place, time, and subject of the air, do mutually suffer each
other; which thing, the Schools will not admit to be possible in contraries:
for truly, they are such things which they will have mutually to beat down,
break, expel, slay each other, Alps, although the sense does not distinguish
them: For otherwise it is not possible, that that heat of the water gotten by
the moment of degrees, should perish in an instant; yea, neither is it the
fight of contraries, which has presently generated that luke-warmth, as
neither the victory of cold excelling the heat, while the former heat is
slackned; but the heat in the water is a transitory Relolleum, because it is
violently brought in: For therefore, the fire ceasing from which it was
produced, of its own accord, it presently is diminished, and cease, being no
longer cherished: That the heat in the hot water being divided throughout the
least Atoms of its subject, perishes of its own accord, but is not overcome
expulsively by a contrariety.

Because a Relolleum is an efficient quality, not proceeding out of the
Ferments and Seeds of things: And it is twofold; to wit, One in its own body,
but the other in a strange body. Relolleum's, some are seperable, As cold in
the air and water: but others are unseperable, as heat in the light of the Sun,
Candle, and Fire, which can never wax cold: A strange Relolleum is violent, by
which, if it be not nourished, it therefore perishes by its moments and
degrees: And therefore it is called transient, as is heat in the water.
Therefore air, and water are not made hot by the fire, through contrariety,
but by the generating Relolleum, as it acts that which was commanded it to
act, after a different manner of acting with seeds.

And therefore, it neither acts to, or for a form. In like manner, when water
extinguisheth fire, or fire lifts up water into a vapor, that never happens by
the force of contrariety:

If therefore contraries ought to be under the same general kind, fire cannot
be contrary

Lastly, If they were contrary, they should be primarily, by themselves
substantially, and immediately contrary, as simple bodies; and that being
granted, their action ought to be a like and equal sight, which thing I have
already before shown to be false, even as also that nothing is contrary to
substances: For by the beholding of which two things, to wit, The fire, and the
water, the Schools have feigned every contrariety of Mixtures and Complexions
in the Universe: What wonder is it therefore that the contrariety of nature
dreamed of in the Schools, is now to be had in suspicion? Seeing their own
privative contraries are without contrariety, likeness or equality, combat,
co-mixture, and grappling of forces?

Furthermore, moisture, and dryness are qualities scarce to be understood in
the abstract (even as otherwise, heat is considered in the hand, besides or
without the fire: yea in its improper Siccum or Dry sounds properly,
ex-succum or without juice, and contains only a denial of moisture: But
although through the admixture of dry, water may seem to be diminished in Clay,
yet the water does always keep its own intrinsecall moisture: As also the dry
Body keeps likewise its own dryness; Because there is not a piercing co-mixture
of those in the Root, but only an applying of parts: Therefore moisture, and
dryth are so tied to a Body, that they can in no wise be distinguished from it.

And therefore they are not Relolleum's, in manner of heat, and cold, which are
brought in by degrees. The whole water indeed vanishes away into a vapor: yet
it never assumeth

Being altogether ignorant, that there is no piercing of moist with dry, in
nature, no radical union, co-mixture, or radical temperature, whereby they
may divide between each other

And I do propose one question at least, to all, by me resolved elsewhere, how
many contrary Elements soever they hitherto suppose to conflux into the
constitution of Bodies which unity: these things already, more largely above.
Therefore it is a deaf kind of Doctrine,

That stupidity of the Schools is not to be borne, whereby they do without
scruple, subscribe

Because through ignorance of nature it self, the common people have brought in
Laws, confusions, contrarieties, fights, hostilities, reducements, and
repeated Resurrections, that of successive alteration: And that, which way
soever it may be taken, is to confess Radical, Seminal, and most inward
contrarieties in substantial forms: And so substances themselves to be
immediately contrary to each other, unless they had rather deny forms to be
substances.

But I am provided to teach, That nature does act all things by its own middle
properties, no aim of contrariety, hatred, or fight being proposed to it
self.

For truly, in the first place; We believe it by faith to be true, That God is
the daily Author and Governor of Nature; and that every where his own
creature does as much as it can, express and witness him in goodness.

In the next place, That God is the fountainous Beginning of love, concord, and
peace; also that he hates discords and contrarieties, so that if he could have
framed the Universe without brawlings and contrarieties, there is no doubt but
he has done it: But he could do that very thing most readily, because he is
Almighty, and has made all things as he would; therefore also has he done it.
The Subsumption is plain, because nothing could resist him, but what he would
make free: but the Seeds of things, or the Agents of nature, he has not
endowed with a freedom of willing; therefore neither could the Agents of nature
resist God: And by consequence, he made the Agents of nature, according to the
good pleasure of his own love, goodness, and peace: For so, when I take meat,
I never find in my self a contrariety, as neither in the meats; but if its
abundance or quality shall offend me, I find indeed a defect in me, but not a
contrariety: If any one be averse to Cheese, it argues not a contrariety, but
a seminal disposition working some hurtful thing, through a seminal power
directed by God: For it lists not us by reason of the necessary successive
changes in things, to call any hurtful qualities the hostilities and enmities
of things: Because we must speak properly in Philosophy; whereas otherwise,
words do change the sense, and do estrange the Essences of things, and
especially, when as thereby the whole constitution of healing is wrested aside
to the destruction of man: For contrariety does not only bespatter the face of
nature with as many vices as there are Agents, and Properties of things; but
also seems to have accused the Parent of nature himself, as if he were the
Maker and Favourer of hatred and brawlings: And so that the whole universe
should be only an Inn of hostility, a perpetual Duel, and a true infernal
Fury, no where expressing the Figure of its Creator. Therefore contrarieties in
nature are not from the Creator, who despises them in things capable of
choice; much more in those things which himself has framed, according to the
example of the Arch-type or first pattern.

Again, The creature, seeing it came out of nothing, bears before it no
Property from it self: But if therefore, contrarieties should proceed from
error alone, from the accustomedness of Seeds being wrested aside; then at
least they should not subsist, but in monstrous effects, and therefore should
be thrust rashly into the composure of nature.

And Lastly, From hence it follows, That the contrarieties of Seeds are only
from God: of which Assertion, a Christian judges the folly. For the Schools
have never hitherto thoroughly weighed, how much these might differ from each
other; to have done any thing through a conception of contrariety, and to have
wrought any thing through the obedience of the Seeds due to the Properties
given them by God: For therefore, to admit of contraries, is to place errors in
the intention, means, and end of nature. Therefore we must know, That nature
does altogether refuse contraries, if we hope to attain its in-most tone or
highest strain. But that which the Schools have devised concerning radical
heat, at least they have forgotten, That radical cold does marry it under the
same vital principle, That contraries might rejoice in their own equal right:
And they have opposed death only unto it, out of the general kind: Wherefore,
they have left that principal quality single without a contrary: And leaving
their own false Maxim, That contraries are under the same general kind, and
that they are predicated by as many equal turns on both sides. For seeing death
is a privation and non-Being, it can never supply the place of a contrary
(according to the dictate of the Schools) That it may be opposed to life or
radical heat; seeing that which is not, and which is nothing, does not stand
under the same general kind with radical heat: Concerning the Fables
whereof, and the fictions of Primogenial or Radical moisture, I have treated
very largely in the Treatise of Long Life.

Again, The Schools being dashed against the Rocks, do now and then treat of
heat, and cold, as potential things, yet not as contraries; because in every
small drop, or the least atome of Simples, they determine heat and cold to be
connexed, and very excelling in strength: to wit, They declare in Opium, a
heightened cold to be, and also a heat in its bitterness: And so also, I have
now rendered their knowledge drawn from savours, ridiculous, from one only
example touching Relolleum's: Because Seminal and Specificall Powers have by
the Schools been rashly brought over into Elementary qualities, or (...): For
they Divine cold to be in Opium, although bewrayed by no judgment of the
senses, from its effects; because they by a ridiculous dream, have tied up the
seminall, sleepifying power unto cold: As though the most High, when he would
send sleep into Adam, had stirred up cold in him! And as if, after Dinner a
notable cold in us should ascend into the head! Truly, the Schools do every way
require an understanding for the obedience of an incomprehensible faith. But if
the Herb Flammula, or Scarwort, although it has it self after an univocal or
simple manner (as much as in it lays) unto all things whereunto it is applied;
yet it does not embladder a dead carcass, even as it does a living body:
Because a dead carcass is not moved actively, or by its own motion, by the
poysonsom ferment of the Flammula: Because those potential qualities are no
more those of heat and cold, than the Elementary ones are; But the proper and
formall-specificall efficacy of things. Wherefore the device and testimony of
rudeness or ignorance for contrariety, is vain or foolish, whatsoever has been
by the Schools subscribed to the desires of the Gentiles concerning heat, and
cold potential; Seeing they deny potential heat to be the companion of actual
heat under the same kind, under which notwithstanding they do collect
contraries: And so, the rash history of temperaments has drawn to it the vital
and seminal faculties of things; for it is unknown in the Schools, that
whatever acts by reason of Salts, is not of the proper power of the Seed, but
an accident varying by reason of the object: For they have esteemed Lime as a
most hot Simple, because by its Salts, it moved an escharre or crust in a
wound: Neither minded they, that in Calx vive, even as in Snow, worms do of
their own accord arise: What is desired in this place, I have elsewhere more
largely explained concerning actions, even as also touching the knowings of
diseases.

Therefore hitherto I have taught, That qualities are, and do operate in the
Elements without respect to contrariety: But now I descend unto a Systeme or
collection of things.

First of all, Oneness or a Unite is not contrary to a Binary or that which is
twofold, although they go back divided by interchangeable courses: Likewise,
neither are upwards and downwards, East and West, contraries, but oppositions
of Scituations, which do vary through respects: And so, that which is above, in
respect of another thing, is beneath: neither therefore is the right ear
contrary to the left, although opposite: For neither do I speak of
contradictory terms, which do only contradict in a Relative respect, but have
not hostile Properties in things: Neither also is my speech concerning
privative things: Yea, neither do I deny contraries in the wrathful power; but
I constantly affirm only this one thing alone, That God has not made
contraries in nature, which by hostility may kill and set upon each other: Or,
I deny contrary properties in natural things; That is, I deny positive and
real contraries to be in the order of natural actions: For virtue has it
self opposite to vice, from the disposition of the thing depriving: Neither
also is a flying creature contrary to a creeping one, for the same Silkworm is
both: Neither is generation it self contrary to corruption; but there is one
only flowing of the Seeds, from point to point, by wearying, withdrawing,
losing, or extinguishing the strength or faculties. Likewise, neither is great
contrary too little, nor straight too crooked; Seeing one and the same thing
may sometimes be small, sometimes great, strait, and crooked. Let the same
judgment be of sweet and bitter, hard and soft, rough and smooth, heavy and
light, sharp and blunt, coagulated and resolved, or of white and black: For all
the powers of things are in themselves absolute; neither do they respect others
that are diverse from them; Because every thing is even as it existeth by it
self: But for that they are opposed by us, even as if they did disagree among
themselves, that is unknown to things, and plainly by accident, or foreign
unto them. In the mean time, a Hatchet does not cut wood, or a Knife cut bread,
by reason of contrarieties or hostilities, but every property acts without
reflection on an opposite one, that which it is commanded to act. It is a
foolish thing to will things to be contrary, wherein there is no pretense of
hatred, disagreement, victory, or superiority: And therefore, neither is there
any intention of contrariety in nature. Therefore every thing acts even as it
is commanded to act. For within an egg-shell, a war of contrariety is not
enclosed, although the Seed may flow through various successive alterations of
dispositions, far unlike from each other; a Unity and concord of nature is on
every side kept, which is no where contrary to it self: yea, it abhors every
contrary, and whatsoever disturbeth unity. For indeed, there is in the Seed a
transchanging of the water existing in the earth of a Garden; and so that one
only water passes into a thousand hot, sharp, bitter, sour, and cold Herbs:
For not because any Seed is contrary to the juice or water in the earth; or
that another sharp simple does envy a sharp one that is neighbor to him, which
does less answer to him in the resembling mark of unity; far be it: For they
proceed indifferently from the vital Beginning of their own Seeds, wherein
hostile contraries are not entertained: For accidents, seeing they are the
dispositions of Seeds, or of absolute Beings in themselves, not of Relative
ones, and therefore ignorant of contrarieties, they follow also the guidance of
their own Seeds, whose instruments, and products they are: Therefore the Table
of repugnant things admits of contraties only in the sensitive and wrathful
power of free Agents.

Secondly, It admits of privative things.

Thirdly, Last of all, of those things which do contradict in Relative terms.
Since therefore there are not things absolutely contrary in nature; how
carelessly it has hitherto been proceeded in the fictions of Complexions, and
healings of the sick, they shall see, whom the mournings of Widows and Orphans
shall one day accuse; to wit, That for one only sluggishnesse, they have rashly
subscribed to stupid heathenish Doctrines: And so, that indeed they have not
hitherto so much as known the definition of nature, which I thus define.

Nature is that command of God whereby a thing is that which it is, and does
what it is commanded to do: But that fitly, because the Schools reject their
own Theorems or Speculations; Erisipelas the most fiery of Apostems (as they
say) they cure by applying of the best Aqua vitae.

Lastly, If nature the Physitianesse of her self, can overcome diseases by her
own goodness, but not by a fighting quality: Let them show I pray, what kind
of cold it may be in a Nature be ignorant of contraries (as I have shown)
surely these could not fight in us, and least of all so long as the creature
stands in need of help or ease, and the disease was present: For truly, our
nature does always work a univocal or single thing, whether it resolves
coagulated things, or at length coagulateth resolved things: For it does no
otherwise than as Gold-finers powder, which gives a hardness to Lead, a
difficult melting to Quicksilver, and Tin, both which qualities it takes
away from Iron: Not indeed, Because that powder is contrary to it self, and to
Metalls (which it perfecteth) in working, and adds to these what is wanting to
themselves; to wit, That one only powder does afford to every one of them,
their own, and far diverse Dispositions which they have believed to be
contrary, as hardness in Gold is to softness in Lead.

Let Paracelsus likewise give place, because he has enclosed all healing in
things that are Archeus does find his delights.

For example; Hunger is as it were a very sharp disease, killing in good
earnest, at least, through the sufferance of a few days: But it is not cured
by contrary food, nor lastly by as much as it is contrary to the ferment, nor
as it is like to the same, but because it is an appropriated Remedy.

The like thing is to be required in the healing of any deseases whatsoever; to
wit, a suitable fitting of the Remedy to the indisposition of the Archeus, and
a taking away of the occasional

Paracelsus sometimes supposed, That no Simple is fit for healing, unless it
self does first dye. And again in another place, That it is not sufficient for
a Simple for that cause to dye, unless it be first reduced into the three
first things, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury (so he calls them:) Which error of
the Affirmer, has raised up in the Author a frequent unconstancy: Because
there are not a few Simples which do unfold the specifical property of their
form, the Subject wherein they in-here being safe: Of which sort that comes
first to hand, are Medicines tied about the head for the Headache, and very
many Amulets, which himself calls Zenexton. So indeed, we have pleasantly
noted, That tremblings or beatings of the heart, the disgraceful pain of the
Hemorrhoides or Pyles, inordinate Fluxes of Blood, Falling-sicknesses,
stranglings of the womb, and Fevers themselves, have been appeased by things
hung on the body. So on the contrary, not a few distilled Remedies do scarce
know how to dye, or to pass into the family of man; Yet great is their effect
in diseases. Let Paracelsus also pardon me, because that resolution of simple
Remedies is never made in our body: For I have elsewhere sufficiently taught,
That the Digestion does never tend to those late three first things; Nor that
we that are ever nourished by these things, but by the one only, and the same,
or colike liquor whereof we consist. Many things also, through their first boy
sing, do lay aside their former virtues: For so Asarum or Fole-foot, of a
vomiting Medicine, becomes a provoket of Urine: And by the dividing of a thing
into those three first things, its specificall Property is for the most part
destroyed: For although they keep some kind of constitutive temperature of
their composed body; yet they are by the fire made a new creature. Also he is
happy, who by crude or raw Simples, has known safely and readily to take away
diseases: For it is the more ancient method of healing, noted in the
Scriptures; Because the Almighty has created medicine from the earth: For
truly, a specificall Being cannot but be altered by the fire: Therefore not
un-often, Extracts, and Magisterial Medicines are weakened. For indeed as
Alchymie brings many things to a degree of greater efficacy, as it stirs up a
new Being: So on the other hand again, it by a privy filching, does enfeeble
many things. Indeed, he accuses nature of sluggishnesse and imperfection,
whosoever thinks the same to have perfected nothing without the fire: Let the
seeds of things be the witnesses of these things: For some seeds do bud of
their own free accord; But some do want sowing, and harrowing, but very few
stand in need of the Art of preparing: at length none do admit of the fire, or
of a resolving: For the powers or virtues which immediately stick fast in the
bosom of nature, do act after the manner of an influence, neither will they
willingly be submitted to the fire. But those powers which are immediately in
the forms, not indeed of a Simple, but of Heterogeneal parts, do very often
shine again in the more abstracted part of them: For so Mace, Terpentine, and
Asparagus, do even paint their mark of resemblance in the Urine. But the powers
which arise out of things by the fire, although they owe something to their own
composed body, as it were the pledges of its family; yet certainly they are
new, and transplanted branches, for the most part the Vassalls of another
Monarchy, even as elsewhere concerning the faculties of Medicines. For I have
always greatly esteemed the ordination of the Creator in the endowment of
Simples: For in very deed, according to his mind, very many, or most Diseases
do give place by Simples, as if they were driven out by a most old Wedge. But
because I speak in the praise of Simples, I would not be received into a
sleighting of the Art of the fire: But I speak only to those who admit of
nothing besides those three first things, and do far prefer the Sweets drawn
out of Herbs by stilling, before their bloody juices.

For first, They may learn, that the Juices of Herbs, and likewise the Broathes
of fleshes, do season and keep from corruption for years, without Salt,
Vinegar, Honey, Sugar, and Fire; Then at length they will easily despise the
stilled waters of Herbs, no less than Syrupes: But when as the disease has
arisen into a degree, and has intimately married, prostrating nature; higher
remedies are required, than those which nature has of her own accord produced.

At length perhaps, I shall by many, be judged to have strived about Goats
Wool, and only about a name: And that, what the Schools do call a contrary, I
have strove to mask with Crisis, if Victory be thence to be hoped for. Truly I
have shown, that such powers are not found in nature: Likewise, that neither
do the seeds of things act from a hope and endeavor of Victory, or of
trampling on their Patient, as being contrary to it: Nor also of overcoming the
activity of the Patient: And so that there is not any contrariety, striving,
hatred, War, combat of arrogance, or superiority to bear any show, or be
preferred in natural things, but that they act without an intention and
foreknowledge of the end, as they were so created by God their Umpire, and were
so endowed, and so commanded by him to act: Therefore it is clear, that
contrariety as it is taught in the Schools, to be implanted in any kind of
things, is banished from whole nature, except from the wrathful faculty of
living Creatures: and so, although self-love, sympathy, antipathy, choice, yea
and some sense or perceiving may be attributed to things without life; Let it
be an Analogy, or proportionable resemblance re-shining rather in their
effects, and causes; than in the direction of the Creator, or Ordination of
ends; because, in a proper sense, they are deprived of choice, intention of
acting, and foreknowledge of ends. But seeing any of these sort of things do
plentifully witness, that they have a directer, strongly moving, and sweetly
disposing the ends of all things even to their bounds; the unfoldings of their
properties are Testimonies, that the most glorious God does rule the rains even
of things of small esteem, by powers given unto them, ignorant thereof: And so,
that they are wholly right, withut a knowledge of the end: that is, without
their violent force, anger, strife, and hatred. So far is it therefore, that I
judge the actions of things, and remedies, to be made by opposites (in the room
of contraries) that I have equally banished, as well opposites as contraries,
from nature; but I have admitted opposites, after the manner of a Relation of
terms; But not in the way wherein they act on each other: For I have always
from the Age of a man, supposed; that if there should be contraries, or they
should act as such, nature should not totally, exemplarily, formally, and
dependantly respect its Creator: And that, of such a Creature, it could not be
fitly said; And God saw that whatsoever things he had made, were good: if it
could not unfold the properties planted in it, without hatreds, after a hostile
manner. At length, how much opposite things, which I have reckoned among
repugnant or resisting ones, may differ from contrary ones, those Physicians
have known, whosoever do not burn with a pleasure of reproaching: Therefore let
young Beginners mark, whether he who overthrows the first principles of
healing, from the intent of the Creator, striveth with me about a naked name
who would have all things operate according to the endowment of nature
conferred on it; not by contrariety, or a desire of destroying each other, but
for the ends foreknown to God alone, who is love and peace; but not hatred,
strife, or the fuel of contrariety: Therefore, from the intention of the
Creator, are created things to be weighed. The VVoolf has deceived the
Schools, who kills if he could, not one Sheep only, but also the whole flock.
Contraries are in man, and Beasts, by a power of animosity or angry hear, which
is banished as well from the Mineral, as vegetable Kingdom.

At length, in mortal men, sins are opposed to virtues privatively, seeing Sin
is reckoned a non-being. I may think habitual virtues not to be contrary to
vices, as they do as yet For out of the heart proceeds Murders, Adulteries,
etc. But a mere non-being does not proceed, as neither does it fall under a
conception; seeing it has not a Species of its own wherein it may represent it
self.

Therefore sin is not only a turning away from the Creator; but also a mental
or mindelike act of a determined wickedness or malice: but an act of the mind
does always put on and thus far it springs forth according to the Soil of the
Soul, into the faculties of the Body.

Hitherto, I have discoursed of Faculties created from the intent of the
Creator: to wit, that there is not given an incentive or inciting Faculty of
contraries and enmities, unto things etc. yet the same things do operate after
the manner of poisons, and poysonsom Plants; which divine goodness, has not
created to hurt, or kill, or unto an ill end; but for other ends directed for
the glory of his Majesty. But it will be very hard to attribute the contraries
of Hostility to inaminate things by an accustomed, and wanton analogy of
powers, to consider a matter or thing (to wit, the Spittle of a mad Dog, or of
Serpents) to be imprinted by anger on a man, without that contrariety which we
of our own accord grant to be in a bruit Beast from whence it sprang: But
surely, he shall with me, easily perceive it, if he consider, that poison,
whether it be created by a Beast, or prepared through the contagion of
animosity, does not therefore cease to be poison, and to act according to the
nature of poison: The property whereof is, to act by a natural force or power;
yea although having risen from the impression of anger; yet this quality is no
more anger to it, but a certain natural product: and so wherein there is
indeed a mark of anger and contrariety, but not anger it self: And therefore
there is not a certain product like unto love, wherewith a man being stricken,
or anointed, may by so much profit, by how much he is deadlily smitten by
another product. Whence it is manifest, that that poison, however it be
produced by anger, and be mortal unto a man; yet that does not happen through
any contrariety; seeing that a direct contrary is wanting unto it, which does
equivalently or equally help, and promote the life, even as this poison hurts
it. And so, if these kinds of poisons do act by reason of contrariety, now the
Maxim is false; That so many ways one contrary is said to be, by how many wany
ways another is so said. Therefore it has now beensufficiently shown, that
poisons indeed, are made from the anger of Beasts; but it does not therefore
follow, that the poysonof a Plant, if it act (as was shown above) by reason of
its own natural endowment implantedin it by God, and not by reason of any
contrariety, that the poison of bruit Beasts is more capable of contrariety,
than that of other Simples: Otherwise, the same thing is wholly to be judged
concerning the poisons of those that have the art of poisoning, Sorceresses,
etc. For although they are compounded, and given to the drinker; to hurt the
mind: yet those do operate either naturally, and so without an intention of
contrariety, or fight: or they operate by the power of the Devil; which is
either solitary or singly alone, and so is truly a hostile effect (because from
the evil Spirit an enemy) or natural: And then, not by the force of
contrariety or fight; but only by the unfolding of its natural endowment: The
which I have already shown above, to be void of contentious contrariety.

Furthermore, through occasion of these things, the efficacy of poison prepared
by animosity, is to be explained: it is known to the common people, That the
blood of a Bull does strangle him that drinks it; but not the blood of an Ox
or Cow. And that thing I have elsewhere referred to the fury of the Bull, with
the desire of a dying revenge, after the manner of Serpents. But a Hog,
although he perish with anger (perhaps therefore, God forbad the blood of
living Creatures under pain of indignation) yet that is done with a fear of
death. But the Bull is struck with so great a fury, that he suffers no
apprehension of death: And so, although his blood be poysonsom, yet not his
flesh; Because his fury approaching nigh unto death, has not space enough to
defile his flesh. But a mad Dog, because he was a good while mad before death,
does also infect his flesh. Therefore fearful Animalls, as the Mouse, Toad,
etc. do centrally besprinkle their fleshes, and bones with a certain fear: Even
as I have demonstrated elsewhere in the Plague-grave. But hitherto has that
Maxim regard, Morta la bestia, morto il veleno: The Beast being dead, his
poison is killed: which surely has place in a poysonsom living Creature;
because between while, he burns with a fury of revenge. In brief, if the
virtues and endowments of Simples be adverse to us, that proceeds from Divine
Ordination; but net from the Idea or Image of revenge, or hostile contrariety:
For these do far differ from each other; to be contrary to any thing, and to
have hurtful endowments in nature: For truly this proves Gods order and
variety of powers appointed in nature; But that declares Hostility, an enemy
to God and nature: therefore they differ in their end; That is, in the
institution and direction of God in nature: which is, in the order, intention,
ordination, and so in the whole scope of the mind of God: according to which,
I consider contrarieties in Bruits, and in Man, and not in other Simples, and
least of all in the Elements. And therefore to conclude; the question is not
here, about a name; if I shall overthrow the contrarieties of Elements, and
their fights, and successive courses of Complexions in things falsely believed
to be mixed: even as also, whatsoever has from these Suppositions, been
hitherto pratled in the behalf of life, a Disease, Death, and Remedies.

CHAP. XXIV. The Blas of Man.
1. The error of the Schools about the first Moover. 2. Aristotle
contradicts himself. 3. Blasphemy in a Christian. 4. An error has slown
from Science Mathematical badly appropriated. 5. The Blas of man does imitate
the flowing of the Stars. 6. When our Blas does go before, and when it follows
the Blas of the Stars. 7. Why the Blas of Bruits goes before that of the Stars.
8. A voluntary Blas is not annexed to the Stars. 9. A twofold Blas in us. 10.
Whence unsensitive things are moved. 11. Galen resists Aristotle in the
Pulses. 12. He sought into the measurings of pulses, but not into the efficient
cause. 13. The use of the pulses with Galen. 14. A third use unknown to Galen.
15. The consideration of the Author. 16. That a cooling refreshment is not the
end of pulses. 17. Some suppositions. 18. None has treated concerning life.
19. Contradictories concerning the fire of the heart. 20. Whether a pulse be
for the procuring of Colds sake. 21. Why the pores in the enclosure of the
heart, are triangular. 22. Wherein the venall blood, and the arteriall blood do
differ. 23. The sensitive soul is the framer of pulses. 24. To what end the
motion of the heart is. 25. The absurdities of the Schools concerning radical
heat. 26. The motion of the heart cannot be judged to be for cooling
refreshment sake. 27. Why a Feverish pulse is swiftly moved. 28. A Thorn in the
finger teaches that from the swiftness of the pulse heat is increased, but not
cold. 29. Five chief ends of the pulses. 30. How the kindling, and enlightening
property of fieryness do differ. 31. That the Spirit of the blood is not from
the Liver. 32. It is a rotten Doctrine which confounds the ends of pulses
with breathing. 33. The necessities of pulses have been hitherto unknown. 34.
The use of the pulses has respect unto the digestive Ferment. 35. The
sluggishness of the Schools about these things. 36. Why healthy Sailers are
more hungry than themselves not sailing. 37. The Air cannot nourish the spirit
of life. 38. An Alcali is formed by burning up. 39. The wonderful Coal of
Honey, and diverse speculations of Chemistry are cleared up. 40. The
Commonwealth of Alcalies. 41. The fabric of the Balsam Samech of Paracelsus.
42. An Alcali is made volatile, and so interchangeably under the same formal
property of a composed Body. 43. Of the labor of wisdom. 44. An Handicraft
Operation of distilled Vinegar. 45. Some Handricraft Operations of Chemistry
are re-taken for the finishing of the venall blood without a dreg. 46. A new
and unheard of use of the pulses. 47. There is an unwonted pulse from the part
grieving through a Thorn. 48. Pus or corrupt matter being made, why Sumptomes
wax mild. 49. Whence the hardness of an Artery may straightway be made. 50.
What a hard pulse may portend. 51. That the use of the pulse differs from the
use of breathing. 52. While Pus is made, the labor is greater. 53. The quality
of a vulnerary or wound-potion. 54. It is false, that the bowels are by nature
hotter in VVinter. 55. A contradiction of the Schools. 56. A begging of the
principle. 57. An eightfold scope or aim of the pulses. 58. As there is not a
Livery Spirit in the venal blood; so neither is there an Animal or sensitive
pulse of a proper name, in the, shop of the Brain.

THe Elements, Complexions, Compositions, and Causes of natural things, for
natural Phylosophie, being already dispatched: to wit, After the birth of
forms, the ignorance Magnum Oportet, being perfectly taught: Now therefore I
will examine the Beginnings of life.

The Schools have raught, That in every local motion, a first unmovable Mover
is of necessity to be appointed: Which thing, I neither find true by Art, nor
Nature: For the demonstrating whereof; A drunken man of an unstable mind, and
foot, in a floating ship, goes and hangs a weight on a Clock: Therefore in
voluntary motions, there is not required a first stable or unmovable Mover.
Likewise, the Sun does with his beam inflame Gunpowder through a Glass. This
first Mover has not any thing in his possession, that may be unmovable: That
thing is also already manifest in the fire, an irregular Being. Thirdly, In
nature every seed being once conceived in a due place, does not cease
afterward by its own motion, to stir the lump subjected to it: Therefore the
true and first Mover of seeds in nature, and workman of all things moves
himself first, and does not require a motion beyond his own motion: And
whatsoever does stir up any natural Mover to move, is its very own proper and
internal Beginning of motion, and it falling into improper places, dies; and
its motion cease. Therefore the Aristotelicks, who call Nature the Principle
of Motion, or the first Mover, do by an absurd Archeus, that he may the more
strongly unfold his inbred strength of moving, and may direct it unto his own
ends. But if indeed the Schools would have their Aristotle, (although unfitly a
Naturalist) yet in this place to have had respect in natural things, unto the
one and first supernatural Mover of all things, who is the independent
Beginning of all motion; Truly, I respect that as impertinent, it being without
natural Philosophy: For that most glorious Mover has given powers to things,
whereby they of themselves, and by an absolute force may move themselves, or
other things. Indeed, it is impertinent to run back to God the Mover, to
demonstrate the natural motion of Bodies.

But neither also is the blasphemy to be endured in a Christian, which
requires God of necessity to be unmovable, that he may be able to move other
things: For truly, God does (Fait or Let it be done) has departed into nature,
which afterward is for the moving of it self. So B. Gregory says, That there
is a power conferred on the earth, whereby it may thrust forth Plants from it
self. Therefore it is a Paganish Doctrine drawn from Science Mathematical,
which necessitates the first Mover to a perpetual unmoveablenesse of himself,
that without ceasing he may move all things.

The error is to be indulged in Aristotle, not in Christian Schools defiling
young Beginners: for otherwise, there is no motion naturally made, but from a
motive Principle, which moves ship, neither does it naturally contain a motive
power in it, but it is only a means by which the mover measures his motion;
to wit, on which the mover himself stablishing himself as it were on a bottom,
does by weight and the acting forces of Science Mathematical, frame his own
motion, (which otherwise is wholly moveable, and is actively moved:) For so a
Gun does the more strongly cast out a Bullet, if it has a resisting unmovable
body behind it. But surely, as that body is not motive, so it does not but by
an absurdity, require an unmovable mover, and is unfitly compared to the first
Mover: Yea in natural bounds, the first and total Mover is Gunpowder
enflamed, which that it may be moved, it requires no unmoveablenesse, but that
it may measuringly move, it has need of a measured instrument: Therefore it is
impertinent to think, that all motions are made by God the first Mover, as if
he did move all things moved, with a certain staff. It is also an impertinent
thing while it is searched into, whether the Mover as he is such, ought of
necessity to be unmovable: it is answered, That the first mover shall measure
his motion, and more strongly move, if he be unmovable, or it is strove
against an unmovable foundation. Is that to have taught Christian Philosophy?
For indeed, it is not to be doubted, but that the Stars by their various aspect
which they beg from motions, do infuse a Blas motive of the water and air,
that they might be to us for seasons, days, and years. Again, in that the
earth has received an internal Beginning of propagating Plants before the
Stars were born; therefore bruit beasts; although they were more latter than
the stars, yet the seeds of these are not more ignoble than the seeds of
plants, or annexed to the stars by the band of a greater subjection: Because
the Stars were before the Creation of sensitive things; therefore it was meet,
that the Blas of

Otherwise, In infirmities, as all the endeavor of nature is sumptomatical; so
then the

But bruit beasts, as they were created in a day before man, so their Blas does
always go

Yet the Blas which is by the will of living creatures, directed to a local
motion, surely that etc.

For Galen has artificially enough distributed the Pulses, yet being by
Aristotle deluded therein, who supposed the end, and efficient to be external
causes, and thought the ends of

And therefore he has distributed the differences of Pulses into a Scheme or
Figure, only wit, To the cooling refreshment of the heart, to which end the
Heart and Arteries should at

Therefore I began first to consider, That heat was not primarily and of it
self in the heart, but to be a companion of the life and soul, a sign, and mean
of operation in living creatures that

And therefore, that a Pulse is not made in nature, for a cooling refreshment
of the (...), and puffing out or dispersing of smoaks, a dissected Frog will
teach: For in a living Frog

None indeed has hitherto doubted, that heat springs from the Heart, and none
contesteth, but that the young is at first nourished by its mothers heat,
until that through maturity of

But what that fuel is, and why it being once kindled, does not presently dye,
and does continue even to the end; none has diligently searched into, because
all have passed by the Aristotle, who will have this heat to answer in
proportion to the Element of the Stars, and has distinguished it from an
Elementary and Fiery one) also that it lives by devouring and consuming of the
radical moisture: whence it would follow, That the heart is the Torch of a
consuming fire: But notwithstanding, seeing the substance of the Heart, and
Pericardium or case of the Heart, and also of the Blood, is not fit for fire:

They have been forced to confess that fire not to be fire, and that heat not
to be fiery, yet devouring; but they have said, It is sufficient for them to
have described the Fewelor Torch, or Beginning of heat Metaphorically; As if
nature should admit of Metaphors: For first of all, I remember that some
swooning Virgins were beref't of Pulse and breathing, so far as was conjectured
by humane judgment, and so for some hours were bewailed among the dead; yet
that they revived, and being married, afterward to have lived without
sickness, and to have brought forth five or six times.

For they were cold as Ice, as soon as their Pulse had failed: from whence I
began to be Porie, That by the attraction of the ears of the Heart (for on both
sides it is reckoned to be eared by way of proportionable Resemblance, because
it has as it were Bellows) the Veinie Blood does pass from the hollow Vein
(forming the right bosom of the Heart by its passage) and wanders into the left
bosom; not likewise from hence to the right bosom:

Because the pores in the hedge or partition it self are triangular, whose Cone
or sharp yet in the hollow vein, in color, and subtility or fineness.
Wherefore I must needs, not without cause, have found out a new or fourth
digestion in the left stomach of the heart: For no otherwise than as the blood
of the veins differs from the cream and chyle; so also does the blood of the
Arteries differ from the thick blood of the veins, although by a nearer kin,
and clothing of the Heavens, they have after a sort returned into one Family:
Yet in that is the specificall difference of both, that the arterial blood is
informed by the immortal Coagulum or co-thickning of growth: But the arterial
blood, has for its aim, not indeed that it may incline into a smoakiness, or
excrement: For if that thing come to pass, it happens to it from a Disease,
and by accident. After another manner, the proper object of the arterial blood
is to be brought over into vital Spirit: which if afterward it does also
vanish, let this be unto it besides its intent; Seeing that every Being does
naturally desire to remain: For the vital Spirit is a light originally
dwelling in the Ferment of the left bosom, which enlightneth new Spirits bred
by the arterial blood, to wit, for which continuation of light, the Artery is
lifted up: For thus the Spirits are made the partakers of life, and the
executers thereof, even as also the Vulcans of continued heat. Therefore the
life of man is a formal light, and almost also the lightsom or clear sensitive
Soul it self, and so death does forthwith follow the blowing out of this:
Because the immortal mind is involved in the sensitive Soul, which after
death slies away, this other perishing. But far be it, that that vital light
be called fiery, burning, and destroying the radical moisture, and that by the
continual plenty of the smoakie vapors hereof, it should defile the heart and
Arteries: But it is a formal light (even as I have said before concerning
Forms:) for neither shall he ever otherwise describe the in-most essence of
life, who had seen the formal lives of things even in an Ecstasy: Because
words are wanting, and names, whereby these may be shown or called, as it were
by an Etymology from a former cause. And although God had shown to any one
the essence of life in a composed Body; yet he will never give his own honor
of teaching it, unto any Creature; Seeing life in the abstract, is the
incomprehensible God himself.

For so by little and little, the meat and drink ascends into the Chyle or
juice of the stomach, into the juice of the mesentery or Crow, into venal
blood, and at length, by arteriall

For by the motion is made an extenuating, not indeed of the sour, but of the
salt arterial blood; neither therefore is it turned into a fat or butter; but
into vital Spirit, of the nature the Blood, Water, and Spirit are one and the
same: For if that light be in the Spirit, but this be carried through the
Arteries into the whole Body; also that light ought to be on every side
continual to it self, seeing it is the property of light else to be
extinguished. Therefore the Arteries ought to remain open; so indeed, that they
do never remain long pressed together: wherefore it was also meet that the
pulse should dilate the same, nor so to be pressed together, that the whole
Artery should wholly rush or fall down on it self: perhaps therefore it is not
unjustly clothed with a double, and harder coat. For the discontinuance of
that light, is the cause that in one moment, every chief faculty of the Brain
in those that are hanged, does perish: But not that the Spirit had so quickly
vanished from the Brain. Again, if a pulsative motion should not be made, a
deadly cold would straightway arise, and we should be more cold than a Frog: So
that, although many things do live in the Winter time, without breathing, under
the Clay, yet not without a pulse. Also the Ferment of the left bosom does
transchange its own arterial blood, not without a slow delay, and would send it
through the Body every way, too slowly, and therefore it should not satisfy the
importunate necessities of the Spirits. For let us feign a Bottle seasoned with
an Odor, but to be filled with Liquor up to its half: For that Liquor shall
scarce snatch the Odor of the Bottle; but if it be shaken together, that Odor
also does presently insinuate it self through the least parts of the Liquor. So
indeed, is the vital Ferment of the left bosom presently given to the Arterial
blood by the motion of the heart, and does compel it also to a hasty obedience
of its own Impression: For light is easily kindled by light; and therefore also
the Arteriall blood being now quickened, it easily snatcheth to it the light of
that Sunny Lamp, and is brought into a Skyie or Aerie offspring. Therefore the
Blas of the heart is the Fuel of the vital Spirit, and consequently of its
heat; but the Spirit being thus enlivened, is the mover of the heart, almost
neglected in the Schools: Also by consequence, that motion is made for a
necessary heat in Sunny constituted Animals, and for the framing of Spirit in
them: Therefore I may not believe, that the Pulse is appointed for a requisite
cooling refreshment of the heart: For truly things that have life, do not war
under the deadly Ensigns of cold: neither do they intend or hearken to cold,
but only do meditate on vital things. Indeed, cold in us, is a token (because
a Companion) of death: And therefore whatsoever it should attempt in the
Fountain of life, it should intend a taking away of life; as also it should be
destructive to our Monarchy, so far is it, that cold should be for necessity
and co-temperaments sake: For without a Pulse, heat is not overmuch kindled;
but straightway also, life remaining, heat dies. For the Schools being
deceived, do thus judge, they thinking Elementary fire to be for the
composition of Bodies, and that fire in its heightened degree, (without which
its fire cease to be fire) does consist in the heart; and that indeed Kitchen
fire, seeing else a ridiculous fire is to be far fetched from the concave of
the Moon; otherwise, it should not by a loosed Bridle, slide downwards safe, at
the pleasure of inferior Bodies, and contrary to its own disposition, through
so many colds of the Air, unto the ordinary constitution of Simples.

And so, if the Schools had instead of radical heat, understood a fire
feigned to be under the circle of the Moon, they should improperly say that the
same does only subsist in us, as

Truly in my judgment, the Schools ought at least to have remembered, that the
very blowing of the Bellows does not refresh or cool the fire, but rather
inflame it: Neither do

Indeed, this is the reason, why in a Fever the Pulse is swifter, but not an
expelling of smoakiness, nor a greediness of cooling refreshment.

For truly, let a Thorn be put in the loose or fleshy top of the finger, there
is presently a hard, strong, and more swift pulse, but afterward for the
increase of the Pulse, there is every and vomit up yellow choler: Therefore
also there ought to be a most frequent pressing together of the Pulse, and the
whole Pulse to be most exceeding swift: Especially, because many dying in those
Fevers, do perish in the cold a little before the Feverish fit, through a great
want of the Spirits, and being as it were choked. But in troublesome heats,
also in an Erisipelas, the burning Coal or Fever, the Persick fire, etc. the
vital Spirit being incensed, and as it were provoked to anger by the
diseasifying cause, waxes exceeding hot; as appears in the aforesaid local,
also burning Inflammations: whereas otherwise, a temperate lightsome kindling,
does on every side shine forth under a vital Harmony: yea, that a little
before death or sounding, the horny membrane of the Eye is seen to be deprived
of light, the fire being not before in a burning rage. Furthermore, the
transmutation of the Arterial blood into Spirit, which is begun in the heart,
is ripened in the current of the Arteries, or stomach of the heart: Neither
therefore is it a wonder, that in the Spleen abounding with so many Arteries, a
Ferment, and the first motions of the heart are established instead of a
stomach; the mental and sensitive Souls, being indeed Saturns Kingdoms: For
the digestion of the heart, is with a full transmutation of the arteriall Blood
into Spirit, without a dreg, and smoakiness: Because it is that which neither
contains filths, nor admits of diversities of kind; neither does the Spirit
the Son of heat, degenerate by reason of heat. Indeed it is the immediate
operation of the sensitive Soul, always univocall or single, like to it self,
and to life, for the life that is uttered by vital motions. Therefore the
chief aims of the Pulses, are,

1. A bringing of the venall blood from the bosom of the hollow vein, unto the
left womb 2. An increase of heat. 3. A framing of arterial blood. 4. And again,
a producing of vital Spirit. 5. And then there has been another ultimate aim
of Pulses, to wit, that the original life residing in the implanted Spirit of
the heart, may be participated of. Therefore I will repeat what I have said
elsewhere: To wit, that some Forms do glister, as in Stones and Mineralls; but
some moreover, do shine by an increased light, as in Plants; but others are
also lightsome or full of light, as in things soulified.
And so a vital lightsomness is granted to the vital Spirit, by a kindling,
not indeed of fieriness;

The Schools in the room of those things which I have already demonstrated, do
suppose the blood in the Liver to receive the nature of a Spirit, which perhaps
they therefore call natural: willingly ignorant thereof, at least in the
greatest want of vital spirit: and while the increase thereof is chiefly
desired, then indeed there is the least, and slowest elevation of the Artery:
And on the other hand, while the Spirit abounds, there is the greatest
elevation of the Artery. I confess indeed that breathing is drawn by the
bridles of the Will, or by the instruments of voluntary motion, but the Pulse
not so: But seeing that a sound breast may satisfy by its breathings, the ends
of the Pulses, the Pulse should not therefore be necessary, as long as any one
is cold, and his breathing does sufficiently inspire. But seeing
notwithstanding in the mean time, the Pulse does not therefore pause; surely
there must needs be one cause, or necessity of the Pulses, and another cause,
or necessity of breathing: For we percieve the necessities of breathing, we
also do measure our breathing at our pleasure, and some can wholly press it
together, or suppress it in themselves; But why do we not feel the more vital,
and no less urgent necessities of the Pulses? Chiefly seeing it is the life
that is the Original of sensibility, which alone indeed does feel all its own
necessity, and does alone exclude us from every act of feeling: Wherefore hence
I conjecture, that there are other necessities unknown to the ancients.

I know indeed, that from the Arterial blood, and from the vital spirit, there
are no dregs, filths, or superfluities expelled (as I shall show in its place)
but that smoaky vapors are wanting

Whence I repeat a handicraft operation: to wit, That at length, under the last
digestion, all our Arterial blood does perish and exhale, neither that it
leaves any dreg behind it: The dead Head) which dreg being at length thus
roasted, does resemble a Coal. For the action of heat is of it self every
where Simple, Univocal, and Homogeneal, differing in the effect, by reason of
the Matter. Therefore if the vital blood ought to be wholly so disposed in us,
that it be at length wholly blown away without a dead head, it was altogether
necessary that that should happen by some other Mean than that of heat: But the
air was always and from the beginning, every where the seperater of the
waters from the waters. This has not been known in the Schools; to wit, that
the whole Venal blood, that it may depart into a Gas, it has need of two wings
to fly, the air, and a ferment. Wherefore observe thou, That as often as any
thing of blood becomes Fevers, Apoplexies, Falling evils, Asthma's, likewise
pains and deaths do soon follow. Let us see therefore what the air, or what a
ferment may conduce hereunto. First of all, Every muscilage of the earth which
else is easily turned into worms; likewise Starch, Fleshes, Fishes, etc. being
once frozen, at that very moment do lose their muckinesse, and return into
water; As the air was once very well combined to the Ice (as I have sometimes
spoken concerning the weight of Ice) and so it is the first degree whereby the
air does resolve a tough body into water. And then under the greatest colds,
and purest air, we are more hungry, yet we sweat, and less is discussed out of
us, with a small and more hard siege or excrement.

Therefore one that saileth in the Sea, eats more by double, if not by treble
(unless he be The water causes a promoting of digestion: As if indeed, he
that saileth should not float in the air, but in the water! but floating does
renew the air in us, and from hence there is a stronger digestion: Therefore,
if we do eat more strongly, and do cast forth less excrements, it necessarily
follows, that the more is discussed, or does vanish out of the Body; which is
to say, That the more pure Northern and Sea-aire does conduce to a
transpiration or evaporation of the body, or does dispose the blood unto an
insensible perspiration or breathing out of it self.

Surely for that cause is breathing made, not indeed, that the air may depart
into nourishment Alcali is not generated in ashes by the fire essentially,
although effectively it proceed from thence: For the office of the fire is
indeed to kindle, consume, and separate, yet not to produce any thing.

Seeing the fire is not rich in a seed, it is the very destroyer of seeds: But
from seeds all Alcali is fixed out of a Salt that was before volatile, it is
not a new production of a thing, but only the Alteration of a thing: For the
Alcali was indeed materially in the composed body before burning, and did flow
together with its Mercury, and Sulphur: Notwithstanding while the fire takes
away the Mercury, and Sulphur, the Salt indeed as being a principle more
subsisting in the melting of the combustion, does snatch to it self the
neighboring part of the Sulphur or Fat, and when it is not able sufficiently
to defend it from the torture of the fire, it partly also flies away under the
mask of a Gas, and attains the odor of corrupted matter, and is partly
incorporated in the laid-hold-of co-melted Sulphur, and is made a true Coal:
Wherefore the Sulphur being now fixed by the wedlock of the Salt, it does not
speedily incline from a Coal into a smoaky vapor: But by degrees, and not
unless in an open Vessel; and so with the former Sulphur (for from hence the
Sulphur of a thing being for the most part sharp, does retain the savor of a
volatile Salt) and at length, with the Coalie Sulphur, the just weight of its
volatile Salt flies away: Which thing surely is no where more manifest than in
the Coal of Honey: For if this Alcali Salt does fore-exist materially in the
composed body, before combustion. Because all the Salt was formally volatile in
the composed body, and not in the form of a more fixed Alcali, which thing is
now especially manifest in the blood; which being wholly volatile, exhaleth
unsensibly through the Pores without any residence: But if it be combusted or
burnt, it leaves very much fixed Salt in its own ashes. In the next place, The
wood of the Pine Tree, which affords little ashes, and less Salt in the
preparation of ashes barrelled, is by calcining wholly turned into an Alcali:
For barrelled ashes are brought to us out of Scandia, called Weedaschen,
combusted for the most part out of the Pine, and some out of the Oak, which do
infect the Hogs-head wherein they are carried, with a more moist air, to wit,
with a melted Salt: Therefore the woods of the Hogs-heads being thus salted,
when they are burnt, they melt like Horn, and do almost wholly degenerate into
Salt: for part of the ashes also is made a Salt, by reason of the contained
Salt, which afterward they name, Potaschen: For else, the ashes of the same
wood, the Salt being taken away, do remain ashes, and are not made Salt. Whence
indeed it is manifest, that the Salt of the ashes does afterward make a Salt
like to it self by co-melting, and that indeed a fixed one: And therefore there
does arise a fixedness in the composed body by reason of the Salt, and
co-melting, which otherwise does not exist. So when Tartar of Wine is burnt,
sixteen Ounces of it does scarce yield two Ounces and a half of Alcali Salt:
therefore thirteen volatile Ounces and a half have perished in the calcining:
Yet if these are distilled, and are at length imbibed in their own remaining
Coal, they will as yet yield four Ounces and the third part of an Ounce of
Salt, by co-hobating. Therefore what thou see to be done (thy self being
Judge) concerning the four Ounces and a third part, judge thou the same,
touching the two Ounces and half of the former Alcali. Hitherto does that
belong, which I have elsewhere spoken of Aqua vitae, being fixed in the Alcali
of Tartar, and the same thing happens in distilled Vinegar. Hence therefore it
appears, that the volatile Salt of a thing is fixed in its own fixed Alcali
or Salt. Yea likewise, that the whole ashes was before, volatile; and fixed,
under the first comelting of combustion: But that the volatile Salts, which
were nigher to their Essences, departed together with their Essences, in the
first torture of the fire. Yet note, that although an Alcali be made of the
spirit of Wine in the fixed Salt of the Tartar: nevertheless, as the Salt of
the Aqua vitae was changed by the Wedlock of Essence, yet one is to be
separated and distinguished from the other in the univocal or single fixedness
of them both; As the Alcali of the Spirit of Wine being powered on Aqua fortis,
becomes red, but the Alcali of Tartar does not change its color.

Wherefore also there is among Alcalies, their own Commonwealth, and the
Adulteraters of money do labor very much about Salt of Tartar, he Alcali of
Saltpeter being contemned. Lixivium or Lie of Tartar: So as that it becomes
the astringent Balsam Samech of Paracelsus; the which, before it had the Savor
of a Lixivium, was an expert Balsam, and did resemble a Caustic on. At length,
hitherto that suits, that rotten Sulphur, as from the Mercury, is materially
the same with the Alcalized or fixed Salt.

And therefore a volatile Salt is fixed, and likewise a fixed Salt is made
volatile, the formal property of the composed Body remaining. Again, it
follows, That the Sulphur of a Sulphur of a Coal, are of the same particular
kind, although this be imprisoned, but that is free.

Truly Handicraft-operation taught me these things; after that I knew how to
separate the three things from ordinary composed Bodies, without a corruption
of matter, I learned that Salt, which by the snatching of its own sulphur unto
it, is fixed into an Alcali. In the mean time, that part, for the most part
abounds, which escapes the embraces of the co-melting volatile sulphur: In
which co-melting, the action springs into the Sulphur of the thing: Which,
understand thou by an example of distilled Vinegar.

This I say, seeing it is water impregnated or got with child of a sharp
volatile salt, if it shall through the action of its sharpness touch any thing
by biting, it is straightway co-agulated, Alcali. Yea, if the sharp and
volatile Spirit of Vitriol shall corrode a Mercury alike volatile, the
sharpness of the Vitriol is fixed into a true Alume. Which
Handicraft-operations, I do moreover show, in drawing them to the scope of a
total consuming in the Venal Blood.

If the Air (let him who can, comprehend the secret) does in the first place,
volatize the Sulphur of the composed Body, with the every way separation of its
Salt, this Salt (which Alcali, by the fire) is made wholly volatile, and climbs
upwards, sometimes in a liquid shape, and oft-times, in the form of a
Sublimate, and has the whole constitutive temperature of the composed Body.
This Salt is demonstrated by Handicraft-operation; but its demonstration is
known to few, although it lists us to make it plain. At least, it from thence
appears, that the true use of the Air in the Pulse, and breathing, was not
made known to the Ancients, by reason of the ignorance of the Art of Alchymie.
Likewise from thence it is manifest, that from a continual necessity, the Air
is drawn inward for a peculiar end, that it may cause the blood of the veins
(else through our heat not to be discussed, but rather to be condensed) to be
plainly volatile, without the remembrance of a remaining dead Head. But in
Fishes, as the venall blood is not stirred by heat, but only by the vital
Ferments of the parts; So neither was there need of breathing: For truly those
living Creatures might freely want breathing, whose venall blood wants the fear
of heat: Because it is a thing unseparable from heat, that the more watery part
of the venal blood being exhaled, the remainder does wax clotty, and at length
does degenerate into a dry lump, unless by the uncessant attraction and Wedlock
of the Air in the Bride-bed of the Lungs and Breast, the Air it self should be
co-mingled with the sulphur of the blood, it being as it were the seperater of
the waters, and should bring forth the sulphur changed in its last essence, and
breathed through the pores, together with a watery vapor, by an unperceiveable
Gas.

That was not a naked office of cooling refreshment (although it be in the
Schools so thought, who are wont to measure all things by heat, and cold) but
the vital Ferment of the Arteries being adjoined (for this cause perhaps, and
that especially, the Arteries do accompany veins thorowout the whole Body)
there was need of a greater moment and necessity: And so, that neither is the
Pulse any more to discuss or puff away the smoakie Vapors of the venal, than
of the arterial Blood, not of this more than of that, but it merely especially
serves (besides the framing, enlightening, and continuation of the vital
Spirit) to prepare the arterial blood in to an exspiration, without a dead
Head: which thing indeed, is altogether requisite to nature: Not indeed to
chase away smoakie vapors bred by heat (although no smoakie vapor does
properly exhale out of moist Bodies) but rather to hinder, least by the
ordinary endeavor of heat, vapors (which they undistinctly call smoaks)
should be bred: Or by speaking more properly, least vapors departing out of
the venal Blood, the other part of the venal Blood being thickened, should cause
a total destruction.

To which end behold, that the finger being pained, hot, and wounded, presently
an unwonted Pulse does bewray it self in that place, because the Air is hindered
from entrance unto

But corrupt matter or Pus being made, that fear is diminished, because it
stops in the deed:

For before the wound, a hidden Pulse, straightway a violent one arises in the
same place, even before heat, or a presupposed smoakiness were present. In like
manner also, as soon as any night does invade the inward membranes, the Artery
does presently after a wonderful manner, wax hard throughout the whole man,
and brings forth a hard, extended, shaken Pulse; yea, and a Pulse like a Saw:
But by no means (as the Schools think) that the Artery is

Therefore a hardened Pulse does betoken a contracted Artery, but not one that
is dried up: For if the Pulse should be uttered to this end, that the defect
and quality of the parts

Because the foregoing labor has brought forth a want of Spirit, and the
present corrupt matter or putrefaction does want a speedy discussion. Likewise
in an enflamed tumor or a is the double Coat of the Artery, now besmeared with
a future sweat? Does it hitherto wax moist with a strange moisture? or else is
it void of moisture? whether it does retake its hardness after the hour of
sweat? and shall almost recompense at pleasure its own dryness by a successive
or coursary softness? For how full of weakness are the medicinal speculations
of the Schools? For truly in the aforesaid affects of the Lungs, a most loose
Artery, and watery Pulse do plainly show unto us, that breathing is given for
the service of the breast: For nature is conscious that there would be no need
of a provoked Pulse, as neither of an extended Artery, when as breathing has
undertaken its office, first for the breast, and consequently or secondarily
for the rest of the body: by that very thing is shown us, that the use of
breathing was chiefly appointed for another end, and over another part, than
for and over that which the Pulse is. As often therefore as there is need of very
much air for the blood dispersed through the Veins, to volatize that which
threatens to be hardened, so often does the Artery strain, extend, and contract
it self, but is not dried: But that air is attracted, not for the nourishment
of the Spirits, or the expulsing of smoaky vapors; But altogether, that (as
that which is in it self the seperater of the waters from the waters) it may
add a spur to the Ferment of the last Digestion, that after the performance of
its offices, it may expel the whole nutritious liquor, without any residing
remainder of it. Therefore the in-breathed air is serviceable to this Ferment,
not for cooling or refreshment, not for the food of the spirits, as neither for
the Bellows of smoakie vapors: For otherwise, the looseness of the Artery is
incapable to breath-in sufficient air. But the future and prepared swear,
seeing it is already in it self volatise, and presently flows forth in manner
of a Latex, or Liquor, it does not require very much labor, nor hardening of
the Artery: for the strength decaying, the Pulse is watery before it be
creeping. Because nature, being weakened, does not any longer meditate of great
labor: but an Apoplectical Pulse is the chief and most hard of the Pulses, by
far and especially a little before death. The Schools will have that to come to
pass, because there should be the same, and an individual necessity and end of
the Pulse and breathing: As (they say) the heart will recompense the defect of
breathing. But the swooning of Virgins in the affects of the womb, whose breath
is stopped, and their strength strong (for from thence they do for the most part
rise again) have their Pulses very small, for a reproof of the foregoing
Doctrine. So likewise the Pulse of those that are diseased in the Lungs, is
watery, and feeble, for whom notwithstanding nature ought to be diligent in
supplying the penury of breathing. But why in an Apoplexy, the Pulse is hard
and great, we must search it from the nature of a disease, which I will at
sometime profesly touch at in a Book, and that of the disease of the Stone. Now
for the neernesse of the matter, I will explain two Aphorisms.

The first whereof is; While Pus or corrupt matter is made, the labor and pain
is greater than when the Pus is made. Every Aposteme ending into corrupt
matter, does necessarily Hippocrates spoke more rightly than Galen; Diseases
are not hot, or cold, etc. but sour, sharp, bitter, and brackish. For a wound
as soon as it feels corruption, its lips do swell, and corrupt Pus is made,
unless a more violent force do compel a worse thing, or the thin matter sanies
to wax duggy or curdy: But the corrupt pus is called by Idiots, A good
digestion of a wound; that is, more rightly to be reckoned a less evil: but if
the wound be new, and fenced by Ballam from corruption, corrupt pus happens not
thereto: But when a sharpness, the token of putrefaction, does contract or
draw the Bottom or Lips of the wound together, corrupt matter is made: For
worms are oft-times plainly to be seen in wounds by reason of corruption. In
Kitchins, if fleshes do begin to corrupt, their broaths do wax four.

Wherefore every vulnerary or wound potion, ought to contain in it a hidden
Alcali, and indeed a volatile one, if it ought to resist the accidents that
sprang from the corruption of tartness: Alcali does slay all sharpness which
it touches: For so indeed, the stone of Crabs is a provoker of Urine, and
vulnerary; which is manifest enough: For it being steeped in Wine, does after a
days time savor of a Lixivium.

The other Aphorism says Bellies are by nature hotter in Winter than in
Summer. Truly (...) sounds or imports hollownesses, not bellies. It is a
suppositive Aphorism, not agreeable is false. Again; for in Winter I eat hot
things, likewise, I do not drink cold things; yet after food I am cold within,
none whereof I feel in Summer: For in tangible things I take the touching to be
Judge. The Schools excuse themselves and say, That the outward cold drives our
heat inward, whence there is a more plentiful digestion. First of all, I have
sufficiently taught elsewhere, that digestion is not from heat. And then, after
meat cold is more felt within, in Winter, than in Summer.

I confess indeed, That all heat is from the vital spirit of the Arterial
blood: If therefore by cold, the spirit be driven inward with the Arterial
blood, there shall be peril of choking, That a greater quantity of
nourishment is consumed in Winter, than in Summer, by reason of the abundance
of heat: And again, they divine a more plentiful heat to be in Winter, from a
want of the more nourishment: For the same thing, and that in the same respect,
should be the cause and effect of the same thing: The father and the son,
before and after, in respect of themselves. But I blame the air, which as often
as it is colder, is also nearer to its own natural quality, and a more potent
seperater of the waters: And so, by how much the air is colder, it does the
more volatilize the venal blood into a Gas: No otherwise than was said
concerning Sailers. Otherwise, the dreams of the Schools do vanish, as to the
heat of hollow places and Wells, by an instrument meting out the qualities of
the encompassing air. And likewise as concerning the belly of man, if it live
in a somewhat lukewarm Stew: But the instruments of sense cannot exactly
distinguish the moments of heat, where there is a six-months interval; because
they themselves remain subject to the alterations of seasons. Therefore also
the application of sensible objects, to the instrument of sense, is at a
different station, deceitful. Also stomachs seem more hot in Winter, because we
want the more nourishment. Neither is it a wonder because we therefore drink
more liberally in Summer; but we are more speedily nourished with drink than
with meats. Therefore the use of the Pulses are

1. That the venal blood may through the Partition, be transported into the
least bosom. 2. That therein, and in its dependent Arteries, the spirit of life
may be made of the Arterial blood. 3. That of venal blood, may be made a yellow
arterial blood. 4. That it may be informed by the mind of man. Indeed the
Arteries are the stomach of the heart, as the sucking veins are the Kitchen of
the Liver. 5. That there may be a continuation of the vital Light throughout
the whole body. 6. The Blas of the Pulses is for the framing of heat, but not
of cold. 7. That the venal blood being dispersed into the habit of the body for
nourishment, may be made wholly capable to be breathed through the pores,
without a Post-hume or Future remembrance of a dreg. 8. But breathing has for
its aim, only this last use of the Pulse.
At length, I also add this; That there is not an Animal spirit in nature:
Because the change which the vital spirit receives in the Brain, is not unto a
formal transmutation, but is a perfective

CHAP. XXV. Endemicks, or things proper to the People of the Country where
they live.
1. The Schools have stated whence it was to be begun: 2. That the encompassing
air is not breathed into the Arteries: 3. It implies, that the air does
inspire at every turn, and that smoakie vapors are expelled. 4. The mutual
unsufferableness is demonstrated: 5. It would thence follow, that the artery is
not lifted up but that it may fall down: 6. The end, manner, and possibility of
air, attracted by the pulses, should cease: 7. That Endemical things are drawn
by breathing: 8. That vapors are not drawn inward by Ointments. 9. Its own
generative virtue is wanting to the vital spirit. 10. The humane Lodestone of
Paracelsus is a fiction. 11. That no smoakiness is to be granted in the heart
and Arteries: 12. That the whole knowledge of the Schools by signs or tokens,
is polluted. 13. The progress of Endemical things.

IT is not sufficient to say; That the Mines of Veins do belch forth the wild
Gas of a hurtful Arsenick, and a metallic malignity; Fens, a stinking vapor;
breachy Rivers, and

But I as the first, being supported with the much authority of reasons, and
the great authority of truth, have doubted of it: By consequence also, That
Ointments applied to the places

For if there be a successive, continual, and uncessant expulsion of the Pulses
from the center of the heart by the Arteries; of necessity also, the whole
Channel of the Arteries shall by

And moreover, it follows from the same supposition, that the Artery is not
lifted up by it self and primarily, but that it is only principally elevated
that it may fall down; next that by air should rather hurt than profit? For not
for the cooling refreshment of the heart; seeing all the Pulses should scarce
allure the smallest thing from the air, by the least and utmost mouths of the
Arteries, which being the more swift in drawing, should not straightway
afterward be expulsed by the depression of the Artery: yea it should so most
speedily in that very moment be co-united with the smoaky vapor, and made hot
by the Arterial blood, that the heart should not feel in it self any cooling or
refreshment thereby: Especially seeing the air should not by one only
attraction, proceed that way from the skin to the heart; but by a manifold
depression of the Artery coming between, it should wax so hot in the way, that
it should deceive all hope of cooling refreshment. Wherefore if the Arteries
should allure the air from without the elevation of the Artery, should of
necessity always far exceed its depression in swiftness and greatness; which
is abusive: As also, that the air should keep the quality of a cooling
refreshment undefiled, being introduced by little and little, through so many
windings of the Arteries. In the next place, neither should the Artery draw the
air, that the vital spirit may take increase thereby: Because with the consent
of the Schools, the vital spirit is not made of air; but of the vapor of the
venal blood elaborated in the heart to the utmost, and ennobled with a vital
faculty: And it is a dull affirmation, which supposes the vital spirit to be
nourished by a simple Element: Seeing we are nourished by the same things
whereof we are generated. Wherefore seeing the in-drawn air is an elementary
body, it has not the nature of a sanguine spirit; as neither seeing the air
can ever be made individual by a humane determination, it shall not be able to
nourish a composed body, as I have taught in its place.

Moreover, It always keeps the properties of a universal Element, but does not
attain the condition of an Archeus. For the air is neither akin to us, nor is
it capable of a vital light: And therefore the Artery shall abhor a Forreigner,
neither does it admit the air into its family, before it be elaborated in due
shops; neither does nature attempt any thing in vain, as neither to prepare the
air, that it may be made that, toward which it plainly has not a possible
inclination: otherwise, the vital spirit should be made in vain, through so
many preparations of digestions, long-windings, and shops of the Bowels, if by
so light a breviary, and without usury, it may be ripened from without. For
this has deceived the Schools, that it has hitherto been believed, that fire
is necessarily nourished by air: Therefore also that vital spirit as the
Author of all our heat, does want for its food, the Element of air. But I have
already cleared it up above, that the fire is neither a substance, nor that it
is nourished by air: Yea, neither by a combustible matter, unless that in
hastening to the ends of its appointments, it does require an inflamable matter
for its object, but not for its nourishment. Also for want of an object, it
perishes in an instant, when it has attained the end of its appointments:
Because, seeing it is neither a substance, nor an accident, it also perishes
for want of an object, for that its own object is also its subject.

And so also, that is a thing most singular to it, and hitherto unknown.
Therefore the Arteries, the manner cease, and the possibility cease. Again,
if the Artery sucks the Air by the Pulse, it should indifferently suck, and
such an attraction should be promiscuously endemicall, and so, hurtful: which
I have observed to be false by often experience.

Especially, because that as often as a foreign or strange Plague is contracted
from without Air is made by the Arteries, when as the poison it self is apt to
infect the skin, and forthwith to burn it into an Eschar. Surely it is a far
different thing, for the Pest to be drawn inwards by the Arteries, or to be
allured by sucking; and another thing by force of its own contagion, to creep
inwards by touching, as it were by the stroke of a Serpent: for emplaisters,
Baths, and Oils do alter the skin; and consequently, they do either proceed to
alter, or do draw from the Center to the skin: but not because vapors fetched
from thence, are drawn materially inward.

Then at length, the Pulse is not after the manner of breathing, which by one
sigh does blow Air in the Breast: but the motion of the Pulses is interrupted
by an opposite; and therefore the expiring motion is most frequent, no less
than the inspiring; and those successive motions do so much hasten, that if
they had attracted any Air, that should enter for a frustrate end, seeing it
would be knocked out in an instant: For truly, that which is nearer to the
mouths, that should also first be blown out: And so the Air should not have
hope, ever to be more thoroughly admitted, or that it should satisfy the cooling
refreshment of the heart.

Lastly, a generative faculty is wanting to the vital Spirit, whereby it should
bring the Air into Spirit by a formal transmutation; Seeing that power belongs
to the Ferment, and Vein or Artery, venal blood should not therefore ever be
made thereby, or arterial blood. Therefore the Air, although it should be a fit
Body, yet it could not be made the nourishment of the vital Spirit, unless it
had first been elabourated in the heart, being quickened and enlightened therein
individually, according to a humane Species: all whereof do resist an Element.

Therefore the frivolous device is made void, and the cooling refreshment of
the heart by Air inwards by the Arteries, is feigned: And the Lodestone of Man
celebrated by Paracelsus, is feigned; Seeing the Arteries do not suck inwards,
and the Air so introduced, should be for a greater load to the Arteries than
the feigned smoakie vapor of the Schools. If therefore the Arteries do not
draw Air, certainly much less should flesh do that, being an enemy, wanting
the hollowness of the Air: For indeed, that the Air is drawn from without unto
the heart by the Arteries, as well for its cooling refreshment, as its
nourishment, and increase of the Spirit of the Archeus, is nothing but a mere
device.

So is the invention of the Schools alike frivolous, that the necessity alone
of expulsing the smoakie vapor bred in the heart, should depress the Arteries;
For truly in the foregoing Spirit? and by what trench should they remain
divided from each other? How should the expulsion of smoakie vapors be
possible, which should not also abundantly power forth the vital Spirit most
intimately co-mixed with themselves? And so, as the Schools have nothing of
pure Doctrine, do they also suffer no unpolluted thing, no undefiled thing
without an excrementitious and dungie smoakiness? do they think that the
essential offices of life do indifferently belong as well to a smoakie vapor,
as to the Spirit of life? And so hitherto also to be co-mixed? How should the
depression of the Artery thus far tend unto a good end, and that appointed by
the Creator, which together with the smoakiness, should also puff out the
vital Spirit thoroughly mingled with it? And so shall it forthwith bring death
and destruction? How had not that Vmpire of things, most highly to be honored,
even from man's Creation, made death by the contraction of his Pulses? Last of
all, if a smoakie vapor should be the Musical measure of the Pulses (as they
will have them;) what should be that seperater, who should compel the smoakie
vapors rather to depart into the habit of the flesh from without, than through
the chief Arteries with a straight line, into the head? Or if a co-mingled
smoakiness does indifferently hasten with the vital Spirit into the bosoms of
the Brain, why do they not continually disturb the Family-government of the
Senses? what if the pressing together of the Artery be dedicated to the
expulsion of smoakie vapors; for since the Arteries are thumped sidewayes, so
also thus far they do bestow Spirit and vital Powers on the places through which
they pass: therefore that way also they should mutually expel smoakinesses:
which surely should be more pernicious to all the Bowels, than to the Arteries
themselves, because these are judged to be refreshed by fresh Air, but not the
Bowels. If therefore they will have smoakie vapors expelled by the pressing of
the Arteries together, let them first show us that smoakie vapors cannot be
otherwise purged, than by the last or utmost mouths of the Arteries, and that
with the continual safety of the Spirit that is thoroughly mixed with the
smoakinesses. Truly, the Schools do support their defiled Doctrine by a
smoakie vapor, and by a blind persuasion of sluggishness do subscribe their
Genius unto Galen.

Seeing therefore they have been ignorant of the matter, heat, residence,
content, and circle a three-legged stool, as well in the knowledge of Diseases,
as in the progress, and end of the same: which thing I shall hereafter, much
more plentifully prove.

Therefore Endemical things do affect or stir all things whereby, and which way
they enter: etc. But some do enter in the shape of a smoke, and are breathed
into Minerals, which are again diverse ways coagulated within: For some are
spewed-forth spittings, if they are not hurtful: But others do for term of
life toughly adhere on the walls of the pipes of the Lungs, and do exercise
their tyranny for their entertainment. Of this sort, is, whatsoever does fume
out of the veins of Minerals: wherefore also the Fume of Minerals, by reason of
its malignity, and an Arsenical poison, have become Sunonymalls or things of
one name: to wit, the Arsenick, and smoakie vapor, and smoke of Metalls fall
together or agree in one: Whence are hoarsnesses, tremblings of the heart,
faintings, Asthmas, Pleurisies, Inflammations of the Lungs, Coffs, spittings of
Blood, Consumptions, Imposthumes full of matter, etc. In the mean time it is
not manifest, that Endemicks or things proper to people in the Country where
they live, are drawn by the Arteries, neither that the same are immediately
affected: But if Mercury does bring forth tremblings, that at least is
impertinent to the Arteries. Neither also do they therefore tremble, into whom
Mercury is driven by Ointments: But they are bladdered in the mouth, throat,
the Uvula falls down, and their teeth are ulcerated, do shake or are loose, and
wax black, their head swells, and they spit stinking things greatly. Also
Guilders, Diggers and Seperaters of Mercury, because they do inspire a deadly
poison into the head, and Sinnewy parts, they do work or effect Endemicks in us
as much as they can.

CHAP. XXVI. The Spirit of Life.
1. The Doctrine of the Ancients concerning a threefold Spirit: 2. They have
stated whence we must begin: 3. The spirit of wine does contain only two
Chemical Beginnings, flexible at the pleasure of the Artificer. 4. Vital spirit
out of spirit of wine. 5. How drunkenness comes. 6. How the spirit of wine,
and Aqua vitae or Water of life do differ. 7. Whatsoever is stilled only by
fire, does go back from the virtues of its former composed body. 8. The ferment
or leaven of the stomach, and of bread, differs. 9. The Plurality of ferments.
10. Gas being unknown, has brought forth many absurdities in the distinction
of things. 11. The soul is in the Arterial blood, and not in the venal blood:
12. The Venal blood is without a spirit of the Liver. 13. Drunkenness. 14. The
progress of the vital spirit through its offices. 15. The declared disposition
of the spirit it self. 16. What things are by sense reckoned to be one, are
severed or discerned in their effects. 17. From whence the spirit of life is
Balsamical. 18. The spirit of Aqua vitae only by touching, loses its
oylinesse. 19. It is presently made a Salt. 20. The whole venal blood is turned
into a Salt. 21. Of the life of the vital spirit. 22. The light is now and then
extinguished in the matter of the spirit. 23. There are as many particular
kinds of sublunary lights, as there are of vital lights. 24. The definition of
the vital spirit. 25. The heat of life is not the Constituter of its own
moisture. 26. That heat is an adjacent to life. 27. The undistinction of the
Schools, of the effects of heat, and of a ferment. 28. Whence heat is
Escharotical or the maker of an Eschar in us. 29. Whether the animal Spirit be
distinct from the vital.

I Have discoursed already before of the Archeus, as it were the Vulcan in the
seed, and after what manner he may dispose of all things, as well in
generation, as in the transmutations of meats, throughout the course of life;
which office does properly respect the inbred or implanted spirit: But now,
how, and whence the spirit floating in the Arteries may be constituted by
occasion of the Blas of man already described; consequently I have undertaken
to explain in this path, their Office, and Properties.

The Schools teach, That nourishments are first changed into Chyle, and then
into digested juice and venal blood, and so that a certain natural spirit is
made in the Liver, which afterward by a repeated digestion of the heart, is
changed into vital, and at length is in the Brain made animal or sensitive, so
as that the natural spirit is ordained for nourishing of the parts, but the
vital for the preserving of the same, and the animal for the functions of
sense, motion, and the soul. But I think it has been far otherwise
Phylosophized, and farther proceeded: For they had known out of Hippocrates,
That a certain spirit is that thing which causes violence, or makes the
assaults. But it was not sufficient to know, that there is a certain Spirit to
have told by what instruments it should be made, or what it might act, unless
they should explain also the disposition, substance, and properties of the
same, together with the manner of its making.

I have elsewhere delivered, That of any plant, and fruit, a ferment being
applied, Aqua vitae or a water of life may be made; which thing seeing it is
commonly known, while out

But Aqua vitae is a volatile Liquor, Oily (as it is wholly enflamed) and
wholly Salt (as being sharp, biting, as being detained the longer in the mouth,
it burns the upper skin of the gums and lips) and is one and the same simple
thing, and so it contains two only, and not the three Chemical Beginnings: So
indeed, That according to the will of the Artificer, the whole Aqua vitae may
be made Salt, or Oil, that is, That those Beginnings are not Beginnings not
constant things, but changeable at the will of man.

But the Wine as to its Winie part, contains a spirit answering to Aqua vitae:
For this is

So that if more wine be in the stomach than is meet, drunkenness follows, as
the spirit of

Notwithstanding, in Wine, that spirit is milder than Aqua vitae which is drawn
forth by distillation: which thing appears from the like in Oil of Olives: For
the Oil (which they Olem Phylosophorum) being distilled, does far differ from
the Oylinesse which is drawn out of simple Oil, by digestion only with the
circulated Salt of Paracelsus: for that circulated Salt is separated the same
in virtue, and weight, after it has divided the oil of Olives into its
diversities of parts: For a sweet, and twofold Oil is separated out of oil of
Olives, even as a most sweet spirit out of wine, being far severed from the
tartness of Aqua vitae.

Whence I have learned by consequence, That whatsoever is distilled only by
fire, does far Aqua vitae is not extracted out of Potherbs, Grains, Apples, or
Pulses: For truly, the intention of nature is not then to procreate an Aqua
vitae; and there is one ferment in us, whereby things are resolved into Chyle,
and another whereby things do send forth an Aqua vitae or a water of Life out
of themselves: For while herbs do putrify in water through a ferment, the
stalk, stumps or stocks, and leaves do remain whole in their ancient figure and
hardness for the extraction of Aqua vitae, which being eaten by us, are turned
into Chyle and loose their first face.

Wherefore I have comprehended as many varieties of putrefactions, and as many
dungs of one bread different in the particular kind, as there are particular
kinds of living creatures That nothing does profit us, which should not contain
a Beginning or Essay of life in its root (and so therefore they do admit of the
air for the increase of spirit, being deceived by the Lessons of Poets, who
call them Vital airs) to wit, they would have in the venal blood, a spirit of
the Liver, naturally actually to be, and to glister like air.

For they thought it to be a vapor; being ignorant that a vapor is never made
an uncoagulable Red spirit, in which the Soul inhabits:

Although that be properly understood of the Arterial blood; Because the
Scripture is fractures of bones: For the Chyle of the stomach is the same after
growth, as it was in a Youth: But all that is at length discussed without any
remainder of it self: it again retakes the nature of a bone in a callous
concretion in the solidness of fractures: And therefore for that very cause all
Chyle is volatile, and thus far it sometimes does assume the disposition of
spirit in the venal blood: Not indeed because there is a natural spirit in it,
and diverse from the venal blood; but rather because the whole venal blood has
obtained a spiritual Character in the promise, John 5. The water, the blood,
and the spirit are one.

But I will teach concerning digestions, after what sort that sowreness in the
Chyle may be Sanguification, but not the creation of spirit, which do differ
far from each other. For neither do so many, and so diverse Offices belong to
one bowel, especially because the rude heap of venal blood, is not yet a fit
seminary for the spirits: For it is sufficient for the Liver being enriched
with so few Arteries, and a communion of life, that it performs a true
transmutation of the Chyle into venal blood, and a true generation of a new
Being. But in the heart, as it were the fountain of life, it is first of all
meditated concerning vital Beginnings: For the Venal blood is there extenuated
into Arterial blood, and vital air: which two are wholly perfected by one only
action, according to the more ready, and slow obedience of the venal blood: For
the venal blood is made with the in-thickning of the Chyle or Cream, therefore
by the separation of the liquid excrement, or urine: But the spirit is made
with the attenuating or making thin of that which is in-thickned: Both which
actions so opposite, do not therefore agree with one Liver. But if the Schools
will have a natural spirit to have fore-existed in meats, but to have received
a perfection in the Liver: But yet it easily expires in things boiled, cocted
and roasted: And if any does by chance remain, that spirit is not the hepatical
or Liverie one of our Family Government.

I confess indeed, that the Spirit of wine is the spirit of Vegetables, and is
easily snatched into the Arteries, as it were a simple Resembler, previously
disposed, that it may easily pass over into vital spirit: But from thence the
Schools do frame nothing for their spirit of the Liver: For the Spirit of wine
is immediately snatched into the Arteries, out of the stomach, without
digestion: Neither is it taken as a vital companion by the degree of venal
blood; it is also easily from thence gathered, that the vital spirit does not
presuppose a natural one: And what I have said is manifest: For truly, they
which suffer fainting or trembling of the heart, do presently and immediately
feel the spirit of wine to be admitted into the fellowship of life, for neither
then also are they made drunk by much wine abundantly drunken.

Otherwise, Wine being as yet corporally existing within the stomach,
drunkenness does not from elsewhere proceed, than because the winie spirit is
abundantly snatched into the heart, remaining lees that do go forth with a
total transpiration of themselves. Therefore the heart does frame out of the
venal blood, arterial blood, which it fitteth and extenuateth by the Spina
Medullae, as we have seen in the Shops optical or of the sight, which if they
are through some error brought to the tongue, they are plainly unprofitable
for tasting: Wherefore it comes to pass, that oft-times the fingers are
benumbed, some moveable part, loses (its sense being left) either feeling or
motion, for that the parts are bedewed with a strange, and wandering Spirit:

For the Authors of touchings are unfit for motion, and those of this likewise
for them; Saltpeter.

The venal blood also, does by distillation afford this salt spirit, plainly
volatile, and not any thing distinguishable from the spirit of Urine: Yet I
have considered that they both do differ Long Life: Because otherwise, Natures
are not to be demonstrated from a former Cause, as neither the operations of
Ferments, because they are essential causes for the transmutations of things.

Therefore the vital spirit is saltish, and therefore Balsamical, and a
preserver from corruption, and that not so much by reason of the salt, as in
respect of a light conceived in its own Aqua vitae be easily assumed into vital
spirit, yet this is not oily and combustible, but the spirit of wine only by
the touching of a ferment, does easily ascend wholly into a saltish volatile
nature, forthwith as soon as it loses its oily or enflamable property.

Even as I have taught by Handicraft operation in the Treatise of Duelech: To
wit, after what manner, at one only instant, Aqua vitae may be truly changed
into a yellow gobbet or Aqua vitae, by a saltish vital Ferment.

Therefore the Spirit of Wine, is straightway snatched into the heart without
delay, or by a further digestion, through the Arteries of the stomach, and
restores the strength, because it

Furthermore, that the whole venal blood is a mere Salt, it desires not more
strongly to be proved, than because the whole venal blood is in Ulcers, the
dropsy Ascites, etc. homogeneally

The vital Spirit performs the offices of life: But the famous top of life is
not proper to a Liquor, or exhalation, as they are Salt things: And that the
life of things may live, it ought of Glowworms have a light in their belly a
little before night, (as also bubbles of the Sea have a night brightness, and
very many things, which through purrifying, do proceed into the last matter of
Salts) yet vital, and that which is extinguished together with their life.
Suppose thou a certain a like light to be in the spirit of life, which as long
as it lives, shines, and when it forsakes the eyes of one dying, they appear
horny, and made clean.

And that light is now and then extinguished, the material vital Spirit being
as yet safe, in etc. yet thou may not think, that the like essence of light
is in us, and Glowworms, that indeed lights do differ only in the tone or
tenor of degrees:

But in very deed, there are as many particular kinds of vital lights, as
there are of Creatures that have life. And that is an abundant token of divine
bounty, that there are as many

Therefore the vital Spirit is arterial blood resolved by the Ferment of the
heart, into a salt Air, and enlightened by life: which light is in us hot, of
the nature of the Sun, and is cold in a Fish, neither does it ever aspire unto
any power of heat, wherefore our heat is not a consumer of the Original
moisture (even as concerning long life) seeing fishes have not hitherto escaped
death.

Neither could the first men who before the flood, saw a thousand Solar years,
have had more Adam being formed by the hand of God, obtained the most exceeding
perfect Stature of the Lord Jesus Christ, neither to have exceeded the same.
Lastly, Fishes should naturally be immortal, under the frozen Sea, seeing
their radical moisture should not there evaporate by heat. Some of our
Religious Countrymen are almost for a whole year so cold from the Foot even to
the Belly, that they do not feel that they have feet: wherefore they should
likewise be longer lived than us, yea and their Legs should be like young men's,
when as their whole Breast is crisped with old wrinckles, if primogeneal
moisture being consumed by heat, should afford an unavoidable necessity of
death. And likewise, as well Fishes as those Religious men, ought to refuse the
daily refreshments of nourishment, because scarce any thing does exspire through
the pores: or if heat should be of the essence of our life, certainly the part
languishing with continual cold, should either die, or at least should be
changed into a Fish.

Whence it is plain, that heat is only an adjacent to our life, and its
concomitant token, but

Therefore the Schools may see, how unfitly they have hitherto circumscribed
the whole constitutive temperature of nature in heat: For far be it hereafter
so blockishly to phylosophize,

But if an increased heat does sometimes rise up in us, so that it is that
which does as it were burn the members, gangrene them, and like fire make an
Eschar, or now and then does etc. does flow sorth, oft-times most sharp, and
oft-times raging without a Corrosive; For such kind of errors do happen in the
life (for therefore in a dead carcass they do cease) as they by a proper Blas,
do put on the animosity of nature corrupted by the Life, and the life does
inflame a sword, whereby it does manifoldly hurt it self, even as sometimes
concerning diseases.

At length, whether there be any Animal spirit to be distinguished in the
Species from the

For truly, in the largeness of its own vital light, it is capable of all those
Properties without the through changing of its native essence: For that Spirit
which is thrust forth unto the tongue, does exercise the tasting, but that same
does not taste in the fingers, but does every where receive a particular
Character of Organs or Instruments, and puts on a particular property: The
which if thy mind carry thee to distinguish from the vital spirit, there shall
again be as many essential divisions of the spirit, as there are offices, and
as many as there are services divided by the pluralities of offices.

In the mean time, understand the thing, and call it as thou listest: For I am
not contradictory to the Schools out of a stomackful passion: for I being
admonished by a superior Authority, ought only to have laid open their
errors, and to teach things unknown. Let they themselves likewise disclose my
errors or mistakes with an equal mind, surely I shall rejoice, if so be that
only my neighbor do obtain the profit, which I wish.

CHAP. XXVII. Heat does not digest efficiently, but only excitatively or by way
of stirring up.
1. Heat is not the proper instrument of digestion. 2. What has deceived the
Schools herein: 3. The defenses of the Schools. 4. The rashness of Paracelsus.
5. The anguishes of the Schools. 6. They forgot their own Maxim concerning
contraries. 7. They have constrainedly made heat, and the predicament of heat,
more powerful than fire. 8. Digestion, and Seething do differ. 9. Ferments are
angry because they are put after. 10. What the univocal action of heat is. 11.
A fish digesteth without heat. 12. There is no place for potential heat in
things to be digested. 13. An Argument of hunger. 14. Another from the unity of
specifical heat. 15. The third from a Maxim. 16. Another Argument. 17. Why
sour belching after the savor of burntish ones is good. 18. Why one sick of a
Fever abhors fleshes. 19. From the scope of healing. 20. The admiring of
Paracelsus. 21. An error of the same man. 22. The digestive sorce of Hens. 23.
The Author being as yet a Boy, learned the true cause of digestion. 24. He
knew resolving to be from sowrnesse. 25. We grow old only through extreme want
of Ferments. 26. The quality of a fermenting sowrnesse. 27. Whence is the
dislike of some meats. 28. The forces of ferments. 29. Mice accuse the Schools
of error. 30. Why the Ferment of the stomach is diverse from it self. 31. A
commendation of the Spleen. 32. Degrees of heat and cold do vary. 33. The
errors of the Schools concerning the degrees of Elements. 34. The degrees of
Chymicall heat. 35. The Author has made degrees of distinction. 36. Moisture,
and dryness are not to be considered as qualities. 37. Why they do not admit
of degrees. 38. Hence trifles were introduced by the Ancients into the doctrine
of the Elements.

BEcause the whole foundation of nature is thought to hang on the hinge of
heat, and the Elements, mixtures, and temperaments are already banished far
off; therefore to Archeus, and vital Spirits, we must hence following speak of
digestions: The which, because the Schools have enslaved to heat, I will show
that heat is not the proper instrument of digestions. Indeed, the metaphor of
digestion has deceived the Schools: to wit, it being by a Poetical liberty
borrowed from a rustical sense, introduced, they have made concoction of the
same name with digestion.

And as they knew seething or boiling to be concoction, therefore they
translated digestions to boiling, and on both sides where they thought heat to
be the natural, total, and one only as in the natural digestion of the belly,
from which, they slumbered as expecting abundant help to themselves. In the
mean time they were in doubt, when they took notice that meats were not by
seethings, wholly transchanged into juice by a total metamorphizing: For
fleshes (the vessel being shut) they resolved into a consummated B^oth, a true
portage being pressed out and melted: but indeed they observed their error,
because fleshy, tough, and hard remaining threads did abide, and never melt by a
true transmutation into juice yet through etc.) yea, and the moments of heats
for a help of their excuses; So that every degree should almost in every
moment, have its own constitutive temperature in digesting.

In which stupidity Paracelsus also involved himself, who will have one only
bread in so

But while the Schools did presume to have taken away every knot in the
Bulrush, they

Having forgotten in the mean time, that as they had feigned one only kind of
contraries,

So that while they would believe that some Birds do digest those things which
otherwise do

For truly, whatsoever is cast into the stomach, digestion being at length
finished, is transchanged,

Because the one only ignorance of ferments has caused digestions, and the
remedies of unconcoction to be unknown, and a faulty argument to be promoted,
of not the cause, as of the cause: where it is not an idle brawling, as it were
about a name, while fermentall effects Relolleum or quality not having a
seminal Being: For it never belonged to heat to withdraw a thing into a formal
transmutation; Seeing heat by it self and primarily does nothing but make hot,
but by accident it separates watery things from stiff or tough things:

Which univocal or single action of heat, is no wise a digestion, being wholly
included in transchanging: For although digestion does happen in us, heat
accompanying it, yet that is

For therefore in a Fish, there is no actual heat, neither therefore
notwithstanding, does he digest more unprosperously than hot Animals: Neither
is he after the manner of men, badly

Therefore it is a frivolous thing to flee to potential heat for a fish; For in
sensible things known by sense, the touching only is witness and judge; but
not to flee to dreams: For if digestion be to be attributed to heat not
actually hot, but to a virtual power; I now enjoy my wish: For otherwise, what
is that I pray, but ignorantly to brawl about heat as such? And in the mean
time to confess, that there is something besides a sensible heat, which is the
containing cause of digestion: For what can more foolishly be spoken, than that
potential heat does actually make hot, and that digestion is made for this
heatings sake? Can a thing in power, now act actually? But at least in a
Dog-like hunger, there is a most swift digestion, and implacable hunger.

Therefore a troublesome and offensive heat even then ought to be felt in us
hot creatures, if digestion be made in us by actual heat. For if a little heat
causes a small digestion, and

Then at length it is to be noted, That the digestion of bread in a Man, Dog,
Horse, Fish,

For truly, I perfectly know, that whatsoever things have diverse essential
efficients, have

For if the digestion of heat were needful, a more prosperous and plentiful
digestion should continually follow a greater heat: For by how much every cause
is more powerful in nature,

For Eggs, Fishes, Fleshes, and Broths, are presently made cadeverous or
stinking within, Hippocrates has reckoned to be good, as well from the sign,
as from the cause: Yet there is in one that has a Fever a heat, also sometimes
that heat is temperate, to wit, while it is not troublesome, neither does stir
up thirst, yet the digestion is void.

Impure bodies, by how much the more powerfully thou nourishest them, by so
much the

Therefore we should rather study the increase of heat, than cooling: And so
the Scope Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, Niter, Citron, and the like, help; but the
heat should be stirred up, and increased by sharp things. He speaks something
like madness, who says, That the Snow makes cold, as it is white: So it is a
ridiculous thing to affirm, That the specificall ferment of the stomach does
digest by reason of vital heat existing in it. Surely it is to be lamented,
that the credulity and sloth of those to whom the care of the life is
committed, have changed burying-places into a mere Sumen or fatting juice,
despairing of the searching out of natural properties, whence notwithstanding,
they have their Sur-name.

Paracelsus also being deluded by a digestive heat, and ignorant of the Ferment
of the hours, and that a bone is consumed in the luke-warmth of the stomach of
a Dog: who aspiring to the Monarchy of healing, failed thereof, after that he
named this a power to be admired at, was ignorant of and knew not the ferments.

For being unconstant to himself, he wrote elsewhere, That this digestive
property does agree no less to the mouth being shut, than to the stomach; and
so also from hence, That Anchorets have spent their long life happily without
swallowed meat. But surely, that Idiotisme is to be left to his own boldness;
while in the mean time, whatsoever has perhaps remained within the
hollownesses of the Teeth, is straightway made like a dead carcass, with a
horrible stink, but is not digested.

For I remember that a white and thick glass being cast out of my Furnace, was
swallowed

I learned the necessity of this ferment of the stomach, while being a Boy, I
nourished Sparrows; I oft-times thrust out my tongue, which the Sparrow laid
hold of by biting, and endeavored

And then I saw that the sharp distilled Liquor of Sulphur had seasoned my
Glove, and that Olives, Vinegar, juice of Citron, of Orange, Mustard, also
Salt, and Saltpeter, as it has a spirit in it that causes hunger, and most
pleasingly sharp: And likewise, the Berbery, Rasp, Cherries, Quinces, etc. In
this respect they give content to silk folks that want digestion or concoction.
Therefore the contemplation of this ferment is so necessary, that it is chief
in the Government of life, and therefore it is to be grieved at, that the
knowledge thereof is hitherto suppressed in the Schools.

And although the dryth of the whole body waxes strong with old age; yet we do
not wax old, unless by the penury, poverty, and extinguishing of some
ferments: For truly, the Stag, Crow or Raven, Eagle, Goose, etc. in their first
years of youth, are far more dry than we, yet they remain alive for some ages,
yea Youth is voluntarily renewed to the Eagle, and Stag.

But that digestive ferment is not placed in any kind of sharpness only: For
neither does Vinegar, or the Broth of Citron leaven or ferment the meal; yea,
neither is leavened meal Mice, Dormice, and Swine do sooner perish with hunger,
than they do eat of a Ring-Dove or Wood-Culver: But in a man it for the most
part aspireth to the largeness of a general kind.

In the mean time, many do abhor Cheese, Wine, Milk, or do despise other
things, because they do not digest them; And therefore what things soever do
strive with our digestion, is an essential property, consisting in a certain
vital sharpness or soureness, mighty for transmutations; and therefore of a
specifical property: Falcon dies before he will eat up Bread. I have already
said elsewhere, that if the venal blood be stilled, by whatsoever degree of
heat, yet it is always thickened, waxes dry, and leaves a Coal behind it; yet
that and the same venal blood does wholly exhale by our Ferments, with an
unsensible transpiration. Seeing therefore heat does always univocally or
singly operate it, cannot by digesting change the meat into Chyle, into blood,
into a nourishable liquor, and at length banish it by an unsensible efflux,
without any remainder of it self: One only heat cannot I say, in a Youth,
change venal blood into bones, and likewise in the breaking of a bone,
constrain the venal blood into a callous matter, which in those of ripe years,
and likewise in healthy people, does wholly fly away into exhalations, unless
besides heat there are other powers, knowledges and perceivances, the chief
effectresses of these things: For truly it is proper and natural to heat to
consume moisture, and to retain the thicker part by drying up.

For Mice are fed only with meal, without drink, and do resolve it into their
own Juice or

But there are many Ferments in us, even as I shall by and by explain
concerning digestions. But seeing the Stomach does now and then want a Ferment,
it is manifest from thence,

I do here lay open the blindness of the Schools, exceedingly to be admired,
and bewailed with tears of blood; who have dedicated that Noble bowel of the
Spleen for the sink of the Duumvirate, and likewise concerning Digestions, be
made more clear.

Moreover, before the conclusion of this question, we must note that among
Physicians there are only four degrees of heat, and as many of cold, in
Simples: to wit, from the temperate Causticks and Escharrers; because they
treat only of a virtual and potencial quality, the which I shall sharply touch,
in its place elsewhere: For therefore the fourth degree of heat is with
Physicians, in the nature of things, and temperate as to the touching.

But the Philosophers do measure heat according to the sire, and so even to the
fire, they feign eight degrees, whereof the fifth, sixth, and seventh, they
have not yet designed, because That the Elements do destroy, devour, and
consume each other, no otherwise than as fire does consume wood.

And then, he Chemists after the custom of Physicians, have made only four
degrees in the fire it self, taking little care to themselves touching the
other Elementary qualities, because Reverbery or striking back.

But I for a more clear doctrine, do in Chymicals, distinguish the degrees,
that the first may be where the greatest cold is more remiss or slack: For I
who conceive Chemistry to be the May Sun. The ninth is distillatory, and that
which now overcomes the touching. A tenth distilleth with boiling up. The
eleventh sublimes Sulphur, and dry spirits. A twelfth does melt, and sublime
the fire-stone. The thirteenth is in a somewhat brown fierynesse. The
fourteenth is a bright burning fierynesse. The fifteenth, Lastly, is the
ultimate vigor of the Bellows and Reverbery.

Lastly, Although heat, and cold are real qualities, and do undergo degrees;
yet moisture and dryness are not to be considered but in their own Concrete or
composed body, and

Therefore moisture, and dryness do not admit of degrees, neither therefore do
they change, as neither do they alter each other: Because properly, they are
not qualities in the abstract,

For to the air, that there is a moisture heightened unto eight degrees, but to
the water, that the same is remiss or temperate, to wit, to the fourth degree:
Lastly, That dryness is heightened

CHAP. XXVIII. The threefold Digestion of the Schools.
1. The general scope of this Book. 2. The first digestion, in the stomach. 3.
The first Region of the Body. 4. Two things are to be admired in this work. 5.
Another digestion, and second region. 6. The third digestion. 7. The last
Region of the Body. 8. The forgetfulness of the Schools. 9. The state of
Growth.

IT is not enough to have shown that there are not four Elements in nature, as
neither the material mixtures of them, and Complexions, and Strifes resulting
from thence: Lastly, Catarrhs, and the hard, and new invention of Tartarous
humors; and so to have shown that a disease as well in the general, as in the
particular, has hitherto lain hid from the Schools, and consequently that
mortal men do languish under a conjectural Art, as yet fundamentally unknown,
unless I shall even discover the proper causes of Diseases. And seeing the
causes of the most inward enemies are for the most part intimate or most
inward: I will before all things propose a history of the functions or offices;
but after that done, I will demonstrate some principles of nature necessary to
be known, hitherto unheard of.

The Schools affirm That the meat and drink are by the force of heat
transchanged in the stomach into a liquor; the which, by reason of its likeness
to Barley Cream, they have called Chyle: But they say, That afterward, this
Chyle is by the veins inserted in, and accompanying the stomach, and whole
guidance of the Bowels, therefore being annexed by the mediating Mesentery
(which in the room of a third Coat, does cloth, encompasse, and involve the
Bowels) by little and little sucked forward, and drawn inward: But that the
more gross remaning part is left in the Bowels; as it were unprofitable dross,
to be expelled through the Fundament.

Indeed this first coction, they have called the first of the three digestions:
And so that the first Region of the Body begins from the mouth; but to be
terminated in one part, in the fundament;

Two things sufficiently admirable do concur herein; To wit, that in a few
hours, hard meat is resolved into juice, and that the veins are terminated
into the bowels by their utmost

Wherein they say, the whey of the venal blood is again separated for Urine,
which passes through to the Reins; but they will have the more corpulent Cream
to be changed in the

And then in the third place, the blood falling down out of the veins, and
being snatched into the nourishment of the solid parts, is by degrees
perfected, and transchanged into a humor,

And therefore, they call this last shop of the Body, the habit of the Body,
and do forget the Bowels: The which indeed do also themselves, by the same
right, concoct for themselves,

CHAP. XXVIII. A six-fold digestion of humane nourishment.
1. The miserable boastings of the Galenists. 2. Whence the first dissolution
of the meat is. 3. A sharpness being obtained, is presently changed into a salt
Salt. 4. The use of the gut Duodenum neglected in the Schools. 5. Sharpness or
soureness out of the stomach, does hurt us. 6. The variety, and incompatibility
or mutual unsufferableness of the Ferments. 7. An example of that ready
exchanging. 8. Nothing like a Ferment does meet us elsewhere. 9. The
volatileness of sharpness does remain in a salt product. 10. The latitude in
Ferments. 11. Whence it is known that the first Ferment is a forreigner to the
Stomach. 12. Why Sawces do stand in sharpness. 13. Sharpness is not the Ferment
it self, but the Instrument of the same. 14. Too much sharpness of the Stomach
is from its vice. 15. A receding from the Schools in the examination of the
Gaul. 16. That Choler is not made of meats. 17. That the Gaul is not an
excrement, but a bowel. 18. The membrane of the womb is a bowel, even as also
that of the Stomach. 19. Why the Gaul and Liver are connexed. 20. What may be
the stomach of the Liver. 21. Why it goes before the Ferment of the Gaul, and
is the second digestion. 22. Why the venal blood in the Mesentery does as yet
want threads, neither therefore does it wax clotty. 23. The womb of the Urine,
and the womb of Duelech or the Stone in man, are distinct. 24. The stomach of
the Gaul, and its Region. 25. The rotten opinion of the Schools concerning the
rise of the Gaul, and its use. 26. Nature had been more careful for the Gaul
its enemy, than for Phlegm its friend. 27. The separation of the Urine differs
from the separation of wheyiness out of milk. 28. The second and third
digestions are begun at once, although the third be more slowly perfected. 29.
What the stomach of the Gaul is. 30. The Gaul does import more, than to be
chief over an excrement. 31. Birds want a Kidney and Urine, but not a Gaul. 32.
Fishes also do prove greater necessities of a Gaul, than of filths or
excrements. 33. That the Schools are deceived in the use of the Gaul. 44. The
Liquor of the Gaul with its membrane, being a noble bowel, does now and then
banish its superfluity into the gut Duodenum. 35. How excrements do obtain the
heat of the Gaul, yet are not therefore choler, or gaul. 36. The proper savor
of the dung does exclude the gaul, and fiction of choler. 37. Gauls seem what
they are not. 38. Whence the vein has it, that even after the death of a man,
it does preserve the venal blood from coagulating. 39. The extreme rashness of
the Schools. 40. The solving of an Objection. 41. It is proved by many
Arguments, that the veins of the stomach do not attract any thing to themselves
out of the Chyle. 42. The Author is dissented from the Schools, in respect of
the bounds of the first Region in the Body. 43. The true shop of the blood is
not properly in the passage of the Liver. 44. The action of a Ferment does act
only by inbreathing, neither does it want a corporeal touching. 45. The absurd
consequences upon the positions of the Schools concerning touching, and
continual nourishing warmth. 46. The Ferments of the Gaul and Liver do perform
their offices by in-breathing. 47. Why Flatus's or windy blasts do not pierce
an Entrail. 48. The Error of Paracelsus about the pores of the Bladder. 49.
The first digestion does not yet formally transchange meats. 50. Where the
absolute transmutation of meats is completed. 51. It is false, that
nourishment is not to be granted without an excrement. 52. It is false, that
the stomach does first boil for it self, and secondarily for the whole Body.
53. The Gaul has the nature of a Balsam. 54. A miserable objection. 55. The
Gaul taken for a Balsam in the holy Scriptures. 56. Against the Gaul of the
Jaundise. 57. Two Idiotisms in Paracelsus. 58. How the Salt of the Sea is
separated from Saltpeter. 59. Out of water there is Vinegar. 60. The fourth
digestion and Region of the Body. 61. Why the heart is eared. 62. The fifth
digestion. 63. That the vapor in the venal blood, is not yet a Skyie Spirit.
64. The nourishing of the flesh, and the bowels, is distinguished. 65. That the
Animal Spirit does not differ in the Species from the vital. 66. The fourth,
and fifth digestions do want excrements. 67. What the sixth digestion is. 68.
The Diseases in the sixth digestion are neglected by the Schools, because not
understood. 69. In the designing of the Kitchen, and Shop, there are some
errors of the Schools. 70. Why an Artery does for the most part accompany a
vein. 71. Paracelsus is noted. 72. The error of Fernelius concerning Butter.
73. The rashness of Paracelsus concerning Milk. 74. A censure or judgment of
Milk. 75. The best manner of drawing forth Goats blood. 76. An undoubted curing
of the Pleurisy without cutting of a vein. 77. Why Asses milk is to be
preferred before other Milks. 78. The education of a Child for a long and
healthy life. 79. Some things worthy to be noted concerning the Urine. 80. Why
dropsical persons are more thirsty than those that have a hectic Fever. 81.
The proper place of the Ferment of the Dung, is even as in a Wolf. 82. The
proper nest of Worms, and the History of the same. 83. The difference of
Ascarides from Worms. 84. That a Clyster is injected in vain for nourishment
sake.

I Have observed notable abuses committed throughout the whole description of
Functions, or of the use of parts: Although Galen does not more gloriously
triumph in any place, than Galen from elsewhere, and prostituted for his own,
are as yet to this day worshipped in the Schools. Wherefore I have premised the
digestions which Antiquity has hitherto known, and has confirmed each to
other by subscribing; and I will subjoyn those things which singular experience
under divine grace, has taught me.

Without controversy, it belongs to meats and drinks, together, and in like
manner, to be dissolved into a Cream, plainly transparent in the hollow of the
Stomach. I add, that that is Ferment, manifestly sour or sharp, and borrowed
of the Spleen: for I have found as many suitable Ferments, as there are in us,
digestions. Again, neither is it of less admiration, that that Cream is
spoiled wholly of all drawn sourness of the ferment, as soon as it slides out
of the stomach into the great Bowel or intestine, than the power of that
ferment in the stomach, was wonderful. That intestine is called the Duodenum,
from the measure of 12 fingers, and it is immediately under the Pylorus or
lower mouth of the stomach.

Truly Anatomy complains of trouble in this place, by reason of the stretching
out the offices of the kernels and Vessels, to wit, in so small a space, for
Instruments of so great uses;

For first of all, when I learned that the ferment conceived in the Cream of
the stomach, was pernicious as well in the intestines themselves, as in other
parts, by reason of many torments

I not sloathfully noted, that all particular parts have obtained particular
ferments, seeing there is an unexcusable necessity of these, in transchanging.
And so I also from hence further ferments do abhor strange ones to be their
Companions, and the commands of strange patrons, as if they were foreign
thieves, and such as thrust their Sickle into another man's Corn: And that
indeed through no vice of jealousy, as though they did envy the activities of
others: But from an endeavor of executing the office; which was enjoined them
by the Lord of things. It is a wonder to be spoken, that a sour cream in the
Duodenum, does straightway attain the savor of Salt, and does so willingly
exchange its own sharp Salt, into a salt Salt.

No otherwise almost, than as the Vinegar which is most sharp, has forthwith
(through red Lead) put off its former sharpness, and does presently change into
an aluminous sweetness; Sulphur, is forthwith changed in the Salt of Tartar,
But by a far more excellent vigor of transmutation, that sour Cream is
presently made Salt in us.

For truly, that is made without any co-mixture of any Body, even as when
Vinegar waxing sweet, it is constrained by the addition of the Lead, or a sharp
distillation is drunk up in an Alcali-Salt: Because in very deed, nothing is
any where found, which can fully answer to the force of a ferment; seeing
Ferments are the primitive causes of transmutations, and that indeed from a
former cause: and therefore it must needs be, that the similitudes of those,
drawn only from a latter effect: do very much halt.

Therefore our sour Cream is made salt, only by a fermental, and unchangeable
disposition: wherefore also, the volatile sharpness of that Cream does remain
in its ancient volatility, Litharge, Minium, or Ceruse: because in dissolving,
it is coagulated, and does assume the form of a more fixed Salt, now separable
from the liquid distillation of the Vinegar, which it had lately married; but
in dissolving it is coagulated, and does assume the form of a more fixed Salt:
because it is the action of a thing dissolving, and dissolved, but not of a
transchanging Ferment, which does continually tend to a new Form on either side.

For indeed, the Stomachs of some do more easily digest Potherbs, Pulses, or
bread-Corns; but those of others do more succesfully digest Fishes, abhor
Cheese, prefer water before

First of all, the stomach has not this Ferment in it self, or from its own
self: For the digestion of the appetite, and Family-government of the stomach
do sometimes depart, and Saturn, and in pride, the liberal Feasts of Saturn.
The Ancients have smelled out some History of ancient truth: To wit, that
whatsoever things, meats being digested, are cast out by vomit, are of a sour
taste, and smell; yea although they were seasoned with much Sugar: For sour
belchings coming upon adust ones in Diseases, are reckoned to presage good,
according to Hypocrates.

Hence indeed, all saltnesses or seasonings, and Sauces of meats for sharpening
of the Appetite, are sharp; as the juice of Citron, Orange, Pomegranate, the
unripe Olive, Tartar, Vinegar, Berbery, Vine-branch, Mustard, and likewise Salt
of the Sea, as it contains a sharp Spirit in it: in which respect, also the
Liquors of Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, Sal Niter, etc. are commended: For I will
not that the sharpness of any of those be consumed into increase of a
specifical and appropriated ferment dwelling in the Spleen: Far be it; for
ferments have nothing besides, or out of themselves in nature, which may
worthily be assimilated to themselves; seeing they are specifical gifts of a
vital nature: For therefore a ferment, in what respect it is a ferment, is a
vital and free Secret, yoaked to no other quality: for it is sufficient for
Sawces, that sharp things do prepare meats for a more easy entrance of the
ferment of the Spleen.

In the next place, although the ferment of the stomach has a specifical
tartness, yet that tartness is not the vital ferment it self; but only the
Instrument thereof: For the ferment

For from hence, there is no seldom offense of the stomach, it having arisen
from a degree of a foreign sharpness: wherefore, an Orexis or inordinate
appetite to meat, and such like ferment should consist in soureness; Vinegar,
Oil of Vitriol, and the like, should ferment the lump of bread, and should
digest our meats by a perfect transmutation: but they do neither of these;
Therefore the ferment is a free Secret, and vital, and therefore it every where
co-fitteth to it self a retaining quality in its own Borders: Because, seeing
ferments are of the rank of formal and seminal things, therefore they have also
severed themselves plainly from the society of material qualities: But if they
have associated unto them a corporeal ministering quality, whereby they may the
more easily disperse their own vital strength; account that to be done for a
help; and so it cannot but contain a duality with the Ferment: And therefore
also, that quality may offend, as well in its excessive, as in its diminished
degree.

For in that thing I greatly differ from the Schools: Because first of all,
they teach, that the Gaul is not a vital bowel.

2. That it is not a noble member. 3. That it is nothing, but a very
unprofitable superfluity it self, and banished from the mass of venal blood;
to wit, least it should infect the venal blood. 4. That it is therefore a
product besides the intention of nature. 5. Being only profitable for the
expelling of Dung, and Urine. 6. And therefore that the little bag of the Gaul,
is not of the substance of a Bowel, but a sack or sink of dregs and
superfluities. 7. That at length, Sanguification or the making of blood does
begin, and is completed in the Liver: which things indeed seem to me, dreams.
For first of all, seeing Choler is not required to the constitution of venal
blood, that bitter Gaul or Choler should not of necessity be procreated of all
kind of meats, unless it be propagated Pericardium or Case of the heart.

It is a wonder at least; why Fishes, of water, and Cattle, of Grass, do
nevertheless always daily make so bitter a Liquor. Truly that simple identity
or sameliness of the Gaul, through

Surely I have found in the Family-administration of man's digestion, Bodies,
and Ferments connexed of two bowels (the Gaul and the Liver) for
Sanguification. To wit, the Gaul to

For seeing Sanguification is not a transmutation, which may be introduced by a
momentary disposition; and since the Liver is deprived of a remarkable
hollowness, whereby it may be straightway changed into venal blond. Wherefore a
perfect Sanguification could in no wise be made in the Liver; Because the Liver
was not a Kitchen, but a family Governor by its own Sanguificative ferment,
whereby as it were by a Command, it chiefly by successive dispositions,
executes the office enjoined it from its creation. Therefore the plurality of
the Mesentery veins is the stomach of the Liver it self, and the preparative
Shop of the venal blood: And the perfection thereof, the Liver does breath into
the venal blood, as yet naked, after that it is laid up into the hollow vein.
Truly, as Sanguification is a certain more exquisite digestion, and a more
manifest transmutation of a thing, than is the melting of the meat into Chyle,
it could not fitly or profitably happen in any large vessel, but in many the
more straight ones, which together, may equalize some notable capacity; whereby
indeed that fermental Archeus may most strictly, narrowly, and nearly touch,
and comprehend them all, and his Liver may communicate a ferment in changing,
and may inspire a vital faculty. Forth Spleen does inspire its Ferment into
the Stomach, a large vessel; for neither does the Spleen touch the meats
immediately: So also does the Liver inspire the act of Sanguification by the
breathing, or ferment of its own life into the veins subjected under it. And
even as the meat slides from the Mouth into the Stomach, and there expects
the end of digestion:

So from the Entrails the Cream is immediately snatched into the stomach of the
Liver: But seeing that Cream is much, and for a great part of it
excrementitious (for as yet it contains

Seeing the venal blood in the Meseraick Veins is not only not coagulated, but
neither indeed is it as yet coagulable, as long as it is conversant in that
stomach: As is manifest in the

And so the womb of the Urine begins before the Meseraick veins: Yet the
womb of the stone is not as yet in the same place, because the ferment of the
Rein or Kidney changes

Therefore whatsoever was sour in the Cream is changed by the ferment of the
Gaul, into the salt of the Urine: But the stomach of the Gaul is the Duodenum,
and the following Reed

First of all, The Doctrine of the Schools standing; That the venal blood is
made in the Liver, and that together with the venal blood, the Gaul is also
made: Therefore of necessity nourishment from the Gaul? which in it self should
be nothing but an excrement? But if the Gaul be said to be collected into the
Chest under the Liver, for the wiping away the dregs of the paunch; at least,
the Agent which procreateth in the Urine a Salt of not Salts, had more
commodiously left a part of its own Urine for the washing and cleansing of the
Entrails, and disturbing the superfluities of these, as it had freed the Liver
of the stinking; and ^edious burden and consociation of the Gaul. Nevertheless
it is of Faith, that our body is so (workman-like) framed by God, that nothing
therein is in vain, and nothing therein diminished: Because that, it is far
more artificially and commodiously made, than our understanding can comprehend.
Therefore, if the ends of the Gaul granted by the Schools, should be true,
verily the Reins had far more commodiously satisfied those ends (as I have
said) than that the workman of things had therefore loaded; the Liver with that
unprofitable weight: But the consequence convinces its antecedent of
falsehood. Therefore the whole doctrineis false. If Birds do want Reins a
Bladder and Urine, whereby they may the more fitly fly, but the Gaul should
serve only for the wiping or cleansing of the blood, at least the blood had
more willingly wanted the refining of the Gaul, than the refining of the Urine;
that is, if nature be able to separate drink in a Bird, without Urine, and
therefore likewise to want Reins, and Bladder, would it not bemuch more easy
for it to have severed some small quantity of the Gaul with the Urine, and
superfluities of the paunch, than to have loaded a noble bowel with a Chest,
and so by the unprofitable baggage of an excrement, to have troubled
Sanguification? even in Birds? Duodenum, because its digestion, and ferment
should go before the digestion of the Liver, or Sanguification.

Indeed the wheyie superfluous part ought to be separated from the lively
Cream, which separation therefore is not to be compared to whey and milk, which
are not severed from each

Yet both ferments, as well indeed of the Gaul as of the Liver, do begin at
once, because neither of them keeps Holy Day or is idle: For as the ferment of
the Liver is of a greater

For in the first digestion, the stomach is the receptacle, but the Spleen does
inspire from it self, a sour ferment into the meats, and a sour Cream is
thereby made: But in the other, the Vitriol is by the only touching of Mercury,
converted into a mere Alum, Vinegar, and Salt, etc. Also straightway after
drink, there is oft-times a watery pissing made, yet Salt, and the mark of the
first digestion is scarce conceived, but that a notable part of the drink
slides forth under an error of the Pylorus, and by consequence, there was not
made a separation of the Urine from the blood in the Liver: Because the venal
blood is not as yet made in the Liver, if the Chyle it self be as yet made or
concocted out of meats in the stomach: To wit, when drinkers do very often make
water after meat: Therefore also Urine is made of watery drink, yea out of
drink from whence venal blood was not made; and so the generating of Urine does
there go before Sanguification. At length, the very veins of the Mesentery, are
the stomach of the third digestion, which way the Liver inspires a bloody
ferment, and a very red or ruddy salt venal blood is the effect thereof.

For the wounds of the Gaul are presently mortal, but those of the Liver not
so. If the e^ore the Gaul were likewise Choler, death would of necessity follow
every effusion of Gaul. Nevertheless, the yellow Jaundise is not mortal,
although the Gaul (as the same Schools do teach) is not only diffused over
the entrails, but throughout the whole Body, equally, longly, largely, deeply,
and throughout its least part: Therefore either a wound of the Gaul does import
more than the effusion of Choler, or the Jaundise is not effused Choler, or
both is necessary. Wounds of the Bladder also, being inflicted above the share
(as successful Wurtz is witness, in my judgment the Standard-defender of the
more modern Chyrurgio^s) are cured, although the Urine, together with its Gaul
(as they will have it) cannot but be powered forth at that very time or moment.

Therefore the Chest of the Gaul has a necessity, and Integrity, fast tied to
the life by reason of sudden death: Neither is it the effusion of that gawly
superfluity, which does necessitate Birds do live prosperously without Kidneys,
or a Bladd^r, yet not without a Gaul: wherefore there is a more conjoined
necessity of the Gaul, than of Kidneys: Because that the Kidneys being rockie
and putrified, the life is safe. And then, Fishes (according to the Doctrine of
the Schools) do abound with very much phlegm, and

At length, their excrements easily glistering, they had no need of a spur, the
Gaul. Wherefore, seeing the ends, matter, and efficient cause of the Gaul
attributed by the Schools, Liver is vainly, deceitfully, and by the error of
nature, yea and of the Creator, wearied, unless we had rather acknowledge
perpetual errors in the Schools, and to contemplate some greater moment of a
necessary bowel to be in the Gaul.

From hence therefore, I determine the Gaul to be a vital Bowel, and its very
Body to be a bitter Liquor prepared of the best venal blood, containing the
Balsam of the Liver, and Arterial Duodenum, is the excrement of it self, and a
Liquor now despised of the Gaul.

But that these things have themselves after this manner, I have at sometime
shown under the impostures of Choler, by the example of a Calf, who^e
motherly, and sweet milk waxes Duodenum does proceed unto the Ileos, being
coagulated, and waxes of a Citron color, the more, by how much it has
departed farther from the stomach; and at length it waxes green; yet there is
not bitterness in the yellow, but a nitrous taste: But in the green, the smell
of Dung does now plainly appear: But the wheyie Cream is presently drawn and
supped up with greediness by the meseraick veins, for the use of
sanguification. Likewise Milk is stirred in Infants, whence also those that are
the more young ones do cackie all yellow, not from the plenty of Choler,
neither by reason of the domination of the Chest of the Gaul; but surely,
because the ferment of their Dung is feeble. Therefore the ferment of the Gaul
does not change the sourness of the stomach into bitter, but into Salt, for the
reasons explained concerning the Spirit of life. Spare me ye more tender ears,
because I ought to treat of Dungs. I will therefore show, that the savor of
Dung excludes the Gaul, that it befools the use of the Gaul invented by the
Schools, and convinces Choler of a fiction.

A Boy of four years old had fowled in Bed; but being much afraid of whipping,
he ate his own Dung, yet ^e could not blot the sign out of the sheets:
wherefore being asked by threatenings, Gaul, over thick, and undigested Dungs,
as there is over transparent things, and those things which are to be prepared
into the dignity of venal blood. I came by chance unlooked for, the same day,
and I diligently enquired, a price being also added, whether those things which
he had eaten, were bitter. He answered negatively, and the same as before.
Likewise Nuns did Board noble Maids sufficiently sober, at their Table: but
they continually preached, that they who did eat dainty fare, should have their
parts with the rich Glutton; but that they only should be saved, who by the
every way denial of mortification, did eat any the most vile things. Therefore
a noble little Virgin being very desirous of her Salvation, and much moved by
the aforesaid persuasion, eats her own Dung, and was weak or sick. But she was
called home again by her Parents, and at length told the chance: She was asked
thereupon, of what savor it was, and she answered, it was of a stinking, and
waterishly sweet one. Thirdly, a Painter of Bruxels, being mad between whiles;
about the beginning of his madness, escapes into a Wood near by, and was there
found far from the sight of men, to have lived 23 days by his own Dung. He was
straightway brought home; I went to see him, and the Lord healed him. But he
was perfectly mindeful of all things past at the time of his madness. I asked
him, whether he remembered of what savor his Dung was: He said, it savours as
it smells: And being afterward examined by me through the Capital tastes, he
answered, it was not sour, not bitten, sharp, salt, but waterishly sweet: Yea,
he said, that by how much the oftener he had re-earen it, by so much it had
always been the sweeter. But being asked, for what cause he had rather eat Dung,
than return home? He said, that he throughout his whole madness abhorred men,
being persuaded by his own fury, that men sought to destroy him by a snare.
Therefore it is manifest, that there is not even the least drop of Gaul in the
Dung: for the Gaul being once burst, however a Fish may afterward be most
exactly washed, yet the bitterness of the Gaul conceived by the least touching,
is never laid aside.

For if yellowness should bewray the Gaul, the dung of Infants should be
especially gawly, which notwithstanding is licked by Dogs, because it has as
yet retained some kind of savor Duodenum, and is severed from the Dung: but
if any thing do persevere sour, which may resist the ferment of the Gaul,
wringings of the bowels, etc. do presently follow: But the excrement of man
does putrify, because the ferment of the dung is chief over that place: But
that which slides out of the stomach undigested, also is not digested in the
bowels; It is cast out whole, but it keeps, and now and then increases the
part of sournesses which it assumed in the stomach: For from hence do the brans
in bread, provoke the stool, by reason of sharpness; but other things do wax
more sharp, and stir up wringings of the guts: Therefore from the Duodenum, the
Chyle does forthwith begin to exchange its own sharp volatile Salt into an
equal saltness, it being resolved in the Cream: But the remaining, and more
corporal substance of the Cream does expect a sanguification in the veins of
the mesentery, from the inspired ferment of the Liver: The salt Liquor in the
mean time being attracted by the Reins through the Liver, is it self committed
to the Reins and Bladder for expulsion. Therefore the third digestion begins in
the veins of the mesentery, which is terminated in the Liver: For the venal
blood as long as it is in the mesentery, is not yet digested, not yet thredded,
or perfect: For the venal blood of the mesentery, does therefore not grow
together in the Bloody flux: But otherwise, a vein of the stomach being burst,
the venal blood does forthwith wax clotty in the stomach.

For the ferment of the Liver is so much inclined to sanguification (for it is
its univocal Archeus thereupon confirming it; So that the blood in the veins of
a dead Carcass is not coagulated a long while after death, which being
elsewhere powered forth, does presently wax clotty: For the Cream running down
afterward through the Bowels, becomes the dryer, and also the liquid matter
thereof being sucked upwards into the veins: But thereby, the rest does more
and more putrify, so that, when it is almost brought down to the ends of the
Ileos, now not a little of a more liquid Dung is generated; because before it
has fully putrified, it is snatched to the mesentery, that it may be thoroughly
mingled with the Urine, profitable for its ends: Even as elsewhere concerning
Fevers, and likewise concerning the Stone.

Which yellow Dung, the Schools have believed to be Choler and Gaul; and so
out of the Dung, they have founded their demonstration for one of the four
humors, and a Gate many things or humors, which being again separated, they
should be the same after their death, as before in their life; but that a Body
is not born of Mother nature, by a true transmutation of the Chyle into
univocal or simple venal blood; and at length, to have instituted healings
about the removing of accomplished causes, which never will be, or were in
nature. Surely that thing does exceed gross ignorance, and renders the Snorters
of the Schools unexcusable.

But perhaps they will object to me; Thou say that the veins do suck the
Cream, being Gaul; that is, without changing of the Sour into Salt: And by
consequence, thy ferment of the Gaul is a dreamed and invented thing: yea meat
broth injected by a Clyster, shall be able to pierce to the Liver, without the
knowledge of the Gaul (touching the right of a Clyster, I have finished this
question in the Book of Fevers.) I answer, that it is an ancient abuse of the
Schools, who have equally attributed the same use to all the Gaul, in its own
stomach of the bowels: yea, although the Arteries being dispersed throughout
the stomach, do suck the Spirit of Wine, yet they draw no juice: For which way
should the Arteries draw juice, seeing they can never do any good thereby?
seeing sanguification does not belong to the heart, but to the Liver? Seeing
the juice being attracted in the Artery, should of necessity be a hinderance,
and ought to be corrupted? If therefore the Arteries have a natural endowment
of avoiding things hurtful, and likewise of drawing vital things unto them, and
things appointed for them by the Lord of things; shall that discretion be
denied to the veins in the stomach? For nature should have dealt ill with
Horses, who being content with one only draught in the morning, are fed all
the day after, with Straw, Hay, Chafe, Oats, or Barley: For truly dry or
unjucie things, should straightway contract thirst in the stomach; if the veins
of the stomach should draw drink unto them, Horses should be thirsty all the
day: Therefore the drink ought of necessity to remain in the stomach so long,
as that it may expect there an end of future digestion, least the sour Liquor
be drawn into the veins, which is plainly hostile, or least the Cream being
half cocted, be supped up by the veins, before the appointed time. Therefore
there is another use of the veins of the stomach, than that which is of the
meseraick veins: And therefore the Argument objected falls to the ground:
because the meseraick veins are the stomach of the Liver, and there is not
another besides those: the veins of the stomach are not likewise that which are
only dedicated to the nourishing of the stomach. Again, whenever the Pylorus
is not exactly shut, it happens (as in long drinkings) that the stomach does
almost with a continual thread, as it were make water downwards, by dropping
into the bowel: but in those that have Fevers, whose Pylorus does err through
too much straightness, the drink does sometimes remain a full three days
space, and at length, more is cast back by one only vomit, than was taken in
two days; which thing surely does oppose that, that the veins of the stomach
do attract juice. It has oft-times befallen me lying in a Coach with my face
upwards, that I should hear through the jogging of the ways, my stomach to
contain a Chyle floating in me like to a Bottle half full: but that I have
often gone to bed after that, without a Supper, or drink; yea that I felt my
stomach in the morning, as I did the day before: Wherefore I being somewhat
curious, have provoked my self to vomit, and I vomited up Cream somewhat sour,
plenteous, transparent, so that my teeth were astonished by reason of the
sourness; and although I felt no burden before vomiting, yet after vomiting, I
perceived an easement or lightning: whence I observed,

First of all, that if the veins of the stomach had now sucked the Chyle 20
hours, I had not been as yet able to have cast back so much, from a moderate
yesterdayes dinner.

2. That the sour Cream is not allured by the veins. 3. That that sourish Cream
was not as yet dismissed from the stomach, not indeed through the vice of
digestion, but through the error of the Pylorus. 4. That digestion differs
from the expulsive faculty, if one be perfected, the other being absent, or
failing. 5. That now and then, the digestion bears the unguilty fault of the
expulsive saculty, and this of it. 6. That as I did offend by too much shutting
of the Pylorus, so drinkers do offend-by a too much negligent bolting of the
Pylorus. 7. Moreover, at the beginnings of Diseases things are often cast back,
which were taken three days before. 8. That it belongs not to the veins of the
stomach to attract the Cream. 9. That nevertheless the Doctrine remains,
which has made it a foolish thing for a Clyster to be injected by the
fundament, for nourishing of the sick. 10. That the upper orifice of the
stomach in Fevers, offends by too much opening and thirst; but that the Pylorus
errs through a strict closure of himself. 11. That in Fevers, both digestion,
and also expulsion do offend. 12. That the Key of the Orifice or upper mouth of
the stomach is in the Spleen, and that of the Pylorus, in the Gaul, by reason
of the diverse seats of a twofold ferment. 13. That the reason of Situation for
the Spleen, and Gaul, is from the reason of their office.
For indeed, the Schools do extend the first Region of the Body from one
extreme, from the mouth even into the fundament; and from the other extreme,
even into the hollow of

In the next place, the shop of sanguification is not the Liver it self in its
own substance: because even the Liver of Fishes should also make their venal
blood: but yet seeing every

And the Schools do think, that sanguification is made by an actual nourishing
warmth of the Liver, and Cream; because they are ignorant of any other actions,
than those which happen

And therefore also, that every Agent ought necessarily to suffer, by reason of
a resistance, are-acting of the Patient; and that is the unexcusable containing
cause of our death, because Aristotle, having more place in the Mathematics,
than in nature, have deceived the Schools: which thing I shall elsewhere
abundantly prove.

In returning to our purpose, I conclude, that the Gaul, and the Liver do
perfect their own offices, not indeed by a corporeal co-touching, congress, or
co-mingling of themselves;

Furthermore, the Schools stand amazed, why winds cannot pass through the
Coats of the intestines, in wringings of the Bowels, while notwithstanding so
great a glut of Liquor is every

Paracelsus for the framing of Medicinal Vitriol out of Brass, bids old or
decayed Salt to be hanged up in a Brass Kettle of hot water, in the bladder of
a Swine, and so that the whole yet I knew from Philosophy, that Salt could not
be resolved into Water in its own weight, without its substantial
transmutation: yet on the other hand, the authority of Paracelsus persuaded the
contrary; to wit, That without the adjoining of water (for else the Bladder
should be in vain) the salt should melt into water. Wherefore I being a young
Beginner, decreed to try the rash monstrous assertion of so great a man: But
presently by a slow or gentle heat, I found the water in the Kettle to be not
much less salt than that which was in the Bladder, whose neck was tied fast to
the handle of the Kettle appearing above the water; from whence I knew, that
the water did pierce within and without the Bladder; to wit, That the Bladder
was passable by Salt, and hot water, but not by air: For seventy seven parts of
rain water do resolve twenty three parts of dried salt: But whereas one of the
seventy seven parts of the water flies away, a crust of salt swims on the
brine. Therefore Paracelsus does vainly command by a Bladder, those things
which are commodiously done without it: And that, besides the supposition of a
falsehood hitherto. Therefore I observed that a Bladder is Porie in a degree of
heat, but not in the heat of our family-administration: Hence therefore I
gathered, that throughout the Conduit of the Veins, the Bowels do abound with
more, and very small Pores, than elsewhere, to which Pores others should answer
being passable throughout the Conduit of the veins. Therefore the Cream does
pass through the bowels, partly by its imbibing of them, even as Salt water does
a Bladder, and partly by a proper sucking of Sympathy through the aforesaid
Pores, open indeed in our life time (even as also in heat, waters do pierce a
Bladder) but shut in the time of death. But wind is not imbibed by the Bowels
by moistening, neither is it sucked by the Veins, and therefore neither does it
for this cause pierce the Bowels: And that especially, because it wants the
drawings of agreement, and a motive Blas, whereby the wind the severer of
things to be drawn, may be drawn, and does resist. The Veins therefore that are
dispersed between the double Coat of the stomach, do want the aforesaid Pores:
but the porous ones, with which outer Coat they being encompassed, do sweat
through them the elementary venal blood: And so the proper Kitchen or Digestion
of the stomach is from without to within; But the Kitchen which is made
universal in its hollowness, is there also wholly composed and enclosed; And
that, least the digestion of them both should breed confusion. Indeed, there is
a twofold Cook in the Stomach; one from the Spleen; and the other being proper
to it self sends forth diverse digestions. Moreover, the sharp ferment in the
Stomach dissolves the meats into juice; but the ferment of the Gaul, by saleing
the sour Chyle, does separate the juice for venal blood, and from thence does
withdraw the Liquor Latex, Urine, Sweat, Dung, being yellow and liquid, and
the parts of a thicker Ballast. Neither therefore is Digestion in the Stomach,
a formal transmutation of meats:

For example; for Magisterials among Chemists, do indeed melt the body of a
thing, and do open it with a seperating of some certain dregs also: Yet they do
not therefore include a Archeus is as yet on both sides chief Ruler. So neither
in an egg is there a formal transmutation, although at the time of nourishing
heat, the yolk does melt and contract a stink; but they are only material
disposures required unto a formal transmutation, resulting at length from
thence again. Neither is the Digestion of the Gaul in respect of the lively
Cream, as yet reckoned a formal transmutation, although in respect of
excrements, it does formally transchange: For the unlike parts of the Cream, of
which an elementary application is not intended for them, do putrify through a
dungie ferment, and are deprived of their middle life, as also of an Archeus:
But there is only pretended a transmutation of the Homogeneal Cream, as also
an enjoyment of the same.

Therefore meats are not truly and essentially changed, unless when the venal
blood is made Ileos and Colon: And the dung differs from the eaten meat
essentially, but it must not be believed to be putrified in a few hours by heat
only, the which, neither is it turned by heat into a certain kind of Cream,
but by the proper ferments of the Kitchins. Therefore the meat is not yet fully
transchanged, unless when its own Archeus being subdued, our vital one is
introduced with a full vassallizing of the former: For so wine is wholly
changed into Vinegar, Quicksilver wholly into Gold, an Egg wholly into a
Chick, and the blood wholly into the last nourishment.

From whence I conjecture it to be a falsehood, that there is no nourishment
without an excrement: For a separation of dregs from that which is Homogeneal
is impossible, wherein one thing does not any thing differ from another: But in
meats, or under the first ferment, there is a diversity of kind, by reason of
the difference of the meats, and parts of the same, the unequality of chewing,
and an unlike application of the received ferment: For the sood does partly
hearken the more easily to the ferment, and being partly rebellious, does
resist; whence also a disagreeable capacity of the ferment does arise.

That also of the Schools is false, That the stomach does primarily coct for it
self; secondarily, only for the whole body, and so that it self is truly
nourished by a sourish Chyle: And so that if it should not be nourished by its
own Chyle, neither would it begin, or attain a Cocture; Because that from the
self-love of nature, every thing does act intentionally for it self.

1. If that thing may have place in a total Agent; yet surely not in the
direction of all particular parts. 2. Because no part does act any thing in the
body from a proper pleasure of self-love; and much less do the shops dedicated
to the service of the whole, so act: But nature does on every side obey the
appointments of the Creator, which were measured out by use and necessity, in
the power of the Lord of things. 3. We are nourished by the same things whereof
we consist; but we in no wise consist of the Cream. 4. The stomach is nourished
with no other matter than the other rank of membranes, which is destitute of
the Cream. 5. The Cream does not receive life, but by the Degrees of venal
blood; but the stomach cannot be nourished by a nourishment not yet vital. 6.
The Cream is a melted food, having as yet the Archeus, and Properties of the
food; but spermatick and similar members of the first constitution, cannot be
nourished by a liquor not yet limited unto a humane species. 7. The veins are
not dispersed into the stomach that they may suck venal blood, but that they
may diffuse nourishment; But they do not contain the Cream: Therefore the
family-administration of the Members being unknown, faulty arguments, from not
the cause, as for the cause, do every where sprout forth in the Schools, and do
bring forth capital errors, and deaf experiences, to be purged in another
Tent.
Francis Alvares an eyewitness writes, That the Abyssine, or Ethiopian
Nobles are delighted in their feasts with raw Ox flesh, with a seasoning, or
sauce of its own Gaul, yet they are not any thing weaker than the strongest
Europeans. If therefore the Gaul be an excrement (as it has pleased the
Schools) and of so great cruelty (as they think) that the Gaul being detained
in the stomach, does produce a fainting of the Spirit; yea that within few
days, Choler, through a disease, does kill us: How shall a raw and cadaverous
Gaul, make men sound, and the more strong?

Perhaps they will object; If the Gaul be so necessary a Bowel; Pigeons or
Doves could not want that: But they know not that the situation of the
Members, and heart in a Pigeon, is turned upside down: For if an Emmet has his
Choler in him, Pigeons have also their Gaul, although it be not bitter, nor
distinguished by a little bag, as neither in Emmets: For it is sufficient that
the Blas of the second digestion is established in another part: For the heart
of a Pigeon sits in the four Lobbets of the hollow of his Liver, they being
overwhelmed above, and its bunch hangs forth downwards: The Pigeon being a
great fighter even unto blood, does want a little bag of Gaul: But the Lamb
has a large Gaul, even as also every the least, and mildest of fishes. They
gave me Gaul to eat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink That was
wine of Myrrh mixed with Gaul, which they offered to the Savior of the world,
now fainting with the pains of an unwonted passion, and wearied out with the
weight of his own Cross: Not indeed that he might presently swoon, even as
otherwise they are threatened with fainting, who undergo bitter vomitings (which
the Schools falsely call Gaulie ones.) The Jews therefore, did acknowledge the
Gaul for a Balsam preserving life; and it fat differs from that yellow poison
rejected by Vomiters: Therefore the Sacrilegious did offer Gaul, whereby they
might the longer torment the Lord Jesus under pains, before death. Therefore
the Gaul if it be a Bowel, and its action be altogether vital, it can scarce be
restored, and at least, is by no means delighted with material Remedies, as
neither with solutive ones, but with an equivalent ferment, of the nature of a
Blas: for there is a certain immediate and mutual traduction or passing over,
and easy operation of powers into powers; Because there is a touching of each
other, and that mutual, in a co-resemblance, and therefore also a piercing one.

For I remember that I saw the diffected dead carcass of a certain Comptroler
to a King, and of another, a Schoolmaster, who were dead of the yellow
Jaundise, yet the emunctory of neither Gaul was brought close to the Duodenum;
but in some of the Meseraick Veins, were pellets, which I judged to be liquid
dung there detained, molesting the action of the ferment of the Gaul: also
sorrow has oft-times given a Beginning to the Jaundise and does nourish it
being begun. If therefore sorrow does inhabit in the Spleen, the seat of
Melancholy (according to the Schools) why therefore should the Gaul be stopped
from sorrow? and not the Spleen? Therefore,

1. Sorrow does not only hinder the digestion of the Stomach, but also of the
Gaul; By the error whereof, the liquid Dung, which is especially carried
through the Fundament, does immoderately, and unseasonably arise into the
veins. 2. Therefore the Gaul is a noble, and vital Bowel.
At length, The Cream sliding out of the Pylorus or nether mouth of the
Stomach, into the Duodenum, being straightway snatched within the Sphere of
activity, by the in-breathing of the Gaul, does exchange its sourness into
Salt, and its more watery part is made severable from its more pure or un-mixt
part, which is drawn by the Reins.

Whence the Urine is sufficiently salt; but the venall blood, a little. But
that Paracelsus will have the Urine to be brought into the bladder, not by the
Reins and Urine vessels, but by That Oils and Emplasters are the true food of
wounds, so that a wound is truly nourished by them, and that the corrupt matter
is the excrement of that nourishment. Therefore the sour salt of the Cream,
seeing it is destitute of an object, and the which, seeing it wandreth through
the action of a dissolver, into a fixed salt (as I have taught before
concerning volatile spirits) it is suitably exchanged into the volatile salt of
Urine; And that not by the action, or re-action of sournesse on a certain
object, but by a true fermental transforming; for the Spirit of life it self is
of the nature of a volatile salt, and of that which is salt: And so even from
hence alone, the vital action of the Gaul is proved: For Sea salt being often
eaten, does remain almost whole in the excrements.

Which thing the Boylers of Saltpeter do experience against their wills: For
they are constrained to separate salt out of the dung of Jakeses, being
sometimes eaten up by the Saltpeter, Saltpeter has obtained a sufficient
drying up of its own coagulation: And therefore from hence it is known, that
Sea Salt is more readily coagulated than Saltpeter: Therefore humane
excrements are less fit for Saltpeter, than otherwise those of Goats, Sheep,
and Herds: Yet as much of that Sea Salt as is subdued by the ferment of the
stomach, so much also is sour, and volatile: Consequently also, although any
one do use no salt, his Urine should not therefore want salt; because it is
that which is a new creature, and a new product out of the sour of the Cream.
The Salt of the Urine therefore has not its like in the whole Systeme of
nature: For not that of the Sea, Fountain, Rock, Gemme, not Nitre, not that of
Saltpeter, Alume, or Borace; Lastly, not of any of natural things, as neither
the Salt of the Urine of flocks or herd, with which although it may agree in
the manner of making, yet the salt of man's Urine disagreeth from them
throughout the general and particular kinds; no less than dungs do vary
throughout the species of Bruits, although bruits are fed with common fodder,
to wit, by reason of the diversities of an Archeus and Ferment: Therefore of
meats, and drinks, not sour, or salt, is made a salt sour, and at length a salt
Salt, and it is easier for a thing of a sour salt, to be made Salt, than of not
Salt, to be made sour salt.

I remember that I have seen a Chemist, who every year did fill a Hogs-head of
Vinegar to two third, parts with water of the River Rhoan: he exposed it to the
heats of the Sun, and so Vinegar, a ferment being conceived out of the
Hogs-head: This I say he was thus wont to do, by reason of the singular
property of that Vinegar: For truly, out of the Vinegar of Wine, the weaker
part does always drop or still first, but the more pure part a little before
the end, rises up with the dregs: but this Vinegar made of mere water, as it
wants dregs, so it always does minister an equal distillation from the
Beginning even to the end. Wherefore as the ferment of a vessel does by its
odor alone change Water into Vinegar; So indeed, by the fermental odor of the
Spleen breathed into the stomach, meats are made a sour Cream, which afterward
is turned into a urinous salt; yea, and into a vital one: Because the Schools
never dreamed of these things, neither had their followers read them in the
labors or night watches of their Predecessors, therefore they have been
ignorant of the use of parts, and ferments, and the celebrations or solemnities
of transmutations, but they have introduced both the Cholers into the mass of
the blood: Lastly, They have not known the Contents and be-tokenings of the
Urine: Therefore the third Digestion is made by the President-ferment of the
Liver; which is by the blind odor of a Gas, does begin Sanguification in its
own stomach of the Mesentery, and at length perfecteth it in the hollow Vein.

Furthermore, The fourth Digestion is completed in the Heart, and Artery
thereof; in

But the fifth Digestion does transchange the Arterial blood into the vital
spirit of an Archeus, Blas of man, as also under The Spirit of Life. I could
not satisfy my self, that in the venal blood of the Liver there was any
spirit, although it has gotten a degree of its perfection, after that it has
overcome or exceeded the Mesentery: But that venal blood always seemed to me
as it were a certain Mass of Mummie, and the matter Ex qua or [whereof:] But
not as yet to be accounted for perfect vital blood.

For if the blood of the hollow vein had begged a spirit from the Liver, the
right ear of the heart had been in vain, which works uncessantly for no other
end, than that some spirit may

For the venal blood slides indeed within the stems or threads of the Muscles,
and is made For which of you shall add a Cubit unto his stature? For I have
observed that women with child being long afficted with notable grief, have
brought forth the less Young.

First of all therefore, I do not admit of a Livery spirit to be in the venal
blood. And then, neither do I distinguish the Animal spirit from the vital: For
truly in one only ship, one only Pilot stands at the Stern, neither do more
suffer themselves to be together, without confusion: Neither do I admit of a
new Digestion for animal spirits in the bosom of the brain.

Like as also, that the spirit does not differ in the species, from it self, in
all the particular Organs of the Senses, and Executers of Motions: Although the
senses dirfer among themselves Archeusses to be in a man: For although the Gas
shall draw a singular disposition from the instrument, yet this does not prove
a specifical diversity. Therefore in the Fourth, and fifth Digestions, there
are no excrements, nor unlike things or parts, nor do they proceed

And therefore it is false, That in every nourishment there is an excrement:
For the arterial blood, and spirit do agree in a simple and vital unity: But
if any superfluities of the former Digestions do rush into, or are engendered
into the Arteries, let that be a diseasie, turbulent and confused government: I
now speak of the ordinary Digestions.

At length, the sixth and last Digestion is perfected in all the particular
Kitchins of the

But I call things transchanged, dispositions, which afterward do in the
Arterial blood, consequently succeed into the true nourishment of the solid
parts. The Schools divide these

Thirdly, When it is now applied to the solid parts.

And lastly, When it is assimilated or made like to the thing nourished, and is
truly informed hereby, it assumeth the nature of a solid part; which to be the
dross of the Schools, surely they do not diligently mind.

For in the first place, Neither the Arterial, or Venal blood do wax white in
the extremities of the Veins, seeing the extreme or utmost parts are not potent
with any other power of ashop or office, which its whole more former Channel of
the Vein has not: And so the Vein, although it be the vessel of the prepared
nourishment for the Kitchins of the solid parts, yet the Vein is not the
Kitchen of the solid parts. Indeed all particular solid parts do nourish their
own and proper Kitchen within. Therefore the venal, and arterial blood are not
altered, unless they be applied to the solid parts; Because they are diverted
by the property of the solid parts, into a raw seed, but not of their own free
accord in the utmost part of the veins.

Secondly, The spermatick Muscilage is not be-dewed by the veins in a solid
Member. For a Muscillage is badly consonant to a dew. But the thin and fluid
arterial, and venal blood slideth along within the Kitchins of every part,
which are only transchanged by the ferment of the place.

Thirdly, Neither are there empty places of flesh, which are devised to be
greedy of a dew.

Fourthly, Neither is nourishment applied to the sound or solid parts, in
manner of a dew, which but a little before was a Muscilage.

Fifthly, Neither at length is this dew united, and assimilated to the solid
parts, but what soever happens to be assimilated unto them, this is within the
years of growth; but afterward, as the venal, and arterial blood have
thoroughly crept into the solid members, by a continued sucking of nature; so
they are there digested, and suited, and at length expulsed by transpiration:
Therefore these four Dispositions feigned by the Schools, and badly harmonized,
I meditate to be digested into a Quaternary number (for peradventure a hundred
Dispositions do interpose, before of an Egg, of a Chick, a solid part I say be
constituted of Arterial blood) with the blemish of the blindness or giddiness
of the Schools: wherein nothing is right or true, but they do behold the very
history of the matter bespotted, and to them it is a truth, because they have
no nourishment of truth without the excrement of Fables.

Therefore also the veins themselves, as they are nourished only with the
Arterial blood of the first constitution, even so also in this respect perhaps,
an Artery does every where accompany

But Paracelsus every where bringing nature over to his own desires, says,
That in the Digestion of the stomach, a stinking or putrified Sulphur is
separated from the two other Beginnings: But in the Liver, that the salt is
separated from the Mercury; but the venal blood to be the Mercury, and the true
nourishment of the whole entire part. Neither is it worth ones labor, by
scoffing at this man; to be drawn any longer on the Stage, while himself does
infringe this his own Doctrine: For he diligently searching into the original
of Ulcers, says, That the whole venal blood is nothing but the salt (now he
makes no mention of Mercury, unless he confounds the Mercury with the Salt,
in name and thing) although the urine of those that are ulcerated does not
contain a crum of salt less than themselves not ulcerated. But surely it is a
shameful thing to reckon the three first things of the venal blood, as if they
were excrements, whose Arterial blood is one of the three. Also he every where
compares Milk to the Arterial blood; Not knowing that a thing transchanged, is
not any more like it self being not transchanged, as neither is a Chick like to
an Egg, or to an Yolk. Indeed he calls the Buttery part of the Milk swimming
upon the Milk, the Sulphur of the Milk (never in the mean time, not indeed
Analogically, does the Buttery part swim upon the Arterial blood) but the
Cheese or Curds he calls the salt of the Milk; therefore also the Whey of the
Milk shall be also the Mercury of the Milk, and by consequence its best part,
and the best nourishment of the Milk: And the Whey of the Milk shall be the
Mercury, out of the Mercury of the Arterial blood. I will willingly, and
smilingly grant Paracelsus the Whey, and will my self take the Cream; Because
the Butter resembles the smell of flowers, wherewith the Cow is fed; but not
the Whey.

But Fernelius thinks Butter to be nothing but the froth of the stirred
Cream: not knowing Ashes, Soape, Sugar, or of those things which do participate
of a Lie or Lixivium, be immingled with the Cream, there will never be Butter
made thereby, by reason of an Alcali which flayeth every sour Ferment: For
therefore in Winter, the co-shaking of the Cream is more tedious, before the
Butter be brought forth; because heat does promote sour things, and all
putrefactions.

But Paracelsus being elsewhere unmindful of his own Doctrine, does prefer the
Cream before the Whey, and Cheese, as well for health, healing, as for the
goodness of the food: But Galenical Schools do prefer the thin and waterish
Milk before the more fat Milk. For this cause they determine Ewes Milk to be
the vilest, and then Cows Milk; Thirdly, Goats milk; And at length, they prefer
Asses milk before the rest, by reason of its thin substance, and very much
wheyinesse. But I know, that this one only Milk of beasts fed in dry pastures,
is the best, as well in healing, as in eating, and to be least wheyie: For they
command a Goat (let the same judgment be of Milk where the like reason
appears) whose Venal blood the Schools do prescribe in the Shops, and in many
places Sheeps blood is sold for Goats blood) to be first nourished with things
Diuretical or provoking Urine. Therefore the virtues of Milk are to be measured
by the soundness, life, and meats of the Beast, but never by his

And Physicians being called to give their judgment of Milk in a Nurse, do
come badly instructed; neither are they ready to judge otherwise, than of the
venal blood drawn out by Phlebotomy: That is, minds being blind through
ignorance, do not see with open eyes. I have observed also, that of the same
Cow, of the like quantity of Milk, there is an unlike quantity of Cream,
although she rejoice in the same pasture; for that also is according to the
unlike soundness of the Cow.

But I, for Blood, hang up a He-Goat by the horns, and do bend his hinder legs
to his horns: I cut off his Testicles, and his Venal blood being received from
thence, I dismiss him without etc. without cutting of a Vein: Neither will it
ever fail thee.

For Asses Milk does more refresh and recreate or renew, yea and thus far it
nourishes; not as it is more wheyie; For that is to have judged of the virtues
of a Kernel never before

For it must needs be, that her Milk also has an Archeus endowed with a long
life: And for this cause indeed, her Cream does not separate it self till a
long time after: Because

Wherefore also, Women's milk, although it be most like unto us, immediate,
mumial, and nourishable, yet it gives place to Asses-milk for long-life. But
the she-Asse is to be combed

Therefore let the Schools learn a better judgment concerning Nurses,
concerning Milk, and Diet; likewise to judge of the contents of the Urine, nor
to acknowledge Choler, or

We must also know, that at the end of the Bowel Ileos, there is a little Sack,
which they

But humane Worms are not generated in the Duodenum, and much less in the
stomach:

For otherwise, in the Caeliack passion, worms should be continually stirred
up: For the Cream would presently putrify, unless the Gaul did presently
season the Cream with its Salt. Ascarides do come forth, which are not Worms of
the substance of man, or bred of the Cream; but of putrified superfluities,
even as in Flesh, Cheese, Fishes, and Ulcers, Worms do come forth. Therefore
Ascarides are cadaverous or as from a dead Carcass, Worms not so. Lastly, Worms
are in us without increase of offspring; but Ascarides do bring forth their
own Eggs. Common water boiled with Quicksilver, in a little, and unhurtful
drink, kills all Worms, as well in the Bowels, as elsewhere; but in Ulcers,
if that water be powered on them. Last of all, for an overplus, I will add,
seeing the Bowels wherein Worms are bred, cannot digest the same; thence it
follows, that Clysters put up for to nourish, are frustrate of their hope, and
they shall sooner nourish Worms, and Ascarides, than the man.

Nature therefore, has with me, constituted six vital digestions; But in the
seventh number she her self rests.

CHAP. XXIX. Pylorus the Governor.
1. The use of the Pylorus delivered by the Ancients. 2. The chief Diseases of
the Pylorus. 3. He is the Moderator of the first digestion. 4. Of what sort the
closure of the Pylorus is. 5. The Command or Government of the Pylorus. 6. How
vomiting happens. 7. The Blas of the Pylorus. 8. The Stern of the first
digestion. 9. The Eccen tricities of the Pylorus. 10. Some Originalls of
Diseases neglected by the Schools. 11. Some Positions. 12. Whence the diversity
of matter vomited up, is. 13. What that gauly thing may be, which is cast forth
by vomit. 14. The sluggishness of the Schools. 15. Their ridiculous admonition.
16. The shutting and opening of the Pylorus. 17. The reason of the Situation
of the Gaul. 18. Whence Fluxes, wringings of the Bowels, Bloody Fluxes, the
Hemorrhoids or Piles, etc: are. 19. An error about hunger and thirst. 20. Some
absurd consequences upon the positions of the Schools. 21. A sense of appetites
in the Pylorus is demonstrated. 22. The remedy of the Bloody Flux or Dysentery,
and Flux, has opened the office of the Pylorus. 23. Giddinesses of the Head,
whence they are. 24. An example in a Cock. 25. The leekie Liquor of the
stomach, is not that of the Gaul. 26. Thirst does not show a necessary defect
of moisture. 27. Whence there is a yellow and bitter vomiting at the beginning
of a Tertian Ague. 28. The use of the Pylorus is confirmed by four Histories.
29. Thirteen notable things resulting from thence.

IN what part the Stomach lays open at top, and being conjoined to the
throat, does lay under it, that by the figure Autonomasia, is called its
Orifice or mouth: But its utterance beneath, is named the Pylorus or Porter:
For in those that are well in health, the Pylorus is shut, while the Stomach
has received the meats, or drinks, until that the digestion of the stomach
being finished, the Chyle or Cream be made.

For then, not before, the Pylorus opens himself: but the orifice of the
stomach is shut, at least, fullness being present (if there be not sufficient
cast in) when the stomach begins to Pylorus: But I have apprehended a great
hinge of health, and sickness, to be involved in the Pylorus.

For first of all, I have seen now and then, in Fevers, that as to day,
undigested things have been vomited up, which were the third day ago cast in:
But on the contrary, in the Caeliack Pylorus is never shut: Yea some, after
that they have been filled with dainty fare, they do not desist from rioting
all the night, and therefore they do piss continually: Therefore it must needs
be, that their Pylorus being notably passable, does not only distill drop by
drop, but by a continual thread; neither that it does expect any bound of
coction: For straightway even from the beginning, that it was not suitably or
exactly shut, or at leastwise, that it does somewhat lay open in divided
wrinckles, after that the stomach was not sufficient for the entering drink: For
that happens in healthy persons, when there has been a defect of the closure
of the Pylorus. There are others also, whose Pylorus is a more stubborn keeper,
they vomit drinks after they are half digested: because the digestive faculty
being not equivalent to the drinks received, being provoked, does cast forth
the whole. Indeed there is too much obstinacy of the Pylorus, where three days
meats are cast forth.

Which things surely do convince, that the Pylorus is not only the Porter, but
also that it does govern the first and most evident digestion; and so that in
this respect, there is a that first of all, the Pylorus is shut, not indeed by
a muscle, after the manner of the fundament, or Bladder; for it is not the
Client of a voluntary motion. Neither in the next place is it shut by
contracted fibers or threads, like the Cramp, or wringings of the bowels: For it
performs its office of a Porter without feeling, and trouble. But no otherwise
than as the womb Pylorus shut his nether mouth on every side, by his own
proper Blas: thus I consider both the Orifices of the stomach to be shut: yet
so, as that the upper Orifice, being in a healthy person once shut after meat,
does easily open it self wholly, at every importunity of a morsel, or pertinacy
of a draught; seeing it can scarce endure that any thing should hang above over
it in the throat: Although in sick folks, and those that have suffered hunger
or want, its opening does happen with pain and great anguish; because in the
same persons, that closure of the Orifice does depend on an inordinacy.
Therefore the closure of the Pylorus is more obstinate, and exact, than that of
the Orifice. Again, it is not to be doubted, that the motive faculty of either
part does not obey the will, and so that it is natural, or diseasie.

The Pylorus is said in the Schools, to be subject to the retentive faculty:
But certainly, it shows an absolute power, when as the expulsive faculty
being against it, the digestive failing, Pylorus is oft-times stubborn, as well
in its closure (as I have said above to happen in Fevers) as in its opening (as
in Caeliack passions.)

For vomiting is made while the Pylorus being shut, it does contract it self
upwards, not Pylorus does command vomiting, and hearkeneth not unto the
retentive faculty. Seeing therefore the power of the Pylorus is not the
Chambermaid of other faculties, nor subjected to fibers, but Monarchal, and so
that the fibers ought to yield obedience to its very pleasure; It must needs
be, that this power is absolutely vital, and that it has a proper motive Blas,
like the womb, independent on the will of man: And that so much the more potent
a one, by how much the Duumvirate of the stomach shall now come to light. And
although the Pylorus be wearied oft-times by external and occasional causes (to
wit from Medicines, Poisons, or Dregs; yet its Blas is free unto its self,
which is implanted in its part, or Archeus.

Wherein notwithstanding, I admire a certain power from above, like unto the
influences Pylorus does as near as may be, express the Blas of a free will: for
truly an external inciter rushing on it, it can nevertheless at pleasure oppose
as to shutting, or opening, that as long as the Pylorus is well in health or
able, it may be moved for lawful ends, or at leastwise those that appear so to
it, for the straightning, or loosening of the passage.

Yet when a man being inordinate, does transgress against those ends, the
Pylorus as the Pylorus does for the most part, and easily stumble: Even as the
womb not being shaken from elsewhere, does rush it self headlong, ascend, or
being furious, does writhe it self on the sides, does alienate, straighten,
enlarge, contract the throat, weasand, yea and the sinews readily serving the
will, against their office, and does now and then exhibit cruel motions,
scarce unlike to magical ones, as the motive Blas is excentrical in stirring up
diverse Tragedies of Tempests. And these things are diligently to be attended by
Physicians, that as often as through occasion of the provoking cause, the Pylorus
does wander from its aims, he may straightway study a removing of the cause.
But if the Pylorus be exorbitant through the error as it were the fury of its
own proper Blas, let him think that he must fight with excentrical powers, and
not with matter; and least of all, that evacuations must be trusted to. For we
may think that in a temperate state, a man having eaten moderately, his Pylorus
is suitably shut, least any thing do Pylorus does open it self: Surely neither
does this come to pass from a foreign pricking quality of the Chyle; but
because the Pylorus is expert of things to be done in the stomach, and
therefore is to be reckoned the moderator of digestion, by whom indeed are the
bounds of Government, and the Keys are kept: For otherwise, if the Pylorus be
shut longer than is mere, seeing that which was sufficiently digested does not
therefore cease to undergo a further force of the digestive ferment, therefore
also it is cocted more than is meet: Not indeed, that the Chyle is therefore
more excellently cocted like Glass in the Furnace, by how much the longer; but
through too much delay it is alienated and corrupted, which afterward must
needs bring forth very many difficulties, as well in the stomach, as in its own
neighboring parts. Notwithstanding, if the Pylorus be less exactly shut,
surely the new drink cannot but be (together with its former crudities) carried
into the Bowels; about which surely since the digestion of the stomach is not
employed, a ferment of the Gaul being received, it is changed into a strange
substance, and at length does procreate diverse Infirmities in the veins;
because the first digestion being omitted, it is come to the second: For so
inspired tremblings Aqua vitae inbred in it, does cause the proper nourishment
of the veins to degenerate with it self; and an unnamed and unknown guest does
bring forth unwonted and unknown infirmities: Even as for the most part, if the
Chyle being well ripened, does slide down into the Duodenum, and at the same
instant, new food be injected from above, be sure, that the Pylorus being well
appointed, is presently shut, the former baggage being not yet plainly
dismissed: Therefore the detained part of the Chyle is corrupted, does wax sour
more than is meet, and defiles the new food with a foreripe ferment; And the
whole Chyle is made a forreigner, unless that before an exact coction it be
banished by the Pylorus, which is by exciting diverse appetites, wringings, and
Fluxes. Therefore the error of Pylorus, whether it be proper, or stirred up
from inordinacy, does cause many difficulties. But that new food sliding in,
the Pylorus is presently closed, it is manifest; for else, the new and raw food
should slide forth together with the Chyle which should appear in the
excrement, as if it were bred from the affect of the passion of the belly,
which is sometimes otherwise seen in devouring Children, their Pylorus being
not yet sufficiently able to obtain its own ends. Therefore weaker stomachs do
complain that great sournesses do arise in them, which in the morning they do
cast up with their yesterdays food, or at night, with the Chyle of the
precedent Noon, and the Relics of their last meats.

Furthermore, for a more full knowledge of these things, we must repeat, that
it belongs Pylorus being shut, and that the whole length of the stomach is
contracted from the nether parts, upwards to the Orifice. Lastly, that this
motion is made by the Pylorus, which if he should be opened, he should
certainly unload the stomach of a less trouble; but seeing he opens not
himself, he judges it to be inconvenient for health, to have those dregs
dismissed beneath: And so he has seemed to me, to be the Rector or governor
of digestion. But that vomiting does happen two manner of ways; To wit, by the
proper Blas of the Pylorus; but then it is without pain: But the other is made
by provokers; and that, although it be made also by the Pylorus, yet not by its
own proper will.

Therefore also it is troublesome, and grievous: at leastwise, vomiting is not
made, unless Pylorus: Else that should fall down into the Duodenum, which is
expelled by vomiting: For when vomiting is made by the proper motion of the
Pylorus, all of whatsoever it judges to be hurtful to it self, parts at the
first vomit: But if the Pylorus be provoked by a repeated vomit, other things
are ejected, than those which bewrayed themselves in the first vomit: To wit,
yellow, yolkie things, and then those things do follow, which are of a more
transparent yellowness like the Oil of Rape-seeds, and which are believed to be
gaulie, by reason of their bitterness: and at length, now and then, things
Skie-coloured and green, which by taking of the more cruel purging Medicines,
do happen straightway after the beginning.

Here the Pylorus was opened between the first, and following vomits, so that
whatsoever Pylorus may pull upwards unto himself, whereby he may wash off as it
were the mark imprinted by the Medicine: But those things are for the most part
bitter, both because they have again and again undergone the ferment of the
Gaul, and that an exorbitant and angry one; then also because they are besides
their Custom, snatched up into another Harvest, where they are corrupted into
an excrement, made notable by the quality of the ferment which it has
immediately drawn: therefore the Chyle in the same place becomes gawly and
bitter.

But in this place I do behold the Schools with admiration, that they should
prescribe meats of an easier digestion to be sent into the stomach, before
those which are of a harder cocture; Pylorus to be so shut from the beginning,
that it suffers nothing, even so much as a drop, to slide forth before
digestion be finished. Next, that coction is made by the un-cessant heat of the
stomach, and so for this cause also, the digestion continued from the
beginning, to begin, neither ever to keep holiday, as long as its Valcan heat
does remain: But that all particular things contained, do receive that
digestive heat after the manner of the receiver: which Doctrine indeed
standing, seeing all things are reduced into a liquid Chyle, and are thoroughly
mingled exquisitely in the one only pot of the stomach; it follows, that in
feeding, those things are first to be sent in which are of a harder digestion,
because they are cooked by so much the longer space of heat.

Suppings (say the Schools) and things of a more ready coction, if they are
taken last, would putrify, if they expect the ultimate bound of the more hard
assumed things: As if the digestive Pylorus should open it self by set periods
or turns, that the order may be kept in dismissing the Chyle, which there was
in receiving of the meats: which things, if the Schools shall believe to be
possible, the Pylorus at leastwise, should have a greater power of discretion
in observing the priorities of meats, than that the Schools should so
sloathfully neglect its office. But the closure of the Orifice does not conduce
unto digestion, neither does it govern the appetite: But the Pylorus does
command both; because a sufficient satiety is indeed for the most part present;
yet moreover, we as yet do eat and drink from vice: Therefore the closure of
the Orifice is not from an appetite, as neither from fullness: But weariness,
loathings, and aversion from fleshes, do begin presently after Fevers, and the
rise of Diseases of the stomach, and they have the Orifice shut.

Therefore the Orifice is neither shut from fullness, nor for the necessity of
concoction; as Pylorus is more famous than that of the Orifice.

For truly he is the Ruler of the whole Family-administration of the stomach,
even unto the last Circle of the Intestines or greater bowels: wherein, because
seeing the operation of the Pylorus.

Of both which, if there be not a full consent, Fluxes, wringings of the
Bowels, Dysenteries, Abdomen or bottom of the belly do arise.

It is also an erroneous thing in Galen, and his modern Schools, that we do
hunger and thirst Phlebotomy is badly instituted in the penury of venal blood:
But if that be considered in Diseases, suppose in a Fever, where there is no
appetite, there also shall be no defect of venal blood: But if as many ounces
of blood are supplied, as are consumed, of which Consumption, hunger should be
the token: therefore in a Fever, either there is not a consuming of venal
blood, or hunger is not the sense of venal blood consumed.

But if the venal blood be also wasted in a Fever, Phlebotomy shall be in vain.
Likewise for emptied out: And by consequence, the positions of hunger being
supposed, Phlebotomy shall every where be made vain: For the Schools suppose
that the blood is dispensed into the lesser veins out of the hollow vein (as if
a vein were a dispenser, and there were not a difference between the Vessel it
self, and the dispenser, or the power proportionally dispensing) and at length
into the small little branches, whereby in the last place, it may be dispersed
into the habit of the Body: And therefore only from the sense of hunger, that
the last small branches of the veins do suck the greater Trunk; but that this
does afterward suck the veins Pylorus, the ruler, and executer, is an
assistant: For the Pylorus for all that, has a free Blas of opening or
shutting it self at pleasure, which in time of health is moved by reason of its
knowledge of the ends known to the stomach, for which, coction, and appetite
are created by the Spleen, as if the Pylorus were conscious of the secret ends
of the Spleen: But in sickness, the Pylorus opens and shuts it self
preposterously, and with an invented order being as it were stricken with a
symptomatical fury. For I being about to buy a Village, I did walk with a
notable appetite, then by chance I wrung my foot awry, I slid down, rigor
presently came on me, with a loathing, vomiting, and the former appetite to
eat, being suppressed; but I straightway reposed my writhed foot, and that,
half put out of its place; and at the same instant, my former appetite was
restored unto me, and the nauseousness of my stomach was ceased.

Indeed my Orifice was open, as well in appetite, as in nauseousness; but I had
my Pylorus shut in my appetite, and straightway opened in my nauseousness, and
again shut in my vomiting: Pylorus upwards: but in the hicket or sobbing, there
is made an inversion of the stomach it self upwards, which therefore is far
different from the inversion of the Pylorus beginning to vomit. But that those
things were after this manner, is apparent: because seeing my stomach under
notable hunger, had not wherewith to vomit, being greedy of meat, the Pylorus
by his own consent, presently closed himself: who again, even from the
distortion or writhing of the ligaments of my foot, being as it were mad with
fury, opened himself, and called unto him the filths from the Duodenum: For at
the time of my vomiting, that the Pylorus might expel the conceived ballast, he
shut himself, and again had opened himself for a new accumulation or heaping up
of filths, unless by the restored small dislocation, the fury of the Pylorus
had been appeased. Therefore if with the closure of the Pylorus, my withdrawn
appetite straightway returned, who sees not that the appetite afforded by the
Spleen, is governed by the Pylorus? I have said, that the Pylorus does snatch
the filths out of the Duodenum upwards into the stomach; that he who before
being the Porter, was thought to be dedicated only to detaining and expelling,
may think of attracting hurtful things: which things, although they do happen
by a common sorce, whereby all things being once banished, do put on a hostile
character, and are thereby presently made worse; yet they are in an inverted
order drawn unto the stomach, by a raging Blas of the Pylorus. I have likewise
herein discerned, that the Pylorus is not only the cause of appetite,
nauseousness, and vomiting; but also, to be the one only causer of the Disease
called Choler of the Dysentery, or Bloody Flux, and Flux; and I have
experienced, that often times, a small Remedy being administered, the furies of
the Pylorus were appeased, and the aforesaid hurts corrected. Surely it is a
thing to be grieved at, that nothing has hitherto been weighed by the Schools
touching these things; and that their whole aid is placed in a Clister, neither
that they have come unto the nest of the evil. They have only converted
themselves unto the through passage of the thing produced, like the Dog that
bites the stone that is cast at him. For I have seen a young man exceeding well
in health, and enjoying a notable appetite, in the morning to have eaten some
fresh ripe Mulberries well washed, with bread buttered, and straightway to have
felt a sweet delight of cooling refreshment in his stomach thereby: And then
his appetite being by chance half an hour after sore troubled or destroyed, he
fell with the pain of the Colic into a Flux, and he had daily perhaps seventy
stools of a Milkie color: But presently restringent Cordials were administered
as well within as without: To wit, the juice of Quinces, with Confection of
Alkermes, of Diarrhodon of Spodium, De hyacintho, and the like exhilerating
things. In the mean time, very many Clisters of Whey steelified, and the like
sweepings were injected, and all in vain: At length also Opiates were annexed
to other things, and nature laughed at the learned ignorance, and sporting
experiments; but the sick man grieved at the vain remedies: And at length at
the utmost danger of Life that was appointed, the Lord healed him.

For I administered two hard yolks of Eggs, tempered with Rose-Vinegar: his
dejected appetite, and the restoring of his appetite by the yolks taken, do
testify that the Flux arose from Pylorus: For he perceived a manifest ease,
the medicine being as yet detained within his stomach. I remember also that by
Horse-hoofs fried in Buttel, and the same being afterward powdered, the fury
of the Pylorus has been often appeased, that dysenteries and fluxes have
stopped, and felt the bounty of healing, that strong smelling remedy being as
yet detained within the stomach. But if the hoof be the superfluity of a wanton
Colt, it is said To bring certain destruction on those that have the Dysentery
or bloody Flux. Therefore the Pylorus being the Ruler of the closure of
Digestion, and appetite in the stomach, it does also through a long journey of
the Intestines, govern as well the contents, as the exorbitances of the
neighbour-Veins: for the undigestions of meats, and excrements, their
corruptions, and quick passages do testify, that the indignation of the
Pylorus only is to be confirmed by remedies.

For so yesterdayes gluttony does stir up giddinesses of the head, not so much
over night, as in the morning, the stomach being void of meats, and those do
for the most part cease, the Pylorus does open, and is beset with filth, and
afterward he closed himself at the coming of the breakfast, and does as it
were forget the former discommodity.

A Cock of ours, of two years of age, eats Bran and Oats in the morning,
according to his custom: but a little before evening he refuses to Roost on
his accustomed staffs; he lays Pylorus, which being less than a Flint, had
cut of the hope of passage: For neither was there any other cause found of so
great giddiness, and unwonted death, but that the Pylorus because it was by
force and against its will, shut in the place of Coction, it had confected or
made a Leeky liquor above the greater Flint: Which surely, could not have come
thither out of the Gaul, seeing the Flint had stopped up the passage from Gaul
its coming within the stomach, out of the Gaul, through the Duodenum: Pylorus.

Likewise concerning thirst, I have often observed that those that are thirsty
in Fevers, have again vomited up the drink, with a fourfold quantity. Therefore
thirst is not of necessity, by Alcali abounding; hence neither does the thirst
cease, although the stomach does abound with its own drink: for neither does
the drink come unto that Alcali: For so salt and peppered things do prepare
thirst, no otherwise than as putrified Alcalies or Lixivial salts do; because
they exclude the sour Ferment out of the stomach. As salt does hinder the
resolving and transchanging of the food, that is, the entrance of the digestive
ferment breathed from the Spleen; So a quantity of the more pure drink, things
peppered, hard, and undigestible, are causers of thirst: but not because they
are hot and dry things in the middle waters detained in the stomach; but
because they do resist the aforesaid Ferment of the Spleen. But sour things on
the contrary, as they are near to the Ferment of the Spleen, they do refresh
thirst. Therefore thirst in the like cases, is not through defect of nutritive
moisture, but by reason of the Ferment of the Spleen being hindered, which at
length overcomming (by a longer time of sleep) the aforesaid difficulties,
therefore sleep takes away thirst. Also thirst arises in Fevers by reason of
burntish putrefactions, and coagulated things; but not because nutritive, and
cooling refreshing moisture is desired (as they think) but a resolver of that
which hu^ts: And so it does not so much show and require a nourishment, as a
Remedy. And therefore neither does thirst cease by drink, unless this has
brought a co-resembling mean for the receiving of the Ferment. Seeing therefore
the Pylorus is the Governor of Coction, and no less the Moderator of thirst,
than of appetite, as well meats as drinks shall be also the perceivances of the
same Ruler, distinguishing the bounds or ends of digestion.

For in the Beginnings of Tertians, a plenteous vomiting of a yellow excrement,
together with much thirst, does molest; and those two do concur with the
shutting of the mad Pylorus, Pylorus in the action of Government. My Wives
Brother was by chance ill at ease for the space of eight days, at Mecheline,
from a Mecheline to Bruxels unto us: Therefore being Boored, and now fitted for
his journey, the day following before noon, he dyed, after that in the
foregoing night he had been ill, and had vomited often as before, somewhat
black Liquor, or venal blood there corrupted. But his dead carcass being
dissected, showed no vice, except that in his stomach a blackish Liquor floated
on the shut Pylorus.

2. A Girl of three years old, and noble, takes a vomit to drive away an Ague,
of a boasting Italian Physician, being a few Grains of a certain Powder.

Also another Noble young Daughter, not yet exceeding the second year of her
age, took the same: Both of them indeed straightway after the taking of it,
vomited; but both of them had their right eye wrung or wrested aside, and their
whole side as it were beset with the Palsy; their arm indeed wholly, but their
leg not altogether so: For the elder being wholly given to tattle, yet her
sorely annoyed; but the younger, slumber and vomiting now and then interrupting
each other, both of them dye. I am called unto both, and I attempted some
things in vain: Perhaps indeed because late, and life failing. But both their
carcasses are opened: And the same stinking Liquor detained in the stomach (the
Pylorus being exactly shut) the cause of the murder, comes to hand.

3. A Hen, when she would pick grain on the ground, she retorted her neck to
one side, and in picking was rolled into a Circle on her left side, and her
legs failing, at the taking of every Barley Corn, or Crum of bread, she slid on
her hinder part upon her tail: And that had remained thus perhaps for eight
days space, before it might be declared to me, I ran unto the unwonted
Spectacle, I unfeathered her most lean breast, and a certain old woman opened
her former or memb^anous stomach with a Razor. But I found that she had
swallowed a small gobbet of rocky Crystal: but that woman sowed up her stomach
again with a thread, and afterward she survived in perfect health.

4. One of my household servants forming some Vessels about Distillation, with
a most sharp fire of pit-Coals, melted a Glass by sporting: the Fragments and
Vessels themselves were dark and white, from green Glass, and the sweepings of
my distillations, But the Fragments of his new Vessels being cast into a corner
of the floor, the Hens devoured them, being deceived in the whiteness of
glass: They were well in health: but it happened that the fifteenth day after,
the two fatter were killed for the Table: But that there were found in their
first Stomach some of the aforesaid Fragments, which were easily conjectured to
have stuck in the same place many days: But they were diminished (so that when
as glass is not broken, but Point-wise) as well side-wayes, as corner-wise:
Those Fragments were on every side obtuse or blunted. But I have hence
collected to my self things worthy of note.

1. That the Pylorus being shut, my Brother did always vomit: For truly, also
after death, that stinking Liquor was found in his closed stomach, which else
had been in the Bowels without 2. That that shutting of the Pylorus was
furious, otherwise it had opened it self, and had not so hurt. 3. That the
motions of the Pylorus are of another Re-publick, than all others are: For all
contractures do cease with death, those of the Pylorus not so. 4. That in the
vomitory medicine, its poisonous faculty had stirred up the indignation and
contracture of the Pylorus: For he was not only contracted or drawn together,
but he drew forth or allured a bloody juice out of the veins of the stomach,
which was forthwith made black, and stinking. 5. That the same things happened
in the two little Girls. 6. That the indignation of the Pylorus does also
produce Palsies. 7. But an Ae^uginous or cankery Liquor, death. 8. That in the
Cock, the only stubborn stoppage, from the Even-tide, caused his giddinesses.
9. The Hen which had swallowed the Crystal, does more strongly prove this,
besides which, no other thing was found in her fore-stomack. 10. That the
detaining of Glass in the stomach did remain with health, because the Pylorus
was not thereby stopped up. 11. That glass is of easier Digestion than rocky
Crystal. 12. That an Aeruginous, or black Liquor was made from the indignation
and shutting of the Pylorus, but not from the detaining of a Body, or Glass
besides nature. 13. That Glass was consumed by little and little in the stomach
of the Hens.
CHAP. XXX. A History of Tartar.
1. That a Treatise of the four feigned humors, is to be joined in this place,
for the integrity of the work. 2. After the rejecting of a quality, being an
elementary distemper, we must then also treat of Tartar, and the three first
things or principles of the Chemists. 3. The Birth and Life of Paracelsus. 4.
He first brought Tartar into a disease. 5. Strife unhappily fell out between
the Humorists and Paracelsus. 6. They afterward made use of Remedies borrowed
from our fugitive servants. 7. Humors were long ago silenced, which I at
length have demonstrated in a particular Book, never to have been in nature. 8.
An Epitome or Summary of those things which Paracelsus has here and there
written concerning Tartar.

IT has seemed to me a meet thing to premise natural things in order to the
matter of Colonia, by Jodoc Calchove, directed for a forerunner of this work:
and nigh the same year I set forth two other Books, to wit, concerning the
disease of the Stone, and the Plague-grave wherein I have shewn^, that hitherto
the causes of those diseases are unknown in the Schools: Therefore it is enough
here to have attested it: Although those books are to be ^ansferred hither for
the integrity or en^ireness of the work. Therefore the causes and essences of
diseases, have even unto this day stood neglected by the Schools, and they
being neglected, therefore the more weak have been destitute of right Remedies.

Now at length, because Paracelsus has lately dared to remove the general
cause of almost Tartar: And although Paracelsus first, has rashly made that
sufficient; yet he has remained uncertain and unconstant, whether he might
rather determine the three things (which by his own Authority he called The
three Principles of all corporal things) to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,
for the general cause of all diseases, than his own brought in Tartar: And
therefore he has left both of the aforesaid assertions to strive:
Nevertheless the more famous Physicians have at this day yielded themselves
unto Tartar. Wherefore, seeing there is not in either, at this day, the truth
of the Causes, and Remedies of Diseases, I have held it worth my labor, and
for the good of my neighbor, to brush and sweep away both those errors of
Paracelsus out of the Schools; That Physicians, who while they do now incline
unto the Doctrine of Tartar, all errors being at length removed, they may
betake themselves to the true knowledge of diseases and remedies: And that from
thence my neighbor (which thing I only have wished) may receive profit. For
the knowledge of things according to the Principles by me delivered, is drawn
by the definition: But a definition is to be taken from a knowledge of the
causes: And therefore in so great darkness on every side, and ignorances of
Medicine, I will endeavor to bring those that shall succeed; yea and likewise
modern young Beginners, into the true knowledge of diseases and remedies. For I
have long since lost my hope of the Seniours, who will refuse to learn, being
brought to that pass, as well by reason of sluggishness of assenting to the
inventions of Pagans already drunk up, and converted into nourishment, and of
laboring about Furnaces, as through a bashfulness of learning of me a poor man
of little esteem, the last of Philosophers.

The father of Paracelsus being a Bastard of the master of the Teutonick
Knights, went for a trivial Physician, rich in a famous Library; who committed
his son Aureolus Philippus Theophrastus Bombast to Tritemius of Sphanheime:
Whence he being rich in the substance of Secrets, went unto Spagyrick or
Alchymistical works under Sigismund Fugger: For he was not there given to Venus
(indeed a Sow in a place where three ways met, had gelded him.) Secondly, not
to sloth, nor spent he his life in flattery, being earnestly desirous of
knowledge: For he, about the twentieth year of his age, searching into the
diverse Mines of the Minerals of Germany, at length came into Muscovy, in whose
borders he being taken by the Tartars, our gelded Physician is brought to the
Cham: from thence, with the Prince the Chams son, he is sent away to
Constantinople. At length about the 28th year of his age, he obtained the Stone
that makes Gold, it being given unto him; for which things sake, he took up his
Inn in Basil, where when he now became famous through many cures of diseases,
he obtained the Chair of Medicinal Philosophy, that he might give himself
wholly up to Spagyrical labors. Indeed as the stone that makes gold lifted up
his mind, and he saw the narrow substance of Physicians, and wandering errors
of the same, he had long since aspired unto the chief-dome of healing: Indeed
he taught at Basil full three years space, and expounded a Book concerning
Tartar, and likewise of degrees, and compositions; surely Both, the work of his
owninvention, and burdened with many Anxieties. In the mean time, as every ones
own pleasure draws him, he indulging drinkings more than was meet, began to
despise the Chair; yea and the Latin, whence, he had almost forgotten it, and
he supposed that he ought to speak truth only in the Germane Tongue. Therefore
although he was born with a rare wit, yet he was more happy in the gift of the
Azoth or Practick, than in the searching out of the Theory.

He I say, first obtruded Tartar on us, into the cause almost of all diseases,
and accused us, when he perceived that neither in the Schools of the Ancients,
as neither in his own three first

First of all, the pages of Galen, and Paracelsus have disputed, whether the
matters of a Tartarous humor and phlegm were not the same, and only pure
Sunonymal things: But at Galenists admitted of a tartarous humor, and began to
use Remedies which they begged from fugitive Servants.

Which things, although they were all poisonous, base, and adulterate, and are
at this day as yet more; nevertheless, they have invented a knowledge with pots
or Boxes, that they Tartar rising up, the humors have almost failed among the
more refined wits.

Therefore the disgrace or reproach of Physicians from the ill success of
curing, has persuaded them to look back unto Chemical Remedies, and the
grounds of their own Art being Galen being well perceived, the Galenists do by
degrees decline unto Tartarous humors: Therefore what things I have read out
of many Books, which Paracelsus writes concerning Tartarers, I will contract
into a brief tract.

Nature being at first a beautiful Virgin, was defiled by sin; not indeed by
her own, neither therefore for a punishment to her self; but seeing she was
created for the use of ungrateful Tartarers are designed unto us; To wit, their
matter which should exceeding sharply prick us: For the words do show the
progeny of the Earth, by the use whereof they do signify, that Diseases should
at length be incorporated in us: For first of all, the hostile Tartarers do
traitorously enter with meats and drinks, they pierce into the bottom, are
radically co-mingled, and shut up with a hidden Seal: Therefore some of them do
even presently separate themselves within, from the pure noutishment; but
others do remain together with the nourishment, which being wasted away, the
surviving Tartarers are coagulated under the form of a Muscilage, Clay or Bole,
next, of Sand, or a Stone, which then, are not only incapable of receiving the
breath of life; but moreover, they keeping their wild Thorn, have become as the
most inward immediate causes of all Diseases, the daily Nurses of the calamity
of mortals: For as soon as the blood is converted into the substance of the
thing nourished, and afterward consumed, this offspring of Thorns does often
remain, surely inconvenient through a foreign coagulation, if not also through
acrimonies or sharpnesses: For it waxes more hard daily, and bespotteth its
own Inn with a 1000 Hostilities: But a Tarterer or tartarous humor, differs
from the humane excrements of meats in that, because these do putrify, but
that is coagulated: Therefore that stomach, and Liver is only happy, which
have known how to banish the sweepings of Tartar from the stinking excrements,
in the beginning. As these Thorns are procured unto us by our ancient Tartarous
enemy; So the Stone that adhereth to the Joints or Ribs of the Wine-Hogs-heads,
giving by reason of its manifest Prerogative, a name to the other Ranks of
coagulable vices, is called Tartar: For truly the Wine in the Vessel is on
every side incrusted with a Stony bark, which is Tartar, diverse from the Lees:
For this falls down to the bottom, knowing no coagulation; but that being
extended round about, does arm the Vessel, and preserve it within, for ever
from corruption: But that guest being through nourishments, a stranger, is
called a foreign Tartar, to distinguish it from that which grows together
within us, with a fatal Spectacle, by a Microcosmical Law: For whereby any
violent thing does rush into us, for that very cause the nourishable humors
being destitute of life do appear hostile, are coagulated, and called the
Tartar of the venal blood: whence are Apostemes, stoppages, and other
Calamities, according to the delighted property, and pleasure of every
Tartarer: And so Tartar insinuating it self from the mouth, even into the
ultimate Coasts of the Pipes, is also the principal cause of all Diseases.
These are the things which I could collect out of Paracelsus here and there,
into one, concerning Tartar.

CHAP. XXX. A History of Tartar of Wine.
1. A fishing for the Whale. 2. The Spirit of Wine is depressed unto the Center
of the Vessel, by reason of cold. 3. How Vinegar differs from Wine. 4. Why the
Wine in the Superficies of the Vessel, is less good. 5. The manner of making
Tartar in Hogs-heads. 6. Why it affixeth it self on the Vessels. 7. It is
coagulated in affixing or cleaving on them. 8. The things foregoing are proved.
9. The error of a Chemical Maxim. 10. The History of Wine coagulated in
Tartar, is not a like to that of the excrements coagulated in us. 11. The
difference of Tartar, and Duelech or the Stone in man. 12. Tartar is not
wholly, or truly the superfluity of Wine. 13. The first error of Paracelsus.
14. The Tartar of Wine does wholly differ from a coagulated superfluity in
Diseases. 15. Another rashness of the same man. 16. Why Tartar is not incrusted
upon the Lees of the bottom. 17. Wines are distinguished by their Tartar. 18.
Tartar is neither Wine, nor the Lee thereof. 19. Why an Alcali or lixivial Salt
out of Wine, or Tartar, does dissolve Tartar. 20. The Wine-Lee, as to a part of
it, is matter for Tartar. 21. How badly Tartar does square to our coagulations.
22. Tartar is among coagulated Salts, not among Stones, as neither among
excrements.

BEfore I shall reject the necessity which Paracelsus has feigned to himself
for the constitution of Tartar in every nourishment, for the finding out of the
Causes of Diseases, and that the vanity of that fiction may be made manifest,
it shall above all things be profitable, to expound the manner how Tartar is
bred in Wine: for truly (even as it is begun to be believed) all causes of
Diseases do stablish their Family, and draw their name from thence. The
Cantabrians, whom they call Biscons, before they were associated to our Dutch,
for the catching of the Whale, being oft-times under Groynland (which is at
this day thought to have failed) being prevented by cold under the Quicksands
(they call them Atalaians) had their boiled Wines, otherwise generous enough,
frozen.

Therefore the hoops being taken from the Hogs-heads, they exposed the naked
Ice of the Wine, in the form of the former Vessel, unto the open Air: That by
one only night following,

Which being done, they did beat the Ice, and about the Center of the Ice, a
Liquor of the Color of an Amethyst came to hand, the mere Spirit of the Wine,
and a fiery and vital Liquor,

But seeing it is a far more desirable thing for the Spirit to go into the
Center of the Wine, than to vanish by flying away; therefore necessity has
caused cold and deep Cellars Austrian Wines working continually, as it were
through the heat of the ferment, are clammy: For from hence the Cellars of
Vienna are for the most part no less than a hundred steps deep. The Spanish
Wines would undergo the same thing, unless a Caution be administered by admixing
a Parget of Lime, while they are pressed in the Press, which they call Hieso.
Therefore in cold Cellars, the Spirit of Wine by reason of cold, runs back unto
the inner part of the Wine, and hides it self.

Therefore Wine, because cold does strike the Vessel in the Bark round about,
has less Spirit than in its more inward parts: whence it follows, that as
through want of the Spirit

Therefore when new Wines are brought into the Storehouse, and while they have
waxed

Therefore the sour matter in the Wine being now filled with a small dreg, and
now stripped Every Spirit dissolving, by the same action whereby it disselveth
Bodies, is it self coagulated. Therefore the more sharp Wine dissolveth the Lee
in its Bark, because a sharp Salt of the sour dissolving Spirit is presently
coagulated together with the dissolved Lee or Dreg, and applies it self to be
neighbor to the side or Concave of the Vessel: And that, least both (to wit,
the thing dissolving, and thing dissolved) be hindered from coagulating; but at
least, that it be not on the other side encompassed by Liquor: Therefore Tartar
the new offspring of coagulation, is affixed.

Understand thou also, that before it be coagulated, there is not yet a
coagulation, and therefore that somewhat sour Wine, the Lee being now dissolved
by it, in an instant, before

This very thing is the Tartar of Wine, of which we are speaking. That these
things are Tartar in the Vessel; yet it is the same matter, differing only in
cold, or heat: There indeed with Tartar, but here without it.

First of all, a remarkable thing plainly appears from what has been before
deduced, that the aforesaid Maxim of Chemistry erreth in that, because it will
have the dissolution of a Body

But on the other hand, in the Region of the Lee, Tartar is not found. Let
there be another Tartar of Wine is altogether impertinently taken according to
the likeness of coagulated things in us: wherefore the name, History, manner,
and end of Tartar of Wine has been impertinently introduced into the Causes
which make Diseases: And these things shall be made manifest, when as I shall
make the devise of Tartar in Meats and Drinks plainly to appear. Likewise as to
that which belongs to Tartar of Wine; for that is not a strange forreigner to
Wine, produced by a foreign Mother, matter, against, or besides the nature of
Wines, as neither to expiate the wickednesses committed by Wine, by those
things which are adjoined for a curse. And then, neither is the Tartar of Wine
ever coagulated by a Cream proper unto it (although Paracelsus has otherwise
so supposed) but the Tartar is coagulated after that the dissolutive sourness
of the Wine is woren out and glutted by the Lee.

That is, the sourness being overcome by the dissolved content, does think of
making a coagulation: not indeed to make a true Stone; but a feigned one,
because it is that which is Cremor Tartari, or the Cream of Tartar. All which
things surely do badly square or suit with our coagulations: yet they all have
by a like identity or sameliness of Tartar, in all particular nourishments,
been intruded by a winy devise.

Lastly, and that a violent one: Because Tartar is not an excrement of Wine,
unless in respect of one part, which is a solved Dreg, which thing surely was
not also hid from Paracelsus, Tartar of Wine far above the Wine, as it were an
heir of greater virtues.

Wherefore he does badly accommodate or fit the Tartar of Wine by the identity
of Being, and framing, with diseasie Tartarers, which he calls an excrement,
yea a curse arising from Tartar of Wine, although there should be any other,
being erected into the matter of Diseases, in taking the Tartars of Diseases,
they should even according to the mind of Paracelsus, badly agree together:
And so he has also but impertinently referred the cause of Diseases unto
Tartar:

Seeing they do not any way agree in the matter, efficient, manner, cause of
coagulations, in the bound of a Cream, in their object, as neither in their
principles: For the Sand or Stone Tartar of Wine is.

Therefore the whole metaphorical transumption of name and property is
frivolous, and a bold rashness of asserting, by bespattering all created things
with a curse, so as wholly Tartar: and the boldness has proceeded so far, that
they seign Tartar to be even in the Marrows, yet not coagulable, which neither
has Paracelsus ever seen; but has asserted only by a boldness: Now he makes
Tartar not to be Tartar, nor coagulable: And so that not only every coagulable
thing, and that which has solidness; but that every liquory thing, that is,
the whole Creature should be nothing but Tartar, appointed for a punishment of
sin. Now when new Wine has waxed cold, has lost its sweetness, and has
assumed the qualities of Wine, the whole Lee has fallen to the bottom; and
then the transmutation of the more sour part of the Wine, begins to act of
the Lee: For truly that which is more fruitful than the Spirit of Wine desiring
by degrees the more inward parts, does forsake the Superficies of the
Hogs-head; but this beginning thereby to wax sour, nor finding an object nigh
to it self, on which it may act, but only in the bottom, it by degrees
dissolves that object in the same place; And thus indeed, the sharpness thereof
is by degrees the more confirmed: But seeing every sour thing does as it were
boil up in corroding, hence it comes to pass, that when the sourness which is
about the bottom has acted upon the dreg, it arises from thence, and is
substituted or affixed in another place.

Therefore the generation of Tartar is slow; And therefore cannot the Tartar be
affixed in the bottom, by reason of the disquietness of that continual boiling
up: wherefore generous Tartar.

But old Rhenish Wines, do become weak indeed in the acceptableness of a winie
taste, as their sourness was drunk up in the Lee, yet are they stomatical,
because that their Spirits are French Wines, unless they shall keep their Lee,
and the which, they therefore say is the Mother or Nurse, they dissolve their
own Tincture, and drink it up together with their own sourness; and therefore
those of two years old become discolored, unless they are exceeding generous:
For truly the tincture of Wines is a certain separable Body: But generous red
Wines, because they do more slowly wax sour or sharp, they are kept for many
years: But those bearing a little white, unless they are severed from the Lee,
they presently grow weak: For the Lee being taken away, when their sourish part
does not find an object which it may dissolve, the Wine remains in its own
former State. Therefore Tartar is no longer Wine or Lee, but a neither thing,
constituted of them both. But that the thing is on this wise, it plainly
appears, Wine, however it be stirred by boiling; To wit, by reason of the
sharpness of the Wine, whereby the Tartar was coagulated.

Lastly, six ounces of Salt of Tartar do dissolve seven ounces of crude Tartar,
because the Lixivium or lie of that Salt does drink up the sharpness of the
Tartar.

But that Tartar does consist of the Lee of Wine, and not of Wine only,
Printers do prove, who do prepare the Lee of Wine or Tartar, to be a suitable
Ink for them: And both of these Wine does so compass the Salt in the Tartar,
that cold water cannot the more fully dissolve it, by piercing.

Therefore seeing the Nativity of Tartar does not elsewhere consist than in
winy juyces actually consisting of Spirit of Wine, and lightly waxing sour by
reason of the flight of the Spirit inward: Let the Schools of Paracelsus from
hence know, how badly the Speculation of Tartar does suit even with those
Diseases, for whose sake it was invented.

For truly our Stone is by no means solved in boiling waters: because Tartar
is rather to

CHAP. XXXI. The rash invention of Tartar in Diseases.
1. No Disease does arise from Tartar. 2. Galen is unsavory about the matter
of the Disease of the Stone. 3. Galen was often deceived herein. 4. He thought
the Stone to be hardened in us by the Element of fire, in the middle of the
Urine. 5. Some ignorances of the same man. 6. A neutral Judge is called for. 7.
The drowsiness of the Humorists, unexcusable. 8. An explaining of the thing
granted. 9. Paracelsus came nearer unto the nature of Stones. 10. But he also
slid in stumbling. 11. Paracelsus recanteth. 12. His rashness brake forth from
the ambition of a Monarchy. 13. Blockishness is the Companion of ambition. 14.
The nodding unconstancie of Paracelsus. 15. He was deceived by the Metaphor of
a Microcosme or little World. 16. His hidden boasting. 17. The like boldness of
Aristotle. 18. That the Metaphor of a Microcosme differs from the truth. 19.
Paracelsus. has not sufficiently trusted to his invention of Tartar. 20. Two
ignorances of the same man are demonstrated. 21. The Rise of hereditary
Diseases. 22. The Schools have erred in both extremes. 23. The Philosophy of
Paracelsus concerning Tartar, is rustical or rude. 24. His error is proved.
25. The incongruities of Paracelsus. 26. Paracelsus was ignorant of a formal
transmutation of things. 27. He blockishly proceeds.

SEEING that Tartar has first entered into Medicine for the consideration of
the Stone, I have finished a Treatise touching the Disease of the Stone, and I
have shown in print, Stone. Now at length, I will make manifest, that plainly
no Disease does arise from Tartar, but that the meditation thereof in Diseases,
is vain.

Galen had known a man to be grieved with Stones and Sands in his Reins and
Bladder; but

Which thing, because he marked with the Element of water, and watery
properties, therefore that it ought to grow together at the water-pipes in us:
The Invention smiled on

Therefore he thought that our fire, because he believed it to be one of the
four Elements which do concur unto the constitution of us, was necessary for
the hardening of the matter of

For he knew not, that all things did at sometime arise out of nothing: now at
length, that from a necessitated continuation in nature, all things afterward
should flow forth from a certain

Therefore a strange Judge is called unto the Reasons found out by us, least
being credulous, we worship our own fictions, and love them as it were Sons,
and pledge for the same against

Therefore let the fire, the sieve of Reasons, be that Judge: But the art of
the fire was not yet known in Galens time, but it was hidden among privy
Counselors under an Oath, in Pythagoras.

For Galen never law even the distillation of Roses: Therefore in so great a
want of knowledge, his ambition unto the chiefdome of healing might happily be
excusable, if he had Tophus or Sand-stone, or to be again resolved like Glue:
For so it had behooved the Monarch of Medicine to have proceeded, and not to
have exposed himself as a laughing stock in time, among his coequals of
posterity, and of a wiped nose, because he being content with so wan a devise
concerning Diseases, had filled huge volumes concerning the griefs of the sick,
their life, and healing.

Indeed I do not deny, but that any Muscilage does now and then become a Stone;
but I constantly deny, that that comes to pass, in as much as it is slimy or
snivelly; but only if Galen, has been dried up in a seminated or seedied
Stone, has remained barren in the Schools without an Ear, and fruit, and has
there grown sick under the Chair, and as brickle, being even now presently
scattered into powder, shall vanish away. Indeed the following Ages being more
prone to believe than diligently to search, have followed the flock of their
Predecessors, going not in the way wherein they were to go, but wherein it had
been gone; and through the ignorances of their Ancestors, under the conduct of
sloth, the easy Schools do hitherto subscribe to so great ignorance.

Wherefore Paracelsus aspiring to the new Monarchy of Elias the Artist to come,
not resting in the lukewarm and drowsy Dreams of snorters, seeking more firm
principles of Tartar of Wine, he conceived and nourished great hope in his
mind, thinking every Stone, as well in the great Universe, as in the little
World, to be mere Tartar.

And then, through a rashness of boldness, his Progress began to affirm, that
every Body does extract its own solidity with the same coagulation of Tartar,
that those which he had

He afterward withdrawing this his own intent of Tartar, and that ingenious
enough, plentifully collected, that even as Tartar was a Stone of Wine (a
Metaphorical Stone I say, because and easy invention, that he thereby promised
himself the Monarchship in healing.

But when he had sufficiently well weighed, that the Elements, Complexions, and
humors failed, nor that they were sufficient for Diseases, and so the true
cause of a Disease not yet to Paracelsus, and his emulation of finding out the
cause of a Disease, are to be gratified by us; who knowing the vain trifles,
and shameful sloaths of the Schools, wholly contended for the public good: And
I shall believe, if he had been more negligent of ambition, that through the
most bountiful Grace of God, he had come unto the true fundamentals of healing:
But as ambition is swelling, and always hanging on others wills or Judgments,
therefore God does always suffers ambition to float into uncertainty.

Therefore Paracelsus being unconstant, could never satisfy himself by the
invention of Helvetian Rocks, Ice to lay knit together by great cold, perhaps
for a thousand years, yet not to be Crystal, but to remain Ice as from the
beginning: Therefore he was not yet at quiet in full rest, to have tied up the
eyes and credulity of his followers in Tartarers, and to have framed to himself
a glorious name; as being confident, he flees unto another the last Anchor of
his hope; To wit, he translated the Metaphor of a Microcosme into the truth it
self; Willing, that we should express every way and fully, the whole Universe
exactly or as to the square, and in very deed, to contain it in all the
differences

So also Aristotle aspiring unto the sameliness of name of [the Philosopher]
despised the Necromancers do require to be credited without demonstration.

Let eternal praise and glory be to my Lord in all Benediction, who has formed
us not after etc. For indeed, seeing we are by Creation, that which we are, and
a Stone should be made in us, that we may represent Rocks; Now death and a
Disease were in us before that we departed out of the right way or fell: Let
Heresies depart: For neither do we all suffer the falling evil, neither do
they who labor with it, have it, that sometimes we may represent Thunder, or
the Earthquake, or an unknown Lorinde of the Air its unconstancy: But now, if
there were at least, the least truth hereof, verily he who suffers damages
according to Justice, ought also to perceive the profits of the Microcosme,
even so that, especially we ought to fly; Seeing it is more rational, for us
sooner to show our selves Birds, than great Stones, or storms of the Air, or
water. Therefore let allegorical and moral senses depart out of nature. Nature
thoroughly handles Beings as they do in very deed and act, subsist in a
substantial entity, and do flow forth from the root of a seed, even unto the
conclusion of the Tragedy: neither does it admit of any other interpretation,
than by being made, and being in essence, from ordained causes.

I observe also, that Paracelsus, Tartar being invented; and introduced into
Diseases, has not yet stood secure enough: for truly, he immingles Tartar also
in the first Beginnings of Wine is never so refined by possible circulations,
as that it does not as yet contain its own Tartar in it: As if Tartar were the
chief Root of the Universe, or an immediate Companion thereunto: But I know, if
any foreign thing be materially in the Seed, generation does never follow:
Next, that the Seed of Adam being materially prepared in Paradise, had not
generated a more perfect offspring, than that which afterward after the fall
was made in him, Cain and Abel do especially prove that thing. At length, if
Tartar should so intimately grow in Seeds, that after many years from
generation, it should cause hereditary Diseases by materially separating it
self from the whole; surely that Tartar should not so soon be separable by the
Magnet or attraction of a Woman, seeing, if any thing be separated from the
seed, it is a Gas, diametrically opposite unto Tartar: For if the womb should
separate any thing from the seed, that should happen by drawing: but such is
the condition of drawing things, that they draw for themselves and unto
themselves, and then cease: but if the womb shall extract for separation sake,
there shall now be no fear of an hereditary evil, because the womb has a
power of serving that which is hurtful. Lastly, although Diseases shall come
by degrees into the place of exercise, yet they were never materially thoroughly
mixed with the Seed, after the manner of Tartar; that not Tartar, not a gowty
Chalk fore-existed in the Seed, but that Diseases derived from the Parents, do
lay hid in manner of a Character, in the middle life of the Archeus, whose Seal
Archeus of a Disease, together with every requisite property of the Seeds: For
a Disease also, is a natural constitution proceeding from the Seed, consisting
of an Archeus as the efficient cause.

It has otherwise rustically been thought in the Schools, that Diseasie Bodies
do materially conflux unto the Generation of hereditary defects. It also
contains an Idiotism, to exclude Archeus, the Ruler of Nature has already
forsaken the Rains of the same, and mankind shall shortly go to ruin. Also
that saying of Paracelsus is absurd, that not so much as the Spirit of Wine
does want its own Tartar: For although it should be circulated for the space of
an Age, yet it shall never in very deed separate any Tartar.

For Paracelsus, who never saw or found that Tartar of the Spirit of Wine,
will therefore be credited in his own good belief, no otherwise than as
elsewhere, where he thinks, that is taken from created Bodies; but what then
had he made himself besides ridiculous? does he not the same thing now? while
he tieth up every Body, as well that which is coagulated, as that ever
congulable, under Tartar, to find out the cause of a Disease? For what new
thing does he bring which before was not known, besides the name of Tartar?
Has not Galen known, that the material cause of Diseases is coagulated, or
coagulable? Therefore by the name of Tartar, he has at least dazzled the eyes;
Seeing coagulable Bodies do not assume a hardness elsewhere than from the
appointment of their own seed; but not after the manner wherein wine and Lee
do strain themselves together in acting. First of all, these things do resist
the holy Scriptures, and his very own position, which teach, that Diseases have
come into man from sin, and the position, that Tartar was sprinkled on the
Virgin Nature: And by consequence, that before transgression, Bodies had their
Creams in them, and not from Tartar: For he had found in the History of Nature,
if not an Idiot, that no Liquor does undergo a coagulation by virtue of
Tartar, but from the intention of the Creator shining forth in the seeds: And
therefore whatsoever is condensed, is a new Generation; but not the ripening of
a fore-existing Tartar: For else there had been Tartar not only in meats
before sin; but whole nature had been nothing but a Disease, and the cause of
death a punishment before an offense, and death had arisen from the Creator.

For Paracelsus elsewhere thoroughly weighing, that favors do remain in the
thing transchanged, Tartar, and that in this respect, the undunged fields of
Bohemia do yield less tartarous fruits than those which were fattened with a
stony, or earthy juice or food, or at length with the dung of living Creatures,
wherein indeed abroad in the Air in a long race of years this earthy Sumen or
fattening juice does voluntarily melt: Because this Sumen-soil should produce a
Tartar in Herbs, more wild and Rockie than dung so often re^cocted and refined
into the matter of Salts: In which respect, some filths do wash out of Towels
like Soap.

And Paracelsus has grown to that insolency with his Tartar, that as often as
any thing did gnaw the Bladder, or bring on the Strangury or pissing by drops,
he presently names that Paracelsus: That is, by literally, and not
metaphorically understanding them, which sense or meaning, does always banish
it self from the History of natural things: Neither do I suffer his Tartarers:
but according to the same Paracelsus I will say, we must believe no man [in
that] which he cannot prove by the fire: And therefore I may not consent that
Lime is burnt in us, as neither that Tartar is bred in us, because Tartar is
not to be acknowledged but in Winy Liquors: but that the matter of Tartar does
remain from Generation to Generation, through the Shops of the digestions, I
reject it as a Fable.

CHAP. XXXII. Nourishments are guiltless or innocent of Tartar.
1. Physicians at this day do by little and little accustom themselves to the
Doctrine of Tartar. 2. An Argument against Tartar. 3. The Tartar of a Disease
should not be a Creature. 4. The Thistles and Thorns not to signify Tartar. 5.
Two womb Sisters in nature. 6. By what means the transmutations of solid things
may be. 7. An unbelieving invention. 8. An impossibility, some impertinences.
9. The unconstancy of Paracelsus. 10. A frivolous thing. 11. Absurd
Consequences upon the Position of Tartar. 12. The Archeus prepares matter for
himself, while he does not find the same. 13. The Error of Paracelsus about
the Idea of the Microcosme in Bread, about Anatomies declared in meats, and
Medicines. 14. Other absurdities. 15. Some notable things against the Tartar of
meat. 16. Manly Age is less subject to Worms. 17. A stone growing to a Tooth,
has deceived Paracelsus. 18. Hence another fiction has sprung. 19. The
aforesaid assertion, and some absurdities are discovered. 20. Some absurdities
concerning the Stone of a Tooth. 21. A frivolous thing of Paracelsus. 22. What
a dental or Tooth-stone is. 23. Its Birth and manner of making. 24. The Family
Government of the Teeth. 25. Teeth have their Age. 26. Why Cold is an enemy to
a Tooth. 27. An Error about the hardness of Stones in us. 28. Why the Stone of
the Reins does at length arise pale. 29. The unconstancy of Paracelsus. 30. The
neglect of the same man. 31. An instance brought on a Maxim.

THE more refined Physicians do so by degrees go back from the Humorists the
Schools, that with Paracelsus, they now ascribe almost all Diseases unto the
one thing,

After what manner soever therefore Tartar be taken, it was not created by God;
And therefore it is not any wise created.

Indeed the seeds of Thistles and Thorns were promised to the first Husbandmen,
not that thenceforth through the curse, a new Creature in all nourishments
should be transchanged or Paracelsus ought to have known that there are in
nature two Sisters of the same womb or Mother, among tangible things; To wit;
resolving; and coagulating; which do mutually receive each other by course.

For a Liquor waxes solid, and solid things do likewise melt: Because that
successive change is a Law written in the Stamp of Bodies.

For truly a solid Body is never transchanged into another Body, but it is
first reduced by Paracelsus devises to arise from thence; Seeing God is not an
excepter of persons; but a just and severe revenger for every one their deserts.

Lastly, very many things do hinder me to believe, that any Tartar does
traitorously enter into us, and that although it be rightly subdued and
transchanged by our digestion, yet that Adam had not sinned, yet Wine had not
therefore been without Tartar, Milk without Cheese, Rivers without Stones, and
Meats without excrements. Surely, the emunctories of dungs were before sin,
neither appointed, that only after the fall they should serve for their uses.
Surely the Tartar of Wine it self, has deluded this first inventer of Tartars,
being ignorant, that that Tartar had proceeded from its Creation, as a
profitable and good Creature, having proper ends according to the intention of
God; By how much the more, that the inventer of the Tartar of a Disease does
confess Tartar to be more excellent than Wine; but excrements are not more
excellent than the Bodies whose superfluities they are: At leastwise, it is not
reasonable, that a Being should possess a great virtue, which it had drowned in
Nature, from the curse of sin: But if a Body in as much as it is coagulable, is
Tartar; now the whole Universe shall not be free from this guilt, but it is the
Son of cursing, and not of Creation. In the next place, Tartar of Wine is
resolved by the boiling of water, and the water being evaporated, it again
grows together into a Powder, which is now called a Cream: But it being once
subdued by our digestion, it is no more afterward coagulated into a Powder:
For even as there is need of boiling water to dissolve; so there is need of the
digestive faculty to transchange.

Therefore he should be a Physician of wicked Counsel, who should give Tartar
to drink, if it might again be coagulated within, and should traitorously
adhere to the Vessels: For Paracelsus: But besides, the Tartar of Wine is not
any more coagulated into its ancient state, but it lays aside all hope of
hardening, so that it cleanses the stomach of muckinesses or filths: therefore
much less could the Tartars of meats do that.

Furthermore, if any Tartar having entered out of the Earth, into meats, should
again retake the drawn Counsels of a Cream in us, surely that Tartar first
undergoing in Herbs and

Wherefore, if Tartar has lost its own essence, and departed into a strange
one, it could not have retained its own, and much less, rather have passed in
us from a privation unto a the powers of sublunary things, which should suffer
nothing at all by so many transmutations succeeding each other, unless being
taken by us alone: But this is absurd, to endow any thing with the excrements
of perpetuity, which should not be familiar to their pure Being: yea, either a
field that is dunged (Rape roots springing a fourth time therein) should bring
forth fruits laden with no Tartar at all; or it is absurd, that at the third or
fourth turn, Tartar should even manifest it self, before it be hidden.
Moreover, if every growing or increasing thing should have a proper and
unseparable Tartar in it, that in us only, but not in the Milk and Blood of
bruit Beasts, Tartar by an appointment should be made; it should needs be, that
Tartar began from the beginning of the Creation, and not from the reproof of
sin: But if Tartar should not be in other Creatures, but only in us, now its
original should be supernatural, and no Disease should be natural; but every
Disease should arise from a Miracle; and our digestion should be viler, and
life shorter than that of the vilest little Beast, whereof to wit, there is a
digestion unto a true transmutation, and in respect of them, all Tartars of
meats do remain miraculously changed in its first matter: This I say,
Philosophy destroys, which teaches, that a transmutation is never made
without the death and decease of the former Being, and the destruction of the
term, from whence, to wit, least one only thing should consist to be in two
terms or bounds at once: For that the juice of an Herb may be made venal blood,
the essence of the arterial blood of the Herb must needs first perish, with the
properties of its own Archeus, and for this cause also all Tartar to perish in
every transmutation of things. What if Stones in Cherries, Peachies, Medlers,
Pears, etc. be the created Tartars of those fruits, surely they ought rather
to have been brought on the Stage of Tartars, and into the causes of diseases,
than the very Tartar of Wine it self, which is resolved in boiling water: Also
the Medicinal Schools should be wicked and pernicious, who do give the shells
of those Fruits to drink to their sick folks in manner of a Powder, in as much
as whatsoever should melt through our digestions, should contain Tartar, and
therefore should necessarily increase our Stones. And moreover, Tartar being
granted for the cause of Diseases, of necessity a Kernel had before sin, been
in a Cherry, without a shell, and so every created thing after sin, had been
forthwith changed, even unto the Sciences and Idea's of Seeds, and had put off
its former disposition and figure, and should presently increase from the
curse, and not from the virtue of the blessing, Increase and multiply.
Therefore are the shells of those Fruits vainly adorned with so great a grace,
are sealed by providence, and do keep every where a specifical sameliness, if
they are the offsprings and Relics of excrements or Tartars, if they are not
the appointed works of Seeds; but the accidental structures of Tartar. So also
through the stalk of a Cherry (surely a small thread) a Liquor should pass, the
future Tartar of so great a hardening, which had never grown together in the
stalk or body of its Cherry, but only about the Kernel: And moreover, the
appointment of Nature is rather and more prime about the skin, and shell of the
Cherry, than about its Winy juice: And so nature should intend an excrement,
before the thing it self: But in us, only by the co-touching of the teeth,
Tartar should straightway wax hard: Also Tartar should exceed in a notable
knowledge, because it being taken, does not yet wander through the Plant, nor
also while it being chewed by a bruit Beast, is it wasted or grinded; but being
in the possession of man alone, should be formed into Tartar, but elsewhere it
will not, or knows not how to be coagulated: Truly if in Fruits, Tartar does
not follow its own appointments; but first, only in man; I can scarce believe,
that this Command was enjoined it by God, while it enters into us in manner of
meat: But rather, if any thing of meats does degenerate within, from the
banishment of that which was accustomed in nature, let that be our vice, not
the vice of things great with child of Tartar: But if Tartar should lay hid in
things, the error should be in the Archeus, from the ignorance of the Laws of
his own nature.

Let that be an absurdity, to wit, to deny that through digestion, the thing
digested and transchanged from the former visage and inclination of its seed,
can be changed into the nature Archeus, who has fully known the office of his
own life, and has obtained means for the perfecting those things which are to
be done by himself in the matter subjected to him: For not any thing is
separated from the seeds, for a root, stalk, leaf, flesh, bone, or brain: The
diversity of members is not drawn from the truth of a simple liquor, for the
Archeus wants not a little, and unperceivable diversity thereof in seeds, on
whose power every interchangeable course does depend, and of which
fore-existing disposition, indeed the Archeus himself is the principal and one
only workman, to wit, from the same Vulcan the diversities of things do issue
forth, no less than the properties of diversities; for else the Archeus should
not be a transchanger, but only a ripener and cook. For was not wood a juice
in its beginning? and so a mere herby liquor waxed hard by a seminal virtue,
but not by a fore-existing hardness in the matter.

That also of Paracelsus is absurd, that although material dispositions, the
causes of heterogeneal members, do not actually exist, at least wise there is a
spiritual humane Idea in the Paracelsus did not show always an humane Idea, but
now and then he offered a swiny one; unless a spiritual separater were
present, who might remove the other Idea's as often as he will, from the humane
one, to wit, who makes himself appear visible in an humane Idea to whom he
will. Away for shame, with serious trifles in healing.

Furthermore, a Bean being set or sowed, the bean presently comes forth to
light, neither has it lost its heterogeneal parts to be propagated into a
root, stalk, branch, and leaves: But a thing separated being granted, which
should be made in the seeds of things, according to the varieties of parts to
be constituted; therefore how much more curiously has the Archeus watched over
Tartars to be separated from the meat or food? Nevertheless, if any Tartar be
granted in the food, surely that is never sent into the veins; but when it
shall be converted Tartar: And therefore coagulation being taken away, it is no
more a Tartarous matter, otherwise the whole Universe should be nothing but
Tartar.

For a certain young man loosing with us from Cales, sailed eighteen whole
days, even unto Bilbo, and he did eat daily, not less than as much as he had
eaten in six days on land; but he went once aside on the ninth day, and again
on the eighteenth day to unload his belly, but his excrement scarce exceeded
the bigness of two eggs: Whence I infer, that so great an heap of foods was
changed and consumed into juice, straightway to be blown away in nourishing: If
therefore his meats did contain Tartar, and that young man should not expel
this by excrement, he had of necessity been sick; seeing indeed Tartar is not
digested or turned into good arterial blood; but according to the laws of
Tartar, it being snatched into the veins, ought to have been coagulated; yet he
lived in health above four years after: Therefore the Tartarous trifles do fall
to the ground.

Again, a man being made not a little lean by a more durable disease,
recovered; but he could not abstain from much meat, because he was exceeding
hungry; neither yet cast he forth through his bowels the sixtieth part of the
food taken: so that whatsoever he is wont lately to deject by excrements, did
then repair his flesh: For so a more strong stomach does easily coct even the
harder meats without hurt, or remembrance of Tartar, which meats
notwithstanding, the Archeus separates abroad, as a true excrement, being
lately become more sloathful than himself; to wit, he sometimes is luxurious
within, while with threatenings to himself, he corrupts with a superfluous
delight, those things which otherwise are unhurtful unto him, and banisheth
whatsoever less pleases him, although it be full of juice: For whatsoever he
will not overcome, that he is not intent upon, does not attempt, but repelleth
from him, and condemns: But as much as he does not resolve in the shape of a
transparent liquor, but leaves troubled or besmeared with color; all that he
leaves as unprofitable, to run down in have: But that which is fully resolved,
being fit for himself, he chooses, retains, and suits with a conformity,
draws it inwards, and entertains it within his own possession, being then
stripped of the inclination of every cream, and it borrows that inclination from
the Archeus of the members that are to be nourished: But so much as the Archeus
has once despised, it is either a superfluity in it self, or it presently
becomes such, for a repulse; but whatsoever he has once repelled, that he
hopes will never be assumed again afterward. Therefore it is manifest, that if
meats are not changed into good venal blood, that happens through the vice of
digestion, but not for the sake of any Tartar: for a more slow and delicate
digestion does loath all things, as it were with much huckstery, and reserveth
but little to it self from much meat, though full of juice; but it despises
the rest, being affrighted through the abundance, no otherwise than as being
enraged by its own unaptnesse or drowsinesse: For I remember, that a cock being
filled with wheaten bran, expelled the brans whole by excrement, without the
flower of the meal; but that he being by and by pressed with hunger, again ate
up the ejected brans; and in his second dung, that all the bran returned into a
liquid excrement.

Whence I have learned, that if any thing among the excrements does appear
less bruised, or changed, that is not from the vice of Tartar, but from the
error of the digestive faculty: Tartar, but of the transchangeative virtue of
the Archeus.

Therefore finally, we are constrained or cannot admit of any Tartar in meats;
for that has deceived Paracelsus, because he saw^ yellowish stone to grow to
the teeth, which although

Lastly, he thinking that nothing of a meaty Tartar did belong to the bladder,
said, that the stones of the reins and bladder are only the Tartars of drinks,
not of meats: and to be Tartar for to be the Father of any Diseases, which
things surely are here more largely to be explained.

First of all therefore, I will suppose ale or beer of the best and wholsomest
water, (to wit, rainwater, and refined from all suspicion of Tartar) and
heavy, to be made strong, and to be Tartar of drinks. Wherefore if Paracelsus
has not dictated Fables, that Ale or Beer could never supply matter for a
Stone: yea, the Tartar (which he feigneth) in comgrain, should lose its meatie
property of coagulating it self afar off, and should assume the property of the
Tartar of drink, by the only coction of it self: and by consequence, that the
same thing should happen unto bread baked with fire, as also to other meats;
and the aforesaid rule of Paracelsus should be only for raw meats: So that he
which eats only boiled things, should not be apt for a Stone of the tooth: As
if he who drinks pure distilled water, should not be subject to the Stone!
which thing Paracelsus himself denies concerning Frederick the Emperor,
abhorring Tartar: and he will also have drinkers to be subject to Tartarers, by
pure water, and boiled, because water once boiled, easily putrisieth: therefore
putrefaction, in respect whereof Tartars do decay, shall now be made the Mother
of Tartar, which one only thing otherwise, is wont to be the enemy of
coagulated things: As if indeed decoctions, or the broths of fleshes, should
either not be subject to putrefying! or unwholesome, as being boiled! or that
Tartar in waters not boiled, were instead of a Balsam: why therefore does
Paracelsus prescribe preservatives to be chewed with every food, least the
drink wax Tartary, if this has lost its Tartar by boiling? or if water shall
suffer nothing by boiling, why does he say that it is unwholesom; soon
putrifiable, and the cause of a stinking breath? But if Urine be made of Drink,
through a sufficient mixture of meats; how therefore will it make the Stones of
the reins and bladder out of the Tartar of drinks alone, and not likewise out
of a promiscuous meaty Tartar? Does he perhaps intend to say, that none does
piss solid meats? But that is a folly, if it be spoken in earnest: But if he
will have that to be a property to drink, that it makes Tartar so much the
harder, by how much the father it shall be brought down; yet then likewise he
shall badly distinguish the Tartar of drinks against the Tartars of meats,
seeing (if there were any) the Tartar of the meat should be as alike well
immingled, as the Tartars bred in drinks: For what journey or delay should
drink give to Tartar? or what shall this obtain for its hardening by running
down? for truly the Stone is not coagulated by heat, course, or digestion, (as
shall be made manifest in its own place) but from the seminal root of its own
internal coagulation. Therefore it must needs be, that Tartar should less
exactly inhere in meats, than in drink.

First of all, Ale or Beer contradicts this, which although it consist of a
water not Tartarous, yet it begets Stones, and the stone of the teeth, no less
than simple water.

Secondly, waters do contradict, which in falling, do at any obvious thing
presently wax stony, and so much the less, by how much the farther they shall
decline from their Springhead. Wherefore, seeing at the time of digestion,
separations of superfluities do happen, which digestion does want a flowing
water; Surely the drink should under the first narrow examination of digestion,
put off every stone, and that which is most exceeding hard and sincere, and the
Tartar should hang too loosely in meats, which by chewing only as soon as may
be, should fasten it self to the teeth, and should separate it self from the
meats wherein-it had lurked before through so many circles of years, and
metamorphoses of forms, in plants, beasts, milk, etc.

But I pray, what separating faculty is there in the teeth, which through a
naked, mill-like bruising of the meats, should not only draw the Tartar out of
meats in healthy persons, but Radzvil tells, that he has observed a thousand
jaw-bones of dead Carcasses in Egypt, seasoned now for two thousand years with
a mumial balsam: And that he found none whereunto a tooth was wanting, that was
rotten; or lastly, black: For such is the goodness of the Climate, for the
teeth, and their brightness, which surely it punishes another way; because
there is scarce a third man in the same place without bleareydnesse, or a
notable vice of the eyes.

Lastly, if such should be the property of the teeth, that it should separate
such a Tartar from meats; now the teeth of all should be altogether equally
beset with stinking Tartar: And likewise if any co-chained order or row of
teeth, and that detained with the hand, should be led or held by bruised meats,
even the meats with that order should be bruised as it were with a pest, and
the row should be so much cleansed by washing, as one only draught being
profesly taken does rince our teeth for us, yet never any stone should grow to
those teeth, and much less that which should stink like a stone of the teeth,
because it is that which makes the breath to stink. And then to him that has a
Fever, who eats or cheweth nothing for four days space; a muscilage is not
therefore wanting to his teeth, which at length becomes a stone; yea, he has
it more plentifully than one that is well in health. Therefore it is manifest,
after what manner the muscilage becoming a stone first about the roots of the
teeth, where they do appear without the gum, can be the Tartar of, meats: and
then, that mere drink should readily cause the same hardness which he feigneth
to be proper to the Tartar of meats. Next, another who eareth nothing, and that
drinks by a cane through the defect of his mouth, palate, tongue, jaws, etc.
and therefore cheweth nothing, and so touching not any nourishment with his
teeth, yet he daily affixeth a stone to his teeth, no otherwise than he which
eats. Likewise, after every repast, although the mouth and teeth be exactly
cleansed by washing, yet in the morning a new stone and stinking muscilage is
conversant about the teeth, which at least could not have remained of the meat,
and the which, if it should be the Tartar of meats, this should also be as
often diverse, as there are interchangeable courses of meats; which the
Carthusians have, the same, and alike smelling, as the devourers of flesh have.
Likewise they who are fed with simple bread, and apples, have it no otherwise
than those who do eat bread, and likewise cheese; Even those Irish, who live by
Trifoil or three-leaved grass (which they call Ciambrock) instead of bread and
water: with the Norwayes, who are content with raw and dried fish; all do agree
in the same stone, except a few of a more happy disposition.

Therefore it was a frivolovs thing to have founded the invention of Tartar for
diseases, out of the Tartar of meats, by reason of the tooth-stone, which
certainly in the first place does Microcosmical property; because the
Macrocosme shall never in chewing affix a stinking stone to its teeth. If
therefore the stone be not from the Tartar of meats, neither surely shall it
also be from the Tartar of drinks; because seeing it is that which seldom
touches at the teeth, it swiftly flows through, and should sooner wash off the
same Tartar, than apply it. Therefore I will show from whence the tooth-stone
may have its matter, and efficient cause; Because it will afterward as yet be
certainly manifest, that the reasons of Tartar are vain.

Therefore it is an undoubted truth, that the tongue is clothed with a
fimbrious or seamy coat like unto whole silk; and if it shall wet any thing of
the meat, or drink in the mouth,

Understand thou therefore, that this ballast of the tongue does spring, not
only from the meats, but also from the spittle and superfluity of the tongue:
For if the meat that is detained in the hollow of a tooth, the same excrement
whereof is drunk up in the coat of the tongue, has remained there all night,
it breaths forth a far more stinking vapor, than the aforesaid shaved
muscilage of the tongue: So also between the gums and the cheek-bone, how clean
soever thou shall wash thy mouth after supper, every morning a certain white
muscilage is co-heaped, which being wiped off from thence by a towel, and dried
on it, does smell with a proper stink: Therefore by an oblique passing through
the matter, I will give notice, that this muscilage of the tongue is the
special cause of the difficulties arising in the jaws; consequently also,
those that are subject unto these evils, to have freed themselves by a frequent
filing, or scratching, to wit, as after every meal or time of feeding, and in
the morning, they do claw their tongue: For truly the tender and neighbor
parts abhorring this muscilage, when it puttifieth, do wax wroth through a
horrid contagion on themselves; therefore they do kindle a thin inflammation,
by reason of the presence of a guest that is a foreigner unto them. But that
tooth-stone is not the son of the spittle or meats; seeing neither, nor indeed
both of them together, can ever be coagulated into such an hardness, and much
less into a smell so stinking, infecting ten thousand times every day the
whole air of a stinking mouth and breath. I have long since admired with my
self, that a generation or birth, so frequent, strongly smelling, and manifest,
has remained unknown for so many Ages, and by so many wits of men: Therefore,
as being afraid, I sighed; what therefore would the Schools act about more
abstruse or hidden things! I will show what the Mistress of things has taught
me: In the mouth nothing is conversant, besides spittle, meat, and drink: But
the tooth-stone is of none of these, but in its first rise is like a white
snivelliness, which on the morrow becomes of a pale-yellow color: thence at
length it grows to the

For which cause we must note, that the tooth is nourished, not only in its
bottom and root, but also side-wayes from the gums themselves; gums themselves
that are bloody, or

Then lastly also, because the tooth is of a most acute feeling under the gum,
which out of it, it wants: Therefore in so great a liveliness of sense, the
tooth lives, and therefore also is nourished. Therefore the excrement of the
gums, as it was of prepared venal blood, for the nourishing of the tooth; so
also it has received some kind of limitation, or power, of a tooth-like
hardness: Which excrement surely of the teeth, when as it has drunk up the
muckinesse of the meats and drink, it straightway also hastens to harden unto
its appointed hardness.

For that which I have said in my Book of the Disease of the Stone, concerning
the stony seed, and so of petrescency or the manner of making in stones; that
also not incongruously does totally agree to the tooth, for the framing of a
tooth-like Stone: For it once received the Seal of a Cream, and Seed of a Stone
making for the tooth, the which, although it were already made a superfluity,
it as yet retained; not indeed, that it might therefore be Tartar, but from the
determination of the Archeus, whereby it had been already appointed for the
making of a tooth. But a spear-like gum is there a sign of the most perfect
health, or foundnesse, and therefore it scarce creates a tooth-stone: For the
gum co-touching with the tooth, even unto the end of it, does not admit the
tooth to bring forth excrements, but preserves the tooth: Even as a tooth
being bared of gums, does easily ache, does putrify, and affix a Stone: For the
eyes do weep forth a Liquor, which in the morning in the eyelids, looks like
Amber, and the which by the Germans is for this cause by way of similitude,
called [Augstine] or Austine. But the excrement of the ears, like unto a
yellow Ointment, is a great comfort in the pricking of the sinews: therefore it
has not been an unaccustomed thing for the teeth to produce an excrement, and
this a strong smelling Carcass resolved out of stinking blood: For the
muckiness cast on the tongue from the meats, is dried, neither does it wax
stony, unless it shall be admixt with an excrement which does unsensibly break
forth between the tooth and the gum: For as that is the excrement of the tooth,
it had drawn a limitation of hardness from the beginning: And so it being grown
to the tooth, it deceives with the show of a stony crust. I have observed also
a tooth to grow even unto the fortieth year, with a true growth: For that which
is opposed to the tooth pulled out, through the penury of attrition or
grinding, does exceed its own rank, and enters into the opposite rank, even
unto the aforesaid term: therefore a tooth, after it cease to grow, scarce
wants nourishment, or but little (because it is a substance scarce capable of
diflation or blowing away); then therefore the gum is fruitful in more
superfluity, snatcheth somewhat more of nourishment, becomes bloody, and being
swollen, is presently lessened, and becomes as it were rotten: For from hence
is there often toothache, rottenness, hollowness, and putrefying, especially in
those whom a little after due season, they do in youth suspend their growth:
therefore the teeth, as they do live in a peculiar Family-administration, so
also they have their own ages, which I thus remarkably distinguish.

For the tooth which after a man's eighth year does show forth the clearness of
dark or Artificors call Lattime) or of a Snail-shelt, is a young one; It is a
white Color, bright and polished: And then by degrees it waxes pale:
presently afterward it becomes dully white, as it were Ivory; It is the youth
of the Tooth: Then afterward it becomes obscurely pale, as is seen in those
who swoon, and in deceased Virgins; And this is its manly Age: And at length it
waxes palely yellow like a bone, and loses its former brightness; Then does
the old age of a Tooth begin: For so much as a gristle differs from a membrane;
but the Toothache is frequent, while the Gum decreaseth, and the Tooth is of a
bony Color: But last of all, a rotten, hollow, black, wormy and strong
smelling Tooth, is the frail or declining age of that Tooth: therefore cold is
an enemy to the Teeth.

For it hastens their old Age: the greyness of hairs does argue the old Age of
the same, Southern people have brighter Teeth than Northern; because they enjoy
a more bountiful Air for the Teeth: the Teeth of Children before the seventh
year of Age, do easily feel rottenness, because they are driven out of their
ditch by another growing up, are deprived of nourishment, and loaded with a
Tooth-like excrement: therefore the hurting, or anointing of the Teeth is to be
esteeme^ (...) the annoyance of the Gums: to wit, from the plurality, and
bruitishness of (...): No otherwise than as the Brain being hurt, does heap up
very much muck, (...) other part being discommodated, many dregs; so the Teeth
and the nourishing parts of these, if they are hurt, do thrust forth not a
little of a stony, and stinking superfluity: But because that excrement is not
so much the superfluity of meats, as the excrement of man; therefore all
Nations have very equally a stinking Tooth-stone, which does circumvent
Paraceljus, and has increased the suspicion of Tartar in us.

Hence therefore it is manifest, why of the same Urine, the same stone does
first grow together a^ brickle, in the Reins; and afterward in the Bladder is
most exceeding hard: not-indeed, Tartar in the Urine, which by how much the
farther it slides down, by so much it is the harder: that is a childish thing:
But surely every stonyfiable juice has its own determined, and not a foreign
hardness, from the virtue of its own seed: For this juice being oft-times mixed
with a matter not becoming a Stone, waxes greatly hard: Suppose though Rye
meal does not become a Stone; but being at length resolved into dung, it fails
in rottenness or a worm: Notwithstanding, if it be joined to Lime which is
conjoined with its Saud, it affords a stony, and not perishing Mortar: So
likewise the Bladder at the time of the Stone being its guest, weeping out the
muckiness of its own nourishment, does also co-mingle it with the stonifying
juice of its Urine, affords a hard Stone to the Bladder far different from the
Disease of the Stone of the Kidneys.

Wherefore the Reins also being vexed with a Stone of long continuance, do no
longer produce a reddish and sandy Stone; but a whitish and hard one: to wit,
when the Superficies

For Paracelsus does for the most part ascribe the hardness of Bodies unto
feigned Tartars, but elsewhere, all hardness to be from Salt or from one of the
three things: However, both Tartar, as it were a principiating material cause
from a formal effect. So I have sufficiently and over-proved, that neither of
them is true: For it has hitherto been unknown, that all Bodies are materially
of water only. Indeed Paracelsus had seen Metals, and Wood to stonifie, and
to be immediately reduced into a Salt; yet he knew not that the hardness of
things, as also their solidity, compactedness, and weight, is not from the
nature of his thoroughly taught principles (because they are those things which
are demonstrated to be non-beings in the nature of principiating) as neither
from a material virtue elementarily; but only from the appointment of the
Seeds. Therefore I collect two things; one is, that Paracelsus is unconstant to
himself touching the Coagulum or curd of Bodies, and concerning Tartars: But
the other is, that the Maxim of Aristotle falls to the ground; That for which
every thing is such, that thing it self is more such: For although hardness do
proceed from the Seed, and its appointments, the Seeds ought not therefore to
be harder than the things constituted: For the Archeus, which disposes the
bones to their hardness, is not therefore harder than the bones: yea neither
are the means directed to the end, more hard, solid, or compacted than the
things constituted: For Aristotle being readily inclined unto Maxims, brought
over his experiences from artificial things into nature: therefore has he
every where slid in nature, because he being wholly ignorant of nature, does
miserably quarrel.

CHAP. XXXIII. Tartar is not in drink.
1. Some suppositions proved before. 2. That Tartarers are not in things
constituted. 3. Three Monarchies of things, whence a threefold stone. 4. It far
differs from the Tartar of Wine. 5. The Stone in man is made from error, but
not from the intention of Nature. 6. An Argument from the like, is not of
value. 7. Some Arguments taking away Tartar out of drink. 8. An opposite
Argument. 9. The rashness or heedlesness of the Schools. 10. Two Histories. 11.
The boastings of Paracelsus. 12. The swellings in the neck or Kings-Evill, are
not from Tartar. 13. Wine is innocent of humane Tartar. 14. Whether stony or
Rockie waters do contain Tartar. 15. Whence there are Strumaes or swellings in
man's neck, and not in that of Bruits. 16. A Remedy against those swellings. 17.
A Remedy against Scirrus's, and swelling pimples in the face. 18. A
preoccupation or prevention. 19. A distinction by a Maxim.

Whatsoever Arguments do take away Tartar out of Meats, are like premises in
this place: But seeing waters do immediately wax stony, the proposition is to
be Tartar: And then, that the concretion or growing together of every Body is
from the Seed, but not from the Law of Tartar. Thirdly, that the concretion
appointed by the Seed, is from the integrity of nature, and so from the gift of
Creation; but not from Tartar, which according to Paracelsus, is nothing but
the excrement of a thing.

But a natural product is of its Mother matter, but not of a stepmother; and
moreover of a seminal or efficient beginning, in which, all the figures,
Idea's, and knowledges of things to Tartat into Diseases, that a stone is the
fruit of water, if the condition of Tartar be not in a stone? Or that Tartar is
the fruit of Wine, if there be no such thing in other things? For what does it
prejudice nature, if the fantasy deluding a Stone external, or the Stone
internal with a name, shall call it Tartar? And he weakly enough, and without
proof affirms, that Stones, and every solid Body do mutually agree with
Tartar of Wine in every property? For truly that his own assertion is free,
without truth and probability: For the Stone in us is generated by another
seed, mean, and progress, than Tartar out of Wine, or a Stone out of water,
are: To wit, there are three Monarchies of Bodies in the Universe; the Animal,
Vegetable, and Medlers, Peachies, etc. and both these again from the Stone of
Crabs, Bezoar, Snall-shels, Fish-stones, the Stone of Man, etc.

Again, those three Stones do also far differ from the Tartar of Wine, which is
not to be reckoned among Stones, seeing it is the concreted Liquor of a Salt:
For a Mineral is either Petra or a Rock: But a Vegetable Stone, seeing it is
burnable, as the Jeat or Agath, otherwise also, Mineral Sulphurous Stones, it
is rather a knotty Wood, than a Rockie Stone: But an Animal Stone is rather a
stony bone (because it is partly burnt) than a Rockie Stone. Also for
distinction of the stone of man from other stones, that is by Paracelsus called
Duelech: Because rockie stones, as well the mineral as vegetable ones, are
fruits, natural, necessary, and of the first intention in creating: But Duelech
is only a Disease, and like to a monster: But in other enli^ened Creatures,
the stone has obtained a profitable appointment.

Whence it is made manifest, that although waters do beget a Rockie stone; yet
that they do not therefore follow the essence, seed, and manner of generation
out of the Tartar of Duelech after sin, does from a diseasie excrement, but not
from the intention of nature, nor from a Rockie or tartarous matter, but by
accident, to wit, through the error of the faculty, breed a diseasie seed,
through the necessity of a connexed agent: wherefore I do not admit of Tartar
rather in drink than in meat; but if it be potentially in Wine, that comes to
pass by the necessity of a connexed agent, and by accident; neither can it
have place of exercising forces, or actuating in us, to wit, that by a power, a
potential Tartar may be actuated in us; and therefore I do not admit of a
tartarous generation in drink, appointed by God for our destruction: for what
if bones are found in the flesh, and the seeds of a Duelech in us. Moreover, if
there be any evil now, or that may come to pass among the digestions, surely
that is not from the Creation, appointment, property, efficient of matter, and
the final intention of the Creator; but does issue wholly from our error, and
the corruption of nature: Indeed such things do happen through a received
importunity of foreign seeds, a defectuous transmutation of nourishable
things, or a not sufficient severe expulsion of hurtful things. Tartar
fore-existing, and being solved in the drink, if it were so, verily it should
by its appointment presently wax corrupt in us, before digestions,
putrefactions, and resolutions, neither should it expect the counsels of
coagulating into the last passage of the Urine: And the same should rather
stonifie equally in all: Notwithstanding, seeing the stone does not grow up in
the drink, but only in the excrements, by the admission of the Salt of the
Urine, and the assistance of other co-workers (even as abundantly in my Book of
the Disease of the stone) it is presumed, that Duelech does not consist of a
fore-existing Tartar of the drink; which is made plain by a Handicraft
resolving thereof in the fire: For Duelech being distilled, the Glasse-vessels
also being shut, does produce a stinking Oil, lastly, the Spirit, and Chrystals
of the salt of the Urine, being such kind of things as are allured out of man's
Urine by distilling: For it is certain, that the stomach, bowels, veins, Liver,
and kidneys, do not generate Duelech or the stone in man, of their own nature,
much less do they continue the same, and as yet much less of a prepared and
fore-existing Tartar in drinks: For else all likewise which do generate man's
Urine, and in any man without exception, no otherwise than as little stones do
grow in Crabs without exception, should procreate Duelech: But Duelech does wax
stony from a seed, being at length generated in the Urine by a transmutation of
a matter: That seed is so prevalent, that although one subject to the stone,
drink nothing but distilled water, he should not therefore cease to generate
Duelech. But they say, red Wines do generate very much sand in those subject to
the stone, therefore they do contain a sandy Tartar: therefore not only in
those subject to the stone, but in all altogether,

The ignorance of the Schools has arisen from hence, that they know not, or do
not thoroughly weigh, that many things are made by transmutation, which were no
way materially within: Duelech is formed of things far estranged from
coagulation: for neither does it follow; some Wines do contain more of the
spirit of Urine, or of a volatile Earth; therefore they contain the stone
Tartar, or therefore the Tartar of Wine does materially generate the stone of
man by its separation of it self. Ginger brings forth much sweat, therefore
Ginger contains very much sweat materially: For the Schools do give their
judgment after a rustical manner concerning the things of Nature, not knowing,
that many things are brought to pass by the endeavor of the Efficient of
transmutation, I say, by the seed of the thing coagulating, and at the time of
the Operater's transchanging: which works are never due to matter, nor to their
heats, and feigned combats of the Elements.

For I have seen two that were Twins, educated also by the same Nurse, and
meats, the elder whereof was subject to the stone, the younger not so: for the
milk did contain no more of Tar^^r Lithotomy or cutting for the stone, once at
seven years, and then again at ten, and thirdly, two years after; and the last
time, he gave up the Ghost under the knife: these two Histories at least,
happened not from the coming of a foreign Tartar.

Seeing therefore there is not matter, existence, truth, knowledge, necessity,
or consequence Paracelsus has to braggingly boasted, that he first found out
every cause of Diseases, that he was the chief Monarch of Secrets and Medicine,
and that by this his own invention, he has accused others of ignorance: But
moreover also, that he did discern by the Tartars of Countries, to what
Diseases the Inhabitants were subject: For if there never were Tartar either by
creation, or from the curse, which may be the original of Diseases; surely its
a frivolous thing, that he has searched into the same by distilling, and has
found that which never was. Indeed he had seen great stones to be generated in
the bottom of waters: Also that in Stiria, Subaudia, Valesia, horrible Strumaes
or swellings in the neck, did with a miserable spectacle, deform the shape of
man: And he being deceived, hence he concluded, that from the Tartar of waters,
there were stones, Strumaes, and consequently every stopping thing: For he was
badly ignorant, and that for the destruction of his followers, that all things
do arise from seminal Agents, and that it is granted to them to bring over the
matters subjected unto them, according to the appointments and ends of the
seeds: For indeed although some drink be more hurtful to those that have the
stone; yet that is neither Tartar, nor does it from hence contain it, neither
is any thing of the form of Tartar co-thickned into Duelech (as I have taught
in its place) but it is the work of that which operates, whatsoever is in the
waters, by an actual seed, unto a Rockie Stone or Bole.

But if there be any thing in Wine, it shall be as to the Lee, by it self, but
as to Tartar by accident; but not as to Duelech: For thou shall ask in vain,
whether waters in distilling, Tartar is never made, and much less Duelech:
neither shall also the plurality of Lees or dregs accuse Tartar: as neither the
stone: Because Duelech is of another Family than Tartar: Hence, by how much the
richer vvines are, in Tartar, they ought to be so much the more healthful
against Duelech, if Tartar, otherwise, be given to drink for the cleansing of
filths.

I agree indeed, that Rockie waters are of a wild disposition, of a mineral
condition, and the causers of undigestions, as they do contain strange or
foreign things: But they do not Duelech in them, altbough they do occasionally
destroy digestion, do imprint a rockie middle life: whence the enfeebled
vegetative faculty of man puts on that wild inclination: But that makes nothing
for the Author of Tartars: For truly, it is a far different thing to be made
stony occasionally, from a stonifying virtue of the middle life of things,
imprintingly and sealingly introduced into the Archeus: and to be made to have
the stone from Tartar melted and resolved in waters, which at length in the
period of days, may reassume its former coagulation in the drinker:

For this latter to be in Nature, I deny: but the former I affirm to be among
ordinary effects. But as concerning Strumaes or Kings-Evil-swellings in the
Neck, and swelling pimples Paracelsus, from the use of waters of an evil juice
or disposition: But I could wish according to the man's own Doctrine, that he
may show by the fire those evil juyces in waters, whose property it is to be
coagulated only in our last digestion, nor elsewhere than about the neck or
throatbone: But I know that he never found in waters such a Tartar: Therefore
he may be condemned by his own Law, wherein he gives a caution, that none is to
be believed, but so far as he is able to demonstrate that thing by the fire. I
confess indeed that there is in the water a middle life, whose property it is
to stir up the Archeus, and to infect it in the exchanging of good nourishment
(but not of a foreign Tartar existing in it materially) into a Rockie
hardness: But unto Strumaes a matter is required, which by the property of its
own Archeus, may be bred to stop up our jaws, and as it were to strangle us,
and that without the taste of astriction, or an earthly sharpness or harshness
(for otherwise this taste sticking fast in the bosom of the matter, being
ripened by the first digestion, dies) and which being transchanged into
nourishment, and retaining the ancient virtues of the middle life, performs its
power more about the throat, than elsewhere: which power being left to it by an
heredicary right, in nourishments, and from hence in the venal blood, does
convert the nearest nourishment of solid Bodies into a Rockie excrement, which
goes unto the throat by a strangling faculty of the directer. And I narrowly
examining that thing in Germany, have found Mushromes to be strong in the
aforesaid poison of strangling; and that those do often grow out of the Root of
a Fountain the Fir Tree, and Pine-trees, in steep Rocks, toward the North,
where black Agarick, an Heir of the same crime, is often in the Trunk or Stem.
I have learned therefore, that the whole Leffas or Planty juice of the Earth is
there defiled with a Mushromy disposition: Therefore I have believed that hard
swellings of the Neck are bred by the use of Herbs and waters, which have drunk
in this sort of Leffas.

Furthermore, that an Archeal power of the middle life in things, does beget
Strumaes, but not a reviving ill juycy Tartar of the water, the thing it self
does speak: For otherwise, a Struma should bewray it self no less in the
bottom of the Belly and Liver, nor more slowly, than in the throat.

For River or ill juicy waters do not respect the throat, nor should promise so
great hardness: Strumaes or hard swellings of the Neck to have vanished away in
one only month, and the strangling suddenly brought on people by a poisonous
Mushrome, to be cured: which Remedy is on this wise. Take of Sea-Sponge burnt
up into a Coal, 3 ounces; of the bone of the Fish Sepia burnt, long Pepper.
Ginger, Pellitory of Spain, Gauls, Sal gemmae, calcined Egg-shels, of each 1
ounce, mix them with the stilled water of the aforesaid Spongei, and let it be
dried up by degrees. Take of this Powder half a dram, with half an ounce of
Sugar, the Moon decreasing, that it being melted by degrees, may be swallowed:
Or make a Lincture or Lohoch. It shall also disperse Botium or the swelling
pimp^^ in the face. Others for want of the Sponge, did take the hairy
excrescency growing on wild Rose-Trees, very like to the outward Rhine of the
Chestnut, rough, and briery or hairy: the powder of which alone, they did use
succesfully. Likewise I have used an unction in Strumaes, and Schirrus's; Of
Oil of Bay (not adulterated by Hog's Grease) 8 ounces, of Olibanum, Mastich, Gum
Arabic, Rosin of the Fir Tree, of each 3 ounces; distill them, then distill them
again with Potashes. If therefore the hard swelling of the Neck, or a hard
Scirrhus elsewhere, should grow together from a foreign Tartar, it should
rather wax hard by hot Remedies, neither should it be so easily dissolved:
Therefore the Struma is a defect of the Archeus the transchanger, and not
through the coagulation of Tartar: even as concerning Duelech or the stone in
man, I have more clearly and abundantly demonstrated: For the Archeus
transchangeth every mass subjected unto him, unless being overcome by a more
powerful middle life, he shall give place: Therefore the Strama is of good
venal blood, on which, a strangling power of the middle life is felt. And
Botium or the swelling pimple of the face, a remedy being taken, perishes,
which is not for dissolving a Rockie matter, if it were of Tartar brought over
thither: otherwise, it is altogether impossible that Tartar (if there should be
any) should conceive a breathing hole of our life, be made lively, be co-sitted
to the members, and be admitted inwards unto the last digestion, and conceive a
ferment of the Arterial blood, but to be discussed or blown away by an
unsensible transpiration; as also Schirrhus's bred of vital venal blood, the
aforesaid Remedy being administered.

But besides, the contention is not about the Asses shadow: for truly it is not
all one to have denied Tartar to be materially in meats and drinks, and
likewise to remain throughout Archeus: For as there is one order of generation;
so also is there every where another of fore-caution, and healing: Therefore
there is no foundation, truth, appearance, or necessity of tartarizing: For
which way does it conduce, to devise Tartar to be the stubborn Prince of
coagulations, which owes his Birth to a fiction? For truly the dispositions,
coagulations, and resolutions of things do depend on their own Seeds. Duelech
is made no less of the purest meats and drinks, than of those less exact, if
the middle life do badly season the Archeus. And then, which way is it
convenient, to render meats and drinks which the Lord has judged good,
infamous through a tartatous treachery? I suppose indeed, that it was invented
by Tartar Hell, or the Infernal, when Satan did now conjecture, that there
would speedily be a banishment of Humors out of the Schools of Medicine.

And indeed, seeing every thing is dissolved by the bursting of the bonds which
tie the same, it helps to have admonished, that coagulated things are not
made in us by drying up Tartar privily existing in us: surely much less from a
stony and limy condition of the Microcosme: For that Chalk after the attained
thickness of the Sunovie or degenerated spermatick Muscilage, is afterward by
degrees dried up: Even as elsewhere concerning the Gout. After another manner,
even as any Schirrhous thing, and likewise a bole, clay, muckinesse, sand, and
Duelech, are in their beginning coagulated and resolved by seminal beginnings,
and are far otherwise solved and coagulated, than if a stubborn and
unchangeable Tartar of any kind of things, had of its own free accord yielded a
foreign curd in us. It is a Sophistication, to have accused not the cause, for
a cause, or to have neglected the cause, as not the cause, which Sophistry, if
it be wont any where to bring on great straights: surely in healing, as great
as may be, full of dangers of life, and damnation, as also of damages: For one
does well digest, and difficulty separate, but another does successfully
expel, and troublesomely digest. Lastly, a third does briefly digest and cause
meking; but does vitiously transchange for himself under the command of a
foreign seed. Therefore it is one thing to chastize a foreign impression of
the middle life (which consists in the concretion or growing together of the
thing digested) and it is another thing to expel or separate that which else
being retained, would hurt. And that is contained by dissolving and expelling.

Finally, if there should be any Tartar in things taken into the body, ending
at length into a stubborn coagulation, which it had treacheroufly brought
inward with it, it should every where even contain a desperation of healing:
And in this respect a medicine of destruction in the earth had been framed in
nature from the beginning by the Lord of things.

Last of all, Tartar is not in meats, as neither in meaty drinks; but in the
water there is indeed a seed of small stones, but that Stone is no more Tartar,
than a rocky stone is bread: wherefore also from a stonifying Seed, the
presence, or power of Tartar can in no wise be concluded.

Likewise, although in superfluities or degenerated venal blood, there be a
power unto a Duelech or Schirrhus, yet not unto Tartar; and much less that
there is Tartar naturally as

CHAP. XLIV. An erring watchman, or a wandering keeper.
1. The Schools nod or doubt concerning the four humors. 2. The Authors
repentance. 3. A Position, with proofs. 4. What muck or snivel is, and in what
sheath it is generated. 5. Who the keeper in the terms proposed may be. 6. The
unexcusable necessities of the keeper, hitherto unknown. 7. It is proved, that
snivel is not the excrement of the Brain. 8. The brain is from thence concluded
to be most miserable. 9. The vanity of Diseases dedicated to a Catarrhe or
Rheum. 10. Snivel is not made of venal blood. 11. An argument from a like
suitable thing. 12. From the Pose, or distillation of the head. 13. From the
likeness of the other Bowels. 14. From the supposed doctrine of the Schools.
15. From the identity or samelinesse of the Archeus. 16. From Anatomy. 17. From
an absurdity. 18. From the necessity of stoppage. 19. From the constitution of
the brain. 20. From its scope or aim. 21. From experience. 22. The rashness
or heedlessnesse of the Schools in a matter of so great moment, and so plain,
is taken notice of. 23. That the excrement of the Ears is brought forth by a
vapor. 24. A necessity of watchmen or keepers. 25. It is proved by the Pose.
26. By Hoarsnesse. 27. By Coughs. 28. The Keeper is an unheard of power. 29.
The Schools thought both powers to be a certain distemper, even in healthy
persons. 30. A diversity from other powers is proved. 31. The testimonies of
the keepers. 32. A stuffing in the head, or descending Rheum is never healthy.
33. The Cough is examined. 34. A wandering keeper. 35. A dry Cough. 36. The
difficulty of curing, from whence it is. 37. The Remedies are taken notice of.
38. The rashness of the Schools. 39. Remedies out of Sulphur. 40. A twofold
Asthma or difficulty of breathing. 41. The difficulties of healing. 42. The use
of the Keeper. 43. The erring Watchman of the windpipe is the more destructive
one. 44. Snivel differs from a spitting by reaching. 45. That the Keeper
differs from the other Faculties in the brain. 46. That the Diaphragma or
Midriff is pory.

THe Schools pointing with the finger at the muck or snivel from the Brain, and
the spittle Behold, Phlegm is one of the four constitutive humors of us. And
afterward they always subscribed to themselves. That boldness in wantonizing
increased, being confirmed by the prescriptions of so many ages, and subscribed
authorities of Schools: As if the brain had consumed the three other supposed
and feigned humors for the nourishment of it self, Phlegm only being
excluded, although most like to it self, and otherwise, according to the mind
of Galen, most fit to be totally transchanged into venal blood. Also sometimes
the Doctrines of the four Humors being forgotten, they have sent away the same
muck or snivel, no longer as a Phlegm, or a snivelly Phlegm, but as a
superfluity of the brain, being as it were a banished enemy, a superfluity
resulting from digestion. It has deservedly shamed them of that their own
Doctrine, because they have acknowledged snivel to be an excrement of the last
digestion, but not any longer a humor produced in the Liver, as it were one
part of four of venal blood: For an excrement resists a vital humor.
Therefore they do oftentimes nod, and stagger, and doubt again, while they do
promiscuously point out a snivelly man, (to wit, from that dung and diseasie
affect) to be Phlegmatic, and afterward they thereby measure and divine of
his strength, wit, manners, and fortunes. In the mean time, the Beginnings of
the Schools are unfortunate, which from an excrement known to themselves, do
denominate the essence, existence, properties of phlegm, of Elements, and the
constitutive humors of us: For the phlegm which about the beginning of a pose,
does rain down out of the Nostrils watery (as they say) and thin, after some
days is made thicker, and yellow, because it is thickened by a daily cocture of
heat: As if perhaps for full forty years, without the corruption of it self,
the Scull being empty, it had exspected a thickning as its chiefest good? nor
otherwise being more thin, should it find chinks enough for utterance! These
dreams do not deserve reproof by Argument, unless by a serious credulity, they
had translated the method of healing into the destruction of mortals.

I confess indeed, that at the time of my young beginnings, I believed, that
snivel, if it arose

Hence I lay it down for a position; that the snivel of the nostrils is more
watery, and plentiful, and therefore there is a continual cleansing of the same
in winter, but not in Summer: etc. which is false: For it should denote a
superiority of the encompassing Air over the Spirit, the Fountain and Ruler of
all Functions: And then the snivel ought to be made, and to descend from all
the intimate, connexed, and least particles of the brain, and not only from
those which may immediately be shaken by the entering Air.

Whence it is manifest, that snivel is only an excrement of the lower parts of
the brain, degenerated from the totality or wholeness of its nourishment,
before it could nourish: But Latex, and also of nourishment) is converted for a
good and ordinary end: which conversion of that matter, seeing it is natural,
is extended as it were a Coat of Mail on the part stricken by cold.

And seeing the matter is vitiated through the injury of the Air, surely it
does not adhere, but does distill a continual drop of water: Therefore I call
this effective power of snivel, the excrements of the Paunch, and Bladder, are
indeed the superfluities of the whole Body, and of the parts wherein they are
made and do grow, they being superfluous and unprofitable, from within
themselves: But sweat, and an unsensible eflux, are superfluities now made in
the last digestion, and expelled after the utmost discharging of their ends.

But snivel is of a neither kind: For it is made by the Keeper only, provoked
indeed; but he is that, which that he may defend and oversmear the part, does
thus change the more

Because, if an excrement be a superfluous part of digestion: should an old man
consume more Arterial blood in his brain (because he cleanses out more
excrement) than while he

For if any of these things be true, I suppose the brain to be the most
miserable Cottage of the whole Body: to wit, to want a greater nourishment, the
troubles and labors of the brain

I as yet pass by the trifles of Catarrhes or Rheums, raining down with so
large and continued Epimenides dream or sleep, being as it were fed with Lotus
or a feigned tree; so that they may treasure up a little advantage from their
credited Catarrhe: for neither is ordinary Snivel from venal blood.

And that thing the Schools might have easily taken notice of, if they had not
been accustomed Latex, and will describe in a particular Tract) and adopt it
into their own borders, to wit, no more unprosperously than the Kidneys do
separate the Urine from the venal blood, and draw it unto themselves.

For I do here thrust in the Urine, because it is not an excrement of the
Reins, as if it

Therefore, in the pose, as long as the evil does mostly rage, and the North
wind is more fierce; by so much also is the Snivel the more watery, yet under
an equal digestion of the Brain, and the health of the senses, as well internal
as external. Therefore the thicker, tougher, more sparing, and more yellow
snivel is praised about the end of digestion (as they say.) Then next, I
consider, that from our small brain, so great a quantity of excrement cannot
daily be severed, by reason of the unaptnesse of nourishable venal blood:

Especially, because the Liver does bring forth no excrement from it self, or
from its own nourishment; Yet is it nourished, and the like fortune of
digestions and equal weight of excrements

At length, I remember that the nourishment of the solid parts are made, with
the transmutation of the whole venal blood into nourishment, without a
separation of the pure from Archeus prescribes, there shall be no muck of the
Brain, neither shall it yield any other thing in the place of an excrement,
than that which it wholly exhaleth by transpiration, after the manner of other
members.

Again, an excrement is a Relative unto digestion, which is made in the thing
nourished, because it supposes the same: But nevertheless, Snivel is not an
excrement of the aforesaid Archeus should cease to be in the digestions of the
similar parts.

Moreover, if Snivel should be an excrement of the brain, it should be
collected from on every side from the whole, and should betake it self unto a
like Cell, but not unto the Basin:

Likewise also, the thorny marrow should in like manner have its own muck, and
while it should endeavor to evacuate it, that ought to be done, either from
above by the

In the next place, Snivel, after what manner soever it be taken, and stirred
by a lukewarmth, Tophus or sandy stone: And so an excrement of the solid brain,
or from the whole similar part thereof, is unprofitable, yea unpossible. For it
wholly resists the thickness of the brain, the which, seeing it is not open

Surely, there does not any aim appear, why the brain does prepare snivel as
the superfluous

For it happens to a man well in health, and sleeping, that he does not eject
any thing of

Therefore the testimonies of the Schools in the behalf of phlegm do fall to
the ground;

But that bitter excrement which the Ears do sweat forth, is little in one in
sound health,

For indeed the air ought by every storm and coursary succession of tempests,
to be immediately Latex, or more crude venal blood, as it were a garment, and
as a partition against it; against which, the raging air, the inclemency of its
first stroke being partly laid aside, should wax mild, and partly conceive
within it self the blemish conceived by the air, and should wash off the gotten
brand, (if happily any should be imprinted on the part by a sufficient quantity
of Snivel. And that thing is first of all w^itten on the distilling Pose. For a
small offense of the evening Air, or a blast of a more Latex. And then, when as
this is made void unto him, he brings forth a more tough Snivel, to wit, while
the other is made more glewy in the Ethmoides or straining bone. In like manner
also, hoarsnesses do happen through Snivel objected by the Keeper.

For the Keeper being a delegated power, that he may break the injuries of the
air, and

Therefore the Snivel of the nostrils dropping down from above, even as also
that which is

Because it does not only expel its own, but also frames its own, and indeed
only excrements,

Wherefore the Schools have altogether neglected both these Faculties prefixed
before the

As long the Keeper is in its right-strength, as a Conqueress of the Cruelty of
the Air, it

And it happens that one is hurt, the other remaining safe; which truth,
sneezing medicines do discover unto us, which do, presently after the neighbor
Snivel being dispatched, stir up mere waterishnesses, most speedily brought
forth by the provoked Keeper; So that at length, if the sneezing medicine shall
be the sharper, fibers of venal blood do fall down with the thin muck, and a
salt water waxing pale, is expunged from the red: According to the Proverb, he
that expungeth too much, does at length draw forth blood. For the red blood
beg^n to wax palish, which through the troublesomnesse of sneezing, was
untimely drawn o^ allured, otherwi^e it had been snivel.

Therefore the Keeper does first of all witness Divine Providence to have
watched over

Therefore it is false, to have said that a pose is healthy, as being the
expunger or wiper out of filths: For the Offices of both the Keepers, and their
errors, I have by the way already Latex, and venal blood: Which Doctrine,
although it show a novelty, and for that cause may carry difficulties with it;
yet the ignorance of Ages is never able to prescribe to the truth.

For first of all, a multiplicity of matter being drawn out under the error of
the Keeper, shows the same not to be the excrement of the brain, otherwise
sound and strong: Therefore the instinct of preparing, speedy, ready, and
diverse mucks, is raised up from ^lswhere. Indeed the Powers are for the
washing of the filths off the atoms of the air, therefore placed at the doors
or entrance of the Bowels that are passable for Air: Surely all things proceed
well, and orderly so long as the Keeper does not exceed its own limits: But
seeing all humane things are exposed to ruins, where, as often as the Keeper
wandreth from its aim, presently, Poses or Distillations, Hoarsnesses, Coughs,
etc. do invade us after a miserable manner.

Concerning the Grief or Stuffing of a distilled Rheum or Pose, I have already
spoken sufficiently: Now moreover I will speak of the Cough.

The Cough arises from a feeling of that which is hurtful, troubling the
windpipe from Latex, as seems fit for it, and transchangeth it into snivel,
which in manner of a dew it thrusts forth unto the windpipe; whereby the
injury of the Air may the less nakedly and immediately affect the solid p^^^
it self; but may break it self against the aforesaid coat of snivel.

But alas I when either the outward injury is greater than that which may
^^ffer it self to be Lungs; now the Keeper stumbleth: neither does it withdraw
its aid only from the Late^; but does alienate the very substance of the next
nourishment, and wander into a muckie glue: indeed so much the nearer to the
immediate nourishment of the Bowel, by how much it shall come deeper unto a
Color of yellow, looking ruddy, and nearer to redness, and having slidden from
that Color, it returns into its former Color, while it shall approach from a
ruddy Color, nearer to the yellowness of Chafe, and from thence at length
unto the similitude of the white of an Egg. Hence on the other hand, in hectic
Fevers, the snivel becomes bloody, and assumeth the Color of the more dark
ashes, while the very substance of the nourishment it self being transchanged,
departs, and does there show forth a failing integrity of life: Then indeed the
stinking smell of a dead Carcass beginning in the breath, does bewray the
faintings or doata^^s of the Archeus of the Lungs: Therefore the snivel does
readily serve for a partition wall between the hurtful thing coming unto it,
and the forces or strength of the Inn: wherefore it has a saltness brought to
it as the prick of its expulsion, that it may provoke the feeling of the
Windpipe. And in the smallness of Salt snivel, Coughs Eclegma or Lohech would
slide down through the think of the voice into the VVind-pipe: Nor having
regard, that there would be a straightning of breathing, Coughs, choking, and
expectorating, of greater misery, by reason of the admitting of a foreign
guest, than the Cough it self becomes, which stirs up such unhappy fictions of
help: which things I have elsewhere on purpose opened at large.

Alas! and a wretched remedy of Fox-lungs has also entered, whereby the poor
living

At length, the root of Chemists succeeded, who when they saw the ground where
Sulfurvive grows, to wax dry and barren, (but I call the vive or quick, naked
Sulphur, and that which

But that Asthma is not the guest of the Lungs, to arise from its proper
Epileptical passion: to wit, whither those Sulphurs have not entrance: But the
nest of that Asthma is about the Arsenick has obtained the name of the fume or
smoke of Metals, well consider the strength of that Remedy.

Truly, the Lungs does speedily hearken to the destruction of it self, and
there is a very difficult restoring of its sliding life: Also the Lungs does
scarce obtain help by nourishments, weakness: And that is especially more
manifest in the Inn of the Lungs, where the power of the Keeper, according to
his pleasure, does retort, alienate, and corrupt its proper nourishments that
are immediately to be assimilated or made like unto it: Wherefore I have
expelled Minerals from this aim or scope (except the greater Secrets) because
they are those which neither have a passage to, nor have contracted a
familiarity with the implanted Archeus of the Lungs. I have also examined the
Remedies throughout all their Ranks or Orders, and those vulnerary ones have
promised singularities, which do appease the Archeus; next, which do divert
from corruption, and hence do restrain the wonted furies accustomed to the
wound: But not that I hope that those Remedies can reach unto the Lungs, or
vvind-pipe in their former power (even as I shall elsewhere make manifest more
commodiously on purpose:) But only I did meditate, that although the defects
of Coughs were not separations of the Continual, as neither that spittings were
corrupt Pus; yet that a vulnerary potion is that which might afford a
nourishment to the whole Inn of man, of such a sort, that it might materially,
and efficiently by it self, employ it self in restoring the exorbitancy as well
of the Archeus, as of the Keeper.

Therefore there was a great necessity of both Keepers to wipe of the inspired
filths, which

But the restoring of the Keepers from weakness, is very difficult, and that of
the vvind-pipe more dangerous or destructive than that of the Nostrils, because
it threatens a Consumption, etc. For although an Imposthume full of matter may
bring forth diverse difficulties of breathing, and straightnesses of the Breast,
yet scarce Consumption-Coughs: Therefore I have thought these to spring from
the hurting of the rough Artery or vvind-pipe.

But that the Keeper does not touch at the Essence of the Brain; I conjecture
from a

Therefore the Air, after that it is brought down through the Lungs into the
Breast, and thrusts downwards the very transverse partition (which is named the
Diaphragma or Midriffe) Diaphragma pierces the pores thereof, and straineth
the drunk-in Air through it self: which thing, Odours drawn by some nostrils,
and at length returned by belching, do teach: For so the fume of Coals does
provoke vomit, and does sooner affect the Stomach than the heart: yea the Sent
of a dead Carcafe is felt about the Stomach long after. So also a Woman great
with young, bearing (...) a dead child, the very dead Carcass smells in her
breath.

For that smell passing through her Womb, and Midriffe, teaches that breathing
is serviceable, not only for the cooling refreshment of the heart, but for the
whole Body: So also from a pining fume, others have shown that their Stomach
was tinged with yellowness by reason of smoaks: So also the Stomach abhors
the smells of loosening Medicines received, although those very purging
Medicines are cloaked with Sugar and Spice, because it perceives the same
Odours by its own smelling: Therefore if an Odor does proceed in a straight
line unto the Stomach, the Air also does. The Plague it self being introduced
by an inspired breathing, is forged for the most part, about the Stomach:
therefore vomitings, Headache, drowsiness, etc. do accuse and show the Stomach
to be affected.

CHAP. XXXV. The Image of the Mind.
1. The fear of the Lord is the Beginning, and Charity is the end of Wisdom. 2.
Man was made after the Image of God. 3. Three Ranks of Atheists. 4. The
Authors wish. 5. The Intellectual Understanding of the mind. 6. The intimate
Integrity of the mind, suffers by frail things, without the passion of
extinguishing. 7. The action of the mind is scarce felt or perceived in us. 8.
The first Atheists are scoffers at the divine Image. 9. The second Atheists
have newly arose. 10. The Atheistical ignorance of this is manifested. 11. The
variety of vital Lights. 12. The mind, how it differs from an Angel. 13. An
intellectual Vision of the Author. 14. Every wish or desire without God, is
vain. 15. The Authors misery. 16. The Vision of the mind being separated from
the Body. 17. That the mind is figured. 18. The mind is an immortal Substance
figured with the figure of God. 19. A common error about the Image of God. 20.
The error of those who think the Image of God to be placed in a ternary of
Powers. 21. Against the opinion of Taulerus. 22. The Image of God in man
hitherto not evidently shown, because it is incomprehensible. 23. The mind is
damned by accident. 24. After death there is no more memory, or remembrance.
25. The will was accidentally over-added to the mind after its Creation. 26.
In Heaven the will is void. 27. A will appears in Heaven, not indeed a power,
but a substantial intellectual Essence. 28. If the mind be the Image of God,
this was known to Plato. 29. The definition of the mind. 30. That Reason is
not the Image of God. 31. The Authors Opinion. 32. These two thinglinesses or
Essences, do lay hid in the Soul, through the corruption of Nature. 33. This
love is only raised up by an ecstasy; not otherwise, in the miseries of this
nature. 34. A precision or abreviating of the Understanding. 35. An Objection
is solved. 36. That a triplicity or ternary in the mind, is unfolded in every
Susteme or Constitution of the World. 37. A Similitude for the Image of God is
far another thing than that of a ternary. 38. A repeated description of the
mind. 39. How the mind does behold itself. 40. The constitutive Birth of the
Fantasy. 41. The mind does understand far otherwise. 42. The Prerogative of
the mind. 43. An explaining of living love. 44. The differences of
Understandings in mortal men. 45. Why that desire does not cease in heaven. 46.
A description of desire. 47. How sin is in the desire of the mind. 48. The love
of the mind is a substance even in mortal men. 49. How great darkness has
veiled the mind by the corruption of nature. 50. The Image of God quite marred
or trodden under foot in the damned.

THe beginning of Wisdom is the fear of the Lord; but the fear of the Lord
begins

And the knowledge of life does presuppose the knowledge of the soul; because
the life

But hitherto it is not sufficiently manifest, wherein that likeness with God,
our Archtype, or chief or first Example, does consist. I will speak what I
perceive under an humble subjection to the Church. There is no knowledge more
burdensome than that whereby the soul comprehends it self, although none be
more profitable, Because the whole faith does stablish its foundation upon the
unobliterable or undefaceable substance of the soul. I have found indeed many
Demonstrations divulged in Books, about this Truth: but none of them at all,
wherefore, or for what cause it is so, in respect of Atheists, who deny the one
only and constant Power, or Deity from everlasting.

Indeed Plato has determined of three ranks of Atheists; to wit, one which
believes

And as they see themselves Schoolmasters, Deputies for the instructing of
sorts of children;

But I long since learned, that our mind does understand nothing by
imagination, nor at length by Figures or Images, unless the wretched and
miserable Discourse of staggering reason shall have access to it.

But when as the soul does comprehend it self, or in it self, intellectually,
reason fails it, and the Image of its own self, whereby it may represent it
self to it self; that is, the soul

Therefore sleep, fury or madness, and drunkenness, are not the Symptoms of
the immortal mind being hurt, but only the Pages of life, the passions only
of the sensitive soul;

For he that confesses, does oft-times not feel the effect of contrition, and
he greatly bewaileth that his own unsensiblenesse: Yet he being asked, whether
he would sin; perhaps

The first Atheists and Christian Libertines do laugh, as either that the image
of God in us, is feigned, or that we were created after the Image of God.

But other Atheists of the second sort, do believe, not only that we were
created after the Image of God, but they feign in us an identity with the
immense or vast, and uncreated

For truly, whatsoever began, for that very cause it is a creature: but it
includes an impossible imperfection in God, that he could create any thing
besides himself, in substance or essence,

And seeing there are many general kinds and species of vital lights, that
light of the mind differs from other vital lights in this, that it is a
spiritual and immortal substance; but that

But the Mind differs from the Angels, that it is after the likeness and image
of the eternal That the least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than John:
For the Son of man is not less in dignity and essence than an Angel, although
he be also made a little less o^ lower than an Angel; because the Son of man
in his condition of living, was diminished a little less than the Angels,
while he was made man; so also was John: therefore also an Angel does always
remain a ministering Spirit; but he is no where read to be the friend, or Son of
the Father, the delights of the Son of man, and the Temple of the Holy Spirit,
wherein the thrice glorious Trinity has made its Mansion: For that is the
famous or royal Prerogative of the Image of God, which the eternal Light
imprinteth on every man that comes into this world.

In the year 1610. after a long weariness of contemplation, that I might
obtain some knowledge Will thou have Honors and Riches? I was amazed at the
unwonted voice, I walked about, weighing with my self what that should denote:
in the mean time, on my right hand, a chink was seen in the wall, through
which, a certain light with an unwonted splendor, dazzled mine eyes, which made
me unmindful of the Liquor, of its voice, and former counsel; because I saw
that which exceeds a cogitation or thought expressible by word; and then that
chink presently dispersed: I returning thence unto the Bottle again, but
sorrowful, brought this away with me: But I did endeavor to taste down the
Liquor, and with long pains I opened the Bottle, and being sore stricken with
dread, I awaked out of my sleep. But the foregoing and great desire of knowing
my Soul, remained; with which desire I breathed for 23 full years: For at
length, in the year 1633. in the vexatious afflictions of Fortunes, yet with
the rest or quiet of my life, given me to drink from the safety of an innocent
life, I saw in a Vision my mind in an humane shape; but there was a light,
whose whole homogeneal body was actively seeing, a spiritual Substance,
Chrystalline, shining with a proper splendor or a splendor of its own: but in
another Cloudy part it was rouled up as it were in the husk of it self, which
whether it had any splendor of it self, I could not discern, by reason of the
superlative brightness of the Crystal spirit con^eined within: Yet that I
easily observed, that there was not a sexual note or mark of the sex, but in
the husk. But the Seal of the Crystal was an unutterable light, so reflex,
that the Crystal it self was made incomprehensible; and that, not by a denial,
otherwise, than because it cannot only not be expressed in word; but moreover,
because thou know not the essence or thinglinesse of the thing which thou
feast: And then I knew that that light was the same which I had seen for twenty
three years before, through the chink: I likewise from thence comprehended the
vanity of my long desire:

For howsoever beautiful the Vision was, yet my mind obtained not any
perfection to it self

But as to that which has respect unto the Image of God, I could never
conceive any thing, not indeed in the abstracted meditation of understanding,
which would not by the

For as often as the soul being separated, does see another soul, Angel, or evil
Spirit, that is Peter from that of John. For truly such a distinction does
happen only by a proper vision of the soul, which vision of the Soul includes
an external interchangeable to urse, and therefore also a figural one: For
truly an Angel is so in a place, that at once, he is not elsewhere; wherein as
well a local as a figural circumscription is of necessity included.

And then, the Body of man as such, cannot give unto it self a humane shape:
therefore

Furthermore, it is of faith, that our mind is a substance never to die: The
new framing

But because the Body is oft-times defectuous, they have thought the glorious
Image of God the Arch-Type, represented in the mind, to consist only in the
power of Reason: Not searching or hunting out of Sciences. But others hold the
Soul most nearly to express the Image of God, by a single simplicity of its own
substance, and a ternary of its powers, to wit, of understanding, will, and
memory: which similitude has always seemed to me fabulous,

But Tauterus severeth the Soul or mind, not indeed into three powers, but
into two distinct parts: To wit, the inferior or more outward, which by a
pecullar name, he calls the I shall not easily believe a duality of the
immortal Soul, or the interchangeable course of a binary or twofold thing, if
it ought to show forth in its very own essence, a unity: But rather I shall
believe, that the mind is rather made like unto God in a most simple unity, by
an indivisible homogeneity, of Spirit, under the co-resemblance of immortality,
and undissolution, and identity without all connection.

Therefore the glorious Image of God is not separated from the Soul; as neither
to be separated; but the mind it self is the glorious Image; as well intimate
to the Soul, as the

And because from the constitution and appointment of it, it is a partaker of
blessedness: therefore damnation coming upon it, is to it by accident, to wit,
besides its purpose, and by

And therefore if any memory should survive in it, it should be vain and
burdensome for ever: As also remembrance or calling to mind; because it is
that which is drawn forth into

And moreover, together with the life, the will also departs from the Soul; and
therefore it seems to be accidentally, as it were added to the Soul: For God,
after man was created,

While a wishing only, neither can, nor could any more be brought into act,
which is not in Heaven, where there is full satiety and possession of desirable
things with all abundance.

Therefore together with life, a power of willing perishes, and a substantial
will manifests

Plato his Parmenides at sometime understood, that there are not accidents in
God, neither that there is a duality, distinct from his Essence: wherefore I
conclude, if the mind

And so as the eye does behold nothing more truly and properly than the Sun,
and all other things by reason of it; So also the Soul that is blessed does not
understand any thing more

But they which have placed the Image of God in Reason, do argue; That the Law
is the Image of God, but the Law is written in our Souls by reason; and so they
think the Soul to

Therefore the will and love of this place, has nothing common with the will
of man, or flesh: because they are essential Titles, whereby for want of words,
the mind does after a

Therefore love, the other being as it were laid asleep, stands in the
superficies or upper part, as long as it shall sup up the other into it self:
But in this life, love is before desire, of the mind, which is substantial
love, and resembles the Image of a corporeal faculty, in this life; and
therefore, all things do inclinably or readily rush into disorder, and into
dissolution: But in the heavenly Wights, that love does neither constitute a
priority, as neither a distinction from desire, neither has it the nature of a
power, as neither is it a habit, or act of willing, neither does it subsist out
of the understanding.

Therefore the Intellect or understanding is a formal light, and the very
substance it self of the Soul, which beholdingly knows without the help of
eyes, even as also it discerns, wills,

For neither does it hinder these things, that in living persons the memory
decays or perishes, the judgment being safe, or on the contrary: For the
faculties of the sensitive Soul

Even as also unto Inanimate things, I observe a certain deaf knowledge of the
object, likewise a feeling, and affection of the object, to belong: And the
which have therefore begun etc. which threefold degree, is as yet more manifest
in the more stupid Insects, and in outrageous or mad men, in whom no
understanding is chief, and only a power of a visual light the governess, does
shine forth: yet in these moreover, there is an act of vital virtues and
functions present, by reason whereof they do subsist: And thirdly, there is in
them a far more clear act of rejoicing and turning away or aversness; which
things are yet far more powerfully declared in other sensitive Creatures: To
whom indeed belongs a certain sensitive imagination, with a certain kind of
discourse of Reason, shining forth in them instead of understanding, more or
less in every one. So that wittiness or quick-sightedness, will, memory, do
happen unto them under the apprehension of understanding; Yet the objects, and
offices or functions being continually changed, according to the matter that is
apt for divisions and singularities: which matter does therefore indeed accuse
the diversities of receivers. Also in these, there is an issuing power of
goodness and virtues, whereby Souls do more or less favorably incline into
the exercises of their own virtues, or cruelties: And at length there is also
in them their own complacency or well-pleasing, weariness, and animosity or
angry heat, for the considerations of objects; so co-united to sensitive Souls,
that it is scarce possible to behold two persons, but we are presently addicted
to one more than to another: And these being incorporeal things, after the
manner of the receiver, shall for that cause, in man, be more clarified.

Finally, I will not therefore have the Image of God to be considered for any
ternary of faculties, which does thus far belong to other things in the Systeme
or frame of the World: because

For truly, the mind is one pure, simple, formal, homogeneal, undivided, and
immortal act, wherein the incomprehensible Image of God does immediately,
incomprehensibly, and

To wit, in which Organs or Instruments, the substance of the mind does seem
only to assume the race of properties. Surely, while the abstracted
understanding it self

The which, from the Society of the imaginary power, the Splendour of the
sensitive Soul

But whatsoever the Soul does require to know and will, for once, or for oftener
times; that it has wholly from it self, and not from a stranger without: For
the good substantial will of

Which Prerogative it has, because it is the typical Image of the Divinity.
But Bodies do slide by a perpetual free accord, into the attributes of Forms,
their diversity of kind, successive

For truly, now we often desire those things which the understanding judges
not to be desired, and the will could wish not to come to pass: But it must
needs be, that things whose

Therefore that desire or love is the fuel of an unterminable or endless
delight: Therefore it is manifest, that understanding, will, and love, are
things substantially co-united in the

But the desire whereof I speak, laying hid in the mind, unless it were of the
essence of the mind, he that has seen a Woman to lust after her, should not
sin before a consent of the will: Therefore we now desire by the faculties of
the mind, emulous or striving in the sensitive Soul, the effects whereof are
refused by the will and judgment: Also in the manner; for now the desire or
love works one way, and the will another. Likewise in the motion of the day,
or in duration, desire goes before, or follows willing, and one thing
successively overcomes another, that it may restrain any thing distinct from it
self, and that wholly in mortal Creatures; because it is from the animosity of
the sensitive Soul.

But in those that are in Heaven, that love rises again, as it were the
substance of the mind: for there, nothing is desired which is not willed: And
that is collected into a

But the miserable mind being devolved into utter darkness from the uncreated
Light, whereby it has separated it self, has so lost the native light of the
Image, by reason of appropriation, Protheus) that is, into the similitude of
evil Spirits its objects: From hence there is always within a present hatred
of God, and of the Blessed, desperation, cursing, damnation, and the raging
torments of infernal Spirits. The Almighty vouchsafe out of his own goodness,
to break the Snares extended in the way for us by hellish hatred. Amen. Let
these things suffice concerning the Soul, for the natural knowledge of its own
self. Now therefore I enter unto Nature, that I may make manifest the Seat of
the Soul in the Body.

CHAP. XXXVI. A mad or foolish Idea.
1. A doubt of the Author about mortal poisons. 2. The ignorance of the
Author from the Idea unknown. 3. A very powerful force of those Idea's. 4.
Ignorance is the guide of Physicians. 5. Another Ignorance. 6. The doubting of
the Author. 7. The confession and, acknowledgement of the same. 8. A Prayer of
the Author. 9. The existence of the mind in us. 10. The floating of the
Author. 11. A History of the Author about the examination of poisons. 12.
What has incited the Author hereunto. 13. What he has learned from thence.
14. That the understanding is of the Essence of the Soul. 15. That our will and
memory dwells in the frail life, and why love is required from the whole. 16.
How the understanding shakes its Beams into the Head. 17. A distinction of some
Lights. 18. A certain act of feeling of the Powers of the Duumvirate, and the
proper manner of the Soul in its own state of Lights. 19. A difference of
Knowledges in respect of place. 20. A clearing up of Remedies for the Head. 21.
What the Schools do well teach concerning these Remedies, and what defectively.
22. There is a diversity of understanding in the state of innocence, and now.
23. The difficulties of the Author. 24. The knowledge of the faculties of the
mind is far different from that of any other whatsoever. 25. The difficulty of
searching for madness, and the manner proposed by the Author. 26. A
co-knitting of the mind with the sensitive Soul. 27. Why the mind is not in
the heart, as neither in the Head. 28. A convincing Argument proves that it is
in the Duumvirate. 29. The glory of divine compassion does shine forth in our
griefs or weaknesses. 30. The first degree of madness. 31. The second is in a
drowsy sickness. 32. The inward obstacles of the sensitive Soul. 33. The
memory does first fail. 34. The following arrivals or commings of defects. 35.
The conceits as well of a sound man, as of a mad man, are made with Idea's. 36.
Some mad Idea's are always, and every where equal, others not. 37. The
implanted Spirit of the Midriffs being hurt, madnesses do remain for life. 38.
Things worthy to be noted. 39. The Confessions of mad men, being cured. 40.
What conceptual Idea's may do for a mad man. 41. Excentrical and poisonous
Idea's, wherein they may co-agree. 42. The power in a mad man which overcomes
Colds. 43. The immortality of the mind is proved from hence. 44. Whence the
Treatise concerning madness may be derived. 45. An extinguishing of a mad Idea
is intended. 46. The manner of extinguishing the allied blot, and a double
manner against madness. 47. Some Histories of the thing done. 48. The Remedy of
a Hydrophobia or a Disease causing a fear of water, and of the biting of a mad
Dog before a Hydrophobia. 49. A repeated History of a mad man. 50.
Considerations of plungings under water. 51. A ridiculous thing in an added
Remedy of Galen. 52. A miraculous curing of madness.

COncerning the action of Government, and likewise concerning the Duumvirate or
Sheriff-dom in office, even as becomes a natural Philosopher, I have written;
that I might discover the Seat of the fancy or imagination, and might
describe the strife about the (...) or Seat of the faculties of the mind.
Notwithstanding, I being long since in doubt, knew not, after what manner an
understanding, man might degenerate into a mad man. I knew indeed, that in
sordid and poisonous things, there were certain natural endowed powers, not
indeed understanding ones; but those which might answer in affinity to those:
So as that they might seduce our understanding against our wills into their own
obediences; as the biting of a mad Dog, the stroke of the Tarantula, the eating
of Nightshade, etc.

For I thought that in Feverish filths, their own co-like faculties did
inhabit: wherein the dance presently troubled me: To wit, because in the same
Fever, cruel raging madnesses I from thence persuading my self, that in the
agreement of madness there were not disagreeing effects: For neither at the
first view, did I sufficiently heed, that poisons do wax mild, or are
exasperated by ripening.

And then, I looked back on a Lunacisme, because it did invade, and go back,
together with

I wholly doubted, being ignorant as yet, that besides corporal poisons, there
were also poisonous images, impressions, the most absolute and most efficacious
Mistresses of the vital

In the mean time, I have known by Faith, that the mind is immortal, and that
by the same right, its own understanding does remain unpolluted by the
contagious of the Body; because I did willingly confess humbly my own
ignorance; but on the otherside, I did contemplate on the miserable, and never
narrowly searched into condition of a mad man, and the so scanty Remedies in
the greatest evils, and those mostly to be pitied: Because Physicians deceiving
the World by a vain Doctorship, did persuade it, that they had thoroughly viewed
all things, neither that there was a Medicine for so great an evil; because the
Brain had equally put on an unequal distemper, as it were a Garment: yet they
being asked, which was the primary distemper I had taken notice, that
hypochondrial madnesses were without controversy, belonging to the Midriffe; I
at first began to doubt, whether that cursed poison should be brought unto the
Brain, through certain singular or particular Arteries?

But at least, that suspicion presently displeased me; because every one should
labor with I have noted a difference between feverish doatages, and madness;
because this indeed might very often remain safe for a long time, without a
lavishment of the health; also in late Nephews, without the discommodities of
the seed, and life. Indeed I often left off the matter, then to me
unsearchable; and I oftentimes from compassion, took it up again: And at length
I saw clearly, that I was supported by false principles, that I was led aside
by the I stripped my self of the Doctrine which I had supped up in the Schools,
concerning the Soul, and concerning Diseases: And then, from the search of the
functions of the understanding, I committed my mind in rest, and poverty, unto
the Lord, that he might perform what should be his good pleasure concerning me:
yet I was not so indifferent, but that I always had a desire to profit my
neighbor.

Therefore I begged of the Lord, that I might become known to my self, not
only, in acknowledging

Wherefore I revolved the question concerning the Seat, or Marriage Bed of the
immortal so in the finger, that this being cut off, the whole should depart
from the whole, or through a hastening or speedy chance of fear, it should
return inwards: Therefore I found the soul to be homogeneal or one and the same
in kind, simple, and not to be divided; else, neither could it be immortal. And
then I knew, that its whole did shine only radially on the ignoble parts, after
the manner of the light of the Sun, which should in the mean time as it were
lurk in its Throne or Seat, and from thence should shine throughout the whole
body, being altogether unknown to the sensitive soul, whose life nevertheless,
the mind it self should be: Verily, even as the God of all, is intimately
present with every one of us, yet is he naturally unknown, nor felt or
perceived by us.

And then a debate arose in my mind, whether there were many centers, and those
divided according to the vital necessities of the radical bowels. But at
length I knew that the mind Adam before sin; Seeing the Almighty created
neither death, nor a medicine of destruction, and so to have sent forth such
cruel things, not indeed that they might kill man; but because he was
constrained in the sweat of his face to eat his bread, to which diseases he was
made subject also in sweats, that he should extract Medicines for Diseases.

And therefore I did promise to my self, that that poison after the manner of a
Keeper, and yet a most free resigning of my self into the Will of God, restored
me into my former rest. At length, after about two hours space, a certain
gentle giddiness of my head twice repeated, invaded me; For from the former, I
perceived the faculty of understanding to have returned; and from the other I
felt my self to understand after my wonted manner. And then, although I
afterward diverse times tasted of the same Wolfs-bane, yet no such thing ever
happened unto me any more. But I from thenceforth perfectly learned many things.

And first indeed, that as by extafies, certain flourishes of the soul do
clearly appear; so by

Secondly, And that thing is by so much the more unthought of, because the
ordinary framing of discourses is about the mouth of the Stomach, but not in
any Bowel, but as it were in the Membrane or Filme of the Stomach, as if in an
undividable place. Nor much othewise does there inhabit in the Membrane of the
Womb, a certain Monarchy of the whole; yet so, that a wound of the Stomach does
presently import life, but a wound of the Womb not so.

Thirdly, That for about two hours, I did perceive after an unlooked-for
manner, nothing to be acted in the head; and after an undeclarable manner, the
whole Soul most clearly to meditate in the Midriffs.

Fourthly, That the like thing does almost happen in the prayer of silence, and
more and more manifestly in an ecstasy.

Fifthly, And that therefore the intellectual Soul is centrally entertained in
the same place.

Sixthly, Then also, that as madness is a defect of the understanding, so
therefore that it is stirred up from the part about the short Ribs: Seeing the
same faculty, which in health performs a healthy function, suffers under
diseases, a defect of the same; to wit, as often as the understanding is
ecclipsed in its own seat.

Seventhly, I have also certainly sound, that the power of willing does
inhabit in the heart,

Eighthly, That the memory sits in the Brain, there imprinted by the soul; and
that therefore it is in comparison of the other faculties, most easily hurt by
a disease and old age: Yea, if any one does labor that he may remember a thing
forgotten, he sensibly perceives this his labor in the forepart of his head.

Ninthly, Again, seeing the will and memory differ, are at a far distance from
the seat of the

Tenthly, To wit, that sins are made in the heart and will, in the flesh of
sin, in the will of the flesh and of man: Therefore that love is required
wholly from the whole mind, which

Eleventhly, I have found the understanding to cast its beams lightsomly into
the head, yet by the means of a corporal connection through an Aerie spirit,
which while it strikes the bosoms of the Head, should bring on it a certain
giddiness and cloudly understanding: So although for sense, and fear, the
spirits in that state should be plentifully diffused from the brain, yet there
was likewise need of a singular light, which ascending from the midriffs,
should enlighten the spirit the mean, through which it did pass; which
lightsome beam is no otherwise expressible, than that it is intellectual and
exceeding a sublunary contexture or composure: Because it is that which ought
to be framed by the soul alone, which in it self is nothing but a mere
understanding, or a substantial and intellectual Light.

Twelfthly, That because sense and motion stood free, I did think, there was
another Light

Thirteenthly, That the Liver should be of a due strength, or prosper well,
also the heart of the Spirit should uncessantly blow out into the Brain, and
likewise the required will of acting should persist indeed; but the
intellectual Powers only, being stupefied in the Brain, should as it were
sleep, if they should not be enlightened by the Midriffs. But this light
pierces the whole Body, which way it casts its Beams: Even so as the light of
a Candle does ruddishly shine through the bones of the fingers in younger
persons, as if the bones themselves were transparent.

Fourteenthly, That from that time, I am wont also to have more significative
dreams with a more formal discourse, and a clearer than before: For the mind
once as it were retaking the offices of its own Body, does afterward better
understand: From whence also afterward, I attained the knowledge, how day unto
day does utter the Word, and night unto night shows knowledge.

Fifteenthly, I was more assured, that then, my state was one; but that of
madness the Lethargy, Apoplexy, etc. another: For I seriously weighed my self
with circumspection, whether that were the way, whereby men became foolish;
Seeing that in my full judgment, I was so void of all fear, that I did
contemplate of my own matters not as mine: For I looked back on them
crooked-wise or by the by, they being as it were shaken into the Head of a man
of another World.

Sixteenthly, I learned also, that life, understanding, sleep, etc. are the
works of a certain clear or shining light, not requiring Pipes or Channels;
Seeing the shining light pierces the vital light: Therefore also the Soul does
retract, diffuse, and withdraw it self by a motion

Seventeenthly, At length, that the understanding being raised by invention and
judgment, with a reflection on places, on circumstances, on things past, said
before, premised, and so on

Eighteenthly, Therefore poisons which have a power of displacing the
imagination, do not primarily affect the Brain; but the Midriffs only: Which
thing, the History of a Lawyer, who had drunk Henbane-seed (elsewhere by me
rehearsed) does sufficiently prove: For whatsoever the Stomach does conceive,
that very thing is plainly transchanged, and does wholly pass into another
Essence, before that the least quantity does from thence reach to the Brain,
and whatsoever thereof does come thither, is already venal blood, which has
put off all the qualities of its former condition in the entry of the first
shops; or at length, it slides cut of the Stomach, and together with the
drosses, is thrust out of doors.

And so no Simples, after what manner soever they are taken, are materially
applied to the Brain: Therefore it is false, whatsoever the Schools do set to
sale concerning pills for the

Nineteenthly, Also lastly, hence I have understood, that the immortal and
untireable Soul, while it did of due right govern its own Body before sin, it
understood all things intimately, optically or clearly, and that without
labor, tediousnesses, and wearisomness:

Because it did understand all things that were in its power, in its own Center
and unity, without the help of Organs or Instruments: But now being detained in
a strange Inn, it being

In this place, I presume to give a Reason of the thoughts of others, who
cannot sufficiently promise, or grieve for my own: For I have proposed to
phylosophize concerning the and exorbitances of floating and uncertain
Cogitations: yea we must pierce deeper, when as we must take aim at the powers
of vitiated Cogitations themselves, and must come unto the fountainous and
occasional causes of these vices. Surely it is a matter, hard, obscure, and
unpassable, wherein the speculations of the Schools, the succors of Bodies do
fail before the threshold, yea and of Diseases, whose causes and effects do
fall under sense, or are proved by the dissections of dead Carcases: wherein I
say, the Patient or suffering imagination does indeed enlarge it self; but the
Agent or active one is hidden.

In other diligent searches, that which is vitiated is known by a knowledge of
the whole;

Also madness is always of a most difficult learning, because it contains in
it a denying, together I have judged of the same in another way; whether
perhaps, by searching into the manner of making in any one kind of madnesses,
I might find an utterance for the other: Therefore I have proposed that
madness which arises from a strong, and continued contemplation, feat, and
passion: Forthwith afterward, I concluded that the quality of the poisonous
matter, was to be known, and the dispositions of Instruments which should
concur, when as any Simple being taken, or something inwardly generated, had
stirred up madness: But the knowledge of one sort of madness being attained, it
shall be the easier to measure afterward the diversities of the same, by
descending into the ampleness of the manners or measures, strength,
approaching, application, and variety of particular kinds: For therefore I
first of all reckoned to search into the Seat of the Sensitive soul, to wit,
the exorbitances whereof do cause madnesses.

For truly I have considered, that in what seat the animal form should abide,
in the same

Therefore I first of all decreed, that the immortal mind has not chose a
mansion for it I intentively considered of this convincing argument.

If the mind, the image of God, be centrally in the head, it shall be either in
the bosoms, tied to the sensitive soul; indeed to an impure Being, given to
concupiscences, enticements, and pleasures, and that the immortal mind does so
easily assent to it, as if it would now sleep for ever in the carelessness of
its own self.

But not so; for by so much is the glory of divine compassion the greater,
which by its own

For the first degree of madness does plainly appear in sleep; yet is it
natural, while with etc. And which filthy heap of impurities, besieging the
sensitive

For I have many times certainly found, that Doaters have felt beforehand,
intellectual Images or Representations to be dismissed from beneath, to be
troublesome upwards, and that

In Doatages I have observed the memory of things once conceived, first to
stagger, and

And seeing that in health, conceptions are not otherwise made without Idea's:
in a dotage also, there must needs be its own mad Idea's: But altogether with
this distinction, That

For it is manifest that Idea's do follow the disturbances of things from
whence they are Tarantula, whose poison does produce a proper, determined, and
equal madness, and Idea's always co-like to themselves: so also a strong
disturbance of our imagination does forge an image, and imprint it on some
filths; but if not on the nourishment it self, yet even on the solid and
constitutive part of us: whence indeed there is a continued propagation of new
Idea's, (...) the (...) and ample^ess thereof in mad folks (...) or truly, from
fear, contention, envy, ambiti^^, love, study, care, shame, coverousness, and
(...) co-like disturbances are madnesses made: And so much the more miserable
are those which are stirred up without the infamy of excrements, because they
do either continually persevere, or do return at set periods of relapses.
Otherwise, the filthine^ses being consumed, the blemishes sprung from thence do
voluntarily cease. But madnesses, whether they do rage with a continual heat,
or do return by intervals, they at least have so defiled the spirit of the
Duumvirate, that they have radically imprinted the storm of furious-images
received after the same manner, as a blemish branded on the Young from the
exorbitancy of its mother great with child, is durable for term of life.

Indeed, even as the mark of a Cherry in the Young, does every year wax green,
yellow, and

In the mean time, we must take notice that a Lunatic person could not be
cured, but by the casting out also of the unclean spirit; whether this shall be
a companion of the Night-star,

Because conceipted Idea's as yet wanting a body, have and hold themselves in
respect or

Yet with this difference, that Idea 's, which were forged by the excentricity
of conceits, did indeed enter, and more admitted more powerfully, but were
imprinted more slowly: whereas otherwise, (...) that cause madness, a disease
mediating, ^^d by degrees sow their own ferment on their proper objects; but at
length they did (...) imprint it on them, as it were sealed on nature.

And it is a thing proper to mad folks, that however naked, he does lay on the
ground, or does A mad man feels not cold, nor knows that he is cold: For truly
a depriving, or denying of knowledge or sense, affords no real thing, and much
less does it make hot, or take away the forces from the cold, that therefore
it should cease to freeze the flesh: For although a child in the Cradle does
not fear the plague, nor knows that it is present, the plague has not
therefore lost its right over him. Therefore there is some kind of power which
overcomes Colds, neither does it submit to a sublunary tempest.

And hence it is chiefly manifest, that the mind in us is immortal, and not
capable of suffering:

Furthermore, seeing all madness does arise from a budding or flourishing,
conceptual, foreign miserere) does for the future vanish away of its own
accord. After the same manner also that the Idea of madness ought to perish,
the immediate subject wherein it does inhere, being in the mean time safe:
Whether that be done, by introducing a death of the Idea, or by in-generating
an Idea of equal prevalency, or one that over-powreth the foolish Idea: For
from hence it comes to pass, that a remedy for madness has been hitherto
despaired of, because none has hitherto carried up the nature and properties
of madness above the distemper of the first qualities: yea, Paracelsus himself,
otherwise injurious against heats and colds, has enslaved madness wholly unto
heat, and blood-letting, and has therein rendered himself ridiculous. I
confess the scope of curing has seemed difficult, because not only the Idea
of a corrupted imagination, and a sealie mark and blemish is introduced into,
and imprinted on the innermost point of the understanding; but also because the
restoring of the inbred spirit is accounted plainly impossible. Indeed a
wished aid of Secrets has been implored, but the progress hereof has been
slow, because a stubborn enemy did resist within. But medicines have been
administered, wherein a symbol or mark of resemblance does inhabit, that is,
the fermental imagination of a sounder judgment. For truly, as there are
poisons of the mind, causing alienation for a space, or for the whole
lifetime, to wit, which do introduce a proper phan^^sie into us; as a mad dog,
the Tarantula, etc. So also there are in Simples their own fruits, of the
knowledge of good, and evil, in their first face indeed poisonous; under which
notwithstanding, the more rich treasures and renewings of the faculties of the
mind are kept. But seeing it is not safe to cast those remedies on common
Physicians, by reason of the manifold abuse of the wits of this age:

Lastly, seeing neither is it fit or meet for every one to go to Corinth:
therefore in another way, which is of the mortifying of foolish Images, have I
thought meet in this place to proceed.

But some Histories have confirmed in me the consideration conceived: the
which, as those Gandt, which they call Cataracta: I saw a Ship swimming beyond
it, and therein an old man naked, bound with cords, having a weight on his
feet; under his armpits he was encompassed with a girdle, wherewith he was
bound to the Sail-yard: I asked what they meant by that spectacle: One of the
Mariners said, that old man was now Hydrophobial or had the Disease causing
the fear of water, and to have been lately bitten by a mad dog: I asked, toward
what part of the Sea would they carry him? did they intend his death? Nay
rather (says the Mariner) he shall presently return whole: And such is the
blessing of the Sea, that such a kind of madness it would presently cure: I
offered them an earnest-penny, to take me along with them as a companion and
witness: Therefore we had sailed about the space of an Italian mile, when as
the Mariners did open a hole in the bottom, whereby the whole Ship was almost
sunk even to the brim: Indeed they used that brine to recoct Spanish salt. And
when as that hole was now again exactly shut, two men withdrawing the end of
the Sail-yard, lifted up the top thereof, and bare the old man on high: but
thence they let him down headlong into the Sea, and he was under the water
about the space of a Miserere, whom afterward they twice more plunged, about
the space of an Angelical Salutation: But then they placed him on a smooth
Vessel, with his back upwards, covered with a short cloak: I did think that he
was dead, but the Mariner derided my fear: For his bonds being loosed, he
began to cast up all the brine which he had breathed in, and presently revived.
He was a Cooper of Gandt, who being thenceforth freed from his madness, lived
safe and sound. From hence, as our soul is a Chambermaid to find out reasons
before unknown, I presently understood the Idea of the madness, and the mark
of the imprinted poison, to be like as is a mortified blemish in the Young: For
I knew that warts, and likewise ulcers, and foreign, future, and strange
poisons lighting on the first constitution, were separable, the vital root of
the Individual remaining.

Also the Mariner did relate, that the Dutch, by a raw herring salted, for
three days space Antwerp, that a Carpenter, persuading himself, that in the
night-timehe had seen horrid Dympna the Virgin, where those who are possessed
by an evil spirit are wont to be freed; the matter being thereby wrested into
an abuse, that all mad men should indifferently be sent thither: As if the
condition of those that are possessed, and mad, were the same: The Carpenter
therefore is nourished a whole year, and mad, however the wonted remedies were
implored; and when as moneys were not sent from Antwerp, for the last half
year, they sent back the mad man bound in a wagon, who, when he had loosed his
bonds, he leapt out of the Wain into a deep and neighboring pool: He being at
length drawn out was laid up into the Wagon, for a dead Carcass; but he lived
for eighteen years after, free from madness. By which example, I (being raised
unto an hope) knew, that not only the madness from a mad dog, but also that an
inveterate or ancient Mania or madness might be cured: And that thing I
afterward often tried; neither has the event deceived me, but as often as
through fear, I drew these mad persons over-hastily out of the water. I
likewise learned by the example of the Carpenter, that it would be all one,
whether the aforesaid plunging, or choking of the mad Idea, should happen to
be in fresh water, or salt.

A certain woman, to me known, commendable for her much honesty, in the month
November, in a dark evening, rushed headlong from a bridge, into a small River
or Brook, with Hannonia or Hungary, a young man drowned in swimming is brought
unto a noble Matron, a companion of my journey; who bad the mother, bewailing
the death of her son, to be of good cheer: Therefore she stretched the young
man with his face placed downward upon his knees; and when the feeble young man
thus hung, being altogether naked, he at length (the water being cast back)
began to breath again, and revived in our sight.

Again I remember, that in the year 1606. I returning in the evening from the
Castle of Perla, two leagues distant from Antwerp, found a company on the bank
of the Rotomagian Channel, because they complained, that a young man, the only
son of a rich widow, was drowned, who was sent for, and found his dead carcass
laying on the ground in the stubble or straw; she took him up into her lap, and
kissed him, weeping bitterly: I bad that she should turn his body, with his
head and shoulders hanging downwards, and his back upwards; and the young man
began after a quarter of an hour, to breath again. I have learned therefore,
that drowned persons do not easily die, seeing both the aforesaid young men,
lurked perhaps for the space of half an hour under the water: Neither must
there be a cessation from prayer, as soon as he which is believed to be dead,
does cease to take breath.

Galen, for madness of the biting of a mad dog, before the fear of waters has
arose, gives Cray-fishes or Crabs calcined to drink, for forty days: Yet if
that Calx be not given presently Paracelsus affirms, that the Hydrophobia is
cured by sharp loosening medicines; but surely the event has not answered his
promises. Therefore Catholics despairing, nor trusting to these remedies of
the Universities, our Countrymen flee to St. Hubbert, where by some Rites
performed, they are cured: Yet this is remarkable therein;

That if the Rites be not precisely observed, the madness which otherwise did
hitherto long lay hid, does forthwith arise, and the Hydrophobians are left
without hope. There is a robe Hubbert, locked up in a chest with six diverse
keys, and also kept by six diverse Key-keepers: but they do every year cut off
part of that garment, the garment the while remaining always whole, for eight
hundred years now, and more: Neither is it a place of juggling deceit, because
it is not known at this day, whether the Robe be of fine flax, wool, hemp, or
cotton; and so neither could a new one be yearly substituted in its room: But
they cut off part of the garment, that they may incarnate a thread or rag
thereof, within the skin of the forehead of every one that is bitten by a mad
dog: For from hence there is another miracle: That he who has once recovered
by his rites, through the thread or rag taken out of the robe, may delay the
time for another that is bitten, and stupifie the prevailing madness for
forty days, and that for some years, until they to their own profit, can at
length come to Saint Hubbert: yet with that condition, that if any one do tarry
never so little above forty days, and has not (as was said) before obtained
by request, a prolonging of the limited time, he presently falls into a
desperate madness. For the Lombards do thus run to the Saints, Belline, and
Donine, and so do request preservation: And they require the healing to be from
a madness arising from a deed done: But for foolish madness or being out of
ones mind, they do not hitherto (as I know of) invoke any heavenly Patron.

CHAP. XXXVII. The Seat of the Soul.
1. The matter is as yet before the Judge. 2. A third opinion. 3. The head
being dead, a certain Bride has over-lived for eight hours at least. 4. The
mouth of the Stomach being smitten, has brought a sudden and total death. 5. A
Paradox of the Author concerning the Seat of the Soul. 6. The Creation
teaches this seat. 7. Physicians do occultly consent to those very things
unwittingly. 8. The Lord confirms the Paradox of the Author. 9. Some
reasons. 10. Against the existence of the Vegetative Soul. 11. The Heart is a
servant to the Stomach. 12. The seat remains fixed. 13. That the first powers of
conceptions are felt in the mouth of the Stomach. 14. They unwillingly place
the faculty of concupiscence in the Stomach and Liver. 15. Whither this
speculation tends. 16. They have also against their wills assented to the
Paradox of the Author. 17. The seat of the mind is the same with that of the
sensitive soul. 18. The manner of existing in its seat. 19. A piercing of
Souls. 20. What the sensitive soul is. 21. A similitude of its existence. 22.
Heat is not the fountain of the light of life, but the light of the Archeal
life, or product. 23. What the mind is. 24. By the coming of the sensitive
soul, death has entered. 25. A comparison of the dignity lost, and obtained.
26. The Spleen, for the Duumvirate. 27. The dignities of offices. 28. All
foolish madnesses do from hence take their beginning. 29. A remarkable thing
touching the examination of remedies, a further progress being denied. 30. How
immortality did stand. 31. A change of the State. 32. A Corollary of what has
been said. 33. The error of the Schools.

THE Sur-name of a Duumvirate, or Sheriff-dome may astonish the Reader with the
terror of novelty: wherefore I am first to render a reason of its Etymology,
and afterward I shall explain its government. Before all things the seat of
the mind is to be searched into: For although the soul be every where, where
the life of it is; yet as the Sun is not properly but in his own place, in
heaven, although the light thereof be Plato contends for the Heart, for whom
the Holy Scriptures seem to vote, while they reach, that out of the Heart
proceed Murders, Adulteries, etc. But Physicians do respect the Head, as it
were the Inn of discourse and understanding; especially because the heart, by
such an unwearied motion of a stirred pulse, cannot but make the soul to be
troubled and unquiet. Those that baptize do follow the opinion of Physicians.

Neither are there those wanting in the mean time, who determine the immortal
mind to be so every where, and equally in the body, that they will have it to
abide in no certain seat,

A certain Bride, being willing to celebrate her marriage in Opdorp nigh
Scalds, because the Governor of the place was there, is saluted by her
retainers with the noise of Guns: But one of them discharges a Gun laden with
a Ledden Bullet, but it pierces the Coach, and the Temples of the Bride: She
presently falls down, and is reckoned a dead Woman: But Opdorp is seven Leagues
distant from Vilvord, whither when she was brought, proceeding to Bruxels, her
Head was a dead Carcass, cut in thin pieces, and plainly cold; yet nigh her
heart, I noted a luke-warmth and pulse. Likewise a certain Image fell from a
high place, on the Crown of a Woman, so as that the whole top of the Scull had
depressed the Brain, almost two fingers in breadth: She was reckoned to have
been dead, yet there was a slender pulse in both Arms, six hours after, and it
was noted by many.

A certain studious man, being strong, strikes another sitting at the Table,
with his fist, about the orifice of the Stomach, who presently fell down with a
foaming mouth, and being

Therefore under a humble Censure of the Church; I will declare another
Paradox. Although

The Creator (to whom be all honor) has kept a certain progress from a like
thing, who instructs us in the Seat-royal of the Soul, that from the more
gross things we may consider

For whatsoever natural Philosophers have ever thoroughly weighed concerning the
heart that is of great moment; they, will they, nill they, they have made all
that common to the Cardiogmus or the griping biting of the heart, Cardialgia or
the pain of the heart, have been withdrawn from the Stomach, by a
transchangeative and borrowed name; and likewise swoonings, faintings, and
epileptical insults or fits of the Falling sickness, and those things which do
seem to carry the Rains of life, do take their original from the mouth of the
Stomach: For in bloodletting that is daily seen; wherein very often, presently
after a Vein is opened, giddinesses of the Head, and likewise dulnesses and
obscurings of the sight are manifestly felt to spring from the Stomach, and to
cease again, as often as the finger is laid upon the opened Vein, and it being
removed from thence, the same Sumptoms are again felt to arise from the
Stomach, and to be stirred up from thence. Again, the Authority of the Word
confirms my Paradox, in the entrance, while it asks, What Cogitations have

For every Cogitation, in its first Original, ought to spring from elsewhere
than in the heart: For the Pulse and vehement and uncessant motion of the heart
would have forbid that thing:

Indeed, in speaking properly, and understanding distinctly, there is not a
certain vegetative

For in very deed, the heart is a servant to the stomach, while it all its life
long only employeth

For it was never the study or office of the soul, to wander or pass from
place to place, that it may choose out a Bride-bed for it self; because that
which is directed by an understanding

First of all, it is easily perceived, that all the force of the first
conceptions, and every entering and primitive stirring of disturbances does
happen about the mouth of the stomach: For

So that persons against their will, and at unawares have before me, there
placed the desirable

For very many have remained without hope of recovery; because Remedies have
been applied to a member appointed for functions, but not to the Root from
whence the error Medicines ought to be appropriated, if from the Root, a
Medicine for Diseases is to be appointed: wherein surely, they have most
grievously erred hitherto.

At least, the first motions or assaults which are not in our power, are long
since admitted to happen about the Orifice of the stomach, and to climb
upwards to the Head: But it is a

But that which I write touching the seat of the sensitive soul, I understand
also for the immortal

Therefore the radical Bride-bed of the sensitive soul is in the vital Archeus
of the stomach, and it stands and remains there for the whole lifetime: Not
indeed, that the sensitive soul

But because every Soul is a light given by the Father of Lights, and Creator
of things; but Adam: of which, in the Book of long life, concerning the
entrance of death into man.

Therefore indeed, that sensitive soul, although it be locally present, and be
entertained in James, the Father of Lights.

Therefore the heat of things soulified, is not of the Fountain-light of the
soul; but a heating light of the vital life; and so it is the product of life;
but not the life it self: And

But the immortal mind it self, is a clear or lightsome, incorporeal
substance, immediately showing forth the Image or likeness of its God, because
it has received the same engraven Adam, there was not a sensitive soul in man;
but by what means or after what manner, that, together with death, has
descended at once into humane nature, that shall be showed in its own place. At
least by the coming of the sensitive soul, death has entered, and the
corruption of our whole nature, and the Majesty and Integrity of our former
nature was obliterated or blotted out.

For truly, while the mind did immediately perform the offices of life,
neither was the sensitive soul as yet present, immortality was also present,
neither had beast-like darkness occupied the understanding.

And so man indeed suffered Shipwreck in his own nature, and that an
unrestorable one: but by the new birth, under the calamities of tribulations,
ma^^s exalted in a far more excellent

Not indeed that the arteries do give all force or virtue to the Spleen, but
they have themselves as Bowels, after the manner of Stars: For although the
Stars do borrow their light from

Be it therefore, that the arteries of the Spleen do supply the place of the
Sun; yet the Spleen it self has obtained a double and native dignity peculiar
to it self, although the Family-service

And the sensitive soul it self, being as it were the husk of the mind, does
always, will it,

Also Remedies do scarce materially go without the hedges or bounds of the
stomach: Quartane Ague is plain enough to be seen: For the immortal mind is
read to be inspired into Adam, by omnipotency, and that without the Wedlock of
the sensitive soul: And that breath of life, he calls a substance: And
therefore that is not found to be breathed into bruit Beasts.

Therefore the mind was first of all immediately tied to the Archeus, as to
its own Organ or Instrument, the which, therefore it could at its pleasure,
daily substitute anew, Adam: But seeing that in the same day of their
transgression, they were made guilty of death; a soul subject to death, came
unto them, the Vicaresse and Companion of the mind: To wit, unto whom the
mind it self straightway transferred the dispositions of the government of the
Body: For at first, there was an immediate Wed-lock of the immortal mind with
the Archeus. Presently after the fall, and the stirring up of the sensitive
soul, the mind withdrew it ^^lf like a Kernel, into the center of the
sensitive soul, whereto it was tied by the bond of life. The mind is not
nourished by foods, it could choose meats for its own Archeus, and prepare them
for him, who now is constrained with an unwearied study to watch for his own
support of nourishment: And that, by degrees, he less and less fitly prepares
and applies to himself, by reason of the defective duration, and power of the
sensitive soul. Thus therefore, I ought to speak concerning the seat of the
mind, of the material occasion of mortality, and the necessities of Diseases
and distemper: For truly, what things are here required, in the Treatise of the
entrance of death into humane nature, is demonstrated at large, with an
explication of that Text: From the North shall evil be stretched out over all
the Inhabitants of the Earth. Therefore, for a Summary: The central place of
the Soul, is the Orifice or upper mouth of the stomach, no otherwise, than as
the Root of Vegetables is the vital place of the same. The mind sits in the
sensitive soul, whereto it was consequently bound after the fall: But the Brain
is the executive member of the canceipts of the soul, as it sits chief over the
sinews and muscles, in respect of motion; but in respect of sense or feeling,
it possesses in it self, the faculties of memory, will, and Imagination:
Therefore the stomach failing or being defective, there are palenesses,
tremblings, drith's, Consumptions of the flesh and strength, wringings of the
Belly or Guts, the Asthma or stoppage of breathing, Jaundises, Palsies,
Convulsions, giddinesses of the Head, Apoplexies, etc. For the most famous
Physicians do wonder, that oft-times extreme defects are overcome, not
otherwise, than by remedies pertaining to the stomach, and that the evil of the
stomach does bring forth Diseases far distant from it self. And the more modern
Physicians are amazed, that vulnerary potions should succesfully cure wounds of
the joints: And that according to Paracelsus, the Cancer, Wolf, the eating
inflamed Ulcer, are cured by a Drink.

Therefore the error of those that cure the more outward parts that are
ill-affected, as if

CHAP. XXXVIII. From the Seat of the Soul unto Diseases.
1. A greater sense is proved to be in the mouth of the Stomach, than in the
eye, or fingers. 2. The Schools do every where, being unconstrained, consent to
the Paradox concerning the seat of the Soul, although they do openly dissent
therefrom. 3. The wayling of those that are exorbitant through much leachery.
4. The life of the stomach is chief over the other digestions. 5. The Ferment
that is a friend to the stomach, is afterward, an enemy to all the particular
shops of digestions. 6. Diverse Diseases are stirred up by the Ferment of the
stomach being transplanted. 7. The snare of Gatarrhs. 8. The foundation of
Diseases. 9. The joynt-sickness proves that thing. 10. Very many Diseases do
flow centrally from the stomach, which are feared, and healed by the Head. 11.
Of what sort the co-mixture of the Character of some Diseases may be. 12. How
Medicines applied to or bound about the Head, do operate. 13. It is proved,
that the seat of the Soul is not in the heart it self. 14. Remarkable things
about the Character of Diseases. 15. Why the effects of fear do vary their own
effects. 16. The same thing is considered for a poisonous occasional cause. 17.
They are appropriated to the vital light. 18. An objection. 19. The intent of
the Author. 20. A most notable decree or opinion about the Direction, Power,
Progress, etc. of Remedies. 21. The healing of a remote wound, and the notable
force of Alcalies restraining remote sharpnesses from the stomach. 22. The
Schools are deceived about the Remedies of wounds. 23. A lixivial Salt does
potentially lay hid in Herbs, and performs other things, which the Alcali of
things calcined do not so easily do. 24. Whence the diversity in the Remedy of
a wound, and Ulcer is. 25. The diuretical or Vrine-provoking virtue in a
vulnerary potential Alcali, is examined.

THE mouth of the stomach does (very often) not endure the hand laid on it,
although

Indeed by the complaints of many that do wan^onize with foolish leache^^ they
were compelled; because they did bewail that they were oppressed with an
eveni^^ ^owling and vexed

And moreover, because that seat of the sensitive soul does not only govern the
digestive

So indeed, that hostile sourness, the which, although it be acceptable to the
Stomach, yea

Therefore a foreign guest of the Stomach being brought by a vital Beginning,
unto a strange

This indeed is the deceitful snare of Catarrhes or Rheumes, which has
ensnated the

But that it is a far more easy and nigh thing (but only the hand being once
delivered to

For gowty persons are first ushered in, and they should accuse the Stomach,
and that they Sunovia, and it is the transparent nourishable seed of the
joints, and it is there the more plentifully laid up, by reason of the
frequency of motions, and a strong com-pressing of the bones: For truly
otherwise, the bones should very shortly rage with heat, and be dried by a
mutual rubbing together. But although these things are much more fully
described in the Chapter of the Gout, yet it is profitable for me more plainly
to enlarge them.

Surely, diverse diseases are met withal, which draw their original centrally
from the Stomach, etc. savours, and especially the sour, fermental, and
digestive or trans-changeative savor is not proper or natural to the Stomach;
but it is prepared and inspired into it, by the Kitchen of the spleen, being a
neighbor unto it for this end; which ferment indeed failing, for that very
cause there is an un-concoction in the house, a difficult or slow coction, a
dejected appetite, a loathing of meats; which things are presently beheld to be
proper to, and stamped on fevers. Wherefore the old man has said, That sour
belchings coming upon burntish or stinking ones, is a good sign. Also it
sometimes happens that a sparing ferment does flow unto the Stomach: From thence
also that an unnourishing or wasting of flesh is stirred up, and that meats do
become hard to be cocted: Yea, the Stomach which seems to be deprived of its
ordinary feeling, neither which feels any things but those which are hurtful,
and that as often as it is unworthily affected by foreign things contained
within it; it presently under the smalnesse of the ferment, brings forth a
watery liquor, and is busy in thrusting it out with a loathing. But I call
that watery, which now and then is nothing but a mere water, likewise a slimy
muscilage, also oft-times, unsavory, and not seldom seasoned with a foreign
tartness, which does as far differ from a vital ferment, as a dead man does
from a living one; so that, although they do participate in taste, yet they very
far differ from each other; which may be seen in the bitterness of Wormwood,
and of asses or wild cucumber, or Coloquintida. For while the drink, and also
the nourishment to be adjoined in the Stomach, do offend through the penury of
a lively ferment, they presently decay into a yellow liquour, which the Schools
have hitherto falsely called the bowel Gaul, yea also one of the four
constitutive humors of the venal blood; being ignorant the while, by what
author and guider, choler should be separated unmixt from the venal blood,
nigh akin to, and intimately well mixed with it, and that (surely much changed
from choler swimming on the blood) should be all alone brought unto the
Stomach; Seeing there is not a passage from the Liver unto the Stomach, but by
so many windings, which may worthily accuse this invention of the Schools of
blockishness. But when the nourishment approaches to the Stomach, that it may
be made like unto it, and nourish it, and it fails through the penury of the
ferment, or a storm otherwise arisen in the Stomach, it presently pu^rifies and
becomes infamous with a burnt savor: For that being detained in a lukewarm
place, which has now entered the threshold of life, and has been received into
the number of things by an by vital, it presently also putrifies, is made
burntish, yea if delay shall have access, it becomes cadaverous: Whence are
the disease of choler, lienteries or smoothnesses of the bowels, belly
passions, etc. Also now and then the Archeus of the Stomach, being even
unwilling to supply the smalness of a sour ferment, is wroth, and brings forth
a sharp, sour, cruel one; from thence are inordinate appetites, and likewise
wringings as well in the Stomach, as in the bowels themselves, for the most
part cruel ones. But if the plenty or harshness of food, does flow unto, and
overflow a moderate sour ferment, then the whole food waxes bitter, that
excrement by such a degeneration grows yellow, and gross, and a various Troop
of evils being thereby kindled, it rises up into a Flux, unless the whole be
at once presently cast forth by stool. Sometimes also the Archeus of the Stomach
does conceive a fury, and is enflamed of his own free accord, so as the
tartness does not strike into the meats, but does wandringly infect the
Archeus himself: Then indeed the joint sickness or Gout is conceived, and the
Archeus being diffused throughout the whole body, does notwithstanding
immediately affect with its sharpness, the Sunovia or raw seed immediately
adjudged for the fashioning of the Bones, and therefore laid up within the
joints: But he defiles the Sunovia or raw Seed of the more weak part in the
strength of nature: Therefore the joint sickness is reckoned to choose at
pleasure, the part which it apprehends. And because that tartness being
received in the center of the Stomach, is dispersed by the Archeus unto remote
places; therefore it is false that defluxions are propagated from the head,
through the sinews and veins. So indeed, great wringings of the belly, by a
conserving or consent of parts, do stir up a hurtful sharpness in the Stomach,
which afterward do oft-times wondrously shake the hands, and feet with a
convulsion, and likewise straightway after, does also resolve them with a
Palsy. Therefore an undue tartness of the Stomach, if it lay hold of the dewy
nourishment, and the spermatick nourishable juice thereof, how slenderly soever
it be, it stirs up giddinesses of the head, and by so much the more troublesome
ones, by how much these do the more behold or respect its hinder part. But an
Apoplexy arises, while as an unsavory Muscilage, plainly by a strange motion
and entertainment, does enter from the hollow of the Stomach into the veins
thereof, about the Orifice, and does keep the rightness of its own side, and
distinguishes a great one from a less, by theabsence or presence of
poysonsomnesse. But there is for the most part in such chronical diseases, a
certain sealing Character: So indeed the Gout does oft-times issue from the
Beginning of the Parents into the offspring, and does there patiently wait
very many years, before that the proper fruit thereof does obtain its own
ripeness. Therefore in the vital Beginnings and radical Organs of the Stomach
(which are the local, or implanted Archeus it self) that post-bume and
translated gouty character or impression, does stick fast by a hereditary
right; and consequently, likewise also, that entired character which is gotten
by an inordinary of living, that sits in the Archeus of the orifice of the
Stomach; the which, while it is wearied by Archeus of life. For let us feign a
unity of the thing supposed, and of the property whereby that character does
lay intombed for the Gout, Apoplexy, or Falling evil, and is stirred up at the
set stations of its own ripeness, or is much stirred by certain meats taken, or
smells. And then let us consider the natural sharpness of the stomach, now
degenerate, and likewise the tenderness of its orifice, stirring up swoonings
and falling sicknesses (which testifies nothing besides an easy feeling,
hurting, suffering, disturbance of the life, and so an enemy present, tumulting
from very many things) therefore if the sharpness which is co-mingled with the
Archeus, be stirred up besides nature, and seeing this is chief over all the
particular digestions, that sharpness is beamingly brought down unto strange
cottages, whereto is wholly an enemy; and from thence does the Gout or joint
sickness issue forth. But if it be co-knit to the meat, or drink, pains of the
Colic, wringings of the Guts, and other exorbitances of the parts occasionally
are present. But if that the sharpness of the Stomach does degenerate, and
associate it self with an opiate or drowsy poison, with a piercing toward the
seat of the Soul, the falling evil is straightway present. But if a stinking
muscilage inclining to bitterness does arise, there is a giddiness of the head;
and that more strongly insulting, does stir up an Apoplexy. For neither is it
meet to distinguish those precisely from each other, while it is better to have
the matter or occasion exhausted.

Likewise some external Medicines bound about the head, do preserve from an
Epileptical Archeus: Indeed in either manner the hurtful matter is to be
let or prevented, to be extinguished or annihilated, that it be not
co-mingled with the Archeus. And moreover, as vegetables are wont for the most
part, to sleep in Winter, and to be as it were awakened at Spring, that they
may send forth a bud, leaves, flowers, or fruits; So a Gouty, Epileptical, etc.
Character, is also stirred up into a ripeness at a fet period, unless the
importunity of provoking things do forestal it: At leastwise, the giddiness of
the head, and Apoplexy, etc. although they are brought back within occasional
causes; yet they do sit immediately within the very nest of life, in the
Archeus, which indeed is implanted in the orifice or upper mouth of the
Stomach. For in how easy a breviary, by things hanged on the neck or body, is
the falling-evil suspended and detained? Because an entrance of the hurtful
cause into the sensitive soul, is hindered; for there is a piercing of the
hurtful cause lurking in the Archeus, to within, and the which does therefore
wholly take away the mind: Indeed it leaves a

But the Gout, as it tends to without, so the Character thereof does not so
much affect the secret chamber, or seat of the soul, as the Archeus the
President or chief Ruler of the digestions: Archeus (but not the soul) which
then alone bare the whole burden on himself. But he that has gotten the
Character of the Gout by the exorbitances of his life, although it shall come
to him being a man in years, yet it keeps the nature of its own property:
whence it is made manifest, that the stamp or character of every disease is
promiscuously to be admitted into the lap of the sensitive soul.

So that as great fear has made many persons Epileptical or to have the
falling sickness for their life time; so a co-like fear has afterward rendered
many free from the Gout. Indeed Hippocrates (which seeing it has no where ever
existed, is to be taken for the effect attributed to that choler) subsisting in
the Midriffs (for he has had respect unto the seat of the soul or the
Duumvirate, not yet known) if it he dispersed into the body, provokes the
falling sickness; but if into the soul, madness. For such was the plainness of
the first age, which indeed did heartily fifth things; but for want of light
Archeus the instrument of life: And not only those good inclinations of
fathers, or grandfathers, are propagated into the Seed; but also, certain
diseasie seedinesses, such as are in simples, are cobred, being as it were
hardly threatened on us: The which indeed, as they do deserve a serious Archeus,
then next unto the arterial spirit, also oft-times beamingly to the life it
self, which indeed is nothing but a central light, capable also to be pierced
by any radial or beamy light: So indeed the vital light of the sensitive soul
is pierced by a foreign light, being coupled with it, no otherwise then as
light through colored glass, does tinge a simple light in the wall. Truly in
the Monarchy belonging to life, and the which descends from the father of
lights, are those living lights, which otherwise do shine in a simple Sunnie
light, or in a colored light, being attributed wholly to a frail or mortal
light: And there is a combination of living lights, not only capable of bearing
each other, but also active on each other: so that from hence it is plain, that
the Father of lights does restrain the Bridles of life, and of whole nature.
Therefore in the Arteries of the spleen, or in the very substance of that
Bowel, is now a property stamped (which I call the characteristical one of a
disease) or next in the very coat, veins, sinews of the Stomach, or also in the
vital Archeus of the same; which property does propagate it self by intervals
or spaces, into the sensitive soul; or it shines thorough it with a continual
fuel, and compels that soul to be its Chambermaid; so that the soul it self,
or the life or vital Archeus thereof, being vexed or troubled by turns, they
are carried headlong into some motion of fury, madness, swooning, giddiness of
the head, falling evil, apoplexy, palsy, convulsion, etc.

I know well enough, that the adverse party that is not desirous to learn, will
accuse the mist which I spread, while I wrest these sublunary things aside unto
the life, unto vital lights, or

Truly I every where behold it to be nothing but the common good of my
neighbor, for to open the windows, whereby the light of nature, hitherto
obscured, may come into the Schools, guidance of the Archeus, or is in stilled
by a participation of life.* Good God, how far do I dissent from the tradition
of the Ancients? I would there may be such, or at least I would thou may
make them such, who may comprehend me, and nourish the hope of the sick with a
richer talent! But thou, O God, wilt do in these things, according to thy own
good pleasure, to whom I totally refer and offer all things, and every thing,
which I have, know, see, and am able to do. I return therefore unto my path.

First of all, I have elsewhere shown, that vulnetary or wound-herbs do
operate, by virtue Lixivium or Lie. Neither I pray, therefore, let the
Physician abhor the use of wine in a wound, or fever, etc. For at that very
time that it savours of an Alcali, it loses the virtues and property of wine:
For so, the Lixivial Salt of the Teil-tree is successfully given to drink, no
otherwise than that powder of Crabs. For the goodness of God has invited us,
that by reason of the rareness whereby that stone does subsist in a little
space, mortals may be drawn into an admiration thereof, and thereby also may
learn its virtues, and may sift out its property alike wonderful, whereby it
profits wounded, bruised people, and those that have fallen headlong from an
high place.

And here presently a wonder not yet declared, comes to light; to wit, that a
wound in the Alcali has ever obtained access; to wit, as the Lixivial Salt of
this Stone does correct the sharpness, which is kindled in the utmost members,
or habit of the body, and which is prepared to be kindled. For neither does the
force of the Alcali pass from the Stomach through the Veins, even into the
Toes: But neither is it admitted thither: and although it should be admitted,
yet it could not proceed free and unbroken, through the foregoing questions and
examinations of digestions: For there is no man, which may be ignorant of this,
and not grant me what I have said.

Therefore from thence it is altogether manifest, that that Alcali, although it
go not materially Alcali go materially unto places far off, to restrain
sharpness; seeing neither indeed is it able to pierce unto the Spleen, the
seat of a Quartan Ague. Therefore it suffices, that it restrains sharpness
in the Stomach, the ruler of all the digestions: Not indeed that it destroys
the sour ferment of the Stomach, but as it is corrected, and the translation of
the ferment unto remote places, is hindered: which thing also the aforesaid
Paradox it self confirms, to wit, that the digestion of the Stomach is chief
over the particular digestions of a thousand kitchins.

And then, that there is not made a wandering of Lixivial Salts, materially; and
that it is better to Alcalies of these stones, than calcined Shell-fishes:
Because that although they do help, and the Alcali in calcined things is far
more powerful; yet it has under an actual vigor, vitiated the ferment of the
Stomach, or at least does incline it: Whereas the Stone of Crabsis carried not
so much into the ferment, as into the product of the ferment. Also there is a
plain reason, why that Stone, and herbs like unto it, do heal great and remote
wounds, yet that they do not any thing help small ulcers in the throat,
windpipe, or bladder.

For it is also hence confirmed; because every Wound does sharpen its state, if
the sournesse The which also therefore, is not appeased by the taking of an
Alcali, and there is need of Secrets piercing every way. For meats, drinks, and
medicines do lose their own virtue or strength about the first digestion of the
stomach; neither do they go; or are carried deeper; because they only nourish
simply, and therefore do there put off, and plainly detest every mask horrid to
nourishment, or are otherwise changed into excrements: And so also they are
made unprofitable for the conceived curing.

But if indeed the Stone of Crabs be a provoker of urine, it is not that
therefore the coming thereof even into the bladder is to be hoped for, or that
its virtue remains untouched, and unbroken; Far be it: For let it be
sufficient, if that Stone do spoil the whole drink of a souring faculty;
because it is that which only, how little soever of it be brought down in the
urine, belongs to the breeding of the Strangury or pissing by drops, Dysury or
difficulty of pissing, and heats familiar in the disease of the Stone: For the
sharpness, although it be most excellently subdued by a sound gaul; yet the
least quantity of it may be hostile in the urine, and to the parts subservient
unto it, and no less unto the whole remaining family of digestions. Now at
length I return unto the Authority of the Duumvirate, that it may be manifest
in what sort the soul does diverse ways exercise its own commands in its own
body, and does act by way of a command, government, rule, as also of cruelty,
fury, and tyranny; neither that to this end, it stands in need of pipes, winds,
vapors, smoaks, and least of all, of the help of heats, colds, and defluxions.
The Schools beholding the effects of the Duumvirate, and thinking to knit
causes to them all, have transferred all things into heats, or humors, and the
declinings or cessations of these; as if those things which naturally happen in
us, should happen only through an urgent necessity of weights, heats, and
imaginary humors.

And seeing they have gone back from the Soul, from living strength, unto the
artificial, or dead examples of learning by demonstration; at length they have
quieted themselves, that

CHAP. XXXIX. The Authority or Privilege of the Duumvirate.
1. An Aphorism of the old man is illustrated. 2. The falling-evil and madness
are proved to proceed from the Duumvirate. 3. That sleep is from the
Duumvirate. 4. An argument against the prerogative of the head. 5. The same
thing is confirmed from Galen against his will. 6. A privy shift of the Schools
for the head. 7. What all particular Senses can attribute unto the thing
generated. 8. The vegetative power is in and from the Dunmvirate. 9. The Young
lives diverse ways. 10. The fantasy of the Brain does presently die, unless
it be nourished by the lower parts. 11. Why the soul is said to be in the
blood. 12. Conceits ascending from the parts about the short ribs, are
presently seen in the countenance. 13. The first conceptions are proved to be
formed in the seat of the soul. 14. Sleep and dreams to be from the Duumvirate.
15. The Mare is in the stomach; therefore sleep and dreams are from thence. 16.
But the Gumm-ich before the coming of teeth, from the sensitive soul only.
17. The opinion of the Schools about the Mare. 18. It is noted for an
absurdity. 19. Balaams Ass spoke not the word of the Angel. 20. An history of
my own steep fall. 21. Some dignities of the Pylorus are reckoned up, and
astonishing remedies, by reason of their easiness. 22. Concerning the seat of
the soul for the Duumvirate. 23. An history of madness from a medicine as yet
existing in the stomach. 24. The same by fainting or swooning. 25. From a Maxim
of the Schools. 26. From the suffering of hunger. 27. That troublous passions
of the mind have respect unto the Duumvirate, not the head. 28. Too much study
brings forth madness to be felt or perceived first in the stomach. 29. An
error of the Schools. 30. By the Maxim of the Schools it is contended against
the Schools. 31. Sleep is from the Midriffs. 32. A remedy of Opiates. 33.
Vesalius carps at Galen. 34. Of what sort the state of innocence was. 35. That
the first conceptions are badly said to be those out of our power. 36. A power
of remembering in the Scull, and others elsewhere. 37. The memory of the mind is
diverse from that of the imagination or fantasy. 38. The lustful, and wrathful
seat of the Schools. 39. The leasures of the Spleen. 40. The Head follows the
Midriffs. 41. A stupefactive virtue. 42. The Stone-vessels or Cods. 43.
Tickling or provocation to leachery is not to be attributed to the kidney, or
reins, but to the stomach. 44. That a frail or mortal life has entered, and is
established, where the soul also is. 45. The mouth of the stomach is the center
of the whole trunck of the body. 46. What it may be to have carried the Messiah
in his loins. 47. A remedy for a woman in travel. 48. Judiciary Astrology falls
to the ground. 49. An external Spleen, what virtue it may have. 50. Why a woman
at the time of her going with Young, is troubled with wondrous conceits. 51.
The mind does not become mad. 52. Splenetick conceits. 53. Curable, and
desperate diseases, which they may be. 54. The natural endowments of Simples.
55. Conclusions deduced from an ignorance of the foregoing things. 56.
Sleepifying remedies do not heal madnesses. 57. The Lydian Whet-stone for a
Physician, in madnesses. 58. An objection of those that are ignorant or
skillful. 59. Fatness limited. 60. The Majesty of the Duumvirate is to be
admired. 61. Risibility or a capableness of laughter, what it is, and whence it
happens to man alone. 62. The dominion of the Duumvirate over the Lungs. 63.
The original of Spittles. 64. The virtue of Sulphur is determined. 65. Why the
Stomach commands the Lungs.

IT is a saying of Hipocrates, In whom a vein does strongly beat in the part
about the short Ribs, their mind is presently sick or distempered: For the
Artery of the Spleen is most frequent, yet the Pulse thereof is not manifest,
as long as it is in good health, and does rightly imagine: But when it is rash,
it presently, with a strong pulse, even into the left ear, being also oft-times
audible by the sitters by, denounces madness: But that thing is manifest in a
thorn imprinted in the finger, whose pulse before unknown, is presently after,
before the swelling of the finger, stirred with a troublesome and hard beating.

Therefore, madness is denoted to proceed from a thorny spleen. The same old
man has

For all madnesses (except the Sisters of sleepy evils) do undergo watchings:
As a sure etc.

Therefore if the Head should be the proper place (...) Imagination, the
operations of the mind should remain, which notwithstanding do perish,
presently after light is denied

Galen proposes ashes of burnt Crabs, against the madness proceeding from a
Dog: which madness rages in the desirable or lustful faculty, or in the fear
of liquid things; From whence Hydrophobia is given unto it: Therefore madness
by a Dog, lays in the part of the desirable power: For neither is the
Lixivium of Crabs fit to be brought unto the brain: For nothing goes thither,
which was not first transchanged in the stomach, neither does it go to the
fifth, or sixth, but through the first and second digestion: Therefore that
madness is by intervals, to wit, the Cup being offered, it rages into the
desirable faculty; but none has dedicated the lustful power of drinks unto the
Brain: Therefore when a mad Dog bit the finger of Dr. Bald, that poison crept
from the finger into the stomach, as the chief Instrument of the sensitive
soul; as also to the Spleen, bending about it: whither the Remedy of that
Lixivium creeps, as it is the subject for the Hypochondriacal passion. But
least the Schools should detract from the dignity of the Brain, they grant that
madness,

Peter Bor, a Christian, in his Annalls of Belgium, relates, that in the year
1564, at Bruxels, a Sow brought forth six young ones, the first whereof (for
the last in generating, is always had only a sensative soul. Indeed a
Sodomitical monster is more like the Mother than the Father.

So of a sheep the mother, and a He goat the Father, a Lamb comes forth, which
besides Wool and tail, has his other parts like a sheep. So a Mule, his
Father being an Ass, and his Mother a Mare. And so a Horse of a Bull and a
Mare.

Lastly, in seven Coneys, from their Father a Dormouse, and their mother a
Coney, nothing besides their tail was like unto the ^e ^^tter. If therefore
that monster had the soul of a swine, therefore the soul follows the
condition, not indeed of the Head, but of the inferior members: And the very
prerogative of the fantastical soul inhabits in the Duumvirate (although the
Head be a part which is the conductresse of conceits formed in the lower parts)
for it is in the Center, and very middle of the Body.

For I have demonstrated elsewhere that the Spleen does inspire a digestive
Ferment into

But the Young is grown before quickening, only by the influx of participation
from its mother,

Therefore the actions of government do beam forth on their objects, with an
un-interrupted light: And therefore the discourse being suited unto its own
shops, does receive Laws etc. persons. From (...) it sufficiently manifests,
that the brain does obey the doting Duumvirate.

For it is most agreeable to truth (...) the wisdom of flesh and blood (which
is the sensitive

For I have observed seriously, the eyes and countenance of one distempered
about his short Ribs, to be writhed presently as often as he would relate to me
his foolish and first conceits; Act. Ap. chap. 2. v. 17. And it shall be in the
last days, that I will pour out of my Spirit upon all fl^^^ and your Sons and
your Daughters shall prophecy. And your young men shall see Visions, and your
old men shall dream Dreams. To wit, significative ones. Nighr unto night
shows knowledge, if the Watchmen do fore-learn to withdraw his thoughts from
things or affairs, place, and motion.

I have also not undeservedly affirmed, that the first conceits of
disturbances are felt in

I have also taught elsewhere, that the stomach of the Liver, is not some
notable hollowness spreading within its own bowel; but that the Mesentery veins
themselves are the sheath of sanguification or bloud-making, into which the
Liver does beam forth the first breathingholes of sanguification: But that the
stomach of the spleen is the stomach it self, which it therefore nourishes by
embracing, that it may inspire into it the Vulcan of digestion: yet there is
another and proper stomach of the spleen, admirable for the manifold winding of
Arteries, wherein the Milt does cook for it self alone: Under which digestion,
if the least error rusheth on it, the spleen cease in digesting, and denies
the ferments due to the external stomach: which thing is evident in a Fever,
while as instead of a sour digestion, burntish or stinking belchings do come
for witnesses, which are emulous of a certain putrefaction. The Brain also,
through its own unsensibleness, has relation to the Milt, as also the Coats of
the brain unto the stomach it self, in this respect: For the action of the
stomach is powerful, and has in it the Vicarship of the heart, and does
execute the offices thereof, against the will of the Schools.

For neither does the spleen by an unbroken, vital, and wealthy number of
Arteries, flourish in vain, in its own conceptions; but as often as it makes its
conceits drowsy through the delights

No Physician has hitherto doubted, but that the Ephialtes or Mare is stirred
up from the Midriffs: for it comes for the most part, through the taking of a
larger supper of the more

For the Schools do assign the causes of the Mare to be gross vapors invading
the thorny

I hitherto confess, that for fifty full years I never as yet saw a gross
vapor of distillations. There are indeed corporeal exhalations, in which a
volatile matter is sublimed, and not only cause a hearing of inward
whisperings, and grants to discourse, also to fear; but also external, true,
and appearing objects are heard: But he cannot move his tongue, how much soever
others may speak in time of dreaming. Do the Schools perhaps think, the motions
of the tongue to be made by the thorny marrow? Therefore those gross vapors
shall be far different from dreamy ones, they not hindering the use of motion
of the tongue, yea of the whole Body: For while they apply themselves to the
sinews that they may afford the causes of unmoveableness, the Schools
themselves become dumb and unmovable: While they shall never understand what
they say, as neither, after what manner those gross (that is impossible
vapors) shall pierce the stomach, bottom of the belly, hollow vein extended
through the back, with a beating Artery its companion, and likewise the
ligaments of the turning joints. And how those things shall be silent,
appeased, and cease at a moment, if happily he be awakened who suffers the
distemper of the Mare. Surely they had more rightly learned the action of the
government of the Duumvirate, to wit, that an impediment brought on the stomach
in its vital government alo^^^, does without vapors, or Truncks, trouble the
Brain, does vitiate the sinews, and first conceptions, as it interrupteth the
comforts of the spleen: For so it happens, that those who have the Apoplexy
and Palsy, do eat, hear, and sleep, etc. yet that they cannot speak: For the
Schools do accuse the back-running sinews to be stopped: Why therefore shall
not the Mare have regard to these sinews rather than to the thorny marrow? Why
do Remedies for the Duumvirate, help those that have an Apoplexy, a giddiness
in the Head, that know not how to go and speak; those very Medicines I say,
being as yet present in the hollow of the stomach; but are unprofitable to the
back-running sinews, and head? Has a Pie perhaps those sinews stuffed together
before speech? Shall a Cow which thrusts forth her tongue moveable into the
nostrils, have her tongue bound, and does she want back-running sinews? Or
else she shall have them in vain, if they are perpetually and naturally stopped.

A certain voluntary command is brought down from the Head unto the sinews of
the tongue, that is denied unto four-footed beasts; but not unto some Birds:
Likewise that thing,

In the year 1643. the day before the Calends of the 11th month called January,
I sat beginning to write in a close. Chamber; but the cold was great, and I
bad an earthen Pot or My little Daughter comes unto me, who as soon as she
sented the hurt or offense, wi^hdrew the Earthen Pan, and unless she had
chanced to come, I being choked, had perished: For I presently felt about the
mouth of my stomach, a sore-threatned swooning; I arose from my Study; while I
would go forth abroad, I fell like a straight staff, and was brought away for
dead: For there was a twofold affect, one of the bruised hinder part of my
head, which filched away my taste, and smelling, but did over-cloud my hearing:
The other was a sounding affect stirred up from the stomach: For in the first
days, my Head turned round with giddiness, as often as I looked on one side,
much more if upwards. I thought that that befell me from the stroke of the fall,
with the naked hinder part of my Head suddenly, and from my whole statute, on a
hard stone: But by little and little, I was better assured, and I for many
days, revolved all things within my self. I knew therefore at length, that my
giddiness proceeded from my-stomach, and that it was there nourished by the
same Root, from whence the swooning had proceeded: For some meats did promote
that my giddiness, and specially about the evening, to wit, while they were not
as yet cocted; and so that the same thing happens in the Mare, from meats well
nigh concocted. I had remembered also, that as often as I had passed over the Sea
in time past, although I was in due health, and was very much given to eating;
yet my Head ran round and staggered for many days after, until that by a
gentle vomit, I had shaved away the filths out of my stomach, whereon that
whirling Idea was imprinted: For I certainly found, that my giddiness did not
only accompany the offensive meats; but moreover, almost an hour of finished
digestion, and that food being taken, and moderate Wine, my giddiness was
always presently mitigated. And moreover, although I had long after that,
escaped wholly free, nevertheless, at the eating of some meats, I suffered a
relapse about the evening: Therefore (as they are wont to say) I believed
experienced Robert, that all giddiness of the Head does climb up from the
parts beneath, without a vapor or smoke; but that the Head does hearken to the
stomach, through the government of action alone. And which is more, at the time
of the giddiness which threatened my fall, all discourse began to reel or wheel
about, (...) presently after the taking of wine, was restored: And so I
comprehended, not indeed the meat left in the stomach, but the first fuel of my
swooning, to have received an hurtful impression from the stain of the more
unworthy food; from whence by the Sulphur of Vitriol I was also made free.

I have elsewhere explained the Pylorus the Governor, together with his
dignities, whereby I have observed the more cruel Colic, sometimes to pass
into a Palsy, but at another time to have brought forth a Convulsion of the
hands, feet, arms, and legs. I have also seen the griefs of the stomach, by
reason of the sharpness of pain, to have taken away all motion, and to have
caused an affect like unto a Tetanus or straight extended cramp: which affect,
our Country people have called (Geschor) an in-darting, as if it were
suspected or overlooked, and sent in by witches. And the Ischiatick passion or
Sciatica does oft-times accompany those in-dartings; whereupon I have seen
cuttings of veins, likewise solutive medicines, Clysters, Emplaisters,
Ointments, cauteries or seating medicines, and the like, administered, and with
an unfruitful event: For theirs were mocked endeavors, who would establish a
remedy unto the consequents or effects, or products, and would pass by the
Springs issuing from the Pylorus: For I have observed the four less hot seeds,
for the most part to have appeased the storm; because they succor the most
inward Archeus and household remedy of the bowels, and appease him being wroth.
Wherefore I admonish the Reader, that he take good notice of the stumblings of
the Schools, who impute it to their Catarrhs and deffuxions of phlegm, for a
sacred anchor of their ignorance.

But surely an History is worthy to be noted: A man of fifty years of age, that
was burst, suffered a Rupture of his Entrails through the carelessenesse of a
Bond or Trusse, which presently increased to the bigness of ones head, and
waxed hard after a wonderful manner: He renewed hot fomentations of milk and
Cows dung, all night, and they tried to put it back; but in vain: For truly one
only hard swelling had become continual or firm, like an earthen pot, and took
away the hope of a possibility of its going back through an hole that was ten
times less. Therefore we offered him a draught of wine being once boiled with
seeds bruised, (to wit, of Anise, Caraway, Fennel, and Coriander, of each a
like quantity) and presently the hardness was made soft or tender, and the
burstness was suffered to be thrust back: wherein the hardness, with so great
a swelling, is stiffly to be considered; the which indeed owed not their
existence unto wind, nor to dung; but hardness is subject to the Pylorus: And
therefore it seemed not to be a body co-touching from the passages of the
Ileos, but it seemed one only continual body: And then, the Ileos did not fall
on that which fell down, neither rushed it of its own accord, forward, into so
great an heap; but it was thrust forth thither by a more powerful force of
government. Again, it does not appear in women with so great a swelling, and so
great hardness: Wherefore the injury of the stones stirs up the Pylorus into
fury: And therefore the whole remedy consists in the mitigation of his fury.
But I have seen some great men to have miserably perished, being seduced with
an hope placed in Physicians, locally, according to Galenical absurdities.

Furthermore, hence I return unto the Duumvirate, wherein the soul sits. For
Plato has Eve in the same place, and death invaded. For the Schools do on the
one hand scoff at the words Cardialgia and Cardiogmus, as rustical and
barbarous words; but afterward, on the other hand, they have viewed swooning,
so immediately to spring from the mouth of the Stomach, as if it did wholly
consist in the same place, to wit, did proceed from thence, and were there also
presently restored by sweet smelling or spicy injected liquours: but they have
taken notice in swooning, the understanding, sense, motion, and together also
the pulse to f^il; and so that it climbs suddenly out of the stomach from the
functions which are ascribed to the (...) and the heart together; yet without a
deeper diligent search, they have attributed the (...) constitutive temperature
of the life, understanding, and soul, unto the head; not being able to
conceive, that the beginnings of life do belong to the Duumvirate, although
they should be put in execution by subservient Organs or Instruments. As if the
beginning of motion were in the muscles, and bones, because they are moved!

A certain Lawyer had taken two drams of Henbane seed bruised, instead of
Dill-seed,

For those that faint, do affirm that they feel the fainting to be threatened in
the midriffs,

Therefore, if the maxim of the Schools be true, that from the hurting of the
actions the Diaphragma or midriff.

For therefore mad-folks are most able to endure hunger and thirst. For I have
seen in the year. 1615. at Alost, a Girl of nine years old, wanton enough, the
little daughter of a Steward Oh head, that art worthy of Hellebor: For although
manifold vomitive medicines are not wanting, yet a peculiar virtue is
attributed to Hellebor for a mad brain: Not indeed, that the poisonous and
hurtful quality does reach into the head: For truly, Hellebor being present
within the stomach, and that being afterward cast up, Convulsions do happen
thereupon, such as I have noted above, from frettings or wringing in the guts.
Therefore black Hellebor eases madnesses before other vomitive medicines
commonly known, because it unloads the ancient fevers of the midriffs, and
unloads the Spleen: For that, nothing strikes the head by arteries, or vapors,
has been already, fully, and by many arguments demonstrated above. Therefore
the aforesaid diseases, and their remedies have regard unto the Duumvirate,
neither do they affect the brain, unless by government, or by a secondary
passion: For Students do inordinately feel a fullness within, composed of
giddiness, and anguish, with sighs, and they point at the mouth of their
stomach with (...): But from thence they accuse the pains of the head. But if
at length they are (...) through continuance, they perceive about the mouth of
the stomach, a certain swooning, and afterward their imagination to be
disordered or turned upside down: And therefore unless they do speedily desist
from studying, they keep a foolish madness returning by intervals, all their
life long. Therefore where the hurt is felt, there is the blemish of the
understanding, and the soul does principally reside.

The Schools on the contrary, do contend, that the Spleen is the sink of black
choler, and that it unloads it self of its own dungs, into the Stomach: and
that which I call the ferment of Galen, and to forsake the black cholery
Schools; concluding by their own Maxim; If the cause of madness be in the
Sp^en; therefore the Inn of the judicious understanding is due to the same
place: If there

Whence also I further concluded with my self, That the somniferous or
sleepifying power is to be placed in that part whose office it was, first to
frame watchings, and vain dreams, where

Yet drowsy sleeps, as well diseasie ones, (...) ones, or those of Opiates,
are most excellently vanquished by Lixiviums, whi^^ notwithstanding, are by no
means acknowledged

Galen has feigned a certain folding or small net of arteries in the bosoms o^
the brain; Vesalius does oft-times convince Galen, that he never saw (...)
humane dead carcass dissected, how great Volumes soever of Anatomy, he has
set forth: And therefore it is to be suspected, that he wrought the same word
for word out of another, who had dissected an Ape, as the same Vesalius
proves; because it is that which has the aforesaid folding in its brain. And
however Galen was even rashly de^uded in that folding; yet he determined the
judgment to be in the head, by reason of that folding that does not exist. But
are not the beginnings of imaginations rather to be drawn from the folding of
arteries in the Spleen, from the Saturn of the Spleen (whence Satur^s Kingdoms
are wished to return, in the innocence of the first conceptions?) That the the
Spleen may communicate the letters, or answers of its own p^^asure to the
brain, by the influence of government, without vapors or truncks, and that in
an instant, even as I have above demonstrated by the readinesses in Fiddlers.

For our first parent was not to be presumed ignorant and stupid before the
fall; for he was ^e who put proper and essential names upon all living
creatures: but the state of innocence

But such conceptions as are modern, in the first place, (while I say the first
conceits or first forces to be formed in the midriffs) I do not understand
them to be the forces of the

Whence I see, that although the soul does sit in the midriffs, yet that it
has placed the power of remembering in the head, and the other of willing in
the heart; and so that both these are in this life, frail, and companions of
the sensitive soul, which although it be centrally the bond of the mind in the
midriffs; yet nothing hinders but that it has its own powers distributed or
placed by Organs or instruments: No otherwise then as the visible power is in
the ^ye, the tasting power in the Tongue, not elsewhere, and the touching power
almost ever^ ^here: For seeing they are the frail and beast-like powers of the
soul, the soul it self has after the manner of bodies, subjected (...) bodily
rules.

The mind after another manner, is wh^^ (...) ^^vided, and contains its own
memory and

For the Schools do assign the desirable or lusting power to the Liver, but the
angryable or

Truly, unless the Lord do nourish us with his grace, we dream throughout our
whole life, wholly by a confused conc^^pt; yea, neither do we perceive that we
do understand, while the light of the Spleen being troubled, and ceasing, the
brain receives the first conceits of Idea's, scarce any longer worthy ones.

Therefore sleep is stirred up in the Midriffs, and does notably manifest it
self in the Head, and so the Head does not blush to bring forth at the consent
of the Midriffs. And therefore Sulphur of the Vitriol of Copper, a
stupefactive, sleepifying, and hot virtue, and sweeter th^^ ^^ey, which in
Opium is bitter: whence it becomes easy to be seen, that there is not a
^^^vative stopping, and cooling virtue (especially after feeding, and drinking
of wine) but a created faculty that over-tops watching in the Spleen. So also
some poisons do alienate the mind, and its own native Imaginative power,
whereby they do dispose of ours at their own pleasure (as in the Apple of Adam,
in the Spittle of a mad Dog, the pricking of the Tarantula, in Jusquiamus or
He^bane, etc. So also stupefactive medicines do withhold the Spleen from a
working exercise of serious Visions or Representations dismissed into the
Brain, besides the case of the memory, by virtue of a soulified or quickened
light of government: For indeed, God formed the last top of Creation, not of
the Skin, blood, or grease of the man, but of a Rib about the Spleen.

Also the Vessel or Kernel assistant to the stones, on the left side, is not
derived into the Galen being deceived, otherwise thought) to beg a tickling of
the seed from the Salt of the Urine; but that the vessel of the Kidney might be
proper or natural to the seed: For who doubts but that the salt of the Urine,
or of an excrement, does not take away all fruitfulness of the seed: Especially
if a small piece of the hair of a Horses mane or tail, how small soever it be,
be thrust within an Egg-shell, it extinguisheth the hope of a chick? Galen
being wholly excrementitious and ignorant, who thought our Beginnings or first
principles to want a tickling, and begged also the last completing of
fruitfulness from excrements: Therefore at the beholding of this man's
ignorance, I will moreover add a Paradox.

The Schools ascribe Venus or carnal lust, and the tickling or provocation to
leachery, to the Paracelsus and all Antiquity subscribes thereunto: All of whom
(I being silent) Fishes themselves, and Birds do presently convince of error:
For Birds do want Kidneys, and Urine, and Birds are most leacherous: I at least
do believe, that Venus is the office of the sensitive Soul, and so that it is
to be placed in the part wherein the first motions, also while we sleep, are
made: Because nature was in nothing more careful than in the difference of
Sexes: And so from the beginning of the pourtraying of the Young, she is
straightway busied in the Instruments of Venus. And so perhaps, this, even the
Ancients would imply, when as they have ascribed the Spleen, the first
paternity, to Saturn the first of the Starry Gods. Yea therefore they
deciphered their Fauni or Country Gods, and Satyrs (a most leacherous and
scurrilous kind) in the figure of Saturn: For I have always abhorred it as a
filthy thing, to have placed Venus the greatest Star next the Sun, in the
Kidney the sink of Urine.

Truly Birds in this respect, should be far more noble than us. Pollutions also
or defilements of the seed, do not happen in time of waking; because sleep is
the effect of the spleen, and to this, after delights: Otherwise, what common
intercourse is there between the Reins and sleep? do we not oftener make water
waking than sleeping? As (according to the Schools) sleep does withhold any
kind of avoiding of excrements, except that of sweat, and unprofitable seed?
Surely otherwise, voluntary pollution should be more subject to a waking, than
to a sleeping man: But such an excrementitious expulsion issues forth with the
sleep of wantonness, that it may be manifest, that there is the same Instrument
of sleep, dreams, and pollution, as they are the workmanship of one soul: For
as bloud-making begins in the veins of the mesentery, as it were the stomach of
the Liver; so the cocting of the Sperme or Seed is made in the stones by the
spleen: For I remember those that have been stony in both Kidneys, yet to have
been much inclined to leachery: But it were an absurd thing that a healthy and
lascivious power should remain, or be manifest under a Disease of its own
radical Organ: For the Liver being badly affected, a good sanguification does
not arise, neither is there a fit seeing to an eye beset with Sand: Neither
shall I ever believe, that the Reins moystening with a continual Urine, and
being busied about the expulsion of an excrement, and never keeping holiday,
are intent on luxury. Therefore it has seemed an excrementitious opinion, that
the motions of propagating the Species, the Summons's of the vital faculties,
and Character of the mind, should beforged in the Stable of foreign dregs or
filths.

For the first motions of lust are manifestly felt about the mouth of the
stomach, no otherwise than as the late repentances of leachery: For if death
entered by the first motions, it is

For the Orifice of the stomach, obtains the place of a Center in the Trunck of
the Body, whence the beams are most fitly spread upwards, as downwards. But
that it is written, that Abraham carried the Messiah in his Loins:

That is unaptly withdrawn from the spleen unto the Reins, from a bowel I say
chiefly vital, unto an excrementous shop and sieve. I have noted also very many
who from a Quartane

I have also observed Women in a difficult labor for some days, an
adventurous or experienced Ossacrum are opened in the loins, and the Young is
presently expelled. Indeed I have noted the Stomach to keep the Keys of the
Womb: And this medicine I have divulged willingly, for the good of my
Neighbor, that she who is in labor, may not hence-forward undergo the danger
of her life: But it is the Liver, together with the Gaul of an Eele, being
dried and powdered, and drunk in Wine, to the quantity of a Filburd-Nut. The
gift of God is in this Simple:

That seeing the Woman ought to bring forth in pain, by reason of the envy of
the Serpent; God whose Spirit was carried upon the waters, has filled them
with his blessing: He would

From this time likewise, the Judiciary divination by the Stars, Hermes his
scale, and whatsoever is supported by the point of Nativity, falls to the
ground. But upon occasion hereof, Vesalius witnesses.

And so it has as it were an external spleen, to wit, wherein as it were the
venal blood of the Kitchen, and the Arterial blood of the Mother is re-cocted
(the Spleen in this respect,

For the mothers themselves do wonder, that they are then affected with such
unaccustomed conceits, longings, furious frights, and storms of troubles: But
it is no wonder to me; Zoophyte or a Plant alive; such as are Sponges, and also
the thicker muscilages swimming in our Sea, which do enlarge, embrace, strain,
suck, and show forth rare testimonies of life being present with them.
Moreover, if the poison of a mad Dog, or a Tarantula do make a madness limited,
and that like unto it self; it is now wonder also that this milty lump, is
enlightened participatively, does live balsamically, and move the mind of the
woman with child, with a diverse passion: As well because it performs the
office of a Kitchen, as because there are in the things themselves their own
vain visions or apparitions; as is manifest in a mad Dog.

But besides, the mind of man being the near Image of the most high, wholly
immortal, doateth indeed with the sensitive soul, but is not capable of
suffering by a little Liquor; Because For flesh and blood have not revealed
these things unto thee. Therefore discourse and conceit is from the milt
consumed, and the circuits and durations of the same do vanish away, even as in
the milder Fevers; So also they may be voluntarily silent, that they may forget
to return: however the boastings of Physicians do differ in this thing.

For those whose Roots do the more stubbornly cleave unto them, they are the
more fully con-tempered, therefore, after another manner, they altogether
resist a voluntary resolving, and

Likewise there are in Simples, those faculties which make drunk, do bring
sleep, drowsiness, forgetfulness, blockishness, foolish madness, furies, raging
madness, or doatages; because

Therefore it is clear as the light at noonday, that nothing has been known
in madnesses, nothing enacted in the Apoplexy, nothing thought of in the
stranglings of the

For it has often been tried, by things greatly sleepifying, to succor madness,
and in vain: For they scarce procure sleep in their fourfold quantity; and
therefore the administ^ing of

For whosoever he be, that cannot resolve the occasional cause of a Quartan
Ague from the Spleen; much less can he convert himself unto the curing of
madness: for madness sits

Indeed madness differs from doatage, in this: that that wants filths. Those
who refuse to learn, will laugh, because I affirm, that one, or a few secrets
of Paracelsus does prevail over

Which thing, that it may be made so much the more manifest, I will bring a
History. First, I have seen a fat Body, whose whole fatness has been resolved
into Liquor, which afterward compose fat out of venal blood: But the Kidneys
have not that Dignity to make us fat, or lean; while as many do oft-times wax
fat with consumed and stony Kidneys: But from thence, the chiefdom of the
stomach does manifestly appeal; and that as the Root does govern the whole
Tree, and the Comedy of the digestions hereof, as well in the Leaves, Fruits,
and Barks, as in the Wood, Pith, and Branches; so also, the same thing does
likewise happen in us by virtue of the Duumvirate: For it often times comes to
pass, that a Capuchin being burdened with long fasting, and being satisfied
with a little Drink, and a little Ale, is endowed notwithstanding with a gross
habit of Body: But on the contrary, great eaters, and those who are brought up
with dainty huckstery, are seen to be notably lean. Surely howsoever I do
meditate of both these chances, I find the fountainous digestion of the
stomach to be the governess of the other, as it were successive subordinate
ones unto it self.

But at least, it is a wonder, after what sort, the Oily fat being resolved,
does return back Hipocrates has dictated, that the while Body is wholly an
un-respiring, and exspiring thing: in contemplation whereof, I have elsewhere
said, that man is not called an Animal or living Creature, but by an injurious
name: For he is, he which put proper names upon all living Creatures; but not
on his own self; because his own knowledge of himself did fail him, because it
is that which was not found, nor was within the latitude of living Creatures:
he presently beheld (although some one Character did not answer, which might
represent himself to himself) that there was something present in humane
Nature, which did climb above the condition of soulified Creatures.

And that thing, with Adam, the Schools might have sufficiently sifted out, if
they had at Laudanum of Paracelsus being taken, although it did afford wellnigh
waking nights unto one that had the Cough; yet it so appeased the Cough, and
restrained plentiful, yellow, and compacted Spittles, that they were not only
presently diminished in quantity; but also that they were changed into
snivelly, somewhat pale, and afterward into white spittles: Especially also,
because the Opiate being taken late, returning by vomit in the morning, did
testify the Cough to be suspended or withheld, and also the generating of
spittings by reaching, being horrid in plenty, and color, to have stopped.

First of all, I think that I have abundantly demonstrated elsewhere, under the
toy or doatage Winde-pipe. Therefore it is manifest enough, that they are
uncessantly digested in the very Conduit of the rough Artery: And by
consequence, that a Medicine being as yet in the stomach, thoroughly mixed with
other supper meats, does restrain, that the nourishable Liquor of the
Winde-pipe become not degenerate, and depart not so plentifully into that muck
or filth: wherein, the restoring or fortifying force imprinted on the stomach,
is evident, that it is already conveyed unto the Steward of the Lungs, and
that in the same place it stretches forth its own Authority: which things
indeed, as I in my first years, beheld with joy and admiration, thus to happen;
so afterward I studied to increase that restoring power, by detaining it, the
Opiate, stupefactive and hurtful faculty being the while suppressed: For I was

CHAP. XL. The completing or perfecting of the mind.
1. The blind knowledge concerning the mind. 2. What the chief operation of
the mind may be. 3. The thingliness or essence of the sensitive Soul. 4.
Quick-sightedness is not the Daughter of the mind only. 5. It is proved. 6.
From the fruits of the Soul, the knowledge thereof is to be fetched. 7. A
nearer knowledge of the mind: 8. The difference of the sensitive Soul of man
from that of a bruit Beash. 9. A dispensing of the fruits of the sensitive
Soul. 10. They flow from a foreexisting knowledge of the Senses. 11. An
exhortation. 12. The operations of the mind are more abstracted. 13. Things
required unto the purity of mental operations. 15. The Prayer of silence is
commended for the knowledge of the mind. 16. A Reason is added. 17. The
Majesty of the mind is learned from the wisdom of the Father. 18. The three
wishes are explained. 19. Their excellency. 20. Whatsoever the Lords Prayer
includes, is new and unheard of. 21. The top of an amorous wish or loving
desire. 22. The place of a sensible fuel. 23. The abstracted secrets of the
mind are felt, and there is not a word meet to express them. 24. An
illustrating of the amorous mind. 25. The Author willingly confesses his own
nothingness. 26. The late directers of the mind, who have entered in by the
Windows, are hissed out. 27. These shall fall in the fullness of time.

I Have already spoken some things concerning the Birth and offices of the
sensitive Soul: but there has not been as yet said enough, and much less
concerning the immortal mind;

But neither is that the chiesest operation of the mind, which after a drawn
knowledge of the premises, the judgment of man does form and conceive to it
self from the conclusion: because neither has the judgment of man it self,
such a proper respect to the mind, that it is the immediate offspring hereof:
For the mind adhereth to the sensitive Soul by so strict a bond in us, that
the commerces of humane custom can scarce hitherto separate the distinct
offices of the same from each other. Truly all abstracted speculation is even
hitherto bruites there are differences of quick-sightednesses noted, there is
place left of conjecturing, that in man, the same operations, are as yet, far
more diligent, powerful, eminent, and frequent than in bruites; and that the
sensitive soul of men does far exceed animal creatures in quick-sightedness;
unless the sensitive soul should be a stranger to men, and altogether a
forreigner

And although quick-sightedness or sharpness of wit, be the daughter of
judgment, and discourse, yet it is not therefore moreover a proper operation
and fruit of the mind: For that

And I at first long stuck in these things, until I had seen madnesses,
doatages and foolishnesses

Wherefore neither could I more distinctly set before my eyes, the operations
proper to the

Yet we must remember, according to the doctrine delivered concerning the
original of forms,

For first of all, in madness, foolish madness, foolishness, doatage, fury,
drunkenness, and dreams, there are indeed diverse cogitations of the whole man;
yet with so small a light of

Indeed every sensitive thought is brought on of necessity, by the service of
the senses, neither

Wherefore we must diligently procure, that as much as is possible, we do
withdraw our selves from all that which may be conceived by the senses: for so
we come unto the Mountain

For those kind of thoughts are as yet of the whole man, as long as there is
any selfishnesse, or the mind does apprehend something without it self, with a
duality or twonesse, and Dionysius to Timothy, is first to be received:

For that divine things may be understood (but divine things are whatsoever
things the naked Image of God beholds) and as yet after a slender manner, and
for the looking into divine Secrets, the Senses, are to be rejected, and
whatsoever may be perceived by the Senses. Moreover, reason, the actions of
reason, and whatsoever may be known and perceived by reason, whether that be
created or uncreated; and that thou go out of thy self, and out of all
knowledge of all those things, and that thou come into the one Unity of Him,
who is above all nature and knowledge. Thus he.

For the mind is the nearest image of the Divinity, therefore as the eye
beholds nothing more absolurely than the Sun it self (the cleernesse of whose
light notwithstanding it bears not) but all other things by reason of it: So
the mind does principally and intimately think or contemplate of nothing
properly, besides that Unity, and all other things for the same Unities sake.

Whence it manifestly appears, that as long as any thing is thought of, which
may be perceived by the senses, or reason, it is not yet a pure and naked
cogitation of a mind abstracted

Therefore, according to my poverty of judgment, a man does not in acting
climb nearer

The Lord Jesus therefore is the Way, the Truth, and the Life: the way I say,
unto himself

For those wishes are without all selfishnesse, and are naked respects toward
God himself, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousvess thereof,
and other things shall be added unto you: But it is not the righteousness of
God, that righteousness may be done by us (for no one living shall be justified
in his sight) but that his Name may be sanctified, which is not only due unto
him, and so a just thing but that loving wish justifies us. For it presupposes
first of all, Christian faith itself, and then also his infinite goodness,
whereby he vouchsafes to be our Father: And indeed, in the word [Our]
selfishness is put for the goodness of God, and the obliging of all of us,
which otherwise is nowhere seen in the three wishes. And thirdly, it shows
forth his vast majesty to be co-measured by his dwelling place of the Heavens,
which is the work of his own hands: And so, such like things as those being
premised, an amorous wish or desire is kindled in us, which does not desire,
that his Name be only sanctified by his only begotten Son, and our Mediator,
where Deep calls unto Deep: neither also, only that the heavenly Wights, and
whole Church militant, may adore his unutterable Name: neither also therefore
is it the sense, that his Name may he sanctified on earth, like as it is
inheaven; but that it may be sanctified or hallowed in us, and by us; in all
this, notwithstanding, selfishnesse and nothingnesse being renounced: and that
there may be a naked and most pure reflection of the honor and delights of God
in that which is to be with us, and to be worshipped in the spirit of love: And
therefore also the other succeeding wish does not ask the Kingdom of God for it
self, but the Kingdom of God which is in us, that it may come nearer to us: Not
indeed nakedly, and simply for our sakes, but because it is of his goodness to
be with the sons of men in delights: Wherefore also it is wished, that his own
Will may be done, in us, upon us, and by us, with a full resignation of our own
will. Therefore the three wishes do proceed from the soul, without a modal
restriction or reflection on us; because they do exceed all personality of the
creature, that God may be worshipped for himself,

And therefore they do excel all force of prayer, petition, praising, giving
of thanks, yea and of glorification it self. For to give thanks, does denote a
benefit, and implies a receiver:

For praises, and prayers, as well in the Mosaical Law, as at this day, were
made by Hymns, Psalms, and Prayers: But man, before the truth be perfectly
learned, has never attained

Therefore the desire and wish of an amorous soul, fervently desiring the
sanctifying of the Name of God, nakedly and simply, is not made indeed by a
creature below God, but by a

For that so naked, and excellent love arises in the seat of the mind, and is
felt there where B. Dionysius, is described to be above all that which can be
conceived by reason, sense, and words: Truly it is felt, but without discourse
and imagination.

Because by a naked conceiving of amorous truth, truth it self is then stricken
with, enjoys, and approaches, yea, and presently pierces by an unexpressible
touch of the mind: Otherwise,

In the power therefore of understanding, and indeed in the native vigor of
the mind, and the desire of a loving soul, a certain God-like Being is bred in
us, as it were in the

Truly, I fear least I may be a Bell, calling the Faithful together unto the
Temple, which it self remains in the top of the Tower abroad: But only I hope,
if I shall profit in the aforesaid

Moreover, there have lately arisen directers of the conscience, transferring
on themselves all liberty of the mind, to be dispensed especially on the
devoted Sex: this Sex they called being shut after them: And then, they require
honor, reverence, and riches to be due unto themselves, under obedience, and a
manifold vow. And so the hurtful or envious man scatters his own seeds for
tares, that he may suppress those also which were good Seeds.

And therefore the Prophet Hildegard has foretold, that at length secret
luxury shall be Simon Magus, by the prayer of the Apostles, or of the Bishops
and Faithful. But besides, when any one has at least once been brought into
the vigor of that wish or desire, himself being pricked by his own spurs, will
hasten to return thither; and being now as it were made expert in the ways,
the passage will be easier for him afterward. In the mean time, because every
one does not reach thitherto, God has made diverse mansions to be occupied in
his own Palace: So also he has ordained diverse means to this end, through
Charity, which I willingly omit, because they are not the proper objects of our
Medicinal Faculty. Therefore it is sufficient for me to have proposed the
largeness of the mind in acting, and its wandering power of forming Idea's or
shapy likenesses, as well for the consideration of diseases, and of a sound
life, as for the exercises of virtues.

CHAP. XLI. The Scab and Ulcers of the Schools.
1. Why the Author treats concerning the Scab and Leprousie in this place. 2.
He repeats more clearly the beginnings of his repentance. 3. An error in the
causes, indication or betokening sign, and remedy. 4. A question proposed to
Physicians and the Schools. 5. The credulities in the Author. 6. Late
Consideration. 7. Out of my History, fourteen Conclusions. 8. That the
speculations of the Schools are scabbed. 9. A Scab remained in me before the
distemperature of the Liver. 10. Pustules or Wheals in Scabbednesse, are signs,
and fruits of the Scab, but not the Scab. 11. Grass roots in an Apozem are
taken notice of. 12. The occasional causes of Ulcers. 13. The Dreams of the
Schools. 14. Galen is noted to be ulcerous. 15. The unconsiderance of the
Schools, and Galen. 16. Some absurdities. 17. Thin Sanies, and corrupt Pus are
not excrements, although filths. 18. The corrupter in an Ulcer is the Ulcer.
19. Venal blood is not vitiated in the hollownesse of an Ulcer. 20. The vain
labor of the Schools. 21. The root of Ulcers. 22. The hollow of an Ulcer is
not the Ulcer it self. 23. Considerations of Pus or corrupt snotty matter. 24.
The differences of Pus and Sanies. 25. Galenical ignorances. 26. Some
absurdities of the received opinion of Galen. 27. The occasional cause in the
corrupter. 28. How ridiculous a Catarrh is for old Ulcers, and how foolishly
Cauteries are applied thither. 29. The ignorance of ferments, what it brings
forth. 30. How there are so many diversities of Ulcers in one only venal
blood. 31. Corrosives, if they can heal Ulcers, the rather notwithstanding,
their corrosion being appeased. 32. The trifles of Paracelsus concerning the
Microcosmical birth of wounds. 33. Paracelsus is urged with an actual and true
Identity of the Microcosm or little world. 34. An Idiotism of the same man,
concerning the nourishing of wounds from without. 35. A healing Secret of
Ulcers. 36. The curing of wounds.

HItherto I have shown, that the causes of Diseases delivered by Galen, and his
followers, are erroneous, and false: it should be meet even now, to pass over
unto the true

Wherefore in the Book of Fevers I have rehearsed indeed the principles of my
repentance, whereby I was compelled to depart from the method and doctrine of
the Schools, ejection of liquors which the Schools do persuade to be the
constitutive ones of us, and those erring in their due quantity, and quality.
Therefore it has not ^ked me, hitherto to refer, and to repeat the same
beginnings of my repentance. I being a young man, and about to take my leave of
a certain Gentlewoman, held her glove and hand for some little while, which
labored with an hidden and dry Scab: But I thereupon, presently contracted,
not indeed a dry, but a thin watery Scab, to wit, only, and that by a sober
touching: And then I observed many times, that hand-towels have brought forth
the manginesses of scabbed persons, and the hairs of moathy cloths, moaths; as
also the contagions of leprous, and lecherous diseases, to have been propagated
by a participated ferment: and that thing the Proverb related to incorrigible
persons, signifies; to wit, that one only little bird infects a whole flock
with his scabbinesse.

For such kind of vices being transplanted by a poisonous fuel, are
notwithstanding reckoned by Junior of them answered, that the same distemper of
an inflamed Liver, did not therefore afford true phlegm, but an abounding salt
phlegm, but that the temperature of salt was hot and dry. To whom I replied,
Should therefore the Salt of the Urin be made through the vice of the Liver and
heat abounding? but the broaths of fleshes that are not salt, not put on salt,
although they should boil with heat? The Senior answered, These things were to
be proposed by me in the Schools, but not in times of practice, wherein the
family had appointed hours for gain. But he presently asked me, what Authors I
had consulted with? or what I had learned was to be done? I said, for the
cooling refreshment of the Liver, and blood, the vein of the right arm under
the Cephalical or head-vein was to be cut: and then that we must proceed by
cooling Apozems, in regard of burnt choler, yet so, as that cutting and
extenuating, temperate things were to be mingled, by reason of the saltness of
the phlegm. I showed out of Rondoletius, an Apozem or decoction, which might
perhaps contein 50 ingredients, tending to a most plentiful hope of
accomplishing both ends. And seeing they knew not in their readings, a daily
diligent noter of all things, they would that I my self should describe all
things for my self. Therefore after a sufficiently plentiful letting forth of
blood made in the Springtime of my youth, and otherwise in the fullness of
health, I took for three days together the aforesaid Apozem, whereinto on the
fourth and fifth morning, I put a sufficient quantity of Rhubarb, and Agarick,
to wit, that Nature might begin to obey the calling purgative medicine, and
that both the peccant humors might be rendered pliable unto it: They praised all
things, and especially because I was greedy of learning, and obeying. But on
the fifth day in the evening, I took pills of F^mitary, because Cordo, (who was
afterward unto me Codrus) writes, that they do draw together, or are
profitable in both the peccant humors (for I had not then as yet known by a
feigned name, to impose pills on the sick: as though they provoked Stools by
reason of the Fumitary, and not by reason of the cruelty of poisonous
Solutives:) Therefore on the sixth day, I had at least fifteen Stools: in the
mean time, they praised my providence, whereby I had made or prepared my body
so fluid. Presently after two days from thence, because the Scab had not laid
aside any of its cruelty, I took the same medicine, with a notable loathing of
my stomach, and the like Stools succeeded: They said, that the flourishing age
of eighteen years was apt for the breeding of choler: And when they saw, that
for all that, the itching, and wheals were nothing diminished, they decreed,
that two days after, I should take the purging medicine the third time. But
then, a little before evening, my veins were now exhausted, my cheeks had
fallen, my voice was hoarse, the whole habit of my body going to ruin, had
waxed lean; also it was difficult for me to descend from my chamber, and to go,
because my knees did scarce support me. These things had befallen me, who was
in health, from the touching of a scabbed hand. Indeed at the first turns, I
rejoiced when I observed so large filth, and such stinking ones:

But I considered too late, that before the purging medicines, I was well in
health in my bowels; but now that through a dejected appetite and digestion, I
had contracted much I certainly found, that by a thrice taking of the solutive
medicine, I had cast forth almost two little Buckets of stinking and cadaverous
choler, the ejections being besprinkled with snivelly branches, which the
Physicians affirmed to be that salt phlegm. And in the mean time, while I
nourished almost throughout my whole body, mattery and large wheals, especially
in my legs; I asked them, whether the corrupt snotty matter or Pus did not
denote the venal blood to be guilty, no less than choler, and phlegm: They
said, seeing that my strength did now fail, they should be silent, as to a
repeated cutting of a vein, otherwise meet to be done in the abundance of
corrupt Pus remaining. But I repentingly considered, that before, I was in good
health, except the contagion of my skin drawn from elsewhere, and that of
nothing, nothing was, or could be made; neither could any corporeal body be
placed, but in a body: therefore I leasurely enquired, whence so great a plenty
of choler had flown from me? and in what place it had layen hid? For all the
veins together could scarce have contained the tenth part of the filth,
although they should contein no good blood: I knew moreover, that so great a
weight could neither be entertained in the head, nor in the breast, nor in the
bottom of the belly, although they had been empty of all bowels.

Therefore with earnest repentance, and my own damage, I collected by Science
Mathematical:

First, That the name of purging was a grand deceit.

Secondly, That a particular Selection of bringing forth such a humor, or any
other, was likewise false.

Thirdly, Because the birth and existence of humors was also false.

Fourthly, That the cause of scabbednesse in respect of burnt choler, and salt
phlegm, was feigned.

Fifthly, That the Liver was guiltless in contagions of the Skin.

Sixthly, That my Scab did as yet remain after purgings, although not with an
equal fury.

Seventhly, That the fury thereof was not slackened, because that some one or
more imagined humors were expelled, and that for this cause the abounding of
the same humors had offended: For truly, the venal blood being straightway
recovered, the scab persisted the same; and so the scab had been a little
diminished through a defect of fullness. At length perhaps, after three
months, I recovered from my scabbednesse by an easy anointing or unguent of
Sulphur.

Eighthly, That the Scab is an affect of the Skin only.

Ninthly, That the Schools did name as well choler, as phlegm, humors ill
affected, as well in the veins, as out of them, as well those hurtful, as
harmless.

Tenthly, That any purging things did promiscuously melt, resolve, and putrify
the venal blood and flesh, even while they abode in the stomach and bowels.

Eleventhly, That it is false, that the venal blood does return into humors,
from whence it was bred.

Twelfthly, That in this thing an impossible return from a privation to an
habit should happen.

Thirteenthly, That it is a grand deceit, that those three humors do remain in
the venal blood, flesh, and solid parts, that by purging medicines they should
be renewed into that, which they were before the framing of the flesh, etc.

All which things, when I found them fighting with the truth of nature, and
with the agreement of Philosophy, I manifestly knew the speculations of the
Schools to be scabby and false:

At leastwise in me, the scab was contracted and bred only by touching, in a
full enjoyment of health, before the Liver could even have ever waxed hot: for
my scabbedness was

A Sheep feeding only of Grass, does voluntarily get the scab: If that be
from a hot distemper

In like manner also, Ulcers are made either from a wound being badly cured, or
from a

The Schools therefore being credulously misled by Galen, have mutually signed
unto his dreamed humors rising again out of the venal blood and flesh, by
reason of the importunate

For Galen in his Therapeuticks or curings of Diseases, will have it, that an
Ulcer ought to consist naturally of a twofold excrement (for it has seemed
sufficient for him to have laid Galen) namely, one which should dry up, and
drink up the thin Sanies into it self; in the next place another, which should
be a cleanser of the corrupt Pus.

But how seriously has this man weaved his own Fables? and how undefiled or
fault less are these toys kept as yet to this day? For now indeed they do no
longer remember a fourfold Galen will have the gross matter to be venal blood
putrified, neither is he mindful of himself, while he teaches that the blood,
in corruption, is turned wholly into Choler. In the next place, if purging
Medicines do separate three humors apart out of the venal blood at the will of
the Physician, he ought to have remembered, that that happen through the
corruption of the blood, to wit, while it departs asunder into its foregoing
constitutives (or, whatsoever has been devised concerning purging things, and
humors, is false) wherefore in an Ulcer, that not two only, but four ought
wholly to issue forth: yea according to Galen, an Ulcer without gross matter
(to wit a Cancer, a difficult or malignant Sore, or acorroding one fluid with
liquid Sanies only) shall be more easy to be cured, than otherwise, a gross
mattery Ulcer is: Because it is that which shall have need of driers only, to
wit, Chafe, or burnt bones.

For how stupid and unsound a thing is it: to have taught, that an Ulcer is to
be cured by the

Because the name of an excrement, does contain an expulsion of the impure from
the pure: And therefore liquid, and gross matter, are not the excrements of an
Ulcer, or of the part, as Galen, especially in the more malignant ones. And
likewise it must needs be, that those things which are not nourished, do also
want excrements: For nature does no where labor that it may nourish an Ulcer:

Seeing that in an Ulcer, a proper corrupter does inhabit, which vitiateth the
nourishable blood, before it be fit to be digested. A lee also, in speaking
properly, is not the superfluity

For the blood which is appointed daily, for the nourishing of all particular
parts, is sent, is distributed by distributive Justice: nor otherwise to the
part being ulcerous, than if it were

Therefore if the Schools do wipe an Ulcer, whether with a Towel, or in the
next place, with a cleansing Medicine; although they both do the same thing;
yet they take away nothing Galens Doctrine is seen, which places the healing
of an Ulcer in the withdrawing of the product.

The Root therefore of every Ulcer, is in its bottom, and lips or brim; that
is, it inhabits in the parts next to the hollowness; wherein indeed is their
own Cookroom, in which the venal etc. But the liquid matter it self, is the
product or positive effect of Ulcers: But the very hollowness thereof, which is
commonly reckoned to be the Ulcer of Physicians, is the privative and deficient
product: For as a burnt or destroyed Village, is not war; but is the effect
accusing the defect, privation, desertion, and destruction made:

So neither is an Ulcer the wasted hollowness of the flesh; but this is the
sign left by the Ulcer: For in the Coasts of the Ulcer there does an hostile
corrupter, and guest, the poisonous

Let the Schools therefore, take heed what they teach, while they deliver the
curing of an Ulcer to consist in the taking away of the latter product: yea
corrupt Pus does not carry the which the Galenists do never dry up with their
driers, although they do moreover super-add all their cleansing Medicines, and
however the Catagenians and Catatopian do boastingly glory of their own
experiments.

For corrupt Pus is not procreated but in the flesh being closed, and opened,
and those not

Therefore Galen and his followers, because they have been hitherto ignorant of
the causes, Schools: and the which, for that cause especially, have withdrawn
themselves from the works of Chyrurgery, with the great disgrace of Galen, and
his own Greeks who lived in the same Age, and the Arabians their followers,
even as I have profesly touched in the Book of the Plague-grave.

For the milder Ulcers, and in those whose malignity is taken away, and while
they hasten Galen, more difficult than while they flow with Liquor: But Ulcers
already mitigated, are provoked by cleansing things; So far is it, that they
are healed by the same. Surely, if things that dry up, and cleanse or wipe
off, should satisfy all Ulcers, the curing of any Ulcers whatsoever would be
easy: For why is the Galenical School so carefully troubled about the choosing
of Medicines, when as they do abundantly satisfy both betokenings, with a dry
Towel or linen Cloth? To wit, one only Towel dries up, and together with it,
cleanses likewise. Let it shame them therefore, and seriously shame them, to
diffuse such trifles out of their Chaires, out of their presses, and out of
their mouth, for Youth, and Chyrurgions, instead of a maxim of healing; and to
dismiss thereupon, these men so instructed, as provided, with the specious
Title of a Physician and a Doctor, to the death of mortals, and the torture of
those that trust in them. Therefore it is not sufficient to have wiped away,
and dried up the thick or snotty, and liquid matter; but the hostile framer,
and corrupter sitting on the part, is to be blotted out; because he is that
which does nothing slacken or wax mild by drying, and cleansing.

Indeed the quality of the seminal mortal poison, and the poisonous foreign
Impression of the Archeal part which perverteth the good venal blood dispensed
unto it, does naturally

Therefore the Schools may see, whether a Rheum being lifted up in manner of a
vapor, out of the stomach, into the plain of the Head, be able to give a
beginning and fuel to the

There are indeed as many Ferments of Ulcers, as there are diverse corruptions
of Ulcers, and distances of corruptions: To which end, the testimony of one
bread will very much conduce; etc. as their differences do issue forth

For Arsenick being fixed by Saltpeter, and dulcisied or mitigated into an
astringent Sulphur,

Furthermore, what Ulcers I refer unto a seminal, and poisonous Ferment,
Paracelsus after his manner, has transferred on the minie and saltish minerals
of the microcosme or little Cagastrical or badly Planet-struck throughout its
whole, not indeed, consisting any longer of diverse composures of Salts; but to
be proud of the structure of the one only Saltpeter; whence, men are born a
hard generation, therefore the hatches of the Earth: For he would, that all
Salts, Stones, Minerals, Herbs, etc. should lurk in man, as it were in their
own Seminaries or Seed-plots: But that they break forth into act, not indeed by
the warmth of confused seeds lurking in a Chaos; but only that by a separation
of the vital Liquor, that they return from those things which were co-bred with
themselves, into their ancient Minerals: Not heeding, that it is an absurd
thing, seeing he will have the Macrocosme or great World, to consist no less
of Stars and Plants, than of minerals, that it should resolve it self, rather
into Salts, than into Plants and four-footed Beasts. Therefore in this matter
has not Paracelsus only forgotten Seeds, Vegetables, Stars, and soulified
creatures; but his own self also? That it should be the property of a Seed,
from whence that heap of venal blood is separated by man's vital Beginnings, to
return rather into this, than into another mineral? For as Galen, endowing all
things with heats, and feverishly doting, drew Paracelsus reducing all things
into an under-earth offspring, being proud of his precious household stuff,
grew mad a while, and thereupon aspired into the same Principality. But I pray,
who is that separater, which withdraws and plucks away a part of himself from
the Balsam of life? in the next place, who is that corrupter, which had changed
the part plucked off from a vital condition, also into a mineral Salt (which
knows not how to putrify in it self) or into a hidden metal, credible only
by belief? Do thou not, concerning long life, call death the dominion of the
Balsam? How is it therefore, that thou now call death the separation of the
Balsam? Or who is the seminal distinguishes, in the Zodiac of man, which may
wrest the one only, and the same Liquor from the Balsam of life, sometimes
into Alume, and at length sometimes into Arsenick? Truly Paracelsus, after that
by a laboursome and ridiculous diligent search, thou have heaped up great
Fables, because thou have been ignorant of Ferments (whereunto notwithstanding,
thou should have come, as to the active, and seminal principles) thou have
past by the Beginnings of Nature; and sporting with the Zodiac or compass of
the microcosm at thy own pleasure, have made thy self ridiculous to Posterity:
For a full knowledge of the ferments does find out an easy way to know, take
away, overcome, and separate the poisons of any Ulcers whatsoever: For
whatsoever is made in the course of Nature, that is made by the necessity and
guidance of the seeds, and is moved unto the last period of them: But not from
the lot or condition of a resolved dead Carcass, or the naked will of a slain
or grove^ng part; The which indeed, should hasten from a privation, by rising
again into its former Being. Away with thy trifles: For we have no fountains of
Salt, no reducements of venal blood into feigned and lurking metals. Neither
are there minerals in us, which by wantonizing, do withdraw themselves from the
vital Beginnings, or which do exspect the withdrawing of these: to wit, that
they should return from man's essence, into their ancient and appointed
minerals, that so they may become the wombs and springs of Ulcers: Neither
also, are there microcosmical Laws in us, any more than the humors of four
Elements mutually agreeing in us, and the fights or grudges of these: For with
Nazianzen, I cannot tie up man unto the sporting Rules of a Microcosme: For I
had infinitely rather to be the Image of God, than the Image of the corruptible
and torturing World: for although man does grow and increase with Beasts, and
Plants; yet Beasts shall not therefore be the Image of Plants: So although man
do feel or perceive, and be moved, yea discourses, together with Beasts; yet
nothing speaks but a man; Because an Angel neither stands in need of speech, as
neither of the Instruments of Seed: But if a Bird seem to speak, he imitates
only the tone, and distinctions or significations of speech: for there are not
in us Hails, Snowes, Rocks, Stones, Metals, Marbles, Flints, Gems; as neither
that Center of a World whereunto all weighty Bodies do incline: Neither is
there in us a Stone, by Creation, neither are there particular kinds of the
red or purple Marble, Jasper-stone, etc. and the stone in a man differs from a
true stone, no less than a Pear does from a Cow: for a Pear is indeed
changed into the flesh of a Cow, sooner than the stone in a man can decline
into a Mineral Rock or stone. The name therefore of Microcosm or little World
is Poetical, heathenish, and metaphorical, but not natural, or true. It is
likewise a fantastical, hypochondriacal, and mad thing, to have brought all
the properties, and species of the Universe into man, and the art of healing:
But the life of man is too serious, and also the medicine thereof, that they
should play their own part of a Parable or Similitude, and metaphor with us.

Last of all, Paracelsus is wholly ridiculous, who teaches that an Ulcer, and
a wound are VVurtz, in wounds. But I say enough to the curious: To wit, that
Colcotar does kill every corrupter of wounds. Finally, for a wound, know thou,
that the very separation of that which held together, is indeed the immediate,
and sufficient occasional cause, to wit, as it opens, beats in Minium or Red
Lead, Cerusse, or Colcotar: Hitherto also does the Salt of ^artar tend, being
rectified by the Spirit of Wine, until it obtains an astringent taste: For it
is the Balsam Samech or of Tartar, of Paracelsus even as out of Arsenick for
Ulcers, whereof, moreover, there is its Balsam of smoke; because that Arsenick
is by skilful men accounted the fume of Metals: Not indeed, that it is not
simple, born, and subsisting by it self; but from a Similitude, for that
metallic smoaks do imitate an Arsenical malignity. And so I close up the
Doctrine of external Diseases.

CHAP. XLII. An unknown action of Government.
1. The Maxim is opposed, That of Contraries the Remedies are contrary. 2. The
foundation of that Maxim. 3. The Maxim concerning the reacting of the Patient,
or of its defense in time of fight, is examined. 4. Arguments on the opposite
part. 5. The same, by moving strengths, by things generative, and irregular. 6.
There is no re-acting of weight. 7. Arebounding action neglected by the
Ancients. 8. Bright burning Iron acts, and does not re-act. 9. The swiftness
of a mover is not the action; but the measuring of the action. 10. Altering
Agents do not properly re-suffer. 11. Another Maxim is noted of falsehood. 12.
From whence the falseness thereof has issued. 13. What Agents of a different
inclination and irregular, are. 14. He proceeds to prove what he has
undertaken to prove. 15. Wherein the opinion of Aristotle may be preserved. 16.
An explaining of action in the slowness of the fire. 17. Actions on an object
separated from the thing supposed. 18. A Fermental and radial or beaming
action. 19. That these kind of actions are not to be referred unto the fault
of vapors. 20. The Blas of Government has been hitherto unknown. 21. The
falsehood of a Maxim. 22. The fire suffers nothing by a burnable object. 23. To
determine or limit an action, and to re-act, do differ. 24. New actions. 25.
The dimness or giddiness of the Schools. 26. Their staggering. 27. Likewise
some neglects of the same. 28. The unknown action of Government is not that
which they call an action by consent. 29. The Error, whence it is. 30. Why
Anatomy has arisen into so great curiosity. 31. How much may be required from
Anatomy. 32. A neglect of the chiefest part of natural Philosophy. 33. The
Schools deluded by thinking. 34. Many things happen in us by the action of
Government, without conveighing Pipes or Channels. 35. Blindness has brought
blind persons unto blind vapors, the action of Government being unknown. 36.
Things admitted by the Author. 37. The action of Government is abstracted from
a cobinding mean. 38. A natural action in incorporeal Spirits. 39. Which is a
juggling action. 40. Luxury takes away the Remedy of the Horsehoof. 41. An
Example of Government. 42. The government of the Womb is wholly over the whole
Body. 43. Government acts into its own marks, the middle spaces being
untouched. 44. The faculties of the actions of the Womb. 45. The furies of the
Womb. 46. The manner of making in the birth of a Disease, from the action of
Government. 47. Why the forehead is not bearded. 48. That Capital Diseases do
not arise through Fumes out of the Stomach.

FRom the first time wherein the Schools placed contraries in Nature, they
presently universally established, that nothing acted without strifes, war, and
discords: Even so that

Likewise they have determined, that in the whole sublunary frame or stage,
nothing is done, or generated, but by a Relation of the Superiority of an Agent
unto a Patient; So indeed, weariness of acting; they likewise decreed from
thence, that that indeed, did not so much happen through a tiring out of the
seeds, and powers, but by a re-acting of the patient: Therefore they confirmed
it, that every patient or sufferer does likewise of necessity re-act, and for
that cause likewise every agent or acter does re-suffer; neither also that it
is any other way weakened: Whence by consequence, I guessed with my self, that
sometimes the I call moving strengths. But other moving Agents, I call an
alterative

Therefore, if there shuuld be any action, or re-acting in weights, in the case
aforesaid, it were to be attributed to the space of place, and not to the
heaviness of weight; seeing that one and the same weight is various, and
manifold at the will of the Artificer, only by the space of place: But the
space of place, or of far removing, is a certain external thing as to the
essence of weight, and plainly accidental by accident: And so, neither can it
give a true and proper action, or re-action in weights: Therefore the
limitation of actions in weights, is not the essential and proper action, or
re-action of weight on weight: Even as also space, or distance of place, has
not any internal force, or essential Blas of local motion, on a bullet sent out
of a Gun; but it only limits the finite force of the imprinted motion; so as
that, through distance, the attained Blas of the bullet does by degrees
necessarily languish: For it is certain, that the bullet does operate into the
middle distance, the which I understand, that the bullet has no activity on
the middle space of the place it self, although this notwithstanding does so
limit the Blas, or motive power of the bullet, that at length it may perish,
because it is of a finite power: Likewise also in weights, the greater weight
is indeed limited unto a certain measure, and power, by the lesser weight, but
that limitation is not the true action of a certain Agent, if local motion be
limited by place it self (which is wholly external and accidental to motion)
without re-acting, or if it does voluntarily languish by a continuance of
motion: But if place, and continuance do not suffer by the motion which is made
in them, that is, that the motion does re-act on the place, and duration;
therefore neither shall there be any true action of the place and duration on
the motion, although the motion being finite, does voluntarily cease in place,
and time. It belongs nothing therefore unto a re-acting, although the lesser
weight does limit the greater unto its own certain and designed bound.
Therefore, it from hence is clearly enough manifest, that very many things are
reckoned to be agents, and re-agents on each other, by reason of the hidden
frailty of us in understanding, which in very deed do neither act on, nor
suffer by each other, and likewise do neither re-act, nor re-suffer
reciprocally: For truly the action whereby the greater weight does lift up the
less, and this gives place to the greater, and likewise whereby the greater is
limited, and lessened by the less weight being opposed, the which otherwise,
being opposite to the greater, does increase this, is not a true natural
action, or power of seminal properties, but relative respects of learning by
demonstration or Science Mathematical, according to place, duration,
greatness, etc. which things are plainly external unto natural Agents, and by
accident: But actions and re-sufferings in nature are considered in a true and
intimate conjoying of forces; which in the things abovesaid have no place. But
that I may show, that those respects of Science Mathematical, have not an
action issuing from the powers of things, but only the relation of Science
Mathematical (every mere action whereof, although it be made by bodies, yet it
is not the action of the body it self, as such) it is sufficient to have shown
by the aforesaid particulars, that the limitation of motions do far differ from
the inward activity of motions, according to which, things are judged by the
Ancients, to re-suffer, and re-act in every action: For so there are many
impediments in nature, which although they do limit, yea and also plainly take
away the force of the Agent, yet they are not to be judged to re-act: And so,
we must speak most properly, when as the essence of things concerning the
properties, and actions of those things, is to be distinguished by a natural
Philosopher, especially when he treats of the necessities of life: For the
lesser weight does not refist, and much less does it re-act on the greater.
But every thing weighs freely as much as it does weigh, without respect of
one weight unto another: But if man opposes one weight to another, that is a
humane thing; neither has the action of weight a mutual respect: For from
hence, what things I have demonstrated above, against the contrarieties of
active Bodies, do more clearly appear: For truly, every Agent, in manner of a
greater weight, acts freely, and without respect to contrariety; but it
acts that which it is commanded to act in nature, and as much as is permitted
unto it to act: Therefore weight, or rather a ponderous matter, weighs in it
self, as much as it does weigh, absolutely and without respect unto another
greater, less, equal, proportioned, etc. weight. For such respects are of
humane industry, which by reason of co-handlings ot commerce, finds out
measures, as well according to extent in length, breadth, depth, etc. as in the
division of weights; to wit, it has appointed Axles or Diametrical distances,
and far removings; so that all the consideration from thence is artisicial, and
therefore also changeable in the samelinesse and unity of one body: And
therefore weights as such, do never act, or re-act on each other naturally, or
by a co-mixture of their own properties, although they seem to act something
artificially: For so the light suffers nothing, although the continuation of
light be hindered by a suffering wall: For otherwise, if the less weight
should in very deed re-act on that which out-weigheth it, the weight it self
should be rather lessened in the thing weighing, for a continuance, and
actually, and not only with respect to the balance; so that a pound
thenceforth should not any longer weigh a pound, as before: And seeing nothing
is changed, or taken away from the weights on either side, it is manifest, that
there are only artificial relations of moving strengths, but not a true
re-action of the lighter weight: For as long as a pound does weigh a pound,
nothing is attained, or has suffered in that pound by another opposite weight;
but on both sides, one is external, foreign, by accident, to the other, and
limitable by a relative foundation, that it may be readily serviceable to
humane considerations: And whatsoever thus acts in our power, or seems to
re-act, acts in very deed, nothing. But as to that which pertains unto
other moving strengths; If an impressive force of strength does act indeed by
it self, but in the mean time be limited by space of place, duration, or be
weakened by impediments, or lastly, if it act measuringly, by reason of figure,
and hardness; at leastwise, there is never in these, any re-acting of the
patient, or re-suffering of the Agent. For example, If any one set term of
time, the digestion of the same is in vain expected: for it tarrying longer in
the stomach, is corrupted, and so then a new Agent arises; neither is the
former any longer digestible, when it is corrupted; neither also does that new
Agent re-act in manner of bright burning Iron, because there are in that
digestible matter, parts incapable of digestion, in respect of that stomach:
Neither also does the leaven or ferment of bread leaven the powder of glass,
or the sand of a flint, because it is a strange and incapable object, and not
to be subdued by it: For so the digesting ferment of the stomach does ferment
the flour of meal, but not the brans: In the mean time, the ferment of the meal
suffers nothing by the powder of glass; as neither does that powder re-act,
resist, or truly repel: For truly, altering ferments do never act, but on
things that have a co-resemblance; but they are quiet, do cease, and sleep, if
they have not an object proper for themselves: Therefore the hindrances of
Agents by an alterative Blas, are uncapacities, hardnesses, impurities,
unequalities, and the requisite movers of space: Therefore the action of these
is terminated on a proper object, and disposes that object unto periods or
ends, and manners decreed for it. But interposing hindrances are not the
re-actions of the patient, but the incapacities of the same: For neither does
silver re-act, while it is solved by Aqua fortis with so great a heat, although
this in the mean time, decays in acting, and loses its own force and virtue:
but there is an inbred property of Spirits, and a natural endowment, which do
operate in acting, that by reaching unto their appointed mark, they may perfect
themselves, Aqua fortis (which for the other half of it, is also the Spirit of
Vitriol) be combined with the Mercury, that snow of Mercury is not made, as
neither does the liquor it self pass over into an Alume: And so from hence it
appears, that the action is not proper to the Mercury, but to the Spirit of
Vitriol diversely disposing it self of its own free accord; and according to an
inbred inclination unto diverse objects, differently changing it self:
Wherefore the Spirit of Vitriol which is in the Aqua fortis, through a strong
heat of bubbles stirred up, and a tempestuous boiling up, dissolveth the
Mercury, and far otherwise, than while it is the naked and simple Spirit of
Vitriol; which variety indeed, in acting, does manifest the various virtues of
the acting Spirit, rather than those of the Mercury it self; because in the one
action the Mercury is made invisible, which in the other becomes white like
snow: For the Spirit of Sea Salt, although it be most sharp, yet it is never
changed by the fellowship of Mercury, as neither also does it act into the
Mercury: And so the effects of actions are seen, and not of re-actings: So Aqua
fortis acts into all metals, except gold; but with Sal armoniack it acts only
into gold, but no longer into silver; And so there are particular properties of
Spirits, but not re-actions of a suffering body; because it is that which in
its own substance and weight, sustaineth nothing but a mere and one only
division of it self: Therefore Spirits being tossed with diverse passions in
acting, undergo diverse transformations; but if they remain drowsy and
sleeping, and do not act on their object, they also remain in their ancient
qualities: For that thing appeared at first to happen, by reason of the
touching of the Mercury, because it is that which is also a certain Spirit, but
afterward in the silver and gold, that was wholly silent. But moreover I
remember, that the Calx or lime of Silver has drunk into it the liquor of
Sulphur, which they call a distillation, which presently in the Silver laid
aside all harshnesse and tartness, and it changed this liquor into a gauly
bitterness, by distilling: for the silver remained the same which it was
before, in substance, weight, and powder: therefore that bitterness could not
be afforded from the silver; and for that cause, in no wise, from a re-acting
of the silver; but of its own free accord it was made by the property of the
Spirit of the Sulphur: for neither is there a less reason, why the same Spirit
of Vitriol, in diversely acting, does also change it self after a diverse
manner, than that the same silver should under the boiling up of diverse
Spirits, wax cruel, by a various manner of re-acting on these; Especially while
that in a Spirit, there is made a various transmutation in acting; but there is
no successive alteration made of the substance of the silver, in suffering, or
diminishing of its weight: which things may be far more clearly demonstrated by
Adeptists, unto whom, to wit, the one only and same Liquour Alkahest, does
perfectly reduce all tangible Bodies of the whole Universe into the first life
of the same, without any changing of it self, and diminishing of its virtues;
But it is drawn under the yoke, and thoroughly changed by its own compeere or
coequal only: For from hence there appears a certain sense to be in all
particular things, the which mediating, they do sometimes one way, and
sometimes another, move and unfold themselves about diverse objects; but not
that the period of motions, and of those unfoldings, and the variety of Agents,
is therefore to be attributed to a re-acting of the Patients; To wit, even as,
while an external luke-warmth bringing up Eggs unto a Chick; for neither of
them does resuffer reciprocally: For neither does the vital Spirit in an Egg
any way re-suffer any thing by the luke-warmth, as neither that luke-warmth by
the vital Spirit of the Egg. Hitherto tends that which I have proved before;
To wit, that altering things do not act by contrariety: Therefore their
Patients do not fight in defending themselves, nor re-act by contrariety.

That maxim also is false, That every Agent does of necessity, act in an
instant; and that its action is retarded or fore-slowed only, by a resistance
and re-acting of the Patient: Because Aristotle, have thought that the fire is
to be compared unto other Agents:

In the first place it is manifest, that the fire does suffer or undergo
nothing at all by the re-acting of a combustible object: For otherwise, a small
quantity of fire should be sufficient for Saguntum, or if Gunpowder be fired.
In Nature also, no seminal Beginning suffers by the matter into which it
works; Because it disposes of the same without re-acting, even as it has
begun plainly to appear in denied contraries.

Moreover, that the falsehood of the aforesaid maxim may be the more beheld,
take notice, that all particular seeds have their own periods and moments
appointed by the Creator, wherein Aristotle are indeed serviceable, the which,
by a violent Command, and the aforesaid laws, it patiently expects the torture
of the fire, and a departure of that water.

Iron also being placed between stubble and fire, hinders indeed the enflaming
or burning up of the stubble; but there is not therefore any re-action of the
Iron on the fire, or suffering of the That the action of the same power is
hurt, whereby the sound one is exercised: For truly there

For neither does that prove, because moisture in Wood, or an interposing of a
coal between

They do indeed some way limit the very action of the fire, or do seclude the
same, as it were incapable partitions, and no more: For it is proper and
natural to fire, first to consume water, in themselves dark, so as that they
may be after some sort, made clear or shining bright: the which, at length it
obtains in making them fiery: Because the fire endeavors to pierce all things
with its own form: The which, while inflameable things do not sustain, without
their own ruin; therefore, in burning, they are enflamed, and being consumed,
do depart: Neither also does the fire pretend to enlighten stones and metals
in a moment, according (as otherwise) to the aforesaid Maxim; but the fire
suits it self in its own nature of acting, according to the limitation of every
object: And so it is perpetually true, that every natural Agent acts, and is
received after the manner of its own object receiving. Therefore the primary
action of the fire is to produce in its object, a fire like it self; wherein
some objects do burn under the intention of fire; but others do persist, and
expect the last intent of the fire: So that, if some things are not
combustible; at leastwise, the fire acts into them as much as it can, to make
them fiery. In like manner also, the light suffers not any thing, although at
one only instant, it dart it self from the Sun, from far, on the Earth, or
although it be not sent through, through a thick mean hindering it: Truly the
light suffers nothing by a thick or dark Body, whether it shall pass through
that Body, or not: For it always attaineth its own intent, which is to
enlighten, whether in the mean time, an Impediment does interpose or not: for
the resistance, or repelling of objected Impediments, are not in manner of a
re-acting (because Agents re-suffer nothing) but they are of a mere incapacity:
Therefore it is plainly indifferent, and by accident unto those Agents, whether
fixed Bodies are enlightened only, by the fire, and are pierced by the light, or
not: For these things are even after the same manner, as the Leaven of Meal in
respect of the powder of Glass: For the Leaven suffers nothing, although the
incapacity of the Glass does hinder whereby the Leaven does work the less: For
at least there is no re-acting where there is no action. These things about the
denial of re-acting, strife, hatred, and war, between the Agent or doer, and
patient or sufferer; to wit, which kind of action alone, the Schools have
acknowledged.

I will add also, other new ones. I have said in the Book of Fevers, that a
poisonous excrement in Fevers, is included in the Midriffs, producing drowsy
sleeps, doatages, etc. Therefore

Lastly, in swooning, a stupefactive or sleepy poison, a dispersive of the
Spirits: And hence, presently taking away sense and motion. But seeing the
Schools do not extend themselves beyond a If in a continual Fever, after yellow
Vrines, watery ones shall presently succeed, they denote dotages to come; by
reason (as Galen will have it) of Choler snatched into the Brain: But the
Schools elsewhere, when they noted that from yesterdayes gluttony, giddinesses
of the Head have arisen in the morning, they had rather to have the matter of
Diseases to be conveyed into the Brain, in a right line, out of the stomach,
in the likeness of vapors, through unnamed Trunks, and the throat: And so,
black Choler, according to Hippocrates, to be brought sometimes into the body
of the Brain, and to bring forth the falling-Evil; or else into the Soul it
self, and then to cause the passion of hypochondrial madness: And that by
uncertain passages, conveighers, and unto certain scopes or objects. But seeing
one only melancholy humor, should be unfit for so great evils, it was doubted
in the Schools afterward (not indeed in a

Therefore the Schools have neglected the matter of so diverse poisons
besieging the Head, and life: But they being heedless, have passed over the
application of that matter unto the life have therefore dis-esteemed, the
manner of making a Disease, and of deriving the poisonous activity unto the
vital object; To wit, because they have been wholly ignorant of the sink from
whence those poisons should be derived, and have passed it by as a thing
altogether unheard of; Because they have neglected the proper action of the
Family-government of man; without the knowledge of which, notwithstanding,
nothing of those things which do befall us within, can be known: For only the
action of the Agent on the Patient, has been known in the Schools, the which
indeed they would have to be made with a certain circumventing or invasion,
with a strife and reacting of the Patient, and with a weakening and
re-suffering of the Agent.

But there is a certain action far different from the former, whereof
Predecessors have never made mention, which I call the Action of Government:
which indeed, is not only made without

But our present action of government, is not the action which the Schools have
acknowledged to be a consent of parts, or by a conspiracy of offices and
necessities: For truly, government

Truly by this inducement, Anatomy has been garnished for the Body of man, as
if it were the undoubted betokener, and healer of all Diseases: For hitherto
they have taken so great pains Galen, do measure him to be a true Physician,
who shall point out most in the filths of dead Carcases, and who shall
certainly find by his own knife, those things which are published by
Predecessors in this respect, even unto superstition: And the error of so
superfluous a curiosity, and pride of unsound Doctrine, praised by the
ignorance of the Schools, is to be judged to have been brought in by the
spirits of giddiness, and the Author of dark dimness: for unto whom it is
acceptable, under what Title soever, we loose our time unfruitfully. For it was
sufficient for Anatomy, to have known the situation; co-knitting, and uses of
the parts; but not to have exercised a butchery on dead Carkases all

For indeed, seeing one muscle ought to be moved, another being in the mean
time, quiet, the chief Judge or Arbitrator of things has appointed
interchangeable courses of Organs, so that the command of our will should be
declared in the muscles by deputed sinews only, but that by the muscles and
bones it should be put in execution: From hence the Schools have does not cease
in man by reason of this dependence, and reciprocal successive course of
members; the which I have already accused in an Insect: but not a few offices
are administered

But I do not pass by a third action in man's Body, which is called
Influential, or that of government: The which although it cannot ordinarily
wander without the Body; yet it is abstracted

There is also a certain lying action, usual with wicked Spirits; to wit, a
juggling and bewitching one. The which, although it contain in it a true action;
yet it does not manifest a true effect: etc. the part is played about the mouth
of the stomach, so that for this cause it has deserved the name of the heart;
and stomach-remedies being suddenly offered, they are for the most part
restored: And so like, juggles, they are made elsewhere, and seem to be carried
to some other place: For whatsoever is written concerning vapors lifted up out
of the stomach, and womb, they do spread forth bewitching darkness, as well
about the matter, conveyances of passages, and means, as the government of
life it self. After another manner, there are true actions, and true effects;
Even as elsewhere I have distinguished in the Treatise of Catarrhs or Rheumes.
I must now more deeply enquire into the Paradox of the action of government:
For indeed, in the first place it is commonly, well observed, that anger, fear,
and other passions of the mind, do not only with speed diversely affect the
Spirit carried in the Arteries and Sinews with the very stroke of the eye, that
the Cheeks do fall, the Appetite perishes, the hairs stand upright, the voice
sticks, the Spittle foams, sweats and the other excrements themselves do
defile, through the storm of disturbances: ^ But a Horse-beast affords the
fragments of his hoof, which being fried, and taken, cures

Eunuchs are beardless, of a straighter neck, their knees being writhed
inwards, etc. Therefore the Beard at least does efficiently depend on the
stones being come to maturity; yea the Brabant, that happens far sooner to the
same in Spain, to wit, where Cherries do sooner come forth: Therefore the
thought or cogitation reaches the Young in a direct passage: not indeed by the
directions of fibers, or straight beams, and the conveyance of aptness of
readiness, as neither by the conceit of the Brain and Womb; but only by a
reciprocal or recoursary action of government. But besides, if there be no
Young present, the Idea's of Imagination do not therefore cease to be
deciphered in the sides of the womb: The which, seeing they are strangers to
the womb, it becomes easily furious, as being impatient of foreign Tables.
There is therefore a passable way from the sensitive Soul, into the womb, and
from this to it: which thing, Hippocrates first took notice of; To wit, that
the whole Body was exspirable, and conspirable: From whence it comes to pass,
that some Symptoms of the womb, are scarce discerned from enchantments: For it
so straightly strains the Coat of the Lungs, that it sends no Air at all through
it into the breast: Here is no communication, passage, access, scope, or manner
of a vapor, and much less is there an affinity with Rheums in this respect,
seeing it begins and is bounded or finished without a material aflux, or eflux.
It is therefore only the action of government, whereby the mad womb does
disturb all things: But a co-knitting, nighness, aptness, or consent are not to
be regarded; Chemistry. What things I have already spoken touching the
government of the Stones, and Womb, I have demonstrated by many Arguments, in
the Treatise of Catarrhs, and likewise of the Duumvirate, not by a more dull
privilege to belong unto the Stomach, neither that fumes, as neither that
vapors do ascend out of the Stomach unto the Head; and so that in this
respect, an impossible Fable is taught in the Schools. Likewise in the Treatise
of Fevers, and elsewhere, I have shown, by what sum drunkenness is made, and
by what way, fumes are derived into the more formerly bosoms of the Brain. Now
I will teach the manner of making in an Apoplexy, the Falling Sickness,
drowsy Evil, etc. that when I shall have denied them to be made by a co-knit
Chain of vapors, they may at least be understood to undergo the action of
Government.

To which end I must repeat what I before spoke by the way; To wit, that the
Beard is bred by the stones, and that the distinctions, ages, varieties, and
colors hereof do depend thereupon: which thing, seeing it is other, yet that
they reserve the Essence and properties of their former Lights: But in
inferior things, wherein Forms do inhabit, and also formal Powers, that these
have their light even actually capable of being stirred up by our Archeus, no
otherwise than as in an Egg, the power of the seed is actuated by a nourishing
warmth. Therefore there is in the roots of the hairs in the chin, a power of
growth, duration, and other dispositions, although the masculine ruling power
thereof, be of one stone: which power of the stones indeed, although it be
absolute, yet it is not but diversely received in places, to wit, according to
the manner and capacity of every receiver. But as much as this speculation
conduces unto Medicine, I will translate poisonous powers into the place of
vital ones; Because they are not less lightsome than those which are
otherwise, wholesome, if poisons do immediately issue from their own forms: For
they are the gifts, either of the more outward or foreign Simples of the first
Creation, or in the next place, are begotten afterward in us through error of
living. By the same privilege also, the natural powers of the parts, to wit,
of the Womb, Stomach, Stones, etc.) do beam forth their own lights throughout
the whole Body, and do pierce the light of the Archeus, also by the action of
government depending on their light: whence indeed, this Archeus is comforted,
weakened, estranged, prostrated, yea perishes: Therefore poisons in the
Midriffs, or those bred elsewhere, do act by virtue of their own formal and
lightsom powers, according to the natural endowed Idea imprinted on them, and
they do affect the vital light planted in the sensitive Soul, in the Archeus,
and so in the parts, and they mutually pierce each other by a radical union,
and that either by a contagion of poison remaining, and transplanting the
inbred, formal and vital light of the parts; or only for a little space, as
in those that have the Falling Sickness, with a liberty of returning or not,
according to the requirance of their root: Therefore the Head is not only
chief over the lower Organs, but also these are likewise chief over the Head,
the which I have elsewhere declared in a manifest example by hanging: For
truly, the thorny marrow being encompassed in the middle of the turning Joints,
cannot be strained by the Rope, that it should deny the passage of breathing to
the Spirit the mover; nevertheless, the understanding, sense, and memory,
perish at the same instant, by reason of the stopping or shutting up of the
Arteries of the throat, even before an every way stopping of Air: whence it is
sufficiently manifest, that some intellectual light does continually spring
from the lower parts unto the Head, by the intercepting whereof, presently in
hanging, and drowning (although the Brain, thorny marrow, and sinews be not
hurt) every virtue, power, and light of the Soul does nevertheless perish: As
also in a Feverish doatage raised up from the lower parts, the discourse of
Reason perishes. There is therefore a reciprocal government of the lower
parts. I willingly confess also, that dimnesses, giddinesses of the Head,
deasnesses, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, and other evils Galen, that it is a sack or
naked Kettle dedicated to the cooking of meats; but as a vital bowel, which is
prevalent in tasting, smells out a thing, and which is driven with diverse
appetites, as if it were a living Creature: and now and then it so loatheth
some things, that a man had rather die, than to swallow one morsel which goes
against his stomach. Indeed the stomach is of necessity serviceable to the
whole Body, also for the vile Houshold-service of the Kettle: But thus far
other things do diversely obey it, and unless they give serious heed, they are
cruelly beaten; According to that saying, He that will be the greatest among
you, let him be the least. Surely the stomach is diligently busied in a low
service; yet the family-service of the stomach is not therefore vile or base,
no more than for the High Priest of the Jews to have played the butcher; but
being compared with the stomach, he was a certain counterfeit or personage of
life, with a famous majesty. If a Sinew, Artery, and Vein are seen implanted in
the stomach, indeed they are rather signs of Clientship, and recompenses
whereby they confess themselves bowels tied or obliged to the stomach, than
that they were added unto it for Government, Mast, and Sails. But neither
indeed will I have this Principality to be so conserred on the stomach, as if
the Government of that Commonwealth does wholly belong to that membrane it
self: For of the Spleen and Stomach, I make one only Wedlock, and one
Marriage Bed: Wherein I attribute to the Spleen, the offices of a Husband in
the first motions, and to the Stomach, in the first sense or feeling; Therefore
the Stomach is the completing of the Spleen, and the Spleen of the Stomach;
under the one only Bride-bed of them both, is the Principality of one
Duumvirate. Yet I do never, cease to contemplate of that which is sufficiently
admirable, what the Lord of things has foreseen; I say, in the naked coats of
the Brain, Womb, Stomach, Pericardium, etc. I say in the Membranes; but that,
in things which are abject in the sight of men, God has wont to constitute his
wonders: whose name be sanctified for ever.

CHAP. XLIII. The Duumvirate or Sheriffdome.
1. Sleep is from a Sleepifying or somnoriferous power, and not from a defect.
2. The Opinion of the Schools concerning Sleep. 3. The Opinion of the Ancients
is opposed. 4. Contradictions. 5. The thingliness of Opiates. 6. The
immpossiblity is shown from the Situation of the Sinews. 7. That Sleep
happens, the Opiate remaining within the Stomach. 8. From the effect of Opium.
9. The Sulphur of Vitriol is taught. 10. Some absurdities accompanying the
position of the Schools. 11. A ridiculous privy shift. 12. When Dreams are
made. 13. Why the Headache arises from over-eating or drinking. 4. Pain
arises from a contraction of the Coats of the Brain, without a Vapor. 15. A
Position for the Duumvirate. 16. The Conclusion.

THe Heathen Poet does morally, yet from a homely judgment, call Sleep, the
Image of Frozen Death. But I, seeing that I know Sleep to be a natural power,
dismissed from the principality of the Stomach into the Brain, and to be
committed to the charge of the Power of Government, that it might be put in
execution; being a Christian, do believe that God (always to be sanctified)
When he intended to frame Woman of the rib, he cast a Sleep upon Adam: Not
indeed as a privative Being, but as an actual real faculty, and merely
positive: And therefore that the Power of Sleeping is vital, necessary, and
consequently natural: For I may not believe, that God made Death in man, or the
image thereof: Neither was it meet, that the image of Death should go before
sin, and the occasion of Death.

The Schools indeed teach, that Sleep is caused by vapors lifted up out of the
etc. which things surely, I being as yet a young man, judged to be ridiculous:
For in very deed, so a disease had been before sin; because sleep should be a
disease; to wit, there had been a flatulent and vapoury Palsy, and Temporary
Paganism should as yet be seriously taught in the Schools, especially by
Christians, better instructed. Yea the Schools do err in their own position
proposed.

For those that sleep do move, and turn themselves up and down, some do walls
Schools do badly accord with themselves, while they confound sleep, and waking
Catarrhs, with the same root, causes, and manner of making; so I, after that
the toys of a Catarrhe were hissed our, rejected also the assigned causes of
sleep, as vain fables. Last of all the Schools also lay hands on themselves,
while they teach, that from Opiates, things (as they say) most cold, and rather
things powerfully restraining every evapouration (at least wise they are
feigned to restrain, etc. Vapors for Catarrhs, more than Coriander) from their
own nature; Sleep, the Drowsy evil, yea and death are most readily brought on
a man: and so much the more speedily, by how much the Opiate Opium shall be
taken, and the more inward cooling made, by so much the more plentiful, and
more continued vapors should be brought from the stomach into the head, also
although the mouth of the stomach be shut. But surely it is a stupid devise,
that sleep should be made by cold. Neither is it to be understood, how one
only grain of Opium can cause a sufficiency of cold in the Stomach, and had
actually driven a sufficient quantity of vapors into the Head? How likewise,
it shall belong to cold, to stir up vapors, rather than to restrain them. But
these things we may suppose to be granted by the rule of falsehood.

And that Sleepifying vapors are derived upwards from the meats: also that the
Sinews, the authors of the senses and motions, are stopped by these vapors.
But Schools, cause sleep. And which way should these vapors incline from the
Stomach, and pierce through the whole Substance of the Brain, by what means
should they reach even unto the very innermost, and altogether continued root
of the Sinews it self, which is unseperably connexed to the Brain? In the next
place, how could he that is awakened at the will of the awakener, be so
speedily loosed and freed from those impediments? Or what may detain those
vapors there for so many hours, without their co-binding, or co-thickning into
water? for truly those vapors being once constrained, a passage should lay
open to the Spirits, which should presently shake of the sleep: Or what at
length may hinder, that new vapors should not continually make toward the
same beginnings of the Sinews, and being there Coagulated, should not bring
forth of necessity, daily Catarrhes or rheums; and undoubted palseys? Surely if
an Anatomist, or a man in his right mind does but once at least, rudely
contemplate of these things, he ought of necessity to admire with amazement at
these fables of heathens, especially because they have no affinity or connection
with the principles of our constitution. It also happens that some one is many
times awakened in one only night, that he arises, and goes to sleep again; and
so almost at his pleasure, there should be so many obstructions of the Sinews
in one night, yea in one hour. I pass by in the mean time, that sleep is
stirred up, an Opiate being as yet materially within the Stomach; even as
unvoluntary experience has often taught. Therefore either so small a quantity,
and only the Odor of the Opium, ought to fume up into the Brain, or it self
being there detained, should send away sleepy Vapors its Vicars:

But not the first, because before that the Opium could strike the sense of
Tasting, or Smelling, the Opium should be continually percieved in the Tongue,
Palate, Nostrills, Schools, the material causes of Giddiness of the Head, not a
whit to differ from the causes of natural Sleep: All which things, I have
elsewhere concerning Rheums, proved to be mere ignorances, and unsavory
consents, having arisen from a sluggishness of diligent searching, and a
readiness of subscribing. But I pray, what is that which is so cold in Opium,
which causes Sleep against my will, and I being sufficiently heated: If the
coldness of vapors, why do Wines after Dinner provoke Sleep? Is there
therefore one only identity or samliness of disposition of Opium? Why are not
hot things judged to be alike Stupefactive and Dormitive or Sleepifying? Why
have not deadly Poppies much praised by Poets for Sleep, persuaded them to
remember another virtue besides cold? Why does Opium taste bitter? And why is
bitterness reckoned in the Schools, to be heat predominant? Therefore the
Schools must needs choose one of these two; To wit, either that cold in Opium is
not exceeding, and by consequence, that Opium does not cause Sleep through
cold; or that bitterness is a deceitful token of heat in the Schools. For why
is not Purslain which is cold by reason of its third degree, Sleepifying? Why
is not a handful of Purslain equivalent to two Grains of Opium, seeing there is
more plentiful cold in it, and it does more powerfully cool in such a small
parcel, than in so exceeding small a quantity of Opium? Why does Nightshade
make one mad, but does not by its cold produce Sleep? But I do find in Opium a
sharp Sudoriferous or sweat provoking Salt, and a bitter oil, far differing
from the smell of Opium, yet provoking Sleep.

But the Sulphur of Vitriol is sweet like honey, with the smell, vapor, and
fury of Opium: because it being fixed in the torture of the fire, is exceeding
hot, and Sleepifying. For there are some, who do wash off a powder from
Colcotar or Calcined Vitriol, in depriving it of its saltness: But it is almost
unefficacious, how ever the writers of young beginnings by vain promises may
boast of it: For the right, and that which they call, that of the Philosophers,
is made of the Spirit of Green Vitriol; which by a repeated Cohobating or
injection of its own extracted liquor in distillation, being pressed out and
made notably volatile in the last torture of the fire, is coagulated and fixed:
which thing the common Sal Armoniack performs, which ought afterward to be
taken from thence by the repeated distillations of the Spirit of wine. That
Sulphur is commendable among Secrets for long life, and for chasing away a
troop of some diseases.

Sleep therefore possesses many as yet speaking, after the whispering of three
moments.

But I have heard Sleep to be excused by the Title of an Ordinary Effect, and
the

A Humorist being asked by a riotous Person, why his Head aketh in the morning
on Anatomy, that the Orifice of the Stomach was inclined toward the left-side:
that it was also taught now for many ages, that painful Vapors are carried
out of the Stomach into the Head; but that they cause pain, because they being
lest of the wine, are sharp, tart, and biting; and likewise that they keep the
perpendicular line of the same side, neither that they are suffered to be
extravagant. The which being said, the Galenist lifts up his Eyelids, joggs or
cocks his Cap, and gratifies his own Soul, because the other being credulous,
thinks he had given him Satisfaction by so lying a Fable: For in that the pain
of the forehead obtains a straightness of the side from the Stomach, it
secretly implies some remarkable thing for the action of Government, and the
Duumvirate: But none has thought that that can be done without an actual
commerce of vapors. For first of all, no Vapor out of the Stomach, strikes
the Head; as neither also is there any sharp, salt, bitter, or brackish vapor;
even as elsewhere concerning Rheums: Because the pain of which we now speak, is
continual, as well to him that lays along, as to him that stands, or sits, and
that without a necessity of belching: But if this does sometimes accompany it,
yet the pain does never, the less, or more molest: neither also is there
therefore, any sharpness, saltness, bitterness of vapors, unless that in
inordinate appetite the belching be sour and then especially, there is scarce a
pain ever present in the Head. And Morover, a Vapor being supposed according
to the Schools, the Weasand at leastwise, holds every where the middle of the
Neck and Jaws. For that cause therefore, the Vapors, if there were any, should
strike the middle, bottom or root of the Brain with a straight line; but not
the forehead, and much less the left-side thereof: neither could they ascend in
one that lays down, but should be blown out though the Mouth and Nostrils:
Because although they were granted to ascend even into the plain (which there
is none) beneath the Brain, yet they should not pierce unto its bosoms,
without a mortal confusion of the Spirits: And least of all, should Vapors
reach uncessantly unto the coats of the Brain; whereof notwithstanding, a
painful feeling is judged to be, but not of the Brain it self: Yea a pain and
savor of the smitting Vapor, should presently be felt, rather above the
Palate (where the plain of the Brain is falsely supposed to be) than in the
forehead, or under the Scull: Which thing notwithstanding, as many as ever have
undergon these pains, will reprove of falsehood.

The Schools indeed have been ignorant, that the action of Government does
contract the coats of the Brain without vapors, in what part it has pleased
the Duumvirate Stone, in the Chapter of the act of feeling): therefore should
not the top of the Crown, rather pain a man, than the one side of the forehead?
even as in the Megrim? For the Crown is perpendicular to the Throat; from
whence it is clearly manifest, that the Head is no more pierced by watery
vapors from the Stomach, than the Chin by vapors of the Stones, in Bearded
persons, but not in those that are Gelded. In the next place, the bottom of the
Brain should especially be pained, the which the vapor should first touch at,
and not the coats or membranes of the Brain. And then, the back-running Sinews
of the Palate, Tongue, etc. should be cruelly affected, before the left wing of
the Forehead under the Scull. Neither at length, should those vapors enclose
themselves under the Pericranium, or above either of the membranes of the Brain
in the circle of one Doller: Neither also should they ever cause a Megrim for
one half of the Head, and much less, sometimes for the right side; but rather
they should ascend in a straight line, and likewise, should always, out of the
Throat, equally affect the whole Head; seeing passages are wanting, which may
as it were through Trunks, conveigh those vapors, sometimes hither, sometimes
thither: for why, according to Hippocrates, does milk bring the headache to him
that is Feverish, if the vapors of whey ought rather to assuage these griefs?
Why does new food appease the headache, seeing that from new meat (especially
Wine accompanying it) sharp vapors, rather than mild ones, like Milk, ought to
exhale? Therefore the pain being once now settled, food should not appease the
pain, but rather should stir it up, and make a new one. All which things,
seeing they resist the position, and experience, they convince also, that the
aforesaid pain, does without vapors proseed from the Duumvirate, by a naked
action of Government. I have many times admired, that it was always
subscribed, by all altogether, and throughout all particulars unto the
traditional fables of the Ancients. But I have shown in the Treatise of the
Toys of a Catarrhe, that these races of vapors out of the Stomach, are
triflours, and therefore also the causes of vapors dedicated to Sleep. Lastly,
I have already proved above, that there is an action of Government on the
superior or upper parts, no less than the actions of the superior parts have
been hitherto thought to be, on the inferior or lower ones. Then also, I have
shown by the way, that out of the Midriffs does issue the most powerful temper
or constitutive temperature of acting in Diseases, which Antiquity has
hitherto dedicated only to the Head.

Now I lay it down for a position, that the Duumvirate the president of the
action

That the Duumvirate commands the whole Body.

That the Fantasy or imagination, Venus, etc. is to be attributed to, or
belongs to the Spleen and Stomach,

That unto this very Duumvirate, belongs Sleep, watching, etc.

That in the same place, is the Inn or Seat of the Soul:

Which four particulars do meet as it were in one only point. The Philosophers,
together with Astrologers, have dedicated the Spleen to Saturn, the parent of
the Starry gods, as to the inchoative or original principle of Life: But the
Galenists, who are wont in most things to contradict themselves, have made the
Spleen partly the Sink of the most stubborn Excrementous and feigned black
Choler, and partly the receptacle of madness, not indeed by reason of a
Melancholy matter in it, but rather, by reason of a certain conceptual,
irrational and bestial disturbance; therefore they sometimes name it the
Hypochondrial passion. But seeing according to their maxim; There is a sound
function of the same part, and power, whereof there is a vitiated one, and on
the contrary: I will conclude from thence, even against the will of the
Schools, Hydrophobia) do accuse their unvoluntary madness, which they forefeel,
foretell, and do warn the standers by to beware of them. They answer, that that
happens, not indeed because any imagining power is there entertained, but
because a fume of black Choler is from thence carried up into the Head, the
Sheath of the imaginative power. Which particulars surely, seeing they are of
great moment, it is meet they should be examined in a peculiar Treatise of the
Soul, and of the Seat, Throne, and Inn thereof.

CHAP. XLIIII. A Treatise of the Soul:
1. The Treatise of the Soul is Commended. 2. What has diverted Scholars from
this Meditation. 3. The knowledge of the Soul is not to be delivered for a
Conclusion. 4. The suppositionary difficulties of the Schools. 5. Why the
knowledge of things is to be put after. 6. By an example fetched from Water. 7.
The actions of the mind in the Body. 8. What has deceived Predecessors. 9.
The Author has desisted from his enterprise. 10. Considerable things
concerning the mind.

SEeing therefore, the entire command of the Duumvirate does flourish or bear
sway from the vital Soul; truly the three aforesaid positions may be abundantly
proved by the fourth: for if so be it may appear, that the very Seat of the
Soul is in the Duumvirate; The principality also of this over the other
Members, and stations of the Bowels, will come to hand: wherefore I will ^ere
by the way, treat of the Soul, although by other writers before me, the
Treatise of the Soul has been banished out of natural Philosophy, especially
in order to the knowledge of the Theory or speculative part of healing. And
although so many sharp discourses of madnesses, do on every side molest us; Yet
verily, seeing I have perceived no aid from Predecessors, but labor and grief
have pierced my most inward parts, before that I could lay aside those things
which I had drawn from Heathenisme; Therefore I have altogether judged my self
not to be tied up unto their Method, in whose possession I have not yet found
any thing which may or ought to be snatched into the Beginnings and properties
of nature.

By looking therefore into my own Liberty, I considered, that among knowable

The first whereof is, because the knowing of the Soul has seemed unto them
far more difficult than that of any other things whatsoever.

The second is, because the knowledge of the mind, might be hoped for, and had,
from a diligent search of external things, and an examining of corporeal
properties. But although the first of these is true, yet the second can in no
wise be so, for if the knowledge of the mind be of an abstracted and spiritual
Being, it likewise cannot be derived on us by any speculation of corporeal
things.

Because God alone is the immediate workman, and prince of the mind, and the
very life of life. Therefore the knowing of our selves cannot be hoped for from
any other thing than from its Fountain and Governor: For truly the knowing of
abstracted Spirits, differs in the whole Heaven, from the speculation of frail
things, seeing they do not partake in any common co-resemblance of Principles,
or properties. Therefore the thingliness or essence of Bodies contains not a
whit of Knowledge or Light, that the Soul may know or acknowledge, or behold it
self, but only by a renouncing, which is a certain despairing and banishment of
knowledge, whence also it gets no light unto it self from that which is above,
or from that which is contrary to it self, nor also does it strike a light of
understanding for it self, as it were out of a Steel and Flint: Because the
manner of knowing the Soul is to be begged from the Father of Lights, and not
from elsewhere: Because it was the good pleasure of the Divine will, that Man
should not fetch the knowledge of himself from any other thing, than from the
Beginning and Fountain, himself, who is the Beginning Mean, End, Scope, and
highest vertical point of all Philosophy, unto which all knowledge is to be as
an addition. But further, the essential knowledges (and those from a former
thing or cause) of Sublunary things, are quite as darksome, covered, and
difficult, as is the very conceiving of the immortal mind, if the essences of
things from a former thing, and their causes, be known only to God. Therefore
it is simply false, that the knowing of the mind is more difficult, than the
naked knowing of things, or therefore to be put after them: Because all things
are alike unknown to us, because the essence of all Beings whatsoever, is their
precise Truth, shut up to usward, and laying open unto that which is infinite.
Therefore the knowledge of things is to be measured at the balance; all
corporeal things are primarily strangers, and foreigners to our mind, and

And moreover, other things, are not to be known but by the mind, and first in
the mind: for therefore the knowledge of any things whatsoever, is only a
certain observation, from whence we frame discourses according to every ones
capacity. Wherefore also, every such observation, and discourse fetched from
hence, how polished soever, is only from a latter thing or the effect, and far
less illustrated than is the observation which is had from the mind. For who
ever of mortals, knew what the water Philosopher: For they do equally conceive
of it by the observation of the senses, that it is a Body, weighty, liquid,
moist, giving place to ones finger, fluid, and reclosing it self upon the
removing of the finger, a receiver of Heat, and extenuable into a vapor; yet
none has known the internal thingliness of the Water, or why it is Revelation
of Faith:

To wit, That the mind is a Spiritual substance, also subsisting by it self
without a Body, Immortal, Living, made after the Image or likeness of God,
immediately by God himself, giving Sense, as also motion to the Organs, and the
which being separated from the Body, does perceive without Organs at its beck
or pleasure, being able also to move out of it self, and the Body being bridled
or restrained, is able to produce a Being out of it self (as has been already
shown concerning a Woman with Child) it understanding, also willing, and
remembering, etc.

The Observations of which Properties and Functions, are far more strong than
is the knowledge of the Water: otherwise, all things and every of things, by an
intrinsecal understanding, are equally unknown and unpassable to us.

But that which has Seduced Predecessors, by thinking that the knowing of the
Water was easier than that of the mind, has proceeded from an Opinion, That a
visible thing is of necessity more known than an invisible thing: But they have
not

They have not known I say, that the knowledge of Observation, does not
introduce an understanding into the essential thingliness of a thing, but
erecteth only a thinkative knowledge: For otherwise, the understanding should
perceive causes that are before in essence. Then also they have been deceived
by the simplicity of the Water, which simpleness they have confounded with the
unity of knowledge to us unknown. In the mean time seeing the observations of
the mind are many, and the more plentiful, the property of every one whereof,
denies a knowing from a former thing: therefore they have thought that they
did undergo more impossibilities in the knowing of the mind, than in that of a
simple Body: And so as well the number only in the mind, as a visual frequency
of Bodies has brought forth in them that difficulty: when as notwithstanding,
after another manner, in the Beingness of a Being that which is visible is as
well unknown intellectually, as that which is invisible. For

But when I endeavored to explain that by the mental acts of Prayer, I had not
freedom in that thing: because they were judged to exceed the Square of my own
contempt or meanness, I willingly omitted that Treatise.

Let it therefore be sufficient for me, to have plainly demonstrated to others
more abounding then my self, that the Christian Philosophy of nature, does not
admit of nor will, mortal, strange, far remote things, and the causes whereof
are hidden from a former cause, and not to know in the mean time, who I the
contemplater may be, what the understanding may be, how an intellectual act may
be formed, and subsist.

Especially, because any thing is not conceived, as it is in it self, but after
the manner of the receiver; that is, of the conceiver. Therefore before all,
the receiving understanding,

Lastly, before I can know whether a thing it self understood, be true and
good, or whether in me, or for me, it is not to be changed in its Beingness by
conceiving, or alienated from its own essence, from whence the Truth of Entity
or beingness it self had assumed a strange mask. I altogether judged, that
those things ought to be cleared up by intellectual acts, tho which I
determined could not be more readily, or successfully begged by any other
thing, than by practice, that is, from the mental Prayer of Silence. But that
thing others shall discern or judge of and weigh more justly or equally, than
I: And therefore I would not willingly descend into this labarinth.

CHAP. XLV. The Distinction of the mind from the Sensitive Soul.
1. The Treatise of the Entrance of death into Humane nature, is commended as
necessary for obtaining a knowledge of the mind. 2. The Reader is also sent
back unto the Treatise Touching the Birth of Forms. 3. The Immortality of the
Mind is proved from the Gospel. 4. It prepares a Weapon against the Atheism at
this day. 5. Leonard Lessius describing or Coppying out, has re-delivered only
out of Augustine concerning the Immortality of the Soul.

FIrst of all, in the book of long Life, I have demonstrated at large, that the
entrance Soul, which else under immortality, had been in vain: whence indeed a
Law in the Members was introduced, contradicting the Laws of the immortal mind:
And a Total and unexusable corruption of the whole central nature was received:
Which new and unheard of Doctrine to former ages, I presuppose is therefore
from thence to be fetched or required, if so be that the knowledge of our Mind
be desired: For as it is now thus stranged from its own self and from its own
Beginning, because it now seems to hearken unto the commands of the Sensitive
Soul, which notwithstanding, in its own essence, Substance, and reality is
unchangeable; so indeed unto those who make a beginning, or do repent, as it
adds the knowledge of the means whereby it fell, and became wholly
degenerate; so also it presupposes the same Doctrine, to be as it were the
foundation of the knowing of it self.

In the next place, concerning the Birth of forms, I have likewise shown, how
far this frail, sensitive, and mortal Soul in us, may differ from the immortal
Mind: the Soul is neither a Substance, as neither an accident; But a neither,
Mortal Creature, and perishing into nothing, and of the nature of Lights.

Which Doctrine is in part, that of the Gospel, which speaks concerning the
Eternal Life and Death of Souls, or that which reckons the Soul of man to be
Soul of a Beast; which indeed together with the Life it self, is returned into
nothing, no otherwise than as the light of a Candle. But as to the other part,
the present Doctrine is plainly Paradoxal in as much as the Sensitive Soul is
banished out of the predicament of a Substance, or an accident. For first of
all, I have demonstrated, that the Sensitive and Beast-like Soul, as well in
bruits, as that which is in us, is not infinite and immortal; yet it must needs
be so, seeing none doubts, but that every natural thing that is born, is also
Subject unto Corruption by the Law of Nature. But we are obliged by Faith to
believe, that the mind of man is immortal hereafter: And so that Atheism had
lately arose in the midst of us, and in Hypocrites of the Church, which by an
every way renouncing of the Faith, does shake it self off from the Principles
whereby such insolent rashness might be appeased: And especially of them who
deny all divine Power: otherwise, neither is it my part to Treat of the
immortality of Augustine, and piously copied out word for word by Lessius, and
by him re-delivered, because they are those who have sufficiently proved the
same: But not yet against those which deny all Divine Power. Therefore I might
desist, by treading the same under foot, to re-meditate of it, if it had been
sufficiently demonstrated by them against the first sort of Atheists: and
unless I had put a difference of the mind in nature, from every Soul of living
Creatures, unless I say, the integrity or entireness of the same, should have
repect unto the knowledge of nature, and that integrity should require a
designed difference of man, from any other Created things whatsoever, and that
^ingly and Principally, only according to its chief and lively part, without
which, man is nothing but a stinking dead Carcass, more vile then a Flint, and
sooner destroyed and broken than any Glass. Otherwise, Christianity standing,
the immortality of the Mind stands, and the Substance of that Substander
o^^emainer; even as also likewise the Mortality of other Souls, or their
reducement into nothing, which is annihilation of a Proper Name. And from
thence is the true, and properly said difference of the same.

CHAP. XLVI. Of the Immortality of our Soul.
1. Atheism, and that worse than Idolatry. 2. Religious Atheists are the worst
of all. 3. The Life of new Religious persons which prefer themselves before
others, has introduced Atheism anew, under the Doctrine of the P^lagiam. 4.
Hypocrites abuse the Scriptures. 5. The Argument of perfect Atheists. 6. That
modern Atheism was foreseen in times past. 7. The foolishness of their
Argument. 8 Of what the Faith of Atheists is. 9. Some Arguments against
Atheists, from things granted. 10. Every thing understood is a Liar, while it
is equalized with things understood by Faith. 11. It is further demonstrated by
the authority of Scripture. 12. The Bread which comes down from Heaven,
Prophesied of. 13. The remainder out of blessed Augustine. 14. The mind cannot
be generated by the disposition of Bodies. 15. A neutrality of Beings unknown
to the Schools.

THe Jews of old, presently after the Cessation of miracles, were straightway
hurried unto Idolatry, and a mad worshipping of Idols. But the modern Age being
more wicked then they of the Circumcision, slideth voluntarily by degrees into
Atheism: Who goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking daily whom he may devour.
But especially, the evil examples of some Preachers, and Vowers of voluntary
Poverty, Obedience, Humility,

In the next place, the Scripture it self entering into that evil mind, it is
wrested in a wrong sense, and has confirmed Atheism, which otherwise, ought to
move to Chronicles of Bibles, are the mere Fables of the Hebrews; or the God
or Power which the Christians do at this day Worship, or the Turks, is far
different from the God of the Jews. For if we know a Tree by his Fruits, and a
man by his Works, the God also may be a doubtful God, which the Christians,
with the Turks, do adore and believe, together with the Jews, as one only God,
remaining always Immortal: he shall be to be known and believed by his own
works, and that such as beseem him: For as many enemies, as in times past, are
read to have rushed on the people of Israel, were overthrown by a small number,
and were slain, through the Astonishment of their minds by Terror, or by a
mutual Slaughter, or killing of each other; although the Camps of the same
enemies, were numerous like the ^o, casts, and the Camels of the same in
numerable as the sand of the Sea shore: Yet through a panick fear, they run
away howling, from three hundred Hebrews founding Horns: and now and then,
they slay each other with their own Sword, so as there was not one that
surviued, who might carry home news of all that Slaughter. Yea, without the
help of Warriors, one only Angel destroyed 180 thousand by Death, and that
with one only Sword. For if those things are true, which are them read, and
esteemed, and the power be at this day, the same which he was in times past,
and alike powerful; he ought alike powerfully to help the Christians (now his
own people) against their enemies, by whom they are surrounded, and subdued or
enthralled daily. For at this day, public Idolatry cease, which was In times
past accused for the cause of overthrow; and the cause of the Divine power
himself is at this day managed; if the Church, the Spouse of the same, and the
Sacraments of his Body, be disgracefully trampled on, and the daily Sacrifice
or Host be hung up, and mocked with great reproach: The disjunctive of both
which, howsoever it be taken, does at least, convince that that ancient Deity
has failed, in manner, in Being or essence, and in power; and that the new
one, or that which the Christians do now worship (of which powers, as well as
of believers, there are great discords in the whole World, hostily spoiling
each other) is not alike powerful, or alike bountiful to his faithful ones, as
the ancient Deity was to his own Israel in times past: Because at this day,
Angels nor Swords do no longer appear: neither do huge Camps any longer kill
each other with a mutual slaughter: As neither being affrighted in crying out,
do they run away from Christians armed with Chariots, on Horseback, and with
fiery Engines: and from hence our Atheists conclude, that as many as do believe
an Immortal and Omnipotent Being, that is, a God, do live deceived: And from
thence consequently, they do further rightly infer:

If any Divine power does at length die or fail, much more the mind of man
which sprung from Mortal Parents. For these Arguments are those which withdraw
the people of Christ, first unto a neglect of Divine worship, and at length
unto the toplof Atheism. After that the Devil took notice, that worshipping of
Idols, and a multiplicity of Starry Gods, among the Judicious, were despised,
as being loose and friuo^us means whereby he might allure people unto his own
Hook, he more subtly spreads this Net of Atheism, and collected a more
numerous Prey: which future Atheism God foretold by his Servants the Prophets:
The Fool has said in his heart there is no God, the Atheists are corrupted,
and become Abominable in Iniquities, there is none that can do good. God has
looked down from Heaven upon the Sons of men, to see if there be one that
understands, or seeks after Gods* For the Atheist has said in his heart,
if I might see God, an Angel, or evil Spirit; Yea or the Spirit of a man, I
would verily believe that they were: But I will not believe what I do not see,
or hear, all things are unaccustomed unto me, and therefore they seem
incredible: But I think with Aristotle, that all knowledge, and all
intellective Learning, is made only from a fore-existing knowledge of the
Senses. To whom the Devil answers, it is good for him so to remain. And God
faith; for he that to this end desires to see, that he may believe, is now
guilty of sin; but the spirit of Truth enters not into a Soul guilty of sin;
and therefore it is not convenient, that thou should see those things which
thou desire to see, that thou may believe: For neither is sin a Means for
the attaining of Faith. It is a Blasphemous and wicked Judgment, to have denied
a God, or a Devil, because it was not granted to him to have seen either of the
two, neither whereof is to be seen unless in an assumed Form.

In the next place, it is a rotten and childish Argument; God does not perform
to Christians at this day, those things which he sometimes of old performed to
the Jews: therefore he is not the the same as in times past, or is diminished
from his ancient power: For truly the matter is changed, not so much from the
power, as from the will of God. But why he will not now, what he would in times
past, it is not our part to ask of God a reason of his own will: therefore it
is a foolish Argument, God does not now do what he did in times past, therefore
he cannot do it. The Hebrew people was a small people, out of whom Christ ought
to arise; and that people were on every side beset with Enemies, and the which,
unless they had been supported with the stretched-out Arm of God, and as it
were by a continual miracle, they being presently brought to nothing, had
yielded as a prey to the Conqueror, from whence notwithstanding, it was decreed
that the Messiah should arise: But the condition and Law of Christians is far
otherwise: For the Israelitish people in the hardness of their hearts, did
measure the grace or favor of God, by the abounding of Wealth, Offspring,
Fruitfulness of Fruits, and their peaceable Possession: But we have known, that
offenses should be necessary in the Church, Tribulations also, how great
soever; yet not worthy to be reckoned with the Expectations of the Age to come.
And likewise it has so pleased God, that for unjustice, Kingdoms are
translated from Nation to Nation.

But that I may show that there is the same God of the Christians, which there
was in times past to the Hebrews; I must not indeed run back unto the written
Chronicles, with which Atheists, the Bibles themselves are of no credit: the
Argument of Atheists is to be overthrown; Seeing their understanding admits not
of that which is not introduced outwardly by the Senses. Their whole Faith is
from a knowledge; but that knowledge is founded in a present Sensibility, a
fore-past Observation, and renouncing of Histories, and succession of Ages, for
otherwise, there ought to be no less Authority of sacred, than of profane
Writers: Yea all the knowledge of Atheists descends to the Eyes, to Sight,
Numbers, Lines, Figures, Tones or Sounds, Weights, Motions, Smells, Touchings,
Handlings, and Tastes, that is, it wholly depends on a brutal Beginning, and
they are unapt to understand those things which do exceed sense: For that is
the cause why they exclude themselves from the intelligible world, and do kick
against the corner Stone.

But at leastwise, they confess that they do see and know those things which
they are ignorant of; which thing happens in the Speculations of the Planets.
But I wish Saturn from us, for they shall confess for that very cause, even
against their wills, the distance of so many thousand Miles, which their
understanding it self will contradict by seen dimensions, or they shall of
necessity incline themselves to confess, that a threefold circuit of Saturn,
in respect of his own Diameter, could not have arisen from himself, or of his
own accord; but rather that there is some Author of these, of infinite power,
wisdom, greatness, and so also of Duration, etc. But if the Atheist does
think, that the Orbs of so incomprehensible greatness, and so regular a
constancy of successive changes, have been thus of their own accord from
everlasting; at least wise the perpetuity of that infinite Eternity, ought to
follow a certain Law, Order, and ordained Government, which did require a
certain presiding or overseeing, or ruling. Being, everlasting in continuance,
great, and powerful. Most miserable therefore are they, who by an utter denial
of all things, do exclude Faith, and the rewards of Faith.

For let us consider the Circle of the Earth to be clothed with waters, or
that place without Earth and water, to wit, that all things do of their (very)
own forceable Inclination fall toward their Center; So that if two men were
there, to wit, from East and West, these should touch each other with their
Feet, and should look upwards with their head, even as we, and the Antipodes at
this day. This I say the Atheist does believe, although sense has not
suggested it unto him. For weighty bodies do teach indeed, their own ready
Inclination of falling downwards; but that the Heaven is on every side above,
in respect of one Center, and that such is the property of this Center, that
there is not another like unto it; neither yet, has the Atheist seen that
property: but nevertheless, he believes it: yea, whatsoever he may at any time
frame, he always finds the contrary, and without that property of a Center, he
believes I say, that same one only natural property in the universal Center:
but he never beholds or looks into the working cause thereof, or that which is
like it, in the least, and he had rather through unbelief, exclude it from
himself. But at least, if there be not a God, nor he every where present, and
giving all things to all, it should be all one, if all things were confounded,
should fall upwards, or downwards, whether weighty Bodies did rush downwards,
or upwards; whether Plants, and Beasts did perish or not. Therefore the
constancy of order and perseverance of the Species or particular kinds, do of
necessity require some primitive Fountainous Being from whence they began, are,
and do propagate by a continual thread, and the which does govern all things at
his own pleasure or by his own beck, and gives a constancy and Succession of
Continuation, least all things should go to ruin, and be confusedly
Co-mingled. Indeed he bears a universal care, and keeps things in their
essence or being.

In the next place, let the Atheist consider the flowing and ebbing of the
Water; To wit, that no water does ascend of its own accord; yet that the water
of the Sea, does always ascend, as well in the flowing, as ebbing of the Sea.
He believes this, because he sees it; but the cause thereof he believes not,
because he sees it not; neither has the knowledge thereof entered by sense,
because it is that which contradicts his senses. But he at least, ought to
believe, that those things do happen by a cause, although he has not known the
same, by which notwithstanding, every thing has drawn such a property. For
although all particular kinds should have this kind of power of seeds and gifts
from everlasting; yet nevertheless, there is not a certain universal property
in the Universe, which may have respect unto all particular things, that they
may be ordained, and which may know all particular things newly risen and to
arise, unless it be out of, and besides the nature of all particular things:
Otherwise, there should be innumerable Deities, as there were in times past:
and moreover, there should be continual Divisions, and Dissolutions of the
species or particular kinds. For the Atheist denies to believe, what things he
knows not by sense: he sees indeed the water to be moist, but he knows not,
what that is which is moist in the water, or why it is moist: Therefore he
believes that which he does not know, and that which he does not pierce, that
is, as the Beast does: for neither shall Humane knowledge ever raise him up
above its bounds, unless he be enlightened by the light, which the Atheist
excludes and: he defines all things by the Contemplation of his own conceit
alone, because he reflecteth every where on all things, as to himself: Being
indeed wholly carnal and vain, as long as he believes his understanding to
arise from a sensual Subject.

For whatsoever is perceived by Consequence, Numbers, Figures, Proportions, and
Suitings, is deceitful; as often as he prefers, or equalizeth the same things
understood, Revelation. What if Science Mathematical does abstract from real
Objects, and all perceived things, and yet they are believed; why shall it be
more difficult to believe things not seen, so they are revealed by a Being,
which by transcending Acts, shows that he deserves a more full Credit?

If an Atheist can assent unto profane Histories, why not also to the sacred
ones? For Moses was famous by many Miracles, known to all Israel; he writes
the History Abraham enlarged the bringing forth of Israel out of Bondage.

Lastly, he delivered the Law prescribed by God, being confirmed by many
Miracles, before an unbelieving people.

They being indeed seen in the sight of an hundred thousand co-living people.
Their Sons and Nephews subscribed to the Writings of Moses, and then indeed to
the Traditions confirmed by their Ancestors. And that was undoubtfully
believed by all the following Ages: And the Gentiles took a diligent care to
have them Translated, and indeed the Seventy two miraculously Translated them,
without any disagreement of words. But thus far, as well Jews, and Christians,
as Enemies, have believed the sacred Histories touching these things.

At length, by the Prophets, there are read predictions for many Ages, before
that by prof^^e Histories they are afterward proved to have happened. For to
Abraham it was promised by God, that the Messiah should arise out of his own
Stock. The same thing Melchizedech foretold unto him, and therefore offered a
new Sacrifice of Bread and Wine unto him, which should sometime by pr^pagating,
proceed out of his Loy^es. But a Sacrifice is no where offered, but to God
alone. Afterward, in the dividing of the Land of promise, there was Bethlehem
or the house of Bread, for the Prophets had foretold that the Messiah should
from thence be born of a Virgin. The Gentiles also, saw the Bread descend from
Heaven, which should destroy the camps of Midian: and he was called the God of
Gideon, whom notwithstanding, Gid^on had not yet acknowledged for his God.

This Messiah also, David afterward divinely foreknew should be born of his
stock; and therefore he named him his Lord or God, and that he was to be a
Priest after the order of Melchizedech: to wit, he foretold it in the Bread and
Wine, by the inspiration of the divine blast. Balaam foretold of this God, as
the Star or Jacob, which the Magi or wisemen coming from the East, afterward
learned, that he ought to be born in Bethlehem or the House of Bread; and they
saw his Star going before them, by admonishment whereof, they had come from the
utmost parts of the East, to worship the Child, who only is to be worshipped.
For he who fore-taught them concerning the signification of the Star, could
have evidently showed them the place wherein the Child was born, whom they
sought by so remote a journey, but that, he he had determined that that thing
should be drawn out of the writings of the Prophets, for the honor of God, and
the learning of People. Therefore if there be any credit to be given to sacred
History; that convinces, that God is one, that the Gods of the Nations are
Devils: That this God Messiah, his Son, was at length to be raised up out of
Abraham, without the will of Man, of a Virgin only; that he is the Angels food
which came down from Heaven, who saves those that are to be saved, freely.

And seeing the understanding of Man cannot comprehend these Mysteries, and
much less foresee them by the help of the Senses: therefore it is needful to
draw the understanding into the obedience of Faith, which it can in no wise
conceive of it self: Because, seeing that is of a limited power, and Faith
every where of a profound obscurity, the understanding cannot comprehend an
infinite term of continuance, or The Immortality of the Soul. Therefore the
Holy Scriptures being at length, granted and believed, at least after the
manner of Chronicles: One, Eternal, Unchangeable, Immortal, Infinite,
Omnipotent, Good, True, Wise God, the Creator, Author, Sustainer, Governor,
and Life of things, does for that very cause, manifestly appear.

Lastly, this divine Power being granted, the arguments of St. Augustine do
conclude The Immortality of the Soul, and Life eternal, Fire eternal, Joy,
Peace, also everlasting Misety or Sorrow, are to be granted. And there are
Angels, evil Spirits, Prophesying dark Spirits, or the Devils Bondslaves.

But the conceivings of these things are wanting to an understanding which
savours only of the Senses, according to Aristotle: and words are wanting to
the tongue, and positive words want Properties of Expressions, to declare those
things which the Ear has not yet heard, nor the understanding could
comprehend, that which has not yet descended into the Heart of Man, and that
which is in it self undemonstrable by the Discipline of the Senses and
intellectual faculty: For Faith, the reward of Faith, and expectation of the
Righteous, do exceed all Sense, and whatsoever can be conceived by the
understanding. Furthermore, if the mind be Immortal, and to enjoy eternal joy,
if it being separated by Death from its own Mortal body,

But these words are of Faith, and the revelations of this eternal Light, and
therefore are they eternally true.

But the Carnal Man does not perceive those things which are of God; and
therefore his Wisdom is Foolishness with God, who is Order, Integrity,
Essence, the Father of Lights, and total, Independent, absolute, abstracted
cause of all things, unto whom therefore is all honor due from every created
thing. But he created not only the substance of the mind, that it may be a
substantial Light, after the likeness or Image of himself; but he also made all
the living Lights of Soulified Creatures: The which indeed could not subsist in
the abstract, without their concrete or composed Body, and therefore they were
to perish with the Death of the fame: And therefore, neither are they
substances, although substantial, or after the manner of substantial Spirits:
Neither therefore also of the number of Accidents, even as I have elsewhere
demonstrated in the Treatise of the Original of Forms. Therefore the beastial
Life is of a vital living Light, and a neutral Creature between a Substance and
an Accident: which neutrality of Beings, hitherto unknown to the Schools, was
given by the Etymology of the Father of Lights: So indeed, that he not only
makes the burning Light of the Sun, and Splendor of the Glowworm: But also
the Souls of all Soulified Creatures universally, whereof himself will remain
even the alone Maker, and Master.

CHAP. XLVII. The knitting or conjoyning of the Sensitive Soul and Mind.
1. Alpha and Omega. 2. The Body is a dead Carcass of no worth without the
mind. 3. The natural Philosophy of the Author is far remote from the traditions
of Aristotle. 4. The understanding of Adam shows this truth. 5. That by the
Prayer of Abstraction, the mind ought to be unfolded. 6. The Author declares
his five Professions. 7. From the fifth he draws five Conclusions. 8. The
co-knitting of the mind as of a kernel in the Sensitive Soul, as it were in a
shell or husk. 9. Defects are from the sensitive Soul. 10. An Objection against
Sin, and desert. 11. An answer to the aforesaid Arguments. 12. By an example of
the Sun. 13. Corrupted nature does always want the aid of Grace. 14. The mind,
as it is the Image of God, does endeavor as it were to create something of
nothing. 15. The difference of conceits to be admired in a Woman great with
Child,

THose things which I have already above written, for the immortality of the
Soul, being premised, I forthwith for the knowledge of the Soul, return to my
Lord Alpha and Omega, or the one only Scope, in whom a total clearness of all
understandings is and ought to be terminated. For the immortality of the mind
being certainly known, the Soul ought to be made known to it self as much as it
can: for truly, seeing the Soul the governess, does continually employ it self
about the Government of the Body; Surely nothing can be searched out in the
Body (unless when by Anatomy alone I behold

Wherefore I determined with my self, that there was a far different knowledge
of the Soul to be delivered to Christians, than that which has been diligently
taught by the Schools of the Gentiles: for look how much can be declared by
words, so much also the Holy Scriptures do deliver: But the rest is (in
exercising) freely obtained by Grace it self, neither does the mind admit of
any other Teacher than him, who has commanded to be called the alone Father
and Master: Because in very deed, all Learning which is drawn from a
fore-existing knowledge of the Senses, proceeds from the Sensitive, Carnal, or
Earthly Soul (and the which therefore, the Apostle calls Divelish) enlightened
indeed, but not by the very mind it self, to wit, which alone wishes to be
enlightened by its Beginning, which is above nature, and not from the
observation of the Senses: Whither the state of understanding in Adam had
respect, Sensitive Soul, or next, because God requiring to be worshipped only
in the Spirit, calls for his own delights to talk with the Sons of Men. Truly
the Prayer of silence, and of a profound intellectual humnity, did require
another manner of man than my self, who am now an old man, and an ignorant
Physician: but seeing I have undertaken the natural explication of the mind,
and since the essence, thingliness, and natural nature of the mind is plainly
Spiritual, and respecting its own immediate and supernatural Beginning; I ought
by all means, to declare and explain the Doctrine of the mind by its exercises,
that a man may be bewrayed by his Works. Therefore I beg and deserve pardon, if
I shall not declare the thing according to the dignity of the matter. Divine
goodness shall supply my defects, by some other more worthy th^^ my self. But
before that I proceed, let the reader know, that hitherto, I have not found a
writer, which has Meditated any thing concerning the more inward emptiness or
voidness, bottom, and fabric of the mind, or of the Creation, Beingness,
Truth, or Thingliness of its Idea: but they have rather cast or hung up this
same Doctrine behind their Back, as it were irregular, unknown, and desperate,
and through admiration only, elevated into a dark Smoke, neither have they
looked any longer behind them, as neither within them.

For first of all, I will discover my Errors committed by thinking, and will
Adam immediately by God: the same Mind also at this day, is inspired into the
young, by the same Prince of Life; Because it is that in which the Kingdom of
God has of its good pleasure, established its seat, and so that he enlightens
every man that comes into this World, and he has enriched it with his own
free gifts of the Godhead, and by his presence has excluded the evil spirit:
To wit, for which mind he vouchsafed to die, but not for the fallen Angel. I
knew in the second place from the knowledge of nature, that bruit Beasts have
Souls, more, or less prudent, and quicke-sighted; yet all frail ones, and those
which hasten into nothing, and that those do perish no otherwise than as a
Blast, as the light of a Candle is extinguished, and departs into nothing: And
therefore that the Souls of Beasts are not Spiritual substances of a proper
Name; but only the living vital lights of Soulified Creatures: The which
notwithstanding are Created by God the Father only, and are dispensed according
to the requirance of Seminal dispositions. I knew thirdly, that every frail and
Sensitive Soul did issue from the seeds, occasionally and dispositively only;
and therefore that it did partake of nothing of likeness or unity with the Mind
of man: For although both were Created by God, yet that they were both divided
a sunder, no otherwise, than as a frail or Mortal Being, from a future Immortal
one, or as Light that is to perish by blowing out, from a substance which
should be the shining Image or likeness of the Godhead. I knew in the fourth
place, that in the seed of Man, dispositions and hopes lay hid, unto such a
frail or Mortal Soul, no less than in the seed of a Dog unto a living Whelp.
Fifthly, I knew that the Sensitive Soul, (even as I have proved concerning long
Life, in the Treatise of the entrance of Death into humane nature,) arose in us
from sin, and that it does naturally remain afterward, through a successive
coupling of the Sexes: neither that the Mortal mind could be made by nature,
Man, or any natural means.

1. Because it was a Substance. 2. Because that it was permanent or durable:
and therefore. 3. That it could never be made from a perishing Being. 4. That
Sensitive Soul, before sin, was not in us, as neither necessary. Next I knew in
the sixth place, that forthwith after transgression, the mind was fast tied to
the Sensitive Soul: Because that in a Body subject to Death, there was nothing
more near, or more akin to the mind, wherein it might sit; and that therefore
the mind had sunk it self into that clear and Vital beginning, as in an Inn,
and had been annexed to it by God, even unto the Period of Life. For I have
therefore beheld so many foolish madnesses, fallacies, defects, errors, and
Treacheries of men, yea and all madnesses which might utterly deny all the use
of the Mind, and might make its total absence, rather than its presence to be
Suspected. Seventhly, I knew that the Mortal Soul forthwith after the fall, did
so over-darken the Mind in its Inn, and overspread it being idle, and as it
were detain it Sleeping, that it did Govern not only corporal actions; but it
did for the most part, so dim or blacken the very presence of the mind it self,
that it is able to do nothing at all, readily, in this Life, as though it were
no long belonging to its own right. For there is a Law in our Members,
resisting the Law of our Mind. Lastly, I felt or perceived a contrary or
contentions disquietness sprung up, which endeavored to excuse the liberty,
and burden of sinning: For howsoever the mind Eve beheld the apple as
beautiful, and therefore as pleasing, she presently took that apple, and ate.

And that thing is so usual, that the holy Scriptures say, that the number of
fools is infinite. For I have gone headlong into these-fallacies of errors,
because I as yet Sensitive Soul was. For indeed, because the mind was now
connexed unto the mortal Soul, it stood bound to this, by the right of an Inn;
so that, although the mind were of it self not capable of suffering, yet
because they were both combined by a conjugal bond and bride-bed of unity, so
as that the mortal Soul did enjoy the sole Life of the immortal mind; it was
altogether necessary, that as often as the mortal Soul did suffer any thing by
frail or mortal, hurtful things, or things hostile unto it, it should
consequently also suffer that very thing, through an equality or likeness of
wed-lock, a conjugal unity, and social right of hospitality. Not indeed that
therefore frail things should obtain a power over an immortal Being, which is
supereminently above it, and of a diverse station: but God would have the mind
thus to suffer, as it being hindered by the discommodities of its Inn, it
should be deprived of its own liberty of ampleness, and should hearken to the
straights and anguishes of its mansion. For the immortal life of the mind is
communicated to a mortal Soul, Seat, and Inn, which life notwithstanding (as
otherwise, every thing received, is received after the manner and capacity of
the receiver) is made mortal in that which is connexed with it, or in a mortal
light: And the which may therefore also be oppressed by mortal things, that the
Life may be wholly blown out: and then the mind being deprived of its Inn, is
not indeed extinguished, or annihilated; but is compelled to depart, by reason
of an untying and annihilating of the bond. Whatsoever therefore the mind
seems to suffer under Life, it self indeed remains safe: but it does not
freely exercise its Offices, because feeling or perceivance is in the middle of
the Bond.

For truly I have constantly considered the light of the Sun married as a
husband to length extinguished, the light of the Sun loses its wife, and
departs into its first fountain, that it may render a reason of its performed
Offices. For so the mind suffers against its will, all the madness of the
Sensitive Soul, which the filths of the flesh do stretch over it: and a clear
or famous beam of the understanding, not being able to pierce the filths, is
trodden underfoot; although in its own root, it be wholly incapable of
suffering.

But that which has been already said concerning the Life, that very thing is
interpreted touching the other functions of the mind. In the mean time, it is
certain and Sensitive Soul is the seat of the mind; so it is the immediate
Chambermaid or Lackey of the same: Unto whom seeing the Government, forthwith
after the fall, was committed: therefore it translates into it self by an undue
acc^stomedness, all the efficacy of the Mind. No otherwise, than as any one
being accustomed, to cut Bread with his left hand, can scarce divide the same
with his right hand. Therefore the mind being Ordinarily accustomed, consents
to whatsoever things the Sensitive, brutal Soul, from a co-partaking, spreading
Beam of Life, does commit, through a largeness of its liberty, and a license of
Custom. Wherefore in all, and through all the Journeys of this Pilgrimage, we
want the helps of Divine Grace, for the which we must often, daily Pray, that
we be not led into the Temptations of our Inn: The which is more distinctly
manifest, when as the mind Operates in exercises plainly distinct, and far
disjoined from the Sensitive Soul. To which end, the power of the Sensitive
Soul got with child, is first considered: to wit, after what manner, through
the aid of a mental Beam, (for as the mind is the Image of God; so also it
diligently attempts sometimes to Create something of nothing, and that from its
will or beck alone) it may Create a true Cherry without the Wood. by appetite
or desire only. First of all, it is not to be doubted, that such a thought is
appetitive or Sensitive Soul being illustrated in man by a beam of the mind,
does actually and truly Operate, and therefore that thing is not so much
obvious in bruits: And the which, if it should not many times happen, we should
by Critics be easily brought into Suspicion of: Covenant stricken with the evil
Spirit, For because the Sensitive Soul alone does not work these things; but as
being illustrated by a beam of the immortal mind; therefore there is a certain
similitude of Creation, which is uttered forth from the lively image of its
Creator: neither do bruit Beasts therefore in the same manner imitate this
effect. Indeed by the only conceiving of passion, a Cherry is created of
nothing in the Young, in that part, whereon she that is with Child, does move
forth her right hand if it be the right; or the left hand if it shall be the
left; because that hand has been wont to carry the Commands of the Soul. And
also, the whole seminal Being of a Cherry is created without its wood, and
indeed a perfect one: but not growing by degrees through seasons, even as
otherwise, in a Tree where a Cherry-Tree after some years, brings forth his
Fruits: But a Cherry in the Womb, or a mouse, etc. is forthwith framed: which
framing Power requires sight, and moreover disturbance, etc. that the force of
the conceit of the Soul may be visibly imprinted: but a need of discourses it
does not require. For neither is this same a true Creation: Because a new
matter is not made even of nothing; but it is a Transchangeative Creation of
one thing into

Through defect of which hand, the drawn Seal of the Cherry perishes, and the
Creation is made null. And that is in things which cause desire. It is
otherwise, in ^ormidable things that are acted, or ministered: because in things
that are so much the stronger, the direction of the Mothers hand is not
required. Indeed the hand or arm of the Young is cut off, although the Mothers
hand hathremained quiet; neither is it found among the wrapperies, even as the
head is; even as also, while the Young is transchanged into a Monster. But in
things ministered that are not to be feared, the hand is required, as a designer
of the place for the Young, that it may be wholly changed. And in those
formidable things, the reason is different: Because that in the one, an act
only is shown; and in the other, a created Being: For in that, it pretends a
withdrawing only; but in this, it desires to imitate, by creating something.
Lastly, in these sorts, that is universal, that the effecting Mother does not
intend to make that for her Young; and so she affixeth these Images or
likenesses, not in her self, but in her Young, at the pleasure of her hand, and
not at the will of the Woman conceiving that which is desirable, or afrightful:
But some pla^sible, or timorous conceit, with a desire, or turning away, does
go before: And presently after, there follows an appetite of the conceits, with
desire, or fear: Which things in this place, I have thus enlarged, that the
power of a similitudinary or like^ous creation of the Divine Image, may bring
us into the likeness of creating a Divine love in the mind: To wit, while it
self, by its own motion (not by a beam only of it self dispersed into the
mortal Soul (even as in Women great with child has already been related to be
done) and by its own proper wishing, is car^yed totally inward into the love of
God. Ah, I would to God we might be led thither!

CHAP. XLVIII. The Asthma or Stoppage of Breathing, and Cough.
1. The Pores of the Lungs and Sinews do lay open as long as we live. 2.
Nothing rains down from the Head to the Lungs. 3. That Remedies are badly
applied to the Head in an Asthma. 4. What the Vulcan the corrupter is. 5. By
what error, sweet Remedies, and Lohochs or Ecligmaes were brought in. 6. What
was said is proved. 7. A censuring of usual and ordinary Medicines. 8. They
have not distinguished the Remedies of the Congh^and Asthma. 9. A^twofold
Asthma. 10. The catamity of the Femal Sex. 11. The heedlessnesse or rashnesses
of the Schools. 12. Vain experiments or attempts. 13. The activity of the Womb
in an Asthma. 14. How the Womb rules and is ruled. 15. An Enemy in the Womb.
16. They have erred in distinguishing. 17. A Woman twice suffers every Disease.
18. A sub-division of the Asthma. 19. The Asthma has been hitherto unknown.
20. Why Physicians may hear that which they would not hear. 21. A History of an
Asthmatical Consul. 22. A History of a young noble Man, a Hunter. 23. A A
History of a Canonical Man. 24. A History of a Monk. 25. A History of a
Citizen. 26. A History of a Man of Sixty years old. 27. A Searching out of the
nest in a dry Asthma. 28. Why its nest is in the Duumvirate. 29. Why an Asthma
is an Epilepsie of the Lungs. 30. The quality of an Asthmatical Poison. 31. A
History of a Countess. 32. The place of the Poison in the Consul was diverse
from that in the Hunter. 33. How the Seea and Fruit of an Asthma do differ. 34.
Why it suddenly invadeth. 35. Why a dry Asthma is without suspicion of a
Defluxion. 36. Remedies are not to be applied to the Head. 37. A censure or
judgment of Remedies. 38. A Paragraph or Summary sentence of Paracelsus
concerning an Asthma. 39. In what the deceit of Remedies may be. 40. Remedies
proper to an Asthma. 41. The causes of a Womb-Asthma are by accident. 42. A
History of that which went before. 43. A Doubtful Asthma, between a dry and a
moist one. 44. Crafts which cause a moist Asthma. 45. A moist Asthma from
Endemical things drawn in. 46. A History of an Asthmatical Man, who was
presently choked. 47. An erroneous judgment of the Lungs grown to the Pleura.
48. Anatomy being founded on bad principles, is oft-times childisher a mockery.
49. From whence death and sudden choking is. 50. Things worthy of note about
the Asthma of him of sixty years of age. 51. It is proved from burtful things
often eaten. 52. That that Asthma was from the Spleen. 53. The reason of the
Schools concerning a climbing motion in an Asthmatick person, is rejected. 54.
A fourfold vapor. 55. An examination by the rule of a false supposition. 56. A
privy shift. 57. Some considerations for the questions proposed. 58. A reason
drawn by conjectures. 59. Confirming signs, 60. A moist Asthma. 61. It differs
from its companion the Cough. 62. From what causes it may arise. 63. A
promiscuous Asthma. 64. An appropriated Remedy, as well for the moist, as the
dry Asthma. 65. Concerning the Cough from a distillation or pose. 66. Why the
Snivell does vary in the running down of a pose. 67. Some Observations. 68.
That for a Cough, Phlegm does not descend out of the Head unto the Lungs. 69. A
judgment or censure of the deeper Remedies. 70. A History of a Snorting old
Man. 71. The Authors opinion. 72. Of what sort the decision of the Question is.
73. Both the Keepers do hasten to the Proof, together with a Histery of (...)
Latex. 74. How much, and how far, the use of a Cauterie may answer. 75. (...)
applying of drying drinks. 76. A consideration of Ecligmaes. 77. A co-(...) of
the fume of Sulphur unto drink.

BEcause an Asthma or stoppage or difficulty of breathing, has been translated
unto the trifles of a Rheum or Catarrh, and the affect has not been known, and
scarce healed hitherto: Therefore I am constrained to write particularly
concerning the Asthma. To which end, somethings out of those that have been
before alleged, Lungs is passable with pores or little holes, as longas wolive,
no otherwise than as all the Sinews are: The which is especially manifest in
Optics, if one eye being shut, the apple of the other seems to wax great:
But in death, they are shut, which otherwise, in those that are alive, are
passable; and the light of the eyes of dying persons does visibly perish,
because the Optical or eye pores being shut, the visible Spirit cease and
leaves off to issue thither. This my thing, Hippocrates already knew in his
age: and therefore, he declared the whole Body to be perspirable or breathing
through, and compirable on breathingly solding together. And then, I suppose it
has been already sufficiently demonstrated, Physicians was conversant partly
about the Head, which is guiltless in this Disease, and partly about the
preventing, and more easy ejection of filths: But not about the

For first of all, the Schools, herein, have forgotten the Head, and next their
own positions.

Then in the next place, they have not considered, that if such Ecligmaes
should enter unto the Lungs, they would cause more straightnesses and troubles,
than the filths themselves there running out, and framed by degrees: at
leastwise they should heap up or increase evil by a new evil: For in that place
they should not any thing profit, unless that for the future, they should
through the much straightness of passages, increase the obstruction, and render
it grievous. In that respect especially, because Roses, Coltsfoot, Fox-lungs,
Sugar etc. do not a whit answer to a curative betokening; because it is that
which only requires a renewing of the changing faculty being hurt: But those
Medicines which do respect a more easy expectorating, do assault the Disease
behind, and its effects only. Seeing therefore, in what part the utmost ends of
the rough artery do end, and breath into the Breast, the Lungs do lay open; it
is sufficiently manifest, that in the Asthma, there is a straightness of the
same pores. Moreover, they do as yet err, that the Remedies of the Cough do not
any thing differ from the Remedies of the Asthma; when as notwithstanding, they

For this Asthma is so frequent to this Sex, that the Schools have dedicated
every Account of the number of the Womb, which is very manifold, unto the
stranglings of the Womb, and would as it were, by one head or Chapter have
passed by a great volume of Diseases. For I have seen women-folks often, who by
the smell of sweet Savours, besides Headaches and threatened Swoonings, fell
straightway into an extreme difficulty of breathing: I have also observed
others, who the North wind blowing, the Innocent were presently, even in Stoves
or Chimneys, punished with an Asthma.

Lastly, also others, which from Anger, a sorrowful Message, drinking of Sugar,
Spanish-wine, etc. or also being chidden, were presently taken with a
lamentable Asthma. For the Schools being always busied about corporal Actions,
therefore also do they perpetually worship Humors, and have on both sides
accused Phlegin, raining indeed, down into the Lungs: That foul or stinking
Vapors, should ascend out of the Womb, which should stir up their companional
Vapors, as well from it self, as elsewhere out of the stomach, whence they
should press out all the expectorated Snivel or Filth, the Author of an Asthma.
For the Schools have granted to such hurtful Vapors, a safe conduct of
piercing every way, whither indeed, there is not a free passage ^or Air: which
thing is manifest, in a voluntary pressing together, or deteining of the
breathing.

Yea although these things have place only in a moist Asthma, yet through the
same ignorance, they have not desisted to try any vain things, by Clysters,
Bloodletting,

Therefore they have neglected; that the Womb, by the action of Government, and
almost after an influential manner, does, at the will or beck of anger, sorrow,
fear, etc. like death, stop up the aforesaid pores of the Lungs, where they end
into the breast; even so as the Moon by her Aspect only, governs the waters;
because the Life and Power of the Womb, commands the whole woman: To whom
indeed therefore, there is another Chin, Wit, Flesh, Hair, Blood, etc. than to
a man.

And again, the furies and inundations of the aforesaid Government ceasing, her
breathing is presently restored free, and that for the most part, without a
notable spitting out by reaching. For neither does the Womb rule the whole
woman by the power of Vapors; but by the mere command of Government; seeing it
is

But besides, the Womb lives in its own Square, and has known no enemy unto it
self, besides the passion of the mind: wherefore it does not serve the Soul;
but by waxing

So also, I have observed, Apoplexies, Palseys, falling-Evils, Jaundises,
Dropsies, wringings of the Bowels, the Megrim, Madnesses, and much tyranny of
Diseases to

For truly the Innocent, and devoted Sex undergoes the double punishment of
Corrupted Nature, through individual womanish Miseries: once it suffers almost

The other Asthma therefore is promiscuous to both Sexes.

But again an Asthma is subdivided into a dry, and moist one; so reckoned to be
from Levites, they pass over into Jerichs: and therefore they hear against
their wills, that which they would not hear; To wit, that unprosperous
clientships of Diseases do happen daily unto them. But neither do they
therefore depart so much as a ^ailes breadth from their predecessors, that
they may once seriously deliberate concerning the life of their Neighbor
committed unto them. For to assent to or lean on old and blind guides, has
turned into sloth: therefore neither do they any more blush, to decree as many
Diseases to be incurable, as they have not floaked with Blood letting, a
Solutive Medicine, Sweat, Clyster, a Cautery, hot Baths, drinking of Sharpish
things, that is, with things that diminish the strength.

But now concerning the Asthma. And first of all I will set down some known
Histories: But they who shall follow me, shall the better and more successfully
trace out the same.

A Consul of a great City, of fifty years of age, being a liberal drinker, and
a strong man, having slidden from a Ladder in a Ship, on his shoulders and
hinder part of his Head,

There was a young Man of 24. years of age, defiled with no Error of Health or
Life, being Studious, Noble, and also employing himself in Hunting; Hence
indeed,

A certain Monk of the order of S. Francis, being a Laick of Paula, is busied
in Wind does otherwise stir up this Dust, he presently falls down, being almost
choked. He is well indeed in his mind; but his ^^^th being almost stopped, he
lays all along as ready to die; and as long afterward, he lays sitting. And
while in regard of his order, and appetite, he eats Fishes fried with (...)
he presently falls down, being deprived of Breathing; so as that ho^^ scarce
distinguished from a strangled man. He says that he felt the signs of the
urgent Asthma which the other, the Hunter, shows; and that he is the more
assured of the future Fit, and of its cruelty, by the like fore-token of
Sumptoms: To wit, while that Asthma does voluntarily assault him, and not from
Meats, or Dust.

A certain Citizen, a wise and prudent man, being by a Peer or great man,
openly disgraced and injured; unto whom he might not answer a word, without the
fear of

A certain Child, presently from his Cradle, strives with a quartan Ague for
two whole years; and beyond the hope of all, through a crisis or judicial
Expulsion, and

For truly, as well in the Consul, Citizen, and Hunter, as in the Canonist, the
Asthma stands in a Poisonous seed, which has gotten the Spirit of some Bowel
for its Root contracted or drawn together, even no otherwise than as the Cod
under a desire of wantonizing. But the nest of the Asthma is in the Duumvirate
(of which I shall treat in a particular Treatise) to wit, from whence the
Government of the whole Body depends: For otherwise, the evil does not sit
immediately in the inflowing Spirit, the which indeed should be finished by one
only Fit: for unless it had obtained a stable Root within, it should not repeat
it self, as neither should it persevere.

Then in the next place, the Character of the evil, which so long as it
sleeps in a stable part, it does not seem that it can elle where be
established, than from whence the Government of the Body does depend, and so
also it has assumed the Prerogative of the heart. The Asthma therefore in
this, is like to the Falling-evil, the which, although it does not strike the
mind, does not contract the Sinews, or stir up swoonings; yet it sleeps in
some Seat; whence at length it defiling the Archeus with a certain contagion,
if it does not contract the Sinews, yet at least wise, it does the Lungs.
Indeed, it has a singular respect unto that Bowel: yea, although it may seem
with the like speed to contract the Veins, Kidneys, and Liver; yet there is not
so manifest a hurting of these, as is felt in Choking: All which things are as
yet more clearly manifest in the Citizen, and old man of Sixty years of age:
For this, retained from his Infancy, a Spleen ill affected, and also Fits of
the Falling Sickness, else, his Lungs were free enough: But the other through
the Agony or Passion of shame, of Anger, Revenge, and the Modesty of commanding
Reason, shows, that the Bowel in him was hurt, wherein the first Motions of
conceptions are enfolded.

We may lawfully therefore, by a Phylosophical Liberty, name an Asthma the
Falling Sickness of the Lungs: Indeed its Nest is in the Duumvirate; it is also
a Disease of the whole Body, as it shakes all the Members before the Fit, and
so also sore shakes the

Also I have seen a Poison to have arisen out of the Womb, which would strain
nothing but the Ocsand, so as that a Famous Matron could scarce swallow any
thing Rheum or Catarrhe, seeing they do suddenly invade, and are solved,
without a manifest Spitting out by reaching, which might have been able so to
have exercised the Lungs: Yea if any thing, a little before the end of the Fit,
be by chance spit out, and that as little as may be; that ought not to undergo
the reason of a former, or occasional cause, but rather, it has the room of a
product; to wit, from a great co-straightning, and unseasonable injury brought
on the Lungs. Wherefore I am cruel, if I shall propose a Remedy for a
Rheumy-Head, or evapourating Stomach. Hence etc. But I found the Errhina or
Medicines that purge the Head by the Nostrils, the Apophsegmatisms or Purgers
of Phlegm by the Palate, caps of Saffron of the Ancients, and other Medicines
of the like fort, to be more foolish than these: Likewise solutives or Purgers
by Stool, and Bloud-lettings, to be cruel ones; because the dejecters of
strength. I confess indeed that by those Arts, the Fits are now and then
allayed, or chafed away and dispersed, and that that thing has in times past
And when, in the mean time, I, as amazed, did seriously weigh my vileness or
little esteem in the sight of Wits in times past so great, I could not but
presently (falling down on my Face) praise the Father of Lights in the Prayer
of Silence, in that he had given knowledge unto the little Ones, which he had
hidden from the wise of this World: Seeing it is not of him that wills, runs,
and labors; but only of God that shows mercy. To whom be all Honor and
Glory for ever.

But forasmuch as sweet Smells, Sorrow, likewise sweetnesses of Taste, did cause
the Asthma, I will not have it understood, as if an Asthma should by it self be
made

A certain rich Elder, and of a good life, had never spent his Youthful years
in Lust, or Riot: in his 38th. year he becomes suddenly hoarse, he loses by
degrees his Tone seen scattered throughout the Region of the Lungs. This good
man did undergo a continual Asthma, but not a returning one by Fits; yet his
Spittings did not exceed: For the nourishment of the last digestion is
Coagulated by a strange Ferment, whence there is a rare Asthma, a doubtful one
between amoist and a dry. Diggers, Melters of Metals, Seperaters, Quiners,
Chemists; and likewise Artificers of Aqua Regis, Cerusse, rea^-Lead,
Verdigrease, Vermilion, Gilders, etc. are all of them presently taken

Another Asthmatical person is suddenly strangled, although he duly cast forth
his Pleura or inner Skin of the sides. The Physicians being content that they
had found the Knot of the Matter; Behold they say, the cause of his sudden
death: For the Lungs could not move themselves, and therefore being choked,
he perished.

I being as yet but a young man, smiled, not believing that the Lungs (the
which I then as yet believed to be necessarily and continually moved) had
perhaps for one small hour, so firmly grown to the Pleura backwards (especially
in one sitting) that indeed burstness it self, being compelled inwards, and
straightly pressed together, should grow together unto the Lip its companion,
so much against its will, even while resting in ones bed. In the mean time,
that this growing to, of that which was continual, being rent asunder, should
be from the betokening sign of Nature; not likewise of the Pleura to the Lungs,
both whereof, their own coat, and scope of nature did distinguish. I despised
these rashnesses of the Schools for the future, the more, after that I had
dissected some Soldiers (that were suddenly slain) for that things sake. For I
had seen the Lungs grown to the Ribs behind, in those that were in good health,
and whom, no difficulty of breathing had before pressed. Among others, a
certain exceeding swift Irishman, being killed with a Dagger by the Footmen
of the Marquess of Winchester, and dissected, showed both the Lobes of his
Lungs to be grown to his Ribs. But if thou shall accuse the vice of the
formative faculty, or a monster; thou shall likewise confess it to be
agreeable unto Birds: For Anatomists, when as they no where find feigned
Humors, yet they promise to prostitute every cause of death by the knife:
first of all, they admire, then also they are earnestly angry, that death
should happen without their leave: For as if they had their hope and remedy in
their knife, they rejoice, that they have found a part in a dead Carcass,
whereto they may attribute Death.

And then they cry out; behold a noble Bowel has long since failed by
Putrefying. Neither is it in the Power of the Physician, that the sick may
always find relief. And instant, death approaching; and it putrifies sooner than
otherwise, dead Carcases do, because it is nourished with luke-warmth. I
conjectured, that that Asthmatical person died, because he being (long before)
vexed with beatings of the heart, also with Duumvirate, does no where more
clearly appear than in the Asthma, Falling evil, giddiness of the Head,
Drowsy evil, Apoplexy, and such like: To wit, where no slain or defilement
meets in the Bowel, and in the next Place, no detaining of that stranger is
seen, which may stuff up the Pores: For I have taken

Furthermore, because some hurtful things being usually eaten, that strictness
or straightness does arise; it is a sign unto us, that the exciting cause of
that straightness, Asthma, by reason of the difficulties caused in the parts
busied in Meditating. So also Giddinesses of the Head which Survive from
Yester-daies Gluttony or Drunkenness, or from the Tossing of the Sea, are taken
away by Vomiting: for not because those filths contain a whirling in them; but
because they do trouble or hinder the Duumvirate in the Mouth of the Stomach.
Now I will Speak of the man of sixty years old.

For this man in the beginning, never suffered a disturbance of breathing, but
in an ascending, and swift Motion: And else, he has an open, free breathing,
and that according to his wish: Wherefore he wants the Asthma of a Proper Name:
For although he has tender Lungs, and those impatient of cold, and through
colds, fruitful in much excrement; yet in respect of these, he undergoes rather
a Cough, than an Asthma. But why is his breathing straightned in time of
Motion? Is it from a matter^ Imposthume, or a corrupt swelling enclosed within?
But it is manifest, that not from either of these two; because being out of
Motion, he feels neither pain in his Breast, neither does he draw constrained
air in rest.

That which is to be noted in him, is a Quartane making its residence in his
Spleen, of a Child, and sometimes stirring up his swoonings, in so tender a
health and Commotion Schools have added a ready cause: To wit, because every
Motion does of its own nature, stir up Smoaks, and therefore the more
Smoakinesses do accompany the greater Motion, for expelling whereof, a more
swift Breathing is required: but they say nothing: For truly, besides the
supposition of a false-hood, the same doubt does as yet remain, as before: To
wit, why a swift motion in a plain, and a swifter, together with a jogging of
the whole Body, in descending, does not stir up so many Smoaks, as a slow
motion, in climbing a steep or hilly street by degrees, does? For the trouble
of slow ascent, is not of the Bowels, or Lungs, but of the Shanks or Legs:
shall therefore those plenty of Smoakinesses be made in the Muscles of the
Legs, which may provoke the Breast to pant for Breath, and the Heart to beat?
And shall Smoaks find a way from the Superficies to the Center, which nature
should rather expel by the pores, than to call back inwards? And then let them
explain, what they understand by the Etymology of Smoaks. For their Aristotle
reckons up only (...): to wit, a moist one, which he calls a wa^ery vapor: and
a dry or oylicone, which he names an exhalation. Also Chemistry add a third,
unknown to the (...) a body it self does ascend from things to knit unto it, in
manner of a Smoke, and (...) it self to the Ribs or sides of Vessels, it is
called a Sublimate: so Sulphur, etc. do afford their own vapors, undistinct
from their ancient Body. I in the next place, have adjoined a forth
Smoakiness; To wit, while a solid Body, by virtue of a ferment, is disposed
into a flatus or windy blast, or wild Gas. But seeing the Peripateticks have
acknowledged only the two former, the Galenick Schools have also undistinctly
understood them both, by the name of Smoakinesses. But first of all, that
waterish vapors cannot be admitted, I do even from hence collect; To wit,
because then, Sweats flowing forth more plentifully in Summer, also the Body
being quiet, they should of necessity, more vex this A^ehmatical man, even than
an ascending upwards in a more cold Air; which is false. But if therefore,
under the name of Smoakiness, they do understand an exhalation; It is certain
in the first place, that those are not stirred up, unless, the watery ones
shall first fail: seeing that does not so come to pass in living Persons; of
necessity also, for want of a Smoakiness, the Schools do not understand
themselves, in their aforesaid Reason, as neither in either Column of the
Pulses, demonstrated in the Chapter of the Blas of the pulses. Neither at
length, that by the name of Smoaks, both vapors together, are understood, it
is manifest: For if by a like degree of heat, dry things with moist, cannot
equally climb, or be separated from their whole entire bodies, it follows,
that the Smoaks assigned are not to be granted, nor are they for the cause. But
go to, let impossible and unnamed Smoakinesses be supposed, which they will
have to breath forth out of us by an unsensible transpiration, yet, they are
not yet examined, whether they war under the vapors, or indeed of exhalations:
Because the Schools have been ignorant, that the whole blood in us is blown
away by a far different help, than that of heat. But at least wise by the rule
of false-hood, let us examine, where those supposed Smoaks are Schools
understand the Smoakinesses of Meats? But why shall those molest the Legs after
meat? But if the more plentiful number of Smoaks are reckoned to be made in the
Heart, or the Shop-bowells; yet this at least is to confound the Spirit of Life
with a Smoke, a Bowel with an emunctory, and to have held the reason alleged
in the Chapter of the Blas of man, of no esteem. But if therefore Smoaks, are
judged to be the Smells and vapors arising from meats; but they will have them
to be brought in a straight line to the Head, and so to bring forth Catarrhs;
at leastwise they are in no wise brought into the Heart. For neither is it a
meet thing, but it is a new invention, that the heart should be provoked with
the Smells of Meats. Neither is the membrans of the Stomach so passable, that
it does admit, of another utterance or passage, besides the Throat and the
Pylorus, for Belching and breaking Wind, the which notwithstanding, are far
more thin than vapors. Why therefore, the Legs being moved by ascending,
should so many Smoakinesses be made, which do reach the Heart? Do require a
difficulty of Breathing? And the which, else, by a more swift steep motion, do
not arise? For if they by chance are formed in the veins and arteries, or
without the same; yet it do not as yet from thence appear, why a slower ascent
and motion may bring forth more Smoaks in the vessels, than a swift motion of
the same Muscles, in descending. But if the aforesaid Smoaks be bred without
the Vessels, now besides the absurdity before rehearsed, likewise, by what way,
shall Smoakinesses so suddenly proceed from thence, unto the Heart and Lungs?
Seeing otherwise, if one that is not Asthmatical, swiftly running, should have
any Smoaks, they should, together with the sweat, sooner exhale out through the
skin, than they should desire the inward parts by a retrograde motion.
Wherefore, there is another cause, for the sake whereof the Breast is strained,
the heart beats, the jaws wax dry, although the Mouth being shut, they do
breath with difficulty, only through the Nostrils, but the Tongue is froathy
about the Teeth, and the Cheek do fall: indeed by the same cause, all that are
in good health in their Lungs, are distinguished, and are free from every
Cough, and Asthma; one whereof nevertheless, is preferred before the other, in
a wise and longer running without difficulty of breathing. Therefore our man of
sixty years old, does more difficulty climb H^lly places, and after meat, most
difficulty; and as often ^he pants for breath, his knees wax feeble. Shall
therefore meat and Drink make Smoaks, whereby the strength of the Knees does
decay? If this be true: But then that shall happen also to those that are not
Asthmatical, who notwithstanding, having taken no Meat, are the stronger. But
they will say; the Stomach being filled, a vacuum or emptiness is diminished in
the Breast. Rightly spoken:

But this is to have gone back from a Smoke, and to have fled unto the anguishs
of place. Why therefore likewise, do not all breath with difficulty after Meat,
in a modeeate

I considered therefore whether perhaps, the Muscles of the Legs being the more
deeply contracted, and elevated by ascending, and the which otherwise, walking
Muscle being in the mean time,. Globy, in ascending, and pressing its artery
together, might contain a nearer cause of difficult breathing. Do therefore in
this motion, the Muscles hinder the Arteries, and also the Pulse of the same,
by successive turns, that hence the ascending may be with a more difficult
Breathing? Next, I considered, whether in ascending, the breath be a little
longer retained, than otherwise, in a plain or steep Motion? Indeed every one
does more press his breath together, while he intends to moove any thing the
more strongly. Thirdly, I considered, that in ascending, the breath is
interrupted almost at every pace; no otherwise, than at if any one should at
every pace, say Ha, Ha, whereas otherwise, in a steep or plain motion, there is
one only and continual Ha, not interrupted by rest. I doubted also, whether the
Lungs do labor with a passion of its own, and the Bowel be in a climbing
motion, intent, not to expel smoakinesses, how great a conceived error soever
it may overcome. I also beheld or considered, that any one does more easily
walk seven hours space, than stand five; Because in standing the Muscle of both
Knee-pans is continually bent on both sides; which in going, rejoices in a
coursary rest: But he that goes, does more difficultly breath, than he that
stands; because many Muscles do successively labor in going: but in
standing, although they are bent, yet they are not moved: Whence, I learned,
that a cheerful motion of many Muscles, does make one to breath the more
difficultly. Lastly, although every one of these considerations should have
some weight in them; yet all being connexed in one, they could not yet satisfy
the question proposed; To wit, why a slower ascending motion does cause
difficulty of breathing, but not a swifter descending one: Wherefore I have
added to these things, that in a moving upwards, how -- slow soever the
straight Muscles of the nether belly do stretch themselves, that they suffrnot
the belly to be sufficiently lifted up. Truly the Breast and Ribs, are indeed,
in difficult Breathing, more largly stretched out; but (as I have taught
concerning Catarrhs) the motion of the Ribs is not primary and principal for
Breathing, but only an asistant, while the principal one is not sufficient:
Therefore the Belly not being sufficiently extended, a difficulty of Breathing
is presently hastened; to wit, it being willing to recompense the foregoing
errors and defect. Nevertheless, although it may be lawful from the aforesaid
considerations, to prove a greater necessity of difficult Breathing; yet at
leastwise, they do nothing convince, why there is a straightned Breathing in
our Man of sixty Years old, but otherwise, in a healthy person, not any at all:
And seeing in the Man of sixty Years old, the Lungs do want obstruction, even
as is manifest from the signs supposed; it must needs be also, that his defect
be fetched from elsewhere, especially, seeing he feels in his Abdomen or lower
Belly the place of his Stomach, pressings together, the causes of his Asthma:
Therefore his Asthma is from the Spleen being ill affected, and that from the
Duumvirate, and the cause is stirred up by an ascending motion (otherwise
sleeping) by reason of the considerations above, which by the action of
government, does otherwise, strain a weak Lungs, by aspect only, no otherwise
than as was declared concerning a dry Asthma; whither a lurking
Falling Sickness, the pain of the Spleen after riding, the sore shaking of the
whole Body, in riding, etc. do tend: Moreover that I may give the more safe
judgment, whether the Lungs did labor by a passion of its own, or indeed by a
secondary passion; I busily enquired, whether he felt carnal copulation
troublesome unto him; and he confessed to me, that before the Asthma was
manifested, Venus had hurt him, that after the flesh lyact he felt cold in his
Breast, a looseness in his Muscles, and fainting threatened unto him; But
involuntary pollutions, that he experienced no such thing: At length in his old
age, presently after a seldom carnal act, that he perceived a snorter of
Phlegms in his rough Artery, or else, silence: Whence I certainly conjectured,
that seeing from an Infant, he had retained his Spleen troubled by a
Quartane-ague, and fallingsickness, Muscles of the bottom of the Belly,
afore-touched: Neither does that poison strike the Heart, and Lungs materially,
in manner of an exhalation, vapor, or Smoakiness, but by the action of
Government: And seeing the Heart does beat, the pulse is inordinate, and also a
great and frequent panting for Breath is desired: and the place between the
Navil and mouth of the Stomach, is vexed from one only cause stirred up, and by
one only motion, and after a like manner, it becomes undoubted, that there is
one only Poison which may affect the vital power of the Heart, and Lungs. Then
also, he is vexed more grievously, manifestly, and cruelly every Year, because
an unacceptable guest abiding in the Spleen, does daily through old age, become
more troublesome. And these things I have more strongly concluded with my self,
because that Asthmatical Man does complain, that for many Years, his left hand
was now and then astonished or stupefied, and that he was cold in the Palm or
hollow of his Hand, under the auricular or ear vein, and likewise that his left
shoulder did greatly pain him, although laden with a light habit, if he
walks the farther, although but modestly: For I have observed, that all
Splenetick persons, when the Spleen begins by palm, does pain him, through cold
piercing it, and likewise that his fingers are now and then benumbed from the
discommodities of his Spleen: that that is made by the action of Government.
But if the Schools do command, that that comes to pass by reason of blind
vapors, at leastwise, let them strew the way, whereby they may go thitherto.
The archer therefore; of this Asthma is in the Duumvirate; but his mark is the
Lungs. Therefore there is a twofold Asthma, a moist, and a dry one: That
indeed has found its name from a plenteous spitting by reaching, and for the
etc.) does first affect the inbred Spirit of the Lungs by the action of
government: And therefore, from an invisible, and sudden immaterial storm, the
whole Body is sore shaken, and is again suddenly restored to an unhoped for
health. In vain therefore are openings of the pores hitherto unknown, attempted
in a dry Asthma; and in vain are many and easy expectoratings, because they
are cloakative and vain helps, as many as are intent on products or effects:
indeed vain are the Remedies which are wont to be administered in Coughs, seeing
the Cough does most far differ from a dry Asthma. But a moist Asthma, although
it for the most part produces the Cough, that it may expectorate the etc.
although they bring forth the affect of difficult Breathing, yet, seeing they
are burdened with a strange weight, they are not the Asthma. But the jaundise,
by a poison proper to it, produces a dry Asthma. Last of all, those Remedies
are due to a dry Asthma, which are for an inveterate Falling Sickness: But

Now I will add my own observations concerning the Cough, by reason of the
nearness or affinity of an Asthma, and the cruelties of a Catarrh: For I am
wont to be taken Helebour and Sugar of equal quantity, on the morning
following, I am for the most part better: But if I shall do that to an
inveterate pose, it does not so easily depart: Yea I have profited so much by
that sneezing powder, that now I could endure the evening air without hurt:
wherefore neither, does a foolish person (according to the Poets) vainly stand
in need of Helebour. For although there are very many vomitive Medicines: yet
Helebour seems peculiarly to profit the Head: Therefore the shivel, does at
first, drop down like salt water through the nostrils, and Jaws, on the same
side (if not on both sides) whereon the soongie bone is beset: but the jaws
hardly bearing the unaccustomed snivel, are wont thereby, together with the
adjacent parts, to wax red, and become swollen with inflammation: And the snivel
waxes thick and yellow, as if that which is stuffed into the spongy bone, did
(instead of a ferment) continually infect the ^^^ivel falling down. Indeed the
wandering keeper perceiving the Enemy dashed on him, does first endeavor to
wash him off, with thin snivel. I being about to speak of the Cough, have begun
with the pose, because this, if it be strong, does stir up and fore go the
Cough: and that I have always observed. Therefore in the first days of the
pose, a certain dry small Cough, with an itching of the rough Artery, does
molest, and sometimes causes hoarsness; but oft-times, a tickling only in the
windpipe, one or two fingers below the chin. If there be carelessness of a
Remedy, yellow, tough, and much snivel is wiped off; yea and by an easy Cough
knocked out: There was hope thereupon, that in a short time the affect would be
loosed of its own accord: Neglect increases, and the external injury is
urgent. In the mean time, the pipe or channel unto the instrument of smelling,
or spongy bone, is wholly stopped up with a strange guest: Thence a plentiful and
glewie snivel is powered through the nostrills, otherwise wide or open enough;
straightway after, a like snivel is expelled by a Cough: But that this is
generated in the Lungs, but not that it drops down from the Head into the rough
Artery, I have already convinced concerning Rheums: and I add, that although
all of what sort is detained within the the chance or fortune of his Prince.
Then in the next place, there is the more stri^^ necessity to the Head with the
Lungs, because both Bowels do conspire in the government of the Keeper, readily
seeming for the same end: These things are thus to be pressed from the root,
that the cure may be directed unto the roots, unto the antecedent, that is, to
the freeing of the spongy bone: For truly, the cough being sprung from the
action of government, whatsoever Cough is in the Lungs by accident, cease,
the pose being removed. A coughing person, if he sit, the snivel does the less
snort in the windpipe, his breath is more free, and his expectorating more
easy, (for hence is the name of orthopnea or upright breathing with
difficulty) when as otherwise, if snivel should distill from above into the
windpipe, it should hasten downwards rather in sitting than in laying; which
is false: therefore also the antecedent. For if it should fall down from the
Head into the Lungs, it should descend with less

But as to that which concerns Remedies, first of all, soporiferous or
sleep-causing things do ease the Cough, and the pose, as they do also appease a
Pleurisy from sumptomatical affects: And I conquer the Cough with those
Remedies, wherewith I do the Pleurisy. There are also in the next place, other
Coughs, never arising from a pose, but from a corruption of contagion of the
air, also from an unseasonable impression of the greatest cold; and the Lungs
are offended in their strengthening or liveliness, no otherwise than as is the
wandering keeper before the door: But the excrement which has overflown longer
than was meet, about the utmost parts or ends of the rough artery, is hardened,
and moreover affords a difficult breathing. And the Lungs being weary of this
guest, do show forth tokens of their wearisomness, by spitting out of the
vitiated excrement, by reaching: And if that excrement be not chased away by
Coughs, or inwardly, it ends into a mattery imposthume, and consumption. But a
sitting life has oft-times brought this evil; wherefore I have always
persuaded unto exercises which provoke difficulty of Breathing, whereby
excrements may be expectorated or cast out of the Breast, and the overflowing
by force of the air, may be hindered: surely no otherwise, than as havens of
the Sea, do require waters flowing on their back, which do wash off Sand from
thence: For otherwise, the filth subsisting, the Lungs cannot choose but
sustain a hurting of their liveliness, bring forth many and diverse spittles,
according to the disposition of the blemish received. Such Coughs have an
adhering and strange filth, and do successively beget another, which afterward
do end into difficulties of Breathing, Asthmaes, gnawings of the vessels, and
of the substance of the bowel: Many of these defects, because they witness a
weakness of the vital strength in the bowel, are difficultly restored, and less
in old age. But an Asthma sprung from thence, has as many floud-gates of air
shut, as there are little mouths dedicated to breathing: And this is the
difference of degrees, in a greater and less straightness of Breathing: But the
filths or spittles which do bewray themselves in these affects, are not so much
the original causes of the Cough, as they bear the relation of a product for
new Coughs continually: For they grow always anew for them, because a hateful
guest being within, does not cease to stir up new filths from the last
digestion. Indeed such is the negligence of this bowel, and the command of
external things over the wandering keeper. But the Remedies which Paracelsus, of
which elsewhere: And likewise which do Sympathetically overcome every Disease;
For Arcanum's do by an every way purifying, take away any Diseases: but seeing
they do not infuse new strength into the vitiated part, as neither do take away
the evil impression of the implanted spirit; surely, the lost strength is not
after any sort to be restored, but by Sympathetical Remedies. But that some
fruit may be cropped from what has been said before. I will relate one example
out of ordinary and domestical ones.

A certain old man did Snort after a wonderful manner, so that he seemed
sometimes to sing, sometimes also to snort with his weasand: that he being
oftimes raised upright all night, was also compelled to sleep in sitting, and
he uttered less noise, and fewer Phlegms, sitting than laying: his Physicians
therefore, refreshed him with Meat-broaths perfectly boiled, with a more strong
and plentiful nourishment, least he should fail of much Spitting out by
reaching, or should suffer a Consumption of the Lungs which they said was
threatened: Yet he felt himself better under fastings, and in time of Lent, then
presently after Easter: But his Physicians did accuse, sometimes the
North Wind, but then the Rain; but not his much juicie and more strong
nourishments.

But I went occasionally to see the man, and when I seriously minded all things
in my Power, I presently showed that that generation of Phlegms, had its
domestical or Lent and Easter now gone and past: And that (indeed) forthwith
after Easter, he more plentifully spat by reaching, and did more troublesomly
of every member is mightily hurt, or turned inward: by which chance, I call
such an evil impression, the Tormenter of a Member, the hinderer of digestion,
and depraver of the last Nourishment. About which indeed, the whole scope and
hinge of healing ought to be conversant. Therefore the Keeper of the Windpipe
is as well provoked above, by the injuries of the Air, as beneath, and by a
homebred indisposition of his own Lungs. Let these things be thus, concerning
the mass dedicated to the Keepers, and touching a mass bedewed for the last
Nourishment of the joints: wherein, whatsoever is vitiated through want of
integrity, that also increases into the occasions of many infirmities: And by
how much the worse mass or immediate matter of which, shall wash against them,
by so much the more powerful also, is the prick of diseases sprung from thence:
And by consequence, abstinence, and fullness, of much juycie food, are fruitful
means, as well to cure, as to make weak or sick. Therefore not any of the
Liquor latex rusheth headlong out of the Head, which also sets upon us in the
show of Snivel, the white of an Egg, thin sanies, thick Pus, and corrupt matter
like honey: For through the error of the digestions, and other impressions,
offenses and vices do happen in the Members, obvious with diverse faces: Which
thing surely is to be diligently noted with a Pen of Steel, where the Curings
and Healings of Sicknesses are intended. Hence the error of cauteries or
searing Medicines is confirmed:

For Issues do in some place profit, not indeed, because they do Evacuate the
descending matter of a rheum, divert it, derive it, or draw it elsewhere; but
as they

In this path, Barley Broaths, those of Sarsaparilla, China, and the like
decoctions are considered: the which besides an elementary Drink, do administer
one far estranged

In the mean time, I greatly admire, that they have thought to relieve the
Luags by sweet things, and Ecligmaes, and by a licking: and they have doubted
about Fox-Lungs, Schools have never considered that if the sick party shall
himself daily beat in pieces his own remedies, he shall by Thumping of his
Nostrills, be able to attract some remedies to the Lungs themselves, to wit, by
breathing in a small quantity of the Powder of the remedies so beaten: And that
by this Method, he may be able immediately to apply his own Balsams to himself;
but in vain: therefore Lohochs or Eligmaes which are not brought down to the
Lungs, shall be as yet more vain. And likewise they have neglected hitherto, a
profitable way or manner, whereby they may immediately connex the fume of
Sulphur to the Drink: which Smoke together with the Drink, does by little and
little yet without any further diligent search; they have always hitherto
persisted in the same Clayie path.

CHAP. XLIX. The Humor Latex, neglected.
1. A disposing of things to be taught. 2. What may be understood under the
word Latex. 3. The reason of that Surname. 4. The effect of four Humors
introduced. 5. The distinction of Urine and Sweat from the Humor Latex. 6.
Errors arisen from hence. 7. What has deceived the Schools. 8. It implies a
contradiction. 9. The absurdities of the Humor Latex being unknown. 10. That
the Whey of the venal Blood; which they so call, differs from the Urines. 11.
The unsauouriness and indifferentness of Qualities in the Humor Latex, by
reason of their use, largeness, and Liberty. 12. The first Scope of the Humor
Latix. 13. Another. 14. A third. 15. Sweat is from the matter of the Latex. 16.
How Sweat issues forth. 17. The Sweat of dying Persons, to what it may conduce.
18. The coming forth of Sweat in the form of Salt Water is proved. 19. The
fourth Scope. 20. The fifth. 21. The Humor Latex is excused. 22. The abuse of
the Schools. 23. The bringing forth of the ignorance of the Humor Latex. 24.
If the Schools were not fast asleep, they might have acknowledged their Errors
by numbers, and weight. 25. The Squinancy has always deluded Catarrhs. 26. A
necessity of the Humor Latex, although neglected. 27. What Thirst may bewray.
28. What the dryness, chapping, and fowlness of the Tongue in a Fever, do show.
29. The Journeys, and Clientships of the Latex. 30. The Lodestone of the
Latex. 31. Some discommodities of the erring Latex. 32. What things the Error
of the Schools about the Latex, has brought forth. 33. Some effects of the
erring Latex. 34. Why the Latex does easily hearken unto a strange Ferment. 35.
The Author passes by the Idiotism of Paracelus concerning the Latex. 36.
Whence Thirst in a Dropsy artseth. 37. Sweat is rather called, than brought of
its own accord. 38. Baths and Cauteries are unknown whither they may be
applied. 39. The Original of a Catarrhe is from the Ignorance of the Latex. 40.
The Error of the Schools concerning the use of the Glandules or Kernels. 41.
Whence there are so manifold Glandules in us. 42. Whence there is so easy or
ready a Muckiness and Spittle of a Squinancy. 43. The curing of Diseases has
been hitherto Coniectural, Cloakative, and attempting Escapes. 44. The Author
exhorts Physicians. 45. The drying of China has broak forth from the Ignorance
of the Latex. 46. An applying of the foregoing Digression.

I Being to speak of the one only Humor Latex, and that, hitherto neglected;
the Question, whether it be or that it is first to be proved: and then the
uses, necessities, or of names may be taken away, after that I have
sufficiently demonstrated by an expr^ss A Passive deceiving of the Schools the
Humorists; in distinction to an Active one, To wit, least, in a stubbor^ness of
repentance I may seem to have accused Malice. Wherefore Paracelsus first cast
them out, as being guilty of a robbed or extorted Inheritance; but they being
admonished, refused to be willing to be wise, although they were admonished,
that they had moved a Fire-band for its more ready Burning, to the destruction
of man.

And first of all, I have sufficiently demonstrated, that there is not either
of the Cholers, as neither Phlegm in nature: now moreover, I have determined to
show, that it was not sufficient for the Schools to have been Ignorant of the
juice or Humor Latex, and the particular aim thereof, but also that they have
altogether erred in the Consti^^tion of the same; because they are those which
do far depart from the Terms of the Latex proposed, being deceived by the
Similitude of Milk: Because Whey is never Severed from Milk, but after the
Corruption of its Milk, and therefore they compare a Dead-Carcase to the Latex.
Next, Whey, because it is not For (...) (...) a part of the Urine, as neither a
part (...) For (...) the salt of the Sweat is distinct in its properti^^ (...)
the (...) U^^^^ And the Latex is moreover, void of a manifest salt; and that ^^
no wonder: Because the Urine, as it is now seaso^ed with a dungy Ferment of the
Reins, ^^ also transchanged by the same: For the Urine is made in its own
Shops, and (...) completed by its own formal properties, being profitable for
its own etc. For in so great a breathing through or evaporation,

Another Scope of the Latex has been, to wit, when as in all the more crude
Chyle, cream, and venal blood, there is some Excrement, and the blood does
under digestion

A third end of the Liquor-Latex has happened to the other two; that it may
materially cause, that no Remainder of a thicker compact does remain in the
last Evaporation

Furthermore, that the Sweat is not carried by Heat in the show of a Vapor, is
manifest: For seeing a Vapor does occupy a hundredfold more Room, than Water,
of dead (...) they have not yet looked into the Anatomy of Sweat, by
Digestious, Smoakinesses, Vapors, Elections, Admixtures, Resolvings, or
Expulsions.

The scope of the Latex was more intimate: For seeing the Eye had need of
liquor, that its Eyelid might be moved without hurt, and the Tongue wanted
Spittle to temper etc. should be made: for while in Squinancies, and the
disgraceful Salivation of Mercury, more Spittle than is meet flows forth, the
Paunch is made dryer then it self. Therefore the Latex wanders unhurtfully in
the Mass of

It is also an abuse to Teach, that the Latex is (in the beginning of a Pose)
crude

Therefore the Ignorance of the Humor Latex, has stirred up many Dreams in
healing, in Catarrhs, and Oedemaes; to wit, the Legs being over night swollen,
reteining etc. Truly a just dispensing of Proportion, should daily require
perhaps 40 Pounds for the expense of unripe blood, to be consumed throughout
the whole Body. Basins and Champer-pots are in one only night filled with
Spittles, and the Bed-cloaths, together with the Shirts, do drop with moisture:
the which, unless they are fetched from the Latex, and not from the Mass of
lively venal blood, whatsoever things are believed concerning Meats,
digestions, and making of blood, do fall to the ground together. For
Arithmetic it self, and the Balance of weight, do delude paultry Physicians
in their Fictions of Phlegm: but what ingenious man, will ever believe, that
Spittle, Tears, Sweats, and besides, plenty of Urine is to be fetched from the
very inheritance of the blood, without a present damage of life? especially
because the same does remain even for long Terms of time? For let us feign a
small Supper, the Stomach and Pylorus to have well performed and much less does
it aseend out of the Stomach which is empty, and under the stopping up of the
Jaws: therefore let Spittle be the ordinary workmanship of the Tongue and Jaws,
the matter whereof is fetched from the Latex; the which, according to the
variety of its Ferment does change with diverse Masks; to wit, Spittles are
watery, Snivelly, Salt, Sharp, Bitter, and tough like a thread. A daily plenty
of the Liquor Latex, was therefore necessary in the Veins, and a ready
obedience thereof unto the call

It is not sufficient to have spoken of the Latex, and some of its uses and
offices, by a distribution of its necessities: it helps also to discover its
journeys, and to have

And hence also wounds do oftentimes power forth an incredible plenty of
Sunovie or Gleary or Glewy water, as if the liquor Latex would fit it self to
wash off the hurt conceived in the payning and ill cured wound. Indeed the
outmost clothing of the Body does of its own property and free accord, allure
the Sweat, and Latex; that seeing it ought to be like to a washing or Lather,
it may receive the Spur of its calling from the Skin: By the leachery of which
drawing, the Skin it self is easily filled with a Grease. Seeing therefore the
Latex is appointed for many uses and offices, it follows also, that the same
being exorbitant, does become the occasional cause of as the Latex does find
any brackish thing within, infected with a sharpish brine of saltness, Galen
knew not the thin corrupt Matter or liquor of an Ulcer, whether he might refer
it unto Phlegm, or unto Choler. But it is no wonder, that the Latex being
transplanted into a strange offspring of rule, does stir up diverse Troops of
Ulcers; when as the venal blood being provoked by diverse strokes of Serpents,
and transplantings of Diseases, does exorbitate or excessively Paracelsus his
own saltish Microcosmical Fountains, and I willingly indulge his liberty,
although together with

The Latex therefore, does easily drink up into it, a strange quality; Hence in
the Dropsy, there is much thirst, also after frequent drinking: for thirst is
not made

Two things therefore especially, are here further beheld; that the liquor
Latex is not carried so much of its own accord, as being called by the
Superficies of the Body, for whose help it was (otherwise) ordained: then also,
that the Sweats of those parts do witness a defect of the same: wherefore,
Bed-cloaths being cast on a man, do provoke Sweat, because it is called by an
endeavor outwardly administered; and

In the next place, the whole spring of this evil has been banished into the
guiltless head of man, into Rheums raining down out of the head; The cause
whereof, if they have erred from, they ought also consequently to have strayed
in the Remedies:

Lastly, I have also noted, that there are notable Glandules or Kernels under
the Arm-pit, in the Groyn, and behind the ears; and likewise in the passage of
the Urine, nigh the Bladder, and about the gut Duodenum, and almost innumerable
ones elsewhere, For the overflowing Latex, does load the Veins by oppression,
and if they are free from the same, the Archeus as it were breathing back
again, does retake to him new strength unhoped for. Therefore the ignorance of
the Humor Latex, has invented, and supported Cauteries or searing Remedies,
has feigned Catarrhs, and has caused all disagreeing Remedies or Succors to
be dreamed of. For nothing of solidity against Diseases has hitherto been
weighed: Because I shall show in its place, that the Beginnings of Diseases
have as yet to this day layn hid unknown: and therefore also that Remedies are
vain trials, neither containing any thing of certainty, unless

Wherefore, I have judged it meet to digress a little in this place: For as I
have seen an Atrophia or Consumption for lack of nourishment, to be
occasionally supported by the Humor Latex; So also I have seen Fatness or
Grossness, in one only two months time, by a Urine-provoking drink instead of
Ale or Beer, to be wholly expelled. But foreign potions of China,
Sarsaparilla, Guaiacum, etc. which should pour forth the Latex by Sweats, by a
feigned and lying title, have attained the name

And indeed, I have already before demonstrated, that every visible body, and
that which is believed to be composed by a mixture of the Elements, is
materially made only of the Element of water, which originally has it self in
all constituted things, in manner of a Latex, and the which also, here to have
supposed, is sufficient, as being once sufficiently prooved. And then, the
Maxim of Philosophy has it; That Bodies are not changed into each other,
unless they are first reduced into their first, and easy following or clammy
Matter. For although they would have that thing applied to metallic^
Transmutations; yet it is to be drawn out of the noted sublunary Transmutations
of any things: Yet not that they will have bodies to be reduced into the first
matter of Aristotle; yea, nor also into the first Separation of the Elements
(for neither do they think that the Food ought to return into its own Element,
that it may thereby be made blood) but they will have a body to be transchanged
into its next matter, or that the subject of the former life ought to return
back before it has fixed a hope of the bound of Transmutation to be attained:
To which end, be it certain, that meats and drinks do assume the nature of a
Chyle or juice in the stomach, with a retaining of the qualities of the middle
life of the meats: Indeed, that the ancient matter of the meats is destroyed,
and made to approach very near to the matter next to the Latex or the Element
of water; to wit, the specifical Ferment of the stomach being busily employed
to this end, no otherwise than as the Ferment of the Liver does transchange the
Chyle into venal blood, and whose companion and fellow, the Latex is, but not
likewise a part thereof. But so differing and singular gifts of Ferments do
exist in nature, that some living creatures do make venal blood, flesh, etc.
for themselves, yea and also an Oily grease, and water only: for in the
stomach of a Salmond, Fishermen say, never any Food or edible thing was found.

There are moreover in Salt-waters, some waterish little living creatures, in
whom scarce any thing is bred, which do communicate a certain Seed of water
drunk by them, from whence they do increase and sustain their own little body;
so that to other Fishes which eat these small living creatures, a Seed is
granted to be engendered in the waters, which is passed over into life, and is
derived into the middle participated life. But small living creatures, which do
immediately make blood to themselves, and their whole substance of water alone,
have an example, almost in every vegetable, especially in stony and sandy
Mountains, which are far separated from the dung of men, wherein, perhaps 60
particular kind of Rosinous trees are taken notice of, are fully nourished only
of rain water, and of snow, or the Leffas or planty juice of a stony odor, and
do grow unto the greatest height, being trees so fat, that they would be
choked, unless they pour forth the same on every side. The ferment of the
stomach in man, does more easily transchange the meats into chyle, than their
fatnesses, because fatness is more remote from the Latex, or the first matter,
than the meat is.

Which digestion of transmutation into watery juyces, is brought hither to this
end, that it may be manifest that the Latex (a foreign seed, and ferment of
the members

CHAP. L. A Cautery or Searing Remedy.
1. A Cautery is nothing but a remaining Wound. 2. No prerogative of a Cantery
made by fire. 3. The name of an Issue or little fountain is a Iuggle. 4. What
things God has seen entirely good, are praised by the Schools, as rent or
toren. 5. The promises of a Cautery are childish. 6. The denial of a Catarrh
denies the use of a Cautery. 7. Ridiculous necessaries for defending
Cauteries. 8. The position of the Schools is shown to be absurd and impossible.
9. What may be purged by a Cautery. 10. Nine conclusions against the
appointments of Cauteries. 11. Foolish desires or delights in a Cautery. 12.
Cauteries, whom they hurt. 13. The undstinction of the Schools. 14. The scope
or end of a Cautery cease. 15. They have circumvented the World by Cauteries.
16. That there is no communion of a Cautery with the brain. 17. Absurdities
following upon the doctrine of Cauteries. 18. The one only refuge of the
Schools. 19. Answers. 20. Cauteries are driven against the Rocks. 21. What the
Schools may answer in the difficulties proposed. 22. The multiplying and
choosing of a Cautery, by what boldness it has arose. 23. Some Stage Play
trifles of the Schools. 24. The Gowt of Physicians is a mockery. 25. Cauteries
are foolish. 26. They are vain in their own desperate cases. 27. It is not yet
determined by the Schools in what cases Cauteries can help. 28. A case wherein
a Cautery profits. 29. How the cruel and stinking remedy of a Cautery may be
prevented. 30. A Cautery is unworthy a Physician.

CAtarrhs or Rheums have found out Cauteries: those therefore being taken out
of the way, the treatise of these might seem to be in vain, unless I should
write these things for young beginners; I distrusting that my studies will any
thing profit the learned or skilful: Wherefore I have determined to declare the
ends and effect and dryness, a flux of humors is the better stopped. As if, at
one only moment, the down malignant from thence, unto some part between the
skin, which the Physician has commanded to be stricken? For how obedient is
that, which being an evil humor (indeed now a dead excrement) shall suffer is
self to be wrested back and sent to another place; which otherwise, being no
more solicitous of the family-government of life, does obey the law of
situation, by its weight only! But that the evil humor to be wiped away by a
Cautery, is a vapor translated and collected from the stomach into the head
through the brain, coats, and scull, and from thence dismissed between the
outward Muscles and skin, that was before peremptorily hissed out, concerning
Catarrhs.

In the next place, those things being granted, it should want the essence and
Etymology of a humor; by consequence also, of an evil humor, to wit, of
Phlegm, one of the four: For whatsoever had once been lifted up in manner of a
vapor, and had grown together into drops, is neither thick nor tough, nor any
more of one of the four humors made in the Liver; but it should be a Post-hume
distillatory liquor. Wherefore if any evil humor, the final cause of a
cautery, be not bred in the Liver, Brain, or Stomach; which at length shall be
the shop of evil humors for Catarrhs? Or which is the sending, and lofty part,
from whence they may be the more steeply brought unto a Cautery?

For in so great a strait of trifles, the Schools are constrained to confess,
that not Schools do examine that while corrupt Pus or snotty matter is making,
the pain, labor, and Fever is greater, then when it is made; they would
certainly know that corrupt pus is materially produced out of the Blood, by the
labor of the faculties, and consequently, that in an issue, corrupt Pus is
wished for, for the same ends: The which standing, the position falls to the
ground, which supposes that evil humors are derived by Cauteries. 2. That the
bringing forth of corrupt Pus in a wound, is not from the Center of the Body.
3. That it is not the excrement of Rheum flowing down. 4. That Cauteries do not
purge bad humors, which do prepare good venal Blood into an excrement, with
the labor of the digestive faculty. 5. That Cauteries do not any thing conduce
to the preventing of a malignant humor which is locally made in the Lips of the
wound it self. 6. That corrupt pus, and Sanies, cannot go back-wards from the
hole of an Ulcer, and slide into a noble part, and much less the good Blood
from whence the corrupt Pus is made. 7. If the venal Blood be an evil humor
before it come down to the issue, then nature ordains some bad humor from the
mass of the Blood, for the wounded part only, that it may nourish it, or this
is ordinary within all particular parts: now then nature wholly labors with
the vice of folly. 8. That it is a foolish thing, that to have made much thick
corrupt matter, is for the Cautery to have well purged; Seeing that corrupt Pus
shows the corrupting of good Blood: And so while a man is not in good health,
the issue, instead of snotty matter, weeps forth liquor. 9. If therefore a
Cautery should make for the evacuation of ill humors, a man should needs be
better in health, while liquor flows, than while snotty matter is made: Which
in the position is false. From hence therefore it is rightly inferred, that no
select ill humor, or pernicious excrement, which otherwise should fall down
elsewhere, is evacuated by an issue; but that, that whole matter, whether it be
corrupt pus, or a thin poison, is nothing else but mere Blood, designed for the
nourishing of the Cauterized part, and there corrupted by the vice of the part;
and so that the corruption of it self, does measure the goodness, and malignity
of digestion in the place of the issue: And therefore while the whole Archeus
does in any sort labor, there is also a greater weakness of digestion in the
issue, and the Pus is the nearer to putrefaction: and in this regard, the
issue, by reason of a more powerful hurting of digestion than was wont to be,
weepeth liquor. Therefore it is the wish of the Schools, that of harmless
blood, there may very much and white Snotty matter be made: And that they call
a good purging,

Whence it follows, that it is not convenient for Young Folks, not for those
that are become lean again, not for such as are brought low by any disease, as
neither for those that live orderly, and least of all, for religious abstashing
Persons.

But they have not yet distinguished, whether corrupt pus in an issue, be only
of

In the next place, a Cautery shall not be to be reckoned, as a preventing of a
Catarrh; or else, the matter of a Catarrhe should not be a vapor, nor also
Phlegm; but venal Blood it self, which the Issue in it self corrupts: For
corrupt pus is not made of Phlegm, but only of venal Blood, as has been
sufficiently instructed in the Schools. Therefore by the essence of corrupt
pus, being well searched into, in its matter, and efficient cause, the ends of
Cauteries and the purgings out of Catarrhs and evil humors do cease: For
indeed any sumptom of wounds being taken away in Cauteries, and a supposed
health, it must needs be, that a loosing or seuering of that which held
together, does produce snotty matter in the Issue, and that that does not flow
from elsewhere; but that it is generated in the part it self. Also the Archeus
daily dispenses so much of the venal Blood to the parts proportionally, as
they have need of for their own nourishment. Therefore the Pus or corrupt
matter, is venal Blood vitiated in that part wherein the Wound is, and an
effect of digestion vitiated in the same place.

Therefore to have vitiated the entireness, continuation or holding together,
and digestion of the parts, next, to have converted the venal Blood into
corrupt Snotty Schools, as to have gone to prevent Catarrhs or Rheums; or
through the hole of a Cautery, to have extracted from the Head (from whence they
originally fetch all Rheums) an excrementous humor, which otherwise had
threatened to fall down on a noble part; whether in the mean time, there be an
agreement between the Head, and the Wounded part or not; for it is all one, so
the Skin be detained Wounded, whether that excrementous humor be Blood, or be
made snotty pus, or liquid Sanies, is all one, so by the threadbare words of
Catarrhe, prevention, derivation, revulsion, and an Issue, the world be
circumvented. For I behold a small Infant of a Year old, now breeding Teeth,
and to suffer a Fever, froath of the Mouth, and Spittle, without ceasing; And
a^^ength that there are wringings of the Bowels, and Stools of
Yellow-Green-coloured excrements: At least that Tooth is a part of the Head,
wherefore the Flux shall be a Rheum of the Head: But what consent is there of a
Tooth about to break forth, or a swollen Gum with a Bowel? Or what power
thereof is there of begetting or sending away that Catarrhe out of the Stomach
of a little Infant, unto his Head? And from thence into the Ileos? By what
right shall a vapor dropped or stilled out of the Stomach, be made Cankered
Choler in the Head? Has perhaps the shop of Choler now wandered from the
beginning of Life unto the Head? Could a Cautery (if an Infant were for
undergoing it) suck unto it a leeky Flux into it self? And by a few small drops
of corrupt matter, recompense or Balance the leeky Choler of some pounds? Why
does the Stomach of a small Infant frame a Catarrhe by reason of the pain of
his Tooth? Why is it sent into a Bowell, and not unto the paining Tooth? Does
not the reader yet see, that a Flux is not a Rheum? But that the Archeus
(wheresoever ye will have it) being enraged, is ready in the Bowels, to
transchange the nourishable juice into excrements, which by the Schools are
reckoned Choler, Phlegm, etc. If therefore the Flux be not a Rheum, and the
Archeus being wroth, can transchange any thing into a troublesome Liquor, if the
Gum be but afflicted; shall not he be able, on every side to unload himself by
the appointed emunctories? And not to wait for the Skin to be opened by a
Caustic? Alas, has cruel dullness caused the Schools to be cruel toward
their mortal kinsfolks? For neither do they consider, that in Women, and those
that are somewhat fat or gross, there is in the fleshly membrane, about the
ordinary places of a Cautery, a mere grease to the thickness of two fingers at
least, for which persons notwithstanding, the more frequent Cauteries (and
those the more profitable ones) are persuaded; wherefore also the bottom of the
Issue shall scarce be in the middle of the grease: therefore there is not a
passage, whereby the evil banished feigned humor of a Rheum, may rush down
out of the Brain, or between the Scull, and Skin, through the middle of the fat.

But what is that solitary humor, in the next place, which for its offense,
being banished from the sending part, descending through the Substance of the
grease unmixed, Schools have (at least) one escape:

To wit, that Cauteries, in Chronical or long continuing Diseases, and likewise
in the more fat Petsons, and such as abound in humors, have oftimes profited:
Therefore

The matter of a Catarrhe, its essence, manner, ways of derivation, and
affect, and likewise an evil humor, and the ends of the Cautery, are feigned
Dreams, the

What if Cauteries have sometimes profited: At least, that is not from the Root
and essence of a Catarrhe, there being altogether none in it self: therefore if
they Schools confess that Cauteries do ptofit from means, and ends unknown to
themselves; and that they do extol a conjectural remedy, uncertain and by
accident, with so great a Praise: For they worthily have admired Cauteries to
have profited from the event: for if any affect which was to cease of its own
accord, or presently after a fullness of time, has perished; do they therefore
think that they have a right by Birth, of miserably torturing two hundred in
vain, if a Cautery shall not prove unhappy to one by accident?

What if on the contrary, the Histories of many are compared, whereunto
Cauteries have proved ill; they presently say we are not Empericks, nor are we
moved by Schools are rational, and are supported moreover, by the Authorities
of the Ancients. And that thing they thus loftily thunder out, as often as they
being destitute of reasons, and convicted by experiences, do cease to be most
expert Masters, neither will they be bowed by experiences contrary to their
own: But they flee with one accord, unto the reasons of predecessors, the
which I have shown to be wan, sluggish, false, and stumbling in their first
entrance.

For truly when the Schools had discerned, that some perhaps by fortune had
felt ease by a Cautery, presently a bristle, or cord being drawn on both sides
through the Skin

They have made trial of diverse Cauteries or Searings, and smiths have made a
large house-hold-stuff, they have instituted Arabic burnings (indeed nothing
but Goats-dung fried in a pan) deep in the great toes, for those that have the
Sciatica, and joynt-sickness or Gowt: Indeed they have every where set to sale
Stage Play trifles, and dreams, for truth, in healing: But the Schools have at
length admired, that one only joynt-sickness, designed to Catarrhs, has
derided all their speculations and Cauteries;

To wit, that it has shown it to be false, that the gowt was made by a
defluxing Paduans, Florentines, Mount Pielirians, do drive a hot burning Iron
even to the seam of the Scull, and they promise that Epileptical fumes will
depart out of the brain thereby, not only that they would lessen the
continuance of the fit, but that they would oftentimes suspend it for the
future: But the sick undergo these things with a deaf hope of health; but
without example: Neither do they once weigh, that dreamed vapors do not affect
the brain, through want of passage; but on the other hand, that causes do stir
up the tempest of a Disease, before they can come unto the skin of the hair.
Wherefore, wan and vain is the endeavor and aid of a Cautery, which begins
from the effect, incuring of Diseases: For it has not yet been determined by
the Schools, in what affects Cauteries may be convenient, because they do
seldom and by accident, alone

CHAP. LI. The Disease that was anciently reckoned that of delightful Livers.
1. The false name of a drop, in this Disease. 2. The Gowt grows daily more and
more frequent. 3. The Gowt will presently distinguish choice Physicians from
others. 4. Things proper to the Gowt. 5. The unconstancy of the Schools. 6. A
hot Gowt does not differ in the particular kind, from a cold one. 7. A
hereditary one at least, is not from a Catarrhe. 8. After what sort the
limitation or appointment of the Seal in the seed is. 9. Diverse fellowships of
the Character, with the corporeal Seed. 10. Nothing of a rheumy substance in
the Gowt. 11. Why the Remedies and preventions of the Schools are abusive. 12.
How long Medicines will be unprosperous. 13. That the Podagra is not in the
foot, as neither the Chiragra in the hand. 14. The manner of making in the
Gowt. 15. Why the perpetual place of the Gowt, is between the co-touchings of
the bones. 16. Why the Gowt does infect the seed of the Parents. 17. Why it
begins far from the heart. 18. The sharpness of the Gowt is not yet in its
seed. 19. After what sort that sharpenss is fermented. 20. What the Synovie is.
21. Whence a Gowty chalk may be formed. 22. From whence, and what is the afflux
unto places of the Gowt. 23. Profitable and hurtful things, whom they may
instruct. 24. Objects in healing. 25. The true Remedy of the Gowt. 26. A
repetition of things spoken. 27. The name of a drop has caused an error in
the supposition or subject of perceivance. 28. A definition of the Gowt. 29.
The rise and progress thereof. 30. It is decyphered from the first into the
last life. 31. Wherein the sick may be deceived. 32. Cauteries are vain in the
joynt-sickness. 33. That no material thing which is humorous, is sent, does
slide, or is directed into places of the joynt-sickness. 34. The Remedies of
the Schools, as well those of the Europians, as Barbarians, are vain. 35.
Drying drinks are derided. 36. The Schools through their own rashness, do fail
in the Gowt, Consumption, Catarrhs, and Cauteries. 37. Some things are chiefly
true concerning moisture, and dryness. 38. Concerning different kinds of
Remedies of the Gowt, elsewhere.

THe Arthritis, joint sickness, being understood by the name of the Gowt, it so
attributed unto Catarrhs or rheums, that in many Nations, by putting one

But seeing I have already overthrown the whole fable of a Catarrhe, I will
also discover the error of the vulgar sense, in the Gowt; which I have judged
could not otherwise be done, unless I shall explain the tragedy of the Gowt
from its beginning. The Gowt remained unknown to the first ages, although
mankind, even from the

Notwithstanding, seeing it does now oftentimes molest Laborers, and
Capuchines who are most abstinent; I have coniectured that the Gowt will
presently spread abroad over the people, unless God being merciful unto us,
shall prevent its in part Hereditary, and in part attained damage.

In the next place also, I have from thence fore-divined, that that will be the
Gowt, which is to be brought as a prognostical Sign, after a Quartane, between
choice and

Furthermore, the generater being not as yet Gowty, does oft-times constitute
an heir of his Gowt, almost the same year wherein the patient after generation,
is to suffer the first beginnings of the Gowt. In the parent therefore, a
silent, and not yet Plague, being bred, does generate, before a just maturity
of its Seed, which is denied to other Seeds in nature: as if the field of
Humane nature being defiled, does now of its own accord, beget the Gowt. I pass
by; that it produces small Stones, Chalk or Lime, diverse in their Beginnings
from Duelech or the Stone of the Kidneys, or Bladder, and a rocky Monster, out
of a wonted and due place, and that it does deform a man being maimed and cut
short in his Members, from so proud a structure, into a Monster. But the
Schools do without controversy attribute the Gowt to defluxions; but it is not

In the mean time, I certainly know, that the Gowt, whether it slide on the
heirs through the Seeds of the Parents, or in the next place, be contracted by
a proper error of living, is of one and the same kind, with every property
following it: Neither

Then also I know, and have learned first of all, that at least an Hereditary
Gowt is not derived from a Catarrhe, if it has layn hid in the Seed, and that
which is Falling-evil in the Elke and Swallow) but only unto individual
Beginnings, whereto they are fast tied as it were by accident. Therefore if
there be nothing of a Rheumy matter, actually, in the Seed of the Gowt,
therefore, neither also in the Gowt, which is to arise from thence; Seeing
proper effects ought always to bear a respect to their

In the next place, if any Hereditary Gowt does want a Catarrhe; therefore
also, any other; Seeing, of one thing in the particular kind, there are always
the same specifical constitutive Beginnings.

Furthermore, if that blemishing Gowty Character be so notably homebred to the
Seed, so intimately social to it, sleeping with so patient a suspense, and not
to be washed off by so many Circuits of years, and storms of Tempests; I have
judged it to be altogether of necessity, for the same to be coupled to the
vital Spirit. Whence first of all, it is manifest, that the supposed
withdrawings of blood, and feigned Humors,

The first is that the Gowt does immediately consist in the Spirit of life,
neither therefore, that the fruit of the Gowt is the Gowt, or the root thereof.

The other is, that the Gowt does not flow down materially, or (as they will
have it) in manner of a Humor, as being a Bridge for the Rheum unto the joints.
Wherefore if I shall explain the Progress of the Gowt in its being made, I
think, that by liberal wits, and those not yet defiled by any prejudice, I
shall be affented unto: For in the beginning, after that the seminal Gowty
Character is constituted (be it now

In the next place, even as all sharpness, as well in the venal blood, as in
the flesh, is demonstrated to contein the beginning and token of putrefaction;
hence it comes to pass, that nature well perceiving or being thoroughly sensible
of that sharpness in the Spirit, which it conceived from the Seed or Gowty
Character, does presently stir up an every days Fever, before the coming of
the Gowt: presently also a pain is well perceived in the proper place or Womb,
to wit, where two Bones do touch each other; first a small light pain, but
afterward, as it were that of a burning Drop: Being increased, it afterward
stirs up Pains, Burnings, and at length, oft-times, Swellings: For then the
sharpness being conceived in the Spirit, by a spiritual Fermentation; to wit,
by an active alteration, defiles the Spermatical or seedy Glue which is
conjoined between the Ligaments, and the Bones.

I have already before demonstrated, that the Character of the Gowt is of its
own disposition, bred to infect, and to be transferred with the seed (to wit,
even as Mercury infects the Mouth and Teeth; but the Spittle of a mad Dog, the
brain) as it were in an Inn, in which it oft-times lurketh for a long Race of
years: Wherefore, by virtue of a co-resemblance, it is agreeable to truth, that
the Character or Impression of the Gowt does originally respect the Seeds:
Notwithstanding, seeing nature is wholly careful of the Sex, and a diligent
preserver of the particular kinds to be preserved, and a saver thereof; she
peculiarly, what she can, forsees, that that Character does not infect the
Species, or that it do not fall on the Stones: wherefore she could not at least
prevent, that in respect of its disposition, it does not Immediately infect the
liquor next to the Seed, which Paracelsus calls the Sunovie, being plentifully
powered forth between the chests of the Ligaments, and the co-touchings of the
Bones. But at the very moment of Copulation, the Character of the Gowt,
otherwise sleeping Archeus, being stirred up under so great a stirring of Lust,
is con-tempered with the Spirit, together with the seed, plainly after an
irregular manner: because nature being then unable to govern the Rains, could
not restrain, but that the Poison of the Character does fermentally infect the
Lustful seed: Therefore seeing the Seed or Character of the Gowt does regularly
defile the Spermatical or Seedy parts; therefore, as speedily as may be, the
Sunovie; which no where happens alone, but where two Bones do mutually touch
each other: Hence is the place or Nest of the Gowt in the Joints: which things,
seeing they ought to succeed by causes already constituted, nature being at
least needy of her own preservation, does not suffer the imprinted Spirits to
infect the Sunovie, but in places far distant from the heart: For from hence

This is the original and root of the Gowt, and this is the manner of its
making: the which surely is confirmed by things helpful, and hurtful: Not
indeed that I do approve of that Maxim, shameful in it self: or that I will
have curative judgments to be drawn from thence: But errors being sometimes
admitted, do instruct Judicious erring persons, who are willing to be wise in
Charity, as good Remedies do confirm good operators: being the more largely
drunk; and likewise whatsoever things are corruptives of the liquor Later, as
Asparagus, etc. In like manner also, whatsoever things do take away sharpness
out of the Spirit of life, and the Latex, before the fit, being inwardly taken,
or outwardly applied, do remove, prevent, or preserve from the fit; at
leastwise they do mitigate the pains, and hinder the knots. But in curing the
Gowt., the sharpness produced is not to be regarded (which is instead of a
fruit and of a product)

For neither does every Letter-Carrier come unto the Caskets of the vital
Spirit; but only the Ambassador who is a Friend. And therefore the purging by
the Coralline Sol, to whom alone all Honor and Glory is due. He that
understands me is rare; yet he knows that what things I have said concerning
Gowt, are true. Nevertheless, seeing that is not sufficiently spoken, which is
not sufficiently understood, it shall perhaps be profitable, to have repeated
the rise, and progress of the Gowt in an Epitome.

In the first place, those that have the Gowt or are Gowty, do complain that
they do well perceive or feel the defluxion of a burning Humor.

But I have already sufficiently and more than sufficiently taught, that there
never was any humor of us in nature, besides the blood, the Latex, and a
secondary or nutritious

Therefore in the suposition of feeling or percievance, there is (of necessity)
an error Therefore the Gowt is a diseasie Character, Seminally implanted in
the spirit of life:

But Gowty Persons are first disturbed in their Midriffs, and they do as well
feel the inward successive changes of Drinks and Meats, as the outward ones of
the air, yea Schools the errors of defluxions, an accused Liver, and the Head
to have paid the punishment of an undeserved fault, and to have sustained a
thousand vain Medicines. Therefore the Gowt is not that which Paineth, and that
which Swells, or burns; but they are the products hereof: For neither when
the foot is taken off by the Bullet of a Gun, is the Gowt taken away, or the
Joynt-sickness: for truly, in the act of feeling, by an instrument of feeling,
there is made only a consent of parts:

Which thing has deceived the Sick, and Physicians who believe or trust to
them: neither in the mean time, does Swelling prove a descending: For that
which follows the Pain, ought to go before it, if the descending of a humor, or
a Swelling should be the cause of the Pain. Add to this, that the hottest Gowt
is without Swelling: For that is wont to be seen in the pain of the Teeth, in
the thorn fixed in a part, that the pain of a place does counterfeit the
defluxions of the upper parts; But what have these things common with the fable
of a Catarrhe? On the contrary, the Schools do persist, they inflict Cauteries
on the opposite side, that they may pull back the humor flowing down into the
opposite Leg, and expunge it by a hole: But in good sooth, what do Cauteries
suck out? nothing but Snotty, and liquide corrupt matter: But Schools sell
their own Dream to the Young beginner; that Snotty corrupt matter does descend
between the joints, or that it is apt to be turned into a Chalk; but well, that
it maks an opening to it self by Corroding: And it is more childish that any
Snotty corrupt thing flowing down into the right foot, should decline from the
scope appointed to it, if the Wound be made in the left leg; the which if it do
flow down, it falls down of its own free accord, or is sent and directed by a
Commander.

I pass by in the mean time, the absurdities of making it, and of ways or
passages which I have elsewhere blown away: And likewise the falling down of
humors separated

In the Gowt therefore, surely, nature has derided the vain purgations of
Physicians, their extenuations, cuttings of a Vein, Scarrifying, hot Baths, and
Cauteries, the

In the next place, they appoint dry sweats with less loss of Life indeed; but
with the like unprosperousness of successes. At length, they give drinks, from
a barbarous foundation, of the utmost corner of the Earth, to drink, and when
they perceived our own Country remedies to be in vain, they promise that humors
(never seen, named, and bred) are to be dried up at least by barbarous remedies.

But why do they give these drinks to drink also in a dry consumption? Is it
not that they may dry up the defluxing and exorbitant ill juicy humor? But let
them

Lastly, at leastwife a Catarrhy humor could not choose but be an excrement: But
the Schools have not considered, that excrementous things cannot be blown away,
as neither only of heat, and cold: This whereof, in an increased degree scarce
Tolerable for living Creatures, does convert watery Bodies into a Gas; but the
other is not an Operative quality into a drying vapor, as neither into
Moisture; but that the dry does drink up the moist, and on the other hand, that
the most does moisten as it is imbibed: But moisture is not dried up by
dryness, but the moisture departing, being supt up by heat, or cold. The
Schools in defluxions, do forbid hot things, do forbid Wines, do persuade
Barley Broaths, and so in the middle of the Waters, sometimes moistening, and
sometimes drying up (as they say) they endeavor to dry up; but they know not
what, in what manner, and by what means, because hitherto, the Humor the Author
of so great evils, is an unnamed one. I therefore have not known, either the
Motion, or manner, or means, whereby these Drinks are able to dry up, by a true
drying up, and much less hurtful excrements only, and least of all, can they
perform those things which Physicians do promise. Nature therefore despises
these Dreams of Physicians, and does always make, and will always make void
their promises. I beseech the most excellent God, that he would pardon the
offenses or sins which we have contracted, not by a stubborn ignorance, but
from humane frailty: Yet I fear, least that befall Physicians, which does other
men; among whom an ignorance of right or Law, takes away or loses the
inheritance.

Last of all, even as the Gowt is truly, a primary or chief disease; hence the
knowing thereof, depends on the knowledge of chief Diseases, about the end
whereof, some things are recorded concerning the cure of the Gowt.

CHAP. LII. A Raging or Mad Pleura.
1. The Pleurisy of the Schools. 2. The errors of the definition, and
forgetfulnesses of themselves. 3. Some Dreamed assertions. 4. Whether the
weight of Phlegm falling down, does pull away the Pleura from the Ribs. 5. Some
more gross assertions. 6. The Vain Azugos has no regard unto the essence of a
Pleurisy. 7. The vain hope of revulsion and derivation. 8. To what end
Blood-letting may conduce in a Pleurisy. 9. The Schools are deceived by
Artificial things. 10. Both causes of the Disease do remain in their own
effects. 11. Some rashnesses of Paracelsus. 12. The carelesseness of the
Schools. 13. The consideration of the Author in a Pleurisy, declared by an
example. 14. A contemplation of sharpness in the bounds of a Pleurisy. 15. A
Proof. 16. The vanity of bloodletting. 17. Things required in a Remedy. 18. A
sharpness is proved in the Pleurisy. 19. How the Pleura may be pulled away
from the Ribs. 20. Whence an inflammation of the Lungs is. 21. The Thorn being
plucked out, the place does often become thorny. 22. From whence a Pleurisy is.
23. Where the Kitchen of a Pleurisy is. 24. The repentance of nature in a
Pleurisy. 25. The Ancients have spoken something of a Husteron Proteron,
concerning the Pain of the Pleurisy. 26. How the bloody Flux seperates it self
from a Pleurisy. 27. Wherein a Peripneumonia or inflammation of the Lungs, and
an Imposthume full of Corrupt Matter, do differ from a Pleurisy. 28. What a
clyster can work in the Bloody Flux. 29. The use of Ecligmaes are taken notice
of. 30. The Schools are every where buisie about the Cloakatived cure of
Diseases. 31. The cruel carelessness of Physicians. 32. Remedies wrested in a
Pleurisy. 33. Notable absurdities about the Bloody Flux. 34. Why a Clyster is
hurtful to a Bloody Flux. 35. Observations of the Author who had a Pleurisy.
36. How a seasonable cutting of a Vein differs from that which is delayed.

THe Pleurisy is by the Schools numbered among defluxions or rheums, and they
define it to be a bloody Aposteme, wherein the Pleura or coat which girdeth the
Ribs, is general kind of the Disease defined; and so those who always define a
Disease to be a disposition, and do place it among qualities, do now think, the
product or effects of a Pleurisy which follow upon the placing of a defluxing
rheum, to be the Disease, and do provide it a place among substances: but they
no longer place it among a distemper, disposition,

Therefore they define the effect, also they think that a defluxing rheum, does
by Almanzor, longly and largly, concerning the vein Azugos or stock arising
from the right side of the trunk of the upper part of the hollow vein, whether
it be distributed between the Ribs, without a peer or fellow, do scratch
themselves, and so forget their defluxing rheum, even as also the weight of the
same, being turned only unto the emptying of venal blood: For herein they
rather consider the one only remedy which they have, and that alike known to
Country People, to wit, by the only repeated cutting of a vein, than the very
nature of the Disease, or the Schools their supposed causes of a Rheum.

And moreover, all have altogether declined from that absurdity, because the
consideration of a Rheum being rejected in time of curing, they think to have
brought the cause from that part first, from which the blood slid as it were by
accident, out of the unlike vein, between the Pleura: For they have always so
greatly fallen under sluggishness, that they for the most part overshadow the
causes, by meditating on the effects: Neither have they ever heeded, that the
blood is not brought down by the veins of their own accord, as neither that it
slides into the place by its own proper fall: For to tear the Pleura from the
Ribs, to send venal blood thither, and the like, are the offices of life, but
not the faults of a sliding liquor. But what will the Schools do, which are
accustomed to subscribe so much to Pagans, whose doctrine is wont to imitate,
not nature, but science Mathematical it self in artificial things? For they see
the vein Azugos to be extended and derived through both Ribs; therefore from
hence also, they beg all the cause; No otherwise than as a Traveller sleeping
about a river, and a dead carcass is found slain in the next wood by Thievs,
therefore, that sleeping man, loosing his head as guilty, ought to shed all the
blood. Therefore they appoint blood-letting, and try to draw forthblood by
revulsion, out of the vein Azugos, made guilty, as the most near, immediate,
and containing cause. But where now remains your Catarrh of Phlegm, or Choler
flowing down from the head? and the which only by its weight, does tear the
Pleura from the Ribs. They at least intend to pull back blood from the unlike
or non-peered vein, not only flowing, but also in possibility to flow: And it
is for that cause, called revulsion, even as also, some more near vein being
pierced as it were the mediatress of the evil, is called derivation. Alas! how
circumspect are the Schools in discursive and artificial things? Which in
nature are nothing but mockeries? Because although a vein of the elbow may
empty out all its blood, even into the hollow vein, and this consequently, may
draw the blood out of the vein Azugos; yet the Schools ought to know, that
presently after, the whole venal blood is equally restored again into the
veins; So that, although the vein of the elbow might be wholly evacuated (which
is never) yet that the whole blood should be presently again equalized
throughout the whole co-weaving of the veins: whence it is manifest, that the
trifles of revulsion and derivation are vain, because they are such things,
which being granted, yet would be serviceable to the intention but for a small
time of delay. I pray therefore let Physicians consider, that blood-letting is
not of use in the Pleurisy, for revulsion and derivation, but for a mere
exhausting of

Which causes being co-knit together, are iddeed before the effect; yet do they
so persevere in the same effect, that they are materially and efficiently the
very effects

But Paracilsus meditating of this pulling away of the Pleura, and being
willing to square a cause thereunto, has brought in other follies, that he may
defend his own

And first of all, he teaches, that this Ogertine salt is of the property of
Arsenical Sulphurs: in the mean time, he is silent concerning its mines, veins,
property, history, free accord, or indeed by another tearer: they are content,
as satisfied in the doubt, if they shall say, it is rent from the Ribs by the
weight of a down-rouling Catarrh: in the resolving nevertheless, of which
doubt, as of the root, the whole cure and prevention of a Pleurisy does
consist: For the root of every Disease, is worthy of the dumb silence of the
Schools (to wit, I shall show in a peculiar treatise, that the very essence of
any kind of Diseases whatsoever, has been hitherto unknown in the Schools); it
has seemed to suffice them, if they have applied their doctrine unto without,
unto artificials, unto the latter sumptoms, unto the consequent fruits or
products: as though the stage of causes and essential roots were ridiculous and
in vain.

Paracelsus also, if he reckoned to confirm any solid thing toward a Disease of
so great moment, and to add his doctrine thereto, if he determined not to
derive his Ogertine salt it self, from a power unto act, out of the blood; at
leastwise, that unwonted, unnamed, and unknown salt ought to have brought a
necessity of its invention, and of its generation, that at least, some place
might be afforded for prevention For this, the pretended title of the Monarch
of secrets does require. But all things have remained neglected, because the
chiefdome of healing has stood founded upon empty stubble. I promise
therefore, that whatsoever has been built thereon, shall fall to the ground:

For whether a fire, the searcher out of truth, be built, or next, whether the
voluntary corruption of days shall consume the stubble, at leastwise I know,
that at length that building will fall to the ground.

But I, in a Pleurisy, consider, the first inward moover, or spur, and
afterward the tearer of the Pleura: And both those being one and the same
efficient cause of it,

Let a Thorn be thrust into any part of the Body, the which, pain instantly
succeeds; from the pain there is presently a Pulse, from the Pulse, an afflux
of vendl blood, whence arises a swelling, a fever, an Aposteme, etc. the Thorn
therefore mooves the other things after it.

Therefore the Metaphorical Thorn of the Pleurisy, and by speaking properly,
the Pleurisy it self, is a foreign sharpness conceived in the Archeus, the
which if it chaseth, or lays aside into the blood of the hollow vein, surely
that is expelled unto the vein Azugos, yea or into the very flesh near the
Ribs, from whence arises an Aposteme as the product of the Pleurisy.

In the next place, as an Aposteme which is bred from a Thorn fastened in the
finger, a not but rashly cured by cutting of a vein; but it promises a cure by
reason of the plucking out of the Thorn only: so it happens in the Pleurisy.

For as sharpness in the stomach, is an acceptable, and ordinary savor; so out
of the stomach, all sharpness is besides nature, and hostile, which has been
hitherto

For so, from a sharpness, are wringings of the bowels, there is a strangury in
the Urine, a corroding in Ulcers, in the skin a scab, in the joints the Gowt,
etc. And the which, if thou will experience to thy hand, mingle some drops at
least, of sharpish Wine, with the Urine that has been newly pissed out without
pain, and cast it in with a Syringe: Thou shall experience against thy will,
that I teach the Truth.

In the humor Latex also, (of which afterward in its own place) it raises up
a bastard Pleurisy, (the which they, altogether through the same carelessness
of narrowly searching, as in other Diseases, do call a windy one): but if the
Archeus has laid up a gentle sharpness into the lap of the venal blood,
unhappily applied to it; it as despised, is presently hunted out, and cast out
of the veins, and brings forth an Aposteme in whatsoever place that shall
happen: but if that does happen to be the deeper or lavisher in the veins, a
certain pestilent affect arises:

The which; I prove; for the venal blood, or flesh, do never wax sour or
sharp, without an actual obtaining of putrefaction (the which I have els-where
on purpose good while from coagulating, out of which, if it shall fall, it
waxes presently clotty; which is more largely declared els-where.

Hence it follows, that of an Aposteme made in a Pleurisy, the blood of the
same Hippocrates the first of Physicians seems to have perceived, while he
writes: Hot, Cold, Moist, or Dry, are not diseases; but that which is Sharp,
Bitter, Sour, and Harsh.

But that there is sharpness in a Pleurisy, is manifest from this; because in
the Pleurisy, the Urine and venal blood being drawn forth by a cut Vein, do
wax clotty

But if indeed the sharpness be dispersed by the infected Archeus into the
Arterial Vein, or Venal Artery (which are the vessels of the Lungs) a
necessitated Inflammation

The Pleurisy therefore, is bred in us of its own accord, when a guest of the
first digestion

But the Pleurisy which is restored by blood-letting, does oft-times, after a
years space return, and does more often leave a Consumption behind it; Because
the business of the remaining Thorn is left to be overcome by the shoulders of
nature alone, without a help restoring the Character which there stays
behind. The Ancients indeed have perceived, that where Pain, and Heat are,
thither venal blood does flow:

But none (that I know of) has hitherto reached to the Thorn, and foregoing
motive sharpness, as neither to the convulsiue pain; from whence
notwithstanding, comfort ought to be hoped for. It might justly be doubted, why
the Pleura slackening

Furthermore, the Dysentery or Bloody Flux differs from the Pleurisy, not so
much in the sharpness of the material cause, as in the variety of the subject:
For neither have the Bowels flesh behind them for a kitcihn; And therefore a
Bowel has its own Thorn fastened in its own coats: For besides a double coat
of a Bowel or intestine, a third is entrenched with the Gown of the Mesentery:
And because it has not without Pus. Therefore very much blood hastening for an
ease of the pain (where pain is, thither blood hastens) beyond or through the
Pleura, does pierce into the Breast, which is reached out by Spitting with a
most troublesome Cough.

Wherefore a Pleurisy differs not from a Peripneumonia or Inflammation or
Imposthume, of the Lungs, in its occasional causes, as neither in its Remedy:
For blood is poured into the substance of the Lungs, according to the
pleuritical thorn: For in a mattery Imposthume, although the Lungs do contain
venal blood, and diverse hostile things many diseases do not differ in their
occasional matter; but in the diverse agents, and properties of members, and
functions; The which for the most part do not so much vary the Remedies, as
adjacent things depending on the powers of properties.

For it is thereby manifest, how vain the Remedy of Clysters is in the
Bloody Flux; because the Bloody Flux is only of the slender Bowels, which are
some else distant from

Therefore in the Pleurisy, and Peripneumonia, they make use of Blood-letting,
for a necessary remooval (as they say) of the causes; as if the abounding of
blood alone (the which nevertheless, they say is the one only and suitable
betokener of cutting of a Vein) were their mother.

But besides, therefore they have prescribed Ecligmaes, not indeed for remooval
of the Thorn; but for a more easy expectorating of Spittles; to wit, lickings
or Ecligmaes etc. For seeing this living Creature is almost unwearied, they
have thought, that dying (for without thinking, the strong authority of the
Schools fails) he had bequeathed the Remedy of curing difficult breathers to
his Lungs, although the Bowel, the author of the Thorn in us, does remain badly
affected, the Apostem which threatens snotty corrupt matter persisting; And
the which, unless (as Galen is author) it be wholly cured by a set number of
days, an undoubted Consumption of the Lungs is to be expected. Wherefore, the
whole study of the Schools, does not aim so much to cure, as only to prevent
its increase; 'that

For as I have said concerning the Lohoch of Fox-lungs, they likewise in the
Palsy, commend the brain of a Coney and Hare, because they are swift in
running, the Yard of a Stag for those that are cold, because he is a wild Beast
very much inclined to Leachery. If therefore a country man shall eat the boiled
hand of a Musician, shall he perhaps artificially strike the Lute?

But the Schools do require, that Ecligmaes be swallowed by a slow drawing, and
therefore are they endowed with the name of lickings-in, that the Remedy may
materially descend unto the place of the Cough. I wonder in the mean time, why
they have not likewise prepared Lohoch sanum of a Horses tail, which is
stirred all the Summer for brushing off the flies.

But nothing has been thought of by the Schools for taking away the Thorn of
the Pleurisy; by reason of one only Fault; to wit, because they have not known
the

I bewail in the mean time, the condition of mortals, who have gotten such
helpers in so painful a disease, who being ignorant of the cause, do attempt
any absurdities, so they have first weakened the Sick through a Penury of venal
blood and strength; in the mean time, they have left nature swimming with her
one Oars: But if in the mean time, a proper strength shall help the infirmity
of Youth; they require, and ascribe honor (that is, in effect, a reward) to be
due unto themselves: And they declare that they have gotten the privilege of
killing two hundred others by the same means: or if the strength being wearied
out by the emptying Chrurgion, does fail, is extinguished by a long
Consumption, and a daily mournful Spectacle; at least wise the Physician can
excuse himself by a cruel and unwonted greatness of the disease, because the
best Remedies being administered, he has nevertheless declined into a
Consumption: none such whereof would happen (for I promise and promise upon the
penalty of proof) if the cruel cutting of a Vein being despised, the Balsam of
life, and strength of nature being reserved; the radical thorn be plucked out:
so the pain, bloody Spittle,

The Powder of the Yard of a Stag, or Bull, or the venal blood of a He-Goat, or
the juice of wild Succhory, of the flowers of wild Poppy, and many such like. I
especially, commend the Blood of a He-Goat, not indeed that which is sold; but
I hang up a He-Goat by the Horns, and his hinder feet being tied to his Horns,
his Stones being cut off, he is gelded: The blood issuing from thence even
until his death, is received, and dried: And it is known from the Saleable
blood (which is nothing but Sheeps blood) because that which is sold, is easily
beaten, and the Powder thereof is of a red or Pomegranate Color; but the true
He-Goats blood is most difficultly and tediously beaten, and the Powder thereof
is of a pitchie Color: But the beating is so troublesome, not indeed by reason
of its toughness; but by reason of its mere and incredible hardness. For these
kind of Succors being friendly to the Archeus, and homebred or familiar to man's
nature, do correct the immediate cause in the Archeus, and take away its
sharpness, and do dispose the blood to transpiration, do appease the pain,
because they extinguish the sharpness: Also the ferment of Tartness being taken
away, they resolve as much as they can of the out-hunted Blood, and the
appointment of Corrupt Pus being neglected, they do seasonably cast out the
rest by Cough: Wherefore the same Remedies are given to Drink to those that
have been thrown down or have fallen from an high place, as they do disperse
the venal blood made clotty by the Bruise; that is, they take away the thorn,
they take away the poison, and for that cause do incarnate the place: And so
they do satisfy all betokenings, by the one only amendment of the thorn: For
the which, the unexhausted bounty of divine clemency has made many the like
things.

For a bloody Flux does not require astringent Medicines; for under an ordinary
judgment, or under a close stoppage and astriction, death is straightway
present:

Finally, I will declare, what I my self having a Pleurisy, have observed. On
the January, a Fever suddenly invaded me, together with a gentle rigor, so as
that my Teeth did shake; there was a Pricking pain in the forepart of my side
about the Breast Bone, which hindered my in-breathing: presently after, a bloody
Spitting was present; at length mere blood bowrayed it, self: I took presently
a cropped piece of the Genital of a Stag (for it was at hand) and the pain was
presently diminished; by and by, I drank a dram of He-goats blood: On the
fourth day therefore, my spitting of blood ceased, a seldom small Cough
remaining, together with some Spittings out by reaching; but the Fever
continued: For on the second day, the pain about my Girdle enlarged it self on
my left side, with a difficult breathing, an increase of the Fever, and an
intermitting Pulse. I had now finished my 63d. Year, and I did expect that an
Aposteme was Co-agulated in my Spleen; Because my Milt waxing round into a
Lump, did cause a weight; for if I did lift my knees on high, or lay down on my
right side, I felt the falling globe of a great weight; And so I suspected the
Pleurisy to be stirred up from my Spleen, the which, when it was driven away
by meet Remedies from my Ribs, it at length afflicted my Spleen: The which I
presently withstood, by drinking of Wine boiled with the stones of Crabs, and
within few days, all the pain, and lump of weight vanished away. In the mean
time, I was visited by a Noble man, who had heeled his Boots with sweetsmelling
Pruss^an Leather; through the smell whereof, I presently felt the pain of my
Spleen, and the Fever renewed: From whence I collected, that the Archeus of my
Spleen was the Author of the whole tragedy. Lastly I noted, that in the
beginning of a Pleurisy, a Vein being cut, does indeed stay the inward
breaking forth of blood, and the Sick seem to be the better:

And although a letting out of Blood shall increase weakness; yet they adjudge
the same not to the Launcet, but to the Pleurisy: But if there be a more slow
opening of a Vein, the Blood already Co-agulated, and the Aposteme conceived
from thence, and the ordained corrupt matter, do hasten unto their bound or
limit: For hence, from curing by cutting of a Vein there is a frequent
Consumption, or a Pleurisy returns every Year; which otherwise, by the
aforesaid Remedies, are not beheld to come.

CHAP. LV. That the three first Principles of the Chemists, nor the Essences of
the same, are not of, or do not belong unto the Army of Diseases.
1. Why the Schools leave the Market? 2. Why Paracelsus has sought other
beginnings of Diseases? 3. He has theevishly transferred on himself the
Invention of Basilius. 4. An easy slip or fall of the Paracelsians. 5. An
Abuse discovered by degrees. 6. Paracelsus was deceived by Chemical Rules badly
understood. 7. He aspired to the chiefdome of Healing. 8. He failed under his
Fardle or Burden. 9. He was deceived also by Ulcers. 10. Some Rashnesses of
his. 11. Robbery is covered by Sin. 12. Some Rashnesses of his. 13. The
Doctrine of the Elements of his Archidoxis is taken notice of. 14. He flees to
the Stars, least the curious should follow him running away. 15. The Adeptical
part of Healing. 16. The Boasting of Paracelsus. 17. The most perfect
Distillation of Art. 18. The wonderful Coal of Honey. 19. Paracelsus thrown
down from his pretended Monarchy. 20. Fabulous means of Diseases. 21. The
Venal Blood is blown away without a Dead Head. 22. What things Nature has once
refused, she never retakes again. 23. The Water, although it be a thousand
times Distilled, it is not notwithstanding, therefore made subbtile. 24. Some
Absurdities. 25. The Fiction of a Microcosme in the manner of making Diseases.
26. The Ambition of Paracelsus. 27. Whence he had the boldness to invade the
Monarchy. 28. That the Three first Things are not in us. 29. He was ignorant of
the Bond of the Three first Things. 30. He was ignorant of the Original of
Salt. 31. Some of his Rashnesses. 32. His Error in the knowledge of Fevers.
33. An Example that the whole venal blood does melt by purgings. 34. Diseases
do not bewray the Three first Things. 35. How the Three first Things are made.
36. That Galen and Paracelsus were almost alike in Boldness and Error. 37. The
Three first Things are resisted. 38. The Error of Paracelsus about the Essences
of Diseases. 39. That the Three first Things are not, nor do operate in
Diseases. 40. Paracelsus came more nigh to the Truth than Galen. 41. The Three
first Things do not immediately support Life. 42. Although the Three first
Things are not Diseases, yet they are Remedies. 43. The manner of the Operation
of Remedies, is badly weighed in the Schools. 44. A Quintessence or Fifth
Essence is withstood. 45. It has been inconsiderately subscribed unto the
foregoing Things, because the Essence of Diseases has remained unknown. 46.
That the Three first Things is a late Invention. 47. That the Three first
Things have not fore existed before their Separation: but that they are bred
anew. 48. That Water passes over into Oil. 49. For those Three Things to be
changed into each other, does resist Principles. 50. Proofs of Positions. 51.
Against Aristotle, that there are only two Beginnings of Bodies, which are
also their beginning or initiating Causes. 52. The oversight or rashness of
the Paracelsists. 53. That those Three Things are not in any Bodies whatsoever.
54. That the Three first Things are not in the Water, as neither in Mercury.
55. The Objections of some Writers of the Entrance into Chemistry. 56. They
proceed further. 57. Paracelsus is brought on the Stage. 58. An Answer. 59.
Whence the Immortality of Mercury is. 60. The Principiative Maxims of
Chemistry. 61. The truth of Bacon. 62. An Answer to a Paracelsian Objection.
63. What the Three first Things in Bodies are. 64. Other Instances in Sand, a
Flint, etc. 65. It is proved by Handycraft-operation, that the Salt in Lime is
not an extract of the thing contained. 66. How a necessity of Offices has
invented the Three first Things. 67. That the Three first Things were not
natural or proper to a Body, as it was a Body. 68. It is proved by
Handycraft-operation, that the Fire is the Workman of the Three first Things.
69. The unstability of the Three first Things. 70. That in the Digestion of
Meats, a Separation of the Three first things does not happen. 71. Why a
Disease is not of the Three first things. 72. That the Three first Things are
not the Principles of Bodies. 73. They are ultimate Things, that is,
Principiated ones, or those that are begun. 74. The unconstancy of Paracelsus.
75. He was ignorant from whence the Salt of the Urine is. 76. An Essence is
said to be after diverse manners. 77. A Chemical Essence. 78. Some Homogeneal
things do not send forth a Fifth Essence. 79. A greater Virtue is in some
Simples than in their extracted Essences. 80. The Rashness of Paracelsus. 81.
Putrefaction also does elsewhere generate a Fragrancy. 82. What a Quint, or
Fifth Essence properly is. 83. The Liquor which makes Plants fruitful. 84. The
Essential Oil of Spice, or Crasis of the same: How the Elixir thereof may be
made, and that more strong by an hundred fold.

NOw after that I have demonstrated, the Elements, Complexions, first
Qualities, and at length Tartar, to have been rashly introduced into the
Essential causes of Diseases, Chemists, and those of late brought into the Art
of Medicine, have been falsely intruded into the Essential causes of Diseases.
What therefore will the more refined Physicians do, while as they do clearly
enough behold, not only the miserable stuff of their Remedies, but also the
unprosperous Helps of the howling Sick? So that they have many times seriously
and secretly confessed to me, that nothing almost did any longer obey their
endeavors, and that all the curing, as well of sharp Diseases (for of Chronical
Diseases they have all every where long since despaired in their mind) as of
any of the least ones, was in very deed nothing but a Cloakative cure, and a
mere juggling with the sick, to wit, whereunto, unless as it were a certain
resurrection of the Nature of the Sick, does voluntarily succeed, the appointed
and sure comfort of Remedies is in vain expected. And moreover, that hence it
comes to pass, that many an Old Woman is in many places, far more successful
in curing some defects, than is the whole School of Medicine, with all their
discursive Speculations, speculative Prescriptions, Kitching Precepts of Diet,
confirmed by the long experience of the destruction of their Neighbors, and a
multiplicity of their Dispensatories. When therefore the more ingenuous persons
were long since wearied in the Correcting of Distempers, in the vain expelling
of Humors: they now incline to another thing, seeking a Haven from shipwreck,
and being easily seduced by Theophrastus Paracelsus, they have so bent their
Studies, that what was not yet found out by the Greeks and Arabians, they may
find more successful elsewhere. Hence indeed they have been devolved with a
steep fall, unto the Fictions of Tartar, but surely their curiosity is to be
had in great esteem, although it shall not attain unto its desire. For, It is
not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God alone that shows
Mercy. Therefore the Schools donow leave their title and Market; For what
shall they do, if the conjoined root of Diseases, and method of Curing them, be
not to be drawn out of the Elements, Qualities, Contrarieties, Humors, Stars,
Winds and Catarths?

But seeing other Examples of healing have possessed the more Modern followers
of Paracelsus, Paracelsus. For when he (the Lessons of the Ancients being
rejected) had sufficiently understood, that there was nothing of a Foundation
or Truth in Complexions and Humors, he began by variously doubting, to inquire
into the most immediate Cause of Diseases, and Posterity owes him Praise for
it. Although he has not exactly touched at the matter, that cannot be
accounted a fault, if the Most High, the Dispenser of Gifts, as yet vouchsafed
not to open the Truth to Mortals, in Paracelsus's days.

This man therefore had learned of Basilius Valentine, that Water, Oil, and
Salt, were to be separated by Distillation from most Bodies: He began to call
these Three Things, not only the first universal beginnings of corporal beings:
but also, he so introduced them within Diseases, and the necessities of
healing, that he referred all Diseases immediately into some of those three
things. And thus he made his followers almost mad, that the first hope of
diligently searching into the truth being rejected, they consecrated all things
to the three first things. Which Doctrine has fixed its roots the faster,
because the three things are actually separated from most Bodies, and so that
they were not undemonstrable, Hermes before the industry of the Greeks sprang
up, because in his Pymander, he had noted every Trine to be perfect,
consequently also, he foresaw, that in Chemical things, Metals did consist of
two extremes (to wit, of a Body and a Soul) and the which, he would have cleave
together, not but by the baudery of a certain third thing, or Spirit.
Afterward, Basilius Valentine, a Monk of Benedict, wrote more distinctly; he
named the Soul of a Metal, the Sulphur, or Tincture, but the Body, the Salt;
and lastly, the Spirit he called the Mercury. Which things being thus borrowed
of Basilius: Theophrastus Paracelsus afterward transferred by a wonderful
diligency of search, into all the Principles of Bodies, he being one Age
younger than Busilius. The Doctrine of whom (the Authors name being suppressed)
he snatched on himself, and by a liberty of his own, introduced

Except in the Family of Ulcers, where he had seemed to himself to have found
salt: at least wise, in the other two beginnings, he on both sides remained
scanty and almost ridiculous. Basilius was not commonly known, therefore the
Name of the Author being concealed, he made it his own, and in this respect,
has he enlarged his own Sections. Wherefore, his Tartar now and then losing
its universal dominion in Diseases, it being suppressed, he makes an invasion,
as being constrained by the Laws of his three first things. Which his three
first things (as presuming on increase) he would at length, that they should
become the Mothers and Wombs, even of Basilius: and the which, when he would
endeavor to disperse into the ranks of Diseases by Troops, he sometimes goes
confusedly to work; yet does he again more often go beyond himself, being every
where forgetful of his own Doctrine delivered. For in his Archidoxals, he has
dedicated a little Book to the separation of the while that pretended Monarch
commanded only three to be the principles, as well of Bodies, as of Diseases.
Yea truly, he accuses as guilty, only, and at length, one only Tartar, to be
the cause of almost all Diseases. But elsewhere, in some peculiar Treatises, he
calls the Heaven, the assisting and cooperating Workman of all Diseases, an
angry Parent (Zedo) is the immediate and containing cause of the Dropsy. So,
he affirms, that to the Consumption, Gout, Apoplexy, etc. does belong their
own peculiar (yet unnamed) Star, and unto every Epilepsie or falling Evil, its
own proper constellation. But in his Paramires, he affirms the three first
things to be the immediate causes of all Diseases; that is, all things
confused. Let him explain and excuse him that will; for I have not dedicated my
life to the interpreting of others dreams. Therefore have I seriously searched
into Nature, and the particular kinds of Diseases, and it has happened unto
me, no otherwise than as to all others Paracelsus has framed diverse Books
concerning long life, to have chosen death for himself, Paracelsus, to have
forsaken all things involved under doubting, who in a slender draught, had
drunk down another Invention, and had not yet converted it into nourishment,
and making it his own, of robbery, has (he striving to fly unto a Monarchy)
slipped out of his Nest before he had sufficient feathers. For he snatching
unto himself the glory of the Invention, has well pleased himself, now once
performed, is designed for scattering or blowing away: that is never afterward
distilled, sublimed, calcined, or circulated in us. For the works of Nature are
too Chemist has Paracelsus might the better overshadow his own Fiction, he
supposes, that one of the three first things being separated, does presently
Paracelsue Paracelsus his own transmutations. He thought therefore, that as
much falt ^^^here was, so many turns of Mercury, and parts also of Sulphur
there were, and being confident that his Household Stuff would be sufficient,
he had willingly designed the predicament of Diseases unto them. But remaining
unfit for the burden, he dyed. But he had discovered his own Error, if he had
not been deceived by a bold attempt of great matters. For he ought, without the
hope of ambition, and head-longness of preventions, to have examined where the
remaining Sulphur should stay, if the salt in Ulcers, in the Dropsy, etc.
should by so plenteous a separation, be plucked away from the whole, and its
other two companions. He ought also to have been mindful of his own (although
erroneous) Doctrine, whereby he calls the Salt which is fluide out of us, and
present within us, a mere expressure of the Saltpeter of an evil Star, or
Cagastral. And so he endeavors to persuade, that not only fleshes and blood,
but also that the whole Body is with the life of Saltpeter, and that
Cagastrical. For the blood (as the water yields all fruits) is wholly similar,
or alike, which being seasoned with a poisonous or strange ferment, does
sometimes degenerate into diverse offsprings of Salt, but another time, into
diverse offsprings of Dungs, without any memory of a Posthume, Mercury, or
Sulphur.

In the next place, that Paracelsus may find out his own cause for Diseases, he
for example, does oft-times define a Fever to be an Earthquake of the
Micro^osm; which Galen, thinking that the blood did consist of as many simples
as it was resolved into. I wonder therefore at the unconsiderateness of
Paracelsus, that he did not know, that the three first things are never Galen,
who thinks that the Elements do essentially remain in

But that the subordinate forms of the entire parts, even of the three first
things (if these are within, before they are made by extraction) are restrained
by the form or Archeus; because the three first things do never appear and
operate, much less do they offend by distemper, or are diseasie, unless their
obedience due to the Archeus, be first dissolved: that is, that they shall be
separated by the fire, and their last life be destroyed, with a persevering,
not of the whole seed, but of a small quantity of the middle life of that
composed body, whose properties every one of them do after some sort imitate,
when they are made a Being, by it self subsisting. For this Paracelsus thought,
every power, and the formal operations of things, so immediately to depend on
the Essence of the Three first Things, that he has described the properties of
Vegetables, as they did contain such a Mercury, Salt, or Sulphur, and all those
according to his own pleasure. As though, these beginnings being shut up under
a formal Archeus, could operate, the Archeus of life being idle or at rest. For
Galen attributed all things to the Elements: for which Paracelsus being angry,
thereupon attributed all things to his three adoptive beginnings. Like
Quack-salvers, who having gotten one only Oil or Emplaister, give forth, that
that prevails wholly for all Diseases, and at least for most Diseases.
Paracelsus I say, heeded not, that Lead, as long as it is Lead, has other
virtues, than when it is changed into Sulphur and Mercury.

For Water, Oil, and Ashes being shut up in a bottle, do not operate out of
the containing Paracelsus therefore, although he Galen, as some of the Three
Things are actually allured or drawn out of many Bodies, which does not happen
unto feigned Elements and Humors: yet both of them have stumbled in this, that
he has introduced his own suppositions into Diseases, when as, otherwise,
nothing feels sicknesses in us, besides the vital powers themselves. But the
Life moves and alters matters by its own Seminal Blas, and nothing does
materially hurt us within, which is not hostile, foreign, and an excrement in
respect of the Life, and so that it cannot be of its first adoptive beginnings.

For neither are those Three Things originally and immediately subject to the
whole Life, etc. are not immediately subject to the command of the total
Archeus, but to the Seminal mumial Balsame of composed bodies; And that not
before their manifested Nativity. Diseases therefore do not owe the Original,
or Cause of their birth, unto the birth of the Three first Things, or any of
them. Because they cannot be, act, or hurt, unless being first separated from
each other, and the intireness of the whole Body, wherein they are potentially
contained, being destroyed by death. But if they should be separated, that they
may be able to wrong and hurt; surely that should be made by some internal
disease and agent, besides Nature, and by a former thing or cause. Therefore
the separation of those Three Things from each other, could never be but a
product, and so also a more later thing than the Disease; neither should it
first appear, unless, a Disease being supposed. Therefore it could not be the
immediate or nearest occasional cause of Diseases.

For although the Three first Things are not the Causes of Diseases, yet this
does not-argue, whereby the Salt, Sulphur and Mercury of things are ever the
less the Medicines of Paracelsus has so commanded, whereby he might oppose the
maxim of Galen; Contraries are cured by Contraries. For Poisons are not
overcome by a co-resemblance of the Venom, but by that which conquers the
Venom. For those medicinal Powers are the gifts of God, which do neither

Furthermore, it has been already sufficiently and over demonstrated, that
Nature does not suffer four Elements, neither that she does admit of their
congresse or encounter Paracelsus had known, he had undoubtedly named the
Essence which he calls a Fifth, a Fourth, in respect of his Three first Things.
Indeed he thought that every Body is constituted, even as also resolved, as
well by Art as by Nature, into these Three Things, and that nothing besides
remained. For in so great Novelty, he being unconstant, knew not unto what side
he might throw himself. For now and then, he denies the Elements to be Bodies,
but he calls them, void and empty Wombs, Places and Seats of Bodies: But that
all Bodies are nothing but the Three first Things, but not Elements. But
elsewhere he having followed the flock of his Predecessors, teaches, That the
Elements do remain in all particular Bodies, are therein to be found, and that
they are thence drawn out safe. So that their Essences and Bodies do remain in
the mixed Body, being only heaped together by mixture. Certainly, as well in the
Three first Things, as in a Fifth Essence, it is at this day no less emptily
subscribed to Paracelsus, than it hitherto has been to the Fables Paracelsus,
without a diligent search. Although I have seen, read, or heard of none
hitherto, who has been able, and much less has boldly attempted, equally to
separate the Three first Things out of Bodies. Wherefore I state this
Proposition.

The first Three Things are a late Invention, contrary to the truth of Nature,
and of a Thing.

The first Position.
Although that the Three first Things, are in part drawn out of some Bodies by
the Fire, yet that is not done by a Separation of the same, fore-existing, but
as by a Trans-mutation made by the Fire, they are there generated, as it were
new Beings, and there is made that, which there was not before.

The Second.
A branch of a Tree of one pound, growing as yet, green, will scarce yield a
Dram of Oil, which about October, or the Eighth Month (waxing wooddie) will
yield about seven Drachms of Oil. And at length, in the Twelfth Month, called
February, after, will give almost two Ounces of Oil, and fivefold more of Coal
and Ashes, than before in the Sixth Month called August.

The Third.
That those Things which were not in, as constitutive from the beginning,
cannot be the first Things, but they themselves are made and exchanged into
each other as later Things, to be made to a likeness, and which are to arise
from the directions of Seeds.

The Fourth.
Elementary Water is made Oil in Vegetables, Animals, and Sulphurs; Likewise
all Oil, with its adiunct, is easily reduced into Water. But the first
Principles of other things, cannot be exchanged into each other, or cease to be
that which they were before.

The Fifth.
Some Bodies do not contain the Three Things, but are content only with one
alone, or with two.

The Sixth.
There are some Bodies, from whence the Three Things were never separated by
skilful workmanships hitherto used, the which, do always by a suitable weight,
weigh equal with the body from whence they are drawn.

The Seventh.
Some Bodies are altogether Unchangeable and Inseparable, and not containing a
Duality or twofoldnesse.

It is profitable for me a little more exactly to explain these things for the
sake of young beginners, who do easily subscribe to other men's devises.

For, First of all, Woods contain Water and Oil, not a Coal which was not in
them, but is produced by Art, neither was it in them, except ^aterialy,
potentially, remotely, neither could it ever be made from thence but by the
(...). In the next place a Coal unless it burn with a manifest fire, it is
never in the least changed, so far is it that it should be turned into Ashes or
Salt. In a Coal indeed some fatness burns, the which is immediately and
materially reduced into a Gas, never to be seen. This Gas does at length pass
over into Water; but as long as it is a Gas and is separated from its concrete
Body, or Coal, it is not Sulphur (for it is wasted away, and trans-changed by
burning) not Salt or Mercury (for those should not return into an uncoagulable
Gas, but should return into Mercury and Salt, if they were the first and
constant beginnings of things) therefore some other thing out of, or besides
those three. But besides, neither is the whole Ashes which remains of the
Coal, a Salt, because the Lixivial or Lyee Salt being taken away, that which
remains, cannot be calcined by any fire, as neither be turned into Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury. But if it be by additions turned into Salt, it is a sign
that it is made, but that it is not a Salt, and so that a Principle should be
born. Therefore Salt in the Ashes arises not by extraction, or separation, the
other two being wasted away by the fire, but by a trans-changing into a new
Being, which was not before. For whatsoever is framed of that thing, is not in
that thing. For so blood and bones of diverse general kinds and species were in
the bread. For neither does Marble contain Glass, although of Marble with an
adjunct, Glass be made. For it is one thing to dispute of those Three Things,
as the total matter of things, and those actually constituting a thing and far
another thing, that the Tree is in the Seed, or a Fish-bone or Grisle in the
Bread. For a Hide or Wood, are not a stone, although they are in some springs
stonified. For in things trans-changed, the end differs from it self, in the
beginning of motion, at least in the particular kind. I have elsewhere also
demonstrated, that a fixed Alcali, or Lixivial Salt, has not fore existed in
Vegetables, but that it is fixed in burning. Wherefore the doctrine of the
first Things does not satisfy, because it does not only compel Nature under
violent Rules, but that if they are the first Things, and do obtain the desert
of [making to begin] they ought to be stable (which thing was not hid even from
Aristotle) neither can one be changed into another. For if Wood does consist of
Salt, Oil, Water, and Ashes, if Salt be prepared not of Ashes, by the Salt it
self, of the Ashes: Also if every distilled Oil be to be changed into a Salt,
as also into Water, by things adjoined, and there be so great unconstancy of
those Three Things, and they might therefore also be made by the fire in the
separation, and destruction of the composed Body: We must needs in Bodies
establish one first, and last, material, real beginning, which is the Water,
but not the three things, because they are Aristotle) to believe other Causes,
and other Principles of things. They are therefore Principles, which never
slide into each other, by any whirling of successive changes. For the first is
stable, perpetual, the real beginning, and prop, and Seminary of Bodies. And it
is the last thing whereinto the dead, or ended Tragedies of things do return.
But not a certain feigned, sluggish, and impossible hyle or matter. But the
other is the Principle of the beginning of motion, with every property of things
to be acted under their Tragedy. Yea truly, seeing particular kinds do exist
into general kinds, no where solitary, or without companions, and they are
individuals only, which are, and do subsist by a real Act. Principles ought to
have been real, and individually existing. So indeed, that the universality of
the matter be individually limited by the activity of the efficient Cause.

Wherefore, a falsehood being granted, to wit, That all Bodies might be reduced
into those Three Things, by the motion of a proper dissolution; yet it does not
also from in the Beginning, three bodies should be seen trans-changably passing
over into each other, neither were they therefore, to be reckoned Three rather
than Two if of Three, they may be presently after be made two only. Therefore
where the three things are found, they are not the material beginnings of
Bodies; but the Bride-beds of the Seeds. The which being worn out, all things
do of their own accord, return into their original Element of Water.

But that those Three Things are not contained in any Bodies whatsoever, and so
are not necessary Principles, is manifest; because the Mercury, which is drawn
out of a

Otherwise, it is like unto Water, which in it self being defiled with no Seed,
has on every side, a co-like simplicity, and impossibility of separation. But
inasmuch as I have

I seem to hear whisperings, that I shall offend very many Artificers, who with
full cheeks, do boast of the Oil, Salt, Vitriol, and Water of Mercury, and
that I shall convince

First, Gold (they say) a Body which is the most exceeding constant among
sublunary things, is dissolved into parts of diverse kinds, therefore also
Mercury by a more strong Paracelsus says, the matter of things which cannot be
destroyed by Art, is at least wise destroyed by Nature.

Unto the first, I answer: That Gold is indeed the most constant of Bodies in
the fire, but it borrows the constancy of its separation from the Mercury: And
so, if the Sulphur Paracelsus says in his vexation of Chemists.

But the reason of immortality in Mercury, is, because the Seed and Fruit
thereof in the constitution of Mercury, are now one and the same thing, Mercury
in Mercury. Neither where the Seed has become the Fruit, by a most perfect and
undestroyable or undissolveable union. Seeing that Nature cannot pierce unto a
dividing, where there is no knot or diversity of kind. I admit indeed, that
Mercury through a composition of transmutation, (...) a marrying of the
Sulphurs of Metals, becomes a Metal; and that this is destroya^^e by reason
of the doubleness of its Sulphur: notwithstanding the Mercury of that Metal,
remains undestroyable.

Hence Paracelsus in the aforesaid Vexation: Although thou shall destroy a
Metal ten thousand times; yet it shall always rise again the far more perfect
by its destructions. And in his Archidoxals, in the Book of the separation of
Elements, in the Chap. of Metals. Every one of the Elements in the show of the
Oil of a mettallick destruction, may be again reduced into its former white
and malleable Metal, except the Element of fire, which contains the Tincture
or Sulphur. Therefore, although the Mercurial part in Metals, and so also in
the Body of Mercury it self, does by reason of adjuncts, receive the masks of
Vitriol, Oil, Salt, or Water: they are nothing but the jugglings of the eyes.
Because it always returns Mercury from thence, because it is always therein
according to its Nature, and all its Properties.

Therefore I hold with the Principles of the more abstruse or hidden
Philosophy: if Mercury

Therefore Bacon inquiring into the first matter of the Art, and running through
all the Bodies of the World, denies Gold and Silver to be the matter of the
Art: because the Argent vive, is plainly impossible, from whence the Son of the
fire, so much in love of the Philosophers, is made.

Lastly, unto the third, I say, That those things which are not subject unto
death, separation

Therefore that other Bodies are not the three first things; but altogether one
only material beginning readily serving for the diverse appointments, ends,
scopes, and necessities that of salt, than of three things. But because that
unity of the composed body does respect a way unto its first reducement into
the Element of water, neither is the operation obvious to every one: therefore
we have been wont by a general way of speaking among Chemists, to speak of
things under the name of the three things, to wit, of Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury. Not indeed, that I think those to be the principles of things: but
because they are separated by the fire, out of most things, we use their
Etymology to distinguish the diversity of kinds of composed Bodies. The same
thing happens to a stone, which befalls a coal: for unless both are burnt in an
open fire, they are never changed into lime or ashes. And although a coal does
by a fan or stirrer up, yield a flame, and thus far, whatsoever perishes of a
coal, is of Sulphur: yet seeing nothing is enflamed or enlightened in a stone,
let it belong rather to Salt than to Sulphur. Therefore while a small stone,
gemme, great stone, or sand, are artificially reduced into a Salt, that Salt,
by reason of the every way Homogeniety of it self, which is left it by the
fire, cannot send forth, or contain a Sulphur, or be drawn into diverse parts.

In the next place, if glass be made by the fire, of ashes and sand, there is
not an extraction of glass out of ashes; but a fabric and new generation of
artificial skill. For all Bodies,

Therefore I do not admit of the Three first Things to be the constitutives of
Bodies, as niether universal things. Which thing indeed is proper to my
austereness, who Tartar. For truly in destilling sixteen ounces of the best
Tartar, scarce one only ounce of Water is drawn forth, but of Salt, at the
most, two ounces and a half; the rest is wholly Oil: that is, of sixteen there
are almost thirteen oily parts. Yet Tartar is not crude, neither does it act
as an oily Being, neither does it burn as the bark of the Birch-tree, but has
the nature of a sharp Salt, wherefore by distillation, the nature of a sharp
Salt is changed into Oil. And then, again, if the Salt of Tartar be of its own
accord made a Lixivium, and Oil be joined to it, indeed a Wash-ball will be
thereby made, which being distilled, shall be accounted for the most part
Water, and shall cease to be the former Oil, and shall be changed into another
thing. For what is more clear than this handy-craft operation, whereby it
plainly appears, that the Fire is the maker of the first Things; and so, that
they neither are in themselves, the first Things, neither that they do
fore-exist: such is the composed Body, as they are separated from thence by the
Fire: For truly, there is not a naked separation of unlike things, but a
transchanging of the concrete Body by the Fire, according to the activity,
which the Heterogeneal parts do finish among themselves.

But surely, if those Three Things should be in all particular Bodies, so that
no Body could be void of them; yea if all of those Three should keep their
ancient disposition, etc. Then indeed Paracelsus had apparently thought, that
every Body is originally composed of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. But seeing
there is an undoubted successive change of things, through things, and the
least parts of Things, even as also through the passages of a threefold Life,
those successive changes cannot denote a same, linesse of the three, nor of
constant things, whose very race it self is altogether unconstant, and the
perseverance thereof unstable. For forthwith after Paracelsus, every one almost
has subscribed to his Invention, and none durst to pierce into the condition
of those three things; they were astonished at the sight of Heterogeneal
things, which are often extracted by the fire, whence they being as it were fed
with Lotus, or a feigned Tree, they suffered themselves to be misled whither
Paracelsus called them. But let Paracelsus learn, that while Venal blood is
made of Food, there does happen indeed a separation of the pure from the
impure, but none of the three things.

For as often as a Being passes through the last Life into a new Life, the lump
indeed is Hippocrates, unto the Day of Orpheus.

At leastwise it is perpetually true, that those three things are never
separated without Caput Mortuum, unless it be prevented by a Blas and Ferment,
(even as I have taught above concerning the Blas of man) surely the original of
Diseases cannot any way be imputed unto any one, or more of those Three Things.

I deny, in the next place, that Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury are the universal
Principles of Bodies. Because they neither existed before the composition of
Bodies, nor flowed together,

They are therefore the Last things, but not the First, however they may be
taken. For all Vegetables, as long as they are not woody, do contain a spirit
of Wine, as a spirit of Aqua Vitae, or Water of Life, is no longer extracted.
It is made, I say, in Vegetables, through the art of the Spirit of Wine, which
before was not in them from a disposition of the matter of a putrifiable juice,
and agreeing resemblance of a winie Ferment. For therefore the Spirit of Wine
shall not be the Principle of Vegetables, as all Vegetables diverse in
themselves, do agree in this Spirit, and might be drawn out of every one of
them; but the Spirit of Wine bears the reason of an Effect and Product: In like
manner therefore those three things are principated, but not principles. For
shall the Blood want a Salt in distilling, because it has severed the Urine,
which Paracelsus calls, The Salt of the Blood?

And, If Salt be one of the Principles, surely the venal Blood shall in
supposition be Eternal, if it wants a beginning, or something shall be able to
subsist of Mercury and Sulphur Paracellus, striving with his own Doctrine of
the Three first Things; when as he teaches, That the venal blood and flesh of
Leprous persons is deprived of all Salt. And from hence again, his own History
of Ulcers falls to the ground, if the Ulcers of Leprous persons, being without
Salt, are voluntary, and not to be despised.

For he has badly distinguished the Salt of the drink, from the Salt of the
Venal blood. being wholly ignorant from whence there was Salt in the Urine,
Salt being not frequently eaten. Because the rank of digestions being unknown,
natural knowledge in Paracelsus was overshadowed with darkness, and through the
ignorance of Physicians, the days of Mortals are cut short, and burying places
do become bossie.

Concerning a Quintessence or Fifth Essence also, it has been soberly enquired
into, hitherto, as if it were a glorious thing, through sluggishnesse, to have
subscribed unto others devises, and to have stuck in fabulous Principles.

An Essence therefore is called by diverse names. For it is most principally
understood of the most Great and Excellent God, who is the True, Immediate, and
the most Very

But the Life or Form, is not by Chemists taken into the Essence, because the
thing being

So that the name of Essence is plainly Metaphorical. Wherefore very many
things have etc.

For very many Simples do loose their specifical property by preparing: and
more by separating, and the fire. In the Elkes Hoof, and Bezoardical things,
there is a certain thing Water-Pepper) do loose the same. However therefore an
Essence be taken, it is an improper Name, and a [Fifth] Essence, is an
unsavory Epithet. For truly, what Essence they do promise, either it is not
equally in all, neither does it obey the Artificer, or it is not drawn from any
place whatsoever. But under other things, in the crudity of things, it laughs
at painful or diligent Labors. Neither does every sweet smelling thing sit in
the middle, but in the last Life. For the Flowers of Jasmine, of the Lilly of
the Valleys, etc. by putrefying do loose their grateful Odor, and Medicinal
Virtues, they wax sharp, neither do they ever re-take their former Fragrancy.
But elsewhere the sweet smell sits under the middle Life, which Odours indeed
do keep their sweet smell in time of putrefying, the which they send forth in
Distilling, as Roses.

This thing has deceived Paracelsus, and has made him to think, that the
Essences of things do thus putrify; and so he was ignorant, that in Dung and
dunged-Fields,

Of the Sulphur, I say, Because the Sulphur is the offspring of the efficient
Cause, and so, more formal. For Cynamon, while it is without a spiciness, is
indeed, as yet, Cynamon, even as the young, or a foolish person, are men. I
therefore name the best part of a thing, the Crasis thereof, whether the Spice
or sweet smell do sent or not. But in Herbs which are not fragrant, I call the
seminal or seedy Liquor, their Crasis. To wit, I know that from every plant or
seed, and likewise from the trunk or stem of some Plants, a Liquor is to be
extracted, which contains the Power of the Seed: which Liquor, although it be
not fit for sowings, because the Seed included in it, not being able to draw a
More in the Earth, does exhale, yet it blesses with a wonderful fruitfulness,
a Plant of its own likeness, being poured on its Root. For the seminal Liquor
contains

But when the Oil of Cynamon, etc. is mixed with its own fixed Salt, by an
Artificial and hidden Circulation of three Months without all water, it is
wholly changed

CHAP. LVI. Of Flatus's or Windy Blasts in the Body.
1 A fourfold Blas or Windy Blast. 2. The Gas of Life, and Wind of the World,
do differ in the whole Element. 3. The Opinion of Galen concerning Flatus's. 4.
They have been ignorant of a fivefold Gas. 5. The Art of the Fire, what it can
teach. 6. The Schools are deceived. 7. They contradict themselves. 8. The Error
of Paracelsus concerning the Limbus or Zodiac of the little World. 9. His
ridiculous Doctrine of a fourfold Colic, and a microcosmical Identity or
sameliness. 10. That there is not a windy Gas in us, unless it be inspired.
11. Why Paracelsus has neglected in the Womb, the Cardinal Winds of the
Universe. 12. Paracelsus is reproved. 13. His Error concerning a contracture,
from the Colic. 14. The Causes of the aforesaid Convulsion and Palsy. 15. The
Life of the Muscles is concluded from the Blas of them. 16 Why it is not the
last that dies. 17. Unsound or mad Remedies in windy Blasts. 18. Of what sort
that should be, which drives away, or discusseth or scatters Winds. 19. They
are as yet ignorant of the properties of wringings of the Bowels. 20. The Wo^^
wants its proper windy Blasts. 21. Windy Blasts are not stirred up without
their Bounds. 22. A Flatulent or Windy Plurisie owes its rise unto a Fiction.
23. We must be ashamed to have accused conceived Winds. 24. Wind is accused by
many, to be the beginning of all Diseases whatsoever. 25. How cold does occur
hereunto. 26. What is to be known in this respect. 27. What is afterward to be
done. 28. By whom usual Remedies profitable in Windinesses, were invented. 29.
The Ileos or Iliack passion is an averse co-writhing of the intestine. 30. That
Affect has in its Causes and manner, been even hitherto unknown. 31. A History
has discovered the deceit of the Schools. 32. A new Doctrine concerning
Flatus's or windy Blasts. 33. A sixfold Flatus in us. 34. No Flatus in us can
be a Vapor. 35. What is a wild Gas. 36. Flatus's are distinguished. 37. A
certain windiness is necessary for a Bowel, whereof none has hitherto taken
notice. 38. It is proved by a Monster. 39. Some sequels flowing from thence.
40. A consideration about the mean, and a^ounding of this Flatus. 41. From
meats vitiated, or excrements seasoned with a vicious ferment, are pains of
wringings in the Gutts. 42. The Convulsions of a Bowel. 43. Galen was Ignorant
of the use of parts. 44. The Schools neglecting other Flatus's, have had
respect only to Farting, whence a Fartisme. 45. The windy blasts of a
Tympany. 46. The Effects of a dungie-ferment, in respect to Flatus's. 47. The
cure of a most stinking windiness by loosening things. 48. Dungs are not the
voluntary putrefactions of things. 49. A difference between the windy Blast of
the Stomach, Ileon, and Colon. 50. A Scheme or Figure of the Flatus's in us.
51. The Tympany is more mortal than the Dropsy Ascites. 52. Two considerations
touching windy Blasts. 53. A consideration of Flatus's. 54 A Flatus is the
vice of us, not of things. 55. What the interchangeable course of Flatus's may
respect. 56. That Flatus's are made in us by a causing Agent, but not by a
separating one. 57. Galen is withstood concerning Flatus's. 58. Diverse times
again. 59. An Error about lustful Meats. 60. Venus or carnal lust has respect
unto the Spleen. 61. The ingendring of Flatus's, whence and how it is. 62. An
example of windy Blasts. 63. A windy Blast does not fore-exist in the Food.
64. A notable thing concerning the Grape. 65. A notable thing touching the
Ferment. 66. Respects of Flatus's, and of the Stomach. 67. The
handy-craft-operation of Flatus's in a threefold Monarchy. 68. The notable Gas
of Tartar. 69. The windinesses of meats. 70. Sulphur teaches a flatulent or
Windy matter, and the supposing of a Dungie Ferment. 71. Whence wringings of
the Guts are. 72. Why poisons do for the most part make the habit of the Body
to swell. 73. Why Leavened or Fermented things were forbidden to the Jews. 74.
A dead Carcass that is drowned, when it issues up out of the Water. 75. A
remarkable Remedy concerning the lesser hot Seeds. 76. The Judgment upon the
beholding of the dead Carcass of a gentile Matron. 77. The vanity of a Name and
Remedy driving away Winds. 78. A destinction of the Volvulus, or pain of the
Ileos, from the wringings of the Bowels.

AFter that the more judicious of Physicians, had vainly implored aid from the
Elements, Humors and Stars, and in the next place, had in vain invoked Tartar,
Hippocrates [Peri Phusi^n] or concerning natural things. That old man, has so
altogether consecrated all Diseases to flatus's or windy blasts, that he has
promiscuously confounded winds with the principles of life. Therefore the more
fruitful wits of the Schools began to search, not so much into the nature and
properties of windinesses, as (the suppositions of windy blasts being granted
and yielded to) further to superstruct and build the nature and causes of
almost all Diseases, and to dedicate them to windy blasts, vapors, and
exhalations, climbing from beneath upwards: or being thrust headlong
downwards. But when as they were not able wholly to deliver themselves out of
straits, nor that the edifice of so great a moment could stand firm, because it
was supported by no foundation of a more solid enquiry, it was as it were the
thread of an enterprise, broken asunder by too much twisting.

Truly Hippocrates, constrained a flatus into a predicament, whether they
should be partakers of life or death, or at length of destruction, and should
contain the causes thereof, or should be stirred up from Heaven by the Blas of
the Stars, and so should promise causal necessities of the heavenly circle, or
at length they should obey a sublunary, or voluntary Law: to wit, he left it
wholly undecided. And so he left a broken method. And that stood, because there
was not yet so great a necessity, experience, frequency and stubbornness of
Diseases. For it was not as yet known, that the vital spirit had conceived the
light of life, which was that of the sensitive soul, and that they were the
immediate seats of the forms of soulified Creatures, and so, that they did
contain the crasis or temperature of the whole Essence. For none then had
learned that the matter of that Gas, the Water, and so none had as yet dreamed
that the vital spirit did Galen indeed had seen, that Oils and fatnesses did
by degrees exhale through

The Galenical School, I say, has not hitherto known the difference between a
windy from each other, may putrify what all particular Bodies may carry with
them by resolving; in the next place, by what means, the Crases of Seeds, and
properties of a composed Body may show themselves. Lastly, by what endeavor,
all of whatsoever is in us, may be disposed into transpiration, without a
separation of parts. They had heard Paracelsus, although a Potentate of the Art
of the Fire, was not free from the storm of winds. Because he was he, which was
ignorant of the nature of winds and of the Air, that the matter of vapors of
flatus's, is a watery Gas, that their efficient causes, manners, means, as also
matter, is water got with child by a Seed. Because he was he who plainly
despised the authorities of Philosophy, and endeavored to bind nature under
his own idiotism: he was also forsaken, God so permitting it, by the light of
nature, who makes such endeavors every where void. Also no man ever attaineth
unto Wisdom, who has thought to have come thereunto by himself. For Paracelsus
does every where constantly persuade, that we ought to feel the Diseases and
defects of all things, because we are hitherto every way an extract of the
whole universe. That we ought to express the universe, as it were, the Parent
of a Son. For so he will have us to contain winds and their varieties, our
wringings of the bowels also, to answer unto the tempests of the Air. But I
will not depart even a nails breadth from the famous Image of God, that we do
resemble the Macrocosme or great World, rather than God in his Image. For I
believe, that I am not a man, that I might undergo Diseases, and so resemble,
Pirke Olam, or Holam Hapiroud: but rather I know that I do undergo Diseases,
that I might show a depraved and mortal nature, but that I am a man for no
other end, than that according to the good pleasure of God, I may represent his
lively Image.

That man therefore divides the wringings of the bowels into four parts,
according unto the four accustomed hinges of the winds. Whereof, the Northern
one, he first of all Paracelsus had known these things in part, in the next
place, that of winds in the Womb, Pleura, Head, and Muscles, there were old
Wives fables: Nevertheless, he as yet weaved greater, that he might compose
these ridiculous hinges of winds: the which by a stronger right, he had
transferred into the Womb, then into the bowels: The which with great grief
does writh it self sometimes on the left side of the bottom of the belly,
sometimes on the right side, and besieges

Although he also does seriously declare, that the Womb is a World. but
moreover less than the Microcosme. But oh Paracelsus! by supposing some Else of
a bowel stretched cause pain, nor stretch out, but shall be evacuated by its
own emunctory, of its own accord) and so that it does neither breath, nor is
carried side-wayes after the manner of winds. My question is concerning the
Name, Essence, Original, and Remedy of that wind? And then, when the Ileon is
extended, perhaps for 40 turns, as well from the back forwards, as with a side
passage on both sides, with what and what order of twisting shall the hinges of
the four winds have their Situation, Name, and property of Name? For so in
every winding circle, there should be now, forty Southern winds, and as many
Northern ones, etc. For if in the twentieth, or in every particular twisting of
the intestine, thou ought to have added a reason, why not in the tenth or
twelfth, if thou desiredst credit to be given to thee, dreaming of these
things. But surely thou have not been a faithful Aeolus of those winds. Because
thou marking the colic to have oft-times afforded the contracted muscles of
the hands, Convulsions I say, and Palseys, have not blushed Paracelsus, and
ignorance of those that believe him, whereby he excludes and cuts off from
himself his pretended title of the Monarch of Secrets. For he knew not in this
place, that such is the property of any poison being administered even under the
friendly show of purging Medicines, that they do sorely trouble or shake the
Archeus, and stir up a Blas thereof, according to the Aphorism. A Cramp or
Convulsion after Hellebour, is mortal. And that, that colic which besides the
wonted wringings of the bowels proceeding from a sharpness, does moreover
contain an infection of poison, is also the Author of the Convulsion. Although
wind in the mean time, be not carried out of the gut Ileon. So a man dying with
a total extinguishment of his strength, leaves his dead carcass on both sides
extended with a general Tetanus; but whenas he is snatched away by a violent
Death, his dead carcass is flaggy. Whence I have learned, that there is a
certain life, feeling, and motion or Blas in the flesh, besides a voluntary
one. To wit, that life apprehending poisons and death, together with an
extinguishment, does extend

It is therefore for a sound decree. This is carminative, that drives away
winds; but set in the place of a suitable Pestil? or that perhaps carminatives
have the same virtue, like a voice which drives away cattle? and that windy
blasts in the Body do hearken unto the exhortation of enchanting Poets or
Singers? I know indeed from hence, that the Schools are ignorant of the force,
property, causes and manner, as well of the gripings Pandora's box. And that
not only by the touching of cold, as an outward cause, but as a windy blast
has been drawn inwards, and there unduely detained. Of which things elsewhere.

But now our speech is of our, and those, internal windy blasts, I grant indeed
that an unwonted cold (as a guards-man of Death) does indeed affect some noble
part or servile

Indeed the cause of flatus's being known, we must take heed, least their
concrete or composure be turned into a Gas. But a Gas which has been once
made, prepares an easy

In the next place, neither is the Volvulus, Iliack passion, or that of a
barbarous name [miserere mei] any twisting or writhing together, and
extravagancy of the lesser bowel. of reducing the bowels into their former
case, from which they had freed themselves by breaking Prison. And so the evil
being by a strong fortune restored, should of necessity presently return, and
should always afterward rush into a worse state. Again, throughout the whole
tract of the bowel, there should henceforeward be no nourishment with the
Veins, and no attraction of chyle for life; when as nevertheless in the mean
time, that Disease gives place to an easy Remedy. For if, besides its wonted
circles, the bowel should be co-writhed, who should be that mover? or who that
tormenter? For from without it has none, and fears none, which bowel is
covered with a smooth caul and simple bladder of the Abdomen or bottom of the
belly. Also, if it be stopped up by an internal excrement (for this nor the
other can happen unto it) now the gut Ileon is stopped Thomas Balbani of
Antwerp, when I was a Youth, dying within a week of a Volvulus or an Iliack
passion, offered eighty thousand Flandrian pounds to him that should cure him,
having sent his Coach-men or swift Riders every way. The Physicians of Antwerp
then, by the decree of the Schools, with a lofty look, accused the bowel to be
rouled inwards, and to be inwrithed as it were with a Gordian knot, their
remote ignorances providing a Remedy by way of excuse, but not for the sick
man. But Anatomy discovered their Deceit and gross ignorance. For hard dung was
found in the slender gut to have stuck sixteen fingers above the blind gut, and
much loose ballast to have swumme

In the next place, every flatus is raised up either from meats, not yet
digested, or from the cream, or from the dung of meats, or from the seedy
nourishment of the bowels degenerating. There is therefore a fourfold internal
flatus in us, a fifth is external, that of

In the next place, no flatus is air, or wind: seeing the wind or air is not of
the composition of concrete Bodies, even as I have longly and largely proved.
Therefore it part dies, and indeed the implanted vital spirit is extinguished,
and the part is affected with the poison of the Venom, whence is a dungie,
deadly Flatus, abominable to our nature. And so the immediate or spermatick
nourishment of the solid parts, is changed into a wild Gas, and the whole body
swells, or a part is peculiarly affected.

There is also another unsavory Flatus in the Ileon, to wit, natural, and a
certain profitable product, indeed therefore ordinary and natural. And seeing
it is made in most,

For otherwise, in the first place, the endeavors of some fibers in the bowels
seemed to be in vain, if the Ileon does not meanly swell with a continual
Flatus. For a boy, who

Next I beheld, That as long as the Boy did lie on his right side, the
transverse fibers did press themselves together, in the upper part of the
bowels of the same side, that they might drive the excrement upwards into the
steep part: yet the hairs or threads of the down-bending part of the bowel, then
not at all laboring, or being pressed together. I saw therefore, that a Flatus
is not always driven forward by the Ileon unto the Fundament, with the
excrements: but that it does leap backwards, and return unto the parts of the
Ileon, which are re-opened presently after the secluding of the excrement. From
whence, I conjectured, that such a Flatus was natural and profitable, and not
burdensome. For the same closure of the Ileon it self, is most exact, before
that, that which is thin and slideable can be driven upwards, which being seen,
I presently collected;

First, That in the Caeliack or belly passion, the digestive faculty does not
only err by reason of the corrupting of a decaying Ferment, but also the
retentive faculty of the Pylorus:

But whatsoever of this Flatus, as superfluous, does exceed its quantity, is
presently expelled out of doors. A vice therefore in quantity, does of its own
accord, bewray it self,

But if windy blasts are stirred up from meats vitiated in themselves, or those
seasoned with a vitiated ferment in time of digestion, they are painful through
their sharpness, and a foreign part in vain) the bowels do co-press, contract,
and co-wrinkle themselves.

But I call a contracture, the generatress of cruel gripes or wringings, as often
as a bowel

Galen triumphing of the use of parts, being had in great esteem by the
Schools, is shown by Vassalius in an 116 places or errors, never to have seen
the dissection of an humane Galen, they have sufficiently seen, that the
strait, oblique, and transverse fibers of a bowel, do prevail unto the driving
forth of the excrement: yet have they not known, whither, and how, every one of
those might incline themselves in their services. For they who in tediously
writing, have rashly erred in the platting or weaving of the Choroides or
wonderful net of the brain, in the sporting motions of the Lungs, and the
passed by uses of the Pulses, have sluggishly passed by the uses of the Pulses,
and Bowels in their services. Thus far of Belching and Farting.

And Likewise I have discussed concerning a degenerate Flatus throughout the
whole Body; and concerning the natural and requisite Flatus of the Ileon. For
truly, I never saw a dead carcass dissected, which would not offer to the
Beholders, the Ileon swollen with a Flatus. Now moreover I will proceed
concerning the Flatus's of wringing or griping diseases, and the authors of
Death.

In the third place, there is a Flatus or windy blast in the more gross bowels,
consequently bred in the bowels of the blind gut. The Schools indeed have
heeded no other Flatus

But I call that a dungy ferment, as it is bred without a bowel, so also whose
seat is in the blind gut, where the excrements of meats begin to putrify,
under the specifical difference

In this ferment therefore oilynesses are made volatile, and an inflamable
exhalation is stirred up out of putrefying things, wherefore Chemists do
premise all things into putrefaction,

By this right also, excrements and Flatus's, which are drawn out by loosening
medicines, because immediately dropping from a dead carcass, transchanged as well
through aputrifactive follows both the healthy disposition of its ferment, as
also the sick one. Which thing does from thence more clearly appear. Because
belching, or a flatus originally in the stomach, even as also the flatus of the
Ileon, do extinguish the flame of a candle. But a dungy flatus which is formed
in the utmost bowels, and breaks forth through the fundament, being sent through
the flame of a candle, is enflamed in flying through it, and expresses

I will repeat in this place, the general kinds of diversities of flatus's bred
in us, which are specificated by their ferments and the properties of things
from whence they arise. Behold their Scheme or Figure. For there are two
irregular flatus's in us, whereof, one is ordinary, natural and necessary in
the Ileon. The other is plainly pestiferous and degenerate, the which, a poison
being taken, or bred within, does for the most part lift up

The Scheme being now finished, thou shall see that the matter whereof flatus's
are, is that concrete Body, about which a ferment does operate. And then, that
he who strives For if windinesses were by themselves and materially in meats,
flatus's should equally bewray themselves in all, and he that should send forth
the less of flatus's, the same being retained, he should be the weaker. Both
whereof is false. Therefore the aforesaid interchangeable course of flatus's
does accuse the agent rather than the matter.

In the next place, if it should be moved principally from the matter, and
there be a fatty flatus in us: but that could in no wise be troubled or moved
by our luke-warmth, which is first obliged to vaporal moistures, before that it
can be sufficient for dry and oily exhalations. Therefore even from hence it
is also manifest, that flatus's are made by

Again, that also of Galen is absurd, that some things are windy in the first
digestion, but that other things utter their flatus in the second, which he
calls sanguification; and so also, That their fleshes are blown up, and swollen
with windiness, from the eating of abundance of Figs. For every flatus, which
was after any manner materially in meats, at least while the food is boiled,
and afterward formally resolved into a cream, seeing the cream, liquor, or
water, could never take away the flatus's within, or beneath it self, it should
of necessity, presently exhale by belching. But that a flatus out of the cream
of meats, does remain in the blood, or after sanguification is finished; if
that be rightly sifted, it contradicts the position of the Schools, whereby
they suppose, that a natural or livery spirit is bred in the blood, not indeed
an external one, stirred up and retained from things: but being made anew, by
an ordinary power of the Liver. For that flatus in the venal blood, should be a
foreign windiness (to wit, of the Parsnip, Pease, etc.) rebellious and
stubborn against the formal transchanging of the food into blood. Or if it be
by the strength

The Schools therefore contend, that the strength of Venus or carnal lust, does
beg it self for a foreign flatus. Shall therefore a windiness arising from
strange nourishments,

Here it suffices to have separated the matter or power of Venus from
flatus's: A weak digestion therefore, brings forth many windinesses, which a
stronger digestion does not find, even by examining every thing more curiously,
and transchanging them more strongly. For a wandering ferment, draws out of a
thing that which is not in it materially; but only potentially: That is, a
flatus arises from an error of the ferment, being estranged in digesting. For
truly, flatus's are not drawn out of the matter, as though concreted cause by
it self, even as heat does ordinarily allure vapors out of water: but as,
there arises a certain diminished disposition under the digestion of the
ferment, from whence the digestive spirit sucketh a Flatus, as it were a guest
inconvenient for it; and as though the Archeus would correct the Error of the
ferment: wherefore a begun indisposition of the matter, was born to change into
a wild Gas: the which apprehend thou by an Example.

For, Sal Ammoniac, and Aqua Fortis, are those things which may be distilled,
and suffer

So also a Flatus does not fore-exist in the meats, and much less in the Cream:
But there is a certain new and monstrous generation, from the through mixed
seeds of things, or from

For as long as a Grape is on every side enclosed in its skin, it is sooner
dried, putrifies by continuance, or is changed into a raysin; than that it
sends forth a flatus; but if the

For as meal differs from the leavened paste or dough, and the mealie lump from
bread, so does wine from the juice of grapes. And as meal if it be boiled, does
not bring

A most weak stomach therefore, affords un-savoury belchings, but a less weak
one, sour ones a vicious stomach, burnish, bitter, and sharp ones. But a
stronger stomach does indeed etc. Belchings therefore do witness some weakness,
and therefore do express the savours of meats. But under the fardle of much
meat that is full of juice, brackish, also burntish belchings do bewray
themselves, especially if the meats are mortified. But brackishness being
stirred up by an exasperated ferment, does bring forth a various appetite to
meat. Furthermore also, that flatus's are not bred of windy things; mark an
example. Distilled Vinegar, while it dissolveth Crabs stones, Crysulcha,
Silver, a wild spirit is belched forth. A harsh apple in roasting, stirs up
very many flatus's: not or unripe, consists of the same matter; and indeed
not of a windy one. A sharp apple being roasted in a glass Hermetically shut,
constraines the vessel by reason of its windy blast, to burst asunder. But a
like apple, being closed up in the like glass, with as much water, as that it
may boil, sends forth no Gas, but only a watery exhalation. Aqua fortis,
being distilled by its self, does wholly pass into the vessel receiving,
without a wild Gas. But if a dissolvable metal be added unto it, it brings
forth a Gas, so as that if the glass be well stopped with mortar, although most
strong, it breaks in pieces: when as in the mean time, none of the aforesaid
metal departs into a Gas.

The Tartar of Wine, cannot be distilled so much as with the hundredth
distillation of its own oil, unless a chink or chap be left in the joints.
Otherwise a wild Gas, how big

For the food not being sufficiently subdued in the stomach, putrifies, and
causes a Gas. For it putrifieth through the corruption of the place, which is
of the dung of the stomach:

Take of Sulphur one part, let it boil with a double quantity of oil of Line:
presently Jews) therefore a sudden That a dead Carcass will issue to the top
of the Water, when the chest of the Gaul is broken. For neither does this want
its own vigor of

Furthermore, I have said, that the lesser hot Seeds were from divine
compassion, made known to mortals, and by the good common People, the use of
the same brought into the Schools, not knowing the cause, and circumstance of
Flatus's. Those seeds therefore do restrain the coruption and also the
sharpness of matter, and therefore they are refreshments of the Bowels. But
that ease or comfort learn thou by this Example.

There was a burst man that was negligent, whose Intestine fell out into his
Cod; it presently rises unto the bigness of ones head, is hardened, and at
length waxes black and blew, or envious. For they in vain attempt with a
various warmth of milk, and a lukewarm fomentation of Cows-dung, and it
seems to be sixfold less through the hole, than is the swelling of the Cod,
which is to lay aside the hope of its return, by reason of hardness. And then
through the drink of the seeds, to wit, of annise, caraway, fennel, coriander,
etc. in wine, the hardness of the bunch does presently vanish, and it suffers
it self to be repulsed inwards. The which, a clyster, and outward fomentation
afforded not, therefore that defect does by it self, silently speak; That the
bowels being exorbitant about the stones, do presently put on an hardness, and
stir up flatus's. All which things by a comfort to the Archeus of the bowels,
do presently disperse; which else would cause a swift and painful death. But I
will add something concerning the natural flatus of the Ileon, which is not
known by the Schools. A noble woman is taken with a little pain of her belly,
she walks about the chamber, had dined, the pain straight way ascends as to her
right pap, invades her shoulder, and a little after kills her. Her dead carcass
being dissected, nothing is viewed by the eyes, which could be blamed, to have
brought death on her. But

CHAP. LVII. The Toys or Dotages of a Catarrhe or Rheum.
1. Who is the Heir of Diseases, and Nature. 2. Some suppositions in the room
of premises. 3. A conclusion. 4. It is proved from experiences. 5. An
explication of the thing granted. 6. The Lungs are the first thing dying. 7.
Why the Author has departed from the Schools. 8. Things premised of the
miseries of old Age. 9. Why loosening Medicines do hurt in these cases. 10. The
miserable Testimonies of Physicians, of their own ignorance. Because the
Phrygians are wise too late. 11. A shameful Maxim, which is drawn from things
helpful and hurtful. 12. The Errors of Physicians. 13. The Unconstancy of
Paracelsus, whence it was. 14. The manner of making a Catarrhe, is like unto an
old Wives Fable. 15. The Diseases attributed to Catarrhes. 16. How great
destruction of mortals arises from thence. 17. After what sort they make the
sick perpetual bondslaves unto them. 18. An ordinary privy shift of the
Schools. 19. Thirteen Positions. 20. Nineteen Conclusions proceeding from
those Positions. 21. By a sufficient numbering up of parts. 22. A Dilemma or
convincing Argument. 23. Some Absurdities. 24. Catarrhs or Rheumes do arise in
the Schools only from their mother Ignorance. 25. Ignorance is the same
Fountain of Absurdities in Curing. 26. Shame makes the Schools unstable. 27. A
denial of Principles granted in the Schools. 28. Whence heat happens to the
Liver. 29. A proof from Remedies of none effect. 30. The Toothache is again
examined. 31. The digestion of the Tooth and Nail, differs from the digestion
of all the parts. 32. A Rheum unto the inward parts is shown to be impossible.
33. A Pose is decyphered. 34. Absurdities following upon a Rheum of the
Stomach. 35. A Rheum is fanned into the Lungs. 36. What may drop down at the
beginning of a Pose, and what afterward. 37. An Argument from an
impossibility, against the Cause of the Cough of the Schools. 38. The orginal
of matter in affects of the Lungs is demonstrated. 39. The vanity of Remedies
from Ignorance. 40. That the drinks of China, Sarsaparilla, etc. do not dry up
Excrements, as neither hinder the generations of the same. 41. Some Absurdities
caused from hence. 42. What we must diligently heed in affects of the Lungs.
43. The Doctrine concerning the motion of the Lungs, is false. 44. The use of
the Lungs is not known in the Schools. 45. One and Twenty peremptory Reasons
against the motion of the Lungs. 46. The Error of the Schools concerning the
use of the Diaphragma or Midriffe, established eight Reasons. 47. Seven
conclusions issuing from thence. 48. Why the Remedies of Physicians are of no
worth. 49. That preventions for the restraining of Catarrhes, are old Wives
Fictions. 50. Galen in his Books of the Preserving of Health is wholly
ridiculous. 51. The Ignorance of the Schools is to be pitied and bewailed. 52.
The dissecting of a live Dog has deceived the Schools. 53. A new Error about
Ecligmaes. 54. They suppose a falsehood. 55. Some proofs. 56. Whence the Error
of Catarrhes or Rheumes was brought in. 57. A refuting of a mad persuasion. 58.
What it may be, which is felt to cause the mask of a defluxing Rheum. 59. What
the future and succeeding matter may be. 60. The ignorance of the humor latex,
has confirmed Catarrhes. 61. A prevention. 62. The torture of the night. 63.
The unconstancy of Paracelsus. 64. Liquid things, which are not yet vitial in
us, do not talk with the Stars. 65. The Marrow is not among Liquors.

IT is now a seasonable time to show, that the great heap of Diseases which
has been dedicated to a Catarrhe or Rheum flowing down from the Head, even
into the very top of the Toes, without let or hinderance, is an old Wives
Fiction, not invented but by the enemy, the troubler of mankind; to wit, lest
the causes of Diseases being known, the Remedies of the same, should also be
made known. However it be, at least wise, from thence it is manifest, that the
Schools are even unto this day misled by the errors of the Heathen, in the
generating, supposing, defluxion, manner, way or passage, matter, means,
places, instruments of a Rheum; and likewise in its revulsion or pulling back,
and Remedies: indeed it is false and absurd, whatsoever thou shall build upon
one absurdity or impossibility. Whence likewise, the vain hope which is placed
in Cauteries or searing Remedies, falls to the ground, even as I shall
demonstrate in its own place. Natures themselves are the Physitianesses of
Diseases: but the Physician is their Minister Hippocrates. But that is
concerning Diseases, which nature cures of her own free accord. But when she
has failed, so that she cannot renew her strength, a Physician chosen by the
bounty of the Lord, and with whom all Diseases are almost of the same esteem
(for such a one is he, who has obtained some universal Medicine, among many of
the like sort) he remains no longer a Minister or Servant; but a prevailing
Interpreter, Ruler and Master. Let the Name of my Lord Jesus be exalted for
ever, who does always bestow his bounty on his little Ones, who are base or
dejected in their own humility. For nature being the chief receiver of the
diseasifying impressions of the sick, and the sensitive Soul a mover on the
opposite part: likewise where entertained Diseases do prevail, man dies, or at
least wise, lives for the future, more miserably than death it self, unless he
be restored by the Physician, into his former state. Yet it does not happen to
every Physician to go to Corinth, unless to him that is called, elected,
exercised and commissioned, or entrusted. For the universal perfections of
healing, which contain in them, the tune or harmony of nature, had not yet been
made known to the age of Hippocrates (for they are as yet scanty, and derided
by the common sort of Physicians unto this day) therefore Hippocrates deserves
pardon, if he thought that the whole business of a Disease was to be finished
by nature, as a Mistress.

Moreover, I have said elsewhere, that even forthwith from the beginning of the
Young, an implanted spirit, does sit president over every member as an
assisting Ruler: but that

I have also taught elsewhere, that every member does grow or flourish,
according to the virtue of the implanted ferment, and so that neither is a
transmutation to be hoped for, for a new generation, unless by a ferment
mediating. Consequently it is from thence understood, that all growth is made
by the spirits, and so, that a weakened digestion of the members, does depend
on the diminishing of the spirits, and of the ferment of these, according to
that saying, My spirit (the sheath of the ferment) shall be diminished
(therefore) also, my days shall be shortened. So as that, a member, which in
health does produce even no visible excrement, does make much thereof, and that
without ceasing, if it shall be wounded, hurt, diminished, or hindered in the
vigor of its ferment. In the next place, it also from hence follows, that
through a hurt, and the variety of things hurting, a disagreement and undue
proportion of excrements is bred. Not therefore, from one Fountain, to wit, the
Head of man (whence indeed, the Schools do devise all Catarrhs or Rheums to
rain down) but from an own proper affection or suffering, or from before the
other members: because it is the first of the members which waxes old and
dies. As is manifest by the Cough of old folks, and the snortings of dying
persons, although

No wonder therefore, that the common People, heeding the vanity of these
Cures, have took an occasion to say: that it is the best Medicine, not to use
Medicine. For I have oftentimes bewailed with great compassion, in reading
thoroughly of the centuries searching into the catarctical or principal cause,
from the beginning, (as they think and boast) they do every where accuse some
natural, or attained singular distemper, yet under the uncertainty of a doubt,
whether they should appoint the same as the disease, or indeed as the
antecedent cause of the disease, whereof they consulted. But least they should
err, even in any diseases, they have accused heat and also cold. To wit, they
complain almost in all cases, of a coldness of the stomach, alone, or combined
with the heat of the liver, whence they many ways divine, Rheumes to arise,
and to have slidden down into diverse parts, and they prosecute as the diseases
of the same, not only almost all internal ones, but also even unto the defects
of the skin. Thus indeed do the Schools season their young beginners,
theorically and practically. For so Rheumes are guilty of the defects of the
eyes, ears, jaws, tongue, teeth, breast, arms, loins and legs. So coughs,
consumptions, astmaes, plurisies, peripneumonies, apoplexies, palsies, sudden
deaths corrupt mattery imposthumes, spittings of blood, have found their
already supposed cause in Rheums. So in the next place, the Stomach casts up
its vomit, loatheth, labors with an unconcoction, the liver also, and the
spleen are ill at ease. For an undigestible snivel having slidden down out of
the head; obstructions, hardnesses, dropsies, aposthems, scirrhus's, fevers,
wringings of the bowels have taken up their room among Catarrhes, their Clients.

Unto which Catarrhes, Paracelsus (although elsewhere triumphing in Tartars,
and his Three first Things, through an invention) has notwithstanding, for the
most part subscribed, (fflussen) by nodding under his Mistress, Uncertainty.

For the Schools do so seriously adorn this deplorable fable of Catarrhes, and
deliver it from hand to hand, unto each other, that it may supply the room of
Truth: yea Idiots being Greeks, for a ridiculous lying worship or service, and
destructive to humane society. Indeed they determine, that the original
fountain of Catarrhes, is in a cold distemper of the stomach, and a hot
distemper of the liver, and that the great part of infirm mortals, are subject
to this tyranny: Forasmuch as the manner of making it is, that the stomach
being uncessantly in the time of concoction, made hot by the liver, cannot but
always send vapors to the head; but that the brain is in its own nature cold,
and like a cover to a boiling pot, or in stead of the hollow head of an
Alembick, whereinto vapors do ascend, and are constrained into water. The
which, seeing it ought naturally to flow down, it suggests an ample and general
matter for Catarrhes or Rheumes. The which if it fall down into the eyes, ears,
jaws, teeth, etc. The parts do deservedly grieve, that they have a neighbor
brain, and a memory and the senses, are present. For truly, besides the
aforesaid distempers of heat and cold, and a Catarrhe of necessity bred from
thence: the Books, Speeches, Counsels, Conversations, Chairs, and Practices of
Physicians do re-sound nothing: and so the whole hinge of healing is at this
day conversant in purgings, cuttings of a vein, scarrifyings, baths,

But they measure the Dietary and Medicinal part, for the most part, by the
rule of heat and cold: and by this means they never dismiss the Sick out of
their hand; but detain them for perpetual Clients, as it were gotten
bondslaves: yet under a manifest despair. To wit, that the cure or healing
would be impossible, seeing the Physicians are ignorant of the Causes and
Roots, and do see themselves to operate in vain, because the natural Europeans,
even from the days of Galen. The rich indeed learn this Doctrine for a proper
reward of Learning, and what they have learned, they teach others; So all
Diseases sound as bred of Catarrhes or Rheumes.

I will therefore show by Positions granted in the Schools;

1. The Stomach of a man, as long as he is alive, is actually hot, and its
membrane or coat is besmeared with some moisture.

2. But it is impossible for any watery moisture, to be actually hot in us, but
that also for that very cause, it stirs up a Vapor from its self.

3. The upper passage out of the Stomach, is the Throat or Oesand, a membrane
extended like a Cane or Reed, from the Stomach even unto the Jaws, being like
to the membrane of the Stomach.

4. The Oesand, by it self, is actually, wholly moist, and it is shut (seeing
else it crookedly falls down by reason of a vacuum or emptiness) actually and
always, no otherwise then as a bladder which wants its proper Content: the
Throat therefore does touch it self side-waies, through a necessity of Nature,
which does not suffer a vacuum. For the Throat which has not meats, drink, or
air in it, should of necessity be empty, if it should lie open: but that it
does not lie open or contain air, is manifest from that; because else, every
morsel being swallowed, the air which should be beneath the same, and should
resist the suited gobbet, should be thrust downwards to the Stomach, and so,
there should be as many belchings as there are gobbets swallowed. In the next
place, seeing the membrane of the Oesand is moist, it should of necessity fall
down on it self, unless it were on every side extended by a certain force, the
which is neither presented to the view, in dissections, neither should it serve
for any end in living creatures.

5. The mouth of the Stomach is shut by a natural, not by a voluntary motion.

6. But there is no other Anatomical knowledge of the Throat, than that it is
narrow, shut beneath, being co-pressed by the Pylorus or lower Orifice of the
Stomach, and in man's Neck, by very many Vessels.

7. The Throat draws not, as neither does it contain Air: For it falls down
through the proper motion of a moist membrane, and a penury of the thing
contained.

8. The Oesand is not opened throughout its length, unless it shall send
nourishments through it: The which if they are the dryer, they stick in the
passage, neither do they easily descend, unless drink be over-added: which
could not be done, if it should contain air under the Gobbet or morsel, but
that Belching would follow. But the Oesand lays open about the Windpipe, in
the beginning of its self.

9. The Oesand or Throat is shut beneath, by a strange, or another right, and
therefore, neither is it opened, unless by an external guest entering in or
breaking forth, or in time of hunger, it is also opened by another will.

10. No Air, and much less a Vapor, breaks forth upwards out of the
Stomach, without the sound of Belching.

11. If Heat, which is necessary for the Stomach, causes a Vapor, yet it does
not thereupon violently thrust forth the same upwards, so that it is able to
stretch out and open the locked mouth of the Stomach and Throat: Seeing any
contradictory thing being placed, there should be a continual Belching unto
every one.

12. In the Stomach, no otherwise than as in the other Vessels, which are of a
lukewarmth, every watery Vapor, does by the least pressing together, sooner
grow together again into drops, then that it does elevate or stretch out the
co-pressed Membrane through its length. And therefore neither do they make
vapoury Belchings, but Air, and a wild Spirit or Gas only.

13. That a Livery Spirit of the venal Blood, being supposed, all the Veins
should by their heat, bring forth Catarrhes, either about the parts of the
Liver, or in their outmost branches, which are neglected by the Schools.

The first Conclusion.

From these Positions for the most part granted, and clear by Anatomy, it
follows,

1. First of all, That no Vapor is carried out of the Stomach into the Head,
and that the supposed matter for Catarrhes or Rheumes fails.

2. If so great blindness has circumvented the world in things manifest; what
is not to be suspected of things more hidden?

3. That the Doctrine of the Schools standing, a healthy and hot stomach
should generate much greater, and more Rheumes, than a sick one, and otherwise,
a colder stomach; which is already contrary to the Schools.

4. That they should rather employ themselves in cooling than in heating the
Stomach.

5. That all mortals should of necessity be Rheumatick, and alwawes infirm.

6. Because the same Oesand, Brain and Stomach, being actually hot, all do
equally consist of moisture, and of the same figure or shape.

7. That every man, like Swine, should almost at every pace, naturally belch,
because an uncessant heat and moisture should of necessity send upwards, a
continual Vapor.

8. That although a Vapor raised up from the Stomach, should stretch out the
Oesand, yea should ascend without Belching; yet it should wholly be always
blown away through the mouth and nostrills, before it should proceed unto the
Brain through the strait and closed passage of the membrane: Because that
Vapor ascending from the meats out of the Stomach, should of necessity also
smell (in every man) of the meats, and the transmutations of these, and should
be offensive to himself, and the standers by; so that if the Belchings are now
and then smelling or of a stinking savor, all the breath of all should also
continually stink, through an admixed flatus or blast of the meats.

9. That seeing Belching is a wild Gas and a far more subtle thing than a
Vapor, and yet does not strike the brain, unless, the mouth being shut, it be
dashed forth through the Nostrils: surely much less shall Vapors be conveyed
to the Brain.

10. That Belchings are never carried from the Throat unto the Brain, by a
right or strait passage, but only by the instrument of smelling; and therefore
that they do not yield a smell, unless the mouth being shut; and much less
shall a Vapor of its own accord be carried out of the Stomach unto the Head.

11. That, that a vapor the matter of a Catarrhe, might as yet by some means
ascend unto the head, or the instrument of smelling: this ought not to be able
to be done, but by shutting of the mouth. And so that there would not be a
possible matter for a Catarrhe to him that gapes: and therefore this is an
easy Remedy for a Catarrhe.

12. That, seeing two bodies cannot naturally pierce each other in the same
place, and seeing the passage from the jaws, unto the brain is narrow, filled
up (for there is not a Vacuum granted in those Organs) shut above, nor passable
(for the breath, although it be pressed together, does not breath forth upwards
to the Head) therefore a vapor cannot reach out of the stomach unto the bottom
of the brain. For example, A Cane, if it be stopped above, although it be held
over hot vapors; yet this does not admit them to ascend, by reason of the
presence of Air, wherewith it is filled.

13. It being granted, that a vapor could climb upwards; yet it shall not find
any plain or hollow thing upon which it should grow together into drops. And
much less such a one, which may represent the cover of an Alembick or earthen
Pot: but in the bottom of the brain, whither the vapor is freely granted to
ascend, there is a narrow part, the basin, or bottom of the funnel, which has
two tables toward the nostrils, and as many toward the neck; which two latter
little mouths, the ascending vapor should only find. And they are almost
continually filled with snivel, are moist, and do drop, as the proper
emunctories of the brain appointed for the casting forth of its muck or filth.
And therefore a vapor of its own accord ascending, being granted: yet there
should not be a place for the growing together of a Catarrhe.

14. A vapor, if any one possibly being made from the stomach, had also
ascended even thitherto; yea and had grown together into drops in so slender a
space, and if it should fall down together with the muck or snivel, it should
bring less damage than the muck it self, which is the ordinary excrement of the
Brain. All which things the Schools have seen by Anatomy, and shall by Science
Mathematical (if they do weigh them) know to be unevitable: yet they go on,
they have eyes, and see not; have ears, and it is to be feared, that they will
not hear.

15. That although belching be the Gas of meats, and it bears their smell
before it; yet any kind of vapor of meats whatsoever, does give an un-savoury
and unhurtful water. For example, let the snivel or spittle be distilled with a
slow luke-warmth, such as is that of the stomach of a living Creature:
Certainly, thou shall draw out nothing but an un-savoury, and no glewy water:
and much less a salt, sharp, and tart Rheum.

16. That although snivel do slide into the jaws, and does diversely and
oft-times badly affect these, according to the diverse indispositions of the
snivel; notwithstanding, neither that filth, nor the dropping down thereof, can
bear the reason of a Rheum; no more than the urine sliding out of the kidney
into the bladder, is to be called a Rheum. Wherefore if there be an
un-savoury, salt, sharp, or sour, fluide, or gross snivel sliding down into
the parts, whereby it is deputed naturally to be purged, as it were through an
emunctory, it is not to be called a Catarrhe, however badly also it may affect
the parts; even as also the urine, if it shall afflict the bladder.

17. By how much less ought the Flux of any feigned humor, or dreamed
excrement, bred, and derived after a manner, through means, places, and
journeys naturally impossible, to be reckoned a Catarrhe?

18. If the brain in living Creatures be not actually cold, the reason of
condensing of a vapor cease: but if it be less hot than the other parts:
does therefore a vapor seek the more cold part, by sense or feeling, and
choice? because it desires rather to be coagulated, than to remain as it is?

19. Or are vapors driven by all the more hot parts on every side, unto the
brain, as the more cold part? But thus there should be altogether a continued
unexcusable tempest in healthy folk.

But yet all these things being disregarded (the which notwithstanding cannot
have themselves naturally by way of necessity) Rheumes should nevertheless flow
down. But not in Schools themselves do teach, that vapors, or the foregoing
matter of a Rheum does climb from the stomach, unto the bottom of the brain,
and there does find a certain plain (an imaginary one, nor as yet found by
Anatomy) in the hollow whereof, it does presently grow together, and presently
after that concretion, it falls down by drops. Far be it surely from thence,
that an enemy which is a stranger, a mere excrement, a forreigner to the brain,
and the cause of so great infirmities passing into water in the lowermost
plainness of the brain, should from thence pierce through the very body of the
brain, or that in the form of water, or at length again in show of a vapor, it
shall sport in the aforesaid plain. For not in the likeness of a vapor, as
though a vapor reaches from the stomach unto the bottom of the brain, and
does grow together in the place of Galenists do teach that the water which is
made of the vapor of a lukewarm stomach, is afterward fixed. Also that it
has become salt and sharp, only by the touching of the plain, which thing, the
knife has not yet observed. And then, the skin of the scull being far more
pory than the scull, should sooner root out that water by transpiration or
sweat, than the evils, from thence believed, can be made. Moreover, the skin
which is stretched over the scull, is more toughly adhering hereto; neither
does the steepness only of the place suffice for the flowing down of a
Catarrhe, and for the renting of the skin from the bone. Yea and more is, this
water bred from the vapor of the stomach, should of necessity, have a driver
within, which should drive it through the brain, coats, bone and Periostion. But
that should not be any heat: for then it should cease to be water, and should
again be made a vapor, which is feigned to be condensed into water by the
coldness of the brain.

In the next place, Rheumes are said to be more accustomed to old folks, weak
people, and to the colder stations: therefore that driver or forcer shall be
cold (which after another manner, is wont to bind the parts together) and shall
now (the order of things being overturned) drive the water through the brain,
and that indeed in the form of water. And that driving or pulse in the water,
sprung from the mere vapors of the stomach, shall be even in the brain, which
should open it self together with the coats and scull, unto the water coming to
it.

Again, seeing all such water co-thickned by a vapor, is said to be hanging on
the bottom of the brain, neither that it can there be detained beyond the
bigness of a drop; but that it of necessity will presently and droppingly fall
headlong down, or the brain being forgetful of its duty, shall set up this
excrementitious water by drops. And then, besides a driver, the water should
have need of a leader, which should stretch out the skin, and pluck it from the
ribs, that it may provide a place (to wit in the Pleurisy) for it self
hastening downwards. And as well the leader as the driver in the water, should
be more powerful than our Blas.

Lastly the mask of credulity being at once discovered; at whatsoever price I
shall prostitute the dreams of the Schools concerning Catarrhs, none shall buy
their false wares.

In the next place, if water does pass through the brain, coats thereof, scull,
and about the bony membrane; shall it now therefore, being wearied, not be able
to pierce even the skin also? or shall it forget the ways? why shall the
sudoriferous and pory skin, resist the water which was able to pierce the
scull? But when as it should be collected under the hairs, then it should
either there swell into a descending flood, or indeed should flow down with a
slender thread of small drops. If it being little, should be dis-cussed in
manner of sweat, or if it should make a collection in the temples of the Head,
it should presently bewray it self to the finger. What if it flow down from
thence; at least wise it could not but in the term or bound [to which] of
motion, stir up a tumor of sweet distilled water. But at least wise, that
water could never fall down into the muscles, or be the sooner collected among
the muscles: because they are they, which are every one clothed with their own
membrane. And moreover, neither is there room nor passage for flowing down
between the skin, and the Periostion of the scull, unto the Muscles between the
ribs, that the distilled water may cause a Pleurisy. For that which was
without pain, under the skin and hairs, should presently with so great a fury
of pains, stir up a Pleurisy, and only with its descending, by its naked
weight, rent the Pleura from the ribs, it being implanted in, and joined unto
them by fibers. Certainly a huge cruelty should happen by defluxing. At length,
neither can a Rheum fall down unto the teeth, and the sinews or nerves
thereof; Because the sinews which on both sides enter from the bottom of the
brain, unto the cheek or jaw, do, without and within, so fitly or exactly fill
up the hole, that they make a sheath so just and so equal, that there is not
room for the entering water to run down; and so much the less, because the water
does not undergo a small hole, shut beneath. And much less, shall it flow down
to one only, wonted, and only rotten tooth, which it may afflict. And
furthermore, a Catarrhe being gathered together under the hairs, should run
down into the cheeks, but shall not fall down under the gums, through the
fleshes of these, and without being thoroughly mixed with venal blood, according
to the guidance of the sinews, under the flesh, nigh the jaw bone, perhaps unto
some one tooth. And which more is if the water should rush downwards from
above, and it be granted for a cause of pain of the upper jaw: Yet in no wise,
nor ever, water not alive, could molest the lower jaw. What if a Rheum can
decline unto the eyes or ears; surely its troublesome matter should first
proceed from the plain, and feigned basis of the brain, into its bosom; it had
first called a counsel, yea, had sooner brought forth death, than an ophthalmy
or inflammation of the eye.

Moreover, I remember, that a Pleurisy is not between the skin, or the
external fleshy membrane, and the Muscles between the ribs (whither
notwithstanding it should flow down from the skin of the scull, rather with a
straight line, and not inwards) but either in the very oblique Muscles between
the ribs, or between these and the Pleura compassing the ribs, whence it has
found its name. Which way therefore shall a Catarrhe fall down hither from the
Head? I grant indeed by way of supposition, that snivel does fall down through
the palate, even in Children and healthy folks, into the stomach. Yet this does
not pertain unto a Catarrhe or Rheum. Neither does the snivel arise from that
so much reported vapor of the stomach: but it is an unprofitable excrement
begotten by the wandering keeper. As in its own place. I further grant, that in
the joint sickness, and elsewhere, a salt excrementitious liquour is oft-times
sustained, but the humor latex alone, is the Vulcan, Mortar or Parget, and
fuel of these: but not an ascent of vapors out of the stomach, into the
brain, not many humors, nor the feigned distillation of Phlegm conjoined with
choler. For the very Schools themselves being smitten with shame, that the Head
being on every side, filled with the brain, should be the College of for the
matter of a Rheum, let it be old Wives Fables. For the stomach is never

The Liver also does never from its own proper temperature, offend in heat;
seeing there is no heat in us, but what is by reason of life: and therefore,
every dead Carcass, when the life is extinguished, is suddenly cold. But the
troublesome heat of the Liver, is always by accident. For example. Let a cold
thorn be fastened in the finger (an example

Whatsoever therefore rusheth downwards from the head unto the jaws, is a
snivel natural, or altered, according to the indispositions of the keeper. But
that snivel is different the breast, or affects of the Lungs to be from thence
divined of, if the spittles are the very defluxing excrements or Catarrhs of
the Head? So indeed the Rheum of the straining or spungy bone, obtaining a
certain co-thickning from the snivel, does wet with a crude and watery muck,
because nature sends thither a capacious or received latex for the washing off
of that obstructing muck or snivel. For if the matter hereof should be brought
up out of the stomach, why, when the spungy bone is stopped, does a healthy
stomach rage with vapors? How shall those vapors being co-thickned a little
above the palate, come down unto the forehead in the show of salt water, nigh
to the instrument of smelling, to wash off the hurt from the bone prefixed to
it? For whence shall un-savoury and guiltless vapors, draw forth so much salt
in their passage, which they may melt, and carry down headlong with them, that
by their sharpness, they may stir up frequent squinancies, and other
inflammations of the jaws? why shall a matter lifted up from the stomach, and
only by its co-thickning into water (because it is that which by handy-craft
operation, is proved

But seeing that very many Comments have every where arose in huge Volumes,
Councels, Moloch does sit President in their chairs, and that they have
hitherto made the world mad by Catarrhs. Whose matter, birth, place, efficient
cause, manner of making, Case containing, passage, and society of co-bindings,
do fail at once, and are false. And therefore, none but the old Serpent, the
father of a lie, has taught these things hitherto, unto the destruction of
mortals: for truly, whatsoever issues out of the Head is a muck or snivel, and
a mere excrement: but not derived thither out of the stomach. Snivel is white,
thick and slimy, the keeper of the brain being well constituted: but the powers

Moreover, it is a ridiculous thing, that this stinking snivel, should be said
to be now cocted, and thickened by the former latex: the which does again grow,
by a strange vice. But that it is the latex in the beginning of a Pose, is
manifest: for, presently after two days, the belly is dryer, and the urine
more sparing.

In the next place, that latex, being by a luke-warmth evaporated, has scarce
any thing whence it may wax snivelly; as much snivel soever as the latex,
brings down with it, so much muscilage or slyminess it has, and no more.
However it is, and whatsoever that is, which flows downwards from the brain
unto the jaws, not so much as one only drop the Lungs, without feeling, and
that they do enter them without the fear of choking. For I being long since in
the time of my young beginning, deluded by the Schools, have placed these kind
of sick folks in such a manner, that they might sleep between pillows, on their
face, hoping that the mucky snivel would slide down through the nostrils, which
else, should slide into the Lungs; and thus far, I hoped for a freedom from the
effect of the Catarrhe. But the following morning, derided (through spittings
out by reaching) my ignorance. For then I diligently searched into the
Orthopnea, which places such as breath, with a straight neck, that it did a
little stop the doctrine of a Catarrhe, and convince it, as frivolous. Seeing
they should be strangled by a laying with their face upward, and Astronomer
like, whereby notwithstanding the foregoing matter of a Catarrhe should be cut
off. Wherefore, I began to take good notice, that every member which is badly
affected, does frame, not only very much of its own excrement; but also, of an
adverse or contrary one. For so the eye being diversely affected, very much
liquid corruption, and of a sharp tear, does issue forth: the jaws also, being
stopped up by a squinancy, a slymie thread

Hence therefore, I have believed, that the Lungs were held by the Law of other
members; so that, as often as it was provoked, hurt, pricked, slain, oppressed,
or affected through the injury of the Air, or by an Endemical Gas, it did bring
forth, through an error proper to it, diverse testimonies of its weariness or
grief; not that therefore, those so guilty excrements do unsensibly slide from
the brain (for the most part sound) between the slender conduits of the rough
Artery.

Then, at length, I began to wonder that the Schools in the Pose, did see
indeed a proper member to degenerate, and to imitate the excrement of the Head:
and in the mean time, that they have not supposed the same thing could happen
alike to the Lungs, as to the rest of the members. So whatsoever is brought
forth of the Lungs, that is wholly to be attributed to the brain, and that that
falls down (a ridiculous thing) into the rough Artery without feeling, and is
by degrees decocted in the banishment of its race, for the most part there to
be detained without difficulty of breathing, even until a ripeness. When as now
and then, more is cast forth by cough in one month, than the whole capacity of
the breast is large. Therefore the yellow and ashie spittings of persons in a
Consumption, are the errors of the vegetative or flourishing faculty in the
Lungs, and the venal blood there degenerated; the which therefore, a wasting
leanness of the whole body follows. Wherefore vain and deplorable Remedies,
Cephalical or for the Head, are administered; Good God, turn thou away the
slaughter, which the School and root of Pagans, gaping after a little
advantage, does commit. The diseasie erroneous impression only, is to be taken
away (which I call the inward corrupter of the Lungs) which does empty the
membranes of the veins, Paracelsus has cured the Consumption. Any of those
Medicines, which cure the Cancer and eating Ulcers, being taken in I say, at
the mouth, which is to have cured the Ulcer of the Lungs. For whatsoever cures
by its draught, an Ulcer of the thigh or foot: why may it not do also the same
in the Lungs? But what will the Schools do? they are ignorant of the Causes,
they are ignorant of the Remedies, and with a lofty countenance do mock at
Mercurius Diaphoreticus, which is sweet like honey, and fixed: and the volatile
tincture of Lile. And likewise the milk or element of Pearls. For unless the
whole Body be universally tinged with a super-eminent Balsam, internal Ulcers
are never made whole, or confirmed. For the Lungs first waxing old, and first
dying, does most difficultly recover from threatened death, and does therefore,
reboundingly despise the Remedies of the vulgar. Wherefore a continued error of
the Schools succeeds, which

A. Furthermore, that it is certain, that the Lungs is wholly unmoved, that is
sufficiently manifest, not only from their use already manifested.

B. But besides, much more, because the substance of the Lungs is altogether
incapable of enlarging and pressing together.

C. Therefore in that manner, the Lungs of Birds (it serving for the same uses
in a Bird and us) where it is firmly annexed to the ribs, refuses all
enlarging and pressing together of bellows.

D. In the next place, the Lungs consist of three vessels suitably dispersed
throughout the whole (to wit, one being the arterial vein, the venal Artery,
and the rough Artery) substance of the venal blood, and a membrane, as it were
a gown, being poured about or spread over them. But the three vessels are
channels, equally divided throughout the whole Lungs, the two former whereof,
are filled with blood, and so incapable to lay up new imbreathed Air within
them. But the third channel does always appear filled with Air, and therefore
it is also incapable of other new and in-breathed Air, unless the Air contained
shall give place to a stranger, shall enter into the breast, and so, that third
channel or pipe be bored through, together with the membrane clothing the
Lungs. For this third channel is always stretched out and laying open with
gristly rings, and those co-touching one another, no otherwise than as the
trunk of the rough Artery it self. But the fourth part of the bowel, is its
substantial flesh, equally incapable of Air approaching it. Lastly, the fifth
part is the little membrane, or coat of the Lungs. There is nothing therefore
of these which is capable of new Air, nothing capable to receive new breath,
and nothing which may sustain an enlarging and pressing together, or motion. A
wonder surely it is, with how great drowsiness the Schools do nevertheless,
snort, in that they know all, and admit of the things already spoken;
nevertheless do not yet even at this day, cease to teach, that the Lungs like a
pair of bellows, are driven with a continual motion.

E. Furthermore, it being as yet granted, that the third of the vessels, or
aforesaid pipes, were not full of Air, but plainly altogether empty of all Air:
at least wise after respiration or breathing forth (when as notwithstanding it
otherwise lays open, neither is it able to fall down on it self like a
bladder, the gristle of rings forbidding that thing) it should conceive at
least as much new Air in it self, as the part of the bowel should otherwise be.
Notwithstanding, seeing we do at one only turn, breath in at pleasure, so great
a part of Air, as the whole Lungs is large. It is altogether of necessity, that
the Air be not only breathed into the pipes of the rough Artery, to press down
and enlarge the other impotent parts: but that it do proceed inwardly from
these, into the hollowness of the breast.

F. In the next place, if the muscles between the ribs of any one, be pierced
by a dagger, the wound is presently bewrayed to have pierced through: For by a
windy blast, it extinguisheth the flame of a candle. But if afterward, the
wound be shut by breathing in, and again be opened by breathing out, it always
blows out the light of a Candle. Which is impossible to be done, unless the
conveyed and inspired Air, proceed beyond or through the Lungs, into the
breast: And by consequence, that the Lungs are at rest: Especially, because
there is in the breast, a double Mediastinum or partitional membrane or coat,
from the top to the bottom of the breast, for the defending of the heart from
the injuries of the Air. Which Mediastinum or Midriffe, divides the right side
of the breast, from the left.

G. Therefore it is manifest by a mechanical necessity, that the breath is
carried in a right line into the breast, through the Lungs, and so also, that
this is quiet. Which thing, is alike manifestly obvious by the expectoratings
of the Pleurisy. Because those spittles which were first hunted out and
putrified in the ribs, and hollow of the breast, are cast away by cough. It
behooves therefore, the membrane of the Lungs to be very wide, which may
suffice for the sending through of venal blood, and corrupt snotty matter. These
things the Schools see, know, confess and write: yet they deny that the breath
is blown away out of the Lungs into the breast: but that the Lungs themselves,
are of necessity stirred like a pair of bellows. They grant indeed, that the
Lungs have pores, through which, the venal blood and corrupt snotty matter, are
in a Pleurisy, supt up: yet they will not have the Air to be transmitted
through the same pores, into the breast: but they alike stiffly command the
Lungs themselves, to be driven like a pair of bellows. Neither is it a wonder.
Because they meditate that they are nothing but dead carcasses, as well made,
as to be made, in whom the pores of that membrane, are shut by death. For the
same thing also happens to the optic Nerves, the thorny marrow, the partition
of the heart, and little mouths of the veins at the bowels. The lungs of bruit
beasts swims upon the waters, wherein they are boiled whole; but being cut in
pieces, it settles or sinks, because the rough Artery is filled with Air.
Whither (it is added by way of impertinency) if the boiling water has not
access, while it seeths: how shall a Cattarhe obtain passage thither? The same
thing, by mechanical operation.

H. Blow thy breath out of thy breast, as much as thou can; measure the
circumference of thy ribs with a thread: then again, breath in the Air as much
as thou can, and again measure: thou shall find by a square, that more Air
was attracted, than to the bigness of the Lungs of a man. By how much more,
because a great part of the breath does deceive this measure. To wit, as much
as the Midriffe shall bend the stomach downwards.

I. Therefore, make trial again. Draw to thee thy breath, as much as thou
can, and breath it into a bladder, and thou shall find the same thing as
before: and the inspired Air to exceed the greatness of the whole Lungs.

K. In the mean time, remember, that after every exspiring or breathing out,
the pipes of the rough Artery have as yet remained open with their rings, and
to be as yet, filled with Air as before. There is no doubt, but that the breast
and belly does swell up with in-breathed Air: but if therefore the Lungs may be
extended (the which in no wise they are) yet at least wise there should not be
room for placing the in-breathed Air, by almost the tenth-fold so much as the
breast is extended. Therefore the motion of the breast does not prove a
necessary motion of the Lungs.

L. But if the Lungs should fill up the whole hollow of the breast, which it
manifestly does not, it were consonant to reason, that the elevating of the
ribs might extend the Lungs: but seeing Air does not sustain an enlarging and
pressing together (as is wont to be said) therefore the elevating of the ribs
should not draw an equal or suitable quantity of Air. Yea, seeing that
attraction should as yet, be violent (to wit, for fear of a vacuum) which is
adverse to a natural and vital motion, it also follows that the motion of the
ribs was not appointed to extend the Lungs. And seeing the Lungs has not any
principle of its own motion in it self, nor else where, unless from the motion
of the ribs (according to the Schools): It follows also, that the Lungs are
moved by no mover, but that they are plainly, always at rest.

M. For what is a greater folly, than to confess that all the small branches of
the rough Artery are opened by a co-weaving of gristle-rings; and yet to teach,
that all the same little branches, new Air being moreover attracted, are
always enlarged, divided, and pressed together?

N. At length, the Schools teach, that the Diaphragma or Midriffe, is
sufficient for our ordinary use of breathing; yet they substitute or appoint
the muscles between the ribs in the office thereof. Then besides, there is a
frequent belching out of the stomach, which does express the odours drawn into
the Lungs. Therefore the Lungs and the Midriffe are members capable of
breathing them through. Surely it is to be bewailed that such pains has been
taken in the Schools about such hurtful negligences and childish mockeries. For
truly, if in laying with thy face upward, thou shall place one hand upon the
bottom of thy belly, but the other upon thy ribs; but shall, draw a moderate,
or unconstrained breath, thou shall then easily feel, that the muscles of the
bottom of thy belly only, have operated.

O. To wit, thy belly being lifted up, that thy Diaphragma was drawn downward,
and consequently, that so much of the hollow of the bottom of thy belly was
enlarged, as the plain (which is loose in it self) or the Diameter of thy
Midriffe is less in the Semicircle of it self being drawn downward, and by so
much the more ample, by how much also the looseness of the plain of thy
Diaphragma is easy to be drawn. Yea, if thou shall compass thy ribs with a
strait girdle, and shall draw thy aforesaid breath: thou shall feel thy belly
to be lifted up, and pressed down, thy ribs being wholly unmoved. And by
consequence, that the Lungs, although it were otherwise moveable (which it is
not) yet that it can thus rest for a whole day.

P. But in a sigh, gaping, sneesing, and strong breathing with difficulty (but
not before) the muscles between the ribs are felt also to perform the office of
a Vicarship and help. For the Semicircles of a rib are hanging down on the
forepart, all which, the muscles between the ribs do every one draw upwards
unto them.

Q. For this cause also, they are made bigger by lifting up, as they are then
made rounder, and so do enlarge the hollowness of the breast.

R. For so those that breath forth only with a straight neck, do bring their
shoulderblades and shoulders for a help of the blast, do press both their hands
on their seats to elevate their shoulders, that the hollow of their breast may
be increased, and their Midriffe hang over downward, with the bigger bunch. The
Wife of a Senator, in bringing forth offspring or traveling with a Child
(for she brought forth with her buttocks foreward) break and tear her Pleura
between the seventh and eighth rib, without feeling (for the greater pain
obscureth the less) an Aposteme, etc. Presently after the time of her delivery,
she felt that as often as she pressed her breath together in singing, or giving
suck, if she had stripped her breast, a great flatulent tumor presently bloomed
up, which would give place unto a finger pressing it, and did hasten inwards
when her breath was dismissed: And so afterward, she slept not but with a tied
or bound breast.

T. Whence it clearly appears, that the breath is drawn in a straight line,
through the Lungs. Which thing also I have likewise noted in a Noble Woman or
Princess, who had retained her self from Childbearing, that as often as she
pressed her breath together, the one side of her throat, showed it self to us,
swollen like a bladder.

V. Then also, hitherto does this conduce, that those that are distempered in
their Lungs, and likewise those that breath with difficulty, I have attentively
considered, and certainly found, that such do for the most part lay more
favorably on one side, and on the other side, that they can scarce breath. For
it is not to be doubted, but that that is the vice of the Lungs themselves; and
that on the steep side of the Lungs, for (that is it on which the sick person
then lays) and with what part it then touches the membrane of the ribs, the
pores are stopped, through which, otherwise, he is wont to breath: also, that
both the Lobes of the side of the Lungs, then laying upwards, the pores thereof
are diseasedly stopped, if not all, at least wise for a great part of them, and
that is to be measured by the proportion of the failing breath. By which
argument, it is manifest, that the Lungs are not lifted up, and do not fall
down like bellows: but to be penetrable by pores, through which, the Air
passing unto, and without the breast, does equally answer unto the largeness
thereof, being extended and contracted.

Hence indeed those that are raised upright, do breath better than those that
lay along. Because the lungs hanging, has its pores on every side free, which
have not failed through the vice of stoppage. It is therefore an error of the
Schools, in that they teach, the Diaphragma or Midriffe to be the one only
motive member of the Lungs, and so the proper and principiative, efficient
instrument of breathing. To wit, because, while the Diaphragma contracts it
self into its own center, it causes a breathing out: and as much as this
loses from contraction, so much we breath in.

1. For seeing every voluntary motion is executively made by a muscle, its tail
being drawn back unto its head, now, the Diaphragma shall be the first, a
differing kind of, and the most principal muscle, and its head shall be in the
middle or center of it self.

2. But if therefore the Midriffe be the chief executive instrument of motion,
the Diaphragma should by it self attempt motion, even the bottom of the belly
and ribs ceasing. Which is false.

3. Yea the muscles of the Abdomen or bottom of the belly, which are ordinary
muscles, shall not move, but shall be moved by the Diaphragma.

4. Therefore the belly its own fleshy membrane, should be sufficient for this
office, and those muscles should be made in vain.

5. In the next place, seeing every instrument of voluntary motion does draw in
moving; the breast ought to be drawn inwards by the drawing of the Diaphragma,
and without, about the Midriffe, to resemble the figure of an Hourglass.

6. Yea, breathing out should not be a resting from motion; but the motion it
self of the Midriffe being contracted.

7. And so, breathing forth even in healthy persons, should always be more
difficult than breathing in. Seeing,

8. Breathing in, should not be a motion: but a re-loosing, or resting of the
contracted Diaphragma. From whence I conclude:

1. That the use of the Midriffe has hitherto remained unknown.

2. That the use of the Lungs also has lain hid.

3. That the manner of making breathing, has been unknown.

4. That the first and principal instruments of breathing, have been unknown.

5. That for a modest in-breathing and out-breathing of the breath, the muscles
of the abdomen only do suffice.

6. That the Lungs is never moved, and that it readily serves for a sieve, that
the pure Air may enter into the breast.

7. That the difficulty of curing the defects of the Lungs does not consist in
that, that it is impatient of rest, and that in this respect, it refuses
Remedies: but because, its utmost orisices being besieged and obstructed, they
are for the future, made void of hope to be expected from common Remedies:
Seeing nothing is carried thither in a right line, besides Air, and because the
Air by reason of a stoppage beneath, is hindered or prevented, therefore also
interclosed; and likewise does at length, the more dry up the stopping
muscilages, according to which, other products are stirred up, which in length
of time will assume a dryness, sharpness, and malignity: Whence are
short-winded affects, a corrupt mattery Aposteme, gnawing or corroding of the
vessels, spitting of blood, an Ulcer, Consumption, and Death. For let us
suppose, that all the Air is ordinarily carried into the breast, by a thousand
orifices of the rough Artery, and so many to be sufficient for health; if
therefore a hundred of them are stopped, then that man, by a swift daily motion
or ascent, shall be unlike, and short-winded, by a tenth part. Therefore from
hence it is manifest, why Syrupes and Ecligmaes, seeing they do not reach unto
the places affected, Galen, in his five Books of preserving health? all the
which, is famous in a Bath, rubbings, and wearisom exercise! and although in
all things, and every where, I have pitied the poverty of Galen, yet I have in
nothing more manifestly discerned his wit, than where he seriously prescribes
distinctions of rubbings, at length, athwart, crooked wise, and circularly, as
it were the Ceremonies of Necromancers, to be observed with strict obedience,
upon the command of the penalty of a capital punishment. For so, the world,
being from the cradles of Physicians, driven into a Catochus, and being
delighted with a Paganish stupidity, has laughed as it were by a tickling. For
in the first five ages, there were fewer Diseases at Rome, and fewer dead
Carcasses; Diseases also were milder, than after it had triumphed for the
conquest of Greece. The which, all the Europeans,

Just God, all things that thou approv'st of, are most just:
Thou steadfast Rule of Truth, and spring of Godliness.
But since thy sacred Will to do we have no lust:
A mock-prey we are made, to vulgar doltishness.
For there are Anatomists, who have dissected a live dog, and while they came
to the

In the next place, if this should ordinarily come to pass, the ordinary
spittles of healthy persons, would cast a smell of putrified broaths, or
in-licked Syrupes. And although the first spittles do sometimes presently
after, resemble the Ecligmaes; yet those do not come from the Lungs, but from
the neighboring parts of the jaws. Neither therefore do spittles being
repeated, any longer express the Ecligmaes, even as, after another manner,
repeated spittles, do reach forth smoakinesses with them. Then also, he that
should lick in some ounces in one evening, should of necessity, presently
after, yield not only to an Asthma, but also to choking. For a part of the
Ecligmaes had filled a great hollowness of the rough Artery. Surely it is a
wonder, that the Schools being seduced by so wan an experiment of a dog, have
not taken notice, that through the unmindfulness of the dog, in so great a
howling of torment, that colored broth was snatched within the windpipe. Not
that therefore, that is wont to happen in healthy folk, or is observed in
rheumatick people, as they call them. Truly, if a man that has the stone, in
making water, does even against his will, loosen his fundament for pain, shall
that therefore be proper to the muscle of the bladder, that by opening it self,
it also, ordinarily opens the fundament? For the parts do now and then, by
reason of pain, badly perform their offices, and do mislead other neighboring
ones, with them, into error. The History was rather to be believed, wherein it
is written, that a certain person was choked by reason of a small feather, but
another, by reason of an hair: That they may know, that the Lungs are in no
wise capable of receiving foreign things, without notable hurt and anguish,
yea and more is, that short-winded persons could not endure so much as fragrant
perfumes (for the reasons rehearsed concerning the Blas of man.) If therefore,
helpful perfumes, are a burden to the Lungs; what shall not Ecligmaes be,
although it be granted, that they may come down unto the Lungs? For therefore,
as often, as any thing is swallowed, the windpipe is seriously shut with the
cover Epiglottis, which resembles the form of an Ivie-leaf; that not even any
the least thing do slide down unto the Lungs. And I have known some choked,
who at least wise, on one side, had not the Epiglottis strictly enough shut, by
reason of a Convulsion of the one part, or a resolving of the other. And
therein a new error of the Schools is discovered: To wit, in that, they do
affirm, lickings or Ecligmaes which are swallowed by degrees, to be admitted
into the Lungs, but not those which

I appeal to Anatomy, and submit my hand to the Ferule. For there are some, who
sleeping, a great deal of spittle flows out of their mouth; who if they sleep,
laying with their Be ye merciful, as your Father which is in Heaven is
merciful. And even as St. Bernard speaks concerning the Clergy, who eat up the
sins of the People, as they live only by Alms-deeds; for Physicians do not
think whether they do satisfy the command and expectation of charity, who eat
up the sicknesses and infirmities of the People.

But I do not see that these plagues of Egypt had been brought into the utter
darkness of the Schools, but that, they being ill seasoned, oft-times found
affects whereto they might apparently, and without narrow search, attribute the
Tragedy of Catarrhes. Because some one having a pain in his Head, has
forthwith felt his neck to pain him, a

Hence arose the decree, that pain, seeing it is an accident of inherency, does
not wander from one subject into another, unless some material thing shall
depart in dregs out of the brain, by the muscles of the turning joints, through
the readiness of a sliding Rheum, and does square to the received Etymology
of a Catarrhe. This persuasion of a Catarrhe, its mask being discovered by
Anatomy, ought to be known. For truly if the painful matter does successively
drop down out of the brain through the neck:

Secondly, that matter of a Catarrhe, cannot, by sweating through the brain, be
heaped up, and slide down between the brain and thin coat, so that both coats
may keep a continual separation from the very marrow of the thorny sinew:
because the sliding Rheum should bring forth a renting, and solution of that
which held together, in the marrowy root of the sinews, throughout its length.
Which does not want very many absurdities. In like manner, if the Catarrhe
should rain down between both the coats: first of all, both the little
membranes should be double, which might defend the thorny marrow as with a coat
of Mail: which thing, the eye has not yet viewed hitherto. And that being
supposed, it could not at least wise, disturb the motion of the muscles, or
know pain. And so, there is an error in the Position; Because a sinew is indeed
a deriving or conveying instrument of the command of the will, but not
therefore, an executive instrument of a voluntary motion. Especially, because a
small Nerve, does now and then, scarce exceed the grosseness of a doubled
thread: and it being externally implanted into the muscle, the Rheumy humor
could not be cast into it, but by a bringing of a Palsy on the part, but not
cruel pains of the moved muscle.

In the next place, if a Rheum should flow down between the Dura matter, and
the scull, Anatomy teaches, that the egress of the sinews side-wayes, through
the little holes of the turning joints, is so suitable and narrow, that a
passage for a Catarrhe is in no respect granted from the thorny marrow unto the
muscles.

Lastly, if room should be granted for that device, at least wise, what should
be the cause of its succession, that the humor having once slidden between the
little sinew of the two turning joints, should re-hasten unto other successive
Nerves? does perhaps, the Rheum being affected with a weariness of one muscle,
henceforward wish for other Clients of delights? For how shall the Catarrhy
humor flow down through the small little vein, without an astonying or
stupifying of the member? Shall it enter into the muscle, even unto its tail,
by a strange implanting? but shall it again from thence depart unto other
muscles, which henceforward are of a more steep or inclinable situation? or if
a new Catarrhe be feigned, to flow down with a like success, unto other, and
inferior parts; how therefore do the upper parts, seem to be free from evil?
for seeing it should proceed from the same fountain the brain, and through the
same channel of the marrow of the thorn of the back; why does it not rather
follow the path already opened? does it more largely fall down unto a weakened,
inclinable, and affected part, and commit new adulteries? why does it shake and
seek new Innes? Is that perhaps the delight of nature, that through a whorish
appetite, it does molest and divide new parts successively? Finally, that there
is no place of refuge for a Catarrhe running down between the scull and the
skin, and the muscles clothed with their own membrane, has been already
before discussed. Therefore there is no way, manner, mean, connection, or
dependence, whereby a Rheum may in truth subsist. And seeing no material thing
runs down in those affects, know, that as often as a strange or foreign Air,
odor, ferment, or foreign seed is received into the Spirit which makes
violent assaults; so often that spirit being defiled by the Archeus, is
excluded from the Communion of life. But the genius or disposition of that
conceived Seed, has no less parts, whereby also the Spirit defiled by a
strange ferment, is sent unto remote, rather than to nigh places: As shall be
said in its place concerning the joynt-sickness or Gout, in the Duumvirate, and
elsewhere. For so Mercury, being even outwardly anointed, does affect the
jaws, tongue, and teeth. Moreover, when this defiled spirit shall come down
unto the place of its sending, it presently seasons the nourishment of the part
with its own ferment, transplanteth and translateth it according to the idea or
likeness of the Seed, and that Seed does there interrupt the offices of
digestions (by successive blasts being drawn) with strange dispositions. Whence
it at length stirs up a plentiful household stuff, and does oft-times
characterize the impression there made on the implanted spirit, with a brand
durable for life. These things the Schools beg for primary feigned humors, and
for the fallings down of defluxions from the one only brain. I therefore am far
from a Catarrhe, who deny the matter, shops, efficient cause, manner of making,
and defluxing thereof; and therefore I also separate the causes, effect, as
also the cure, far from the fictions of a Catarrhe. Therefore salt, sour,
sharp, phlegmatic, and choleric humors do not fall down: but as often as the
defiled

Vain therefore is the History and matter of a Catarrhe lifted up out of the
stomach unto the Head: vain also is the defluxing and falling down thereof
between the muscles and the skin, and deplorable Remedies from unknown causes.
Vain also are cauteries or searing Remedies to pull back and consume feigned
humors.

Lastly, vain are the Medicines of drying drinks, seeing the evil or Malady is
by the latex and a larger quantity of drink, only occasionally bred. Therefore
it is manifest, how wholesome, sober drinking is: for the liquor latex, in
respect of its appointment ought to be without savor; but it waxes sharp
through the much drinking of pure and more sharp wine. But the History and
necessity of the latex is due in its own Chapter. Thou shall remember, that all
the fruits of composed Bodies do materially spring from water. Let us therefore
also suppose the un-savoury latex, through a little help of a Seed, presently
to wax sharp. For example. For at the Springtime, a plentiful liquor drops out
of a Vine or Birch-tree. To wit, if the bark near the earth be hurt, it poures
out an un-savoury liquour of the earth. But if the wound be made in the stem or
branches; now the same juice is sharpish. So it comes to pass in the latex,
being of its own nature without savor, which through the contagion of things
receiving, does at length wax sharp, or becomes the heir of a strange quality.
For the Schools have neglected the latex, because they have confounded the
urine with the latex. But it is a blockish argument, to have co-melted the
thing generated with the matter [whereof] as if the snivel, spittle, water
between the skin and flesh, and urine, were drinks. The Liver therefore being
badly affected, if it recall the latex unto it self; truly it does not thereby
prepare urine, but Oedemaes, or the Dropsy Anasarca: therefore I am not such a
man, as to call the Pleurisy, Toothache, and other madness of furies,
non-beings. For I know and grieve for their too much serious Paracelsus) but
that a very small quantity thereof, does breath through the pores of the
Diaphragma. For neither, when the breath is pressed together, does any thing
worthy of note, go forth under the Midriffe, neither does the breath smell of
the places which are under the Diaphragma. In like manner, neither are vapors
carried from the stomach into the Head, but by the Arteries, if men are made
drunk. But whatsoever causes the giddiness of the Head, faintings, and other
distempers of like sort, is the retainer of another Commonwealth than that of
vapors. So neither from the womb are vapors derived into the Head, however
brutish symptoms of the Head may thereby be said to be bred: for that is not
the obligation of transpiration, which is the single duel of another Monarchy,
and that whereby the throat arises unto the height of the chin, is not to be
called the action of vapors: indeed it is an action unknown to the Schools,
which I shall some times explain to be that of government, whereunto all parts
in the Body do owe a Clientship. For there is no other command of the womb over
the whole Body, than that whereby the stones do distinguish a Cock from a
Capon, a Bull from an Ox, and a Man from an Eunuch, in figure, blood, flesh,
hide, and courage. But because in supposed Rheumie affects, the liquor latex
being defiled, does obtain its own dominion the torture of the Night. And I
wish this knowledge of presaging, were not sold to us at so dear a rate, that
they ought to be thoroughly paid by pains and anguishes. For a short-winded Gouty
person, yea he that carries a callous matter or corn under his foot, being
often awaked out of his sleep in the bed or chimny, does fore-feel the future
storms of times or seasons, a black cloud to be by degrees spread over the
Heaven, and the hinges of winds to be shortly changed.

But Paracelsus would have Mercury to be President or chief over the liquour of
nourishment throughout the whole Body, and therefore he elsewhere (concerning
Mineral under the torture of the Night, because they hearken to the latex,
through the Dominion of our Moon, they being offensive affects, which hearken
unto the motion of the Stars.

CHAP. LVIII. A Reason or Consideration of Food or Diet.
1. They prescribe a Diet for Diseases, who are ignorant of Diseases. 2. The
dietary part of Medicine is suspected. 3. Some errors about the rules of Food
or Diet. 4. Curing is not subject to the dietary part of Medicine. 5. The
Authors opinion. 6. The object of the dietary part. 7. A proof from a common
event. 8. Crooked ends. 9. From a numbering up of parts. 10. A diet does privily
accuse of the ignorance of a Remedy. 11. A just complaint of the poor. 12.
Observances of the Author. 13. The mockeries of the dietary part. 14. Bread is
not so much a meat, as a universal victual. 15. Why bread is mixed with meats.
16. The chief hinge of the dietary part. 17. A certain rule. 18. Why the
commands of the dietary part of Medicine are not to be trusted to. 19. Ten
Positions of the Author. 20. How far the force of a sparing Diet may extend it
self. 21. The necessity of chewing, 22. Whence the varieties of things digested
are. 23. An examining of Barley water or Cream. 24. Some preventions or
fore-cautions accustomed to the Author. 25. A Question concerning the Ferment
of the Stomach. 26. The digestions do prescribe the Rules of Diet.

AFter that I had finished the Treatise of Digestions, I had willingly brought
Diseases on the Stage: but the action of Government being too scanty in the
Schools, was left behind as yet maimed, and the Majesty of the Duumvirate it
self, and plainly the spiritual radiation or beaming influence of spirit,
according to its whole. Wherefore I interweaved the Treatise of the Soul, as it
yields up its full right to the Duumvirate. But I could not as yet, moreover,
depart out of the Stomach, but I presently added upon the Duumvirate, some
examinations of my opinion concerning Diet. Truly I have promised to
demonstrate, that the Schools have passed by those things, the profession
whereof they chiefly boast of: to wit, that they have not as yet known a
Disease in the general kind, or have diligently searched into it by its
particular kinds or species, or to have handled it by its causes, or by meet
remedies. And therefore it consequently follows, that if through the aid of
Physicians, by conjectures, there has been success in any thing, it has been
from the proper goodness of Nature.

For as soon as might be, after the universal Succors (for so they name
cutting of a Vein and Purging) they presently yielded a half part of curing
unto the government and

For truly besides their gross Ignorance, the consideration or respect of food
was even long since suspected by me, and a certain wretched juggle of
Physicians was seen, and the

For first of all, whatsoever is sold at a dear rate, that is presently
commended as most etc. (for perhaps Spiders webs, if they were brought a great
way off, should be sold at a great price, as is Crocodiles dung) but in meats,
whatsoever hucksterry is therefore grateful to the tongue, nor very difficult
to the stomach, that universally and presently is published to be of good
juice, healthful and wholesome: insomuch as those things which do chiefly please
the palate, ought to be most acceptable and wholesome: And therefore these do
vary according to the palate of Physicians. For that which is by one, praised
to be healthy; by another, whom that thing less pleases, is dispraised. For by
this means, Pheasants, Partridges, Starlings, Black-birds, and fatted Capons,
are preferred before four-footed Beasts: although these together with us, do
bring forth a live Young, and in this respect, are they more familiar with us,
than Birds, Fishes, and Insects, that is, living creatures bringing forth Eggs.
So also, Fishes in stony waters are preferred before sea-fishes, and Bread of
the finest of the corn, before that which is branny. For those Physicians which
are somewhat delicate, do study the huckstery of the Kitchen, and that they may
please the sick, who being destitute of remedies and knowledge, have otherwise
enslaved themselves to a barren profession; for they are those who become
teachers of Cooks. How leisurely do they view all things, that they may
exercise their commands in Kitchins and Parlours; and that they may seem to
have foreseen all things diligently, they are ready to exercise their tyranny
on the sick. As if meats and drinks should be the Medicines of the more
grievous diseases.

Truly it has always notably shamed me of this part of Medicine. For even
from a

But on the contrary, he that has fire, he can burn; and he has a knife, he
can cut; So also he that has a secret, fit for curing, he may cure, despise
the rules of diet, and Hypocrates prefers things accustomed, although less
wholesome in themselves, before things unaccustomed, neither that the diet is
easily, nor safely, nor speedily to be changed from things accustomed: what
therefore is not to be thought of chosen, wished for, and desired meats and
drinks, which have been accustomed to be used? Because they are those, (which
nature dictating to them within) have, to the great shame of Physicians, been
found to have oftentimes excelled a remedy, especially, where they had before
forbidden them.

Diet in the first place, does not treat of things apparently hurtful: for it
is not disputed whether it be healthful to eat poisonous things, or the sheards
of earthen pots, etc.

How many indeed soever they are, who refusing the rules prescribed to them,
have often

Whence Physicians do oftentimes hope to get occasion of excusing death; by the
disobedience of the sick, about the rules of diet not being strictly observed.
Alas for grief,

If the observance of a diet should be profitable, it should be serviceable in
the disease or in recovery of health; But in the disease, how unseasonable,
troublesome and impertinent perhaps his familiar food to be denied him; and so
in strife they stir up new strife. Verily, even as a horse which passes
through a water, and not drinking sufficiently according to his desire, does
thereby retain in himself an anxious difficulty of breathing for his life time.

But a diet after a Disease, or in time of recovery, is also wonderful
troublesome, if not also in vain; seeing now; nature shall have enough to do of
her own accord. For truly,

For I have now experience with my self, for fifty years space, that I cured
more, even those not seen, and the rules of diet being despised, than many
Physicians together, who

For truly, the chief part of the diet of Physicians is sumptuous, in the
flattery of the sick,

Bread in the first place, is accounted the primary or chief food; but other
nourishments are only co-meats, or victuals in general. But I on the opposite
part, call other Irish also, being men swift, and of a most ready strength, do
in some place, use Chambroch or three leaved-grass, only for bread. And some
Northern people do live a long time only with fish, without bread, and do
remain stubborn, against colds and diseases. A filling with bread (in the
Proverb) is worst of all: not only because it is a token of poverty; but in
very deed, because it is the most burdensome in a weak stomach.

For why, bread, by reason of the received leaven (for else it is nothing but
paste or dough) melting into a cream, constraines the herbs and meats, with
which it is chewed, [Apsonium] or general victual, then [Cibus] or meat. But I
may not long be conversant in Nominals, for it is sufficient for me, after
whatsoever manner it be called, so that the use and necessity of bread be known
to prevail most especially unto the melting or dissolving of meats.

Furthermore, I have always had Sobriety in great esteem, as it were the hinge
of all Diet. Then also, if the Appetite was carried about any Object, I have
willingly admitted

Yet I am not he, who am ignorant, that one meal is better, is more convenient
for a sick person than another: But I am little troubled or grieved, whether of
them both the

I supposing if a Remedy, be not able to withstand a Malady or Evil, by a less
convenient food; far less also shall it be able to overcome or expel diseases.
Therefore I

1. First, That Nature in us, is wiser than any Physician, and more skilful of
her own profit and loss, than all the Wits of all the Schools.

2. That Nature does therefore choose to her self, and wish for the most
convenient things.

3. That Cattle have never died, because they had satisfied their thirst,
unless perhaps they had swallowed Poison, and did faint through too much
devouring; because drink in Fevers does subvert very many discommodities of
Dryness.

4. That to drink in thirst, should be no less natural, than for one that has
need to piss, to have made water.

5. And therefore, seeing this does not require the consent of a Physician,
that also should not want Consultation.

6. That I did administer some drops together with the drink, with the which,
easily piercing, especially in thirst, I have many times quenched most Fevers
together with the thirst, with a delightful pleasure of the sick.

7. That a great appetite toward a thing apparently hurtful in the Rules of
Diet, is for the most part dictated by nature it self, to whom her own Remedy
has been made known, but not to the Books of the Schools.

8. That therefore we ought to be little careful about things desired, which
are but little hurtful, and less accustomed.

9. That if a Remedy ought to prevail over a Disease, Meats and Drinks cannot
in their own latitude, contain the strength of a Medicinal Being.

10. That Meats, if they do not contain a Remedy, therefore also scarce hurt;
in speaking of meats as such, that is, of indifferent things.

I have thus persuaded my self of these things, thus have I prescribed these
things to others: To wit, That abstinence and sparingness, are the best means
in the Dietary part: And the rather, where any thing is eaten for pleasure and
delight, according to the Proverb; That which Savoureth, Nourishes.

1. For it suffices the Appetite by quality, but not by quantity. Otherwise,
if fullness grieves or burdens healthy persons, much more sick and weak folks.

2. To wit, Let them eat, not indeed to the filling up of the hollowness of the
stomach, neither at the dictate of pleasure and taste; but as much as easily
suffices for the defending of a healthy life. And if that be difficult to him
that at first accustomes himself; at leastwise, it shall not be to him that
has accustomed himself. For how foolish a thing is it for him that groaneth or
sigheth through a Disease, to wish for his long since denied ingorgings? Yet I
will not, that any man persuade himself, that this sobriety of living, and
light fardle of Food, does prevent any man from having the Plague, a Fall or
Bruise, a Wound, Thunderbolt or Stone. For external incidencies or accidents,
do despise the Family

3. Seeing all food ought to be changed into a Cream, and an exquisite chewing
is that which makes the digestions easy; hence I most strictly commend chewing
at all times.

4. In the next place, whatsoever things are taken in gluttony, beyond the
power of the Ferment of the Stomach, are indeed made hot within, and do
putrify, neither also, are they for that cause digested; as in Fevers is most
plentifully to be seen. But as much of the more tender meats as is taken under
gluttony, is indeed digested, and slides out of the Stomach: but it carries
headlong with it, a great heap of that which is undigested, as well by reason
of the extension of the vessel, as the negligence of nature being loaded, and
forsaking the raines. But if that which is most exceeding tender, shall be
digested, and that stays in the Stomach longer than is meet, that retained
food does also of necessity wax too sharp, or plainly putrify, is brought over
into a bitter excrement in the morning, being oft-times rejected by Vomit: And
the which, the Schools have falsely called Choler. For Diers do by one only
Kettle of Dye, change above a hundred diverse colors, if the Clothes be first
diversely affected: So also one only wandering ferment of the Stomach, does
diversely dispose and determine of the cream, by reason of the diversity of its
parts (else single or simple) if it contains in it, diversities not as yet
plainly digested. So that, although it ordinarily tingeth nothing but the
digested part of the cream with its ferment; yet it cease not to affect the
undigested part, and wrongfully to season it, by reason of the defect of the
receiver. Wherefore most things do thus grow to an exorbitancy in the kitchen
of the first digestion.

5. Whatsoever accustomed thing is not taken as malignant, but desired; that
also, fullness being absent, is the more easily digested, and in Diseases, is
safely admitted, if it be soberly and moderately taken. Because the ferments do
easily subdue those things which are accustomed, and especially if they are
desired. For Hippocrates persuades us to use a most slender food, in sharp
Diseases, to wit, until an appetite does arise again. For I praise the more
thin Ales or Beers, as much as I (trusting to the words of Galen) do despise
sweet Drinks and Barley-broths.

Barley (says he) being a little boiled, causes Ventosities or windinesses;
but stoppages, if it shall be somewhat better boiled. Wherefore, our Ancestors
believing that Barley is not

6. I also urge none with Broths completed with beaten Eggs, etc. if a sharp
Fever be present; being mindful of that Precept, Impure Bodies, by how much
the more thou nourishest them, by so much the more thou hurtest them. For
although in sharp Diseases, people live without meat, and only by drink; yet a
peril of their life does not thereupon invade them. Yea thus do they the sooner
recover, and the strength and appetite do renew with much less difficulty: As
often indeed as a putrifiable or mortifiable thing, is cast into the Stomach
wanting its own digestive ferment, it putrifies that which is digested, and not
digested. And that is the true explication of that Aphorism. For I never
wished, that those who were sick of sharp Diseases, might return fat, or
fatted; but I did well intend that one only thing, to wit, that they might
recover, and indeed not much curtaild, in their strength. The greatest part of
Diet therefore, in Diseases of the Stomach, I have drawn out of the Aphorism:
That a sower Belching (of a repaired ferment) coming upon burnt ones, is good.
For burntish Belchings, voluntary loathings, an averseness to Fleshes, Fishes
and Eggs, yea and loadings of the Stomach, have commanded the sick to be
nourished with things that are to be drunk only: For else, by things subject
so stink or mortify, I had learned, that strange accidents were to be
expected, defects of the mind, and other discommodities of that sort. Then
because drinks do moisten, do comfort thirst, and satisfy heat, do drive away
drinesses, and weaknesses following thereupon. But by drink, I do not here
understand, the suppings of Broths which do abundantly nourish, to wit, of
those, which in a hot stomach, without a digestive ferment, are of their own
accord mortified: but altogether of those, which do least of all putrify: such
as are Ponadoes, and likewise Beer or Ale tinged with wine, wherewith crumbs of
bread also are co-mixed, that they may be meat and also drink. Hither I recall
what I have elsewhere taught at large; To wit, That digestion is made by a
propper ferment, but not by heat. As often therefore, as there is an aversness to
flesh, and burntish belchings, heat is signified to be present, and a sharp
ferment to be wanting. Give heed to this, how easily, new flesh, being fast
tied to a hot foot or head, does putrify, and presently stink. Therefore in a
Feverish Stomach, being very hot; wise Nature fears least a dead or stinking
carcass should be made in it, and therefore she is presently averse to fleshes.
But whither then has the ferment of the Stomach in a Feverish man, departed?
Has it wandered to some other place? or was it extinct? For whither had the
Ferment departed, which is no where acceptable but in its own dens? neither
also has it perished, because it is a vital thing; but whatsoever vital thing
has once perished, does not return again after privation. But a ferment is
that which returns afresh. That therefore happens. For either sometimes the
dismissing of the ferment does not reach out of the Spleen unto the Stomach, by
reason of some defect of either of the two: of the duumvirate, or at leastwise,
the ferment received into the Stomach, is covered over with a strange and
Feverish odor: The which, thus understand thou: Any one being an hungry, and
in most perfect health, staying too long in the importunate fumes of Coals,
does presently perceive a loathing or nauseousness to arise upon him, and an
averseness to meats, and then also a pain in the fore part of his head; and at
length a Vomiting. Therefore the ferment of the Stomach, as it is covered with
the hurtful odor of the Coals; So likewise, through a poysonsome odor and
burntish contagion of the moved Fevers, it happens, that an averseness to
fleshes is straightway bred, as the ferment proper to the Stomach is overspred
with that burntish odor or contagion.

These things, I had thus concluded with my self concerning Diet, and the
consideration of Food, within those few common rules abovesaid; I did measure
according to the course

Finally, Exercises, Labors, Works, Rests, Sleeps, and Air, do depend on the
Rules which the moments or requirances of other Digestions do dictate unto us;
To wit, that the juyces generated of the Cream, may the more succesfully attain
unto their own ends or come unto their bounds. This is the truth of Diet, which
Nature does of her own accord show and teach; and let that thing be one and
perpetual; That whosoever has obtained the best Remedies of Secrets, as he
presently restores the sick, and vindicates them from any Disease whatsoever;
So also he prescribes no other Diet for sick, than for healthy folk. For to
the healthy all things are accounted healthy; because the digestive ferments do
powerfully draw and restrain all things into their own jurisdiction: And so
digestions do prescribe the rules of Diet.

CHAP. LIX. A Modern Pharmacapolion and Dispensatory.
1. The Art of Healing has crept into Fables. 2. The Barbarians excel the
Europeans in Herbarism. 3. The custom of Galen, of filching the Inventions of
others. 4. A Tragedial sex of Herbs. 5. The signate or thing signified in
Herbs, was ridiculously translated into Palmestry. 6. The Rashness of
Paracelsus. 7. It was a vain Invention, to have brought back Herbs into the
Zodiac. 8. How little that is regarded, which is very much to be weighed. 9.
It is a shameful thing ta measure the natural endowed gifts of Simples by their
degree of heat. 10. The stumblings of Herbarists. 11. The true refining of
Simples has been hitherto scanty. 12. The venal Blood, and arterial Blood, do
differ even in Plants. 13. Ice has deceived Quercetanus. 14. The Father of
Lights, is the alone giver of infused knowledge, without the observance of
effects. 15. Vain means to know the virtues of Simples. 16. A specifical
savor. 17. Things desired in the knowledge of Simples. 18. The art of the Fire
opens the way. 19. The diversity of Agents in Nature. 20. A diverse activity of
Spagyrical or Alchymical remedies. 21. A Balsame preserving all the juices of
Herbs from putrefaction, without an alteration of their properties. 22. A
censure or valuation of Extracts and Magisteries. 23. A horrid confusion and
plurality of Simples. 24. Dispensatories prevail only for expedition, but not
for appropriation. 25. A deceiving of Clients or Patients, obtained by the
authority of Magistrates. 26. God composeth some things, which man may not
separate, nor over-add a third thing unto them. 27. When a conjoyning is to be
admitted. 28. A sentence concerning the prevalency of Dispensatories. 29. The
virtues of many things are blunted by sweet things. 30. An Answer to things
Objected in behalf of sweet things. 31. The vanity of Syrupes. 32. Chemistry is
preserred before other professions. 33. The use of things from beyond the Seas.
34. The Crasis or constitutive temperature is the kernel of Remedies. 35. Vices
in Decoctions. 36. A defect in Electuaries, Pills, and Confections. 37. Against
the confoundings of Simples. 38. An examining of loosening Medicines. 39. What
kind of preparation of Simples is to be despised. 40. The dammageable boiling
of Odoriferous things. 41. The ridiculous burning of Harts-horne. 42. The
Correction of many things is fatal. 43. The Offenses of Simples. 44. Absurd
Miscelanies, or Hotchpotch mixtures. 45. The whole Earth has, and brings forth
Poison. 46. Under Poisons do lurk the most powerful Secrets. 47. An Error
concerning the gelding of Asarum. 48. An error concerning its Crudity. 49. No
true Poison in its first Being. 50. The Death of the Marquess Spinellus, by the
folly of Hellebore. 51. The examination of the Viper. 52. Arsenical things, by
what right they are the Remedies of Ulcers. 53. How Poisons may be made
Remedies. 54. The Chemical Remedies of the Shops. 55. An examining of Gold and
Pearls in healing. 56. The use of Oily things. 57. What has departed from
clarified Sugar. 58. The manner of applying of external things. 59. The
Collection or gathering of Simples.

THe Art of Healing is every where drawn into the Tragedies and scorn of the
vulgar. Because Physicians will not be wise, but according to the custom of the
Schools. For what they read, they believe, and what they believe, they deliver
to the trust of the Apothecary, his Wife, and Servant or Family, to be put in
execution. For thereby every

Before my entry of the Shop, I cannot but be angry at the describers of
simples: For although there be no field more spacious, plentiful, and
delightful in the face of the whole earth, and where the mind is more
delighted, than in Herbarism; yet there has scarce been a less progress made
in any other thing. For truly the Arabians, Greeks or Gentiles, Barbarians,
wild country People, and Indians, have observed their own Simples much more
diligently than all the Europeans. For even from the days of Plato (wherein
Diascorides a man of War, lived) nothing almost has been added to Herbarism:
but much diminished.

Galen, from a desire of robbery, wrote this study of another, his name being
suppressed. He being plainly a non-Diascorian, snatched up the words of
Diascorides. The which, in the mean time, Pliny has besprinkled with many
trifles: Because, as its very likely, Diascorides: As if the power of Medicine
had attained unto its end, in the first Author. But the more modern Herbarists,
began to distinguish Herbs into Sexes, and supposing that they understood many
things from thence, complained,

There were also afterward, others, who would observe signatures in Herbs, as
it

Hence Paracelsus rightly writes to Chyrurgions: To what end do ye over-adde
unto Symphytum or the root of greater Comfrey, Vinegar, Bole, and such like wan
additaments? when as God has composed this Simple as altogether sufficient
against the ruptures of bones? finally, whatsoever thou shall add unto it,
thou make, as if thou would by thy correction, supply the place of God.
Thou do grievously err.

In like manner, I also think, that God has perfectly, and sufficiently
composed in Simples, complete Remedies of any Diseases whatsoever.

In the next place, I infallibly know, that there is in the Archeus of
vegetables, no anatomical alliance or affinity with us, whether we regard the
whole, or at length, their parts. For the endowments of Simples, are by
creation: but not from an usurpation of possession: for properties were already
in their-own Herbs, before sin, death, and necessity.

Lastly, I believe, that God does give the knowledge of Simples, to whom he
will, from a supernatural grace: but not by the signs of nature! For what
Palmestrical affinity has the Boars tooth, the Goats blood, the peisle of a
Bull, the dung of a Horse, or the Herb Daysie, with a Pleurisy? or what
signature have those Simples with each other? Truly, I praise my Lord, who
before Diseases were, created all things primarily for his own glory; neither
marked he Simples for Diseases that were to come by accident: but for the grace
of the universe, from whence indeed the Lord has honor. Therefore I have
laughed at Paracelsus, because he has erected serious trifles into the
principles of Mathiolus, Tabernomontanus, Brasavolus, Ruellius, Fuchsius,
Tragus d'Allichampius, and other observers of Herbs, are hitherto busied, only
about the Diascorides: they also tie them up unto the degrees of heat and cold,
as though they did demonstrate something from the foundation: A shameful thing
indeed it is, to have drawn the Crasis or constitutive temperature of Simples
out of heat, but not from the Dodonaeus Friso, being now become a Dutchman,
Tabernomontanus, with a few others, although they did insist on the same steps
of Degrees, yet they have subjoyned some additions, from their own, or the
gathered experiences of others: but as yet, plainly confused, uncertain, and
badly distinct: because that they have not written from knowledge, but either
from the noted revelation of the vulgar, or they being things drawn from a
casual experiment. There is none amongst them all, who has knowingly described
the properties of Simples, even as he, who had described all things, Libanus.
As a sure token, that true knowledges or Sciences are not elsewhere to be
fetched, than from the Father of Lights: even as I have elsewhere touched at by
the way, concerning the hunting or searching out of Sciences. A living creature
that is entire, and alive, cannot be bruised without its dung. It is therefore
to be lamented, that it has not been yet weighed, that Herbs have much dung,

In the next place, we distinguish the arterial blood in a man, from his venal
blood, by diverse marks: But in plants, it has seemed sufficient to have said
it. That plant, in one only subject, consists of diverse and opposite
properties: they have acquiesced, neither bruise, they shall give forth another
and a far more inferior juice, to wit, a dung and venal blood, well mixed with
arterial blood, however they are clarified. For let young beginners learn to
distinguish and separate an arterial blood from the venal blood and substance
of Plants, if they do ever mind to have performed any thing worthy of praise,
by Simples: for from hence it comes to pass, that how stoutly soever thou have
operated in extracting, (the manner thereof being taught by those of late time)
yet one dram of crude Rhubarb does effect more being administered in powder,
than whatsoever thou shall extract out of a dram and a half. For the stomach
resolves more by its ferment, than whatsoever the mediating or middling juices
of extractions can take away; because they resolve without distinction, liquor
of the substance which is like unto a dreg, and despised. For Quercetanus, when
as he had taken notice, that the innermost powers of things were not to be
sufficiently examined by Palmestry, and Anatomy, which they call, Sealed; calls
divination Behold, oh what a figure of the nettle, do I behold in the glass!
And rejoicing, he established a Maxim: To wit, That a seminal figurative Being
of Herbs, does remain in the ashes, unconquered by the fire.

That good man declares his ignorance of Principles, not knowing, first of
all, that every Ice, beginning, makes dented or tooth-like points, like the
shape of the leaf of a nettle: And then, that the Archeus is the figurer of the
thing to be generated, which is burnt up by the fire, long before a coal or
ashes is made.

Thirdly, if a Lixivium should express the seminal Being of Herbs, surely it
ought to resemble, not the leafes; but the root, stalk, flowers and fruits. But
the figurative power Adam, and who to Solomon, demonstrated the properties of
things at the first sight. St. Theresa, having once, mentally seen a Crucifix,
perceived it to be the eyes of her soul; the which she thenceforth kept open
for her lifetime, and the flesh has shut them up in us, through the
corruption of nature. For neither for the future, do we else, know natures from
a former cause; neither do we now know the interchangeable courses of the
Archeus, but by a naked observation. Many Simples are indeed assigned us; but
for the most part, false and disagreeable. Neither does the reading of Books
make us to be knowers of the properties, but by observation: No otherwise than
as a Boy who sounds or sings the Music, does notwithstanding, not compose it,
as neither has he known the first grounds of harmony, by means whereof, the
tunes or notes were so to be disposed. If this thing thus happen in sensible
things which are to be known by sense, the reason whereof, the hearing
measures: what shall not be done in Medicinal affairs, wherein the virtues of
Simples are not penetrable by any sense? But the descriptions of all kind of
Medicines, are read, being delivered in the Shops, with a defect of the
knowledge of properties and agreements. For I speak concerning a knowledge of
vision, such a one, as the soul has, being separated from the Body, and such a
one, as God bestows in this life, on whom he will, and hitherto has he
removed this knowledge from the company of those who ascribe all reverence unto
heathenish Books. The Father of Lights therefore is to be entreated, that he
may vouchsafe to give us knowledge, such as once he did unto Bezaleel and
Aholiab, for the glory of his own Name, and the naked charity toward our
Neighbors: For so, the Art of Medicine should stand aright in us, under every
weight. But it is to be feared, lest he who has suffered the Books of Solomon
to perish, may reserve this knowledge of Simples for the age of Elias the
Artist. For the Schools have by savours or tastes, promised an

In like manner also Aqua fortis, oil of Vitriol, Sulphur, etc. being sour
things, according to the Rules of tastes, ought to be exceeding cold. But I am
to show, at sometime, in its place, that the Schools have not yet beheld the
faculties of things, as to the outward bark or shell of them; and therefore
that they have passed by the fountains of their seminal properties. Finally,
there is in every thing, a specifical savor, which ought to teach their
property, if there be any other external signates: To wit, there is in
Cinnamon, besides a quick sharpness, a peculiar grace or acceptableness in
savor, the which thou can scarce find in any Simple besides. So Gentian,
Elecampane, etc. have besides common bitterness, a specifical savor, which (by
reason of a singularity proper to any kind of Simples) cannot be reduced under
Rules, and is the alone accuser, as also distinguisher of all properties.

Furthermore, that Simples are to be chosen or gathered in the station wherein
they are in their vigor, this is common to the Schools, country people, and my
self: To wit, Seeds, while they are almost dry: but stalks and leafs, while
being juicy, they are moist through a full quantity of venal blood: roots also,
while they swell with strength, and are not as yet worn out with generating and
cocting: but being now filled through much rest, their Archeus being awakened,
they meditate of budding. Others persuade the Autumn; I for the most part, love
the Spring: the which I have learned by experience in Polipodium, Briony, etc.
For the juice of Herbs, is their venal blood, the which being more and more
ripened, is either gathered into them, or ends into the nature of fibers, or at
least wise does slackly perform its office, whilst the vital power meditates of
propagating a Seed.

Therefore, in searching into, and gathering Simples, nothing has remained
more neglected, than that which was most desired, and wherein, even from the
beginning hitherto, there has been no progress. Indeed the powers of Simples,
and their immediate subjects, have remained unknown. For those, besides a clear
and visual knowledge of them, do require a desired preparation and
appropriation. First of all, the knowledge of Sciences: but that does not
presuppose traditions declared at pleasure, and transcribed one to another. But
preparation does not only require the boylings and bruisings of the shop: but
the whole Art of the fire. At length a fitting or suiting, applying or
appropriating, requires a speculation founded in the light of nature, of man,
Diseases, and affects, and then their dependencies, changes, and
interchangeable courses. Its no wonder therefore, that the Doctrine of Simples,
has remained barren. In the mean time, under so

But it has been the error of the Schools, not first to subdue the juices of
Herbs, together with their substance, and their ferment, before that a choice
or separation of the best parts be possible to be made. Then also, they have
neglected diligently to search, that the juice of things being pressed forth
with a press, does afterward, only through the

In the second place, I pity the so many connexions, and confused hotch-potch
mixtures in the shops, the bewrayers of ignorance, and uncertainty. For the
Schools hope, that Paracelsus; thou have now corrupted the mixture ordained of
God. Yet, as often as any particular things have not there intent, I do forthwith
admit of adjoynings, if the things do couplingly attain that by their
conjoyning, which they had not in their singularity:

I afterward knew, by many labors, and expenses, that the mattes of Remedies
being advanced to a more noble dignity only by their preparation, did ascend
unto a degree of perfection, liberty, subtility, and purity, and did far excel
the Decoctions, Syrupes, and Pouders of the Shops co-heaped under Honey. For
whosoever is well instructed in the exercises of the fire, does clearly behold
with me, that there is no Medicine to be found in Hippocrates, if they
acknowledge that Diseases do proceed from sharp, bitter, salt, and so that it
ought to be of no credit or esteem with poison. Therefore the answer of the
Schools by poisons, is impertinent unto the question concerning the Remedies of
Diseases, as bitter, sharp, etc. Unto the second I say, that it is a frivolous
answer, while there is not satisfaction given unto the first. They know not
therefore as yet, that the virtues of Remedies are changed and blunted by
sugar. That to many, the taste of Aloes is more grateful, than that of honey.

In the next place, that those who desire to flatter the tongue; yet, cannot
the stomach, which only by the beholding, abhors Medicines covered over with
the deceit of sugar. That a thing is more easily taken in some liquor, in a few
drops, and is more freely digested or concocted within, than being seasoned
with plenty of sugar. Again, that things being immingled with a convenient
liquor, do the more fully or piercingly enter, than being overwhelmed with much
sugar. That sugar, although it be grateful to healthy persons, yet it presently
becomes horried unto sick folks, being hostile in most Diseases of the stomach
and womb: but that in other Diseases, it oft-times makes the help of the
adjoined Medicine, ridiculous or vain. For sugar is diametrically opposite to
the sour ferment of the stomach, and therefore it causes the more difficult
digestions. For sugar is clarified with the Lixivium of Calx vive, and Potters
earth. For if the Schools had known the sharpness of the spirit of honey, and
the stinking dregginess of sugar, they had been content with a more sparing use
of them among the sick.

Lastly, unto the third, I say, that the Schools herein confess their
ignorance, that they know not how to preserve Medicines from corruption,
without a pickling, and gelding

I praise my bountiful God, who has called me into the Art of the fire, out of
the dregs of other professions. For truly, Chemistry, has its principles not
gotten by discourses, Family-administration, nor rejoices it in Wedlock. Thus
far also, the operation of healing proceeds into the middle life of the
Archeus, the which, by connexions and confoundings, if it does not plainly
perish: at leastwise, it is manifestly weakened. For the vain successes by the
mutual embracing of many seeds, ought to have admonished the Schools, to
abstain from the confounding of so many and so diverse Simples. By how much the
rather, because under that multitude, many supposites or things put in the
place of others, opposites, vain things, but besides most of them ponderous,
impertinent, unfit, improper, and therefore, weak, barren, evil and dead
things, do run together, or at least wise, are made. For although the
worthinesses, and adulteries of Simples, belong more to the Merchants, than
Apothecaries: yet not to have distinguished of those Simples, is the part only
of a sluggish, ignorant, or covetous Apothecary.

In the mean time, it is certain, that for the most part, all things are at
length, taken crude, hard, unripe, shut up, poysonsom, impure, bound, and unfit
for the communicating of their virtues, and to be the more depraved by
co-mingling. And because the stomach of sick folks is in the entry of the
House, and therefore also first offended, because it is weak, and unfit to
extract the middle life, being beset with so many difficulties: Therefore it
was by all manner of labors and singular care to be prevented, that we may
prepare all things for a weak stomach, if we hope sweetly to reach unto our
conceived and desired ends. The use therefore of all Confections, is horride,
nauseous, and tiresom. And therefore, from hence is the Proverb: Take away
that; for the Shops have a smell. Also, if thou take way from loosening
Medicines, Scammony and Coloquintida, the whole fabric of the Shops in
loosening Medicines, will fall to the ground. For purgative

In the next place, seeing the proper and chief virtue of Spices is in that
which is odourable,

Furthermore, I have hated many other Confections of the Shops, because foolish
ones: whereby they endeavor to cloak and blunt the supereminent and violent
power of things,

In the next place, that those Simples do moreover, flow thither in an
uncertain Dose? whence indeed, the hoped for effect is prevented? And indeed,
by the error of every one three Peppers, Acorns, or Galengal, Costus, Rhubarb,
Cassia, Bdellium, Mastick, Amomum, Peucedanum or Dog-fennel, Spikenard, Ginger,
the wood and juice of Balsame, Gumme-dragon, Germander, Euphorbium, also the
Oils of Nard and Musk? Do every one of these conspire for the scope proposed
in the Etymology? Or whether from those being co-mixt together, and perfuming
the intentions of each other, a new virtue shall arise, which may complete its
Promises? To wit, Can it powerfully break the stone in the Reins and Bladder?
and can it presently loosen all the defects of Urine? should not Opobalsamum,
rather perish in other excrements and sweepings? But in Opiate confections,
there is the same deafness, as in spicie ones, every where easy to be seen.
The which, that I may resolve by one only example also. For whither in Aurea
Alexandrina Nicolai, does the confounding together of sixty five Ingrediences
tend? Of which Simples, there is no affinity with Opium and Mandrake, the
pillars of the Confection? Truly the congresses of Simples made at the pleasure
of an ignorant man, have befooled the Schools, and killed the sick: they have
frustrated them of their hope put into them, and by uncertain conjectures have
exposed them to sale, and made them to pass by the occasions of healing, which
are unstable every moment. Therefore the compositions of the shops, if thou
do examine them without prejudice of mind, thou shall on every side, with a
profitable admiration be astonished, that in Syrupes, Electuaries, Pills,
Ecligmaes, Trochies, and other things, the World has been deluded by the prate
of Physicians, the foolish blockishnesses of the Schools, and their hurtful
presumptions.

For we being Christians, do believe with the Stoics, that the World was
composed for Man's use. And when as I in times past, earnestly contemplated of
that thing with my self, it presently seemed to me, that humane use might
commodiously want so great, or so many Poisons: For our more cold climates, I
have found, at least, in this, to be the more happy, that they want creeping,
poysonsome, and deadly Monsters, wherewith otherwise, the hotter Zone does
abound. Surely, we have not much necessity, familiarity, abundance of poisons,
neither shall their use, in any respect recompense so many calamities arising
from thence: Yea if the earth does bring forth Thorns and Thistles, as a curse
of Sin; truly it brings far greater calamities unto us, on its back, as well in
the order of living creatures, as vegetables, which are importunate of the life
of Mortals: wherefore, the Text threatens some very small matter by the
Thistles and Thorns, which man had now bewailed as the greatest, in the
craftiness of the Serpent his Enemy. Surely if it be well searched into, Nature
has scarce any thing free, which has not its own Venom secretly admixed with
it. For we have not Roses or Violets, which do not assault us; as that under so
great a fragrancy, they do not hide the contagions of Poison: to wit, notable
marks of Putrefaction, a co-melting of our body, and filching away of our
strength or faculties.

Therefore we entering into an account of simples, shall find but few guiltless:
Yea if thou shall cast an eye on the fields, the whole globe of the Earth, is
naught but one only Paradise wanted those Poisons, although Serpents were
present; or perhaps, Poisons were to be of no hurt to man in Eden, by reason of
his immortality. But on the contrary, the Almighty saw, that whatsoever things,
(even in the World, out of Paradise) he had made, were good in themselves, and
for their ends. Wherefore I long ago was deceived in my self, as thinking how
unworthy Poisons were; both because the Honor of God did not require their
existence; and also because man had willingly wanted many Poisons, and so I
supposed that Poisons were made neither for the glory of God, nor for the use
of man. There are indeed a few things which are guiltless, in the use whereof,
without a caution, there is safety; but most things do fight against us with a
horrid Tyranny. Other things also do gnaw us by scorching us with their
sharpness; very many other things do every where, under a show of friendship
mock us, and carry a secret destructive enemy within them. But there is nothing
(universally) which does not abound with dreggs, and is not horrid through
impurities: In the next place, which does not consist with crudities, an
unequal tempering, and an unvanquished stubbornness of perverseness. For
although man was brought into Paradise, yet the Creator of things worthy to be
praised, foreknew from Eternity, that the World should be a Mansion for Man;
and as he gave the Earth to the Sons of Men, so also he made the same for Man,
with all things contained therein.

At length, I by Chemistry, beholding all things more clearly, it repented me
of my Asarum or Asarabacca, with how great anguish does it provoke Vomit, and
the Stomach testifies that a Poison is present with it? and how easily does it
depart through boiling, and the Poison is changed into an opening,
Urineprovoking remedy of lingering Fevers, the which, the occult or hidden
spiciness therein, does discover? So, Aron or Wake-robbin, being boiled in
Vinegar, waxes mild, and becomes a healing Medicine of great falls.

Wherefore the Schools have appointed corrections; but I wish they were not
ridiculous ones, not rather geldings, not withdrawings of their faculties!
Indeed they think that the laxative part flies away out of Asarum by boylings,
even as every thing does (through its own rottenness) in languishing years,
consume.

But at leastwise the root of Asarum, does not wax mild being boiled in Wine,
even so as it does if it boil in Water: Yet in an equal degree of the fire,
its laxative part would

Therefore others think, that the crudity in Asarum, is the effector of its
loosening; but these do neglect pot herbs, which are more crude than Asarum:
But that Hellebore is not Scammony in sour things, that they may mittigate it;
but the common sort of Physicians have already known that Scammony is thus
gelded; so as, that if it be exposed unto the sharp vapor of Sulphur, it is
plainly deprived of its virtue; and so much of the Scammony does depart, as it
shall draw of the sharpness. But I being willing from a fatherly affection, to
correct the furious force of Medicines, do understand, that the ancient
faculties or virtues of things ought to remain, and to be turned inward in
their root, or to be transchanged under their own simplicity into other
endowments or qualities privily lurking in the same place, under the Poison
their keeper; or to be bred a new, by reason of an added perfection: After
which manner, Coloquintida, turns its laxative and destructive quality inwards;
and a resolving faculty springs up from the bottom, being a greater or singular
curer of Cronical or long continuing Diseases.

For Paracelsus laudably attempted that thing in his tincture of the Lile of
Antimony; yet

This Hinge, not the Schools, but Physicians chosen of God, whom the Almighty
has chosen from their Mothers Womb, in time to come, shall know; and he shall
make a difference of the Sheep from the Goats. Simples therefore of great
powers or virtues, are not to be gelded, nor mortified, but to be bettered by
Art; by reason of the extracting of hidden faculties, or by a suspension or
setting aside of the poysonsomeness, or by a substituting of one endowment in
the room of another, by commanding specifical adjuncts. These things are for
those, to whom it has not been granted to taste the power of the greater
circulated Salt. For some things do by adjuncts wax mild, their cruelty being
laid aside, do become neutral; to wit, through virtues being partakingly
assumed on both sides. Neither therefore may we borrow these adjuncts from the
received Dispensatories of the Shops, which do not teach a bettering, or even
corrections; but a destruction of things, or surely they afford nothing but
correctingmockeries. For Example; Marquess Charles Spinelli, late General of
the Genoans, when as he had walked late on foot about the City, having thoroughly
viewed all the Walls, commanded the Physicians to be called, and said unto
them, that he had sometimes labored with the Falling Sickness, and was cured
by me, and that now and then he as yet felt a giddiness in his Head, since he
had come out of Aquitane into Liguria or Genoa, by crossing the Sea.

A circle of Physicians, next morning, gives him a scruple of white Hellebore
to drink, and for a correction thereof, added as much of Annise-seed; presently
after half an hour, he Vomiteth, and afterward he invokes the aid of me, being
absent, and accuses his Murderers, saying, Helmonti mio, voi me lo dicesti,
gli Medici t'ucciderano. Oh my friend Helmont, thou toldst me this; that these
Physicians will kill thee. He was silent, and after two hours, his Stomach
being first contracted, and then having a convulsion throughout his whole body,
he dies: the Physicians seek excuses, and the Earth covered their fault. For so
the Confections of the Schools throughout their Dispensatories, do carry many
foolish correctives into the fardle with them, Opiates have not things
(especially) adjoined unto them; but laxatives, for the most part, Ginger,
Mace, Annise, and whatsoever things might cure wringings of the bowels, from a
later effect of loosening Medicines. Fie, with how unpunished a liberty, does
ignorance rage on mortals! How little do they understand their own Hippocrates:
If those things are taken away, which is meet, (that is, which hurt and burden)
the sick feels himself better, and does easily bear it. For seeing those things
which hurt within, do now and then, scarce weigh a dram, every purge which is
directed for health, ought to be an evacuation, either unperceivable, or at
leastwise, exceeding moderate, and that with a restoring of the strength or
faculties. For this is that which the sick do easily bear, with profit or help.
The Correctories therefore of Medicines, are unprofitable patcheries, and a
weight described by the Schools, without the knowledge of things, and so
destructive at least, to the Medicines, if not together also, to the sick. This
part of Medicine requires a diligent and expert Secretary of Nature; Because in
that part, the most ample riches of Medicines, and gilded household stuff of
Glaura, is found. The Schools had in times past, learned of our Philosophers,
that most excellent virtues do inhabit in Simples, over which destructive
poisons were appointed chief Keepers: thereupon, their rashness succeeded,
which co-mingled express Poisons, and manifest Corrosives, with Antidotes;
hoping, that by the goodness and quantity of adjuncts, the malignity of the
Poison was to be overcome; as if it were convenient for health, for a
pestilentious Glove, to be brought unto guests into a chamber filled with
healthy air.

For I do not here accuse the Viper in Triacle, without which, to wit, this
hotch-potch of Simples is as it were dead; For the flesh of Vipers is in it
self unhurtful, and without

For Arsenick and Orpiment, etc. How much soever they may be fixed, and
dulcified

For even as Poisons, have a fermental readiness of acting, so we were to have
labored, that we might reserve the strength and aptness of Medicines, but
withal that we might direct

Wherefore as I do (in general) pity the Compositions and Corrections of the
Shops; so I do as yet more detest the precipitatings, glassifyings, and
preparations of Mercury, etc. And likewise, the adulterations of Spirits out of
Spices, hot Seeds, Vitriol, Sulphur, etc. For they are prepared for gain, by
our fugitive servants, and purchased by the Shops, rather to the disgrace of
the Art of the Fire, than for the defect of the sick.

I likewise bewail the shameful simplicity of those, who give men, leaf-gold,
and bruised or poudered precious stones, to drink, with great hope, selling
their ignorance, if not deceit,

In the next place, Oils and fatnesses are not of value for Balsams,
Ointments, and Emplaisters, unless perhaps, as they may give a consistence to
the Medicine.

For first, a great part of men do not suffer Ointments in their skin, because
they stir up itchings and wheales, with swelling. And then, because the
aforesaid Oils,

It is also worthy of loud laughter, that Loaf, or the whitest Sugar, is
commended, not because it is more sweet, and more worthy in its virtue; but
because it is dearer, and

I am wont also, to apply Unguents outwardly, with choice or judgment: To wit,
in affects, wherein the Cure is abroad or far from the Center, as in a wound,
bruise, burn, the whole body. For a cherishing Tile or Brick, does drive the
odor of the Emplaister inwards, and does attract outward, those things, which
being the more slow, do else stick fast: and likewise the spirit making the
assaults, is attracted together with the blood, is dispersed by the heat, and
another succeeds in its place, draws the force of the Medicine, and as it
were boiling up within, is driven back.

Concerning the gathering of Simples also, men are not every where,
sufficiently grounded. They determine, that roots are to be gathered in time of
Autumn: But for the most

CHAP. LX. The Power of Medicines.
1. The Authors comfort in his persecutions. 2. The Author decyphers his
Adversaries. 3. A dream of the Author. 4. He felt or perceived the Elementary
qualities. 5. He perceived Coagulations. 6. He perceived Atrophiaes or
Consumptions of the flesh. 7. He perceived drynesses in us. 8. He perceived
drynesses in other things. 9. An Error of the Schools. 10. Whence the heat of
the Liver is, and in what manner it subsisteth. 11. He perceived the adulteries
of Merchants. 12. He perceived two savours of things. 13. Notable things
touching the taste and savor. 14. He perceived the Causes of Healing. 15. And
likewise, a twofold manner. 16. He perceived the hope of immortality to be
taken away. 17. He perceived a certain goodness in nature. 18. He perceived the
digestive Ferments. 19. He perceived true diuretics or provokers of Urine. 20.
He perceived the changing properties of Salts. 21. He perceived the spirit of
Salt to be changed by the co-touching of things connexed. 22. He perceived the
nigh or ready, or slow obediences of Salts. 23. He perceived Salts to be the
Authors of wringings of the Bowels. 24. The top or perfection of Salts is seen
in their first Being. 25. He perceived specifical Savours. 26. The definition
of a Savor. 27. Things without savor are tasted by the stomach, which are not
judged of, or discerned by the tongue. 28. He perceived the occult property,
and the boastings of the Schools. 29. The searching after hidden or secret
things, is not [for what] but by the way [of because] from the effect to the
cause, according to the Gospel. 30. He perceived unstopping or opening things.
31. He perceived the activities of Salts. 32. He perceived the spirits of
Minerals. 33. He perceived the loosening poison of purging things. 34. A
threefold sign of a laudable Laxative. 35. The error of Paracelsus. 36.
Chemistry. 37. Distilled things are not to be judged suitable, or equal to
their concrete Bodies 38. He perceived many things to be transchanged by
adjuncts. 39. He perceived the sanguine glassie color of a Metal. 40. He
perceived the distillation of Lead, whereof Paracelsus above. 41. He cured
diverse Diseases. 42. He perceived that the planetary faculties of Metals were
to be drawn forth by a higher or deeper resolving, than that which has been
before. 43. He perceived the diverse virtues of dissolved Gold. 44. He perceived
the virtues of the Alkahest. 45. He perceived the virtues of Mercurius vitae,
in its synonimal or fellow name of Lile. 46. He perceived the action of
renewing things. 47. He perceived the root of a bewitching Sorcerie. 48. He
perceived Poisons. 49. He perceived the actions of things, according to the
applications of the receiver. 50. An Idiotism of Paracelsus, about the
nourishing of a Wound. 51. The use of Salt. 52. The variety of Oils. 53. The
use of the water, and salt of artificiated things. 54. The Elixir of a Spice.
55. The praise of Magisteries. 56. Meats seasoned, why unwholesome. 57. A
censure of some Minerals. 58. He perceived a sixfold digestion. 59. He
perceived when the venal blood is quickened. 60. What the inward and anointed
grease may suffer. 61. He perceived the action of Cantharides and Caustic
Remedies. 62. He perceived the virtue of an Amulet. 63. The virtue of Stones.
64. He perceived whence the diversity of effects in acting, is. 65. He
perceived the necessities of death. 66. The order of Chemical operations.

VExation brings forth understanding, as too much pressure stifles it. Although
in my sharpest adversities, I might make use of Job, and Paul; yet the Lord
Jesus, the For there are those (as says the Prophetess St. Hildegard) who
shall first deceive the potent Prelates, and their subjects or substitutes,
under a show of Piety: and at length, as many as will not favor them, they
shall oppress by the power of great men.

Good God, what have not I felt, and how much could not I witness? But the
whole revenge, have I referred to thee alone, and I entreat thee out of
Charity, that thou would spare them, or that thou would not damn them for
my sake: Because I receive all things from thy hand, and they know not what
they do.

At length, I thought of a means whereby I might meditate, that all my
tribulations were transferred on the head of Nero and Tiberius. Therefore I
being at once, wearied and refreshed, and suddenly with great consolation,
sliding as it were into a dream, I saw [He is] And the footstool of his feet
[Nature] The Porter of the Court, was called [Understanding] who without
speech, reached unto me a little Book, a choice out of darkness, the name
whereof was [The bud of a Rose not yet opened] And although the Porter uttered
no voice, yet I knew, that little Book was to be devoured by me. I stretched
forth my hand, and ate it up. And it was of an harsh and earthy taste, as if it
would stop up my winde-pipe; so as I swallowed it with a great slowness of
labor. From whence, afterward, my whole head, seemed to be transparent. Then,
afterward, another spirit of a superior order, gave me a bottle, wherein was
[Fire-water] as being in one word: A name altogether simple, singular,
undeclinable, unseparable, unchangeable, and immortal. But I knew not what my
business was with it: Neither, heard I any thing more of it; and by reason of
the fear of its greatness, my jaws were shut up, and my voice clave to my
jaws. At length, having performed due worship before the Throne, I endeavored
diversely to experience, what the bottle might contain. Behold, before the doors
of the Court, there was the Art of the Fire, a cheerful old Woman being the
Turn-key, who did not open the locks without, unless the Porter had first
withdrawn the bolt within; the which he did not attempt, unless, from a sign
given him by the light of the Throne. But unto those that knocked at the doors,
the Porter answered, the Key-keeper holding her peace: I know you not. But they
who tried to look in through the lattices of the windows, being smitten with
darkness, forthwith fell down mad, many wandered up and down, promising great
things without a foundation. I stood a good while silent; and then afterward,
a hand (the rest of whose Body I saw not) led me aside unto a pleasant Garden:
where on a sudden, all Simples worshipped me, as though every one had been
singular by themselves. In which assault, I felt or perceived all the Simples
of the world, not indeed, as if their qualities did act in me (for I being but
one, had not been sufficient

I perceived in the first place, that all heats, colds, moistures, and dryths,
were as it were momentary qualities, happening on things constituted, like
colors: But those things which do heat, cool, moisten, or dry us up, I
perceived, that that did not happen indeed, by reason of an excess of those
qualities, whose names they did obtain: but in respect of an appropriation of
the object. For in this respect, the dead carcass of a man, who dyed of a
languishing death, although being nigh the fire, it violently waxed lukewarm;
yet, unto our touching, it seems to be most cold; so that the hand can scarce
recover its heat a long while after it. And surely, that comes not to pass,
through a quality generated in us, which is named cold: the which indeed in
contemplating of it, does so many points exceed our heat, that it imprints an
excess of so great cold: but rather because the vital spirit being greatly
afraid of the dead carcass, does depart or retire from the hand. For in like
manner, Camphor, resembling the savor of Pepper, and bitter Opium, are said to
cool, as they subdue or chase the Archeus: After which manner also, a Feverish
Blas, being the same in number, does stir up, first cold, and afterward heat,
in the Archeus. I perceived therefore, that hot things, from the moment of
their first degree, even unto the degree of an Eschar, do not brand our
temperature with an excess of heat: To wit, by producing in us an excelling of
their heat: but by the ministry of sharp salts, they do so inflame our Archeus,
that they do more and more exasperate the same; and at length, do by burning,
assume a fiery violence, through the motion of their own Blas: Such as is the
Prune and Persian fire. And therefore, none of those hot things do heat dead
carcasses.

In the next place, I perceived, that nothing does properly moisten us, but by
appropriation, and therefore that neither does water properly moisten us
through a defect of appropriation, which is the cause of approximating or the
nearest approaching, and assimilating. But those things which do besmear,
stuff up, resolve, and make the substance of our body (as it were by small
points) salt, without the sense of burning heat and sharpness: those things I
say, do moisten. And that only occasionally, and as it were, by accident.
Therefore I have perceived, that whatsoever things do dissolve, resolve, and
co-melt glutinous things, do moisten: To wit, as they do withdraw the
impediments of coagulation and drying. And therefore the Mallow, Marsh-mallow,
and those things which are believed to be moistening, and so do stop
transpiration, have produced an error in the Schools. For truly, such a
moistening, was nothing but a diseasie detaining of excrements, but not a dewie
moistening of the parts. I perceived also, that no other things do dry up in
us, but those which by extenuating, do dispose to exhalation. For so sweat,
although it moisten the skin, and make the habit of the Body swollen, yet it
merely dryes us.

Furthermore, whatsoever things do coagulate, I perceived rather to harden and
make clotty, than to dry up; and therefore resolving is opposite unto
coagulating, but not

But those things which do induce an Atrophia or Consumption for lack of
nourishment,

I perceived therefore, that there was no other drying in us, than that which
was made by the resolving of the Ferments, and the diflation or pussing away of
heat. I perceived,

I perceived also, that dry things, which drink up liquors into them, although
they are nourishable juice of the stomach to melt. For truly, while I describe
my feelings or perceivances, I am not so much besides my self, as that I shall
deny the excess of an external heat, to burn, and cause a wound or ulcer; or
that cold excelling, does mortify as if it did burn. But in the Dream
proposed, I only perceived them as they are serviceable to the speculation of
healing. Therefore the examples of excessive heat and cold, are like a sword,
but not to be referred among the occasional and internal causes of diseases, to
be considered by a Physician; If indeed, according to the speculations of
Medicine, health is expected by the removal of those: wherefore the speculation
of external and antecedent Causes, is not curative, but only now and then,
significative and directive. For a wound being once inflicted, although the
sword be taken away, the wound is not healed; neither is the fire to be taken
from the hearth, although it has at sometime burnt or scorched somebody in
the same place. For truly, the causes of Diseases are inward, as they are
connexed occasions; therefore the consideration and removal of those, is truly
medicinal.

But the Schools, when they saw the fire to burn its objects, likewise also,
cold to mortify and destroy; and so the body of man, by those external
qualities excelling, to be Persian fire, the burning Fever, etc. That it did
likewise harden by drying or exsiccation of Schirrus's, Stones, Bones, and
Knots. They have also decreed Remedies beseeming such rules, by contrarieties,
not knowing after what sort the spirit of life may stir up heats and colds,
without fire, or icy cold; because neither from the Elements of our body, or
from feigned humors: But they have on both sides neglected the [(...)] or
violent assailant of Hippocrates: Even as I

At length, I presently after the first qualities, perceived the theevish
adulteries of Merchants, wherewith they load, defile, estrange, and
substitutively dissemble foreign Medicines

I presently after perceived two distinct Savours at least, of things, if not
sometimes three or four; one to wit, whereby things are sharp, bitter, salt,
etc. but the other, which Hippocrates has attributed the knowledges of
diseases; to wit, bitter, salt, sharp, and brackish, pointing forth diseases.
But heats and colds he rather understood to be subsequent affects or passions,
than diseases. But I do ascribe their judgment to the taste, by reason of the
aforesaid Archeus, as it were their object whereon they act. Therefore I
perceived that Cures, as Archeus, and the removal of the seminal and diseasie
character produced by the Archeus. This indeed I have perceived to be the
nearest, safest, and highest or chiefest curing: But that which succeeds by
the help of secrets, is busied about the taking away of the product. And
therefore I have perceived, that Arcanum's do operate as Salts. Indeed such
cures do

In the next place I perceived, that not only in the dispositive ferments of
the organs, but besides, by reason of Magnum Oportet, or the necessary
remainder of the middle life,

I moreover perceived, that there are salts which do not find their
disposition but at

I by and by perceived, specifical savours, (to wit, of Mace, Saffron, etc.) to
be as properties, or as the shop of the ultimate forms, uttered by salts
excelling in strength. Archeus, as a messenger, that it may descend into the
knowledge of a hidden property: For unless, things shall smile on the Archeus
by savor and odor, they are not admitted within. Yea, Jallop, Mercury,
Stibium, etc.) as being masked with much Sugar; yet if they are taken again,
they cause horror and abomination. There is therefore one taste of the tongue,
and another in the stomach, as it were the utmost part of the Archeus.
Therefore stomatical savours which are acceptable, do denote, that there is in
the thing, a bountiful life akin to ours: Wherefore a Cat is more delighted
with the smell of putrified and stinking fish, than of Cinnamon. So indeed, we
do oft-times well perceive, that poisons are occult or hidden, by reason of
their specifical savor and odor, horrid to our Midriffs.

In like manner, as often as a pleasing taste appears in a poison, I have
perceived, that under the same Simple, there lurketh a great secret; the which,
the poison being repelled, is born and ordained for difficult effects. I
afterward perceived, that besides specifical savours,

First of all therefore, for the knowing of occult causes, a certain effect is
supposed, and likewise a cause thereof; neither is it doubted, what that
effect, or what the cause thereof may be; but the knitting of them both, is
only sought for: To wit, after what sort, the effect proceeds from the cause;
or on the other hand, after what manner, and by what means, such a cause may
produce its effect. The knowledge I say, of the Tree and its Fruit, is
presupposed: The which, if we compose them for healing (for if the whole world
be for man, also the whole physical knowledge of nature, shall therefore be
subservient to man) the knowledges of ones self shall be first to be
presupposed: To wit, that a true Physician, does know the Tree of the whole
nature of man, and the fruit thereof; to wit, health. Likewise also the tree of
vitiated health, and the very rank or order of health depraved, as the Fruit of
that. Which proper knowledges of the thingliness or essence, together with its
adjacents, are required. Therefore, that we may know the Tree in its root and
properties, that ought to be done by the Fruits: wherefore also, the Fruits are
first to be known. But the Fruits as well of entire, as of vitiated health,
seeing they are the Scopes whereunto the properties of occult Remedies are
referred, have themselves in manner of a Tree and Trunk, whereinto the young
budding slips, and seeds of things ought to be ingrafted, as it were the Fruits
of the same. This indeed the ordination of Medicine requires, that Remedies,
although they have themselves, in manner of a cause; yet that they become
fruits or effects in us, as they do fructify in our Tree: and so, they are not
only the Fruits of their own native Tree, whence in the nature of things they
are derived; but rather, they are new Fruits, from an ingrafting of a product,
and so are plainly promiscuous, of a branch, or Fruit of the Tree implanted,
and of the vital power of the stock, whereinto it is ingrafted. Such fruits
indeed, do bewray their own Tree: And so, as in every progress of nature, a
duality of Sex is required for the production of every Fruit; it was no wonder
that the rank, and applications of occult Qualities, or Remedies, has remained
unknown, if it has hitherto stood neglected, that a healthy, and diseasie
state is bred by the same Parent: and so also they have referred the whole
essence of a Disease, into external, occasional, efficient, and warring causes;
but not into the true and inward Tree of sicknesses. Let us suppose therefore
the Archeus to be provoked, and almost furious, the which being provoked by
occasional causes, does pour forth its own blood, and causes the Bloody Flux:
or likewise, let us feign the Archeus, grievously bearing the mark of pain,
conceived in some part serving to the last digestion, and being as it were
stung with fury, to stir up an Erisipelas. The question is, of finding out a
Remedy, by the occult or hidden property. The Schools therefore have considered
to apply cooling things to the Erisipelas, as to the fruit, and they would not
apply a Remedy to the vitiated tree. But the Secretaries of natural things,
have attended to the aforesaid furies, to be restrained by fear; so that the
fear is not to be incurred on the man, but on the Archeus. Therefore they have
killed the most fearful creature; to wit, a Hare: Not indeed with a weapon,
that he might dye by an unexpected death; but by hunting, that he might perish
by the biting of Dogs: whereby a doubled force of fear may be imprinted on his
whole Body. Therefore they have tinged a bloody Towel in the blood of the Hare,
and kept it being dried: And that they have administered by pieces in Wine, and
the Dysentery was cured. And likewise, they have put it dry on the Erisipelas,
and it was cured. Yea, the Germane Soldiers, do give an Hare dried in the
smoke, in drink, and the Bloody Flux or Dysentery is cured with an
undeceiveable event. From whence they have learned, that cuttings of veins and
purgings are vain, whether thou respectest feigned humors, or in the next
place, a diminishing of heat and strength, together with the blood: likewise,
that coolings are ridiculous; because they are those things which endeavor to
heal from the effect, do never touch at the roots, and for that cause, do for
the most part provoke nature into greater furies. The Erisipelas therefore, and
Bloody Flux, have obtained some common point wherein they might agree: And that
is a certain Ideal poison bred by the Archeus: For truly in the Tree of man,
every exorbitant passion of the Archeus, does tinge its own Idea or likeness on
the blood, yea and on the excrements, no less than in the Tree of a Dog,
through the exorbitancy of madness, Fruits are bred in his spittle, which do
afterward produce in us, the Fruit of the transplanted madness. Therefore the
knowledge of hidden Remedies, is badly sought into from the Fruit. For I have
known, that whatsoever things are made in the world, are made from the
necessity of the Seeds of every Archeus, and so by means of an incorporeal and
invisible Being. But I have known, that seminal Beings do arise from an
imaginative sorce of soulified things, or the Archeus of the same, by a co-like
perturbation: And so, that by a certain invisible Principle, this visible world
is continued: But in things subjected, or not soulified, I have observed, that
they after a co-like manner, have themselves by the same certain Analogical
proportion: But that every disjoynting or irregularity of the Archeus, does by
its Idea's, frame the Seeds to be poisons unto its own Body, and so a sound
Tree rusheth into a vitiated one. I have considered, that the poisons of some
things which are bred with us, do bear Seeds, not those which by the
exorbitancy of their of own Archeus; but in respect of our Archeus, might
produce vitiated Idea's, and to themselves natural, to us mortal Idea's. Whence
indeed, if Fruits or Branches be implanted into the Tree of our entire health;
it happens, that from both, as it were from a promiscuous Sex, vitiated or
poisonous Fruits do arise in us. But the poisons are on both sides, among the
number of occult properties. Let therefore, suitable helps or Remedies, have
Idea's which are chiefly the extinguishers of the poisoned Idea's: or those
which by an eminent goodness, may transchange as well the Archeus, the producer
of the poison, as the poison it self produced: whence I have very clearly
learned, that almost every poison, and its Antidote, and so also the whole race
of occult or formal properties, do seminally descend from the activity of a
vital light. For so the poisons of soulified creatures do arise from
disturbances: the which, by how much the sharper they perturbations, and
therefore also co-natural ones, are by Seeds, transplanted with a continued
course. For we may well know any kind of poisons which are reduced by the ranks
of perturbations, by distinguishing of them. Consequently also the knowledge of
specifical properties is drawn [per quia] or from the Effect of the Cause, if
they are reduced unto the certain orders of perturbations or disturbances, and
affections: Even as more largely elsewhere concerning the Plague: So indeed,
many things are searched into, and found out; we thereby, by the Effects come
to the Causes, and being led by the hand from one knowledge to another, the
poisons of an Erisipelas and Dysentery, being in their Terms, from the wroth
of the Archeus, their cure is in a Hare, wherein is fear, meekesse, flight, and
an harmless life. Neither is the argument of contrariety of value: For, first
of all, I have admitted of contrarieties in living Creatures; and I say, that
the properties of those being as it were sealed in the Idea's of living
Creatures, are in some sort contrary in the priority of the efficient tree; as
the Seals of Passions do end in to this Idea. And so the fruits of this tree,
do act no more by way of contrary Passions; but from the force of a received
and inbred seminal Character, wherein every thing acts according to the
Talent received, even as it is in it self; but not by reason of a repugnant
duality, or disagreeing contrariety. Therefore the blood, wherein is the
seminal product, and the effecter of the fearful meekness, does mortify the
poison which is bred from a poisonous wrothfulness. For I have noted in things,
loves, hatreds, terrors, and the seminal products, seals, Idea's, and
characters of these: Whence I have found out the immediate Causes of many
hidden Remedies: But I have interpreted them to be found out and suggested by
me, with the truth of possible and appearing consequences.

These things I have spoken concerning occult or hidden properties, out of the
Dream, that we may cease to be occult Philosophers, and may follow the manifest
Doctrine of the more tractable ones. Now I will prosecute my Dream.

I perceived, I say, that Smallage, Asparagus, and whatsoever things are taken
to open Obstructions, have indeed a Salt of a specifical savor; the which,
being with their middle etc. Those I perceived even to slide along with the
Superfluities, because they wax sour with their specifical Savor; and then do
take (under the Gawl) the nature of a Salt, and at length under the dungy
ferment of the Reins, do put on a Urine-provoking or diuretical faculty. But
whose specifical Savours, do putrify by continuance, and perish with the
sourness of the Cream: those things, I perceived to be indifferent meats; but
whose Savours do not plainly yield themselves into the sourness of the Cream,
and do after some sort remain in their mediocrity (for the Cream, if it should
alike on every side receive a ferment, and wax sour, it should easily be
sharper than Vinegar) those things indeed-do through the force of the Gawl,
easily perish in the Meseraick Veins; that together with a third, or mumial
ferment, they may be changed into Venal Blood. Therefore I perceived those to
reach forth feeble aides, for dissolving or opening of Obstructions.

At length, I perceived, that all simple Salts, (of the Sea, Sal gemmae,
Fountains, Salt Peter, etc.) as such, do depart through the Urine and
Intestines, and in the mean time resolve the filths or dregs in those passages,
and render the expulsive faculty mindful of its duty. But I perceive that Salts
which carry a Mineral fruit in them, are Strangers to our Nature, and therefore
are scarce to be inwardly admitted. But Salts which are a part of the composed
Body, as Lixivium's, and Alkalies; I perceived to be deprived of Seminal
Virtues, and to have only an abstersive or cleansing, Soapie or resolving
property, unless they are volatile; wherein I perceived the radical Beginnings,
and seminal Balsams of the concrete Body to be. I perceived, I say, that these
are easily transchanged into a new fruit, because they do associate themselves
with, and act in all things, according to their inbred endowments.

In the next place, I have perceived the corrosive spirits of Minerals, to
differ far from themselves, being crude; to resolve the Excrements adhering to
the sides of the first Vessels: (for this also even as Carabe or Amber, does
attract chaffes) etc. do bewray themselves but other things are terminated into
an alteration, as poisons; likewise laxatives, medicines tied about the Head or
Body, Antidotes, etc.

Laxatives, I have peculiarly perceived, to operate only by reason of a poison
lurking within them, which being once admitted inwardly nigh the entrance,
whatsoever they

First,
That they draw nothing from a healthy Body, neither do they move after or
weaken that Body.

Secondly,
That they do not fetch any thing forth, but what is offensive, and therefore
they do not aggravate, but ease of the burden; and presently the sick does
thereby feel himself well.

Lastly,
In the Third place, That they do not draw out the Disease by Sweat, Vomit, or
Stool; but do unsensibly resolve, in whatsoever part the Disease is
entertained; Nature being busied about the rest.

I have perceived also, That such Laxatives, do not electively bring forth
Humors, which are in themselves feigned; but (seeing we are nourished by none
but one only juice, the blood; therefore also we intend the driving forth, not
of the blood but of Diseasie excrements) do resolve whatsoever foreign thing
is implanted within the Inn of Life, but not vital things, unless they are
taken in an undiscreet dose, or frequency. Otherwise they only have respect to
excrements; Nature affording her aid within, to this end. And chiefly, seeing
they are from God, as well by Creation, as the endowment of knowledge; they
have received the ends of their Ordination, only for a good purpose.

Therefore I perceived that Paracelsus had erred, who teaches; That Laxatives
do not otherwise operate, but as the Laxative Medicine by calcination, and a
supervening moisture, should be resolved together with the Humors, like Calx
vive.

For first of all, he that proclaimed War against the Humorists, now again
acknowledges Humors. Then also, his assertion is wholly ridicvlous; Yet the
less, if either Laxatives should be taken being first calcined, or might have
been calcined within; or the ejections should ascend only unto a treble of the
things taken. For what of calcination have the leaves of Sena in them? Does not
Asarum, by boiling, cease from making Laxative? And thus far is ignorant of a
Calx.

I have furthermore perceived, That Chemistry does give more powerful and
absolute operations, and that there are those things prepared by the same,
which before were not. etc. For by the fire, they assume an Acrimony, as Honey,
Sugar, Manna, Dew, Earth, etc. Other things do thereupon lay aside their
corrosion; as the juice of Citron, Scarrewort, Frogwort, Water-Pepper, etc.

They err therefore, who do equally judge of the Spirits by the concrete Body:
For truly, although Spices and sweet smelling things, do persist in distilling;
yet the seminal or fixed Salt, a Calx, Ashes, and Glass; which things were not
before in the composed Body: For I perceived, that there was nothing in the
concrete Body, which did not issue from its seed. For the Fire seeing it is the
death of things, if it does not totally destroy the seeds of things, yet at
leastwise, it notably transchangeth them. Therefore in one thing a preparation
does transchange the whole matter; as in Magisteries; but elsewhere, by reason
of a sequestration of some things, it only changes, sharpeneth, destroys or
consumes the things which are left.

Thirdly, In the next place, by things adjoined, now and then, the things
themselves, together with their adjuncts, are diversely transchanged by the
Fire, and become neutral; as Glass, which is no more Ashes and Sand. Often
times also, without the fire, adjuncts do pierce the root of the mixture, and
that especially a ferment coming between; and then a neutral concrete Body is
constituted. For so, of Rie-bread and Honey, Ants are bred; of Honey and Dew,
Eeles; of Basil and the hoary putrefaction of a Stone, Scorpions; of a Calf
being strangled and Dew, Bees. But those things which are mixed by fusion
only, do oft-times suffer themselves to be reduced into their former Being:
For so, although Glass be no longer Sand; yet from thence by Art, yea and
through the oldness of putrefaction by continuance, the same Sand is found;
because it is as yet, always materially in it, not thoroughly changed, because
without a ferment. I perceived therefore, that many volatile things being
joined to volatile things, by reason of a mutual action with each other, are
transchanged into a certain third thing.

In the next place, that volatile things are fixed by fixed things; and in this
respect, do

I perceived also, that Mineral Remedies, being changed into the nature of Salt
(I do not understand those which are seasoned by an adjoined Salt) do carry
with them their Paracelsus has sufficiently taught concerning Hematine or
sanguine glassie Metals; wherein, although the whole Metal be resolved into a
strange disposition (which is that of a Magistery) yet, because the running
Mercury is straitway drawn out from thence; whatsoever has truly assumed the
nature of a resolvable Salt, is not the Mercury, or inward and immutable kernel
of the Metal; but only the Sulphur thereof. Wherefore those Hematines or
Magisteries, do perfect admirable operations in the Remedial part of Medicine.
I perceived therefore that the Hematines of Sol and Lune, or of Gold and
Silver, although from the purity of their Balsame, they might comfort; yet that
they did contain some strange thing in them, in respect of us.

I perceived, I say, That the crudity of Saturn or Lead, was solvable through
the fatness of fixed Salts, to be sometimes destroyed piece meal, by the Fire
alone; and Saturn, does draw unto a volatilized fixed one, unseparably joined;
And the which, the sublimation of the Saturn does chiefly dispatch. In the
expression whereof, there is no difference of color, or substance between that
which is elevated, with that which resideth: Whence also, the causes of Heat,
Fusion, and Softness, deeply or inwardly residing after the calcinements, and
reducements, does not refute the Fusion and wonted Softness, without the Fire.
There is the same cause of the sweetness of Saturn: For the most sharp calcined
things, if (as in Lead, they are tempered by a concourse of Vitriolated things,
they are dulcified or sweetened with the properties of Sal Armoniack resolved,
and of Tartar being putrified. The Symbols or resembling Marks of all which
things, in all their examinations, especially in distilling, separating of Lead
into Salt, fugitive, sulphurous, colored, fat parts, with the sharpness of
Roch-Alume, are discerned by a quick-sighted and industrious Chemist, not
without great delight.

I perceived, I say, That there are Planetary virtues in Metals, if they are
reduced into the nature of a Salt or Sulphur; yet that ought to be done without
the remainder of Corinth. For after that I knew how to unloose bodies by things
agreeable to their radical Principles; then at first, I began Not indeed that
it does then resemble the Nature of the Sun, and does add any thing unto its
vital faculties; but only that its whole body does by purging unsensibly
cleanse, in a unisone, tone or harmony. Yea also, the precious Pearls called
Unions, are by that corrosive changed into a Spermatical Milk, which is
sociable with the first constitutives of us; and in this respect are they a
Remedy of the Consumption, Palsy, etc.

At length I perceived, That the liquor Alkahest, did cleanse Nature, by the
virtue of its own Fire: For as the Fire destroys all Insects, so the Alkahest
consumes Diseases.

In the next place, I perceived, That Mercurius vitae, reckoned by Paracelsus
among his four secrets, besides the fiery force of the fire of Hell, does
clarify the Organs, no otherwise For it is appointed for every living Creature
once to die. Because there is nothing in Nature which can have an equal
prevalency with the Temple of the Image of God.

Therefore I perceived, That all renewing Medicines, do operate by refining,
and in this respect by exhilarating; otherwise there is not a true renewing of
Youth. And then

Lastly I perceived, That there were Simples, wherein a proper issuing of the
form does not operate; but the command of a strange form and character does
happen unto them,

Yea I perceived, That even all poisons (besides corrosives) did act by reason
of a specifical property, emulous of, or imitating the imaginative faculty,
placed in the seed,

I perceived moreover, That every thing does variously diffuse its activities,
according to the manner of the thing receiving, and of application: For bread
operates otherwise Galen was ignorant of, because he smelt not out the
properties of ferments.

But Paracelsus has caused the incongruities of an Idiotisme, in affirming,
that Oils, and Emplaisters, are digested and transchanged into new flesh, in a
Wound, even as meats

For hence is there a weeping Liquor, Sanies, Pus, Sandy-water, Latex, Worms,
etc. for preventing whereof, the whole care of the Chyrurgion diligently
endeavors; and

And therefore the Salts of Spices, or sweet smelling things, which are made of
their Oils, do supply the room of their first Being.

Magisteries are to be had in great esteem; because, the substance of these is
entire, digestible, and obedient to the ferments.

And therefore Nature refuses meats which are hidden in their Essences, by
reason of their difficulties of fermentation; For all things that are too much
graduated, do draw

But Verdigrease, Crocusaeris, Cerusse, Precipiate, Sublimate, etc. have
ascended into a poysonsomnesse by addittaments. But these, seeing they are not
admitted, within the

At length, I perceived, That there was a sixfold difference of Digestions in
us, and that the three former of them, were busied about the disposing of the
matter appointed for to

Moreover, I perceived, after what manner a Cantharides does embladder in
living People, but not in a dead carcass; as neither does it raise up a burnt
Escharre in the dead I say, they do not only make an Escharrhe, which arises
from an inflaming of the Archeus, but do melt the whole.

Lastly, I perceived also that Amulets or preservative Pomanders, things bound
about

But in Stones there is great virtue; but of Stones, some are transparent
Looking-glasses, but some are thick or dark ones; As Corral, Coraline, the
Turcois, the Jasper. etc. figures of Looking-glasses, presently bethought of,
whereunto Gentilisme joined Hieroglyphics, that by a figure they might denote
the sign of a hidden virtue: Superstition in posterity thereby increased, who
anointed Gamahen, Talismanicks, and devilish Scurrilities of that sort:
Thinking that Figures had not indeed the virtues of a Sign, but of a Cause. But
transparent Glasses, do receive an Evestral or Ghostlike faculty, the which,
although they do not reflect, as otherwise dark ones do; yet they approach
nearer unto the nature of life, or the shining glass.

Finally, I perceived that the diversity of Effects, the end and appropriation
of Medidines,

To wit, Chemistry separates fixed things from things not fixed, which is the
first and

Moreover, by boiling and melting, the parts formerly ruled by one rein, do now
act on each other, under which degree they attain other virtues: Therefore
Chemistry produces those things, which else should never be made, or had in
Nature; and that not only in separated volatiles, but also in things residing,
and the which residues, are therefore calcined. But if by a co-mingling, and
co-fermenting of the composed Body, new faculties do arise; that very thing is
more beholdable in Alchymical things, not only because Art does wholly imitate
Nature in all her operations; but also in a peculiar efficacy of a moist influx
and melting, which do perform various operations under the fire, and change the
Nature. For so, the spirit of Saltpeter does elevate a moist Sulphur, and
embrination or sharp waterishness of Vitriol, from whence are poisonous waters;
the Spirits of both which, notwithstanding being separated, were fit for
Healing, and grateful to the Stomach.

In the last place, Chemistry does bring up some more mild things unto a
degree; as poisons may be made of Honey, Manna, etc. most things, how violent
soever they are, do also wax mild under the Fire: So that fixed Alcalies, is
they are made volatile, do equalize the powers of great Medicines: Because by
the virtue of Incision, Resolving, and Cleansing, they being brought even unto
the entry of the Fourth Digestion, do fundamentally take away the toughness of
things coagulated in the Vessels. For Chemistry does so resolve the most hard
and compacted things, that they being not only forgetful of their former
curdling, and constancy against the Fire, do retire into a tameable juice, and
being occult, are made manifest; but moreover they become social unto us: Yea
it does not only so prepare things themselves; but it also effects means,
whereby Bodies may be opened. For so, coagulated things, do depart into the
Family of resolved things; fixed things are changed into volatile, and on the
contrary, crude things are ripened, and things Heterogeneal or of diversity of
kind, are divided into their Classes's or Ranks.

In the next place, drowsy or sleepie things, do attain degrees of Virtues;
and many new things spring up which have remained unknown in the Schools of
the Gentiles.

Finally, and finally, Chemistry, as for its perfection, does prepare an
universal Solver, whereby all things do return into their first Being, and do
afford their native endowments,

Ah, I wish the Bottle once possessed by me, had not been taken away! But God
has known, why he has given to the Goat so short a Tail. Let his Name be
exalted throughout Ages; and let the alone sanctifying Will of him only be
done.

CHAP. LXI. The Preface.
1. The Authors intention. 2. The Authors excuse. 3. The event is suspected
from Divine Ordination. 4. A wish of the Author. 5. A reason of doubting of the
fallacy of the Devil, 6. How the Author knew, that he was not deceived. 7. A
Reason, teaching that this Talent is of God. 8. The judgment of quicksighted
men. 9. The whole light of Healing has appeared in one only moment. 10. What
the Author has conjectured from thence. 11. Why the Author has written
sharply against the Chaires. 12. The event is intellectually foreseen. 13.
Fevers are frequently stirred up, the occasional cause being absent. 14. A
Relation of terms, seeing it is not a Being, it does not cause a Being in act:
To what end the dissection of a man of sixty years old, was re-minded in his
sleep.

I Have deliberated in the good pleasure of God, to make manifest, that before
the

Truly, I propose to the whole World, and to our Posterity, a matter new, and
plainly to be admired. And ah, I wish, that I alone, who do first make manifest
these things, may ignorance, they do see it to be the accustomed path of God,
that he reveals unto little ones, that which he has ordinarily denied unto the
greater of the World: To wit, by reason of one fault; because they all have by
a continued error, even sunk themselves into the Precepts of Pagans. For
quick-sighted men, will from hence discern, first of all, that they must not go
against me, as against a man.

Then, in the next place, they will weigh in their own jugdement the Reasons of
the Schools, drawn out of my bosom: Whence at length, they themselves being as
it were led by the Principles and Theoremes of nature, will voluntarily hasten
unto far more sublime and famous Beginnings of healing, whither the tenderness
of my judgment could not ascend.

For truly, I admonish and exhort the wise men of this World, that the errors
and ignorances of Physicians, have not opened themselves to me by little and
little, and by degrees

Indeed none of these: For if one thing had been made known unto me before
another, I

When as therefore, I had now determined to demonstrate, that the Essence of
Diseases, by their intimate and proper roots was not yet known, there was a
night, before the August; and it seemed to me, that as from the crowing of the
Cock, dreams are sometimes formed, I heard from the fore-conceived care of
writing, that I should call to mind the Anatomy (whereof a little after, I
shall make mention) and when I seemed admonishingly to have understood these
things, I doubted being half awaked, which way that dissection of the dead
carcass, might touch or concern the Treatise which I had determined to write
touching the essence of Diseases. Therefore I being without care, dreamed, that
I saw a man externally big, sitting at my Table, and eating fresh Salmon in the
sauce of Vinegar and Pepper, and so greedily, that as if he would fill himself
thereby (for in his own Country, fresh Salmon was not found) and I saw, that
two days after, about the evening, a small Ague took hold of him, and that his
teeth did shake; and from thenceforth, that it kept the figure or resemblance
of a Tertian: That is, on the fourth day from the digestion of that meat: So
that nothing of its remainder had putrified, and much less, that that had
remained which might provoke the Aguish tumult, at set intervals. For that
which commonly [Ens rationis] or Being of Reason. Because the thing imprinting
and imprinted, are indeed things in act, and relative terms; but the impression
it self, seeing it is nothing but a relation, resulting from a co-fitting of
the terms, it can contain only the room of a Being of Reason. Wherefore, at
least wise, the impression or distemperature, cannot remain a surviver, where
the thing distempering, or imprinting it self, has ceased to be, and by
consequence, has ceased to hurt.

It must needs be therefore, that the thing imprinting it self, had produced a
hurtful quality out of it self; and had deposed it, as it were its product, on
the subject of impression: And that thing, seeing it was made in an Organ which
was the partaker of life, that product likewise, ought to be by all means, and
immediately sunk, or entertained within the bosom of life it self; and the
rather, if it ought to return at set periods, and to interrupt the silent rest
of health; yea, if by acting in a hostile manner, it ought after some sort, to
show forth signs of the life disturbed. Even so, that I have by this dream, the
more perfectly confirmed the essential thingliness of Diseases: For even as
these things do not happen beneath and without the life; so the life it self,
is the very impulsive cause, after that it is once disturbed in its place,
peace or rest. Behold, on the same day, after the aforesaid Dream; a Senator,
whom I had not seen for many years before, comes as a guest unto my table; and
seeing it was the Vigil, or Eve of S. Laurence, it happened also that a fresh
Salmon boiled, was set on the Board, and he eat no otherwise than as I had seen
in my sleep: Yea, that two days after, he slid into a Tertian Ague: But the
dissected dead Carcass, whereof I had received admonition, has respect unto
the same ends. For truly a man of sixty years old, had from the entrance of his
age, lived in a tender health and through occasion of a light error, was
easily feverish; whom sudden death, afterward at length took away; and I being
willing narrowly to search, whether I could find the Cause of his Feverish
aptness, in the places wherein the lamented that he was pained as often as he had
the Fever: Indeed it was the Hypocondrial in both his sides, as well where the
Liver, as where the Spleen are kept. But there was not the least thing about
these parts to be seen with the Eyes, which might be fitly accused.

Wherefore this dissection being compared with the dreaming Vision of the
Tertian Ague, from the eating of too much Salmon; I presently perceived, why
they were both

CHAP. LXII. A Disease is an unknown Guest.
1. A Narration of things hitherto done. 2. The Object and Intent of the
Author. 3. That the Art of the Medicine of the Pagans was an invention of the
evil Spirit. 4. A Prayer for his Persecutors. 5. The Author searches out or
espieth from his Persecutions, that the evil Spirit was the Inventor of the
Doctrine of the Pagans. 6. The Labors of the Schools from hence are vain. 7.
The Authors Anguishes. 8. A Prologue of the thingliness of a Disease. 9. The
most immediate, containing, and essential Causes of Diseases. 10. The necessity
of a seminal Idea is collected. 11. How far this Doctrine departs from the
Schools. 12. The true causes of things and of Diseases. 13. The Schools,
their ancient definition of a Disease. 14. The first Contradiction of the
Schools. 15. Another Stumbling. 16. A Third. 17. The Author teaches (in his
Treatise of the Elements) that there are not mixed Bodies, as neither humors in
Nature, whence the whole foundation of the Medicine of the Schools goes to
ruin. 18. A Fourth Stumbling. 19. A Fifth. 20. A Sixth. 21. A Seventh. 22.
Against the distemperature of Elementary qualities in us. 23. An Eighth
staggering. 24. A Ninth. 25. A Tenth. 26. An Eleventh. 27. The Error of the
Schools is discovered. 28. A Twelfth stumbling. 29. An absurd consequence
according to the position of the Schools. 30. The uncertainty of a predicament
for Diseases. 31. Arguments on the opposite part, and against a feigned
disposition. 32. Tee true efficient Cause of diseases. 33. The occasional
matter. 34. Wherein the whole thingliness or essence of a Disease may be
situated. 35. Whence the Schools have been seduced. 36. Two false Maxims of
the Schools. 37. Another delusion of the Schools. 38. What natural generation
is. 39. The Schools deceived by Aristotle. 40. Some ignorances arisen from
hence. 41. A Disease consists of matter, and an efficient cause. 42.
Whatsoever is generated, that is made by seminal Ideas. 43. All the
predicaments are in every Disease. 44. The stip of Heathenisme in healing. 45.
That the definition of a Disease has been hitherto unknown. 46. A Disease is
not a Being of the first Constitution, yet has it entered into the account of
Nature. 47. Wherein Diseases are distinguished from other created things. 48.
The Error of the Schools from the subject of Inhaesion of Diseases, and very
many Absurdities issuing from thence. 49. That those Absurdities are not to be
connived at by Christians. 50. A stubborn ignorance. 51. Hunger is not a
Disease. 52. The Schools depart from their own Hippocrates. 53. Some neglects
of the Schools. 54. The rashness of the Schools. 55. That the hurt of action,
is not to be regarded for the essence of a Disease. 65. Whence that fiction
sprang. 57. The consequent upon a confounding of the cause with the symptom.
58. A removal of the Cause does not of necessity respect a withdrawing of the
occasional matter. 59. The Schools being deluded by artificial things, delude
their young beginners by artificial things. 60. How the Seed may differ from
its constituted Body. 61. A Thirteenth stumbling. 62. Some knowledges chiefly
true in the Author. 63. What a kind of production of a Disease is made by a
Blas. 64. The efficient Cause in a Disease. 65. A Disease pierces the Life
with a formal Light, in a point. 66. Some differences of efficient Causes. 67.
An example in the Stone. 68. The Stone is not properly a Disease. 69. While the
Effect has concluded the occasional efficient, there is not the former
Disease. 70. The products of Diseases neglected by the Schools, are touched
at. 71. The Error of the Schools about the Objects of Contrarieties in
Diseases. 72. Some Arguments against the Schools, that it may jerk them. 73.
The Products of Diseases, Secondary Diseases; together with a destinction of
Symptoms and Fruits, are resumed. 47. Weakness or Feebleness, what it is. 75.
An improper division of Diseases, by the Organical parts. 76. Whence there is a
diverse action of diverse things. 77. From the handy-craft operation of the
Fire, of Pepper, an Escarrhotick, and Caustic, are Thirteen Conclusions,
Paradoxes to the Schools, and diverse things are illustrated, worthy to be
noted. 78. The Fire is but little profitable unto the Speculation of Curing.
79. Some notable things concerning our heat. 80. A various Classis or Order of
the Occasions of Diseases. 81. Hippocrates is explained with a connivance. 82.
That which Nature does once despise, that she never afterward receives into
favor. 83. A Disease is of the matter of the Archeus. 84. An explaining of
Products. 85. Our Nature is ruled by an erring Understanding, after that it is
corrupted. 86. The Schools again deluded by artificial things. 87. To Produce,
differs from, to Generate. 88. The Schools have only thought of taking away
the occasional cause. 89. In us, there is a Nature standing, sitting, and
lying. 90. A decree of Hippocrates is explained, with the moderation of that
age. 91. Anatomy is frequent to excuse excuses in sins. 92. The sloathful
negligence of the Schools. 93. After what manner death and a disease, have
become the Beings of Nature, since the creation, and have received second
Causes their producers. 94. Two Objections of the Schools refuted. 95. A Guess
or Presage from the unseparable goodness.

THe integrity of Nature being already, at first, constituted, to wit between
the Matter,

Wherefore, before that I make a more profound entrance, I have undertaken to
prove, That Diseases have not only been unknown in the Schools, in the
particular, and therefore that their Cure has radically layn hid; but
moreover, That the very Essence of a Disease has been hidden in the general.

Truly it is matter of grief, that it has been so ingeniously elabourated in
other Professions; but that in the Art of healing alone, men have been
hitherto, so stumbled through Pagans, and against a mutual Charity, was the
Invention of the evil Spirit. Therefore indeed, the stability of Paganish
Theorems, has remained through the persuasion of the Devil; which speculations
notwithstanding, through their easiness only, at the first sight, ought to
have been suspected by any one of a sound mind. Therefore nothing more hard,
inhumane, and fuller of cruelty, has been received now for so many Ages, among
the Arts of Mortals, than that Art, which under a con-centrical subscription,
makes fresh experiments by the deaths of men. The Professors whereof, while
they presume, that themselves do keep the keys of knowledge, they neither enter
the passages themselves, nor admit others who are willing to enter in: but do
drive away all, by all wiles and subtilties: Always learning, and never coming
to the knowledge of the Truth; according to the Apostle.

Oh Jesus, my light, my life, my glorying, and the helper of my weakness and
corrupt disposition, who in they own matters, do easily find out a passage,
with whom that is easy,

But in so great a tempest of my miseries, unto the miseries of mortals, and
the defective errors of Physicians, before the view of my mind, I have
attempted, under thy command, Thomas a Kempis, it is all one with the Devil, so
he may render thee incapable to serve God: whether that be by true things, or
things appearing. Therefore it suffices him, so he shall but frustrate man of
health, and cut short his life, wherein he might serve God, if so be he shall
make him a despiser of Divine aid, by the appearing Doctrines of Pagans. For
the Schools have written a thousand Volumns concerning the temperature and
strife of qualities; in the Galen, about these trifles, and they have daily
relapsed into new centuries and patcheries. And at length, they have squared
unto those qualities, feigned and excrementitious humors, which should so
wholly govern man, as well healthy as sick, that they should be chief over
humane affairs: as though the conditions, manners, healths, appetites,
instincts, inclinations, slips or mis-deeds, strengths, valors, defects,
events of fortune, yea and the deserved punishments of loss or damnation, and
the adoptions of eternal life of mortal men, should depend thereon. A horrid,
surely, and intolerable thing, that these toys have stood so long, and that
from things not existing, and never to be, and the which, by the asserters
themselves, are accounted for excrements, so serious and pernicious Fables have
been co-feigned and believed. And so that, by the Schools themselves, scarce
any thing has been ever narrowly searched into, which under such Principles,
may in very deed, be truly true and good. In the mean time I grieve (I testify
it again) not indeed, that I have obtained the light of Truth, from a long
compassion toward my Neighbor:

For truly, God made not Death. And that is of Faith. Therefore man became
mortal, from another thing than from God. And seeing the scope or bound of most
Diseases,

Hence it necessarily follows, that every Disease, as it finds matter in the
Organical or instrumental Air of life, whereby it most immediately and inwardly
rises up against the life it self, so in the same vital light, it finds an
efficient cause: And so a Disease, being thus instructed or furnished with
matter and an efficient cause, is entertained about the life. Neither is it of
concernment the while, whether that contagion of a Disease, be drawn from
occasional Causes; or in the next place, be bred within in the Archeus, through
the error of Life: At leastwise, it is sufficient in this place, that the Life
it self is on both sides the principal object for the hostile disease. But
seeing the Life it self is a lightsome Being, it acts not but by its instrument
of the vital air, or by the Archeus, as a mean, between the light of Life
flowing from the father of lights, and the body: But

This Declaration therefore does far recede or differ from an elementary
distemperature,

This exact account of a disease being granted; lo, I come unto the explaining
of a disease.

And first, I will demonstrate from the very Theoremes of the Schools, that the
thingliness or essence of a disease, has been hitherto unknown.

Whence, in the next place, any one shall easily judge, what has even hitherto
been done in the remedies and vanquishing of diseases.

I have oft-times promised, that I will demonstrate, that the Schools have
hitherto neglected (that is, that they have not known) the essence, root, or
nature of a disease, in its own universal quiddity or thingliness: And seeing I
have already from the Elements, prosecuted that thing even unto a conclusion,
through all their privy shifts; now at length, by an Anatomy of particulars, I
shall also stand to my promises, if I shall detect the same in the general; and
especially, if I shall show that thing no longer by the fictions of Elements,
temperaments, and humors, but by the very words of Authors, whereby they
corrupt their Young beginners, as it were, with a mortal contagion.

In the premises, it has already been demonstrated by me, that the Ages before
me,

Then also, that a thing it self is nothing, besides a connection of both
Causes; and that this same thing is in diseases; especially seeing a disease,
although happening unto us by sin, is now admitted for a prodigal Son of
Nature. Truly, the univocal or simple homogeneity of Causes in natural Beings,
has compelled me hereunto; whereby the efficient Cause is denominated from
effecting, but not from the Effect, which is after the Efficiency.

Therefore the Schools do first of all define a disease to be an affect, or
disposition, which does primarily hurt the actions of our faculties, wherein
they do, as yet, very much stumble.

For truly, first they name this Affect, a distemperature of one or two
qualities of the first Elements: For so they rehearse the same thing, because
they consess a disease to be

Again, now and then they call the very distemperature of qualities, not indeed
a Disease, but well, the antecedent cause of the same: They will, I say, have
those four solitary

Furthermore, they afterward combine those qualities in a bride-bed; from the
congress whereof they then derive their offspring, a Disease; to wit, they
believe that the Elements are so subservient to their own dreams: As that also,
qualities being joined at their pleasure, they have commanded them to answer to
as many elements. So that those naked qualities being even balaced with feigned
elements, and dreamed humors, they have feigned to be Diseases themselves. For
in this place I declare the unseasonable,

Therefore the Schools sometimes repenting them of their sayings, will have the
elementary

Otherwise again, that of those qualities being more intense than is meet, a
third or neutral one does arise, which they have called the Diathesis or
Disposition, or Disease it

Oft-times again, the opinion of their mind being changed, they have withdrawn
those Yet they have not such a diathesis or disposition (for if the Schools do
believe diseases to be mere accidents, surely these know not how to sleep,
neither are they while they do not act) in the time of rest from invasion.
Therefore at leastwise in that sort of sick folks, the disease shall by no
means be such a dispositive disposition.

Again, they being unmindfull of themselves, do will, that if that disposition
be small,

In the next place, if a disease be an effect, immediately hurting action; they
ought even from thence, at least, to acknowledge that the Archeus himself, or
the maker of the they being also deceived in Diseases, have believed that the
diseasifying Cause is

First therefore, Aristotle has deceived the Schools, teaching, that
Corruption and

Neither could ever the Schools understand, that the same Workman which has
made a Plant of a Seed, has not failed in the generating of a Plant, has not,
as being banished, etc. And likewise weaknesses are dispositions, which proceed
indeed from the products of diseases (even as by and by in its own place) yet
they are not diseases, because they light into nature, whereinto they are
introduced by the strange violences of diseasie seeds, and thus far are unially
entertained in the life; neither therefore can they have the nature of a
disease, because a disease cannot remain together with the life, in the same
point of identity. But a disease retires out of the bosom of life, no
otherwise than as it separates it self out of health. But Life is in it self, a
certain integrity or sound state of light, with which a disease cannot
co-habite; as neither does a disease subsist but in the vice of life, or in
life that is degenerate: The which indeed is separated from the vital light it
self; and therefore also, from the central point of life it self. For as light,
which the Soul it self is, is not life it self: So neither is the light of life
it self, a disease it self: But this sits in the ulcerous degeneration of the
vital Archeus, and so also vitiates the light hereof: and therefore by reason
of a mark of resemblance, it participates of life, and does sometimes render it
conformable to it self, and does wholly vitiate it: which thing, in the Plague
is ordinary and manifest. It has not been known therefore in the Schools, unto
what predicament they might attribute a disease. But I say, that a disease
consists of Matter, and an efficient Cause, no otherwise than as other Beings
of nature do: For the essicient Archeus, in laboring by his ends which he has
proposed to himself, and to the whole Body, in that very kind of his
estrangedness; and at that very moment, wherein the matter comes down unto the
bound proposed to the efficient Idea, a disease is bred: Even so that, every
seminal disease consists in a real act, which causes an indisposition of the
matter proper to it self, that is, of the very Archeus which makes the assault,
and being applied unto us.

I therefore have learned, that every circle of predicaments, are in very deed
in Diseases

So indeed a true and real Being, does conserve in it self the respects of all
the Predicaments;

For truly, seeing it is a Remedy only privative, whereunto an appeasing of
the Archeus belongs; but it is not a Disposition contrary to the Stone: And
much less a prohibitive He that is cut for the Stone, should be cured only
for a little space, to wit, as the Impediments of Functions are taken away,
otherwise produced, and cherished by the Stone being present; and also as the
disposition mentally interposing, is secondarily, casually and by accident
obliterated. But the mattter is far otherwise; For truly a seminal Disease is a
creature, which made and found out its own matters, and its own Idea's in us
after sin, by an hereditary right of the Archeus, neither had he it originally
in Nature: And therefore the root of Diseases, ought totally to be unknown to
all Heathenisme: And seeing an essential definition is not to be fetched from
the Genus of the thing defined, and its constitutive difference (even as I have
taught in the Book of Fevers) by reason of the manifold perplexities of
Errors, and ridiculous positions; but altogether from a connection of both
Causes, which are Beings in Nature, and therefore, that the primitive and Ideal
cause of Diseases has stood neglected hitherto: It follows also, that the
definition, knowledge, essence, and roots of a Disease, have remained unknown:
And finally that curings have been instituted by accident, with an ignorance of
the universal disposition of internal properties, their efficacy and
interchangable course.

Truly I know, as a Christian, that a Disease is not a Creature of the first
Constitution; constitution, have a proper existence in themselves; but diseases
neither are, nor are able to subsist without us: Because they proceed as it
were from a formal light, and the vital constitutive Beginning of us: And
therefore the natural Archeus and a Disease, do pierce each other, because they
have a material co-resemblance.

But the Schools, when they heeded, that Diseases do never exist without us,
supposed that Gentiles knew not the force of Transgression, although they do
deliver by the Fable of Promotheus and Pandora, that they learned something
from the Hebrews: Yet it is a wonder, that they were ignorant that a Disease,
before it should be made ours, ought to proceed from the most inward Beginning
of Life, and to be incorporated in us; neither therefore, that occasional
Causes, can be the connexed and constitutive Causes of Diseases; for truly,
those Causes, do as yet remain after life, and yet Diseases cease.

But we must in no wise indulge Christians, who are thoroughly instructed by the
Scriptures, that they have even until now, esteemed it for an honor to have
delivered their

But the obstruction flowing from thence, is a relation and Being of Reason;
the which

Wherefore, seeing a Disease ought to contain its own efficient Cause, and its
own matter within it self; Hence it easily appears, that hunger, although like
a very sharp Disease, (even as in the Treatise concerning Digestions) wanting
an Object whereon it may act, yet cannot therefore take rest, it attempts by
resolving the secondary humor, and immediate nourishment of the Stomach; for
the Archeus is as well in hunger as in fulness, the cause not only of a
Disease, but of Health it self: But a want of the matter of Food, bespeaks a
privation, but not a Disease: Wherefore we must altogether exactly note, that
Hunger although it does cruelly slay, as if it were a Disease; yet that it is
not a Disease, in that respect, to wit, because the Archeus is in no wise
diseasie in hunger: From whence it ought to be clearly manifest, that every
Disease does primarily and essentially respect its efficient Archeus.

For that cause it was rightly decreed by Hippocrates, to the carelessness of
the Schools, that hot, cold, moist, or dry (not indeed as such, and concrete
or composed) are not Diseases, etc. For peradventure in the age of Hippocrates,
the occasional cause was not yet distinguished from a true Disease. Indeed, he
knew a twofold excrement to be in us: One indeed natural and ordinary, and so
ours, but the other a diseasie one, from its mother error, and a hostile
propagation, and the which, we Christians know to have proceeded from the
vigor of sin: For when the oldman had distinguished this by foreign savours,
he supposed, that if it were not a Disease it self, at leastwise, it was the
adequate or suitable occasion of Diseases, not yet then distinguished from a
Disease: The removal whereof at least, should open both the folding doors of
Healing. But it is matter of amazement, that he whom the Schools do boast to
follow as their Captain, they have skipped over this his Text, through
sluggishness; as also another Standard-defender of the same Captain; wherein he
has declared, that every motion, unto a Disease, Death, and Health, is
efficiently made by the Spirit which makes an assault: And likewise wherein he
says, that Natures themselves are the Physitianesses of Diseases; and by
consequence the makers also of Diseases, if that assaulting spirit by its
disturbance, does work all things whatsoever are done or made in living Bodies.

Indeed the Schools have passed by many such things, which did deserve to be
accounted like Oracles; because they being deluded and bewitched by four
feigned Humors being traduced

For they have considered a Disease to flow forth as an accident, produced by
its Agent, a diseasifying matter (wherein therefore that its own efficient is,
they have in the entrance

First of all,
They do not distinguish the Agent from the Matter, which is most intimate
hereunto.

Secondly,
Then, They deny a Disease to be material, because it is that which they
suppose to be a mere Quality.

Thirdly,
Neither do they distinguish provoking Occasions, from the internal Efficient;
because with Aristotle, they suppose every Efficient Cause to be External.

Fourthly,
They separate the constitutive Causes from the thing constituted.

Fifthly,
They know not the Chain of Efficient Causes, with their Products.

Sixthly,
They for the most part, confound Occasional Causes with their Diseases and
Symptoms.

Seventhly,
They sometimes look upon a Disease as a Disposition skirmishing between the
Orders of Causes, and the Body of Man.

Eighthly,
They had rather have that very later disposition, arisen (as they say) from
the fight of Causes, to be a Disease, the which, to wit, should immediately (so
they say) hurt the actions, whether in the mean time, it be contrary unto a
vital action, or indeed, it be the effect of that contrariety, which shall
offend the functions.

But I do not heed the hurtings of Functions for the Essence of a Disease, but
the operative disturbances extended on the Archeus, do I contemplate of, in
Diseases. For he does often die without a sense of action, being hurt, who
indeed suddenly falls down, being in the mean time long diseasie; or he that
perishes only by a defect of Nature: Wherefore also, I reckon it among other
impertinencies, to have tied up the Essence of Diseases unto the hurtings of
the functions, seeing that is accidental and latter to Diseases, but not
always a concomitant.

Yea truly, because a voluntary restoring of the enfeebled faculties, does
follow health; hence the Schools have measured the Essence of a Disease, to
owe an unseparable respect

For First, A Disease should be a mere being of Reason, mentally arising from a
disposition of the terms of the Cause unto the Effect; To wit, of the Hurter,
and the thing Hurt.

And then, an Error is discerned in the definition of a Disease delivered by
the Schools; To wit, That a Disease is a Disposition, primarily hurting an
Action: Because it is that which should define the Cause, and not the Disease
it self, or the Effect of the Cause.

Thirdly, If a Remedy ought to remove that it self which hurts the Action;
that shall either have a singular Monarchy, whereby it may call forth, and
shake off the Hurter it self, or the Remedy shall join it self to Nature her
self, and that so most unitingly, that their forces being conjoined, and they
being now as it were one united thing, does set it self in an opposite term,
against the Hurter it self.

But the first of these is not true. Because the Remedy should be as foreign
unto Nature, as is otherwise the Disease it self; by reason of a particular
direction, and arbitriment of motions despised by our Archeus. For if it ought
to help, it should have a power superior to man's Nature, in such a manner,
that it should obey, neither the Laws of things causing Diseases, nor bringing
Death: And so it should expel the Cause which brings the Disease, as well
from a dead Carcass, as from a languishing person. Neither likewise has the
later, place. Because, if the Remedy should be united to nature, radically, and
by an unitive mixture, it should have a privilege above the condition of
nourishment. A hurting therefore of Action it self, does not fall into the
definition of a Disease: Especially, because a Remedy does not respect so much
the occasional Cause, as the internal efficient Cause of a Disease it self.
Whence that Maxim is verified; That Natures themselves are the Curesses of
Diseases, as the Effectresses thereof.

They indeed do on both sides confound the Disease with the Symptom, to the
destruction of those that are to be cured, seeing curing is seated oftentimes
in the removal of the occasional Cause, but never in the removing of Symptoms.
And because the removal of the occasional cause is thought to be an eduction or
drawing out of matter: nothing but solutives and diminishers of contents have
flourished hitherto; whereas otherwise, a removal of the occasional cause does
more respect a correction or pacifying of the immediate efficient, than a
pulling away of the occasional matter: Because after correction, even without a
removal of the occasional matter, a cessation, and unhoped for rest, yea, and
also a cure, do for the most part, by and by happen: The which in a
sympathetical cure does frequently come to hand, and manifestly appears. The
Schools therefore have been deceived by artificial things, and because they
have thought, that all generation is begun

I know also, that a Disease is a real substantive Being; but not a relative
Being, not a naked disposition of the Agent and thing striving, unto the
Patient, as of extremes unto

Neither lastly, that it is a conformity of proportion or disproportion,
between extremes: Although this respect of forming a relation between the
Beings of Reason, be nearer than the effect produced.

I know further, that every natural Agent, is born to produce its like, except
that which acts by a Blas (but the power or faculty, as well that locally
motive, as alterative, because it wanted a name, it seemed good to me, to have
it called Blas, in the Beginnings of the Physics or natural Philosophy.) So
the Heaven generates Meteors, not Heavens. And a man, by a voluntary Blas; and
likewise the Archeus, by an ideal and seminal Blas, stirs up diverse
alterations. But a seminal Agent, being inordinate, does through a strange
Blas, bring forth a Monster, which is properly a Disease: For although a
Disease, according

Furthermore, of efficient causes, there is a certain one, which is and
remains external:

In the next place, there are occasional efficients, which do defile by a
continual and fermental propagation: As Ulcers, the Jaundice, etc. And there
are internal occasionals, which do now and then sleep a long time: As in the
Falling Sickness, Gout, Madness, Asthma, Fevers, etc. Of internal occasional
causes also, some do uncessantly labor, that they may estrange the matter of
our Body from the Communion of life: Whereto if a Ferment shall come (which
thing, Hippocrates in Diseases, calls divine) co-meltings of the Body are made.
But in a Fever the efficient occasional matter, according to its double
property, does stir up the Archeus unto a propulsion or driving out, for the
consuming of it self: Wherefore, neither does it leave any other product behind
it, unless a new Idea shall from the Archeus being provoked, spring forth by
accident: In like manner, as the Dropsy follows Fevers, etc. But let pains,
drowsinesses, watchings, weaknessses, etc. be symptoms and dispositions; so
also, a strange seminal efficient does beget the

In the next place, as soon as the effect or product in its being made, has
lost its occasional

After another manner, oft-times, the product of a Disease, seeing it is an
inbred Monster, it has an occasional propagative faculty from the property of
the efficient Archeus, not enclosed or bound up in the product; but free in the
Organs of life. Whence indeed other products do now and then successively
spring forth: At leastwise, the lavishments of the faculties and life, ought
not so much to be accounted the products of Diseases, as their ordained fruits,
and symptoms, and the periods of these. Neither in the mean time, is that a
Disease by a less privilege, which is produced by a diseasie ferment, than was
the Disease, the Parent of that Product: Neither indeed does it more sluggishly
corrupt some vital thing or part, by strange efficients being received, than
that, in the primary efficient of whose action, the Disease it self is. But the
Schools do suppose a contrariety of the Disease, with health, with life; and
again, with the Remedy it self. Therefore That one contrary is said to be as
many ways as the other. For the doctrine of contraries in Remedies, standing;
health likewise ought to come forth of Medicine, as a chick out of an egg: Or
seeing that contraries ought to reduce each other unto nothing, health ought to
proceed from a Disease, even as otherwise weakness and to the Remedy it self:
at least wise, they shall incongruously apply cold things in a Fever, they
being applied no less to the vital faculty, than to the Disease: Yea, if from
a contrariety of disposition, a Disease be bred; our action ought not wholly to
depend on the Spirit making the assault, but on the mere cause of the Disease:
and the which therefore, seeing it should have the principle of its motion in
it self, it ought to operate as well in a dead carcass, as in a living Body;
and the whole skirmish should be only between the dispositions of strange
accidents suppressing each other: Of which strife, the life it self should be
only a hateful spectator, without discommodity to it self. What other thing is
this, than to have feigned a sluggish and cold vital Philosophy? and that the
Physicians or Curers of Fevers, are cold? What if a Disease does stand in a
quality, whose contrary warrior they will have to be known by sense, and
elementary: why therefore are so uncertain, weak, and slow Remedies of Diseases
devised? Why are there so manifest and ready Tokens, Remedies, and Simples of
manifest contrary qualities, boasted of in the Schools? Therefore according to
me, a disease is a substantial Being, begotten by Archeal

In the next place, the product of a Disease, differs from a symptom, in this,
as this is a fruit: it requires indeed a mitigation from the Archeus himself;
but not a curing as it is by it self: Because it likewise vanishes together
with the Disease. But I find no mention of the product of Diseases in the
Schools; but it is either confounded with a symptom, or is attributed to a
certain new distemperature, and a new aflux of humors. Others also are wont to
dedicate Diseases to the parts containing; the causes likewise, to the parts
contained: but to banish symptoms into the spirit making the assault: Being the
live Body it self: Because the fire consumes from without, by burning; and the
spirit it self through its inflaming, becomes caustical or burning within.
Therefore, from a fourfold handy-craft operation; to wit, of the Fire, Pepper,
a Vesicatory, and Caustic,

1. That the efficient heat of heating things, is ours. In Pepper therefore,
there is only an occasional exciting heat.

2. That a Fever is not heat effentially, but it has things proper to it, as
well cold as heat, from the property of an alterative Blas: And that not
efficiently, but only occasionally, incitingly, and accidentally: But the
Archeus alone is the efficient of heat and cold. For neither is a Feverish
matter in a Body, otherwise hot, now made cold, then afterward hot, that the
whole Body may be cold and hot at the successive change thereof: But they are
the works and signatures of life; not the properties of diseasie Seeds in the
matter, but mere pessions of the Body, thus moved by a Blas, from the heat and
cold of the Archeus; And therefore, neither do they any longer happen in a dead
carcass, as neither after a Disease obtains the Victory, neither also when the
Disease cease; the occasional matter in the mean time remaining.

3. That the very thing, which works heat in us, does efficiently also
produce cold: Not indeed privatively, in respect of heat; because cold is a
real and actual Blas of the Archeus.

4. That no curing is made by contraries, as neither by reason of like things;
because a Disease consists essentially in the seminal Idea, and in the matter
of the Archeus; but at leastwise, substances do not admit of a contrariety in
their own essence.

5. That a Disease is primitively overcome, by extinguishing of the Idea, or a
removal of the essential matter thereof. 2. Originally, by allaying and
pacifying of the disturbed Archeus. And 3. From a latter thing; to wit, if the
occasional matter be taken away, which stirs up a motive and alterative Blas of
entertainment, that the Idea or Disease, may be efficiently made.

6. That both the inward causes, connexed in the Archeus, is the very
substantial Disease, having in it, its proper root: But the occasional matter,
however it be received in the Body, is always external, because it is not of
the inward root and essence of a Disease.

7. That Symptoms are accidents by accident, breaking forth by excitation or
stirring up, according to the variety of every Receiver: And it is rather a
wandering error, or fury of our Powers.

8. That the Archeus, which formed us in the Womb, does also direct, govern,
move all things during life. Therefore occasional causes are perceived only in
the Archeus: who afterward, according to the disturbance thereby conceived,
does bring forth his own Idea's, which immediately have a Blas, whereby they
move, direct, and change, and finish, whatsoever happens in health and
Diseases. But the parts of the Body, as well those containing, as those
contained, and likewise the occasional causes of Diseases, of themselves, are
dead and idle; neither can they move themselves, or any other thing; Seeing
nothing is moved by it self, which is not by it self, and primarily vital;
except weight, which naturally falls downwards.

9. That the products and effects of Diseases, are seminal generations, so
depending on the Seeds, that they do show forth the properties of these.

10. That heat, cold, heates, etc. seeing they are not the proper causes of a
Disease, nor the true products of Diseases, but only the symptomatical
accidents and signatures of Diseases; therefore also, neither do they subsist
by themselves, but they do so depend on Diseases, that they depart together
with them, like a shadow: Because they are the errors of a vital light, or an
erroneous Blas stirred up from Diseases.

11. That Diseases are seminal Beings (except extrinsecal ones, wounds, a
bruise or stroke, burning, etc.) and therefore effects of the Archeus resulting
in a true action, from the occasionals of the exciter, accidentally sprung up
in an Archeal error of our Powers.

12. That, although without the will of a living Creature, contraries should be
found in nature; yet by these, there should be no possible restoration of the
hurt faculties, as neither a pacifying of the Areheus; and by consequence no
curing, if that be even true, That Natures themselves are the Physitiannesses
of Diseases, and that the Physician is their Minister.

Truly that thing is proved by the Fire; the which, by reason of the most
intense coldness of the Air (which I have elsewhere proved to be far more
cruel than the cold of the Water) does the more strongly flame and burn: So far
is it, that Fire should be exstinguished by cold, which is falsely reputed its
contrary: And moreover, neither have the Schools known, that Fire is not
extinguished by Water, because it is cold, moist, or contrary to it; but by
reason of choking only: The which we daily see in our Furnaces. For as the
Fire is momentany, and connexed unto it self by a continual thread of
exhalations; hence it is stifled almost in one only moment: for so the water,
because it is fluid, enters into the pores of the burning matter, and by
stopping them up, does suffocate or quench the Fire; so also a Metal or
Glass, being fired, and burning bright, do shine long in the most cold bottom
of the Water; and in the mean time, a Coal being fired is choked in an
instant, under the Water: Because the pores thereof are presently stopped.
Therefore Copper burning bright, is sooner extinguished than Silver, and Silver
than Gold. But Glass being fired, because it wants pores, shines longer under
the Water, than a like quantity of Gold: Yea hot Water does sooner quench Fire
than cold; because it sooner pierces the pores. Therein also, they have
remained dull; that they considered

Surely, our heat is not graduated, and therefore neither is it fiery, neither
does it proceed from the Fire as being weakened or diminished; but it is the
heat of a formal light,

In the next place, it more highly deviates through furies, and then it (as
burnt up) uncloaths it self of a vital light, and assumes a Caustical or burnt
Alcali; which thing is seen in moist and compressed Hay, where Fire voluntarily
arises. So in Escarrie effects, our heat being forgetful of its former life,
passes into a degree of fire: For through a congresse of lightsome beams, and
a degeneration of the salt of the Spirits, even as in Hay, true Fire is bred,
and would burn us, if the Archeus should expect this end of the Tragedy before
death. Our heat indeed is in the Fire, as the number of Two is in the number of
Forty; yet the Fire is not in our heat: And so, neither can our heat be called
fiery, as neither is the number of Two the number of Forty.

But besides, a diseasie occasion does sometimes burden with its weight alone,
and by its hateful presence; such as is that of a hateful guest. Afterward
from the more mild beginnings, a porous quality oft-times increases or
grows, being of the order of Tastes.

Thirdly, Or at length it stinketh.

Fourthly, It snatcheth up a strange ferment.

And Lastly, it threatens destruction unto us through the contagion of an
unluckie poison; and the cruel seminal occasion of Diseases either comes unto
us from far, or arises from within. It oftentimes also degenerates in its
last qualities, which the Schools have neglected, because (as being content
with their first humors) they have fallen asleep. There is something, I say,
of a hurtful chafe separated from the guiltless vitals, and the co-mixed
occasion of a Disease floateth among the good nourishments, and has even more
toughly mirried, adhered to, and chosen its local bride-bed in the same. But it
on both sides, stirs up the hostile properties of diseasie seeds, by variously
sporting in their Innes. The Archeus therefore is not affected by heat and
cold, but from an excelling quality, and strange fellowship of a taste, and
fashions the seminal Idea of a Disease. And I wonder that the Schools of the
Greeks, do profess Hippocrates to be their standard-defender; yet that they
have despised this hing of healing in him, and have even sunk themselves into
mere heats, and the foolish wedlocks of qualities. For a Disease according to
Hippocrates, is made of a good, or before-condemned liquor, being turned into
an excrement.

Therefore I do truly pardon this (as yet) undistinction of that Age; and
therefore I call those superfluities, not the Diseases themselves, but the
occasional Causes of these; Hippocrates, in the place cited, for a diseasie
signature. For as long as a nourishable liquor is restrained by the bridle of
the Balsame of Nature, it of right enjoyes the savours of blood, and
assimilable nourishment, all things are in a good state; but it being once
divorced from the Archeus, it presently also assumes a foreign disposition; So
also a savor, and through the agitation of days, does vary the degrees of
its malignity: That indeed is the sharp, bitter, and sour, from which the old
man does search out by his oracles, almost all Diseases to spring. For this
although in its quantity it be very little in weight, light, and scarce
perceivable by the sight; yet it is the true occasion of a Disease; But a
Disease it self sits more inwardly, to wit, in the vital Beginnings, and those
more active and commanding, than those things which are called Excrements, do.
For every seminal Disease, and that which is cherished by an occasional cause,
as it began from a being immediately sensitive, and the subject of
concupiscence, which is full of Passions, and perturbations, and inordinacies;
so also it has its seat in no other thing, than in the Fountain, Prince, and
Ruler of all motions: Yet by degrees it strives not with one only weapon of
malignity, but its More or Root being defiled, does also occupy the part it
self, and likewise deprive it of the continuation and communion of Life, if
besides, it does not burden it with the hurt of its impression, or the filth of
a ferment being drawn, in a similar part, it does not threaten its extinction.

A Disease therefore begins from the matter of the Archeus, as it rages in us
by a foreign Idea, from a conceived injury, which it judges that occasional
Causes has done it. etc.) be the Symptom: But whatsoever Springs are caused
by a Disease, or by reason of Pain, the Cramp, the Government of the parts, or
a fermental Action, if that do really subsist in its own Root, that is the
Product of the Disease.

But of Products, some are ultimate effects, left by a Disease, as a Scirihus,
or dropsy after a Fever; or they do break forth, in its being made; As the
pissing of muscilage etc. But others by proceeding inwards do wholly enlarge
themselves, and generate after an irregular manner: As an Apnaea or shortness
of Breath, Convulsion, etc. from the Womb or Stomach. So Wringings of the
Bowels, the Diarrhea or Flux, Hemorhoides or Piles, Dyscenteries or
Bloody-fluxes, and other evils of that sort, do proceed, as being made by sharp
or sour things: Yea the seed of Diseases being at quiet, by intervals, some
unaccustomed and dis-continual thing is budded forth from the hidden seminary
of the Archeus: Such as is the Falling Sickness, the Gout, Madness, etc.

Truly in all these things, there is a manifest Error of the Schools, which
teach, That whole Nature is governed by a Ruler, or a created Understanding,
not erring, knowing all ends, and for the sake of these, acting after a most
excellent manner. For truly, it is not to be doubted, but that a Wound might be
healed or closed, without the Tumor, Pain, corrupt Pus, and Inflammation of its
Lips: But that a Thorn may be drawn out of the Finger, with greater brevity,
than that the Finger should therefore arise into a corrupt mattery Aposteme:
For the fat or grease of an Hare, being anointed on it, does extract the
Thorn in one Night: Means are not wanting to the Archeus, whereby he might
perform that very thing, safely and quickly (even as he does, in some, of his
own accord) but that our Archeus is subject to any kind of Passions, as if he
did conceive childish indignations, from the least hurting of the Body. No
wonder therefore, that the sublunary being of Nature, by no means subjecting it
self to Justice, does yield to, or fall under its own inordinate Passions: When
as also, the whole man, whereof the intellectual mind is President, does
exceed the path of right Reason in many things.

At length, that is remarkable, that in the works of Art, the efficient Cause
is always

Furthermore, I also oft-times admire, that while the Schools do constitute the
benefit of healing in the removal of Causes, after what sort, they could place
distemperatures within the rank of Diseases; seeing the hot, and most known of
diseases, does both suddenly, and of its own accord, slide into cold; and we
are able presently to remove the intemperance of heat at pleasure, without
helping of the Fevers. And then, seeing they have never received the vital
Cause, which is the impulsive one in Diseases, for the efficient

Moreover, in Diseases, Nature is standing, sitting, and laying. Nature
standing, does

Furthermore, Hippocrates will have a Physician to be only the Minister or
Servant of Nature: but Natures themselves, to be their own only
Physitiannesses; and that thing he thus commanded in his age: When as
otherwise, a Physician is the Patron and Master of Nature being prostrated;
which kind of Physician, if the old man had not as yet acknowledged, surely
much less, the succeeding heathenish Schools, even unto this day.

Last of all, dead carcasses are dissected, which is done to excuse their
excuses in sins; for after a thousand years Anatomy, the Moderns do scarce
either the better know Diseases,

To wit, I^ is of Faith, that God made not Death for Man: Because Adam was by
Creation Immortal, and void of Diseases.

For concerning long Life, I have explained after what manner a Disease and
Death, at the eating of the Apple, as an Effect unto a second Cause, have
entered into Nature. Therefore in this place it has been sufficient to have
admonished; That the Concupiscence of the Flesh arose from Transgression, and
also to have brought forth the flesh of Sin; and therefore that Nature being
corrupted, produced a Disease through Concupiscence.

I could wish therefore, that the Schools may open the Causal Band and
Connection between the forbidden Apple, and the Elements, or the Complexions of
these: Whether in the mean time they are looked upon, as the Causes bringing
Diseases, or as Diseases themselves. To wit, let them teach; If the Body of Man
from his first Creation, did consist of a mixture of the Four Elements; after
what manner those second Causes, or co-mixt Elements only by eating of the
Apple (which else had never been to fight) the Bonds of Peace, and Bolts of
humane Nature being burst asunder, at length naturally exercise hostilities,
and all Tyranny. What common thing, I say does interpose betwixt the Apple and
our constitutive Elements? But if this came miraculously and supernaturally to
pass, that Death was made a punishment of sin: Then God had made Death
Efficiently; but Man had given only an Occasion for Death: But this is against
the Text, yea and against Reason: Because Death was made with Beasts, in the
Beginning, even as also at this day, unto every one happens his own Death, that
is, by a natural course, and a knitting of Causes unto their Effect. It must
needs be therefore according to Faith, that Death crept naturally into Nature;
so that man was made Mortal after the manner of Bruits. For it is certain that
at the eating of the Apple, the brutal concupiscence of the Flesh was
introduced: Neither do we read (at length) of any other knowledge of good and
evil to have been brought in, which was signified under the opening of their
Eyes, than that they knew themselves to be naked, and then it first shamed them
of their nakedness.

Wherefore I have long stood amazed, that the Schools have never examined the
aforesaid Text, that they might search out the Disposition or Respect of the
Cause bringing a Disease unto its natural Effect. In what day soever ye shall
eat of the forbidden Fruit, ye shall die the Death. Which indeed is not so to
be taken, as if God had said, by way of threatenings: If ye shall eat of the
forbidden Tree, I will create or make Death in you, Diseases, Pains, Miseries,
etc. for a punishment of sin, or that, through a condign curse of my
indignation, ye and your posterity shall die. For such an Interpretation as
that resists the divine goodness: because that for the sin of our two
Parents, he had equally cursed all their posterity, with an irrevocable curse
of his Indignation; who after sin committed, and the Flood it self, readily
blessed Noah, by increase and multiply, etc. Wherefore those words, Ye shall
die the death; did contain a fatherly admonition: To wit, that by eating of the
Apple they should contract the every way impurity of Nature, as from a second
Cause, seated (to wit) in the Concupiscence of the flesh of sin. But seeing
such a concupiscence can never consist in elementary qualities; it is also
sufficiently manifest, that a Disease and Death, are not connexed as Effects to
the Elements, and the qualities of these: But the concupiscence of the flesh,
as it infected only the Archeus, even so also, it did only respect the same.
In the Archeus therefore, every Disease afterward established it self, and
found its own only and immediate Inn: And so also from hence, the Archeus is
made wholly irregular, inordinate, violent, and disobedient: Because he is he,
who from thenceforth has framed inordinate images and seals, together with a
spending of his own proper substance, as it were the wax of that seal: For
images or likenesses, are at first indeed the mere incorporeal Beings of the
mind; but as soon as they are imprinted on the Archeus, they cloth themselves
with his Body, and are made most powerful seminal Beings, the sealing dames,
mistresses, and architectresses of any kind of passions and inordinacies
whatsoever: which thing I will hereafter more clearly illustrate in the
Treatise of Diseases.

Finally, the adversaries will be able to Object,

That it would be all as one, whether a Disease be accounted a disposition, or
a distemperature of the first qualities, or a disproportionable mixture of
humors, or lastly, whether it be called an indisposition

I Answer Negatively, and that indeed, because both the suppositions are false;
For as to the First, For that does not only contain a manifest fault in
arguing, of [not the Cause] as [of the Cause] and of a [non-Being] [for a
Being]: But besides the Destruction and Death of mortal men, does from thence
follow: For, for that very Cause, for which a Remedy is administered to correct
the distemperature of a Discrasie or the abounding or disproportion of humors
(because of things not existing in Nature) they at least cannot deny, that our
Disputation is of things, but not of a Name only; when as (to wit) they
accuse, cure, or undertake to cure the Disease for the Cause, or this, for it.
They handle I say, things that are never possible, as if they were present.

And then also, they press a falsehood: Because indeed, I never said, that a
naked confusion or indisposition of the Archeus, is a Disease; but I affirm
that the immediate and internal matter of a Disease is to be drawn from the
mass of the Archeus himself: But I call the imprinted seminal Idea, which
springs from the disturbances of the Archeus, the efficient Gause; but as to
what appertains to the other supposition, the occasional or inciting Cause,
and the internal containing Cause, or the very Body of a Disease, do far also
differ from each other. For example; The occasional Cause of intermitting
Fevers is present out of the fit, which should not be if the occasional Cause
were the very internal matter of Fevers: For I have seen some hundreds cured of
diverse Diseases, by some Simples hanged on the Body, without any removal of the
occasional matter: To wit, Nature being busy about the rest.

Thirdly, the fits of Diseases are oft-times ended, the occasional Cause being
present and remaining, but it is altogether impossible for that to be, while
the containing and internal matter of the Disease is present.

In the next place, there are Diseases which have no occasional Cause, whose
own connexed matter is nevertheless, excussed or struck out about the time of
their period, even as fire out of a flint; They not having I say, any other
occasion of them, besides Ideal impressions; such as is the Gout, falling-Evil,
Madness, Asthma, etc. To wit, whose perfect Cure consists in the removal of
the seminal Character, and incorporeal Ferment, not likewise in the
sequestration of any matter: For so a certain odor being drawn through the
nostrils, has strangled many, without a material vapor or moist sent unto the
Paunch. However therefore they may strive with me, they shall discern, and
confess with me, that hitherto, none has come unto the knowledge of Diseases;
and that there has been blindness in Healing hitherto: Give leave to the
truth. It has therefore been sufficient for me to have demonstrated, that
Diseases do lead their Army into us, by unknow Seminaries and invisible
Beginnings, according to that ancient Maxim, That every direction of Sublunary
things depends on an invisible World. Hence it has come to pass, that although
Diseases have oftentimes been silent, and have wholly ceased to be, under the
uncertain Cures of experiments; yet nothing has been hitherto acted from a
foreknowledge of the means and ends, in Diseases of nature standing, or
sitting: Because also, they do very often of their own voluntary and free
accord, hastily run unto the end of their race. But in Diseases of nature
laying along or prostrated, nothing has been heard hitherto, besides the
despaires of incurable Diseases, and the Lamentations of miserable men. What
things therefore, have been assayed before, touching the nature of a Disease,
let them be Prologues unto those things, which remain to be by and by spoken
concerning Diseases: Where I shall professly touch at or reach, the causes of
all Diseases in the point of Unity: Here only, handing forth by the way, that
Diseases do now issue into depraved and impure nature, plainly after the same
manner wherein they at first began to be framed and issue: And the Schools
will not deny that that thing lay hid to the Heathens and their followers.

Last of all, new Diseases have lately happened unto us, and ancient ones do
hereafter Paracelsus in the forepastage, who might propose unto the World the
more profound preparations of Medicines, so far as it was lawful: But at this
day, afterward he has vouchsafed also, to open the knowledge of Diseases:
Wherefore I shortly expect another to come, whose Scholar I am not worthy to
be: For neither therefore, has the most High permitted my self to hope for the
coming of the same man, who has sent me before, as the publisher of his
Praise: For truly with him, every Disease shall equally find its own remedies,
under the Stone or Harmony of unity; together with the speculative knowledge of
Diseases and Remedies.

I entreat the thrice most great and excellent God, that he would preserve the
same man from the vanity of arrogance, and from sudden Death, sorely threatened
unto him by hateful men.

CHAP. LXIII. The Dropsy is Unknown.
1. At length the Author shows, that there is the same ignorance of the
Dropsy, as of other Diseases. 2. The Distinctions of Names used by the
Schools. 3. He must first strive with the Schools about the difference of
occasional Causes. 4. The hurtful ignorance of the humor Latex. 5. The Error
of the Schools is shewit with the finger. 6. A cruel Remedy. 7. A ridiculous
Opinion. 8. Some absurd Concomitants. 9. A History. 10. Absurd Anatomy. 11.
Some remarkable Histories. 12. The Root of Grass is examined. 13. A Stumbling
of the Schools, that they may fall. 14. The Author answers by Eighteen
Arguments. 15. The occasional Cause is meditated of. 16. The occasional cause
is proved. 17. Paracelsus is taken notice of. 18. A most secure Remedy of
Mercury described by Paracelsus. 19. Some remarkable things. 20. The Dropsy is
described by its Causes, and by Nineteen Positions. 21. An Objection of
Paracelsus is refuted. 22. The poisonous fury of the Archeus of the Reins.
23. A Maxim is preserved. 24. The carelessness of the Schools are to be
admired at. 25. The Author narrowly searches into some hidden things. 26. The
examination of a thing or matter, which seems repugnant unto Science
Mathematical. 27. The difference of the Latex from the Urine. 28. The use of
the Kidneys being neglected, has brought forth the ignorance of the Dropsy.
29. An Explanation of a new Question. 30. The fury of the Reins is the
Efficient Cause of a Dropsy. 31. The manner of making in a Dropsy. 32. It is
prooved by a voluntary Cure. 33. What the abstinence from Drink in a Dropsy,
may effect. 34. Thirst does in no wise dry up a Dropsy. 35. After what manner,
the abstaining from drink has cured the Dropsy. 36. All thirst arises from
the the Reins, but not from the Liver, as from the slender Veins, according
to the Schools. 37. The ignorance of Causes has rendered the Dropsy
neglected. 38. The Vanity of Hydragogals or Medicines drawing out Water. 39. A
Remedy of the Dropsy. 40. A remarkable thing concerning Briony. 41. That the
government of the Reins has hitherto remained unknown. 42. A Definition of
the Dropsy, by its Causes, and manner of making. 43. An examination of the
Tympany. 44. A History has proved to the Nostrils what has been said. 45. The
vanity of Carminating Medicines. 46. Why Paracelsus persuades Dungs. 47.
Mercury is commended. 48. A Bastardly and new Dropsy. 49. The preparation of
Precipitate, and of the Arcanal or secretous Remedies of the Dropsy. 50.
Universal and pacifical secrets, do (as yet) more powerfully operate.

I Have made a Treatise concerning Fevers, and seeing that, no seldom Dropsy
defect of the Urine; therefore the Dropsy seemed to be referred unto the
forgetfulness of the Reins: But the Stone has expelled the Treatise of the
Dropsy, therefore it has made a Treasie singular to it self: But I shall be
the less solicitous of order, so my proposed Scope of curing be reached with
fruit. I have made it manifest, that the causes of Fevers, the Disease of the
Stone, Apoplexy, Palsy, Lethargy, Leprosy, Convulsion, Plague, Jaundice,
Colic, Flux, and other like Diseases, are unknown: Then in the next place, I
have already achieved to demonstrate the same ignorance to be, about the
knowledge of a Disease in general: Now moreover, I will show, that the same
thing does happen concerning the Dropsy, as it were the heir of many Diseases.

In the Schools, a Threefold Dropsy is observed, to wit, Anasarca, a water
between the Skin, and the which, they call a Leuco (or white) Phlegmacie, as if
it did arise from Phlegm, and for the most part, they confound it with a local
Oedema or Phlegmatish tumor.

And then, Ascites follows, which is the Dropsy of a proper Etymology, being
forthwith manifest in the Belly and Legs.

And the Third is a Tympany, or windy Dropsy, concluded only in the Belly:
Because indeed, the Abdomen or nether part of the Belly does extend it self
from a Flatus alone, or being mixed with a little wheyishness, and that no
otherwise than as through water, and at length, that it does miserably kill by
choking.

The Tympany is more rare and cruel than Ascites, and is easily from the
beginning, distinguished from an Ascites: Because the Patient being rolled on
his side, does not feel the water to floate, even as, otherwise, that thing is
manifest in an Ascites; yea

With the Schools therefore I will talk, concerning the occasional causes; for
why, seeing the ignorance of the immediate efficient cause, has hitherto made
the Dropsy an natural Philosophy: For even as the food is not dung, although
this be afterward made of food: So neither is the Latex Urine. Furthermore, it
is so confessed, that the Dropsy does universally arise from the error of the
Liver alone; that when I had once, Judged Destaires or Stegrius, did labor
with a Dropsy of of his Lungs, extended from the left part of his Midriffe
into a swollen Arm; the chief Physicians hissed out this my Paradox with loud
laughter, because I sought the seat of the Dropsy out of the Liver: Yet, when
after death his Breast was opened, perhaps two buckets of water flowed forth,
the which had run out or digressed between the left part of his Midriffe, and
Breast, into his Arm and Fingers. Anasarca therefore seeing it was as it were a
less and beginning Dropsy, it was derived (by opening things) into the Liver:
And likewise they hope, that the remaining white Phlegm, the more crude Blood,
Urine, and Dropsical whey (they confound those four in this place) will

They are therefore constrained to feign, that the more crude Blood, or
Phlegm, being

For I will first dispute about the Liver, and under the same by-work, I will
discover

Thus Oxen, ye, that yoaked are,
The Plow, not for your selves do bear.
But Physicians, seeing they scarce any longer expect to learn, they stand by,
stop their Noses, and hope by the expenses of the Heirs, for the most part, to
escape the mark of Death.

A Lawyer, after diverse Gripings or Wringings of his Bowels, died of a Dropsy:
But in the Dissection, we saw his Liver without blemish. An Englishman, my
Neighbor, Stegrius tend.

In the Autumn of the year 1605. I returning out of England to Antwerp, found
some hundreds, after a malignant and popular Fever, to be dropsical: I cured
many, and many under the unhappy experiments of others, in the mean time
Perished: But that People have a persuasion in them, that unless all the Water
be drawn out of the dead Carcases the Dropsy will pass over into the next
Heir: And so, they are Solicitous of Dissection: And I certainly affirm, that
I found the Liver of none defiled. A certain Citizen, was long pained between
his bastard Ribs, neither breathed he without Pain; at length, the Conjectures
of Physicians being tried, he died of a Dropsy: But his Liver was seen to be
without hurt. One pertaining to the Kings Treasury of Brabant, after a sudden
pissing of Blood, was long handled by Physicians in vain, and thefore being
sent by his Physicians, unto the Fountains of the Spaw, he returning, began to
show a hardness in the left Side of his Abdomen, under his Ribs, and thereupon,
the Leg of that side was swollen: But the chief Physicians, and those of
Lovain, although they saw his Urine like unto that of healthy Persons, and
thereby did betoken his Liver to be guiltless, yet they desisted not from the
continual use of solutive, opening, and Urine-provoking things: yea, they gave
him steel diversely masked, against the obstructions of the Liver, to drink: And
at length, having a huge Abdomen, he Perished with a Dropsy: For neither was
there place for excuse, as to say, they were called late, who were present with
him, from the hour of his bloody Pissing: But his dead Carcass being
dissected, his Liver was found innocent: But his left Kidney had swollen, and
that more than was meet, with a clot of out-hunted Blood (such as is in a
boiled Gut.) A Major of Soldiers, from a bloody Flux which was at length
appeased, died of a Dropsy, whose Liver notwithstanding, was without blemish;
however the Schools may grin.

A certain Merchant keeping his bed through a Colic of four months, fell into
a Dropsy; but being dissected, he had his Liver without fault.

A Woman of sixty years old, hearing in the night, Thieves at the windows, and
rising, dashed her Belly beyond the Breast Bone, against a corner of the Table:
But first it pained her, and then her Menstru'es brake forth (as she thought)
the which, although it was little, yet it desisted not, but with the birth of a
Dropsy: it also expurged into the mass of a greater Tympanie: But she being
dissected, Her Liver offered it self undefiled.

Another old Woman, being vexed with a more cruel Husband, after inordinate
menstru'es, Perished with a Dropsy, and showed an unblamed Liver.

A certain Handmaid; hanging some washed webs of Cloth to high for her
Stature, sliding into a flux of the Womb, at length, died of a Dropsy, neither
offered her Liver, it self guilty, to the beholders.

A Cuaplaine of Bruxells, of the age of 31 years, complains to me, of the
shortness of his Breath: he shows his Legs to be puffed up, and his Belly to be
swollen: And he says, that his Cod was swelled to the bigness of ones Head:
For I saw, that he had a face bespotted with red pricks or spects, as it were
with the marks of stripes: He as yet, celebrated the Mass, yet with
difficulty: presently after three days from thence, he suddenly dies: but he
being dissected, his Belly was found to be without water: But in his Breast,
much Blood had choked him: And so a small vein being burst, had caused a
difficult breathing, and did also dissemble a Dropsy: But when as the rupture
of the vein, being more rent, had poured forth its Blood, it choked the man.

A certain Dropsical Man, and but one only, being seen by me, showed a black
and stinking Bubble in the hollow of his Liver. Barth-Cabrollius, an Anatomist
of Mount-Pellier, Says, that he cured very many Dropsical Persons, by Incision
made in the very Navill it self standing out, and that, in both sexes: But
surely if the error had been in the Liver, it could not have issued forth with
the water, through the Navil: or that the Liver being mortally defiled, should
admit of a restoring: Which thing, the Schools will not admit of. Wherefore I
remember, that I have restored above two thousand Dropsical Persons, also whose
Urine did now wax-blackish with Bloodinesse, and who had scarce made a
spoon-ful of water in one night, whose Liver, if it had had but even a mean
(and not a mortal) fault, I consess I had not Cured them. I have seen also,
that they whose Liver has been notably wounded, have escaped, who although
they thenceforth fore-perceived the Storms of the Air, yet not the Dropsy. I
have seen moreover those whose last day, a slow Fever had closed, in whose
Liver small Stones had grown; yet they had not shown a Dropsy.

It is a familiar thing for the Liver of Oxen to abound with small Stones,
although Paracelsus) but from a mere cold and moist Distemperature thereof, for
so a large Flux of Blood, because it brings the aforesaid distemperature, it
causes the Dropsy. But this is wholly prattle, old Wives Fables, and vain
sounds.

For first of all I have sufficiently demonstrated the nullities of mixtures
and temperatures, not any more to be repeated.

2. I have seen many, all the venal Blood of whom, a Consumption had exhausted,
so as that scarce two ounces had remained, when their Heart, Lungs, and Liver
were plucked out; but their Liver was of a yellowish Color, because it was
without Blood; yet there was no cold and moist distemper in these Livers, as
neither a Dropsy, the Supposed son of its feigned Mother.

3. If much Flux of Blood should generate cold and moist distemperatures,
surely the Schools do not affirm that thing to be done, but by the reason of a
withdrawing of the vital Spirit, which alone, is the cause of our heat: But the
defect whereof, seeing it includes a privation, it cannot induce a positive
Being, such as a cold and moist distemperature and Dropsy should be.

4. And likewise, seeing they will have contraries to be contained under the
same general. kind; our vital heat (which they will have to answer to the
Element of the Stars) cannot have an Elementary cold, contrary unto it.

5. A notable Flux of Blood, does of necessity cause cold: And therefore, if a
cold distemperature arisen from a Flux of Blood, should be of necessity, the
mother of the Dropsy, at every notable flux of blood, the Dropsy should of
necessity be present: But the consequent is false: Therefore also the
Antecedent.

6. And moreover, seeing cold, from a flux of blood, becomes universal, there
is no reason, why the Abdomen should be rather laden with water, than the
Breast, whither to wit, the Air being continually breathed in, does increase
the cold.

7. If the Dropsy be the son of that distemperature in the Liver; Whence
therefore is there an uncessant thirst?

8. If the Expulsion of water into the Abdomen, be an action of a distempered
Liver; Why does not the Liver use the same its own expulsive action, while the
Veins do swell with Urine, they being intercepted by a destructive Stone?

9. Likewise the Blood of Dropsical Persons, even as also the Urine, should be
exceeding watery, if the Dropsy should be from a cold distemperature of the
Liver: But the Urine should not be so reddish and Bloody.

10. In the next place, between a Dropsy, and cold distemperature, arisen from
a flux of blood, a positive cause, being a third from a cold, should of
necessity interpose: Which the Schools do hitherto name, because of a
non-being there is no search made.

11. Neither also, do such distemperatures produce thirst, together with a Salt
Water, in the Abdomen; seeing they do not thirst, who do plentifully detain a
salt Urine throughout all their veins, in the Stone which stops up the Reins
on both sides.

12. If the Dropsy be from a cold distemper, Then a Dropsy should never be
expected after a Fever, or wringing of the Bowels, if there be not a branded
confusion of causes. And in vain do they flee unto a cold distemperature for a
Dropsy, the which, should equally proceed even from opposite causes.

13. Every old and decrepite Person, should now nourish the necessity of a
Dropsy.

14. A cold distemper, seeing in its root it is like to Death, extinguishment,
old Age, and privation, every Dropsy should contain a necessary despair of
health, even as such a distemperature denies a restoration.

15. If the Liver be the Liver and not the Lungs, by reason of its Elementary
cotempering (as the Schools say) and so from one only Seed, all the Elements
do proceed and wander hither and thither confused, that they may be the
constitutives of appointed Organs! therefore the Liver receding from its
natural temperature, shall cease to be the Liver, and shall be the Kidney,
Lungs, or Milt.

16. At leastwise, a Member struck with a Palsy, should not be wasted, but
should be after some sort, swollen with a Dropsy.

17. At length, if the Venal Blood be resolved into four, or again into three
Humors, from whence it is either naturally composed, or they are in it, being
applied unto, or co-mixed in the subject of the Blood; The Blood shall never be
able to be changed into a Dropsical water: Seeing this is not any Humor of the
constitutives of the Blood: Yet I have seen a countryman, out of whom all the
water was taken by a Borer, in twelve hours space; for he being become my
Opposite, Scoffed at me: But the morrow morning, being swollen with the former
Lump of his Belly, he died. For the Dropsy increased not by degrees, even as
it had increased from its beginning; but it presently hastened and proceeded
unto an extreme extension: For I observed, that his Flesh and Blood, being
melted into Water, had made their retreat to the nether part of his Belly: For
in that one only day, he had descended into extreme Leanness: Therefore his
Flesh and Blood, shall now wander into an Hydropical or fifth Humor, through
the cold distemperature of his Liver. I could perhaps pardon, that the Liver
being cooled, does afterward generate the more cold Blood (for all Blood being
deprived of vital spirit, naturally waxes cold, because it is a dead carcass:)
But that a more cold Liver does melt fleshes into a Dropsical water, that can
be founded upon no reason.

18. The Schools cannot deny but that a Dropsy is sometimes solved by the
Kidneys: But there is no reason, why the Reins do stubornly close themselves
even until Death, because the Liver was more cold than was meet.

Let these arguments only, as yet, suffice the Humourists which are
distempered with cold, that the Liver may be from a mortal offense.

Now I will over-add somethings concerning the occasional Cause; I will
therefore resume the fact of our Treasurer, who showed nothing memorable in
this dissection, beside

Vain therefore is the devise of Paracelsus, that the Star Zedo is the one only
and singular Architector of the Dropsy: For the cause is in our innermost
parts, and in the very Beginnings of Life, but not to be so far fetched, and
Cured: For the Dropsy is not the workmanship of the Stars, neither is there
such an ordination of the Stars: neither is that of concernment, although
Mercury being separated dead from its Vein, does truly and perfectly cure the
threefold Dropsy: For Mercury is an Analogical, and feigned Name, neither
does it denote a Star; but a running Metal: For what does a Name that is
Metaphorically feigned, belong unto the feigned Star of Zedo? For metallic
Mercury, is neither a Star, nor kills a Star, nor hinders its operation, nor
dis-joynes the conjunction of a Star with us, if there were any: For the Stars
are the occasions of Meteors, but of Diseases, occasions only by accident: For
primarily, they are the Causes of times or seasons, and of the Blas of a
Meteor; but secondarily, and by accident, they disturb our Bodies, proyoke
Diseases, or ripen the occasional matter: But Causes by accident do not respect
Cures, but fore-cautions, especially, where Causes [per se] or [by themselves]
do operate with or in us by a proper motion, and appointment of their own
seeds. For indeed the left Kidney of the Treasurer is stuffed or condensed with
the more dry Blood, the left

I will therefore declare the whole order of the matter so far as my
Observation has taught me: For the Liquor Latex unknown to the Schools, as
long as it is carried with

1. This is the cause of an Anasarca, or in speaking precisely, the Water is
not the Dropsy, as the Anasarca it self, neither is the Wind the Tympany it
self, but the Water in the Abdomen, and the Latex in the Anasarca, are the
Products of the Dropsy, As the Wind is in the Tympany. Surely the Dropsy is a
Guest received with a more inward society of familiarity, and is more intimate
unto us, the which does attempt the vital principles, and faculties of Life
before the Water be bred: and so every Disease, does by occasional Causes
immediately talk with the vital Beginnings, wherein at length it finds its
matter and efficient Cause.

2. And then I have noted, that seeing the Urine of all Dropsical persons in
general, is little, and of a full color, the Latex was the matter, as of the
Urine, so also of the Dropsy: For neither is it formally Urine, but the matter
hereof before Urine was made thereof by a co-mixture of other things, and the
receiving of a Urinal ferment.

3. But I understand in the Dropsy a threefold matter: To wit, the first,
occasional, such I have said out-chased venal blood to be.

And then, a second, which is the Water it self, and the very Latex in the
Abdomen, which is a certain product.

And lastly, the third matter has its internal efficient arisen in the
internal vital principles of the Archeus of the Reins.

4. Like as also, drink failing, the Reins do notwithstanding, as yet, allure
forth the Urine of Blood, although sparingly.

5. So also in the Dropsy, the Urine is of the Blood, not of the Drink, not of
the Latex: The Reins do actually, conceive, frame, and contein the Dropsy:
But the Abdomen or nether part of the Belly, through the action of government
of the Reins, does afford an Inn, and the Kidney sends the Latex thither, as
the product of the Tragedy. For it is not, as the Latex is theevishly snatched
away by another Bowel, but the Kidney alone does banish the Latex unto places
subjected unto it.

6. But the Latex being less chief in the accustomednesse of Life, in an
Oedema, and Anasarca, than in an Ascites: it is also again supped into the
Veins, and slides unto the Reins, that it may undergo the last determination
of Life.

7. An Ascites is regularly cured, if the Kidney shall make much and abundan^
of Urine of its own accord, or by a Remedy: But it commits a relapse, if the
Disease be not wholly taken away out of the Kidney.

8. The Water between the skin, or Anasarca, by a retrograde motion draws the
Latex into the mouths of the Veins, from thence through the Veins it is
sucked into the Kidneys, and expurged in manner of Urine: The least quantity
whereof, only does exhale by transpiration: And therefore they abusively
teach, that the Latex is Phlegm, in an Oedema, and that it is recocted into
lawful Blood.

9. Therefore the Command and Action of Government of the Reins does extend it
self, not only into the Kidneys, Ureters, and Urine Vessels: But besides, into
the hollowness of the Belly, between the Peritoneum or wrapping Skin thereof,
and Muscles of the Abdomen, and likewise into the several Divisions of the
hollow Vein beneath its self, even also into the Feet and Legs.

10. The Reins therefore do not suffer the Latex to fall down through its own
weight, but do truly send it, no otherwise than as they do truly again draw
the same through all the blood of the Veins, to wit, until the Dropsy be cured
by pissings.

11. And which is more, the Kidney does always cooperate, and principally
operate in the framing of a Dropsy: It is therefore of necessity, primarily
affected: Because it wanders from the ends of its acting.

12. And seeing the Kidney is the chief effecter, of the Dropsy, although
another member may now and then contain, the occasional Cause.

13. Therefore a Cure which is instituted by a removal of the Water, is always
subject to a relapse, and is for the most part attempted in vain: Because a
worthy or meet Cure is never instituted from the ultimate or last Agent.

14. Therefore the Dropsy Ascites, is always an immediate effect of the
Reins, and so the Cure of the same does expulsively require a restoration of
the Kidneys, whether the defect be occasionally stirred up, or in the next
place consists in the Kidney it self.

15. Wherefore I do far retire from the Doctrine of the Schools, which, the
Reins being paspassed by and neglected, does continually behold the Liver, and
direct its desires of curing thither.

16. But the Dropsy is not a wandering abuse, or exorbitancy of the Archeus in
the Kidney, a stopping up thereof by a stone or muckishnesse: But a certain
sleepy or stupifying poisonous faculty in the venal blood, which is expelled,
or in a like manner entertained; through importunity whereof, the Kidney does
first of all forget its office, casts away the Rains of separating the Latex:
and straightway after also, does snatch up a fury, while through an inordinate
motion, it banisheth the Latex into the Abdomen.

17. Even just as I said before, that a Kidney was exclusively shut against the
simple Urine, even until death.

18. Indeed I meditate of a co-like devious or wandering quality of out-chased
venal blood, in the Dropsy; through the occasional Cause whereof, the Kidney
is made forgetful of its duty, and the seasonable removal of which poison does
free the Kidney from its bond, and so the Abdomen from the Water: For when the
Kidney sees that an Error was committed by it, and being well admonished by a
right Medicine, it earnestly repents, and again suppeth up the Latex being
dismissed unto it, and drives it forth.

19. Therefore the true Dropsy Ascites is in the Reins; or to lose the
stubborn bolt of the Reins, is to lose the Dropsy; even as to solue the
congealed Blood, is to solue the occasional cause thereof: That is, the
immediate cause, as well the material, as efficient of a true Dropsy, is the
Archeus of the Reins erring; to wit, so far as he becomes Exorbitant, and is as
it were driven into a fury by the occasional Cause, he begets an Idea or
shape, the which the implanted Archeus of the Reins himself, being stubborn,
does foster and nourish: Whereby indeed, he does not, or scarce separates the
Urine, or imploys himself in the care of his Office, or of his appointment:
Yea, neither does he only pass by and neglect his own Offices; but also, being
as it were in a rage, dismisseth the Latex unto the Abdomen, that he may as it
were procure his own Destruction. Therefore we must dissolve the vice of
stubbornness in the Archeus, so that pissing may follow if health be to be
expected.

Paracelsus feigneth, that in the Dropsy, the venal Blood is by the star of
Zedo turned into a muscilage; but from hence into water: But that its cure does
consist in the withdrawing of the water, and first matter, or removal of that
aforesaid Muscilage: But what other thing is this, than to cure from the
effect? I grant willingly indeed, that as often as the Latex does not
sufficiently serve the turn, the Archeus of the Reins, that he may satisfy his
own fury, does sooner cause the blood to melt, than he desisteth from his
error begun: But where there is a plentiful Latex, the dissoluting of the
Flesh and Blood into a Latex, is not worth his labor: For in very deed, as
speedily as he can, he drives all the Latex unto the places of the Dropsy;
neither is he idle, but rages as if in the driving of the Latex unto the
Abdomen, his own profitable end were to be expected: For neither would it
detain the Urine if it were the endeavor of the Archeus to dissolve the flesh
and blood.

Those in whom both Kidneys are stopped by the Stone, and do die, being at
length

It is a Maxim, that every being, desires to be and remain. Which indeed is to
be understood, that a man is immediately, more powerfully hurt of none, than of
himself.

Furthermore, with what great carelessness, and with how light a foot, the
Schools of the Humorists have skipped over the consideration of Diseases, may
be seen, not only Yet without consideration, that such a cold distemper, cannot
be restored; but that Dropsical Persons do every where admit of cure. But
chiefly, the negligence of the Heathenish Schools does clearly appear: Because
that, among so many thousands Writers, the first, is as yet wanting who has
dared to think, which way, or by what possible means, the Liver should lay up
its water between the Abdomen and its Muscles; none I say, has hitherto known,
that the Latex differs from the Urine: And seeing that sometimes, the Dropsy
is for many months leading the Languishing weak unto their Coffin,

At leastwise, however it be taken, the Liver is not able to super-adde even
on the only drop more unto the Abdomen, being now extended into a huge heap and
hardness, by

For first of all, the mouths of the veins ending into the Membrane or Filme of
the Abdomen or nether part of the Belly, have not all of them folding doors
applied unto them, like Bag-pipes restraining the in-snuffed Wind and Latex
within.

And then, if they should have such folding doors, at leastwise the Liver
wants an expulsive faculty of so great force, but rather the Liver it self,
and the channels of the veins, should sooner chap and crack, than they can
super-add the contained water to the hydropical Abdomen, being extended into an
immense hardness.

In the next ylace, if any such veins do end at the Prison of the Dropsy, for
its nourishment, at leastwise, they are the Daughters of the vena cava or
hollow vein: And so, all the water should be in the Liver, and the hollow vein,
before it is in the Abdomen, and those Bowels should be swollen into an huge
hardness: Yea, all the Dropsical Blood should be nothing but mere water; which
is false: And the Schools will grant me of their own accord, that the water of
the Dropsy should be emunged by the Reins, before it should come unto the
Abdomen, unless the vice and offense should be rather of the Reins, than of the
Liver: For sanguification belongs to the Liver; but the sepatation of the Latex
from the venal Blood, is before, and belongs to another Workman, than the
Liver: For the Latex is in the meats and drinks from the beginning, and is
essentially separated by the Gall, until it assumes the nature of a certain
Salt, and changes its sharpness into saltness, and remains locally well
mixed with the venal Blood, until it having obtained the last supply of Urine,
being attracted by the Reins, is expelled. The Reins or Kidneys therefore, are
governors of the Latex, as the Liver is of the venal blood. And then, the
water of the Dropsy, is the Latex, not likewise (as yet)

For the Kidney has received the dominion of the water; so that, the drink
failing, it vitiates the Blood, and transchangeth it into Urine; which things
being unknown medicines

These things I have known, and believed, because I have seen them: But I could
not come unto the knowledge of those passages, as neither of that violence,
which might extend the Abdomen more strongly than Bellows, and nevertheless, by
a continual drop, might as yet increase it: Those passages are hitherto unknown
to Anatomists, and the manner whereby the tumor arises unto so great an
extension, is touched by none, or lightly searched out. The great things of God
in nature I humbly reverence, and greatly admire: For I am astonished at the
furies of the Archeus, and the every where excentrical varieties of these,
whereby he sometimes encloseth water, at another time wind, in the Prison of
the Abdomen, even until the destruction of the whole Bodo, and his own.

I will therefore open the matter, so far as my Industry has permitted me to
conceive:

One, whereby a Body is enclosed in a Body, as Wine in a Bottle, and the Water
of the Dropsy between the Peritoneum and Abdomen: Yea, the pores of these
Membranes are Diseasly closed: For the Body is per-spirable in health, and the
sweat does wholly diminish the Latex; so that the watery drink in Summer does
presently by sweat flow through the skin: But sweat is for the most part,
unprofitable in the Dropsy, so that although the Belly sweats, yet it does not
diminish the Dropsy, however many have vainly tried many things, about these
trifles.

There is also another Action, which is regular and of a different kind in
Nature: Whereby, I have elsewhere showed by many Examples in us, a certain
solid Body (to wit, a knife, beard of corn, needle, arrow, or dart head, bones,
shells of fishes, and the like) are transmitted through the Stomach, Paunch,
Veins, without the hurting or wounding of these: And so that there is a wonted
and necessary penetration of Bodies in Nature.

For the first of those Actions, as it is every where known, is made so far as
a Body does altogether obey its own bolts of superficies, hardness, weight,
channels, etc. And one Body in respect of the other, is as it were dead.

But the other Action is wholly vital, and of the Spirit of Life, which is not
clothed with the Garment of a thicker Body: But its own self is the veriest
Garment of that Body: And the which it does therefore derive through another
vital body subjected unto it: For so Chyrurgions have noted Apostems or Ulcers
to be made through the very bones themselves: And so Authors who are worthy of
credit (whom in the Chapter of injected things, I have alleged) do admit of a
penetrating of corporeal dimensions, as often as a knife passes through the
Stomach, and with a corrupt mattery Aposteme, is returned through the Ribs,
without a wound of the Stomach.

In the Dropsy therefore, the aforesaid double action is conversant about the
same Latex: For this Latex, as long as it being clothed with a clear vital
spirit, does after some sort enjoy a venal life, is led through the solid
places, it slighteth passages, seeing there is none unpassable by it: But it
deriveth it self unto the Prison of the Dropsy, and there, as well through a
constriction of the Pores of the Membranes, as singularly, and especially by
reason of a deserting of the same clothing spirit, it lays up it self, as it
were an excrement now dead: And the which, neither does therefore find
deliverance from thence, unless the vital spirit does again cloth and
encompass it. This is indeed that spiritual force, which is more powerful than
any Bellows: The which we bear in our inward parts, the power whereof we daily
admire, have never known, and being compelled by demonstrations to admit of, do
scarce believe.

In the Dropsy therefore, I have found a fury of the Reins, and their erring
powers, which fury shuts, and is scarce that which may open, and the which
does open, and lay up, etc. Which blood, when it has put on a fermental
malignity, presently the Kidney the governor of the Latex being full of wroth,
receives the sleepie or stupifying poison of that blood: But the ordination of
the Latex is to wash off filths, if there are any detained in any place of the
Body; and seeing the Kidney cannot by the Latex wash off that out-hunted blood,
because the Latex cannot descend thither, this co-heaped in the veins for
disdains sake, and the Kidney, is thereby so affected with disdain, and
weariness or grief, that it cannot perform the office enjoined it: And
therefore it presently shuts the passage of the Urine, that that which it
cannot do by a regular plenty of the Latex, it may perfect by an abundance
thereof: As if it considered: Thou Latex go not whither I would send thee,
to wash off the out-chased blood; I will not let thee pass through thy
accustomed Ureters: Such therefore, is the fury of the enraged Archeus of the
Reins, the which at length, arising to a degree, clothes the Latex, and derives
it whither it will.

But besides, not only the event in making does confirm this fury of the
Archeus; but also,

I knew the Countess of Falax, who while being a young Maid, did swell with a
Dropsy, by the persuasion of a certain Physician (for she was held desperate,
by all) abstained almost for the space of a full year, from drink, being
content with the more solid food, and broaths: And she became healthy, and is
now alive, being seventy years of age.

In the first place, thirst, whether it be taken from a sense of moisture
failing, or for the defect it self of moisture, At leastwise, in neither
manner, does it dry up a Dropsical water: For although no drink be Drunk, at
leastwise, broaths which do afford a sufficient quantity of venal blood, do
also yield a small quantity of Urine and Latex, so much

In the next place, neither does thirst, nor the defect of drinks it self take
away the occasional Cause of a Dropsy (which for the most part, is venal blood
expelled) but rather they do the more dry up, and the more stubbornly reserve
for it, that it may resist a resolving, through the abstinence of the
counterfeited thirst: But that continual thirst, together

Thirst therefore, proceeds from the governor of the Latex, and not from the
Bowel of sanguification: for there is as much necessity of the Latex, as there
has been hitherto dullness in the passing it by.

Some Authors do commend live Toads, being fast bound to both Kidneys, to lose
the Dropsy by the Urine: At leastwise, I have seen a Countryman that had a
Dropsy, cured by an Adder tied about his Belly and Reins: For an Idea of fear
is brought on the Reins, whereby they loose their indignation. Indeed, by the
same title, thirst does stir up an Idea of sorrow, or of a denied appetite,
whence the Kidney forgets its wroth.

From what therefore has been said before, the ignorance of Causes in the
Dropsy is

Therefore Mercury precipitated according to the prescription of Paracelsus,
cures every Dropsy, not as it purges, but forasmuch as it material passing
through the Bowels,

Take notice therefore of this; that white Briony or white Vine, being scraped
or filed,

The Dropsy therefore, is a Disease occasionally arisen from a bloody depraved
matter, as it were from a fermental Beginning: at whose incitements, the
Archeus of the Reins

But the Tympany does very much differ from the Dropsy: For there is unto it a
different occasional Cause, a different manner of making; in the next place a
different matter,

Seeing therefore in the Tympany, it is in the outside or in the crooked
bought of the Intestine: the same flatulent indisposition is to be considered
to be with-out-side, as is within in the Intestine: To wit, it is made from a
similar nourishment degenerating, whereby a dungy ferment happening, the very
Archeus of the place being wroth and ill affected, does turn, not indeed the
aforesaid occasional Cause, but the proper nourishment of the Membranes into
Flatus's. But for this purpose a part of the dungy-ferment, does pass from the
inward cavity unto the outward bought of the Intestine: And therefore that is
not the unsavory, or four flatus of Belchings, as neither does it smell of
dung, because it is not of a dungy-matter; but of a degenerated, and cadaverous
or mortified nourishment.

A certain man by the persuasion of Physicians, sustaining an Incision on the
side of his Navel, who was judged to have the Dropsy, and that they might draw
out the water (I

It is manifest therefore that the occasional matter, and next, the true
matter, and inward effecter, with all the knowledge which credits a Physician,
have remained unknown.

The vanity also of Remedies appears, and especially of carminating things,
which do not respect the outward bought of the Intestine: And vainly do they
feign, that

Cabrollius, an Anatomist of Mount-pellier tells, That he cured a man of Eighty
Years old, who by the persuasion of Rondoletius, ate nothing but salt things,
and least he should be overwhelmed with thirst, he mixed pickels or sauces made
of Vinegar and Sugar with his meats: He also fomented him twice every day with
a Lixivium, wherein Salt, Alume, and Sulphur had boiled: And thereupon used
Cows-dung for a Cataplasm, and at length he escaped, and survived, being a
Hundred Years old. For those things are not administered in vain, which do
consume the occasional Cause: Neither therefore does Paracelsus vainly commend
dungs, seeing they are the salts of putrified meats, unto whom it is granted to
resolve the occasional matter of a Dropsy. Surely there is on both sides a
wonderful action of the Archeus, as well where he deteins the keys, as where he
unlocks the Closets, and expels his Enemy.

But Paracelsus approves of his Praecipiolum or Mercury, drawn dead out of its
Mine, before other Remedies: But other Simples according to the degree of
assinity, wherein they Mercury. It is a Phrase of his own liberty. I reverence
and admire the endowments of Simples, as they arose from God, but not as they
are consanguineal or akin to mineral Mercury. I confess in the mean time, that
that Mercury has always served or answered my desires. Indeed the attainment
thereof is difficult: but the dose of two grains is sufficient, being three or
four times administered. But Mercurius Diaphoreticus being once obtained, it is
sufficient for many thousands of sick folks, as well for himself being a
Physician, as for his successors.

Finally, I have seen a bastard Dropsy; whereof none has made mention (that I
know Mercury therefore slayes the increasing or growing faculty, even as
Quicksilver being cast into a tree bored even into its pith or heart, with an
Auger, does kill the same. Therefore it belongs to the property of Mercury to
extinguish the growing faculty of the Liver: But that that thing may succeed
according to thy desire, the Mercury ought to die, without any association of
external Salts, or fellowship of foreign Spirits: yet thus it ought to die,
that a vital Being may remain in the Chariot, which may be able, in the middle
life of the Mercury, to carry it unto its appointed places. I am thankful in
the behalf of him, whom the Fire has taught me to understand. Hither do I
refer the Remedy of Stibium solulutive: For truly those Remedies do resolve,
consume, and brush off every occasional Cause elsewhere lurking and detained.
That indeed is the cure of Arcanums, which is attained by a removal of the
occasional Cause: and any one of those secrets does suffice, the which do
resolve, cleanse forth, and disperse without distinction whatsoever (I except
the Stone) is besides Nature concluded in the Body. For truly, although of any
kind of Diseases there are two pillars whereby the disease edifice is supported
(to wit, the occasional matter, and the matter with the Archeal efficient) yet
either of the two pillars being withdrawn, the whole building goes to ruin,
which was superstructed upon them. Therefore the secrets of Paracelsus do take
away every Disease by consequence, as they mow down the occasional Cause.

And then, there is another more hidden way of another secret, to wit, whereby
peace, rest, and comfort, is brought into the Archeus, to wit, lest he being
wroth, do bring forth a Disease, and rather that he may abolish it, being bred:
Yea also that he himself may meditate of putting the occasional Cause to
flight: For so, as a Thorn being thrust into the Flesh, is drawn out by the
fat of an Hare, a common, and mild Remedy; Otherwise the Archeus is presently
as it were angry with the entering Thorn, does make a tumult, the place swells,
and a various exorbitancy of Symptoms is awakened, that indeed, corrupt Pus
being at length made, and the place putrified, he may exclude the Thorn; the
which if they had gone more mildly to work, had issued or rushed out, even as
it happens under the persuasion of the Hares grease. In like manner, I say,
there is an Arcanum or secret in nature, which cures almost every Disease, as
it takes away the indignation and confusions of the Archeus, and commands this
Archeus to be peaceable. Of which Arcanum I (first) will endeavor to open the
way. Therefore in the Dropsy the Archeus of the Reins, loses the passages,
and rises up against the occasional Cause that is to be put to flight, no
otherwise than as by a stubborn fury he seeks his own destruction; and so a
Maxim of Hippocrates shall be verified, That Natures themselves are the
Physitiannesses of Diseases, but the Physician only their Minister.

Therefore from the Premises, I conclude, that there would be (as yet) a far
more peaceable and desirable cure, from a sedative or appeasing Secret, than by
the Secrets of Paracelsus: For they make more for the preservation of long
life; of which in a peculiar Book.

CHAP. LXIV. A Childish Vindication of the Humorists.
1. The End of the Race proposed or published. 2. It has happened to the
Author even as he had judged. 3. The Clamours of those who are beaten. 4. The
more secret Arcanums are not to be openly revealed. 5. The Author Answers unto
Letters written unto him. 6. Ten Reproaches.

I Had now set forth some small Works which have been hitherto unheard of; to
wit, concerning a different kind of sharpish Fountains, and especially of those
of the Spaw, and of the Original of Fountains, Concerning Fevers, concerning
the Disease of the Stone, concerning the miserable state of the deceived
Humourists, and of the Plague: That mortals might return the race of all
natural Philosophy, and might thereby safely learn the rise, manner, mean, and
progress of healing.

First of all, the Book of Fevers, reprehendeth the ignorant Schools of
Medicine, about the knowledge of an infirmity so common, whereby they might
repent and excuse the publishing of this Volumn. But concerning the Stone, a
Monster accidentally bred in us, and touching the Plague, as it were an
irregular by-work of the mind, that I might learn what the judgment of the
more learned might be of things hitherto unknown.

But I found that the greater number has despised those things which I have
taught, and presuming to know every thing knowable, has scorned to learn, by
the labors of another, cast Pearls before Swine; that is, the unworthy: But
surely, I have on both sides performed as much as I could, and what I was
disposed to do.

For I had safely learned by experience, that in the Year, 1602. I returning
into my Country, cured some that were past hope, by the Spirits of Salt,
Sulphur, and Vitriol, and etc. whereof there had been no foot-step of Memory
among the Dutch. Therefore the Arch-Physitians, and others the more famous,
laid a Privy Snare for my Remedies: For if I had given any of the aforesaid
Medicines to any one, they presently procured to have them brought unto them,
that they might imitate and exceed me.

I Therefore proposed Chemical Medicines, by my Servants, now married, unto
public Sale: Because they were those who had withdrawn themselves from my
Family-Service. These therefore did gain or earn their Bread: But as all things
are subject to ruins, other fugitive Servants of Foreigners planted
themselves among them, who thrust these saleable Medicines on People at a
cheaper price: And so Medicines adulterated with a thousand fallacies, came in
place, and all things were accounted the best, whatsoever were sold at a
cheaper rate. Hence nothing is found at this day of counterfeited Medicines,
which is not thus adulterated, and the which, the hope of greater gain does not
as yet more corrupt daily: And therefore from hence, I being well instructed,
have learned, that we must proceed no longer in this path: But that whatsoever
of the more rare Philosophy is to be divulged, that is altogether to be
performed under the Heroglyphicks or Mystical Figures of the more skilful.
Therefore let them pardon me, as many as do I pray thee explain thy self, speak
more manifestly of the Preparation of Secrets: Because that is a new method of
learning Philosophy, the which they must learn in the same manner that I have
learned it. For God sels Arts to Sweats. For nothing in Alchymical things is
written to that intent that they may be promiscuously understood by all, but
only, that they may not be understood: And that thing, Chemistry has always
observed singular to it, before other Disciplines, by the Command of God; least
Roses should be spread before Men, and Swine: For our Writings are in stead of
Exhortations, that every one may profit by his own Labors, as much as shall be
indulged him from above. At length the reproachful, and more unlearned, do
reproach me,

1. With what face does this rash, foolish old Man, a trifler, unlearned,
affirm or maintain, that one and the same hot Remedy does prevail against cold
Diseases? also to break the Maxim of the Ancients which is chiefly or most
true? Of Contraries there are only Contrary Remedies.

2. With what sace does he say, That without Purging and Cutting of a Vein, the
abounding of a hurtful Humor is to be taken away.

3. If he thinks that the Secrets of Paracelsus does bring a just temperature
of the Elements, as to weight, shall they therefore repose a broken or
displaced Bone, or cure Burstness?

4. What if secret Remedies or Arcanums can wipe off the peccant matter, shall
this help, if it be not also driven or carried forth by a loosening or purging
Medicine?

5. Or what has this common with the Diseases of mad folks, that we should
believe, that as it were with the one Knife of an Arcanum, every Disease is to
be cut off?

6. And likewise in some hereditary Diseases, there does no Lee or Feces
reside, but a certain co-bred, and naked incorporate distemperature has
remained, whereby at set intervals, unhoped for Mists are awakened, the Authors
of new fits; what refreshment shall Arcanums bring, which do always sound the
one Cuckow's note, of one quality?

7. Have the industries of so many Men, and Ages been of no value, whom, to
wit, a better and safer Minerva or Genius has been pleasing?

8. We also cure any Diseases without Blood-letting, as often as we will: But we
fear worse relapses, while as a hurtful humor being left within, we should
deceive the sick by sleepifying and appeasing Medicines: And therefore, we
proceed not according to the prescription of the boastings of Smoak-sellers,
while as the health of the sick is dear or near unto us, and by a rational
method, we separate our selves from these Empericks. Helmont alone has known
all things, and we have been Blockheads hitherto.

9. For he assembles all unto himself, that the credulous may think, that
Medicine which the most High has created out of the Earth, does issue from the
Fire. For learned men do not thus bid Adieu to Academical Studies, being
confirmed in healing, by a long course of Years.

10. For principal Men are better persuaded, who do not admit of any other
besides University Men, unto whom they commit their Life, etc.

CHAP. LXV. The Author Answers.
1. That some one Arcanum cures all Diseases. 2. He at length Answers fitly to
every Particular. 3. Of what sort a true Laxative Medicine is. 4. The solving
of an Objection. 5. The maxim of Hippocrates is retorted on the Schools. 6. A
saying of the Schools is reflected on the Schools. 7. Why Laxative Medicines
are foolishly administered. 8. He directly and regularly gives satisfaction to
his injurious reproaches. 9. The Author provokes the Humourists of the whole
World unto an actual Combat. 10. He gives answer unto the maskes of fear
objected by the Humorists. 11. He goes to meet his Adversaries. 12. The
intentions of the Author. 13. An old abuse does not give a right. 14. That it
is the miseries of Princes to live encompassed with flatterers, and therefore
out of the truth. 15. The Courts are wanting of the best Physicians.

I Will prove first, that the liquour Alkahest, the first being of Salts; Lile,
the first Metal; Mercurius Diaphoretius, or Horizontal Gold; that any one I
say, whatsoever it be of them (for all of them, through the consanguinity of
one dissolver, do conspire into a Unisone) is sufficient for the curing of any
Diseases whatsoever, however the carping Momus's guts may crack.

First of all, Adeptists have known with me, how far the Dispensatories of the
Ap^thecary do differ from hence; yea and how remotely those Writers are absent,
who being themselves as yet Young beginners, through a great itch of a little
Glory, have set forth Basilicals, and the first principles of Chemistry: But I
will prove it by the assumption of this Chapter, and the other Calumnies raised
up against me, shall voluntarily melt like Snow: Wherefore I being the last of
Alchymists, will thus prove the aforesaid Assumption.

Health it self, does not consist in a just temperature of the Body, but in a
sound or entire Life: For otherwise, a temperature of Body is as yet in a dead
Carcass newly Hippocrates so long ago smelt out, affirming, that Nature alone
(which is only one) is the Physitianess of Diseases, but the Physician the
Minister or Servant; as also the Medicine, a means of reducing nature being
exorbitant: Therefore the integrity of health is in a Unisone, and there is one
only governor of Life, and no more: Therefore this governor alone, is ill
affected in Diseases: For it is he alone which makes the assault as well in
healthy, as in sick folks, and the rupture of him only, does rent asunder the
family administration of Life. For although nothing does provoke from abroad,
and nothing from the seed of our Parents does disturb us; Yet that Archeus does
now and then fail or decay of his own free accord, and from hence our integrity
is dissolved; and impurities by an after right, are thereby many ways bred,
which do ensnare the Monarchy of Life. Truly seeing nature it self, as
Hippocrates witnesses, is the Physitianess of Diseases; therefore its Unity is
to be conserved, and its integrity to be restored: But that thing may be
sufficiently over-performed by one only remedy: For there is a Unity of altered
nature, a Unity of health being hurt, and therefore a Unity of the Spirit which
is disturbed under the Disease is only to be considered; but not a multiplicity
of occasional diseasie varieties: And seeing one of the aforesaid Arcanums,
does plentifully contain in it all things requisite, from the gift of God, and
by the preparations of the Artificer: Therefore one of those Arcanums or
secrets, is sufficient for every, and any Disease whatsoever: And therefore the
text does not say, Almighty created Medicines from the Earth; But Medicine, in
the singular number; which Medicine otherwise, already prepared for the art of
healing, he created not from the earth: That Medicine therefore, pierces the
innermost parts of the Body, which of its own very gift of goodness, does
comfort, and confirm all the members: And next, does most powerfully dissolve
whatsoever filths have been any were co-heaped: The which being once dissolved,
nature is busy to disperse the hurtful matter, through a passage known unto
her self.

Let Young beginners take notice in this place, that according to a wonted
blockishness, they beg the Principle, after that I have already made it
abundantly manifest, that

In like manner also, I have so withdrawn from Fevers, a trust to solutive
Medicines,

For they do object for their purging Medicines; that it is nothing material,
although

And therefore, neither do they dare to give purging things to drink, no not
indeed, in sharp Fevers, unless after that the matter do swell for anger; which
is as much as to

And that thing the Schools are not Ignorant of, who long since affirm with a
serious

For neither, if nature be not foolish, is a Laxative Medicine sucked unto the
veins:

Unto the second and third I likewise say, it has been sufficiently
demonstrated elsewhere, for the temperature sake of the same Bodies, and much
less for a just one, and as to an adequate or suitable weight: Therefore the
Schools presuppose falsehoods; yea and contend by sophistry: For although
Arcanums do cure a broken bone as well as Comfrey, or the Stone for broken
bones: yet it is on both sides required, that the fracture of the bone be
reposed: I likewise remember, that a burstness being well bound up, has been
cured beyond expectation, because from the breaking of a bone, some one had
layen long on his Loins: Neither therefore does it want an Arcanum.

Unto the fourth and also the fifth, it suffices, that the Arcanum or Secret
does wipe away the occasional Causes, to wit, nature being helped, supplying
the rest.

Unto the sixth, let the Schools refrain their tongue: For an Arcanum cures
Diseases, which they under blasphemy, have maintained to be uncurable: Which
thing the Hospitals of those that were uncurable, do testify for me, if they
are compared with the Epitaph of Paracelsus.

But the seventh reproach, breaks forth from ignorant Jaws, to wit, from the
proper testimony of a guilty mind.

Unto the eight and ninth, it is certain, that the Exclaimers do grieve while
they are beaten, for from a sense of grief the Mouth speaks reproaches: But
if of thousands of Alchymists, scarce one does arive unto his wished end, that
is not the vice of the art; because the endowment does not depend on the will
of him that wills and runs; But because it is not yet the fullness of time,
wherein these secrets shall be more common: Be it sufficient for me, that the
signs do no where appear, but among the obtainers of Arcanums, that is
Adeptists; and that none of the Humorists, has ever come thither, neither also
shall come. Therefore there is no place for reproaches against the truth of the
science of healing, but where there is no order, and an everlasting horror
does inhabit: For Owls and monstrous Bats do shun the light of truth; because
they are fed with a great lie, to wit, that they have known how to cure Fevers
without evacuation: When as indeed they know not by both succors, as well of a
cut vein, as of a loosened Belly, how to cure Fevers certainly, and safely; for
let them cure a Fever as they affirm: Shall they not likewise for that very
cause bring rest to the sick? And afterward safely take away, that which they
say does remain? which was not lawful so fitly to be done, as long as they
believe life to conflict or skirmish with Death, and the Disease with health:
But they shun the light of truth under the Cloak of a lie: thus ignorance
dictating, and gain thus commanding, miserable men do defend themselves.

For Medicine is not a naked word, a vain boasting, or vain talk, for it leaves
a work behind it: Wherefore I despise reproaches, the boastings, and miserable
vanities of ambition: Go to, return with me to the purpose: If ye speak truth,
Oh ye Schools, that ye can cure any kind of Fevers without evacuation, but
will not for fear of a worse relapse; come down to the contest ye Humorists:
Let us take out of the Hospitals, out of the Camps, or from elsewhere, 200, or
500 poor People, that have Fevers, Pleurisies, etc. Let us divide them in
halfes, let us cast lots, that one half of them may fall to my share, and the
other to yours; I will cure them without blood-letting and sensible evacuation;
but do you do, as ye know (for neither do I tie you up to the boasting, or of
Phlebotomy, or the abstinence from a solutive Medicine) we shall see how many
Funerals both of us shall have: But let the reward of the contention or wager,
be 300 Florens, deposited on both sides: Here your business is decided. Oh ye
Magistrates, unto whom the health of the People is dear! It shall be contested
for a public good, for the knowledge of truth, for your Life, and Soul, for
the health of your Sons, Widows, Orphans, and the health of your whole People:
And finally, for a method of curing, disputed in an actual contradictory,
superadd ye a reward, instead of a titular Honor from your Office: compel ye
those that are unwilling to enter into the combat, or those that are Dumb in
the place of exercise, to yield; let them then show that which they now boast
of by brawling: For thus Charters from Princes are to be shown: Let words and
brawling cease, let us act friendly, and by mutual experiences, that it may be
known hence forward, whether of our two methods are true: For truly, in
contradictories, not indeed both propositions, but one of them only is true.
But now the Humourists, while any commits himself to me for cure, do possess
him with fear, to wit, least they give up themselves unto an Author of new
opinions; but rather that they go in the paths of Heathens, that they may not,
through a novelty of opinion, be accounted to have put their Life in doubt, and
that they rather trusting in an old abuse, do enter into beaten paths: Ah, I
wish those of another Life, and of the intelligible World, might return, that
they might testify, unto whom their death is owing. Presently, they who being
now subtle Scoffers do seem to ask counsel for their own life, should
acknowledge, that they do incurr on themselves the destruction and loss of
their Life, while they had rather commit their Life to plurality or the great
number, only by reason of the constancy of an old error and abuse, than that
they are willing to be bowed unto the Admonitions of the truth: As if War were
still to be waged only with Darts or Arrows, and Slings, because that is the
most ancient kind of Weapons. But nevertheless, neither are our Medicines so
new, that there are only the thousandth of experiences in them; the which have
been made consonant with truth, by an hundred thousand experiences: Therefore
as many Physicians as do object such things as these, from debility of mind,
and ignorance of Art, are cruel Impostors, Enemies of Christians, being envious
for a little advantage: For truly, they increase fears in the sick, and vex the
sick, that they may extol themselves, and their own Medicines.

And they say; for we are willingly ignorant of those things which are evil:
Because

For if Charity, or the care of your Souls does vex or grieve you, let us go
unto the challenged Combat! For I promise, if ye shall overcome, that I
willingly hereafter

In the next place, while I prefer refined Medicines before yours, and the true
principles of healing, before Paganish trifles: This is not done from an
intention of catching or alluring of gain: Neither also is it meet, that I
should be judged by your covetous mind; for I have begun to preach the truth of
Medicine from a pure intention, that Physicians may repent, and may learn those
things which they know not; may enter on a safer way, and may cease from badly
handling the life of their Neighbor: That they may cease I say, to destroy
Widows, Orphans, and their own Souls: For I know, that in the fullness of time
(for nothing is so hidden, which shall not be revealed) the Doctrine which I
have now divulged by this volume, shall be made manifest: I wish at least, that
it may happen the more timely or seasonably, for the safety of Souls, and
preservation of Families; but as to that which concerns my self, I do not now
for many years, go to see the sick, neither do I invite any one to make use of
my endeavor; which thing is sufficiently known to our country men: Because I
am he, who get not gain by others miseries: But I dismiss no sick Body from me
without comfort. Let the boastings also of the Schools cease, which do implore
authority from the antiquity of possession: For truly a prescription or title
does not happen into nature.

For I grant Paganism to be older than Christianity: I also presuppose that
the errors

Let those boastings also cease, as many as do glister with a wording or
discursive Doctrine, because they are celebrated by the Powers of the World:
For those Physicians whom the Almighty has created, are not Pipers: But in the
commpassion of Charity, do peculiarly cure the poor, and are acknowledged by
that token: But the Father of the poor beholds them with bountiful eyes, who
has attended unto the entreaties of his miserable ones, for the remembrance of
his Christ: They withdraw themselves from the flatteries of the People, and
great men; they live of their own right, being injurious to none: And by this
one only sign they are distinguished from paultry Physicians, as in well doing,
they do suffer vilifying from these, and do willingly bear it: Yea the People
(to whom they are bountiful) do report ill and prate of them. Because that is
the Lot which the Giver of Lights does always reserve for his: For without hope
of gain, they procure to be merciful: But if money be voluntarily given unto
them, they receive it indeed, but they lay it not up but for the former uses.
But these are very rare, and not easy to be seen in Princes Courts.

There was in times past witten in the Epitaph of an Emperor, [He perished
through a Rout of Physitians] So that Princes are the unhappiest of men, unto
whom none speaks Truth; but being environed with flatterers, they hear
nothing but flatteries, and are nourished with deceits: At leastwise, it does
not belong to Princes to have known how to choose the best Physician, unto whom
they may commit their Life; but they receive this

So much in Answer.

CHAP. LXVI. A Treatise of Diseases. A Diagnostical or Discernable Introduction.
1. A Re-sumption of the whole work. 2. Why the Author uses so great
austereness in repressing. 3. He invokes God, while he perceives himself
deprived of humane aid. 4. The poverty, and false (...) of Logic were
discovered. 5. The nakedness of hearkening to the natural Philosophy of
Aristotle. 6. An unheard of method of searching into a Disease. 7. Why the
Schools have wanted the knowledge of Diseases. 8. A Disease has flown from
departing out of the right way. 9. An entrance into the knowledge of Diseases.
10. A Scheme of Diseases out of Hippocrates. 11. The Schools being fed with
Lotus, have forsaken their own Hippocrates. 12. A pithy contemplation of
Diseases.

IT has seemed necessary to have begun from Elements, Qualities, Mixtures,
Complexions, Contrarieties, Humors, and Catarrhes, that I might demonstrate,
the Schools of the Theorie, before that in seeking I had found some right
Medicines which were sufficient for those that had made a Beginning.

Wherefore seeing I was about to speak of Diseases, under so great a Paradox
and weight of things, and sound none among the Ancients and Modern Juniors to
be my assistant, I

Therefore I determined before I wrote, to call upon Logic, that by its
Definitions it might demonstrate unto me the Essences of Diseases; indeed by
their Divisions, Species,

Afterward therefore, I called the Auricular Precepts of the natural
Philosophy of the Schools, unto my aid: To wit, their three (boasted of)
Principles, four causes, fortune, Aristotle, and the blockish credulities of
the World, and of so many Ages, if she her self had not been a non-being
fiction, swollen only with the blast of pride.

Wherefore seeing Nature does no where exist, or is seen, but in Individuals;
there is need that I who am about to write of Diseases, have exactly known the
Causes of particular

First of all, a Disease is a certain evil in respect of Life, and although it
arose from sin, yet it is not an evil like sin, from a Cause of deficiency,
whereunto a Species, Manner,

Defects therefore there are, which from an external Cause, do make an assault
beyond or besides the faculties of Life concealed in the parts; and they are
from strange

In the next place, there are occasional defects, which (seeing Good does bring
forth Evil by accident, and does oft-times proceed from our own vital powers)
are endowed with properties of their own, as it were their seminal Beginnings,
therefore they immediately tend unto the vanquishing of our powers as their
end: The which therefore, I elsewhere call, Diseases Potestative or belonging
to our Powers. But neither is that a Potestative Being, which the Schools do
call A Disease by consent, and do think to be made by a collection or
conjunction of Vapors: But a Potestative Being contains the government of a
constrained faculty, as well in respect of the authority of Life, as of the
diseasie Being it self; the which indeed is born by a proper motion, to stir up
a Potestative Disease of its own order: Just as a Cantharides does stir up a
Strangury: And that also is done through a power of internal authority, and by
the force of parts on parts. So an Apoplectical, or Epileptical Being, being as
yet present in the Stomach, or Womb, shakes the Soul, yea and from thence
transports the Brain, together with its attending powers, will they nill they,
into its own service.

A Potestative Being therefore, does not only denote a hurting of the
Functions, but also a government of the part, and an occasioning force of a
Diseasifying Being prorogued or continued on the subordinate faculties, as on
the vassals of an Empire: It being all one also, whether the parts are at a far
distance from each other, or whether they are near: For they are the due
Tributes of Properties.

Yea truly, Hippocrates first insinuated, that Diseases are to be distinguished
by their Inns, and Savours: And I wish his Successors had kept this tenor. But
that Old Man etc. it self. But he sung these things before deaf or bored ears:
For truly, the long Galen, that they, as it were slept themselves into a
drousie Evil, being afrightned while they are awakened by me. But in the Title
of Causes, I understand, in the very inward or pithy integrity of Diseases, the
matter being instructed by its own proper efficient Cause, to be indeed the
inward, immediate Cause, and to arise from a vital Beginning.

Wherefore also, I name those, external and occasional Causes, as many as do
not flow from the root of Life it self: And therefore I treat of Causes; which
are the Disease it self. For Bread being chewed and swallowed, is as yet
external, because it may be rejected or cast up again: So also, the Chyle
thereof, being cocted in the Stomach, is as yet external: Yea and which more
is, after that it is become domestical, and although it be made a more inward
citizen of our family administration; Yet while it is separated from that which
is living, and rusheth into the Kitchen of Diseases, for that very Cause, as it
is become hostile; so also it is to be accounted External in respect of Life:
So also a pestilent Air being attracted inward, although it has spread its
poison within, and in respect of the Body, be internal; yet it is not yet
internal in respect of Life: And so, neither yet is it the Disease it self: to
wit, whereof it contains only an occasion in it self, neither shall it ever lay
aside that same occasionality: But the Plague is, while the Archeus, (the
contagion being applied unto himself, does separate a part of himself, it being
infected) from the whole: For the banishment whereof, the remaining part of the
Archeus does Co-laborate and is earnestly careful, that it may not be pierced
by the Symbol or Impression, and perish. A co-like thing happens almost in the
rest of Diseases. For truly, the Life is not immediately hurt, but by a certain
poison of its own, and proper to it, which it has suffered to be applied unto
it self.

CHAP. LXVII. The Subject of inhearing, of Diseases, is in the point of Life.
THe Life which is perfectly sound, has no Disease; because health
presupposes an integrity, which a Disease renteth: And so health and a Disease
do contradict each other: Also Life being extinguished, is not a Disease,
neither does it admit of a Disease into it: Because in speaking properly, that
Life is a mere nothing, and no longer existing: But a Disease is [hoc aliquid]
or [this someting.] Thirdly, in the next place, a dead Carcass, however
poisonous it be, or infected with corruption, yet it is no way capable of
Diseases: Wherefore, although a Body while it lives, be the mansion of
Diseases; yet it is not the true internal efficient of Diseases; much less also
indeed have filths or excrements (which are thought to be the constitutive
Humors of us) a right or property of Diseases: But if any part of a Disease,
be to be ascribed unto inordinate fecuencies or dregginesses; truly that tends
wholly unto an occasional Cause: For truly, a Disease is a Being, truly
subsisting in a Body, and composed of a matter, and an internal seminal
efficient, and so also, in this respect does it far sequester it self from
occasional Causes: Especially, because the internal beginnings of things do
constitute the Being it self, and are unseperably of its essential thingliness:
So indeed, that if we speak of the Body, or Soul, as Humane; both of them is
rightly called a man, although not an entire man: So indeed the matter of a
Disease, is truly a Disease: Even as also the seminal efficient thereof, is
truly a Disease, although it be not properly an entire Disease: Therefore
seeing that a Disease is only in a live Body, but not in a dead one, it must
needs be, that the Life is the immediate mansion of a Disease; the inward
subject, yea and workman of the same. But seeing Life is not essentially of the
Body, nor proper to the Body; but that a Body without Life, is a dead Carcass,
and a Disease is in the Life: Of necessity also, every matter, or mansion, and
efficient Cause of a Disease, does not exceed the Limits of Life: That is of
necessity, every Disease does inhabit within the Case of the Archeus, who is
the alone immediate witness, executer, instrument, as also the inn of Life;
but Apostemes, Ulcers, Filths, Excrements, etc. Are only, either the occasions
of Death and Diseases, or the latter products of the same, raised up into a new
scene or stage of the Tragedy: Neither surely is it therefore a wonder, that
together with the Life, all Diseases do depart into nothing, if the Life be the
immediate subject, and mansion of Diseases: But I long since admired, that no
Physician has hitherto known, in what the essence of Diseases should shine:
But that they have wandered about Elementary qualities, Humors, Complexious,
Contrarieties, and Dispositions: Neither that indeed, they have once observed,
that as filths are not Diseases; so neither are Diseases in filths; but that
they live only in the Life it self, and being included in the same, do so
arise, grow and perish, that seeing they are no where out of the Life, they
ought to be the intimate and domestic Thieves of the Life: These things be
spoken of the proper receptacle of Diseases. Furthermore, seeing a Disease is
without controversy, admitted to be a Being existing in us, as in an inn, and
does enjoy its own and singular properties, and different Symptoms; A Disease
of necessity, is not of the number of accidents; because an accident is not of
an accident combined with it, and distinct from it self in the whole Species:
For truly, sharpness, or bitterness, is not a property of whiteness, blackness,
lightness, or heat: But every one of them, do stand by themselves. Wherefore if
a Disease be a Being, and not an accident; if in the next place, it produces
from it self, not only alterations, diverse dispositions, weaknesses, etc. But
moreover, does generate substances, degenerating from the ordinary institution
of their own nature: of necessity also, it ought to consist of matter, and its
own internal or seminal efficient. Lastly, seeing a Disease is internal as to
the life it self, it also follows of necessity, that the matter of a Disease is
Archeal, and its efficient cause is vital: And that I may speak more clearly,
every Disease is of necessity, an Ideal efficient act of the vital power,
clothing it self with a Garment of Archeal matter, and attaining a vital and
substantial form, according to a difference of the slowness and swiftness of
Ideal seeds; which things indeed have been hitherto unknown by Mortals, and
those things which follow, are as yet more largely supported with this
position: God made not Death; and so far is he always estranged from Death,
that he refuses to be called the God of the Dead.

First of all also, although Death does sometimes invade without a Disease, yet
for the most part, Death follows Diseases, so that none doubts, but that that
Death is the daughter of Diseases, or the second Cause whereby, and by means
whereof the Life is extinguished: That is, Death is present; but seeing God is
not in any wise the Author of Death, to wit, by whom Death entered into Man, who
else was immortal, and that no more, or by a stronger right, in the beginning
of the World, than at this day; A Physician must diligently enquire, from
whence Death does causally invade, from the beginning, and even unto this day,
that it may from thence be manifest, from whence a Disease has drawn its
integrity: For truly, although it be sufficiently apparent, that Death does
contain as it were a privation or exstinction of Life; so neither in it self,
or for its existence, it does not require any substantial form, and much less a
vital one: But surely a Disease as such, does not bespeak a privation; but a
Being, truly subsisting, acting by an hurtful act of Life, and ensnaring the
Life: So also it behooves a Disease to consist in the form of its own
thingliness, which the Life can receive into it, and be informed by it. But
seeing a Disease arose from the same Beginning, as Death did, neither is God
ever the Author of Death: It by all means follows, that God is not the Author
or Creator of Diseases; neither therefore although a Disease has a certain
substantial form, Yet it has not Life nor a vital Light, but what it has
borrowed from the Life it self; (to wit,) so far as it glistens in the Light of
our Life, or in that of Cattle: But not that a Disease does require, or has
begged a vital Light from the Father of Lights for the being of its seed; the
which in it self, is rather to be named a deadly or mortal thing, and
altogether estranged from the goodness of God the Creator. Therefore although
God alone does create all the forms of all things, and the Father of Lights
does give every essential form, to wit, a vital, substantial form, and so also
the formal substance, without any mutual competitor, yet that has not place in
Diseases; in the forming of which indeed, man alone is chief: Because the Life
of Man alone contains the second Causes of Diseases and Death. Therefore
because the Creator, God, denies that he made Death; therefore also a Disease:
For a Disease stands in the Life of Man, and therefore all its quiddity or
thingliness depends on the Life of man; and that not only Seminally, even as
otherwise, it is proper to all the seeds of any things whatsoever: But besides,
also formally, so that the Life of the Archeus, or his Flesh and Blood are, and
do remain the whole formal Cause of Diseases, or the effective Cause of the
forms of a Disease. For he who from the beginning refused to have effected
Death, or Diseases, will never at length thence-forward, be willing to have
made Death nor Diseases: For the Father of Lights, will not give his Honor of
Creating formal Lights, unto any Creature, except the Mortal forms of Diseases
whereof; as neither would he be called the God of the Dead: Therefore Man
remains the workman of his own Death (who the day before was immortal) as also
of his own Diseases, as if he were the Creator of Death: So indeed, that
whereas God has made vital Lights, Man Creates Diseasie, Obscure, and deadly
Idea's or Shapes; and such an Idea does as much differ from a vital Light, as a
black heat does from Light: Therefore the formal act of Death, and Diseases,
sprang from the action of original Sin, and shall so spring even unto the end
of the World. For the same Cause which in the beginning of the World, made
Death, or the same second natural Cause which gave a natural entrance of Death
into humane Nature: The same Cause also, does wholly at this day, make Death
and a Disease: For it is repugnant with the Glory of the Creator, not to have
made Death from the beginning, and afterward, when it was made by Man, for him
to have assumed to himself the Glory of knowing how to make it; as if he ought
to have learned that thing from Man. But what has been already spoken
concerning Death, that is by an equal right, to be understood concerning
Diseases: Because that seeing Death, and a Disease have issued from the same
piont of their original, therefore if God be said to give Diseases, or Death;
it is not, that now he will be the Creator of those things, whose Fabric he
before wholly refused: But he is permissively called the Author and Prince of
Life and Death: Because as he is the true and alone Author of Life, and
therefore does govern it, and suffer it at his Pleasure; So he permits, that
this man does yield or depart, and the other Man fall, and that second Causes
do happen as well directly, as irregularly, whence Man dies, or a Disease
grows: But the Creation of a Disease, as of a Being subsisting from a seminal
matter and efficient, and of an Ideal and deadly evil, never proceeded from
God: For while he had placed it in the will of Man, that he might remain
without Death, or the same day to die the Death; by the same step also, he put
it into Man's hand, to frame Death, and a Disease it self, as a forerunner and
preparer of Death. The entrance of Death into the nature of Man being
considered, even as I have elsewhere explained it by a remarkable Paradox, does
most exactly prove, that a Disease does nor only consist in the vital part of
Man; but also that a Disease it self is bred by a seminal Idea, out of the
Archeus himself. But I will briefly prove that thing: From the concupiscence of
the Flesh arose the flesh of Sin, and therefore also, a mortal Archeus in that
Flesh, and from thence by consequence also, the Archeus, forasmuch as he is
vital, acts in the flesh of Sin, every action, and produces every formal,
hurtful, and deadly act which God has refused to do, and has suffered Man to
stamp on himself the Causes of Death and Diseases: Yet Man is not therefore a
Creator, although he makes formal acts to himself, or the substantial forms
of Diseases, or the hurtful ones of Life: For truly, that was granted unto him
by virtue of the Word, That on what so ever day he should eat of the Fruit of
the Tree of knowledge of Good, and Evil, he should die the Death; and should
make guards-men, appointed for his own Death: And that, from the very Nature of
Death it self, necessarily brought forth in the flesh of Sin.

The act therefore which is of the Essence, Exsistence, and Subsistence, even
as also of the propagation or fruitfulness of the contagion of Diseases, does
altogether depend in the Life, from the Life, by the Life, within which it is
also enclosed: Surely miserable are Mortals, and most exceeding miserable are
the Sick, who have hitherto hired Physicians at a great and dear price, who
know not what a Disease may be, from whence it may arise, and in what it may
consist, and subsist. But I admire that before me the more Ancient, as neither
Modern Physicians have smelt this out; because their sacred Anchor being for
the most part in the hope of a Crisis; and concerning Crises's, they have
devised very many things to excuse their own Ignorances. For truly a Crisis or
judicial sign in Diseases, proves nothing besides the Archeus, if they believe
their own Hippocrates, who says, that Natures themselves are the only
Physitianesses, and helpers of Diseases. For the Moon does not make Crises's
causatively, but the Archeus alone, who follows the Harmony of the Moon. For
the Moon measures days, has more regared unto the proof of the actions of
the Archeus, than unto causality: For the Moon is always on the fourth day, in
an opposite place, to that which she was in on the first day: Therefore also
the Archeus has opposite powers or faculties, who does imitate the Harmonious
motions of the Moon; So also on the seventh day, etc.

I conclude therefore for the knowledge of a Disease, that a Disease has
either a Fuel, or an excitement only from the occasional Cause; or does arise
from a voluntary and proper motion, and perseveres in its own contagion of a
seed; as while an Epilepsie or the falling Evil is once con-centred, or the
Gowt has taken root, does indeed awaken of its own free accord, as often as it
lists: Even as also the Disease cease for two or three days, or more, and
again returns at set Periods, although the occasional cause in the mean time,
be always present; and so after a hurtful solutive Medicine being taken,
although it be expelled a few hours after, yet the Archens being thereby
defiled, rages and is obedient to the drunk contagion of the venom: So also
ready inclinations, and hereditary Diseases, Proper or Natural unto some one
whole Family, are co-bred with us: Because they are Con-centred in the Life it
self, and are as it were the Characterical marks, and imprinted seals of
hurtful Diseases.

CHAP. LXVIII. I proceed unto the Knowledge of Diseases.
1. Medicine is the most occult or intricate of Sciences. 2. Therefore the
ignorances of past ages are excusable. 3. In what thing Diseases may inhabit.
4. The rise or original of Diseases. 5. Whence a Disease began. 6. Why a
Disease is immediately in the Being of the first Motions. 7. Why the essence of
Diseases has been unknown. 8. A Disease has married a vital Being. 9. After
what manner all seeds do issue from the invisible World. 10. The rise of
Efficient Causes, and the property of seminal Idea's. 11. All the seminal
Beginnings of things, are from an invisible Idea. 12. How a seminal beginning
receives its completing. 13. The Ideal power of seeds is declared by their
ranks. 14. Although Death and a Disease began from the same Beginning; yet they
differ, in that a Disease has Idea's, but a Death not. 15. The Schools will
laugh at Idea's; But the Author carps at the ignorance of the Schools. 16. He
proves their ignorance, at least by one Example.

I Have already oftentimes, nor in vain asserted, that Arts and Sciences have
hastened unto a pitch; but that the art of healing alone, if it has not gone
backwards, at leastwise,

Therefore Medicine, the most difficult of Sciences, by reason of the
invisibility of Diseases, and deceit much increased by Heathenish Theorems,
has not been penetrable enter: Therefore I ought to expose the one only and
golden Key, hitherto hidden in the Arches of the Archeus, unto the Fire of the
Art of the Fire, and Light of Truth: That any one may enter into the secrets of
the Court, so far as shall be granted him from Above.

First of all, I do not name a Disease, a Diathesis or Disposition; but the
very wandering or erring Being, which is stamped by the vital Archeus himself:
I do not therefore etc. Being, contains the very Scope and Causes of the
Diseases in it.

Truly a Disease begun from Sin: For in the integrity, purity of our Nature,
and vigor

We believe by Faith therefore, that Death and every infirmity has entered into
Man by

Because it was reasonable, that all the ranks of sicknesses should be rooted
in the same concupiscence of the Flesh, whereby Sin entered: For as
concupiscence in the conception,

Which Images or Likenesses indeed, as being the seeds of Diseasie Beings,
should be thenceforth wholly marriageable unto him in the innermost Bride-bed
of Life. This indeed

Wherefore if any one does admire at so great an efficacy of the Archeus being
Ideated, and of seminal Idea's, as to produce Diseases, and Death it self: He
does not yet know

Otherwise Idea's themselves, as they are conceived, are nothing besides the
Lights universe, these things do appear to happen, and to operate by a Light,
with great efficacy; wherefore shall we be ignorant, that these do not
otherwise come to pass in Diseases? Especially while the same things are
engraven by a stronger apprehension.

For things conceived do teach us, that from passions, or perturbations which
are [nonbeings] true, real, actual Images do arise, no otherwise than as the
thoughts of a Woman with Child, do stamp a real Image, how strange, and
foreign soever it be: Wherefore thus indeed the Fantasy brings forth
poisons, which do kill its own Man, and afflict him with diverse miseries: So
that, as those Images do primarily proceed from the imaginative power, whose
immediate instruments, the Archeus himself is: So it is altogether necessary,
that he which touches Pitch should be defiled by it: That is, it behooves the
Archeus himself, primarily, and immediately to conceive, and put on that new
Image, to be affected with the same, and by virtue of a resembling mark or
Symbol, other things depending on him, according to the properties of that
hurtful Idea: And that Ferment being once decyphered in that air which makes
the assault, is a Disease; which forthwith diffuseth it self into the venal
Blood, the liquor that is to be immediately assimilated, and next into the
similar parts, and into the very Superfluities of the Body, according to the
property even of that its own Idea; for from hence the Diseases of
distributions, and digestions: What if Idea's are formed in the implanted
Spirit of the Brain, or inn of the Spleen by imagining, which also in Bruits
are the principal Blas and Organ of all Motions: It nothing hinders, but that
the Archeus himself implanted in the parts, may frame singular, and now and
then, exorbitant Idea's, not unlike to the imaginative power: for so the
Spittle of a mad Dog, Tarantula, or Serpent, and likewise the juice of
Wolfesbane, Monkshood, or Nightshade, do communicate their Image of fury on us
against our wills: Wherefore likewise nothing hinders, the chief or primary
instrument of imagination, from forming, in-mate, seminal, fermental,
poisonous, etc. Images unto it self.

Whatsoever does of its own Nature, by it self and immediately, afflict the
vital powers, ought for that very Cause, to be of the race and condition of
those Powers: For otherwise,

And seeing nothing among constituted things is made of it self originally, of
necessity

The thrice glorious Almighty, by the naked, and pure command of his own
cogitation, its gift received, not indeed of nothing, as neither by its own
command; but it has received a power of Creating its own seminal Image from
God, of tranferring, or decyphering the same on its own Archeus: This indeed is
the seminal virtue of Man, Bruits, and Plants: But not this beast-like
conception is in plants, nor is stirred up from lust: for it is sufficient that
it happen after an analogical manner, whereby the Ancients have agreed all
things to be in all, which manner, by a similitude drawn from us, the Sympathy,
and Antipathy of things do show; for they feel a mutual presence, and are
presently stirred up by that sense, unto the unfolding of their natural
endowments: Because they are those things which else would remain unmoved; but
a sense or feeling cannot but after some sort have an equal force with an
imaginative virtue: The which I have elsewhere profesly treated more at large
concerning the Plague: But now my aim is not to Phylosophize concerning Plants;
but only of Diseases: It suffices therefore that the imagination it self, so
called from the forming of an Image, does stamp an Idea, for whose sake every
seed is fruitful: And seeing that in us, that imaginative power is as it were
brutal, earthly, and devilish (according to the Apostle) therefore it is
subject unto its own Diseases, and can stamp an Image in the Archeus its own
immediate instrument. Hence it happens unto us, that every Disease is
materially, and efficiently in us.

For whatsoever is bred or made, that wholly happens through the necessity of a
certain seed, and every seed has its [this something] from an Idea put into
its spirit; but a Disease is a real Being, and is made in a live Creature only:
Whence it follows, that although a Disease does oppose the Life, as the
forerunner of Death; yet it is bred from a vital Beginning, and the same in the
Life, to wit from the flesh of Sin: Notwithstanding Death, and all dead things,
do want roots whereby they may produce: And so seeing Death bespeaks a
destruction or privation, it wants a seminal Image, wherein it is distinguished
from Diseases: Life indeed is from the Soul, and therefore also the premised
character of the first constitution: But a Disease has proceeded from the
confusions and disturbances of an impure Archeus, and being radically implanted
in him, has so remained thenceforth unseparable, to wit, as to a formative
power of infirm Idea's: A Disease therefore growing together from Idea's, as
from its seminal efficient Beginning, clothes it self with a fit matter
borrowed from the Archeus, and arises into a real Being, after the manner of
other natural Beings: And seeing the Idea is now formed in the Archeus, he
presently also begins to act these things, neither is he idle, but defiles a
part of the Archeus: In which part, a ferment, as the means of the efficient
Cause, is forthwith stirred up through an aversion from the integrity of Life;
and at length by assistance hereof, he either defiles the more gross mass of
the Body, or at leastwise disturbs the family-administration of the digestions.

The Schools I well know will deride the doctrine of Ptato, because I have
assigned seminal Idea's, Ideal powers, and formal activities unto Diseases; for
they will rather That a Man's Enemies are those of his House; for they do every
where notably accuse obstructions occasionally induced by the injuries of
filthinesses, as Diseases; which obstructions do notably argue not so much the
obstructer, or also the thing obstructed it self, as they have always noted
with a losty brow, the majesty of an action, passion, and relation, sound in
the obstructer; as if the obstruction it self, or a relation it self, should be
a Disease; but that the foundation of that relation, should include the reason
of a Diseasifying Cause: Indeed the whole error of the Schools, arises from
the ignorance of a Disease, which consists immediately in the life it self;
but not in dregs, and filthynesses which are erroneous foreigners, and
strangers to the Life: Good Jesus, the wisdom of the Father of Lights! with how
great confusion of Darkness do humane judgments stumble unless thou govern
them. For truly while they have consecrated the Stone of the Bladder, in the
next place, all the filths, mixtures, powers, properties, effects, and
liberties of effects, activities, and interchangeable courses, unto the
combats, and wars of the Elements alone, they have signified by the same
method, that they will not, and cannot be wise beyond heats, and colds.

For so they have hitherto taught without shame and judgment, that the Stone
does wax dry, is dried, and hardened in the midst of the Urine, by heat, and by
the same privilege of rashness or boldness, they have neglected every thing,
the whole history of Nature, and nativity of things, and have made themselves
miserable, because ridiculous in the age to come: Wherefore I have often
complained with thee good Jesus, O thou Prince of Life, how difficult it would
be for the Schools, who have been constantly nourished from their childhood
with so great an harlotry of trifles, and juggle of mists, to have assumed the
true Principles of things: Unless thou hold the stern of the Ship, and inspire
a prosperous wind on the Sails, I guess that the envious man will be ready to
deliver up my Writings for Volusian, Unlearned, or wast Papers.

Help O God, for the good of thine own Image, that Seeds themselves may
testify the Archeus to be present with them, who unless he be fructified by
the only conceived Idea of the Generater, they do return into a Lump, and
dis-shaped Monster, unto which a vigor is wanting, no less of figuring, than
of unfolding of Properties. Let Diseases witness, I say, although I am silent,
that they are Active Beings, admitted into Nature by natural Principles: Let
them confess, according to Trismegistus, that things superior and inferior,
are carried by the same Law of proportion, and co-like Principles: That by the
meditation of one Thing, Archeus or Principle, all things do even to this day
subsist, and are continued: That by the Meditation, and Idea of that one, they
do receive the perfect Act of Superior or Inferior Beings: What he spoke is
Truth, and that Truth shall vanquish every strong Fortress, and pierce through
all Solidities or Difficulties.

CHAP. LXIX. Of the Idea's of Diseases.
1. A division of the things to be spoken. 2. The Spleen sits in the middle
Trunk of the Body. 3. The forming of real Images of the Fantasy, is confirmed
by an Example. 4. Why an Idea descends from the Mother, into the Young. 5.
Consequences drawn from thence. 6. A measuring of the moderatenesse of Wine. 7.
The piercing of Idea's. 8. A Child declines from his native disposition. 9.
What may be understood by an Agony. 10. Most cruel Idea's. 11. A most especial
care of Educations. 12. A difference in the motions of the mind. 13. The
doctrine of Desires. 14. The rise, and progress of Desires. 15. A diversity of
the Sin of Commission, and of Omission. 16. Why God has endowed the Femal Sex
with a peculiar favor. 17. What the gift of a Sexual devotion may operate by
it self. 18. Why the Author has treated of Morals. 19. The Author repeats
Eight Suppositions concerning the Idea's of the Archeus. 20. The Author wanders
about foreign Idea's. 21. The foundations of Physiognomy. 22. A Reason why
Idea's are so powerful in us. 23. What the Abolishment of the Cause of a
Disease may be. 24. A Diseasifying Cause is invisible. 25. The Birthplace of
Diseases. 26. The Author brings forth that Divine thing of Hippocrates in
Diseases, unto the Light. 27. Why Diseases do imitate the properties and
activities of the Life. 28. An Example in the Stone. 29. There is need of two
suppositions, for an introduction of the knowledge of Diseases. 30. A
Conclusion drawn from thence. 31. A Mechanical proof in a Bean. 32. The same in
a Cancer. 33. The progress of a Cancer. 34. How the Beings of Creation, do
differ from the Beings of Prevarication or Transgression. 35. The Thinglinesse
or Essence of a Cancer. 36. Some products of Diseases do lose an occasional
causality. 37. An erroneous Method of Curing hitherto kept. 38. The Schools,
their Causes of a Cancer are Erroneous.

SEeing therefore, a matter and efficient Cause is required unto the Essence of
a Disease, and seeing the Idea is the Efficient Cause it self of a Disease,
both of them are

And first of all, I will describe the thingliness of Idea's, their Efficacy
and Fabric, that the Action and Nativity of effecting a Disease may clearly
appear.

And first I will declare the Idea's conceived by Man.

And then I will treat of the Idea's of the Archeus.

And at length of strange and Foreign Idea's.

And Lastly, I will deliver the matter making a Disease, that from a Connection
of both Causes, the thingliness of a Disease, and its immediate Essence may be
manifest.

First indeed, I have taught elsewhere, that there is a certain unbridled
imaginative obedience performed unto it by the other Bowels: From the
prerogative of which power the spleen is situated almost in the middle place
between them both; yet it is inclined a little more demissly or downwards,
because it has undertaken the place of an entire root: For it touches at the
Stomach with its largeness, in respect whereof a Duumvirate subsisteth: But it
reaches the Womb with its other extreme or end, to wit, being by its Ligaments
annexed to the Loins.

And then I have said, that although at first, that which is imagined is
nothing but a mere Being of Reason; yet it does not remain such, for truly the
Fantasy is a sealifying virtue, and in this respect is called imaginative,
because it forms the Images, or likenesses, or Idea's of things conceived,
and does characterize them in its own vital spirit: And therefore that Idea is
made a spiritual or seminal, and powerful Being, to perform things of great
moment, which thing it helps to have shown by the example of a woman

Whence it is even in the entrance manifest, after what manner a cogitation,
which is a mere [non-being] may be made a real and qualified Being. And then,
it is from hence

It is alike as while a Woman with Child is affrighted by a Duck or a Drake:
For at that very moment, the imaginative faculty imprints the Idea of the
Being, whereby she is affrighted, on the Spirit: So that, that Idea is there
made seminal, and so indeed, it does not only destroy the Embryo now formed,
but transformeth this Embryo into a Duck or a Drake. Whence likewise is
manifest, not only the Power and Authority of the imaginative, but also that
Idea has drawn from the imagination a figurative Faculty, and has a seminal
and figurative Power, yea and a Power of Metamorphizing or Transforming.

And it follows from what has been said before, that a man of much
imagination, is of necessity also weakened in his Strength: Because he is no
otherways wearied, than he who has spent the day in tiresome Labor, and
should wholly fail, as well in Mind as Body, unless he were refreshed with an
acceptable Discourse, a sociable Walking, a pleasant Conversation, and the more
pure Wine: According to that saying, Wine moderately taken sharpens the Wit.

Neither is that moderateness to be delivered by ounces, under the harsh Crisis
of Wine, he says, was made for Mirth, but not for Drunkenness. Sorrowful
persons therefore being wearied, exhausted, and oppressed, must be succored
with Wine, even unto a cheerfulness.

Therefore Idea's, as it were formal Lights, do pierce each other, and imprint
their own Valiant Men are begotten by Valiant and Good Men: For a Child by a
rigid, or tender Education, begins to decline from his native Inclinations:
Then at length when he is endowed with some kind of Discretion, by Exercises,
and Companies, he falls into diverse Idea's of Affections, the which he is
constrained for the most part to obey for Life; because they are implanted from
his tender branches. Presently after that, in Youth, the Idea's of
Consideration or Judgment do begin to grow; the which, although they are for
the most part as yet guiltless; yet when the Idea's of any Passion being
introduced by the hand of Inclinations, shall associate themselves to these;
then the former Idea's are pierced by the stronger; to wit, of Hatred, Love,
Revenge, Luxury, etc. But if a notable Fear shall happen, from thence so
vehement an Idea arises, that it inflicts a violent sickness, with a perpetual
faint-heartedness. But the mildest of Idea's, are those of Love, Joy, and
Desire, which at length delight with their sweetness, and do so ensnare the
whole Soul, that they continually gape after Delights and Pleasures. The more
violent Idea's, are those of Anger, Sorrow, Agony, Envy, Fear, Arrogance,
Despite, Terror, Revenge, Drunkenness or Sottishness, Jealousy, and Despair:
Where also, this is to be noted; That Agony etc. For as there is contrariety in
conceptions alone, so also, in Idea's from thence bred. And those which are not
contrary, are contracted and do pierce each other: But contrary Idea's do
destroy each other, the which shall at sometime, in the curing of Diseases, be
made manifest by Histories. As many Idea's therefore as do pierce each other,
and co-suffer, do arise together into Unity, the prevalency of the stronger
Idea being retained.

But sudden Idea's are the most cruel, and most deadly of all; because they
shake the the Fear of the Lord, by way of a Graft (which therefore is the
Beginning of Wisdom) for a Bridle, or shall cut off the plausibility of
conceits, in its budding of the first Conceptions; it now finds a fuel in
corrupted Nature, Lewdness grows, being not yet apparent by reason of its
smallness; and presently draws the whole Soul under it: So that it becomes
enslaved unto that Appetite, by which it was expelled from its Throne of
Majesty. Suppose thou, if Ambition, or a greater Concupiscence do wax hot in
the Drying Pan of Desire, those things are either possible in hope, without
hope, or against hope: If man persisteth in his Desire, these two latter will
make him mad or besides himself: Seeing every Desire of corrupt Nature, has
always something of foolishness and anguish annexed unto it. But if indeed the
end of a Desire be with hope, it is carried (at leastwise) on an Object not yet
present, and then impossible; and so it has a disdainful expectation, and a
troublesome companion: For we desire those things which are not. Therefore a
painful Desire, is also, for the most part, of its own nature evil, and from
its affect far worse, and at length, from its consequence evil: Because the
Desires do presently decline into Anger, Hatred, Revenge, Frowardnesses,
Crabbishnesses, Un-sufferance, Arrogance, Contempt, etc. For a natural Desire
does always rush into that which is worse, because it descends from self-love,
is formed by corrupt Nature, and is for the most part conversant about the
Objects of sin, does accompany Anguishes, Expectations and Troubles, and bow
down the liberty of Willing: But so far as it is reflected beyond it self, and
on a future thing, it brings forth Impatience, affects a Liberty, resists
Mortification: It brings Frowardnesses, Perplexities, Un-sufferance, and now
and then Despair. A good Desire is always given by Grace from Above, whose
Product is Love, and an endeavor producing the Perfection of the Soul. Vitrues
therefore, as they come from Grace, they transcend from the imaginative
faculty, together with their Idea's, into the understanding, and so they tinge
the Soul; even as also the vices of Passions, the exercises of Sin, and of
withdrawing from the Fear of the Lord, do tinge the Soul, that it becomes as it
were beastlike. Hence are ravening Wolves, generations of Vipers; tell ye that
Fox, etc. Therefore sins of Commission will sometimes be conspicuous in the
Soul, without the search of a diligent

Furthermore, although God be no accepter of persons, yet because he disposes
of all things sweetly, according to his good pleasure, he loves women after a
peculiar manner: I will multiply thy Sorrows) but especially because he has
for a comfort requited them with the gift of Devotion. For from hence do arise
Idea's of Compassion of Miseries, toward their neighbors, of Meekness,
Contrition, and Compunction; the which, for a foundation, do precede the Fear
of the Lord and Charity. For that Devotion (although it Things Conceived. Now
it remains to unfold, from whence Idea's made by man are

1. That Idea's are stamped in the Imaginative faculty, by cogitation. 2. That
they imprint their Image on the Spirit of Life. 3. That they are operative
means, whereby the Soul moves and governs the Body. 4. That they are seminal
Images. 5. But that they are graduated according to the power and strength of
the Imaginative Faculty. 6. Wherefore that a humane Embryo is changed into
diverse Monsters. 7. That every man by the Images of Sorrow, Terror, etc. does
form seminal Poisons unto himself, which do consume him in manner of the
Plague, or else by a violent languishing. 8. That they do also pass forth out
of the Body of the Imaginer; because an Image conceived by a Woman with Child,
regularly wanders into the young, even on the last day of carrying it in the
Womb; yet then it is without controversy, that the young does enjoy its own
Life, and lives by its own Soul, and Quarter.
It is manifest therefore from the aforesaid particulars, not only concerning
the question whether it be; to wit, that there are in Idea's a most powerful
force to operate: but also because they are seminal, that they do naturally
pierce and operate on all things. For truly if there be not a certain ruling,
and forming Idea of the matter of seeds, formed by the generater, the seed by
it self remains wholly barren. In the next place, those Idea's ought to be
immediately, not indeed in the Soul of Man; but immediately in the Archeus
which makes the assault; because without such an Idea, the Archeus should
plainly remain an unpartaker of all action, operation, and propagation.

Therefore also by Idea's every motion and action of Nature, as well in
remedies as in etc. So also the Idea's of inclinations, affections, etc. coming
upon them, do determine or limit the countenance of a Man unto the delineaments
or draughts of Physiognomy: Which afterward also are varied by the future
Idea's of manners, customs, etc. my Spirit shall be diminished, and my days
shall be shortened.

Rightly therefore was it said from of old, That the perfect curing of
Diseases, consists in the removal of the Cause, or Root: The which if it should
be the visible peccant matter it Laudanum without Opium, although the residing
mass or lump were as yet entertained within: Therefore all visible, and
foreign matter, either happening from without, or sprung up of its own accord
within, how degenerate soever it shall be from the very nourishment of the
solid parts, and a liquor separated from them, it has it self always by a
proper name, after the manner of an occasion, and a provoking Cause; whether
that shall be for a primary Disease, or indeed shall be produced and
constituted by a primary Disease, consequently afterward pricking forward the
Archeus unto the erecting of a new storm, or Disease.

And so every Disease is caused from the violent assaulting Spirit, by Idea's
conceived in the proper subject of the Archeus, by whose fault alone, a live
Body, but not a dead

For so, wheresoever Hippocrates has not found any visible matter, as the
occasion of a Pluto's River of Hell, or from the Chaos of successive changes:
Therefore I do in all things wholly admire at this Divine Beginning (be it
spoken by the liberty of Hippocrates) in Diseases, as the judge of a broken
purity, so also a revenger of an hidden impurity and concupiscence, lurking in
the flesh of sin: And therefore also, persevering in the radical disorder of a
vital principle.

But as it does immediately sit in, and is awakned by a vital and seminal
principle: Hence also consequently, Diseases have properties, directions,
proportions, durations,

The same thing is equally manifest in other Diseases, at least by two
suppositions: To wit, one that every Disease is in a live Being, and so in the
Archeus the Mover, but

Whence I conclude, that a Disease, after the manner of other natural Beings,
proceeds

A Bean, as it is the most notable of seeds, is a subject of demonstration. For
herein shadowy Idea's do concur, being co-created with it presently after the
beginning of

First of all, a true Cancer does never arise, but in the Dug, and Womb of the
Women: but the Idea's of a Cancer, are not in, and do not sleep in the Womb;
Even as otherwise pain do mutually co-touch in the act of feeling: And an
unnamed furious passion rises up in stead of a ferment, as it were fire out of
a flint and steel: Hence a fiery seminal Idea, mad or raging (and therefore
poysonsome) is struck out, is imbibed and co-fermented with the juice of the
place: Whence then at length there is a painful, pricking, beating tumor,
because it is also poisonous from fury: The Archeus therefore is stirred up,
and made wrothful according to the disposition of the conceived indignation
(for neither do all things grow generally every where; but here grasses do
spring up without bidding, there more succesfully grapes, else where treeie
sprouts) so neither does the Archeus see in the finger, even as he does in the
eye. The Archeus therefore winds up the poison gotten by his own indignation,
in that bunch of the thorny pain, as the Archeus has there so married himself
unto the Paps, that no part of these does want him: But that swelling is the
product of the Cancer seminated or sown in the indignation, as well of the
Cancer, essentially, as being that Cancer which afterward flows abroad,
stinking with sanies or thin corrupt matter: For neither are Ulcers, or
Apostems in the Dugs ever Cancerous, unless that fury of the Archeus shall be
present: Therefore a seminal Image, rising up from the turbulent tempest of the
Archeus, and decyphered in the Archeus of the place, is a true Cancer, whether
there shall as yet be an Aposteme, or in the next place an Ulcer: For the
Archeus of the Paps being their vital mover, acting, to wit, in that part, the
Sergeantship of the furious Womb, being tossed with furies, does locally stamp
his poisonous Idea's, and imprints them on himself by the same right whereby
the imaginative faculty does frame likenesses agreeable unto its own passions:
No otherwise I say, than as the Womb, Heart, Brain, Stomach, than the
propagative seminal faculty of Vegetables it self; yea nor otherwise than as it
clearly appear in the very excrements of Simples, to wit, in the Spittle of a
mad Dog: So I say a Cancer is bred, and does propagate its own Idea's on the
immediate similar nourishment.

For the primary or first Cancer in the Archeus of the place, through a
dependent connection

For truly in created things of the first constitution, although there be an
Ideal beginning, the same with Diseases, and a progress of making from not a
Being, unto a Being: The Beast being dead, his Poison is killed: For so the
Leprosy, fowl Disease, Falling-evil, Apoplexy, and likewise all primary
Diseases, do proceed. Notwithstanding, the poisons which are taken into the
Body, are not therefore Diseases, or do not arise until the Archeus, through a
borrowed ferment of their contagion, has done injury unto himself: Then indeed
he stamps strange Idea's on himself, not so much from his own fury, as he
borrows the same from Simples ingested or darted in, and at length does fall
under the same; In which conflict he forms wondrous Idea's unto himself, the
which he tragically unfolds by variety of Symptoms: Therefore a Cancer is not
a hollow Ulcer which the eyes do see, neither is it, its crusted and wan, or
black and blew Lips, which the hand does touch.

Lastly, it is not the stinking soil or bottom of the Ulcer which looks
blackish with putrefaction, or the sanies dropping from thence which the
Nostrils do smell: For without bespeaks an unseperable respect unto its own
producing Cause: Therefore a Disease ought to be a Being, containing the
Causes, and Properties of its own entity: And therefore, as well the Cancer
being an Aposteme, is a Cancer, as while it is now become an Ulcer: For
therefore primary Diseases, do for the most part beget an equivocal or doubtful
product in the Archeus: As is the Stone in respect of the first Lithiasis or
Stony affect.

For the troublesome Stone, wounds and hurts the digestion of the Bladder,
stops up the passage of the Urine, etc. Also now and then, a product is
troublesome only by its etc. Water in a Dropsy, coagulated matter in a
Scirihus: And those products, have rather the Nature of a Diseasie effect, than
of an occasion of Diseases; unless perhaps they shall draw the abridgements of
poison in a ferment, for then they supply the room of assumed poison, and do
occasionally compel the counsels of a new Disease into the Archeus: Therefore a
Disease is a Being truly subsisting in an invisible principle, being endowed
with diverse properties; but not a distemperature, or disposition arising from
the sight, mixture, degree of contrariety, and concomitance of feigned Humors.

But the ignorance of a primary Disease, as it has caused the ignorance of a
remedy; So also it has taken away the hope of curing: because they have
employed themselves in Gulick in Germany, cured every Cancer whatsoever, by a
Powder causing no pain, being sprinkled thereon; and then next, he healed it up
with an Incarnating Emplaister; whose Art was buried with himself.

For the Schools being astonished, as often as the Cancer, and eating Canker,
are not appeased by their Egyptiacal Ointment, do accuse the Menstrues, or the
Humor of etc. being taken, does a Cancer never wax mild in the least? For in
times past indeed they have distinguished Diseases by a property of passion,
and secondary passion, and by so much the more unsuccesfully, by how much the
more undistinctly: So that the Schools being dashed against the Rock, have
transferred these affects concerning Diseases unto Symptoms: As while from the
Womb, there is a Megrim, and strangling, or from a painful Aposteme of the
foot, a glans or kernel in the Groyn: They have indeed named them consensual or
co-feeling, or secondary effects; but have never acknowledged them even as they
proceed from their own seed: Even as has been more largely demonstrated by me
touching their ignorance of a Diseasifying Essence.

CHAP. LXX. Of Archeal Diseases.
1. The necessities of Archeal Diseases rushing on us of their own accord. 2.
The Schools have on both sides neglected the First Mover in us. 3. Aristotle,
Galen, and Paracelsus, have become mad about this Tragedy. 4. An unfolding of
the thing granted. 5. A preparing of a Demonstration. 6. The clearing up of a
Question. 7. An explaining of the Idea's of the Archeus. 8. An Objection is
solved. 9. The passions of the Archeus have the Excentricities of another
Market. 10. The ignorances of the Author. 11. The fourfold Troop of Diseases,
proves the Idea's of the Archeus. 12. Hereditary Diseases do presuppose the
Idea of a Disease, to be connexed with a prolifical or fructifying Idea, yet
not to be produced from the intention of the Generater. 13. The pleasure
reflects the Archeus on its self. 14. Death began from the Concupiscence of the
Flesh. 15. Why a Trunk in an arm does not generate a Trunk. 16. Why all the
Diseases of Parents are not equally transplanted by an hereditary right. 17.
Silent Diseases do prove an Archeal Idea. 18. The Diseases of an Astral or
Starry Conjunction do prove the same thing. 19. What Diseases may pertain unto
an unequal strength. 20. An unequal strength, has caused a beginning of the
Fiction of a Catarrhe.

IT was already sufficiently shown, that the Archeus being even well disposed,
is estranged by humane Passions and Perturbations, and likewise that by the
foreign Image of a strange Archeus piercing him, and that by the assumed
destructive powers of purging Medicines and Poisons, he is soon trodden under
foot. But while no vice of things taken That nothing is moved by it self. They
have acknowledged indeed a First Mover, and its Intelligences, the motive Forms
of the Heavens; but the proper Movers inhabiting in the Seeds, which should by
Idea's prepared for them, of their own free accord,

Be gone thou Aristotle with thy whorish appetite of an impossible matter: For
I have else where given satisfaction unto those trifles, even unto thy shame.
Galen being at the Paracelsus, who thought the Essences of things, and the
liquours of these, never to perish, began the dissolution of Life from the
disorder of the three First Things. For he scarce believed the Archeus to
decay, who affirmed, The Essences of Herbs being taken in Fodder, not to die,
so much as in the dung of Fields: Yea he says, The Archeus is never dissolved
by reason of the faintings of Old Age, but is stifled only through corruptions
ripened in the power of Nature: And so, neither does he think the Archeus then
to perish; but being obvolved in strange things, to be obscured and forcibly to
depart, as suspended from the office of acting, and to return unto his first
sacramental Being.

Surely these things are more worthy of Laughter and Pity, than of
reprehension: For they have hitherto been busied only about the products of
Diseases, and occasional things brought inwards. For Paracelsus with his
followers has introduced Tartarous Humors, into the innermost efficient Cause
of every Disease, perhaps neither before hurtful ones, but when they should be
coagulated at the last line of their extension or passage. But I have
heretofore rejected the Errors of that man, and the false paint of falsehood
being now discovered, I have better instructed a credulous posterity: Because I
know that the Archeus has his own motive, and alterative Blas, naturally given
unto him, and proper unto etc. as well every living Creature, as Vegetable, at
the beck of his proper appointment: And so that the Archeus is he that makes
the assault according to Hippocrates, and without or besides whom, nothing is
moved, felt, or altered in soulified Creatures.

In the next place, I know, that the Archeus does regularly move himself,
according to the Idea either left him by the Generater, or another called unto
him from elsewhere.

Whence also, I have believed, that it belongs to the same Being and faculty,
whereby through health, every motion and alteration are made in an ordained
regularity, and

For truly, I have already treated of the humane Idea's of Affections,
Inclinations, Passions, and Perturbations; but not yet sufficiently concerning
Archeal ones, while as the Protheus, does voluptuously transform himself. For
as regular Idea's (from whence the Archeus has all his Blas) are implanted on
the seed by the lust of the Generater; so also from the impurity of Nature, he
has reserved every riotous and voluptuous inordinacy of Concupiscence, which
is plainly never laid aside, as long as there is a living in the flesh of Sin:
Because, it is altogether proper to Nature defiled in Passions: For so the
Archeus is after some sort sorrowful, angry, hates, is vexed, dispaireth and
is burdensome to himself, although a man shall procure no such thing to
himself, or feel it in himself. Indeed exundations are made in the Archeus,
hitherto unnamed, because they are proper unto him, and not even so much akin
to humane disturbances; whence also, excentrical and poisonous Images do bring
forth mere Poisons: For they are as it were voluntary griefs, which gnaweth the
Life as the Moth does the Garment, according to the Wise Man.

These are indeed unnamed Idea's which do bring forth a Disease otherwise lying
hid, or an hereditary Character to light. But if the Brain, Heart, Spleen, etc.
are the Courts wherein the Prince, the Archeus, does celebrate his Counsels:
Why has not the very Principal, Original Being, the Motive one of the
Imaginative Faculty, also a Fantasy proper or natural unto it self? And they
do afford in Nature, corrupted by Concupiscence, irregular exorbitances in that
Being, especially while he does as it were withdraw himself from the Commands
of the Soul, and had rather be of his own right.

Neither does it hinder that such Passions of the Archeus, are not properly
felt in a man, which otherwise, might seem to be required if they ought to draw
out Diseasie and Sealing For does he once think at leastwise of forming the
young? things to be done? For in the lust or desire, the mind is after some
sort alienated, and does as it were withdraw it self, in the mean time while
the Archeus does imprint his own Image, without the imaginative faculty.

The Archeus therefore being retired without the assemblies of his Court, is
molested or etc. Of what sort are the immoderate desires of eating, bearing
rule, knowing, having or possessing, subduing, revenging, enjoying, etc. And so
the Idea's of these conceptions do beget dissolutenesses, desires, lavishments,
and unsufferances: From whence at length there are neglects of the digestions,
of distributions, and government, expenses, voluptuous provocations,
irresolutions, loads or burdens, crabbishnesses, etc. Whence at length Plagues,
also unknown Monsters of Poisons, venoms, and likewise dissolute or wasting
Diseases, and the poverties of an Atrophia or lack of nourishment; for that
sort of Idea's are destitute of counsel, and formed without his wonted Courts:
And therefore their Matrimonies and Ministeries, are no more regular than the
nativities of the same: Therefore the Archeus having slidden into his own
proper, and riotous irregularities, being wholly Symptomatical, and impatient,
is as it were mad, does sometimes forsake the rains of government, the which
otherwise can never be idle; sometimes snatcheth them up again being
interrupted, sometimes operates more slowly, and is hastily affected with his
own heaviness or weariness: Yea in the midst of the fullness of his pleasures,
he stirs up torments to himself, as a being plainly irrational; for the
exercise of the Digestions being interrupted, a nourishable Humor being
detained in the sixth digestion, through to much delay, conceives the foreign
ferment of an abounding digestion, and is frustrated of its end: For from hence
again the Archeus being as it were greatly affrighted, and as it were repenting
him of his carelessness, does rashly move all things.

But I cannot meetly explain the means whereby the Archeus does make his own
voluntary excentricities, nor decypher the Idea's of these by a proper
Etymology, if they

But besides, all potestative Diseases do assent to the Doctrine already
delivered, and those which do as it were wax fresh again without any
co-touching of filths: And of that

Secondly, Diseases which do sleep through long silences of days, and which do
now and then relapse, do convince of the same thing.

Thirdly, con-centred Diseases, which I else where call the tortures of the
Night.

And Fourthly, Diseases of a disproportioned virtue, do declare the same, the
which I call an unequal strength. But as to what concerns hereditary and
posthume Diseases: It is certain, that a Diseasie Idea is transplanted, being
decyphered in the seed of the Parents.

Not indeed that the generater has the character of any conceived passion, or
Disease, a vital Light, cannot but be filled with Vigor, and receive his own
seminal Image, indeed the cause of fruitfulness: For it is proper to him in all
his pleasures, to contemplate on himself with a well-pleasing, in his own
Glass, and with a plausible delightfulness, the which has even brought a
self-love, and a certain arrogance in the first cradles of Nature, yet diverse
in it self, by reason of the variety of Pleasures: For while the Archeus does
withdraw and abstract himself as I have said; yet he cannot but be in a Body,
as in a Place: Therefore I call him abstracted, not indeed from the Body, but
from his Court, or ordinary Throne: But an abstracted contemplation of the
Archeus is not made in the Heart, as if he did floate in the continual motion
of agitation, and pulses; as neither are the bosoms of the Heart, the Court of
Counsel of the Archeus being abstracted; yea neither in the very substance of
the Heart; but his Palace it self is more inward. To wit, in the stable Spirit
it self, implanted in the spleen: Indeed that same Image of his own self
conceived in time of lust, does put on a particle of the Spirit whereby it is
begotten, which particle according to a Chemical account, is the 8200 part of
its whole: And the which least particle therefore being thus decyphered,
passes afterward into the in-flowing Spirit, domestique to the Heart,
together with the Idea of lust and desire: But the Idea's of desire are only
motive directresses (even as else where concerning Sympathetical things) and
therefore the conceived Image of Man's Archeus, is implanted through that
direction, in the material seed: Wherefore as Death began from Venus or carnal
lust: So it is daily hastened, even as also the death of a Plant begins from
a Venus, Anger, Grief, Childbirth, etc. For neither is any matter in any place
detained, the fuel of the Falling Sickness: Because it should either putrify,
wither, be consumed, or loose the Ancient blemish of poison: The which seeing
it does not come to pass, but remains for Life; it has therefore chosen
another Beginning, and immediate Inn, than superfluities; because it is sealed
in the Idea of an active Being, and that constant throughout the whole Life:
Therefore the Spirit of Life concluded in the Organs, does suffer its storms
from its own Diseasie Idea's; the which as often as the inflowing Spirit
receives from thence, so often it presently brings the contagions of the same
into act: For as the poison of the Falling Sickness is that which makes drunk,
is sleepifying, and after some sort furious; its original clearly appears about
the Stomach, and afterward is chiefly perceived in the Head, and does
singularly affect the clients thereof: So the Archeus of the Head stamps
poisonous Images, which are hateful to the very implanted Archeus, and
suspected of a poisonous Contagion, and he is thereby easily made wholly
Apogeal or most remote from his center.

Thirdly, some Diseases are con-centrical in their matter and efficient Cause,
yet seeing moved at the conjunction of the Moon: They do also fore-shew the
hinges of winds to come: For neither does the Archeus show himself to be
obliged to the Stars, unless through the importunities of Diseases: Wherefore
those Diseases, are commonly called the Ephemerides or dayes-books of the Sick:
Therefore in those that are in good health, the Archeus is not ruled by the
Stars: But because they do singularly follow the Moon (which is the night Star)
therefore they do most rage in the night: Therefore I call them the torture of
the Night, because it seems to be carried by a co-like Blas, and to talk with
its Stars, and that thing surely, does not belong but to the Archeus; seeing a
more gross compaction of Body is not fit for this purpose: they are therefore
sealed in the vital Spirit implanted in the principal Organs; but nothing is
there sealed besides Ideal Characters: The Archeus is a fountainous Being,
which by his own Blas does stir up every assault or violation in us, according
to Hippocrates; but he remains a fountainous Being, how neatly soever Diseasie
products are taken away: For although he may sometimes vitiate as well things
contained, as things containing; yet the Archeus reserves an imprinted vice
peculiar to himself, whereby he stirs up every storm at pleasure.

Lastly, Diseases which in the fourth place, I call those under an unequal
strength, are inbred, or obtained: And because they bespeak strength, they have
manifestly enrouled The Spirit (says Hippocrates) has made three motions in
us, within, without, and into a circuit; and he moves, and transchangeth all
things with himself, even while he is orderly: But in his irregularity,
whatsoever he shall perform, he shall also utter memorable effects of his
disorder.

CHAP. LXXI. The birth or original of a Diseasie Image.
1. A description of a Disease by a numbering up of things denied. 2. What a
Disease is. 3. The vain thought of Physicians concerning a Disease. 4. The Inn
of Life belongs to a Disease. 5. The force of a Diseasie Idea is proved by
Vegetables. 6. By the Blas of meteours. 7. The Blas of an Archeal Idea in us,
is proved from the Premises. 8. The ordinary seat of Diseases. 9. The Images of
perturbations are cited. 10. From a mental Non-being, is made [this something]
11. A twofold Diseasifying Archeal Idea. 12. Idea's brought unto the venal
Blood. 13. The rule of right in healing. 14. Why the Author keeps the names of
the Ancients. 15. A probative or proofe-ful Idea, is framed in the Archeus
alone.

I Have already at large described an unheard of Doctrine of a Diseasie Being
premised by me, That Physicians may learn, to look into a Disease from the
fountain, and may desist from being seduced by Paganish Opinions: Wherefore a
Disease is not a certain distemperature of elementary qualities, or a victory
proceeding from the continual strife of these, Galenists have dreamed; neither
likewise is a Disease one of the four feigned Humors, exceeding its natural
temperature or mixture, and matched to the four Elements: Neither at length, is
a Disease a certain degenerate matter, awakened by an impression of the
Elements: But every excrementitious matter, is either a naked matter preceding
a Disease, and therefore an occasional Cause of a Disease, or it is the product
of a Disease resulting from the error of the parts, and so a certain latter
effect of a Disease, although afterward it may occasionally stir up another
Disease, or may nourish or increase another antecedent Cause. Nor lastly, is a
Disease a hurtful quality, budding from the poison or contagion of another, and
that a hurtful matter: Notwithstanding such offenses as those do only accuse
its presence, but not the effect depending only occasionally thereupon.

A Disease therefore is a certain Being, bred, after that a certain hurtful
strange power has violated the vital Beginning, and has pierced the faculty
hereof, and by piercing etc. To wit, the anguish, and troubles of which
perturbations do by imagining, stir up an Idea co-like unto themselves, and a
due Image: Indeed that Image is readily stamped, expressed, and sealed in the
Archeus, and being clothed with him, a Disease does presently enter on the
stage, being indeed composed of an Archeal Body, and an efficient Idea: For the
Archeus produces a damage unto himself, the which when he has once admitted,
he straightway also afterward yields, flees, or is alienated, or dethroned, or
defiled through the importunity thereof, and is constrained to undergo a
strange government, and domestically to sustain a civil War raised up on
himself; indeed such a strange Image, is materially imprinted, and arising out
of the Archeus: A true Diseasie Being I say, which is called a Disease.

For although Physicians are only busied about the dissolution, cleansing away,
and expulsion of the hurtful occasional matter; yet our thought is not able to
vary the Essence of in the seat of the Soul; but the Soul does not operate out
of it self, unless by virtue of its official Organ, which is the vital air of
the Archeus: And therefore it is a wonder that it has hitherto been unknown,
that a Disease sits immediately in the same vital inn where the Life enjoys it
self; of which more largely hereafter: for hateful persons will scarce believe
that every power of sublunary things is stirred up, and contained in Idea's:
But that thing I have already before sharply touched at by the way, yet it
shall profit to have it more strongly bound or confirmed: For we have known,
and believe by Faith, that a power is given to Herbs of propagating their like:
But that proprietary faculty is a

In like manner, the Sea does not cause, but suffer horrid tempests, which the
Wind does efficiently stir up; and truly the Wind is not moved by it self, and
of its own free The Stars shall be unto you for signs, times or seasons, days,
and years; for so great a storm of the primary Elements, or Air, and Water,
breaks forth from a Being which is like unto Light: But the Blas of the
Elements is not stirred up from the mere Light of the Stars: For although the
Light of the Stars be incorporeal, and immaterial, yet it is not a certain
simple Light, but that which besides the property of a solitary Light (which is
only of enlightening) has a motive Blas in it self, and likewise durations, and
directions according to places, strengths, and weaknesses; no less than an
alterative Blas has for all successive changes, and periods of times: These
Blas's are Anciently wont to be ascribed unto the aspects of diverse Lights;
the which aspects notwithstanding, as such, do not exceed their own efficacy,
which is to have enlightened: But for to stir up so unlike stations of times or
seasons, and tempests also foreseen, that is, before the coming of the Stars
unto the places of those aspects, is surely the effect of a greater weight than
only of a simple Light: I therefore suppose that the diversities of aspects
spiritual, Astrall or starry Images of the invisible World are framed, which
they lay up into the Air for the exciting of a Blas, according to the Image of
those properties; for truly the aspect of the Stars is only momentary, as also
their place is unstable, but their effects do presevere for some long time:
Therefore it must needs be that the lightsome aspects, besides a momentary
Light have laid up in the Air the Idea of a Blas, operating even unto a
Consumption of it self, the irregular Rules, Locks, Bolts, Spurs and Period of
times or seasons. Such an Image therefore is of the Nature of Light, that it
may operate at a set time, for else it should scarce reach to us in the course
of many years, unless it were of the Nature of Light: Therefore as there is in
Plants, an awakening virtue of a seminal Image for fructification; So also
there is in the Stars, a faculty of framing the Idea of a motive Light, which
is the original principle of motion, making whatsoever is committed unto it for
execution. But our Archeus, whether he has a virtue or force like unto the
Earth, or unto

And therefore all Diseases, and the Types or Figures of these, are certain
conceptions decyphered by this invisible Ruler, to finish the storms of our
calamities. In the Sky

Likewise the fear of Honor lost, or to be lost, if it has endured for the
space of one the Wise Man testifies, That sorrow does graw the Life of Man, as
the Worm does Garments: But Sorrow is a Sorrowful thought, but this is a
[non-being] because a mental Being; the which because it is a [non-being]
therefore it has no power of acting from it self.

Therefore a sorrowful cogitation does produce an active Idea, and [this
something] is made of nothing, no otherwise than as in a Woman with Child,
perturbation does

Wherefore also a twofold Diseasifying Archeal Idea, of a twofold Archeus,
distinguishes a transient or soon-departing Disease, from a Chronical or long
continuing one:

But Idea's, if they inform the venal Blood, or the liquor which is immediately
to be assimilated, and nourishable, tempests are bred, conformable as well to
the Idea's of perturbations,

And seeing the motions of a wantonizing Archeus, are hidden to a Physician,
and so that we are not able to repose the once rejected Rains, into the hands
of such an Archeus: By consequence, a certain Universal Arcanum, which is a
sleepifier and appeaser of the Archeus, is to be administered.

He therefore labors for the most part in vain, whosoever being destitute of a
Universal secret, does place his endeavor in the brushing away of occasional
Causes, the Archeus

In the mean time, seeing the Archeus proceeds in an unknown path, in his own
fabrics of Images, I am constrained in the explication of Diseases, to keep
the Ancient

For the dead Carcass of a man, which is dead through a voluntary Flux, exceeds
all Ice in coldness, not indeed that in very truth, it is more cold than the
dead Carcass of

1. He feels Death, the which perhaps the imagination is as yet ignorant of. 2.
He greatly dreadeth. 3. The inflowing Spirit retires. 4. But that which is
implanted in the hand is troubled and fails for fear, and so conceives a
beginning of Death unto himself from the trembling fear.
Therefore the Holy Scriptures do not incongrously say, That he that should
touch the dead, is reckoned impure, and half dead: Which Image of Death, the
Archeus, will he, nill he, does conceive, and does so stiffly retain it for
some good while, as long as that Idea of fear is surviving, that it scarce
becomes hot again at the hearth within an hours space: Therefore the Idea of
trembling fear is really there; for truly it works its effect, and is formed by
the Archeus, and not by the imaginative power of the Man: Therefore if the
Archeus runs away trembling for fear, by a like reason also, he shall be
sorrowful, angry, shall be stirred up through fury, and other passions, and is
in a conflict through the Idea's of any perturbations whatsoever, becomes
troublesome and hurtful to himself, according to the pleasure of Idea's, which
he has formed unto himself by his own force, and liberty.

CHAP. LXXII. The passage unto the Buttery of the Bowels, is stopped up.
1. The difficulty of curing a Disease is concluded from the very seat of the
Soul. 2. An example of a quartane Ague. 3. A remarkable thing concerning
Remedies hitherto used against a Quartane. 4. Wherein purging Medicines have
hitherto decieved the unwary. 5. Purging things have sometimes cured by
accident, and have remained through this deciet. 6. A reckoning up of incurable
Diseases. 7. Distillation brings forth new generated things. 8. Singularities
in things produced by the fire. 9. Deccocted things differ from distilled
things. 10. What was the scope of the Author in times past. 11. Some Remedies
have decieved the Author. 12. An examination of Remedies. 13. An examination of
Digestions. 14. An examination of Water-remedies. 15. The abilities of the
Stomach. 16. Whence the chief variety of conditions is.

AFter I had discerned that the Stomach was the root of the tree, or the root
as well of a universal Digestion, as of all particular ones whatsoever, I had
alike seriously known, that the Mortal or sensitive Soul, the Mistress of all
kind of actions whatsoever in us, and the Dispenseress of Life throughout the
whole Body, did inhabit there: That indeed also the Frameress of the first
conceptions, was there situated; likewise the shop of sleep, no less than of
watchings, and madnesses; I held it consonant to reason, that the immortal
mind, or Image of God, could be no where more decently infolded, or co-knit,
than in the aforesaid formal and vital Light; to wit, in a spiritual principle,
for that reason also most near, because akin unto it. And when as the Monarchy
of Life being thoroughly searched into, I saw, and optically or clearly knew,
that every Disease did essentially consist in the Life, and arise out of the
same, the causes of difficulties in curing Diseases offered themselves unto me,
especially those which are not silent of their own free accord, or which do not
hasten through their own violence unto the end of their period, but do
accompany the Life which they do bitterly molest.

Wherefore of the more lingering Diseases, I saw a Quartane, an Atrophia or
Consumption for lack of nourishment, a Cacochymia or state of bad juice,
likewise weaknesses, and afterward, as well those which have chosen their bed
in the outmost habit of the Body, (such as are the Leprosy, Palsy, Sciatica,
Convulsion or Cramp, Gout, etc.) as those which are fast tied to any of the
Bowels (as the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Astma, affect of the Stone, Dropsy,
Madness, etc.) were not cured, not indeed through a defect of desire of curing,
but through want of a remedy alone; but I long labored in that remedy, and I
many times retreated, until I knew that it should respect the very fountain of
Life, or sensitive Soul.

Wherefore first, I took the Quartane Ague it self in hand, because it was
obvious, most tiresome or tedious, and plainly known; and the which while it
did despise the usual remedies of Physicians, it rendered the hope of the same
void. First of all, I was more assured by the same, that wheresoever any
material Diseasie product lay hid, the application likewise of a convenient
remedy was required; or else it was to be feared, that the effect raised up
from that occasional Cause would remain surviving: And therefore from the
correlative of this proposition, I found no remedies of Physicians hitherto;
however through their fame, unstopping, resolving, cleansing, or purging
Medicines may be etc. force of a remedy, does soon even in the Stomach perish,
wax mild, is tamed, or banished through the intestines, if at leastwise it
shall not first die: But if any quality of remedies shall remain safe from
their middle Life, something broken, and being recieved, shall more fully or
inwardly pierce; (as Mace, or Terpentine do from the necessity of Magnum
Oportet, retain their Savor in the Urin) but at leastwise the same offers it
self so gelded and dismembered, that it does not effect any of those things, to
which end, and for which things sake Medicines are swallowed. Eggs indeed and
the Fleshes of Beasts do represent the favors of the nourishment which fatted
them: But surely while they pass over into a vital family-administration,
although they may retain the footsteps of their former taste, and so may
contain some testimonies of health; yet the helps of these are so sluggish, for
the rooting out of any Diseasie product, that long and lingering Diseases have
long ago manifested the boasting of these remedies to be vain, yea and have
taken away their hope. But purgative things only have most especially deceived,
and do deceive as well Physicians, as the unwary Patients hitherto, and alone,
the greater secrets, whereinto an endowed faculty of Nature is instilled from
above, or being made glorious through the praise of purity, and subtilty, have
equally supplanted all tyranny of Diseases, and have thus arose into an
universal Medicine, by the one compendium of restoring Life. I have said
elsewhere, that every distilled thing is a new Creature produced by the fire;
and so not of the first institution of its own concrete Body: Verily even as
the fire is a certain thing made for artifices or crafts, yet natural; so
whatsoever bewrayes it self by the fire, although it be natural, yet it issues
from an oblique or crooked principle of nature, wresting seminal Beginnings
aside unto the will of the fire.

Hence whatsoever is made or composed by the fire, does at once attain its
first, middle, and last Life, and they are melted jointly together, as one only
seminal principle, which

First of all, the contemplation of provokers of Urine smiled on me; to wit,
the which

By way of an Example of the Stone of Crabs, or of the most fixed Stone for
broken Bones, a helper as well of wounds, as of the difficulties of Urin: For
this is not dissolved by Man's etc. are taken, and shall change the odor of the
Urine: Yet their aides are but weak in the Disury, and suppression of Urine:
For in very deed, all the Testimonies of the former Life of Simples is
annihilated within the Stomach, and none but the flaggy footsteps of tastes do
remain; so that the Nutmeg, and Terpentine (which do very much differ in their
savours) yet they do breath one only and alike Odor in the Urine, which is a
manifest sign, that in the first shop of the Stomach, the primitive Crases's of
things taken, do perish, but that new ones do arise, being gotten by cocting:
For otherwise, of Terpentine, and its Oil, and Mace, a sameliness of Odor
could not result in the Urine, as neither an acceptable Odor of Violets from
thence: So Asparagus stinks in the Urin, as a certain putrefaction being
adjoined unto it, does hasten the same into banishment. But vulnerary or
wound-drinks, do no otherwise succor a wound, than as they do so diminish the
unjust sharpness in the Stomach, that they do also restrain, and expel
sharpness out of the wound (all which out of the Stomach is hurtful, Diseasie,
and a Companion of putrefaction, as I have elsewhere demonstrated concerning
digestions:) For truly the general digestion of the Stomach is chief over every
Kitchen of all the digestions: Yea

The Pipes or Channels indeed are unknown to us, but the Life, the directress,
and mistress of these, reflects it self unto its own seat or center, that is,
unto the Soul: And etc. come to be ascribed unto the mortal Soul: The which
indeed follows a material variety of dispositions: from hence therefore is
blockishness, barbarousness, furies, madnesses, as also provocations to
leachery, quicksightednesses or sharpnesses of wit; and lastly, the ruin of
sciences, and extinguishments of memory, etc.

CHAP. LXXIII. The Seat of Diseases in the sensitive Soul, is Confirmed.
1. Ten Paragraphs or Positions elsewhere proved, are supposed. 2. The twelve
Properties of the Stomach are rehearsed. 3. That some Diseases do inhabit in
the Life of the Stomach. 4. An Objection is Solved. 5. The Life of the Muscles.
6. A consideration of the Apoplexy. 7. The incomprehensibleness of the Vital
Powers. 8. Sleep is the last of Faculties. 9. Why sleep was sent in before Sin.
10. The Seat of all Diseases. 11. An unquenchable Consideration of Hunger and
Thirst. 12. That the most powerful Idea's of Diseases are framed in the
Duumvirate. 13. The largeness of the Power of Idea's is rehearsed. 14. That
Remedies for the most part do not dilate themselves without the cottages of the
Stomach. 15. The Schools not heeding these things, have erred in the
application of a Remedy. 16. A choice of Medicines. 17. Remarkable things of
the Stone for broken Bones.

BUt that the Roots of Life may more clearly be laid open, I will compose some
Beginnings or Essays founded by me elsewhere, and borrowed from thence, into
Positions.

1. The Immortal mind, the immediate Image of the Divinity, after that it
delegated the Government of Life unto the sensitive, mortal and frail Soul,
although it delivered its Power unto this mortal Light; yet it has remained
connexed to the same, being co-bound unto it by the Symbol or Resembling mark
of Life, as it were the band of the nearest Knowledge: Which sensitive Light of
Life, because it sits entertained in the Stomach as the Root of a Mortal Life;
therefore also the mind it self has chosen its Bride-bed and Throne in the
same place: The which I have elsewhere more strongly profesly confirmed
concerning the Soul.

2. The Soul has sowed its Faculties necessary for Life, throughout the Organs
of the Body: Wherefore neither does the Ankle See, nor the Ear Walk, as neither
does the Liver transchange Meats received, into Chyle.

3. The vital Faculty of the Organs, in health sends forth healthy or sound
Actions, and the same as often as it is vitiated, utters vitiated Actions.

4. But the vital Faculty is not vitiated but by a Disease.

5. Which Disease therefore is nothing but a real and actual Vice of the
Faculty; a positive Being, I say, and for that Cause consisting of Matter and
an Efficient Cause, after the manner of other natural Beings.

6. But seeing the vital Faculty it self, does essentially include in it a
Disease it self: Hence it follows, That a Disease it self is in the formallity
of its Efficient Cause, a Faculty not indeed vitiated, but vicious: To wit, the
which does vitiate or hurt the vital Faculty: And so a Disease is a Power very
much like to the vital Faculties, and that so intimate with them, that also in
some Cases it is united as well to mortal and hereditary ones, as those that
are centrally rooted.

7. But a vitiated or hurt Faculty, is either a particular one, proper to some
one Organ, as Blindness, Deafness, the Palsy, etc. Or it is every way
dispersed in the common vehicle of the inflowing Archeus, by way of property of
Passion, of a secondary Passion, or by way of Sympathy. And indeed however, and
after what manner soever a Faculty is hurt, at leastwise it is discerned and
clearly seen every where to undergo a vital Vice; and that every Disease does
immediately inhabit in the Principle of Life, that is, in the Archeus himself.

8. For all Diseases in general do sit in the universal beginning of Life,
whether in the mean time the Archeus be particularly molested by some Organ, or
whether he be stirred up and enraged by the Fountain of Life, and a quickened or
enlivened Root: For although that may vary the Species of a Disease, yet such a
variety does not take away the maker of a Disease.

9. The Sensitive Soul is chief over all its vital Faculties, whether they are
fomented by distributed Organs, or next by the common Archeus: At least from
thence it depends, that the Cure almost of all Diseases, consists and is
perfected in the radical Inn of Life; that is, in the Seat of the Soul and
Center of Life: Unless sometimes perhaps a certain Organical part shall drink
up a Disease proper unto it self, and the vital Faculty its guest, shall marry
its self unto the same.

10. Whence it becomes evident, that almost all Curing of Diseases (Wounds, and
likewise those that are Chyrurgical ones I except not) is to be solicited in
the Stomach, and in its Duumvirate: and so, neither there to be incongruously
sought after or solicited: For so also oft-times, the more outward defects are
taken away by an internal Remedy of the Stomach, being else vainly attempted by
external Medicines. It is no wonder therefore, that Remedies do scarce exceed
the command, order of the Stomach, or are materially farther dispersed.

Which things being thus premised by the way, I will subscribe some Privileges
of the Stomach.

1. And First of all, That is a right proper and peculiar to the Stomach, that
it does primarily Cook for it self; but for the whole Body only by accident,
indirectly, and by an extraordinary right before the other Members: Because
Divine Ordination has so suffered it to be, that it may prepare a nourishment
of the rude matter of the meats for all the others: But the Stomach it self is
immediately nourished by the Chyle confected by it self, no otherwise than as
the Root of Vegetables is nourished by Leffas the Juice of the Earth: But not
that the Stomach does allure Blood from the Liver for its nourishment, as
neither does the Root of Vegetables fetch back again the Juice, once dismissed
from it self, and dispersed upwards from the Bark, that it may thereby be
nourished. Wherefore the Stomach enjoys a few Veins for the Office of so great
an heap, and a Vessel of so great capacity; To wit, because it is not nourished
by venal Blood according to the accustomed manner of other Members, but it is
fed only with the Chyle, the which it afterward suits into a Spermatick Liquor
agreeable to it self.

2. But the Veins of the Stomach do not therefore diffuse Blood out of
themselves, neither does the Stomach being hurt by a Wound, weep forth Blood:
And the same right the rest of the Membranes have borrowed from the Stomach
unto themselves.

3. The Stomack-Veines do not transmit any thing of the concocted Chyle of
Mcats, or suck is unto them, that they may derive the same unto the Port Vein,
according as otherwise, the Meseraick Veins are wont to do. And that thing I
have else where more strongly confirmed concerning the Digestions.

4. In the next place, neither do the Veins of the Stomach employ themselves in
the nourishment of the Stomach.

5. And therefore the Stomack-Veins being full of pure Blood, have a free,
vital, undisturbed faculty, appointed for the sucking of the Chyle or
dispersing of the Blood: Either of which two notwithstanding, is domestical to
all the other Veins.

6. Yet the Veins and Arteries being knit unto the Orifice of the Stomach, are
not in vain extended, but the Soul being entertained in the slenderness of the
Membrane of the Stomach as if it were not there, yea being scarce tied to the
place, breathes forth the breath of its Life into the Organs (to wit the Heart,
Spleen, Liver, Brain, Kidneys, Stones, etc.) after an unsensible manner, and
through an incredible straitness and slenderness of Pipes or Channels. Hence
indeed are there sudden Ecclipses, Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Giddinesses,
Swoonings, etc. to wit, as often as the sensitive Soul cease to beam forth its
Light into the Organs.

7. For there is in the Pipe of the Artery of the Stomach, a Vital Faculty of
that Soul, for the beaming forth Beams of Light unto the heart, so long as it
is in a good state: But when as it behaves it self rashly or amiss, presently
also Heart-beatings, Faintings, Giddinesses of the Head, Apoplexies,
Epilepsies, Drowsie-evils, Watchings, Madnesses, Headaches, Convulsions, etc.
are stirred up. In the next place also, there is by the Soul, the Governness of
the vital Faculties, breathed its own vital Virtue through the Stomack-Veines
unto the Liver, and so from the Unity of the Soul, diverse natural endowments do
flow forth unto all the Organs: for truly always, and on every side, all
things as well in the Universe as in us, do issue from one point: For that
mortal Soul, and Seminal constant Governess of the Body, seeing it is
occasionally begged from the Disposition of the arterial Blood, it of necessity
also inhabits in the Organs, as well in the bloody Spleen, as in the unbloody
Membrane of the Stomach: Verily even as the Brain, the Fountain and Judge of
the Acts of Perceivances or Feelings, does most especially want Sense or
Feeling, and therefore also it is many times read in the Holy Scriptures, That
the Soul of Man dwells in the Blood.

8. It suffices therefore in this place, that the sensitive Soul, being placed
in these seats, does there unfold its Virtues, and from thence diversely send
them forth.

9. For indeed Sleep, Watching, Appetite, Digestion, Ferment, Cheerfulness,
etc. do discover by their plurality, a health of the Functions, even as also in
the same Fold, and cemral Fountain, the Apoplexy, Epilcpsie, Vertigo or
Giddiness, Madness, Fury, Forgetfalness, etc. are entertained: For truly the
one only sensitive Soul is the immediate Cause, Center, Nest, Fountain, and
Original of all vital Faculties and Actions whatsoever. But in this Path it is
sufficient to have rehearsed that which else where I have profesly
demonstrated, that in the more inward Coat of the Stomach, as it were in a
Bride-bed, the Mortal Soul does dwell, and that it involves in it the immortal
Mind within its Bosom: But that all those Powers are vital, in their Function
indeed distinct, although not in their vitality or liveliness, and so, so
proper and peculiar unto the Soul it self, that the Etimology of their
Property has sprung from thence.

10. Wherefore without Controversy also, I suppose that all Diseases
universally (because they rising up against the Powers of the Soul, are
Adversaries, and Hostile) do also immediately assault or invade the frail and
mortal Soul: Against which indeed, they are able to shake their Spears or
Darts, and pierce the same by reason of the likeness of a sublunary Symbol.

11. Which strife indeed does first happen in the Archeus himself, the Porter
of the Soul, and from thence they are more inwardly derived, and do pierce even
unto the kernel of the Soul it self.

12. Diseases also which are brought from without, and forreignly to within, do
stand as retainingly subject to this right, as those which of their own free
accord do wax hot, or which are struck out of the Flint of the Archeus.

Wherefore, although I have already accused most Remedies of an impossibility
of piercing; yet it suffices a Physician, if the Medicine does in the very
mentioned Inn of the Soul, talk with the same in its own possession. But
surely these things are new and unheard of, an unexpected Philosophy of
Healing: But the novelty it self ought little to deter us, so truths are
demonstrated.

Especially it should be most difficult to persuade, that all madnesses do
spring from etc. from thence: Unless I say, the Falling Sickness were the more
frequently felt to be lifted up out of the inmost room of the Stomach into the
Heart and Head, and so that the upper parts do for the most part, languish
through a secondary passion of the inferior parts. But if the Falling Sickness
does sometimes seem to be raised up from the Feet, yet at leastwise it never
invades without Swooning, and never takes away the Senses, unless it shall
first sore shake or trouble the sensitive Soul it self, and the principal
Faculies thereof; and the proportion of the commotion should determine or limit
the proportion of the fit: So that although its occasional nest be reckoned to
be in the Head or Feet, yet the Epileptical fit does never depart, the which
leaves not Thirst behind it, and by that Sign it bewrays that it had pitched
its Fold in the Stomach, and that the sensitive Soul was smitten in that part
especially, where in it planted the thirsting Power. But seeing the
Falling Sickness does prostrate all the powers of the Mind with an
Unsensibleness, Convulsion and Beating attending on them: It is for a certain
Sign, that the sensitive Soul it self is pierced in its native and wonted
place; and that it is there and from thence the Governness of all the Senses
and principal Faculties: Yea and seeing such a spoiling of the Faculties does
not happen as it were by hands or degrees, but that there is a commotion of all
of them at once by one only stroke; therefore the government of those
Faculties, is denoted to be smitten in its Center, and the Members farther
remote from the Stomach, are discovered by a secondary Passion, as to suffer an
onset of that Disease: So in like manner also, not to possess from a property
those vital Powers which they loose. Neither let any one be amazed or think
this a vain kind of Doctrine, although I shall place the Majesty of the
Duumvirate within the slenderness of the Membrane of the Stomach: For let that
thing be proper to the Soul, that it is detained in a place as it were without
a place. Therefore the Epilepsie painfully and at unwares invading all the
Superiority of the sensitive Soul, sitting in the Stomach, does argue the very
seat of the Soul to be there: But not that Epileptical onsets do happen from
Fumes or Vapors slowly lifted upwards: The which I have also many times
elsewhere, plentifully confirmed concerning Catarrhes. For those Eclipses do
happen, no otherwise, than as if a hole be suddenly stopped; through which
Light otherwise does beam forth into an obscure place. For the Light is
suddenly interrupted and cease: So that that thing is so natural to an
Apoplexy, that among the Germans and Dutch, it has obtained the Name of a
Stroke; the which notwithstanding, being new, I have many times vanquished, by
procuring Vomit, or by the more strong Stomatical and Aromatical things being
Distilled.

Furthermore, in as much as in fits of the Falling Sickness, all Sense, not
likewise motion, fails: Yet that does not therefore argue, that the sensitive
Soul is not the Fountain

But in as much as an unvoluntary convulsive motion does even still remain;
that is not: to be attributed so much to the Soul, as to the singular Life of
the Muscles: The which indeed

But in an Apoplexy and Swooning, even the motion of the Muscles also, does
plainly fail, except the motion of those between the Ribs; because then the
sensitive Soul does Intelligible World, who does least of all fall under our
Understanding: For neither is the most Glorious Father of Lights, and his whole
Commonwealth, wholly unknown unto us, according to the Testimony of Truth to
Nicodemus, but also the Essence, Thingliness, Direction, and Distribution of
the vital Powers, do exceed our Capacity.

For how astonishable is the privation of Understanding, Memory, yea or of
Speech only; especially Motion, Sense, Appetite, yea and the integrity of
Health remaining? And to lay the Ax unto the root of the tree) we are intent
for the obtaining of Universal Arcanum's or Secrets, which may conserve,
preserve; plant, and build up the Life in the very Fountain of Life; the Author
of Death and Diseases, no less than of Health. For I now have regard to the
frail Soul, but not to the incorporeal and immortal Mind: The which we believe
to be Originally inspired alike, and alike perfect in all. And therefore
Conditions, Inclinations, Domestic or Foreign, Mild or Fierce; Tractable or
Teachable, Humble or Proud, are instilled into us by the Mortal Soul: Wherein
as in a Subject or Place, locally disposing the Inclinations of varieties, are
unfolded; which otherwise, from the Mind or Image of God are naturally banished.

Therefore sleep was not in man naturally in respect of his mind, but was
afterward

Yet Sleep was sent into Adam before the Fall: Not so much for that he stood in
need Adam, they have yet retained Dreams, That the Old Men shall Dream Dreams;
the Young Men shall Prophecy: And Night unto Night shall show Knowledge. For
the sleepifying Power which was sent into the Mind before the Fall, and the
same also being after a sort free from the wedlock of the Mortal Soul, would
after some sort draw it into its Original Prerogative of Prophesying, unless
the darkness of the Soul sprung up, and put in place, did obscure the same.

But while I declaim the Stomach to be the Inn of the sensitive Soul, and for
that cause do dedicate the sink of Diseases to the Stomach: I have indeed
considered Occasional Duodenum (which is the Prison deputed for the
Jurisdiction of the Gaul, and Pylorus) and most troublesome to Anatomists for
its composure of Vessels and Glandules, as in the Archeal sheathes, no less of
that which is inbred, as of that which is inflowing: To wit, that through the
conspiring distemperature whereof, the sensitive Soul is diversely disturbed,
and all the Vital Faculties, the Chambermaids hereof, to be co-shaken, and so
the same being weakened, that an Army of Diseases does arise, as well those
Radical or Chronical, as those soon hastening; as I long since have known,
being thoroughly instructed by many Experiences.

So that I saw Hunger, and unextinguishable Thirst to proceed not so properly
from the sharpness of the matter provoking, as from the very fury of the
sensitive Soul: For otherwise

Now even as the Government of the Stomach has been enlarged on; So also it
has been shown, that the sensitive Soul does there abide, as in the first or
chief Kitchen of the Meats, and that the Life does there Inhabit: For truly the
most potent Powers of transchanging Pride also has often made men mad. I have
also known others who having suffered Reproach, and not being able to revenge
the same, have suddenly fallen into an Apepsia or Unconcoction, into the
straights of an Asthma, and into Beatings, Perplexities of Anguishes, and
Oppressions of the Heart. Others who from a sudden sense of Reproach or
Contempt, have presently rushed into an Apoplexy. And likewise I have known
those that have been wearied with long Grief, have violently rushed into a
Dropsy, Jaundise, and Tumors of the Spleen. Likewise very many of both Sexes,
who from sudden Anger have departed into an Apoplexy; but others who have gone
into diverse headlong Griefs of Contractures.

The Fabrics of which Diseases are manifestly felt about the Orifice of the
Stomach: For therefore a certain small Fever, as it were a Diarie or Daily
one, does precede the

Wherefore also I have taught before, that how much soever Vulnerary Potions
may restrain the framing of corrupt Pus, and fear of Accidents, in the utmost
part of the Foot, yet

Which things the School of Medicine has not hitherto known, although they are
the Foundations of Medicinal Art: Because they are those things which do not
only respect

But so far as it respects the choice of Medicines, it has listed me to
wander through

For the Stone for broken Bones is of a late Invention, which owes its Name
unto the Cure of a broken Bone: But it is unconquered by Fires, nor Calcinable;
but notable in

From hence, First of all it plainly appears, That on the Digestion and care of
the Stomach, do the Cares and Governments of the Sixth Digestion depend
throughout its whole.

2. That there is no necessity for a Medicine to be derived unto the place
affected.

3. That a Medicine only by touching at the Archeus of the Stomach, is able to
Cure remote Diseases in the Body.

4. That there is no need, that for to Cure, the Agent does touch the remote
Patient.

5. That as the Stone for broken Bones, or the Stone of Crabs does finish its
Cure in the Stomach: after the same manner also do Purgative Medicines, and all
other Medicines whatsoever operate.

CHAP. LXXIV. The Squadron of Diseases according to their Occasional Causes.
A Primary A Secondary Diseasie Being in an inordinate Archeus. For whether it
be Primarily raised up from the Idea of a Man, or does immediately arise from
the Idea of the Archeus, it always at length Retires into the Inn of the
Archeus. Things Received, Things cast in by Witches. Things inspired by
Endemicks. Things received by violent Invaders. Things taken In Drink. In Meat.
In Poison. In Medicine. Things Heteroclital or of an irregular kind. The
Torture of the Night. An unequal Strength. Barrenness. Things Retained. Things
left, or Excrements in the 1, 2, 3, or 6 Digestion. Things transchanged in the
1, 2, 3, or 6 Digestion. Things transmitted from one Digestion into another.

Mention is made of these by the Ancients, under the name of an Abstracted
Quality, or Relation of Terms; and so they are only acknowledged by way of a
Name, as they have acknowledged an Occasional, that is, a Remote Cause: By
Reason whereof, I have commanded this Division to remain in their retained
Sir-names.

CHAP. LXXV. A Division of Diseases.
1. The Essence of a Disease is Decyphered by way of Repetition. 2. The Method
observed in Explaining. 3. The Division of a Disease. 4. What Things may be
called things received. 5. What Received Injected things are. 6. What Things
Retained are.

HItherto I have spoken of Diseases as it were in stead of a Preface: Now
afterward I will touch at the Scheme of the same: For a Division also affords
Members, which being explained by course, do bring Light thereunto. Truly every
Disease (the which being once spoken may suffice for the future) is framed
indeed by the Archeus in his own

For there are no more, as neither any fewer: Because every Disease draws its
Beingness from a diseasie Idea of quiddity or thingliness. By consequence
therefore, there are

In the next place also, there are as many diseasie Idea's in us, as there are
Heirs of Potestative or Facultative Beings: To wit, as when a too violent
solutive Medicine is taken: For although it self be soon ejected through the
Paunch; yet the Venom of the same cease not to remain domestical in the
Stomach and Bowels: To wit, so that a stinking Flux does persevere even until
Death. So also besides, some Poisons having lost their primitive matter, do
sometimes by a lingering slaughter, and long one being left on Posterity,
mournfully slay them: And as well, if that be received from without, as if
begotten within.

Finally, so also Hereditary Diseases, and their Consorts, are seminally
co-bred in us, issuing from their own Idea's. So indeed the Gout, Falling-Evil,
etc. do without a visible matter of Filths, unfold their Harmonies, and are
prolonged for Life: Because they have obtained Idea's to be confirmed in the
Archeus, or to be as it were intimately allied, and adhering unto the implanted
Spirit the Governor: And the which therefore do molest only at their set
Terms and Periods, native unto them: Which things being laid down, and now
known, I consequently say, that in the Expedition of the dividing of Diseases,
I will follow the variety of occasional Causes: Not indeed that I would even
from the Beginning invert the Names and every Conclusion or Limitation of
Diseases, unto the much tiresomness of the Readers, who should either hardly to
be understood, as if the occasional Cause were the Disease it self: But rather
that a Disease as an invisible Being, may be understood to be occasionally
stamped by an External matter.

Therefore, First of all, I appoint two general kinds of Diseases: To wit,

Those Received, and Retained.

But those things which are Received, are Injected, Conceived, Inspired, or at
length Taken. Which Four, I will first expound by course: And then I will soon
after Treat of things retained, as well in respect of the Body, and
Distributions, as of Digestions, and Transmutations.

Things Received therefore, are those which do traitorously enter into us from
without, do disturb or affect the Archeus, so as that from Counsel hurtful to
himself, he frames a

But things Retained do proceed from our Vice and Defect: For Superfluities are
for

CHAP. LXXVI. Things Received which are Injected or Cast in.
1. Why the Schools speak nothing of things Injected. 2. A Three fold Rout of
Atheists is here found among Christians. 3. The Balance of Karichterus. 4. A
persuasion of the Devil. 5. How much the Devil can act in Diabolical exercises.
6. Eight Positions brought hither. 7. The Devil has not a free, but a
constrained Will from his depravedness. 8. Satan miserably deludes his. 9.
Diabolical means do operate by the force of a Covenant only, but they have not
on operative force in Nature. 10. An objected Argument is Solved. 11. The top
of Operation in Bewitching Effects. 12. Why the Devil is Impotent. 13. The
Devil can only freely will Evil. 14. The Act of Man is proved in Bewitching
Works. 15. The Prerogative of Man in Operating. 16. What the Desire may Operate
in this Thing. 17. Things Buried or Hung up, how they proceed not, the first
Enterer being unknown. 18. In vile little living Creatures, there is a
Directive Power of their own Will. 19. After what manner Enchantments are
transferred by a naked touching. 20. Why a Repercussion or Reflection does
reach to a concoived Enchanting Verse, or Miscievous Act.

BUt I thus call Received things Injected: they are those which are as it were
Spiritual Wonders, committed by the co-workman of Satan. Of these things the
Ancients are silent; Because they are those who also have neglected most
Treatises of

Divines indeed and Lawyers, have handled their own Examinations; but the
Schools of Medicine I accuse of neglect: For I judge that to be done, because
the evil Spirit is the Prince of this World, who therefore has every where
obtained his Patrons in the Chaires, Courts and Palaces, whereby himself sits
as it were President: And the whole World is in very deed placed in Malignity:
For some of these being the more inclinable

And then others according to the Decree of the Holy Scriptures, do indeed
believe Devils and Infernal Guardians to be: Yet that they are not Cacogeneal
or of an evil property or nature to Humane society, but rather fellowly and
near friends: And so they esteem bewitching Juggles, for deceitful Fables,
melancholy Trifles, and old Wives Dreams.

There are also Lastly, others among the Learned, who being admonished by the
Authority of the Holy Scriptures, of the Works of the Devil, also of the
Enchantments of Witches or Sorceresses, do admit of them indeed: Yet they
esteem them to be mere Arts, nor to be condemned by any other Title, but that
they are thoroughly taught by Satan, and are only Instituted for evil: And
these are the most audacious in all wickedness, and at this day cloak Faith
with Hypocrisy.

I therefore since the days of Plato, do behold three Patrons of Witches to
have now constantly flourished among Athiests: And I guess that so cursed an
Infection has not hitherto persisted, but by the same president: In the mean
time, no Physicians that I know of, except one only Karichterus, has handled
this matter: Who indeed has proposed the manner of making, and some remedies
of curing, but not a little suspected of vain superstition: Neither also has
he touched at the Theory, because he seemed to have been ignorant thereof.
Physicians in the mean time, being greatly afraid least they should be
accounted guilty of a Magical Crime, while they should by a strong fortune, be
reckoned to have conferred a help (which they know not) on their Neighbor,
under so great straits of miseries.

Yet that privy shift, has been commonly persuaded by the subtilty of Satan,
that Scribes and Pharisees, do forsake them in their greatest desolations: For
none is otherwise reputed to have carefully heeded the Disease, or to have
known the structure of the same, for which he describes a remedy: And none is
believed to have given poison to drink, who enquireth into the Causes, and
discerns the remedies: And least of all, is he judged to have inflicted a
wound, who being sent for, has set to his helping hand compassionately, and
freely: As neither is he a Thief, who discovers the dens and counsels of
Thieves: Far therefore by that privy shift, that it should be accounted for a^
infamous thing, to have known the means, progress, ends, and cure of, or
medicine against enchantments; seeing these things ought to be known, and had
from elsewhere than from the Teacher the Devil: For seeing the Devil is
restrained within the Court of Nature, we are not to despair, but that the
most bountiful Jesus, has substituted remedies for so cruel maladies, unto his
own Glory, who has never been wanting to his own Goodness, Glory, and Wisdom.
A good Man therefore proceeds in a strait way, neither does he look behind him,
nor cares he what the World does judge of him; to wit, most of whose
judgments are foolish, and false: For it is sufficient for a good Man, that
the hinderer, or destroyer of a Malady, is void of crime.

Therefore according to my capacity, I will show how far the Devil is concerned
in the

1. That every vital Form is a vital Light of its own Body.

2. That although the Forms of inanimate things do differ from Souls in the
degree, and disposition of that Light: At leastwise they all do agree in
something which is essentially lightsome.

3. That by reason of their Light, they immediately touch, and pierce each
other: And so Forms being connexed, do operate on or into each other, even as
one Light does divide another in the midst; for the Sunbeams being collected
by a Glass into the Crest, for although they shall co-unite into a point; yet
they again proceeding from thence, those which were in the Glass on its right
side, even unto the Crest, do afterward pass through it, being rebounded in the
Glass unto its left side, yet they keep the identity or sameliness of the
former Light undefiled; as neither therefore by reason of the penetration made
in the Crest, do they labor with contagion: The which I have elsewhere
mechanically demonstrated by a Figure.

4. That therefore formal Lights, which are diverse in the general, or
particular kind, do immediately pierce, and communicatively operate, without
wearisomenesse, on each other like Light.

5. That all the forms of Bodies are true Lights, yet not substantial ones,
although Entitated or made Beings, for the reasons elsewhere alleged
concerning neutral Creatures: But the mind of Man alone is a Formal, Immortal,
and Un-obliteral substance: In this respect also it operates with a
superiority, touches at, and pierces every other form inferior unto it (as
elsewhere concerning the searching out of sciences) by that title especially
recieved into Faith, and Nature, because it is the true Image of God, and the
Kingdom of God inhabits therein: And who therefore has put all things under
its feet.

6. That therefore the evil Spirit, has not a power from his Creation of
reaching any Form, that in it he can perfect his own will by the absolute
command of his Beck: For he is a Spirit abstracted from a corporeal Being, and
bound, and forthwith after Sin, a most miserable Scoffer or Mocker.

7. But only a local motive power of Bodies, has remained unto him, and the
motion whereof does turn to the hurt of Mortals: For neither can he beat down
one only window of himself, without the help of the liberty of his Clients.

8. For neither does he move the Elements by touching (seeing that he wants
extreme parts whereby he may touch Bodies, not indeed those which he takes to
him) whereby he may lay hold of, or move any thing; but by his Beck only, he
moves with a beholdable Aspect, such as is, that of the Stars on Meteours, by
Idea's, or of our will on its own Organs: Which mutual power, as it was
naturally put into the Angelical Nature; So also it is left to the Devil.

Indeed he has a native Blas, whereby he raises up Storms of the Air, and
ragings of the Sea, as often as God permits him.

For First of all, the Devil is so evil, and our Enemy, that he cannot will
good even in the least: Wherefore neither has he a free will of willing in
evil things: But in good

For otherwise if those means in themselves prescribed by him, should have in
themselves any force of operating (which he boasts of among his own) from a
natural necessity also,

Neither is that argument of value; Satan prescribes vain superstitious Words
to his,

Seeing that the Devil has not an Ideal, Semminal, and Sealing power, as Man
has from the dignity of the divine Image, whereby the Bruits, etc. are put
under his feet. Therefore the Devil borrows these mental, and operative Idea's
of Witches, the which he can seal in Filths and Poisons. He therefore being
cursed, and wholly most miserable, and forsaken by the Grace of God, is by
himself no effecter of the same Works, unless

1. Because he has not a formative faculty of an operative Idea.

2. Neither has he an immediate touching of access, and much less an entrance
unto formal Lights (whereon indeed, nevertheless, all the properties of things
are inscribed by a figurative Idea) that he may hereby act.

3. Yea neither has he any free power of acting, and much less unto the hurts
of those who do not obey him.

4. For he being wholly most proud, would not ask a Permission from God, that
he may hurt the Man that does not obey him, knowing that the infinite goodness
will never grant this thing unto him; Although he now and then may use the evil
Spirit as an executioner, as in the history of Job.

For we must note that thing seriously in this place; that in Hell and among
all the Damned, there is no honor, or sanctifying of the divine Name, but a
continual cursing. For the Dead shall not praise thee O Lord, nor all them
which go down into the Pit: Yet in or at the name of Jesus, the knees of all
the inferior Citizens are bowed: To wit, as often as God makes use of the evil
Spirit as an Executioner; so often that is enjoined him by a command from
above, of trembling at the name of Jesus; and indeed that command being heard,
the whole infernal Pit does unwillingly bow its knees: For otherwise, that
which is wont to be said, that the Devil by the permission of God does hurt
Man: That must be understood to be granted unto him, by the aforesaid command
of God, as to a Tormentor, or by a mutual operative natural power, which God
has conferred on his own Image.

But the Devil himsef, the most miserable of Creatures, can do nothing of
himself but will Evil: Because whatsoever departs from God, that is Evil, and
therefore cannot but

1. A Man is able by his own perturbations, to hurt his own Prudence, Health,
and Life.

2. Those tempests which are of the mind, do not remain the Beings of Reason,
but falling seminally into a matter, they imprint the constant Idea's of their
own perturbations, which things are proved by a Woman with Child being
affrighted at a Mouse, who if she apply her hand to any place, she presently
seals a hairy Mouse on the same part in her Young: Yea if such perturbations
are fore-timely made, they do oft-times transform the whole Embryo into a
Monster.

3. But whatsoever is natural, and ordinary to a Woman with Child, that none
doubts, but that it may be natural to a Witch not great with Child; Indeed
that she can form any kind of Idea.

What Impressions therefore, or what Idea's, and sealing Seeds, the evil Spirit
raises up in his, he also borrows from thence, and imprints the same on filths
which he prostitutes or makers of Poison: But not because they offer Poisons to
be drunk only, but rather because of not Poisons, they do make Poisons: but
those Poisons are applied, as well by a local motive faculty proper and free to
the Devil; as also because they are transferred unto the intended object, by
desire only, being the mover and directer: As hereafter more at large. The
Witch therefore hangs up, buries, drinks up those filths defiled by her through
an Ideal Being; yea and anoints her own hands, or washes them with those
filths, and seasons or besmeares them with cursed Poisons, that by a
co-touching, she may transfer those Poisons into the object which she would
hurt: For truly those seminal, Monstrous, and poisonous Idea's, seeing they are
now the Citizens of another and foreign Archeus, introduced into the Body of
the enchanted, and so being without their proper place and subject; the Archeus
of the enchanted is forthwith defiled and corrupted by them. Wherefore seeing
the Enemy of Nature cannot of himself complete the very application (for else
all the miserable enchanted Mortals should fall under the

Therefore indeed that hostile Mocker, requires a touching at the Body to be
enchanted, or at leastwise at something which may primarily be affected, and
at length of enchanting the Body, that the Idea's recieved may act on that
thing by a Sympathetical, and Natural force (such as is that whereby
Chalcanthum or Vitriol does naturally cure an absent wound) and afterward on
the Body, a Sympathetical commerce whereof, such natural effluxes do hold as
means.

Lastly, things buried under the threshold, or hung up, do hurt; yea and do
unfold their poisonous cruelty on the first entrer only, without a co-touching
of the Witch at the That all things are put under his feet.

Wherefore likewise, Witches do by a simple touching, or stroke, transfer their
enchantments into the object, but after a far more gross manner, than that
aforesaid; and therefore or any other Efflux: But moreover also, they do of
necessity touch or strike the object it self. But neither have I brought
Sympathetical things hither, that I might defame the same, as I have
demonstrated by those, the manner of application unto a mean: But rather that I
may show that Witches do use natural manners and means, otherwise accustomed
in the Cramp-fish and Basiliske; that I may extinguish all hope of diabolical
deceit from Sympathetical things. And indeed it is manifest by natural things,
how falsely

CHAP. LXXVII. These things which follow, the Author left more imperfect,
undigested, and uncorrected than those aforegoing.
SInce it has already been demonstrated, that every Disease does consist in
the Life of the sensitive Soul, and in the Archeus the vital Organ hereof, but
that this Archeus does conclude in him a unity and identity; hereafter from
hence also we must teach, that curing and restoring from all Diseases does
consist in the Unity of a Remedy. But the Schools of the Humourists, will
argue on the contrary, and will say, etc.

Now therefore a necessity of recovery, from the peace of occasional Causes
with the Life, being proved: and so that almost all universal Secrets do
prevail unto the aforesaid appeasing and pacifying of the vital Archeus: Now
next it behooves me to descend unto those very Arcanum's or Secrets; and not
only to hand them forth by denominating of them; but also so far as charity
toward my Neighbor does permit, to describe the same unto the skilful lovers
of Medicine: But it is not lawful to make them openly manifest, that the
unskilful, and such as only gape after a little advantage or gain, may dispose
of them, and commit them to the Apothecary and his wife. God forbid! for I have
been better instructed, etc.

I will therefore speak, so far as the order of charity does permit, about the
revelations of Arcanums.

First of all therefore, Nature has produced by the goodness of God, singular
or particular remedies in the vegetable Monarchy, whereby Diseases also are
singularly or particularly N
restored and cured; which hitherto through a sloth of diligent searching, and
a covetous desire, and envy of the Devil, have remained hidden. For so the
Elixir of propriety according to Paracelsus, cures the Asthma,
Falling Sickness, Apoplexy, Palsy, Atrophia or Consumption for lack of
Nourishment, Tabes or Consumption of the Lungs, etc. But because that Elixir is
not prepared but by a most skilful Philosopher, who not by thinking, but by
knowing, is perfectly, and moreover doubly chosen hereunto, and so has
obtained the title of an Adeptist: Hence therefore out of compassion, I will
unfold a middle way. Take of clear Aloes, of the Best Myrrh, and of the best
Saffron, of each an ounce, for if thou shall take more, thou shall find it to
be done in vain: Let the two former be exactly beaten; but the Saffron, because
it is not beaten unless it be dried, let it rather be made into a round figure
by pownsing; let them be put in a most capacious and strong Glass, and sealed
with the melted neck of the Glass; and let it be distilled with a moderate
heat, that the vessel burst not asunder, until thou shall see the whole lump to
have grown together in the bottom, and a clear oil, with a water, to be
circulated in the sides of the Glass; then let the neck of the Glass be opened,
and pour into a pint of Cinnamon water, and distill it by moist sand, whereon
let boiling water be poured by degrees, until not any thing does any longer
drop out of the beak of the Alembick: and with this Medicine, I have presently
dissolved as well a Quartane Ague, as a continual Fever: So that he who over
night, had received his Sacro-sainted Viaticum, and the extreme unction of
Oil, has had me his Guest about his bed at dinner.

Nature has also produced in the Sub-terranean, or mineral Monarchy, a certain
Mineral, the which for its singularity, is called by Paracelsus, the first or
masculine Mettallus. The which from its Metallic disposition, is of necessity
clothed with Metallic Mercury and Sulphur; to wit, of a liquid Mercury not
adhering to the fingers, and of a Sulphur burnable with a skie-coloured flame:
But this Sulphur is distilled with its corrosive, and so often cohobated or
imbibed by pouring on it its own liquor, until it pass through the Alembick in
the form of a red Oil; which Oil is then at length most exactly cleansed from
every whit of its corrosive, not indeed prepared by a separation of its salt,
and Mercury; but anatically or unhurtfully reduced wholly into the form of an
Oil: For that thing or matter, as it is as yet oily, is not to be altered by
the whole power of the sensitive Soul, or to be applied to the Life: Wherefore
it ought to be transchanged into a Mercurial juice, which Paracelsus teaches,
and calls the Wine of Life; because it does not cure Diseases after the
manner of other Arcanum's, by a cleansing away and banishment of every hurtful
matter; besides it renewes the strength being lost in the Body in general, and
restores the inequalities of the strength: And therefore neither is it in vain
called by Paracelsus, the Essence of the Members; indeed the whole Spire and
top of hope for long Life. But how much Light I have brought unto the Writings
of Paracelsus, he alone has known who understands Paracelsus with me: But
seeing that Sulphur is not translated, that it may be turned into arterial
Blood, yea and restore and renew the implanted Spirit of the Members, although
it be in it self the top of the Wonders of Nature; yet then it does only as it
were pass through the two former digestions, and does not satisfy its calling,
for which it shines with so famous Endowments: And so even from hence it is
easy to be seen, that long Life is not but for choice or chosen Men, nor
indeed for all of them, not so much because the youth of Princes does shorten
the thread of their Life in fleshly lust, and pleasures, and so that a remedy
for long Life is received, and applied to the Life after the manner of the
receiver: But especially, because Adeptists are wanting, to whom alone it is
given to unmask these kind of Secrets from their husks. I suppose indeed that
this is a masculine Metal, because it does easily suffer its Sulphur to be
sequestered from it; and this separated Sulphur is dissolved in the Oil of
Cinnamon or Mutmeg, or in the Oil, which drops out of Turpentine, till that by
boiling it is coagulated into the best Rosin: But at leastwise, although the
Sulphur thus dissolved, has notable virtues; yet because it draws a stinking
Odor, and reserveth a resistance of the dissolved Sulphur; neither can it pass
through unto the inmost parts, but can only act as it were in passing through,
and by its touching stir up by the way a superficial remembrance of its gift:
Therefore it more differs from the wine of Life, than a Carbuncle does from a
flint: Yet if that melted Sulphur be so united in the Oil of the Spice, that
(however stinking) it shall pass through an Alembick, and afterward be after a
due manner circulated with its Alcaly or fixed Salt, and at length does pass
into a volatile Elixir of Salt, it does after some sort imitate the faculties
and virtues of the wine of Life, and Essence of the Members: For truly, that
Elixir being rectified into the best Spirit of Wine, does loose all its stink,
and resume something of its natural or proper endowment; that it at leastwise
takes away difficult and Chronical Diseases; yet it does not ascend unto the
highest perfect act of the Bowels, that it may be the renewed Essence of the
Members.

CHAP. LXXVIII. In Words, Herbs, and Stones there is great Virtue.
THere is a place in the holy Scriptures which takes Stones for mineral
Bodies: Words indeed so far as commanding from a supernatural Power, they do
command Creatures; the which because they are subject, they do also obey: And
then the virtue of Herbs is that of Medicines, but it does not comprehend
Herbie Meats. There is therefore, a medicinal faculty of Plants, Simple indeed;
but most excelling; so that for the most part it ascends into a degree of
Poysonsomness, Because it exceeds the ampleness of our Nature, and therefore
also is troublesome or offensive unto us: For Pot Herbs, Pulses, and corny
Plants, ought to be wholly subdued and dissolved in the Stomach, that is, in
the seat of the Soul, into which while they light with unbroken virtues, they
do also by their new Hospitality, oppress the same with their Laws: For so the
seat it self does as yet labor about rude Simples, and in operating does
undergo the Crudities, Damages, and Troubles of entertained Vegetables: For in
this respect, whatsoever is not rightly subdued in the Stomach, after its
aforesaid troubles, is commanded out by the Bowels as an unprofitable and
hurtful excrement: Wherefore the more cruel Plants while they do not promise
nourishment, nor are directly drawn into meats or foods; if they shall not
notably hurt, at leastwise they are totally sequestered, and are driven forth
with labor, and anguishes; the which has hitherto plainly appeared in a
Quartane Ague, which has notably deluded the promised help of Physicians, and
hope of Medicines: For although the occasional matter of a Quartane, does stick
only about the Spleen, and in the neighboring places of the Stomach: Yet the
Medicines of Vegetables have not yet come unto the threshold of a Quartane: In
the mean time, the more stronger Vegetables, seeing they have obtained degrees
beyond the strength of our Nature, they are for the most part for that cause,
Despised, or Gelded; and so by corrective means are plainly alienated, and do
degenerate, and so pass over into a foreign Family: Many also have in vain
attempted, to separate the Poisonous Power from the appropriated ones, lurking
under them. However it is at this day accustomed to be, those Medicines are the
more strong, horrid, troublesome, neither are they admitted into our more
inward parts; because they rise up against, and weaken or defile our vital
Faculties, and do every way bring with them Anguishes as Companions: For
although they depart, not into nourishments in us, nor are the more inwardly
admitted than to enter the threshold it self; yet by their only touching, and
naked passage, yea and as it were by a deaf defilement of aspect, they alter
the Archeus, and subject and snatch away this Archeus into their own
client-ship: This is the cause why the more strong remedies of Vegetables are
for the most part suspected of cruelty, and poysonsomness: Which things are as
yet more clearly beheld in mineral secrets, and the more profound Medicines:
Because they are those which perform their Offices, and attain the scopes of
their Endowments, by no co-mixture of them, but as it were by aspect alone. For
so Mothers do dip a piece of woollen cloth in a comixture of Argent-vive or
Quicksilver, and patch it up between the girdle or circle of Garments, knowing
that although Quicksilver does not evaporate any thing out of it self (for it
is a thing so homogeneal, that it is not to be divided into a heterogeneal
part, and that which is unlike to it self) yet that it does hinder the
presence, and generation of Lice throughout the whole Body. I have also
described, after what manner common Argentvive may be reduced into a most white
or Snowie lump, if the spirit of Vitriol be distilled from it: The which Spirit
indeed, is coagulated upon Mercury, and is transchanged into an Alume, but
separable, by washing or cleansing, from the Argent-vive: To wit, which
Argent-vive becomes a yellow Powder, which easily returns into its ancient
Quicksilver, and of equal weight with it self: So indeed, the whole spirit of
Vitriol being in it self most sharp, is by a bare touching of the Mercury, and
without any radical co-mixture of them both, converted into an aluminous Salt;
and that shall be done a thousand times, yet it loses nothing of the weight,
and nature of Argent-vive: For Argent-vive, does without any participation of
it self, or from it self; yea and without any radical co-mixture from it self,
change whatsoever of a Sulphurous Spirit it shall touch; which radical or
beaming co-mixture of Argent-vive, is as yet more to be admired: To wit, if
Argent-vive be steeped in a great quantity of common Water; for this Water,
although it does not sup up any the least quantity of the Quicksilver into it
self, or is not able to convert it unto its own Nature, Yet it borrows a
property, not likewise a substance, from the Quicksilver, so as that such
Water being drunk, does kill all Worms and Ascarides, also those which exist
where that Drink never comes; Because it is that which is soon wholly snatched
into urin; and that Water becomes stronger against Worms, if it shall once
boil with the Quicksilver or Argent-vive: So one only ounce of Quicksilver
shall be able a thousand times to infect a measure of Water, and yet remain in
its ancient weight, and property. For so the Schools also do do against their
wills, perfectly learn, that some Agents do freely, always, and with unwearied
forces, act without a passion, or re-action of their Patients, and the same
weight of themselves always remaining: For Argent-vive does act on the Water,
and imprints its own Character in it; yet it does not likewise re-suffer any
thing from the Water. It is manifest therefore, that a certain Medicinal virtue
is transferred, and does change its natural subject, and departs into a
foreign object, as it were only by its Beam or Aspect: Yet so, that although
the foreign object does attain a foreign faculty or virtue for it self, yet
the acting and in-spiring principle, does not loose or slacken any thing of its
former strength, or weight: Indeed that is done without any Suffering,
Diminishing, Changing, Weakening, or Interchangable course of the Argent-vive:
Surely the example produced in this place, serves for the celebration of an
argument, concerning almost an infinite virtue of Remedies for the future:
which thing, after that it had been often and diversely drawn under experience
in Minerals, it at length perfectly taught me, that perhaps no Mortals
heretofore, had as yet clearly and inwardly beheld, in what manner the more
abstruse or secret Remedies might operate, and that indeed without their
dissolution, or destruction, without their penetration, inward admission,
co-mixture, and changing, they do also freely act aloof of on the stupefied, or
enraged Archeus, as if it were only by their aspect, in beaming or darting
forth of their virtues produced in a mean; their former weight and properties
being as yet retained, and unchanged: And so those Arcanums do testify, that
they are akin to the infinite Goodness, while as they do by degrees disperse
their almost, and as it were infinite virtues. Wherefore Physicians shall not
remain unpunished, while as the poor shall at some time mournfully complain, at
the last Judgment, that they were neglected, who might easily and by the way
have been cured without any charges. Therefore Arcanums can never depart into
nourishment, because they keep their own ends, as those things which were not
ordained for Meats, but for Medicines, and which do remain Medicines, although
taken within the Body: For they begin in the Stomach (the which I have profesly
elsewhere demonstrated to be the seat of the Soul) to unfold or expose the
direct Beam of their own Faculties, and their endowed Virtue, and to which end
they were ordained of God: Whence at length, the bedewed beaming virtue being
drawn in by the Archeus, is dispersed into the whole Body, and health thereupon
succeeding is greedily received. So indeed these more universal Remedies being
administered, cures do happen, such as I have delivered to happen in the
Fountain of Nature, and to be due to the same, and such as Paracelsus has
promised, and afterward Butler put in execution, I being a beholder, to wit,
with the least application of a co-fermenting. Surely, after that this
speculation attracted me under it self by a more piercing or inward
contemplation, I as it were knew most clearly and visually, that in occasional
Causes, and in excrementitious Products, filths indeed did stick, they being
the awakeners of peculiar Diseases: Yet I consider the whole Disease it self,
and its Remedies to be in the Archeus, to wit, altered, or appeased: And so
that with the least touching at, shaking, darting, yea only by radiation or
beaming, or illumination (so that they shall in the seat of the Soul touch at
the sensitive Life) Cures are perfected and completed, no regard being had
unto occasional Causes: And that thing I do more powerfully behold in the
Sulphurous Remedies of Minerals, to wit, in the Sulphur of Venus or Copper, of
Stibium, and especially in the Sulphur of Glaura Augurellus; which Nymph does
hitherto want any other proper name. For these sort of Sulphurs, because they
are at a farther distance from man's Nature than the whole band of Vegetables,
and do in the mean time obtain famous natural Endowments from the Giver: So
also they do most fully and stubbornly resist, that they may not decline by the
digestive Faculty, into the Commonwealth of nourishments, and therefore they
keep their natural Powers free and unbroken; to wit, the Crasis or constitutive
temperature of Minerals remains entire, and is the more fit to disperse its
own Beam into the Duumvirate the seat of the Soul. For so Mercurius
Diaphoreticus, does attain the ultimate scope of its perfect act, by the
redness of an ascending Sulphur, whereunto the Sulphur of the Mercury is joined
by an undissolvable Union: For in this respect, the Sulphurs of Minerals do
under the Vulcan, obtain the utmost completing of the intent of Physicians. I
therefore exhort Young Beginners, that they perfectly learn to spoil Sulphurs,
of their foreign and poisonous Faculty: To wit, under the custody whereof a
vital fire is hidden, most pleasingly bringing the Archeus into the desired
aims. Indeed there are some Sulphurs, unto whom, they being corrected and
perfected, the whole band of Diseases does hearken, because they are those,
whose Plurality is contracted into the unity of the Archeus, as it were into a
fighting, or clutched Fist: By this means we have seen Madnesses, Apoplexies,
Falling-sicknesses, Palseys, giddinesses of the Head, Asthma's, Dropsies,
Atrophia's, and cruel Defects, to be annihilated in the very seat of the Soul,
and combined Duumvirate; indeed to the amazement of Nature her self. In Stones
therefore, a great virtue is declared to be by the holy Scriptures, which is
hitherto hidden as well in the University, as in the Chemical Schools, until
that Kings and Commonwealths shall look into the reformation of Schools: it
repents them of their labor, who hope craftily to get gain by an abuse: They
know not, nor desire not, nor will not labor, who deride those that are
studious of Virtues; for if ever heretofore, now at leastwise, the whole World
being placed in malignity, has deterred my Pen least I should scatter Pearls
before Swine. I will show to our Sons, as the Lion by his Paw: Extract thou the
Sulphur of Antimony, which scarce differs from the common sight, but that it
inclines a little unto greenness: Make this Cinnabar as yet six times, thou
shall sublime it by it self, that the sublimation may serve for the reverbery
of Life: Take half an ounce of this Cinnabar, being bruised or beaten, hang it
up for twenty four hours in a hogs head of Wine, whereof one only spoonful
being taken, for some days, thou shall admire at the effect; and the same
Cinnabar is sufficient for many hundred hogs heads, being again equivalent in
virtue, if it be repeatedly re-sublimed.

I have Ingeniously spoken some things concerning the great virtue of Words,
the which I more admire, than apply. The use of Herbs indeed is very well
known, yet their valor or virtue is not sufficiently known, as neither
suitably circumcised: And that not only by reason of an ignorance of their
Powers, but especially by reason of an un-harmonius suiting of Diseasie Causes,
the defects of the knowledge of Causes unto their effect, and the ridiculous
Lessons of Complexions and Degrees, and fabulous Dimensions, which others
before me have sufficiently hissed out: For I do not here call to mind the
thousand confusions of Simples, and wastings or ruins, and the every way
extinguishments of their Faculties: But especially, I bewail the defect of the
knowledge of the applying of Causes unto their Effects, or of suiting the thing
applicable, and of the thing to be applied unto it. For before all things we
must know, that as the Nativities, and Promotions of some things are slow: So
proportionally also, they have the greatness of Virtues to be expected, and the
Varieties of esteems: For even as it is in the Proverb; That which is soon
made, does also soon perish: So neither is a thing able to be protracted into a
long hope of Maturity, which has not intimate occasions of its own constancy:
For truly it should be in vain expected by a delay of eight hundred years, that
some one Metal should be rightly changed into humane uses, if any Vegetable
through the course of some Months, be to be equalized unto it. But indeed under
the account of Herbs, I also understand Trees and Fruits, and I could willingly
add living Creatures, if happily I did not read by the text of the Law, that
many or most living Creatures, and the parts of these were resigned and
abominated among impure Bodies: For the whole stock of Insects being directed
for Medicines, and the Commodities of great Powers, rather than for the services
of Men, was banished out of uses, and every resigned Remedy begged from thence:
And therefore there was only a commendation made of Words, Herbs, and Stones:
For it is certain that Herbs may be digested and subdued by our Stomach, unless
they have a Malignity their companion. Small indeed is the number of Pot Herbs
and Corns in the rank of Herbs; which scanitness does certainly accuse them of
a certain maglignity, which being rightly sequestered, they then first, and not
before, shall bewray their Powers as the scopes of their sending, which the
poisonous Keepers did cover under them. Truly Vegetables do act on us, only so
long as the Stomach does operate about them: Neither do they proceed further,
but that they do first lay aside almost all strength of a Remedy; for else it
should go ill with us, if the Stomach as not being able to tame the received
Vegetable, cannot subdue it under the rules of its Archeus: For otherwise, if a
Vegetable should proceed with its faculties entire, it should also be made the
consort of excrements, or else should disturb the family-administration of
sanguification or making of Blood: For otherwise how could that which had
resisted the action of the Stomach, already accustomed unto crude Simples, be
transchanged and subdued in the second digestion which is unaccustomed to crude
Meats. The effects of such Remedies should likewise be of greater difficulty,
and of a more labourious work, than the Fruit from thence to be expected. In
the next place, that being granted, an undistinction, confusion, and perpetual
turbulency of our family-administration were to be granted, if any thing being
not first rightly subdued in the Stomach, and the Excrement being not first
separated thereby, should inwardly proceed unto the vital parts: For truly
every thing should from thence without repulse, indifferently proceed inwards
either of its own accord, or should graciously be admitted without choice:
Therefore a Vegetable ought of necessity to suffer the digestions, and the
formal transmutations of these, and the digestive faculties themselves do also
in operating, ordinarily suffer by the foreign (that is not the food-like)
faculties of Vegetal things. A thing surely for the most part dangerous, of a
difficult experiment and judgment. Then again, besides all things being weighed
at the Balance, all the virtue of Vegetables is tied up and limited unto its
degree, to wit, after that it has bowed it self as being prostrated, under the
digestion: Neither does it exceed those limits, and in the mean time has
difficulties, to wit, the commands of Poisonous and Vicious Tyrannies: The
which surely, whether they were added for a preservation or cover of their
faculties, or indeed for their defense, denial, and impediment or hinderance;
at least it is sufficient that most of them have their own annexed cruelty,
infamy, immaturities, or crudities, scabbedness, rottenness, exhaustings of
strength, besides moreover, manifold Dregs and Impurities; because, seeing they
are deprived of emunctories dedicated to the evacuation of an excrement, their
whole nourishment must needs be full of excrement; and it is a most exceeding
cruel thing, that no Remedy has been devised in the Schools against these
defects, besides a simple Decoction.

Lastly, without the reckoning up of these things, and the injuries of Plants
being separated (whose burdens nevertheless, our Nature cannot bear without
great damage) besides their unwonted frowardness, so great is their weakness,
that scarce any thing worthy of praise is to be hoped for from the bosom of
Vegetables: Seeing they are not only constrained to separate or lay aside their
cruelty in their entrance, if they are to be admitted more fully within; but
also, to be altogether formally stripped of all their bounty, before they can
become Citizens of our Commonwealth: For the single scope of our Nature
intends only a sanguification of things cast into the Body, for nourishment
sake: The which seeing they ought not to proceed from every thing
promiscuously, but only from things truly transchanged into seminal Beings, and
from things agreeable to our Species; Surely whatsoever of the Vegetable race
is handed forth for the more inward families of Digestions, is vain, so as that
it should be thought to retain the ancient Power of its Parents: Which thing in
the first place, a Quartane Ague, and all Diseases occasionally procured by
Excrements, which have hitherto disgraced the Schools, do sufficiently confirm;
because they are those, who have not meditated beyond Lettices, and boiled
Herbs. There are indeed Vegetables plainly to be seen, answering unto the
Diseases of their first Ages: But for chronical Diseases, which are for the
most part increased by the infamous cruelty of Vegetals, and having obtained
their privy chambers of the Body and Spirit, far from the Mouth, as that their
dissolutions by Vegetable are difficult, they promise full Hospitals, wherein
the continual mournings or waylings of the unfortunate Sick do dolefully sound.
Wherefore from hence also, every one does almost daily behold in his own House,
a stubborn and uncessant Disease amongst those of his Family, and Physicians
are made the Comedy of stages, because they have scarce done any thing worthy
of thanks: For some of them confess their own and their Authors weaknesses, and
many do unwillingly flee unto Chemical unknown Remedies, most of them abounding
with their adultery and ravishment; they fly back to Books, not likewise to
Furnaces, for their unexperiences do promise most ample Fruits, and they boast
of all illegitimate and ridiculous Remedies: The which, while University Men do
not understand, and on the other side, they do behold their withered Galen so
destitute, they as full of doubt, flee over unto Cauteries, sharpish Fountains
and Baths: Alas for grief, what an unhappiness to the Sick, and a vain refuge
to themselves, has so great a stumbling of darkness in the Schools, produced!
I will therefore show, that the text, and that great boasted of virtue, does by
the name of Stones, understand all Minerals wholly, and metals the Marrow of
these, before the rest: Because they are those things, which do scarce show
themselves in any other Image, than that of small Stones, or great Stones: For
indeed, this is the most rich, and constant offspring, and chief treasure of
Nature: So that therein the conjunctions of the Stars are laid up or hidden:
and moreover in speaking properly, and out of the profound Idiotisme of the
Gentiles, the Stars do excel or are chief over Meteours, only causally; but
Metals in their Excellencies or Remedies, do far exceed the Stars. For truly,
I have taught according to the text of the holy Scriptures, That the Stars are
not unto us for Causes, but only for Signs, Seasons, Days, and Years. Neither
is it lawful for Man, to extend the Offices of the Stars any further: Wherefore
I have never in my desire, married the number of the Stars unto the wandering
Stars or Planets; as neither have I enclosed both their Offices and Dignities
in a like equality, or resemblance: For as they are at a far distance from each
other, so also they have unlike Offices, and ends of Offices divided from each
other. But this one thing I willingly admit of; to wit, that Metals do exceed
Plants and Minerals in healing, by long stades or distances: And therefore that
Metals are certain clear or shining glasses, not indeed by reason of their
brightness, but rather because that as often as their virtues are opened and set
at liberty, they do act by an endowed light, and a vital co-touching: Metals
therefore do operate after the manner attributed to the Stars, to wit, by an
Aspect, and the touching of an alterative Blas; which things will by
handicraft-operation more clearly appear: For Metals themselves are Glasses,
the most excellent offspring I say, of the inferior Globe, to wit, upon which
the whole central virtue has for some Ages before, prodigally poured forth its
treasure, that it might most rightly espouse this liquor of the Earth, this
duggy nourishment, and this offspring of divine providence unto the ends which
the weakness of Nature did require. Therefore the Glasses of Gold, Silver,
Mercury, Lead, Copper, Iron, and Tin, and the fire-stones of these, are not yet
shut up or closed, etc. But I call those shining Glasses, which have such a
force of piercing and enlightening the Archeus from his errors, furies, and
defects, that they restore him into a brightness, through the tincture of an
endowed perfection. For although these Minerals are not for food, or of the
condition of the Body of Man; Yet they have the internal faculty of a Glass,
and a Power most chiefly efficacious, co-touching with or very near to the
Archeus of man being entire, and appeased; such as was the Archeus before the
mind was conceived, the which mind indeed was afterward estranged from its
right path, after that the sensitive Soul (wherein the mind sits) drew the
government of the Body on it self; the which indeed was wholly frail and brutal
in it self. But in shining Glasses (for a distinction to wit of Vegetables
which do not shine,) a certain figure of our former immortality has as yet
remained resident, and in this respect, those Glasses are not only
communicated, but are willingly received by our Archeus: Yea, and which more
is, the restoration of the Archeus should the longer continue, if the Glasses
themselves were not presently banished: which thing is manifest in the
preparation of Copper, Iron, etc. These things concerning the Tree of Life, I
do prosecute in the Book of long Life, that there may be a stable Remedy
transchangeable into man's Nature, to be taken from ones childhood, especially
as long as the growing faculty does flourish: This Remedy I say, does exceed
the force of a shining Glass for long Life, but not likewise for a healthy
Life. Furthermore, whatsoever is further to be spoken concerning Stones, that
was either so far as they do partake of a certain Metallic Sulphurous
Tincture, or of a Mineral Salt: But as a mineral Being is neither for food nor
nourishment, neither could it be Vital or for Life: but before that I shall
pass over unto Arcanums (which is called the great virtue of Stones in this
place,) surely it is profitable to enter into the very seat of the Body, and
inwardly to view how much any Remedy can there operate: To which end, that
which I have already said above, comes first in our way: To wit, that the
Stomach does not coct any thing, but as from a single aim it does from thence
at length frame a nourishment for its whole Body, and for that very cause it
has an intention to make thereof a nourishable Liquor, to wit, venal Blood;
and afterward a spermatick Humor fit for the nourishing of the chief
constituting parts; So that it may be turned into a substance fit for the
nourishment and increase of the parts: To wit, as long as they are appointed
within the bound designed for growth or increasing: From whence it necessarily
also follows, that none but fit and foody matters concocted and digested by the
Stomach, are transmitted into the more remote shops of the digestions.
Wherefore I have first of all withdrawn every Plant, by whatsoever cruelty
being infamous, from the border of the Mesentery; because every thing that is
unfit for these borders, is for that very cause driven downwards by the
Stomach, and adjoined unto the excrements. But whatsoever has now passed over
into Chyle, has presently laid aside every strange quality, whereby it may act
as it were by choice: But if from Magnum Oportet, any kind of quality of its
ancient concrete Body shall as yet remain; surely that is drowsy, feeble,
sluggish, loose, and vain, and therefore it does for the most part, deceive
Physicians in chronical Diseases, and in Diseases lurking far off, through the
crookednesses of the veins; which truth that a Quartane may defend in my
behalf, it readily offers it self. Indeed the School of Alchymy, admiring, and
trusting in the feeble help of Remedies, has long since indeed observed a
noble treasure of healing to lay hid in Minerals, but it long doubted in what
respect they might most fully derive themselves unto the inward Buttery of the
similar parts.

First of all, The former sort hoped in vain and to no purpose, to descend unto
our constituting parts by their Remedies: And seeing they despaired in the
Vegetable Kingdom, they also vainly roasted or wracked the order of Minerals;
because they were those things which can never by our will be transchanged into
foods; seeing the Artificer cannot at his pleasure induce an esential Form: Yea
neither does Nature by one only leap of Digestion, and by its immediate beck,
ever attain that thing: For some being seduced by a deceivable hope of Metals,
and much less also tasting or knowing how much essicacy is seated in shining
Glasses, and in the manifest liquors of Metals: Therefore some have promised
almost a certain immortality from their Labors; and Paracelsus as ridiculous,
does extend them sometimes into an Aniadan year, into the year of the Fire, and
afterward at least into the year of Mathusalem: afterward others of his
followers slid down unto six hundred years. Whereas after that, the later sort
promised that they should attain only unto a renewing of the strength or
faculties: Others being content only with a cropped or defective Cure; To wit,
they rested in the cleansing of the pure from the impure. And although a Body
was now and then granted to be renewed according to its Nails, Teeth, and
Hairs; Yet they have not fitly understood that the Pear Tree is never recalled
from its old age, although it might renew its Leaves every Year.

In the mean time, a rashness of these things, and ignorance of our
Family-Administration, has stirred up the vain boastings of the things
aforesaid, and every one has proceeded in the darkness of vain hope, according
to his own touching without a seen Knowledge. Therefore while every one hoped
most fully or piercingly to introduce his own Remedies, neither yet would they
afterward be admitted within, because they were those things which the more
grievous Diseases, and a want of nourishment, and refreshment of the Faculties
did exclude; they afterward thought to mask some Arcanums of a lighter weight,
into the seigned show of a Salt, that at leastwise they might not be separated
from the Latex; yea that in this respect they might attain a Liberty of
wandering throughout the whole Province of the Veins: And although they have so
suited some Remedies, that they were not altogether strange or detestable to
the agreement of Nature; however it is, they could not at leastwise so far
descend, as to be admitted altogether within: But if through the Error of
Separation a very small quantity of them had but pierced inwards; that thing
straightway induced a benummedness in the more inward Kitchings of the Bowels,
as also a repentance of the Archeus.

Likewise they who have made trial of Treey Remedies, have presently refrained
from them; because that they were more hard and difficult than Herby ones, and
less fit for penetration: For truly the Flesh and Blood are not fat things, but
Treey things are fat, Ro^iny, and unbroken by our Powers.

First of all, Paracelsus supposed, that seeing fixed Bodies did resist the
fire, also that they should delude the unwasted or unwearied Labors of the
Digestions by the same endeavor; and therefore he established it by an
universal Decree, that no fixed Mineral would be taken in at the mouth; because
the Salts which should render that thing potable, being wasted through
Digestion, that same fixed Body should be toughly affixed unto the inward walls
and pipes of the Members, wherein those Salts are changed, and should
afterward by an unexpected annexion, continue for term of Life. Therefore he
would that not only all Mineral Remedies should not only be made potable, but
also moreover volatile: Which admonition, although it be not altogether vain
(Crocus Martis, and very many prepared Powders of Stones taken into the Body,
being excepted) yet those same Minerals do not therefore assume a Foody nature,
neither also consequently are they digested, or do they come more fully
inwards, unto the intrinsecal seats of Diseases. Neither also has he
sufficiently considered, that volatile Minerals have in them a force or faculty
altogether Active, (even as I have elsewhere demonstrated concerning the affect
of the Stone) and for the most part, so strange a one, that they cannot be
promiscuously admitted within, without a notable Error; unless we shall say
that there is no longer any election or choice in Nature, whereby those things
are refused by the Archeus, which do less agree with his Borders. But not every
potable thing undistinctly, is admitted within, yea nor any thing which was not
Foody and Digested in the Stomach, and transchanged into a humane Chyle:
Neither does any thing pass through the Liver, which in the Mesentery Veins
(because they are those which are the Stomach of the Liver it self) has not
been through an obedient disposition first subdued. And let there be the same
Judgment concerning the more utmost Bowels. But seeing as well Vegetables as
Minerals being received into the Body, do presently exercise their tyranny,
which thing Solutives themselves through a ready obedience do testify, and so
also that it is hence manifest, that any kind of Poisons do powerfully the more
piercingly enter, to wit, if they do tyrannize on places at a distance.

Therefore two Opinions are to be reconciled; To wit,

On the one hand, That nothing which is not foody does climb inwards, before
that it be elaborated by the Digestions.

And on the other hand, That as well Simples as Remedies elaborated by Art,
however foreign or brutish they are, do exercise their operation even far
from the mouth, and aloof off.

Unto which Controversy, the famous Action of Government has regard, and also
the suparlative excelling Force or Authority of the Duumvirate: For neither
does Cardiogmus or a Griping of the Heart, and Cardialgia or a pain of the
Stomach, in vain (of old) note the Heart, and have denoted the Stomach it self,
by an Etymology of the Heart and Life: For in very deed, the sensitive Soul,
and the Archeus himself do inhabit in the very Membrane of the Stomach,
distinguishing of the Conveniences or Agreements, Proportions, Likenesses, and
Suitings of all things: Whereof, while the sensitive Soul it self does draw
Apprehensions, it communicates the same also, by dispersing them throughout the
whole Body, to wit, to every part according to the requirance of necessity: For
Solutive things do Purge and cruelly molest, as long as they are detained in
the Stomach, and more formerly Intestines: And therefore that they may quickly
and speedily finish their task, Broths are given to drink, whereby indeed they
may be the more readily washed out of the Stomach. For truly Mineral Secrets
(for in Stones there is great virtue) do indeed most powerfully operate; but
they do not therefore materially enter into the Bowels at all, that they may be
made the co-partaking Citizens of our Life: For neither do things go unto the
Third, or more Ultimate shop of the Digestions, unless they first proceed
through the First.

Wherefore I have first of all diligently considered, that all Remedies do
operate according to a natural endowment which the Almighty has conferred on
them, whether they shall be Vegetables, or Minerals. But seeing the most
powerful Virtues of Remedies are not of a foody Substance, and belonging to
venal Blood, and much less of an Excrementous substance (for truly the
Intestines are only a Sack and Sink) neither is there granted a fit medium or
middle thing between that which is foody, and excrementitious: Therefore it is
required that a Remedy which has so famous endowments, be not indeed foody
(because I have already taught before, that that which is for Food ought to be
feeble) yet a Remedy as long as it sticks between, not an excrement and an
excrement; That is, as long as it is in its passage unto, or in its being made
for an excrement, it is detained in the Stomach: To wit, that seeing there is
not granted a final mean between a foody Being, and an excrement, there may at
leastwise be a mediative mean in the Essence of a Remedy: To wit, as long as
the determination is undecided, whether the Remedy taken into the Body, be to
be put to flight together with the excrements: For this is as long as it is
detained in the Stomach it self, wherein the Archeus the distinguisher, does
most powerfully shine and command. And moreover some Remedies do in this Inn
attain faculties which were not before in their kernel; which thing I have
elsewhere shown by the Latex running down out of the branch of a Birch-tree,
being indeed the more powerful when it now wanders between the nourishment of
its Tree, and the beginnings of corruption presently begun. Therefore now from
hence the truth of Remedies hitherto abstruse, does clearly appear: To wit,
that every Remedy does immediately and principally act only into the Archeus of
the Stomach (the which is therefore also called the Heart) but this Archeus
afterward acts according to a disposition, drawn and generated to himself from
the endowed gift of the Remedies.

It also further follows, that every Remedy exceeding the limits of Food, does
act by its touching in manner of a Glass: For truly it acts only by touching
at the Archeus, without a material co-mixture of it self. Indeed the Archeus
himself does first feel the endowment drawn from the Remedy; but in that act of
perceivance he fashions to himself an Idea of things to be done by him, by
following the Dispositions of that endowment: from whence he consequently
stirring up Peace, Rest, or Anger to himself, and assuming the gotten Idea's of
these, does presently sealingly disperse the same into the Bowels, hearkening
to the Action of Government, performing prosperous or opposite Offices,
according to the Command of the vital Archeus.

Any kind of Remedies therefore are Glasses, and some are shining ones, others
only through their co-touching, Odor, Taste, and Power: But all and every of
Remedies do in respect of the Life, remain external; in this respect also, they
do wash off and drive away the inbred, or conceived stain or blemish from the
Archeus. But they are never able therefore to detain the Life from a continual
defluxion, or to suggest new Faculties, and to create or raise up new Powers
for Immortality: Because the Virtues of Remedies cannot together with their
Substance, pierce or be transchanged into the vital matter of us, so that it
may be admixed by increase with our first constituting parts: For whatsoever
they act, all that is busied about the Archeus of the Stomach, and Prince of
Life, and Governor of the Stern: To wit, on which Ruler of the Stern, the
Center of Life and Pilot of the Duumvirate, all Diseases also do primarily
tyrannize, or by a secondary Passion or affect. For, for this cause, neither
does an ancient Gout which is pithily rooted within, break forth out of the
bosoms of the implanted vital Spirit wherein it is sealed, but that also it
does before its access or fit, molest about the mouth of the Stomach, and
thereby violate and disturb the whole disposition of the whole: The which Gout
apprcaching, a certain precedent small Fever does for the most part bewray:
Wherefore in this respect also do a Remedy and a Disease co-touch, yea and also
pierce each other.

For who has not observed that the Odours of Spices being only tasted, do
straightway refresh fainting Persons, not indeed because those Odours being
co-mixed with air, are an addittament of the vital air, that they can
substitute as it were a new vital Spirit in the place of that which was lost:
Because the very restoring of the vital Spirit by a Spice or sweet Smell,
should be of a more laboursome attempt than the restoring of it by the Arterial
Blood: Neither is the Odor of a Spice pleasing, as it is like unto the vital
Spirit, bred by Arterial Blood: But by reason of the natural endowments inbred
in a Remedy.

In like manner, neither do the Oils of Cynamon, Cloves, etc. refresh the
vital Spirit of the parts by their material joining; (for neither is the Spirit
of Life nourished by Oil) but those things which are grateful in their Odor
and Savor, so many are looking-Glasses, which by a touch of their aspiration
or reflection, do refresh and comfort the Spirit of Life (being burdened) as it
were with an endowed gift. For as the sights or beholdings of some things do
move Nauseousness, Vomiting, loss of Appetite, Anger, Indignation, etc. as they
are visual Looking-Glasses: So there are dotal or endowed Glasses, stirring up
the Archeus into Peace, Tranquillity, Sleepiness, Joy, cessation from Sorrow,
Contracture, Grief, etc. Those are endowed Glasses which do stir up and
occasionally move unto a right and orderly solicitation, or careful performance
of their Offices in the Archeus: Even as on the other hand, those are Poisons,
destructive Things, and the exalted Powers of things which stir up a Blemish,
or Contagion, and Consumption, and every sore shaking in the Archeus: And
Poisons do exceed any kind of Remedies in this: That these cannot be so
connexed unto the Life, that this may indeed be thereby raised up again, or
increase into a more perfect disposition. Whereas Poisons do in the mean time
kill the parts, do wholly deprive of the inbred strength, and altogether draw
into their own likeness, and do therefore truly transchange their vital parts;
which thing is granted to no Remedies, that they can renew the defects of the
parts into their ancient youth, and bring forth an Immortality: Because the
most piercing Remedies are not Identified or Samified in Union with the
Archeus, or a Member which is ill affected. And so neither is it able to
perform a stable Effect from a Union of the Agent with the Sufferer, the which
otherwise is granted unto Poisons.

Those therefore are touching Glasses, which disperse the natural endowment
which the Almighty glories in, that he bestowed it on things cropped from, and
pulled out of the Earth, the concrete body of that Glass remaining entire: For
as some things being hanged on the Body, and born without the Body, or more
strictly tied to the Body, do plainly take away very many sicknesses, or at
leastwise suspend them: So some famous Remedies are stable, and do produce a
stable effect from themselves.

There are also others, which not so much through the force of a touching and
nourishing Glass, as of an Odor easily passing through, do prostrate great
Diseases; to wit, those arising and cherished only by an Indignation of the
Archeus: For there are also many Remedies which have a certain notable Taste,
whereby, although they are not Digested by the Stomach by a passive
transmutation; yet they separate the pure from the impure, although it be the
farther remote from them, as they draw the Archeus (being as it were bound and
obliged unto their endowments) to cause such Effects.

Yet the Glasses which I name touching ones, are therefore for the most part
fixed without Odor and Taste, and do move the Archeus, not so much by
cleansing and sequestring Impurities, as by appeasing his Griefs, Disturbances,
and a continual and successive substituting of Nourishing Idea's. For
Paracelsus dispraising all fixed Metallic and Mineral Remedies, yet as being
unmindful of himself, commends Mercurius Diaphoreticus, being very sweet, yet
fixed, and not mutable in the Fire: And the which notwithstanding is a
contemner of every labor of the Digestions; yet it does in Diseases, as much
as a Physician and Chyrurgion will of right wish or desire: For the sweetness
of its Sulphur, sports in the Superficies; but the Mercurial part being covered
over by an external Sulphur, lies hid, neither does it operate unless by a
Glass shining through the Sulphur, and so affecting the Archeus at its own
pleasure. Otherwise, that sweetness of the Diaphoretick, is of the Sulphur
being drawn out of the fire of Venus, which is of the same savor with the
Diaphoretick.

Wherefore that Fire is harmlesly Anodine, Soporiferous, or Sleepifying, an
Appeaser of Pain, and Allayeth all Worth, Grief, Motion, Disturbance and
Tempest of the Archeus: And likewise it imprinteth on the Archeus a will of
Resolving of all coagulated things: In which respect it takes away every
Disease, occasionally, materially, and by way of violent assault, which is
attributed unto any Excrements whatsoever.

Likewise it is here plain to be seen, That that Mercurius Diaphoreticus
remaining indeed in the Stomach undigested, nor piercing inwardly, because it
perseveres unchanged, being fixed, stubborn, and untamed in the form of a
Powder, does cause all the aforesaid Effects: not indeed that its very self
does work those things effectively efficiently: But because it stirs up the
Duumvirate, the performer of all things. For these things ought thus to be
done, not indeed by an actual co-touching of Excrements, which are banished and
led forth bound, but by the impression of its natural endowment (for Stones
have great Virtue) on the Archeus, the which is the Effecter of all Curing;
even as he is the very Original and Fountain of Diseases; from whence indeed I
have shown above, that every Disease does immediately after sin, thenceforth
daily issue.

A Wounded man Cured himself only by Garden-Nightshade, and that without a
Scarre.

Note how that may happen; therefore by applying it about the Seat of the Soul.

What, and after what manner it may inwardly appease and pacify.

The same thing Assarum performs.

Those things ought to be done without Fire.

In Stones there is great Virtue. The Stone for Broken Bones, it is a fixed
Stone, as also not Calcinable: It Cures a Broken Bone being taken in by the
Mouth. And after what manner that may be done.

2. Does or may it not Cure the affect of the Stone, Gout, etc.

CHAP. LXXIX. BUTLER.
I Have already in the foregoing Treatise sufficiently demonstrated, that a
Disease does not exist but in living Bodies, and that it has not only a vital
body for its proper subject; but moreover, that the very intrinsecal Organ or
Instrument of Life, is the workman of a Disease and its internal efficient. Yea
I have demonstrated, that both the matter and spiritual air of the Archeus
himself, is not only the Object on which all the glasses of Diseases are first
sharpened; but also, that it is the very matter whereof, and about which the
vehement motions, overflowings, and exorbitances of that workman do happen
about his own destruction. Indeed that such is the foolish offspring of Sin,
while man turns himself away from God, nothing but thenceforth foolishly to
convert all things into his own destruction. But seeing every thing in Nature
subsisteth only by a matter and an efficient Cause (the which also I have
elsewhere most amply taught in a peculiar Treatise) and a thing in Nature does
therefore require to be defined only by its immediate and proper matter, and
its internal efficient Cause (for truly the whole essence of a thing, and its
existence, are nothing besides a connection of both the same Causes) certainly
now it is sufficiently manifest, that a Disease is the very vital matter of the
Archeus, into which the seminal Character or Idea of the Archeus being ill
affected, is bred or inserted: Whether in the mean time the Archeus does
persevere in that his abomination from the right path, I say, in a hurtful
disjoynting, or next, shall spread the same Idea's of his Anger on some
Product, and shall afterward cease: that is even all one in a Disease; seeing
it is unto this by accident, to be nourished or not, from a violent assaulting
Cause: For truly the Archeus does sometimes presently seal an Idea conceived
by himself on some excrement of his Body, the which he prepares, if he shall
not find that excrement before prepared for him: From whence also, and wherein
a Disease is thenceforth by it self able to subsist. But elsewhere the Archeus
does not wander far, without the matter defiled by him, and therefore he does
either increase the same by a continual nourishment, or through the conjoyning
of a resembling mark, is admitted into the implanted Spirit of the Organs, and
does from thence, as from a Tower, either continually fight against the
faculties or strength of the Members, or at leastwise does sleep and awake at
set Periods, because in the vital Principle he has branded himself with the
implanted Guest, and household Inhabitant of Life, and has not flowed only in
the Spirit of the fluid Archeus.

Moreover, whatsoever of filths is cast in, admitted, or bred up through an
error of living, whether that thing may follow the Family of a Procatarctical
or foregoing principal Cause, or next, the Family of a Product; it is wholly
altogether nothing but occasional: To wit, at the importunities whereof, the
Archeus himself being sore shaken, does represent the true Tragedy of a Disease.

From whence, first of all it is evident, that Diseases are as well real while
they are silent and sleep, as those which happen being awakened in the
meditation of their fit: I ought indeed, thus repeatingly to press the Tragedy
of Diseases, if fruit be from a thing so unheard of, and of so great moment to
be hoped for, unto those that shall succeed.

The Tree therefore and Fruits of a Disease being known, together with the
connection and progress of concurring Causes; the Tree of Remedies is afterward
to be contemplated of, which is so greatly breathed after, and unknown hitherto.

First of all indeed, I have considered of a six fold Invasion of a Disease,
and liberty of taking its possession: as if it were at first stirred up by the
evil Spirit, therefore also should follow the Week of Creation. From whence
also a sixfold household stuff of Remedies in Nature was continually to be
considered, unless the Super-eminent Divine Goodness, had rather to communicate
the figure of his Unity, every where issuingly erected in Nature, unto man's
Understanding: Because it is that which through the Unity of simplicity has
most powerfully every where erected most rich Remedies against the slaughter of
Diseases: Whereunto therefore, the more weak nature of man's Understanding being
cherished by sloth, also easily hearkening, has searched into the Secrets of
Paracelsus; Whereby it might powerfully relieve all the Errors of defective
Nature. We being now especially the more safe through this prop, shall
hereafter attempt the vanquishments of Diseases, after that we shall behold the
one only Fountain of Life, now wandering from its scope, to have erected the
whole entire predicament of Infirmities.

I deny not in the mean time, but that a Disease does diversely enter into our
harvest daily: But that (I say) it is daily received in diverse Inns, and
occasional Causes, which attempt treachery.

To wit, First of all, They do of necessity break in by a voluntary declining
race of Nature, through a defect and extinguishment of the vital Faculties,
from whence at length difficulties of the Functions, and their afterward
awakened Superfluities do arise.

2. They do happen unto us from an unequal strength of the Members, from whence
there is presently an unequal temperature, or disorder, very much like to that
aforesaid.

3. From the received Inordinacies of Life burthening the Faculties, and the
Offices of these by their immoderateness: Under which slipperynesse or
unconstancy of Life, Venus or carnal Lust, Blood-letting, and what sort soever
of Lavishments of the Strength do war, and after the beginnings of Diseases do
at length hasten an untimely Death.

4. Diseases do most manifestly proceed from Perturbations or Disturbances, or
Passions of the Mind: And far more occultly, from the Riotous, or Immoderate
and Voluntary Disturbances of the Archeus himself, or those being drawn or
sprung from an occasional matter stirring them up. Of these especially there is
a large Company, and a numerous Army led on us, being even hitherto not
attributed to their own proper Causes, because unknown.

5. Diseases do break forth from the unclemency of the Heaven, through the
Injuries of unstable tempests, and the unhappy draughts of Endemicks, whereby a
hostile guest is drawn and admitted within, that it may make it self a Familiar.

6. Lastly, A Disease enters by external things rushing on us, to wit, Wounds,
Breakings of Bones, Falls, Bruises, Burnings, Freezings, Stingings of Asps,
etc. But at leastwise, all of them do lay in wait for the one Life, and from
the Archeus its Defender, from whence they derive their Beginning.

Therefore in perpetually aiming at Unity, we shall contemplate of God, as the
one only most glorious Fountain, President of Life, and one only Permitter of
all Diseases whatsoever: So also we shall occasionally, and the more amply
reverence the same Giver of a Remedy, in the Unity of his own Type or Figure.

Wherefore, although I have elsewhere written by the way concerning Arcanums,
every one whereof in particular, does mow down almost all Diseases with one
only Sithe, to wit, by a separation, and cleansing from superfluity; Yet those
Secrets, even as they are most difficultly prepared, yea and ought to remain in
secret for ever, in the possession of those of the Privy Counsel; So also the
Cure, through the instituted help of the same, does not so immediately respect
Diseases, as in the first place either the foregoing occasional Cause of the
same, or at leastwise, the later product of a Disease: And likewise those
Arcanums of Remedies are most sparing, whereof the most part of Mortals is
deprived and destitute of hope: And therefore, it does not seem to me, that the
Infinite Goodness of God, would not be so issuingly or largly communicated and
made known by so scanty a Remedy. Wherefore I conjecture, that the time is at
hand, wherein the Almighty Goodness will manifest unto his Faithful ones, the
knowledge and essence of Diseases hitherto unknown: But he has not discovered
the aforesaid Arcanums, but for the glory of his own Power, only unto a very
few, least the Commerces of the World, should otherwise perish. For neither is
it otherwise to be believed, that the Divine Goodness after this intimate
Essence of Diseases, being discovered, that he will afterward also hide the
endowed Remedies of his Unity from the Faithful ones, and that the healing of
Diseases ought to be planted into Arcanums alone. Therefore it is meet or
seasonable diligently to search into a Remedy, with my self, which by a single
endeavor, may have respect unto the Tree of the vitiated Archeus, after what
manner soever he be altered. For truly, a certain entire thing is more
formerly, Nature, than a corrupted thing: And therefore the Life and the
Archeus, as they are simply the cause of its Being, they are more ancient than
is a Vice conceived in them: For as the immediate Cause of any indispositions,
is the very Life it self; So surely the speculation of curing, and renewing of
the Life being altered, or weakened, without all discomodity, and burden or
pressure, is more principal, more intimate, more formerly by right, and more
noble, than the curing which is perfected by Arcanums, or by the most excellent
mundificatives or cleansers: For those Arcanums, although they do oftentimes
respect, and cut off the more formerly occasion; Yet it is as it were
secondary, as to curing, which proceeds from internal Causes primarily
altered, and affected: And the which therefore do first and most principally
require an appeasing of themselves by a natural indication, and that a most
capital one of all: For truly Natures themselves have been of old known to be
the Physitianesses of Diseases; even as also the vital Nature was reverenced
under the covered Cloud of the Etymology of the Spirit making the assault, as
the Maker, and Procreater of any kind of Diseases: Yet from the days of
Hippocrates, unto Galen, and afterward from thence the speculation of
Diseases, remained and stood neglected. It is therefore scanty, and not very
passable hitherto, whatsoever I have said concerning the manner of Curing, by
pacifying and appeasing of the Archeus, to wit, by withdrawing or removing of
his successive alterations or interchangable courses: Wherefore in principally
contemplating of the conjoynting peace, quiet, and docibleness of the Archeus,
I will first explain my self by some brief Histories.

There was a certain Irishman, whose name was Butler, being sometime great
with James King of England, he being detained in the prison of the Castle of
Vilvord, and taking pity on Baillius a certain Franciscan Monk, a most famous
Preacher of Gallo-Brittain, who was also imprisoned, having a formidable
Erisipelas in his arm; on a certain evening when as the sick Monk did almost
despair, he swiftly tinged a certain little Stone in a spoonful of Almond
Milk, and presently withdrew it thence: But he said unto the keeper of the
Prison, reach this supping to that Monk, and how much soever he shall take
thereupon, he shall be whole at least within a short hours space; which thing
even so came to pass with the greatest admiration of the Keeper, and the sick
Man not knowing from whence so sudden health had shined on him, seeing that he
was ignorant that he had taken any thing; For his left Arm being before hugely
swollen, fell down as that it could presently scarce be discerned from the
other: On the morning following, I being entreated by great men, came to
Vilvord as a witness of his deeds: Therefore I contracted a friendship with
Butler.

Presently afterward, I saw a poor old Woman a Landress, who from sixteen
years of age or thereabouts, labored with an intolerable Megrim, presently
cured in my presence. Indeed he by the way, or lightly dipped the same little
Stone in a spoonful of oil of Olives, and presently cleansed the little Stone
by licking of it, and laid it up into the sheath of his breast; but that
spoonful of Oil, he poured into a small bottle of Oil, whereof one only drop
he commanded to be anointed on the Head of the aforesaid old Woman, who was
thereby straightway cured, and remained whole for some years, the which I
attest: I was amazed, as if he were become another Mydas; but he smiling on me
said:

My most dear Friend, unless thou come thitherto, so as to be able by one only
Remedy, to cure every Disease, thou shall remain in thy Young Beginnings,
however old thou shall become. I easily assented thereto, because I had learned
that thing from the secrets of Paracelsus: and being now more confirmed by
sight and hope: But I confess with a willing mind, that that new manner of
curing, was unaccustomed and unknown unto me. I therefore said, that a young
Prince of our Court, Vicount of Gaunt, Brother to the Prince of Epifuoy, of a
very great House, was so wholly prostrated by the Gout, that he thenceforth lay
only on one side, being wretched, and deformed with many knots; he therefore
taking hold of my right hand, said: will thou, that I cure that young Man; I
will cure him for thy sake.

But I replied: But he is of that obstinacy, that he had rather die, than to
drink even but one only medicinal Potion.

Be it so, said Butler, for neither do I require any other thing, than that he
do every morning touch the little Stone which thou see, with the top of his
tongue: For after three weeks from thence, let him wash the painful and
unpainful knots daily with his own Urin, and thou shall soon afterward see him
cured, and soundly walking: go thy way, and tell him with joy, what I have said.

I therefore being glad, returned to Bruxells, and tells him what Butler had
said.

But the Potentate answered; Go to tell Butler, that if he restore me, as thou
have said, I will give him as much as he shall require; demand the price, and I
will willingly sequester that which is deposited, for his security. And when I
declared that thing to Butler on the day following, he was wroth, and said:
That Prince is mad, or witless, and miserable, and therefore neither will I
ever help him: for neither do I stand in need of his money, neither do I yield
or am I inferior unto him. Yea, neither could I ever induce him to performwhat
he had before promised: Wherefore I began to doubt, least the foregoing things
which I had seen, were as it were dreams.

It happened in the mean time, that a Friend, overseer and master of the
Glassen Furnace at Antwerp, being exceeding fat, most earnestly requested of
Butler to be freed from the trouble of his fatness; unto whom Butler offered a
small piece of that little Stone, that he might once every morning lick or
speedily touch it with the top of his Tongue. And within three weeks I saw his
Breast made more straight or narrow by one span, and him to have lived no less
whole afterward: Wherefore I began again to believe that the same thing might
have happened in the aforesaid gouty Prince, which he had promised.

In the mean time, I sent to Vilvard, to Butler for a Remedy, in the case of
Poison occasionally given me by a secret Enemy: For I miserably languished, all
my joints were pained, and my pulse, Vehement, being at length become an
intermitting one, did accompany the faintings of my Mind, and extinguishment of
my strength. Butler being as yet detained in Prison, forthwith commanded my
household Servant whom I had sent, that he should bring unto him a small bottle
of Oil of Olives, and his little Stone aforesaid being tinged therein (as at
other times) he sent that Oil unto me; and bad him, that with one only small
drop of the Oil, I should anoint only one place of the pain, or all particular
places if I would; the which I did, and yet felt no help thereby. In the mean
time, my Enemy according to his lot being about to die, bad that pardon should
be craved of me for his Sin, and so I knew that I had taken Poison, the which I
suspected: And therefore also I procured with all care, to extinguish the slow
Venom; and through the Grace of God favoring me, I escaped.

My Wife was now for some Months, oppressed with a pain of the Muscle of her
right Arm, so as that she could neither lift up her Hand, and much less lift
any thing upwards: And moreover by reason of Grief and Sorrow for me, she now
by degrees languished in both her Legs, from the Foot, even unto the Groine,
with a cruel Oedema, the which did in its pit, show the foot-step of ones
finger dipped into it even unto the second joint: For because she had
contracted these Oedema's by reason of the grief for my tribulation, a Medicine
was despised so long as her grief ceased not: She therefore seeing the work of
Butlers Oil to be vain on me, and being willing before some Gentlewomen to mock
my credulity, anointed one only drop of that Oil on her right Arm, and
straightway it being freely moved, was beyond hope restored, together with its
former strength: we all admired at the wonder of so sudden an event; wherefore
she anointed the Ankles of both her Legs with one only drop on both sides,
being spread about on the circle of the Ankle; and presently within less than a
quarter of an hour, all the Oedema vanished away: she also through Gods favor,
lives as yet nineteen Years since, in health.

A certain Handmaid, as soon as she heard that thing to have happened in her
Mistress, required some drops of that Oil, because she had thrice suffered an
Erisipelas, in her right Leg, it being badly cured, she showed a
leaden-coulered Leg and swollen, from the Knee even unto the Toes; in the
evening therefore, at her going to bed, she rubs four drops of that Oil on the
hurt part, and in the morning there appeared no footstep of the former Malady;
so that she, who now before could scarce go into the Market in one day, the
same morning went unto the Temple of the holy God-bearing Virgin, in Laken, and
cheerfully returned, and broguht me Water from the spring of Saint Ann, being
far remote from thence.

Which thing being heard, a certain Gentlewoman a Widow, being now afflicted
for many Months in both her Arms, that she could never lift her hand upwards,
was by a few drops of that Oil, in one only evening, presently restored into
full health, and so remained.

Afterward I asked Butler, why so many Women should be presently cured; but
that I, while I most sharply conflicted with Death it self, being also
environed with Pains of all my Joints and Organs, should not feel any ease? But
he asked me, with what Disease I had labored? And when he understood that
Poison had given a Beginning unto the Disease: He said: Because the Cause, had
come from within to without, the Oil ought to be taken into the Body, or the
little Stone to be touched with the Tongue: Because the pain or grief being
cherished within, was not Local, or External: I observed also that the Oil, did
by degrees uncloath it self of the efficacy of Healing; because the little
Stone being lightly tinged in it, had not pithily changed the Oil throughout
its whole Body, but had only blessed it with a delible or obliterable
be-sprinkling of an Odor: For truly that little Stone did present in the Eyes,
and Tongue, Sea Salt spread abroad or rarefied; and it is sufficiently known,
that Salt is not to be very intimately mixed with Oil.

Butler also cured an Abbatess, sufficiently known, who for eighteen years had
had her right Arm swollen with an unwonted depriving of Motion, and her fingers
stretched out, and unmovable, only by the touching of her Tongue at the little
Stone. But very many being witnesses of these Wonders, presently suspected some
hidden Sorcery and Diabolical compact: For the common People has it already
for an ancient custom, that whatsoever honest thing their ignorance has
determined not to know, they do for a privy shift of Ignorance, refer that
thing unto the juggles of the Evil Spirit: But I could not decline so far,
because the Remedies were supposed to be Natural, neither having any thing
besides an unwonted quantity. For neither Ceremonies, Words, nor any other
suspected thing was required: for neither is it lawful according to Man's power
of understanding, to refer the Glory of God shown forth in Nature, unto the
evil Spirit: For none of those Women had required aid of Butler, as from
Necromancy any way suspected; yea the things were at first made trial of with
smiling, and without Faith and Confidence: Yet this kind of easiness, and
speediness of curing, shall as yet long remain suspected by many: for the wit
of the vulgar, being unconstant and idle in hard and unwonted matters, is
always ready for judgments of the same tenor, by reason of their facility,
and therefore also is weak or flaggy; for they do more willingly consecrate so
great a bounty of restitution unto diabolical deceit, than to divine goodness,
the Framer, Lover, Savior, Refiesher of humane Nature, and Father of the poor.
And that thing indeed not only in the common People, but also in those that are
learned, who follow, and rashly search into the Beginnings of healing, being
not yet instructed, or observing the common, and blockish Rule: Because they
are always wise as Children, who have never gone over their Mothers threshold,
being a fraid at every Fable. For indeed they who have not hitherto known the
whole circuit of Diseases to be concluded within the Spirit of Life, which
makes the assault, or if they hereafter reading my Studies by the way, shall
imprint on themselves this moment or concernment of healing; nevertheless,
because they have been already before accustomed from the very Beginnings of
their Studies, to the precepts of the Humourists, they will easily at length
depart from me, and leap back unto the accustomed and ancient Opinions of the
Schools.

For look what Liquor Men do once, in a new Vessel steep;
Its Odor, whether Sweet or Sour, it will long after keep.
They will again easily betake themselves unto the importunities of Decumbent,
or falling down Humors: But I in a more near search, being unwilling to refer
the benefits of God unto the Devil, have first of all certainly found, that all
things in Nature, do consist of an invisible Seed: That they begin I say, are
supported, and ruled by a Being which the great God began from an imaginating
Desire, or derived Power, and which remains afterward throughout the whole
duration of their Essence and being. But that afterward things are made
visible, or are [this something] only by the clothing and apparelling of
Bodies espoused unto it self. But I have taught that Diseases do by a stronger
reason, arise from a more invisible Seed: Wherefore that the Diseasifying Idea
is only to be Vanquished, Abolished, and Extinguished; because a Disease is a
monstrous, and equivocal or doubtful generated Being, and offspring of Sin,
not adhering therefore to the Humane Species, but only to individual Persons
after an irregular manner: Because seeing, that after the fall, it began almost
from a [non-being.]

For in more fully looking into the matter; first of all, very many Maludies do
depart by reason of Amulets or Pomanders being hung on the outside of the Body;
even as is plain to be seen, in the Plague, Falling Sickness, and other
Diseases.

In the next place, whosoever he be, who shall rejoice to have a Towel which
was withdrawn from a pestilent Ulcer, or desiled with the sweat of him that
has the Pestilence applied unto himself, nor does fear in himself, that the
Plague can thereby naturally be communicated unto himself; we have seen health
restored, as with the anointing o^ Butlers Oil: For truly a Sympathetical
Remedy has been of late made manifest, which cures at a far distance.

A certain Doctor of Divinity related to me, that seeing he could not conceive,
that in Vitriol there did subsist a natural faculty of curing an absent Wound,
if it were besprinkled on a bloody Towel: Therefore also, that he reputed that
curing to happen through the work of the Devil; but on the other hand, that he
had seen some experiences made by honest Men: Therefore in a doubtful matter,
and case of Conscience, that he had made trial of the thing in this manner: To
wit, he sprinkled the Powder of the best Vitriol, on a bloody Towel, with an
express protestation, that he was unwilling to experience any thing, or to be
hereafter cured, if there were even the least cooperation of a contract, or of
the evil Spirit; yet that he saw the Wound to be healed sooner than was wont,
and the Blood also to be presently allayed: And therefore that afterward, he
believed that natural Causes, although unknown to us, did operate in the
aforesaid Sympathetical Cure: The which nevertheless, being not yet
sufficiently understood by its Causes, is as yet rejected, only as for the
enticements of Satan, by this Argument.

A natural Agent, that it may act, ought to be applied and most nearly to
approach unto the Patient.

But a Sympathetical Remedy, ought not to be most nearly applied unto the
Patient.

Therefore a Sympathetical Remedy is not a natural Agent.

I Answer; if it be understood, that a natural Agent ought immediately to touch
the Patient whereon it most nearly acts, with an immediateness of
Supposition, but remotely through the mediation of other Bodies laying between
or interposing, whereby that immediateness is communicated to an object at a
distance:

The Major Proposition is granted:

Because it is sufficient that the Agent does touch the Patient, or its proper
Object, and that at a distance immediately, with an immediateness of virtue.

And therefore, then the Minor Proposition is denied:

Because a Sympathetical Remedy ought immediately to be present, by an
immediateness of supposition, in that subject into which the action is first
received, but not in the part affected, whereinto it is secondarily and
ultimately received by supposed mediating Organs, wandering, and being extended
by an interval: For Fire is not in the hand of him that is heated, nor is the
Sun or the Heaven in the Chamber. But Sympathetical Remedies have at this day
been made known to be like unto influences in this; to wit, that not only the
Air, but a covered Rock, and thick or dark Bodies, are the capable Subject and
Organ of this action, no less than of a Starry influence: For neither does any
thing hinder in sublunary things, whereby God could not, or would not have made
those in some sort, less alike in this thing: Seeing that the manners of the
Grandfather, do sometimes not shine forth in the Son, but in the modern
Nephew: A sound also does ^i^rce far, etc. through the Bodies suitably or
exactly shut: Wherefore if thou art amazed ^^ the sphere of activity in
Sympathetical things, and do allow of them in Astral or starry Bodies, thou
may either grieve for thy Ignorance of those, or for thy credulity of these:
For truly the principle of an action of Sympathy, is a faculty akin to
influences, acting by an in-beaming into an object appropriated unto it self:
And God has known why those things are thus made or do thus come to pass: Who
has endowed his created things, according to his own Pleasure: For he was at
liberty to deliver his natural Endowments, even to the most abjected thing;s
neither can a Christian derive those gifts into the Devil, without Punishment:
But neither do I in this place contemplate of Sympathetical Remedies, as that I
believe the little Stone of Butler to act by a Sympathetical faculty: For truly
this Stone takes away a distance of the object, and gives an application unto
the object: To wit, it is a Remedy familiar unto Man's Archeus, and its virtue
is graduated unto a thousand fold, by the goodness of God: And therefore it
has respect unto the peace and quiet of the Archeus in his own Simplicity: For
let Young Beginners, before the Terrors of their Judgment, have regard, that
a Member at the biting of a Snake, does presently hugely swell, with great
pain, by reason of the storm of the imbittered Archeus, and that the Angry
sting does by its stroke, presently stir up an hard, painful, and composed
Tumor: For what if the Leprosy, or Plague, can speedily defile us with its
Contagion, what shall hinder, whereby our Archeus shall the less willingly
receive the Contagion of so most powerful a Remedy, if he be defiled by Poisons
against his will? If at least there ought to be in Nature, a like authority of
a Remedy, and of Poison, of divine goodness and of Maladies? Let us consider I
pray you, that so sudden a Flux of Maladies, may in like manner presently go
back or return, being appeased by an opposite re-flux: For I have seen one,
whose Fingers had promised the Disease Panaritium, being divided perhaps unto
the largness of his Arm, and had miserably tortured him for some restless
Nights, whereabout the Blood, and fresh Skin of a mold being wrapped, they by
the morrow morning had restored the Finger together with rest in the Night: For
reason required, that the Antidote ought even at the least to be equivolent
with the Poison: For the most swift Antidote of Ornietanus, in Poison, being
taken, and that raging even unto Convulsions, does so presently suppress all
Anguishes, and instant soundings, as if there were no Poison admitted within:
Because as a Disease is a defect of Nature, and the straying Archeus; So a
Remedy is of mere divine goodness; the which also having slidden down into
Nature, ought, as to equalize every defect, so also wholly to overcome it.
Therefore in one respect, the Remedy is far more powerful and famous than the
fault, and therefore also less in quantity, and far more swift than delay: And
that largeness and nobleness of Power, does not so much concern a superiority,
which with growth or increase is attained by little and little through the
obtainments of Maturities, as a present and effective majesty of things,
whereby the medicinal thing it self being unfolded by an endowed virtue, does
free, and restrain the Archeus from Impediments and Furies, and also does
imprint an eminent excellency of a helping faculty, for which things sake it
was created: These things it performs by the manner and swiftness of its
operation: But besides, as to that which concerns the Remedies of so great
goodness, and the efficacy of these;

First of all, it is manifest, that that little Stone of Butler, however
lightly it be tinged in one only spoonful of Oil, if that spoonful of Oil be
poured into a Can of Oil, yea into an Hogshead of Oil, it shall also be made a
Remedy; no otherwise than as a pestilent Odor does infect a whole Vessel with
its contagion. What if the Odor of a Sympathetical Remedy, being sprinkled on
a Towel with a few drops of Blood, be able to help a Wound, a Bone-breach, yea
and an Ulcer, and to appease the disturbed Archeus at a far distance; what
wonder is it, if a Remedy being administered to the Sick party himself, does do
that? Yea neither do the Remedies of Chyrurgions cure otherwise, than only by
touching at the wounded part; because Emplaisters or Oils, do not enter into
the vital composition of the bottom, or into the nourishment of the wounded
part. But in topical Ulcers bred and made in a place, such as are the Cancer,
Wolf, etc. Indeed the touching only of a powerful Remedy, is sufficient to
extinguish the Poison there arisen from the wroth Archeus: And let the same and
equal Judgment be concerning Apostems, Excrescences, Impostumated Ulcers, and
those sealed in a place it self, although first bred from elsewhere, but
devolved, and at length deposited in a place; because an external besmearing of
a Remedy, does by a certain attainment of co-touching, tame the whole Archeus,
no otherwise than as the Tooth of a mad Dog, although it be most exactly
scoured in the Wind, yet does sometimes bring madness: So also the Remedies of
our little Stone, do heal internal Affects; Yet they do the more and sooner
dart forth their Effects, if they are received in at the Mouth, no otherwise
than as some Poisons are void, unless they are derived or brought down into the
open Skin. But if these kind of Remedies shall but even lightly touch at the
Tongue, it is no wonder if that they presently affect the whole Archeus with
their powerful benevolence, and appease the straying Archeus from his fury, and
assuage him from all imbitteredness: Because that little Stone is of the Nature
of a Salt, which is in no wise melted in the Oil, neither does any thing
materially depart from it, which may be received in the Oil wherein it is
tinged, besides a gentle Odor, such as is the Odor of a pestilent impression
in the Plague. And a flourish or Essay of this little Stone, has seemed to me
to be in the holy Scriptures: That the Maker of sweet Oils, shall compose the
Paints or Varnishes of Sweetness, neither shall his Works be consummated or
come to an end: That is, although the little Stone be tinged in Oil, yet scarce
a point of its medicinal Virtue is diminished. Therefore if this excelling
Remedy be taken inwardly, it then does not only change the venal Blood into a
Medicine like a Balsam, but the very Excrements of a Man themselves (to wit,
his Urin) do remain tinged with its super-eminent goodness: No otherwise than
as the Eggs of a Hen do savor of beech-Corn being eaten, and as the Urin of a
sucking Infant does smell of Anise, if the Nurse has taken the Oil of Anise in
at the Mouth: And even as the Urin smells of eaten Asparagus; So also the Urin
by its own washing or anointing, does cure every Disease residing in the habit
of the Body.

Indeed, such is the goodness of God, that one only little Stone is sufficient
for many ten thousands, that the Physician may not excuse himself about the
Poor, discussing the charges of costs.

In brief, all Diseases are cured by one only Remedy, to wit, by anointing, or
by touching of the Tongue, or tasting alone: Because the Tongue is like unot an
open Skin, especially if the succeeding Spittle be presently swallowed. But
that there is so great a Power of this Remedy to be demonstrated, not only from
Poisons, and so from the similitude of a pestilent Air; but that because the
Remedy ought to be far more Powerful than every Malady, if it ought to overcome
it, and that indeed swiftly, and so, that it ought after some sort to express
the seal of divine goodness: Wherefore from the betokening of Philosophy it
self, I presently conjectured, that that Remedy does require:

First of all, that it be a Body once raised up, and once destroyed, and
afterward as it were after its Resurrection, after some sort glorified: And
therefore that neither may it be thenceforth any longer defileable by sublimary
Vices, and mischievous Acts or Injuries.

Hence it follows, that therefore it ought to be stronger by a thousand fold,
than any pestilent Venom, and to be operative in a more absolute manner; Seeing
the Poison of the Plague is simple, and sits in a corporal Air: For a Pestilent
Poison, is indeed the more familiarly co-fermented, by reason of a humane
Symbol or co-resemblance, but it is not therefore a more powerful Poison: For
a Poison does indeed, produce a Poison according to the Rule, and Ferment of
the former Poison, but it cannot exalt the Power of its Product above it self.
But in a Remedy rising again from Death, the bountiful goodness of its simple.
Being is increased unto a thousand fold, and through the thin Odor of its
co-touching, it is diffused, and enlarged into the Mean, and presently bears
command over the Archeus its Object: To wit, that he may compose himself
according to Peace and Virtue: For so the Arcanum introduces the Foster-child
of its Power, there is a hope and jubilee of the Archeus, truly existing, and
super-eminent in the Life.

In the next place, I have considered that this Remedy is not of the Monarchy
of Vegetables, because it is that which does easily spring up, and obtain too
slippery or fading Sprouts or Linages, and the which therefore are scarce
renewed by Art; because they are those which like unto living Creatures, do
easily die under the Artists hand; yet do they scarce rise again from Death,
seeing they do either wholly perish under the trial of the Fire, and loose
their former Virtues; or if they may seem as it were to rise again, yet they
are rather new Beings, altogether secluded from the path of their Predecessors
and Parents.

But whatsoever Paracelsus promises concerning his four Arcanums of his
Archidoxals, that they have a Super-elementary, and almost an infinite Virtue:
for the first, which supposes his Homunculus, it is so horrible as not to be
spoken of, Sodomitical, Diabolical, and in no respect to be mentioned. But the
other three are Chemical ones, whereunto a promise of extending themselves even
unto a tenth Generation, does not belong: But I speak in this place of a Paint
or Varnish, the Works whereof shall not be consummated; neither shall there be
a Disease or Poison resisting it: or as the Text has it, There shall not be a
Medicine of destruction in the Earth, and the Almighty has made all Nations of
the Earth curable.

But by a more full looking into the matter; all Diseases, because they issue
from the fountain of the Archeus, de give place, either by reason of Amulets
being hung on the Body, and Medicines bound about the same; or by reason of
Baths, Ointments, and Emplaisters, whereof there is not the least uniting with
the Diseasie Body, but only an Odor is offered; or if they are received
inwardly, and are digested as Medicines, yet they are even presently
transchanged into the Stomach, and do presently put on strange savours and
figures of qualities, as they do even fully put off every condition of their
former Life, unless they had rather be accounted ungrateful, or poysonsome: Yea
they are afterward altogether so truly transchanged, that they do wholly leave
behind them the Image of their former act of perfection, or may scarce be
reputed to have possessed it: In this respect indeed, are they for that Cause,
taken in a great quantity, or abundance, that they may seem the more inwardly
to breath some very small matter into a Man: And with what great damage that
is done, they have known, who have sometimes experienced, that to live
medicinally, is to live most miserably. Therefore scarce any thing of those
Medicines which are taken into the Body, does resemble its former Being; and if
it does show it forth, woe to the Receiver. Wherefore if there were any Virtue
in a Medicine, surely that was before it laid aside its own proper Nature, and
ancient Being: for it has presently failed, as soon as it has represented only
its Odor: Therefore the force of every Medicine is well nigh concluded in the
co-touching of its Odor, and in almost a certain momentary perfuming: Neither
is there therefore, so great reason for a disturbed Rumor, to wit, because the
Oils seasoned by the little Stone, do presently cure by their Odor: Let them
therefore be the murmurings of Young Beginners about the accustomednesses of
parts nourished: They are altogether vain, although it shall seem Wonders unto
Wits not yet meditating of unwonted matters, but being accustomed unto a
subscription alone; to wit, after what manner, the Archeus being driven into
Fury, being so suddenly touched even with a white wand of Peace, does fall
asleep, or being corrected, does abstain from his own mischief begun: But
surely that is less to be wondered at; seeing every thing does naturally desire
to be, and remain, and easily abstains from its own hurt, so it be made, or be
tractable for the pacifying of its conceived Grief, or Fury. What if a Flux of
Blood, an Ulcer, Wound, Bone-breach, may be presently restrained, and safely
healed, if the out-hunted venal Blood, corrupt Pus, or Sanies, be over-covered
with an absent Remedy? shall not the little Stone season the Oil with its
co-touching, that it may be able, being be-smeared or anointed, to cure a
Disease laying hid under it? For truly no other thing is denoted by these
Words: The Maker of sweet Ointments shall Compose the Paints or Varnishes of
Sweetness; neither shall his Works be Consummated or come to an end. For why
shall the little Stone touching at the Tongue, less cure, than Woolfes-bane
does cause the Tongue to swell by its co-touching? God has made benefits in
respect of Diseases, at least, equal in authority, if not much more famous, and
more: So far is it, that I should consecrate these kind of Effects to the
Devil; that I am the more powerfully moved in admiring of the divine Goodness,
to adore the most ready mercies of Jesus Christ my Lord, whereby without the
Labor of Physicians, Apothecaries, and others, who like Lice, are fatted only
by others Miseries; to wit, whereby the miserably Sick are the more safely and
speedily helped.

Indeed Examples of these things, have of late been made manifest in external
Diseases, to wit, in Wounds and Ulcers, that we may repay the Honor due to
God, out of the midst of our Ignorance of Causes, and may cease to refer those
things unto wicked Juggles, and uncertain Superstitions, and so unto the Works
of Satan, which are the issuing Pledges of divine Love, manifested from God in
the most afflicted Seasons of the deep Ignorance of Medicine, for the comfort
of the Miserable and Poor, who indeed would be called the Father of the Poor,
because he ought so to be.

I say this kind of Sympathetical Remedy in Wounds, has first, and that now
of late (by the permission of God) bewraied it self, to wit, that we may by
degrees, be led by the Hand, from external, and the more appearing Diseases,
unto the reliefes of internal, and the more abstruse Diseases: But that
Diseases should almost by the least point of a Medicine be put to flight: To
wit, that Butler could cure some ten thousands every year, by almost an
infinite Faculty or Virtue, the Text has persuaded me; That the Works of that
Maker of sweet Oils, shall not be Consummated or come to an end.

And then I ought to believe that thing, as being an eye Witness, that the
touching of his little Stone has blessed first a spoonful of Oil, and
afterward a whole little Bottle of Oil, with a medicinal Virtue.

Indeed, I have tried and attempted many things, and that long, about the
framing of that little Stone. I have learned indeed, that in the family of
Vegetables, there is the Herb Chameleon, and likewise Arsmart, which by their
touching alone, do presently take away cruel Diseases, or at leastwise do ease
them: I have seen I say, the Bone of the Arm of a Toad, presently to take away
the Toothach, at the first co-touching; some things to take away the
Falling Sickness, and the like Calamities: Therefore I have believed, that in
the Herby Family, a Remedy does also lay hid for every Disease; but surely that
they do only obtain an efficacy of particular Diseases, but do never ascend
unto a universal and renowned Government over every Disease. Wherefore I ran
over unto the race of Minerals, which is enriched with a long Flux of time or
ages.

First of all, that the Virtue of Stones is great, I ought to believe, being
admonished by the holy Scriptures. And first of all, I knew that every color,
and power of Gems or precious Stones, is begged from Metallic ones: Because
although Metallic Faculties are enclosed in Gems, by reason of the hardness of
their Crystal, yet they are commended in the holy Scriptures for great ones:
Therefore I consider, that in Metallic Bodies, the same Faculties or Virtues
of Gems, do more familiarly converse with us: For Picus in some Books unto his
Wife, does narrowly search, why Gold is of so great Price, also according to
the will and esteem of the Lord: But he was not able to determine his Question:
For it is certain and not to be doubted, that the names of the Planets are put
upon the seven Metals, as whereon the Celestial Virtues, we may believe, are
so clearly or famously conferred: But at leastwise, let them be the nourishing
or milky Juice of the whole terrestrial Globe: And therefore also for the price
of things, and the desires, and rewards of frequent handlings. But the Father
of the Poor has not disposed of Sol and Lune, of Gold I say, and Silver, for
the uses of Diseases in the Poor, for whom notwithstanding, he has been
eminetly careful; and therefore he has so firmly shut up Gold and Silver, that
they do for the most part, mock every endeavor of Artificers; so that when
they are thought to be most opened, they have slackened nothing from their
ancient bolts. But Quicksilver, although it seem to be a certain trembling
thing, and so also in this respect, very passable; yet there is nothing in the
whole race of Nature alike con-closed; even as elsewhere, I have in a long
Tract demonstrated against our fugitive Servants. Therefore scarce the hundred
thousandth of Artificers (not only of laboring Servants) does obtain the
Arcanums which are to be prepared of Sol, Lune, and Mercury.

There are therefore four Metals besides, which do more easily obey the
guidance, and desire of Artificers: So that Paracelsus does not vainly boast,
that with Lead alone, he was able to vanquish, perhaps two hundred sorts of
Diseases: And nothing does so alike victoriously act into the radical moisture,
as the first Being of Copper, or is more bountiful unto long Life, than the
Sulphur of Vitriol: Because it is that which does therefore point out the
Sulphur of the Philosophers.

Finally, Mars, although he be the cheapest in price, and despised for his
numerous offspring; yet he is not reputed (by Paracelsus) the last, from his
fighting Nature.

Truly, Metallic Bodies are e^^ally closed with the Seal of a safe or harmless
Homogeniety, or sameliness of kind, a cording to their Mercuries; but their
Sulphurs are never wroth with us, they afford mutual converses, if so be they
are rendered familiar unto us.

Furthermore, I a long time, and carefully, so meditated about the Stone of
Butler, that I thought of nothing else at the time of dreaming: For I did
oftentimes see the young ones of Chemistry taking preat gains, who should pour
forth bright-shining Trochies, like unto the little Stone of Butler: Wherefore
I long afterward attempted the framing thereof; and at length, although I
affirmed something to my self, to be undoubtedly the same little Stone which I
had seen in Butlers possession; yet the business succeeded not according to my
desire: And at length I knew, that my errors had proceeded from an accustomed
and ancient error of the Schools: For how many soever have hitherto intended
to heal by a removal of the occasional Cause, these consequently and
necessarily, have had need of a certain delay, and quantity of a Remedy; to
wit, whereby they might attain a superiority: But they who shall hereafter
intend to trample on a Disease only by a restoration, and restitution of the
successive alteration of the Archeus, to wit, they contending to induce a
placable Ferment; Surely these Men shall attain their scope, by despising the
quantity of a Remedy, and only by the touch of a fermental Odor. I therefore
being as yet seduced by an ancient Error, Ignorant of a Diseasifying Essence,
did believe that every great Disease was to be put to flight, not but by the
great quantity of a Remedy, and a long delay of healing: To wit, I meting out
the greatness of a Remedy, not indeed from a Power of Endowment; but from the
mere, and only abounding of its quantity. For I, after the manner of the
Schools, deriving Examples from artificial things, have also erred with the
Doctrine of the same: For I being seduced, thought, as two Horses do draw more
strongly than one alone, and a whole Loaf nourishes more powerfully than a
Crum thereof; so likewise I thought, that for a restorative Remedy of the
Archeus, the quantity of Ounces, and Drams was required, which might exceed the
products of Diseases in strength, and weight. Indeed I had not yet laid aside
the contracted blemish of an ancient Error, whereby Diseases are measured only
by their occasional Cause, and the weight thereof; but not by the true
efficient Cause of Diseases: For I being as yet sufficiently confirmed, did not
yet call to mind, that every Disease was framed and governed by the Archeus of
Life, to wit, by the Life it self: And much less did I as yet thoroughly weigh,
that the erring Life would not be conquered, and subdued by the quantity of a
Remedy: Wherefore I soon again considered of what I said before: To wit, That
the Tooth of a mad Dog, of a Viper, of a wood Serpent or Land Snake, although
their Spittle were first cleansed or wiped off in a Garment, yet that it would
kill by its touching alone, without any of its quantity. I considered likewise,
that a Liquor was known unto me, wherewith, the Hand being gently anointed, and
it being dried up, if the Chin of a Man should touch at that Hand, the hairs
of the Beard, Eyebrows, and of the whole Body, would a little after fall off:
For if these kind of Poisons do by a gentle touching extinguish the vegetative
Life; yea and that of the hairs, which do oftentimes grow after burial; that
also, Porestative or Powerful Remedies, to wit, those which will restrain the
Errors of the Life, only by their touch, would by an easy Compendium or
breviary, and without any perceivable quantity, besmeare, and pacific the
Archeus. Indeed I was the more slowly able to apprehend that thing, being
partly prevented by the aforesaid Errors of the Schools; and partly because I
saw, that if Poisons did kill by one only grain, they did the more powerfully,
and speedily effect that by one dram: For I did not yet thoroughly consider, that
all Diseases did proceed from the Archeus, erring, or enraged; and so that a
Potestative Remedy, has a super-eminent, and no vulgar goodness, whereby it
restores the Errors of the wroth and angry Archeus: And much less had I as
yet thoroughly weighed, that therefore a Potestative Medicine ought to be
inwardly admitted, as it were without the knowledge of the Archeus: Otherwise,
if he does suspect his turbulency of indignation and alteration, to be set
upon, or attempted by Remedies, certainly he presently falls down into furies,
he will not admit of helpful things, who being himself now Apogaeal or remote
from his Center, does through his own Error, prove exorbitant, and will rise
up into a greater wrothfulness, and conceptions of stubbornness, the fabric of
his own Diseasifying Idea. Wherefore I have most nearly approached unto the
touchings of Butler, with the top of the Tongue alone, or unto Remedies
administered in the weight of half a grain: For I (for want of a name) have
called the little Stone of Butler, and a Potestative, and Fermental Remedy of
that sort, after our mother Tongue, Drif; which denotes a virgin Sand or
Earth; and likewise in sensitive Creatures, a chasing or expelling Animosity or
Sturdiness; no otherwise than as boiling Sand does shake off whatsoever
foreign thing is inserted in it,

Therefore first; I will show the things required in Drif, and afterward the
manner of its composition; so far as is permitted to a Philosopher, I will
declare, least I shall prostrate Roses before Swine.

1. Drif therefore, first of all, even as I have said, requires, that it be a
certain Metallic Body: Because it is that which by its long delay, does
signify constancy, but not a hastened Corruption: And it has completed its
circle of generation, through a long favor of the Heaven: and it seems to be
that which by a particular ordination, is directed by the Almighty for the help
of the Miserable and Poor.

2. Drif is not of those unwonted Arcanums not bestowed by God, but on a very
few Adeptists, they only being certain of his choice Disciples: For truly, our
Drif seems to be only ordained for the comfort of the Poor.

3. Drif requires, that it be indeed of a Natural Body, partaker of a
Metallic bounty, but that before, it be first made obedient and openea by
Death; not indeed with an extinguishment of its Virtues or Faculties, or like a
Carcass dying of its own accord; but the benefits of its natural Endowments
being retained, that it be unlocked by the Artificer, being free from its
bolts, and as it were raised up again; yea that it be an enriched, and plainly
a new Being, and rising afresh from the fire.

4. And therefore it ought to have risen again, being as it were altogether
Volatile after Death, and spiritual, or to be twice or thrice sublimed, with
other things added unto it.

5. But because volatile things do soon perish, are dispersed, and dissolved,
even before they are admitted within, do pierce, and draw their excellencies
out of their Bosom, or so are able to pacify the Archeus: therefore Drif
requires, that after its volatility being obtained, it be connexed unto a
certain friendly Body, whereby it may be detained, and in its Bride-bed be
communicable unto man's Body, and grateful and familiar unto our Archeus: And
therefore, it ought to obtain that thing, as it were a middle place between a
Body that is easily and not easily difflable or to be blown away: And likewise
it ought to be connexed unto its mean, while its heat being now almost at the
highest, it shall be mild; to wit, least the volatitle Body, in the co-kniting,
do in a great part of it, fly away.

6. And for this cause, it ought to be plainly fermental, not only in its
constancy of Body, but in the extension of its virtues; so that through the
least participation of its Odor it may be able to extend its virtues into the
Archeus, and to sleepifie and assuage the same.

In which Six Particulars, as Drif is described; so in a like Number its
Composition is discovered.

First of all, In the Book of the Disease of the Stone, in the dainty dish for
Young Beginners, I have explained a manner of Distilling, whereby the Spirit of
Sea Salt is drawn or allured forth with Potters Earth being dried. For the Salt
of the Sea is akin unto us, and desirable by us, neither is it adverse unto us
in any of its Tenor. Therefore for Drif, the residing Salt of the Sea,
remaining in its Dreg is required, to wit, it being extracted from its Dreg or
Lee, which is called the Caput Mortuum or Dead Head. That Salt, I say, being
now spoiled of its Spirits, does desire strange ones, and does lay them up
within it self: yet it does not altogether stubbornly fix them.

2. I have likewise taught, That the first Being of Venus or Copper, cannot be
sequestered but by the Death and Separation of its Mercury from its Sulphur: But
moreover, that neither is that Sulphur to be had but in the possession of
Adeptists, whose number as it is choice and most rare, so also it is altogether
small.

3. I have taught moreover, That in Vitriol, however its Venus being now
depraved, and the more often distilled, yet that the very actual Venus does as
yet remain.

4. Wherefore Drif it self requires at leastwise a Sequestration of the Venus
from the Feces or Dreg of the Vitriol, which is not otherwise completed than
by Subliming.

5. Which Sublimation is also of necessity made and perfected by a foreign
fermental Being; yet altogether friendly to the Archeus.

6. Therefore the Sea Salt extracted out of its Dreg, being poured forth,
before its every way co-thickening; Let about a threefold quantity of the Being
of Venus, being raised again by Subliming, and accompanied with its strange or
foreign Ferment, be co-mixed with it: and presently let the roof be covered.
But when they shall become wholly cold, beat them into a Powder under Marble,
and adjoyn thereto, about a tenfold quantity of Usnea or the Moss of a Dead
Man's Skul, in respect of the Ens or Being of Venus. Which Powder compact thou
into Trochies upon a Stone, with mouth or fish-glew being dissolved: And thou
have a Noble Medicine.

CHAP. LXXX. Of material things Injected or Cast into the Body.
1. What material things are Cast in from without. 2. Some Histories. 3. The
Matter of the Deed is admitted, yet it is Disputed concerning the Manner of
Injection. 4. The penury of Judgment in a Searcher out of Magical things. 5.
That it does not exceed Nature, that a solid Body is derived without breaking,
by a Passage far more narrow than it self. 6. A History rehearsed by Cornelius
Gemma. 7. Some Histories of the piercing of Bodies. 8. The piercing of Bodies
in passing through to a Place, is proved. 9 The same thing in passing through out
of a Body. 10. There has been a familiar piercing of the Dimensions of humane
Nature. 11. The same Property does sometimes persist in the Seeds of things. 12
After what manner those things may naturally happen. 13. By a like Example in
dark Bodies, which cease to be seen. 14. A Reason by a Conjecture. 15. There is
an especial and free force concurring in Enchanting, and therefore also natural
unto man. 16. A man as he is the Image of God, does create some Beings, which
are something more than Non-beings. 17. In an imagined Being or a formed Idea,
there is a right of Entity or Beingnesse. 18. After what manner an Idea may
fall out from the Imagination. 19. How the Soul of man does create Images. 20.
An Objection is Solved. 21. Some Paradoxes of the imagining Soul, for the
constituting of an Idea.

ANd then also there are things Injected or cast into the Body, which do
suppose a visible matter. Of which sort are Darts or Arrow-heads, Sharp
Thorns, Chaffs, Hairs, Sawings, little Stones, shells of Eggs, and earthen
Pots, Parings or Shells, and Husks, Insects, Naperies or pieces of Linen
Cloth, Needles, Instruments of Artificers, the which are indeed unsensibly
darted into the Body, and do enter altogether after an invisible manner; yet
are they detained and cast forth with cruel Torments: And it may be, are
oftentimes greater than their hole whereby they are sent in.

For of late there was part of a Buffe or Ox Hide Injected through the pores of
the skin, the skin remaining entire; the which the Chyrugion drew out with his
Tongues unto the bigness of the Palm of ones hand: Yet an Aposteme was first
ripened: But a Witch being burnt at Bruges, confessed that she had cast in that
piece of Hide into the good Man.

So in times past we have seen the Children of Orphans to have cast up by Vomit
the sharp Stake of an Harp, it being drawn out by the hands of the Standers by:
To wit, the four-footed Bench or Balk, being furnished with its wheel and
Strings. But in whatsoever situation the sharp Stake could be placed, it was
easily (by twofold) bigger than the Throat.

I have seen at Antwerp in the Year 1622, a little Maid, who might vomit up
perhaps two thousand of Pins, together with Hairs and Filths, in a heap or lump.

Another Virgin in the Year 1631. At Mecheline, who we being present, did Vomit
up Wooden Sweepings shaved of with a Plain by plaining, together with much
sliminess, unto the quantity of two Fists.

It is a frequent thing, being seen in many places, and admitted of by Learned
men: Yet the more deriding ones do stick at it, because they cannot understand,
how things which are far more big, do go forth through a small passage. For some
do excuse the matter, so that although they may seem to be rejected by vomit;
yet they will have them never to be admitted within: I say they esteem them the
mockeries and bewitchings of the eyes, while they issue forth to appear anew,
and do bring us tidings afar off. Indeed they do admit of true things: For
Insects do live, Metals are melted, and Woods do burn; all things do by
degrees voluntarily go forth, or are drawn forth with the hand: But others
think, that in very deed such things are cast within and darted into the Body;
but they know not the manner thereof.

Delrio with his followers do grant, that they are brought within the Body, and
that they are in very deed such as they appear to be, and therefore they refute
the foregoing Opinion. But as to the manner of entrance and utterance, they
affirm, That those things are broken in pieces by the Devil into a most fine
powder, that they are restored within in the Body, into their former integrity,
figure and conditions: But while they issue forth, they affirm them to be again
beaten into fine powder, and that in the instant time of their going forth, and
on this side the strait or narrow port they are again reduced into their
ancient Being; to wit, that Woods, Needles, Toads, living Creatures, are broken
into powder, and as often reduced unto their former habit, and to revive: For
these men, do deny that they do agree with the other in the foregoing Opinion;
while as notwithstanding they say the same thing with them, for their
utterance, and entrance: To wit, that those things do not in very deed enter,
or go forth, even as otherwise they seem unto the standers by, seeing they
enter or go forth whole: but being first poudered. They suppose the same
bewitching of the eyes, which do think things to be whole which are only
powders.

For Martin Delrio does frequently suppose that, indeed to infringe his own
Judgments: For concerning Magical Inquisitions, in his Treatise of the making
of Gold, when as he had Geber, and Bonus Ferrariensis, he at length when as he
declares his own Judgment, does forge 18 Contradictories. Truly I believe that
it is resistant with piety, if a power which exceeds Nature be attributed to
the Devil; To wit, to make, destroy, and again to re-make, and so often to
reduce the same thing from a privation unto a habit, whose dispositive seed had
already come unto its end. But those that are ignorant of Nature, do presume
that they are the Secretaries of Nature by the reading of Books: but whatsoever
lies hid unto them, let it be either unpossible or false, or juggling and
diabolical: As if Satan were above Nature, and could operate things impossible
to Nature.

I grant him indeed a foreign manner in operating (...) but surely he, as yet,
ought to be restrained within Nature.

Therefore I will show, that there is not plainly a need of the help of Satan,
that a certain

Corn. Gemma concerning Cosmocriticks or Judicials of the World, has
mentioned,

For I have seen at Bruxels in the Year 1599, that an Ox having taken three
Herbs, vomited up a Dargon with his Tail like an Eele, a Hidy Body, a
Serpentine Head, he being no less than a Partridge. The manner is unknown how
Nature could do that. The manner is alike unknown how Satan could do that. They
therefore gain nothing who refer the work of Nature unto the Devil. But whether
they do sin others shall see: For it has been at leastwise an invention of
huge sloth, to have referred all things which we do not comprehend, unto the
Devil.

Truly I find a very near, or co-touching penetration of the dimensions of
Nature, although not an ordinary one. Neither will I that the Devil be invoked
to satisfy us in our questions, through a rash attributing of Powers unto him.

There is a History of a Polonian, a Country fellow, being lately seen by the
son of the Lord Ericius Pouteanus: The rude man had attempted to open a
Squinancy in his own

Likewise at Vilvord, in the Year 1636, a countryman, known to me, being
willing to fat a Cow, gave her every day a pot wherein he had boiled pot herbs
with bran: At length she becomes more and more lean daily, and began to halt
with her right leg: the Cow being slain, a short knife of his Wifes being
wreathen into a box haft, was found hidden between her ribs and shoulder blade;
for the country-woman in cutting of Rape roots, had left the knife among the
pot herbs, and the Cow in drinking had swallowed it.

In like manner Ambrose Pareus, relates of a certain man, whom Robbers had
compelled to swallow a knife, the which he afterward safely restored by an
Aposteme of his side.

Alexander Benedict mentions another, whose Back a Dart had pierced, the hook
or crook whereof, of the breadth of three fingers, he afterward voided through
his fundament without hurt.

The same man tells of a Venetian Maid, who had swallowed a Needle, and she two
years after voided it our by Urine, being incrusted in a stone.

The same thing Anth. Benevine, that a Woman of Tuscany had swallowed a copper
Needle, the which three years after, she being in health, had voided nigh her
Navil.

Valesius de Taranto tells of a Venetian Maid (perhaps the same) who cast forth
a needle of three fingers length with her Urine.

A certain Capuchin of Eburo, called Bullonius, his Surname being Hampreau,
drank a great Spider, which he had seen to have fallen down into the Challico
alive, at the time of the daily Sacrifice, with much averseness of mind. Within
few days a Phlegmone or enflamed Tumor arose in his right Thigh, and at the
time of the first corrupt pus, he restored the Spider whole from thence, yet
dead.

A Merchant of Antwerp, his young man playing at Venice with an unripe ear of
Barley in his mouth, swallowed down the same with great fear of Choking: After
three weeks from thence, an Aposteme appeared in his left side above his
girdle, and at length, the same ear of Barley was drawn out whole with the
corrupt pus, it being now of a clayie color, but he escaped safe.

According to Fernelius, a studious man is read to be restored by him, who
rendered an Ear of Corn through his Ribs.

Writers also do rehearse, that the Young being sometimes dead and consumed in
the Womb, has dismissed its bones through the Womb and Abdomen by the Navil,
and sometimes by the Fundament.

Many such like things are met withal among Authors here and there, which are
worthy of credit: Whereby it is manifest, that solid Bodies, big enough, have
prerced the Stomach, Intestines, Womb, the Omentum or Caul of the Belly,
Abdomen, Pleura or Skin girding the Ribs, Bladder, Membranes, I say, which are
impatient of such a Wound, That is, knives to have been transmitted through
those Membranes without a Wound: which is equivolent with the piercing of
Dimensions, made in Nature without the help of the Devil.

But that the Body of a Man may be drawn through a small hole, through which a
Cat only is able to pass, yet not through a Wall: Yea that the Devil is not able
to break a Paper Window without the consent of his Master; is to be seen by the
Process and Arrest pronounced against a He Witch by Lodowick Godfred, at
Aquisgrane of Narbonie, on the last Day of [the second Month called] April,
1611.

At length, where have three pounds of Brass of a piece of Ordinance marked by
its letters lurked in the Body? After what manner shall the dross grow so many
Months? in what part is a piece of Brass detained, which is bigger than the
Intestine? For while I treated of a necessary Vacuum in the Air, I promised
that I would declare, that although a penetration of Bodies be forbidden, by
the primary Law of Nature, and after the common manner of Artificers; yet while
a Body does wholly pass over, and is translated into the jurisdiction of a
Spirit, and is as it were weakened by it, that then Bodies do naturally pierce
each other, at leastwise in what part they are porie: because the Spirit does
then shut up the Body under it self, and so does as it were take away
dimensions.

I will premise some things: A desire of eating Muskles invaded a Woman great
with etc. do generate seminal Idea's, which the Hand of a Woman great with
Child does dismiss unto the Young, and decyphers in a set place; so the joy of
that being found, which was desired, brings or derives that very thing unto the
Young: For so the sorrow of the Knife being swallowed, the horror of the
Spider being drunk, and of the Ear of Barley being devoured, does repulse the
same, through the Membranes which are impotent of, or unable to endure a Wound
without Death. These things, of things injected, which enter the Body by an
ordinary Power of Nature, without the suspicion of a cooperation of the Devil.
Some such like thing there is, in things that are from within, drawn out of the
Body, the which I will enclose in one only, or two Examples.

The Wife of a Tailor of Mecheline, saw before her Door, a Soldier to loose
his Hand in a Combat, she being presently smitten with horror, brought forth
a Daughter with one Hand, but dead, through an unfortunate and bloody Arm,
because the Hand thereof was not found, and a flux of Blood did kill the Infant.

The Wife of Marcus of Vogelar, a Merchant of Antwerp, in the year 1602, seeing
a Soldier begging, whose right Arm, an Iron Bullet had taken away in the Siege
of Ostend, and who as yet, carried that Arm about with him bloody; by and by
after, she brought forth a Daughter deprived of an Arm, and that indeed her
right one, the Shoulder whereof being as yet bloody, ought to be made whole by
the Chyrurgion; she married a Merchant of Amsterdam, whose name was Hoocheamer,
she also surviving in the year 1638: But her right Arm was no where to be
found, nor its Bones, neither appeared there any putrefying Disease, for which
the Arm had withered away in a small hours space: Yet while the Soldier was
not as yet beheld, the Young had two Arms: Neither could the Arm that was rent
off, be annihilated: Therefore the Arm was taken away, the Womb being shut: but
who plucked it off, naturally, and which way it was taken away, surely, trivial
reasons do not square in so great a Wonder, or Paradox. I am not he that will
show these things; only these things I will say, that the Arm was not taken
away, as neither rent off by Satan: And then, that it was a thing of less
labor, for the Arm being rent off, to be derived else where, than it was to
have plucked off the Arm from the whole Body, without Death.

A Merchants Wife known to us, as soon as she heard, that 13 were to beheaded in
one morning (it happened at Antwerp, in the time of Duke Alban or D'^lue,) and
Women great with Child are led by inordinate Appeties) she determined to behold
the beheadings: Therefore she went up into the Chamber of a Widow, her familiar
acquaintance, dwelling in the Market place; and the spectacl being seen, a
travail pain presently surprised her, and she brought forth a mature Infant
with a bloody Neck, whose Head no where appeared: At leastwise, I do not find,
that man's Nature does abominate the piercing of dimensions, seeing it is most
frequent to the Seeds of things. Thou shall bring forth Children in Sorrow, is
the punishment of Sin: Before Sin therefore, she had naturally brought forth
tall Young, without pain, at leastwise of that bigness, with which we are now
born: But not that a Woman had been unsensible before Sin, but because it had
gone forth, the Womb being shut. Therefore it was a proper or familiar thing to
humane Nature from his Creation, for dimensions to pierce each other; because
he was made, that he might live in the Flesh, according to the Spirit: But
Nature being corrupted, that authority of his Spirit over his Body perished;
and therefore Woman does thence-forward, bring forth after the manner of
Bruits: Yea Writers do make mention, that Ulcers or Imposthumes are made through
the Bones, that all things are carried upwards and downwards, without the
guidance, or commerce of the Vessels.

Indeed that primitive efficacy of piercing Bodies, does as yet consist in the
seeds of things; but is not subjected by humane force, art, or will, or
judgment: For there are

And the Seeds do act this by virtue of a certain Spirit, the Archeus: For
although

For example, Aquafortis does by its Spirit make Brass, Iron, or Silver,
remaining in their own Nature thick or dark, so transparent, that they cannot
be seen, and does transport

First of all, let it be supposed, that the Devil has no authority or command
over us For know ye not, that we are the Temple of God? and that the very
Kingdom of God dwells in us? which thing, is to be re-furrowed from its
original.

First therefore, it is of Faith, that we are the sanctuary of the holy Spirit,
that the holy sacred Trinity does make its mansion with the Just; That the
delights of God are with the Sons of Men, unto whom he has given Power to
become the Sons of God; but Children being Baptized, are innocent, just, of
them is the Kingdom of God, the fitted Temple of God: Yet Children are killed
by enchantments, sooner than others: Therefore it must needs be, that that
thing happens from some free Faculty, that it concludes with the excellency of
a Christian, (especially of a righteous Man) that the Devil has no right or
authority of entering, or introducing of his Means; Seeing it is all one to him,
to have hurt by a medium, or by himself.

There is therefore a far other Power of enchantment, besides the Devil; and
therefore

For first of all, while those kind of conceived Idea's, do at length cloth
themselves with a Body, in the show of an Image framed by the imagination, they
are now made Beings, subsisting in the middle of that garment, wherein they do
equally reside throughout its whole; and in this respect do become seminal, and
operative Beings; to wit, by whom their very own assumed Subjects are
straightway wholly directed: But this Power is given only to Man: Otherwise, a
seminal virtue for propagation, is given to the Earth, bruit Beasts, Plants,
etc. And likewise, a Dog is able by madness, to transfer his Spittle into a
Poison, because it is proper or natural to his Species: The which also is easy
to be seen in diverse Poisons of living Creatures: But to form Idea's
abstracted from their Species, and adjacent properties, that is granted to none
but Man. Also by a more full

But I consider of these things; not that Essaies or flourishes of Idea's do
fore-exist in us, before that which is Imaginatively conceived, that they may
be the conceived Images of a proper name; but that they are made by a
co-touching of the imagining Power in act, (that is by the Image of that which
forms) and of the Object imagined: And therefore the Soul does nakedly form
an Image out of its own Bosom, the which, unless it do presently bind up in the
Archeus, it also perishes, and for that very cause becomes barren: Neither
does that hinder, that in Fevers, or Diseasie watchings, we do against our will
experience the shadows of Images: To wit, the which foolish shadows of Images,
do walk up and down without a connection and discourse, before the imaginative
Faculty:

I answer therefore unto the first Objection: That as Fire is not present in
the Steel and Flint, before a co-smiting of them: So neither does any essay of
Beingness, or footstep of an Image fore-exist, before a conception, and
co-rubbing of the imaginative Faculty on the Object; but every original entity
of an Idea, does arise in the act of conceiving; and a true Idea is made, while
the spark (which elsewhere should presently perish) does fall upon the Fuel,
and the conceived Image falls on the imagining Fuel of the Archeus, from whence
the most powerful flames of Diseases do follow. Notwithstanding, because the
treatise of Idea's does most nearly touch Conceptions, I defer, and omit
further to discourse of Idea's.

CHAP. LXXXI. The manner of Entrance, of things Darted into the Body.
1. The one only means whereby the Devil does cooperate in darting things into
the Body, is the juggling deceit of the Eyes, that they may enter invisibly. 2.
A motive and determined or limited Blas belongs to the Devil. 3. How much Man
may contribute hereunto. 4. The primary or chief Curing of things injected. 5.
A natural Cure. 6. The variety of Gifts in Simples. 7. The Author proceeds by
way of naming them 8. Karichterus is commended. 9 A fore-caution in Herbs. 10.
The manner whereby things cast into the Body, being once expelled forth, do
hasten their rejections.

I Will now proceed to supply the manner, whereby things darted or injected
into the Body, do enter or are admitted; and also I will subjoin their Remedies.

First of all, things injected or cast into the Body, do enter it invisible:
And this one thing is merely diabolical. For truly, the most miserably Mocker,
seeing he has nothing

Things therefore which are to be cast in, being made invisible, the Devil
transferreth unto an Object, the Idea of man's desire directing their passage:
For because it is not any

The Cure of things injected, is performed partly by Remedies, famous from the
rise according to Tobias, is read to be. And such as that of Solomon, or
Eleazer, according to Josephus, Lib. 8. Chap. 2.

For some Simples do drive away evil Spirits (a miserable rout of Men it is
which gives

In the next place others take away the penetration of a formal light, being
fast tied to excrements: Some likewise do at least hinder their touching,
entrance, or application.

Finally, many Simples there are which do correct those kind of Poisons, and
kill them.

First of all, the Mineral Electrum or Amber of Paracelsus, which is immature,
being hung on the neck, freeth those whom an unclean Spirit does persecute; the
which I my self have seen. But I remember that the drink thereof has delivered
many from Sorceries: But there is none, who (that Simple being hung on the
Body) which shall not prevent, that things Injected are not sent or admitted
within, or that is presently not loosed from importunate bands.

Barth Karichterus chief Physician to Maximilian the Second, the chief among
Physicians (that I know of) has dedicated a small Germane Treatise (as taking
compassion on Daurant (it is the Phu of Diascorides) with Purple Flowers (it is
the last kind of Valerian in the last Edition of Mathiolus) before all; I also
greatly esteem Vervaine with a Purple Flower, the more herby St. John's Wort
with a small Flower, Southernwood, Adia^tum or Venus hair, Rue, etc. And
likewise red Coral, and the extracted tincture thereof, I have experienced to
have brought much refreshment.

We must use the Herbs raw, cut, but not boiled: Because their entire power
consists in the integrity of their composed Body. Therefore the Ideal faculty
of the herbs perishes

Those things indeed do thus rightly perish, yet the relapsing returns thereof,
are not thus hindered. Therefore things Injected which were expelled, are more
rightly involved

The weakness therefore of an in-darting Being is deservedly suspected, which
cannot send in things that are to be cast into the Body, because a certain
hindering Herb is present, and President. Therefore the force which derives
things Injected inwards, is not that of the Prince of this World, and of a most
powerful Spirit: But that of a certain Ideal and more infirm Being, which does
so easily hinder all entrance for the future.

CHAP. LXXXII. Of Things Conceived, or Conceptions.
1 The Spleen is the Seat of the first Conceptions. 2. As well the Idea's of
the Immagination, as Archeal ones, do issue from the Spleen their Fountain. 3.
Therefore also they smell of an Hypocondrial faculty or quality. 4. The Plague
always begins about the Stomach. 5. Of soulified Conceptions. 6. Idea's from
the Womb. 7. Madnesses. 8. A mad Irreligion. 9. The reality of Conceptions in
respect of the Matter and efficient Cause. 10. Presumption does blind almost
all mortal Men. 11. An occult madness. 12. Diseasie Conceptions. 13. Diseases
of the Womb. 14. Womb Fantasies. 15. An instruction of every Monarchy. 16. A
double Government in a Woman. 17. The Womb is not ill at ease but from things
conceived. 18. The Female Sex is miserable. 19. Diseases of the Womb differ
from their Products. 20. The Cure of its last or utmost Fury. 21. A twofold
Idea of things Conceived. 22. The rise and progress of a Feverish Dotage. 23.
The progress of Idea's unto their maturities. 24. The Entry of all good is in
Faith. 25. The flourishing of Passions.

MOreover, a Diseasie Being is like unto things Injected, the which I call that
of things conceived; For although this Being does not come to us from without,
nor is nourished from elsewhere; Yea neither does Satan cooperate with it: yet
because it does not much differ in its root, manner of making, and a certain
likeness d^^fects, from some Injected things, I have not unadvisedly referred
things Conceived, among Spiritual things Received: Unto the clearing up
whereof, I have already premised many Prologues.

Wherefore I have already elsewhere demonstrated the Imaginative Power of the
first Conceptions to be in the Spleen, and that it is from thence extended unto
the Stomach

The Spleen therefore is as well the Fountain of Idea's Conceived in the
imaginative faculty of a man, as of the Archeus himself. The Archeus has his
own and peculiar Imaginations

Surely the Conceptions of the Archeus, do forthwith attain the most powerful
determinations in the aforesaid places: Because they smell of their native
place, they are

Therefore indeed the Plague, whether it be made from a terror conceived in
the Soul, or next from a proper Vice of the Archeus, yet it always holds its
first consultations about

I will now treat of soulified Conceptions, because they are the more distinct,
and sensible ones; whosoever they be, which do as it were weaken, insatuate,
and now and then enchant

Indeed the Womb, although it be a mere Membrane, yet it is another Spleen: And

For they stamp Idea's on themselves, whereby they no otherwise than as Witches
driven about with a malignant Spirit of despair, are oftentimes governed, or
are snatched Plutarch witnesses) a desire of Death by hanging, took hold of
all the young Maids in the Island of Chios: neither could it be stayed but by
shame or bashfulness, sore threatened unto them after death. Seeing therefore
the Vice of things Conceived does also touch men; let the Reader be averse to
wearisomness, if it shall behove me to stay the longer in these things, who as
the first, do touch at this string in healing.

Therefore, if mortals shall dash themselves into a presumption of Faith, if
they depart from the Word of God, and for the explications of their own consent
in Opinion, do as

We must here again call to mind with the first, that all Ideal Images are
seminal in respect of a real Being brought forth by imagination: And then in
respect of the Spirits Yet is it as it were proper unto the most of mortals:
For by reason of Virtues, Wit, Learning, Birth, Riches, Beauty, Strength,
Boldness or Courage, Arts, much Talking or Voice, every one forgeth Idea's
applauding himself; the which do make almost the whole World mad: Of whom it is
said, That the number of Fools are Infinite. But the most hurtful madness of
Presumptions is in Political matters, and it is that of boldness, because it is
that which does oftentimes subject its own unto a tormenter.

Surely madness is seldom without Presumption, if Stupidity be not akin to it:
For indeed the Idea of Faith, Despair, Scruple, Irreligion, Arrogance, Esteem;
etc. because they respect the Powers which are more abstracted and
Intellectual, and do the more oppose infused Grace, they do for the most part,
so beget a hidden madness, that it is not but slowly discerned by Spiritual,
and those much Exercised men. Which be-madding Idea's, those do follow in
Order, which belong to the more corporeal Disturbances.

For first of all, as an hard emulation of Jealousy, is a Hell, which throws a
man headlong into very many Miseries: Also, in the next place, the Idea's of
Lust and Fornication, do besides Madnesses, stir up also many Sicknesses
together.

But all Exorbitancies of Disturbances, if they are sudden, strong, frequent,
or of daily continuance, they imprint Idea's and Infirmities like unto
themselves, therefore also durable

For the Womb, as it has a particular Monarchy, so also particular Diseases:
Because every exorbitant affect of the Womb, is a certain madness, or befooling
of the Archeus in

Surely it lists me to contemplate of a Power in the Womb, like unto the
imaginative one of the first motions; As it were of a most powerful Blas of the
Stars, turning and overturning

But for the instruction or orderly preparing of every Monarchy, a certain
governing

From whence the argument of a twofold Monarchy in a Woman, is at leastwise
seen:

To wit, from a duality of the Womb with the Body of the Woman, the Enemy of

From whence entire Idea's may be not unfitly discerned from corrupted ones.
For seeing the Womb governs it self, and lives in its own Orb, from a strange
venal Blood; therefore it is scarce ill at ease, unless it be weakened by a
Being of things conceived; yea it is always after some sort mad, as often as it
is ill at ease: For whether the monthly etc. it is all one; because its Fury
varieth not but by its Tragedies, wherein it abuses its Power, and the Womb
sporteth by a Monarchal liberty, over the whole entire Body: For truly, without
material Vapors, it bears the Keys, wherewith it open the Veins, stirs up
incredible fluxes of Blood, and without any motion of it, it shuts the Pores of
the Lungs according to its desire, yea and takes away the transpiration of the
whole Body at its own pleasure: For it is president or bears sway over the Moon
in the Body, it despises Age, Nature, Maturity, and untimely Ripeness: And
likewise it causes Abortions, and takes away fruitfulness, and in the mean
time, compleats its voluptious Fury by a Lord-like tyranny: It perfects the
sore shakings of the Joints, deprivings of Speech, dis-joyntings of the
Knuckles, for the Luxury of its Fury: And although a Woman be not mad under so
great Evils, yet the Womb is mad in all the aforesaid exorbitances.

She is miserable therefore, who lays under such a command; She is subject I
say, unto so many Diseases as a Man, and does again obey the same from the
Being of her Womb: Eve she is guilty of a double offense: Yet the Womb is not a
part of the Man, as she is a man. It is indeed in man, and lives by his venal
Blood, no otherwise than as Glue by a Tree, and that sexual part commands the
whole Body, much more powerfully, than the Stones do in a Cock or a Bull, who
in their gelded ones do express notable varieties. For truly, not only every
part does hearken unto the Womb; but the violent commands of the mad Womb do
punish the Body of the Woman, together with her Life. Indeed the passions of
the Soul do only stir up the Womb, as it were a sleeping Dog, and the Womb does
thereby assume a cruelty, and presently compels the innocent Woman to repent of
its madness: And moreover also, it oftentimes reflects its fury on the very
Powers of the mind, by which it had been long since provoked, that it may boast
of its absolute command over all things. For the Idea's of the passions of the
Soul, as often as they are importunate on the Womb, if they are introduced into
the angryable Faculty of the Womb, and do pierce it, they as foreign and
hateful ones, do straightway disturb it; from whence the impatient Womb does
stir up it self into diverse furies: Which thing also even from thence, was not
hid to Plato, while he named the Womb a furious living Creature.

In the next place, although from the fury of the Womb, as well the proper
Cookroom thereof does labor, as of other parts laid hold of by it, and from
thence diverse

Therefore an Idea conceived in the imagination of the sensitive Soul, is
twofold.

For there is a certain one which proceeds from the diseasie Seeds of things:
For we see a Calfe to grow mad, and a Dog to die with madness; likewise a Wolf
that is mad every year, to be restored by incredible fasting: The which
Paracelsus ridiculously ascribes unto the slow Star of Orion: I say it
proceeds occasionally, the Power of a foreign Seed being introduced into us,
until our Archeus does borrow from thence the Idea's of fury, the which himself
stirs up on himself, and himself clothes himself withal. Indeed there are
Idea's in some Simples which do naturally infatuate; not indeed that they
naturally destroy the temperature of the Brain: Because it is that which does
clearly understand without a temperature; and those temperaments are mere
dreams; but because they confer there own Ideal character, and do occasionally
imprint it on the Spirit, the instrument of the imagination, and stir up Idea's
agreeable to their own Idea's: For so the Poison of the Tarantula, or Dog, do
propagate determined, and their own only and proper befoolments: And so those
that are careless, having taken in some Simples, do become mad according to
their inbred Idea's.

The other madness therefore of conceptions, does arise from things bred
within: So in the first place, Dotages in a Fever, are not from things assumed;
but from excremental Idea's degenerated within. And there is moreover, a
twofold variety of Idea's conceived within: One madness indeed, being sprung
from mad Idea's, through a wandering abuse of the imaginative Power, does seal
it self in the Archeus, and so from its resembling mark does pierce deeper, and
continually, or repeatingly extends it self on the Life; but the other madness
is bred in feverish and hostile excrements, as in the same, some like thing
does occur, the which we have known naturally to inhabit in the aforesaid
Simples: And therefore these kind of madnesses, because they are entertained in
a corporal, foreign, and hateful Being, they do not so deeply pierce into the
inbred Archeus of the imaginative Power.

For at first, Feverish Filths do bring forth un-sleepinesses, afterward
dreams interrupted by wakings, and at length more continual ones, the labor
and tiresomeness whereof, do us in the first fit, neither should they expect a
heap of days, unless the Idea's of the tiresomeness, and labor of dreams,
should manifestly engender a dotage. What if draming Idea's do cut asunder the
cords of judgment? what shall not the Idea's of Apprehensions, Affections,
Passions, and Considerations beget or cause? especially as often as they being
advanced to the height, do defile the Archeus, by violently corrupting, or
fermentally bespattering of him? for the three former are scarce stirred up of
their own accord, but are moved and provoked by some foregoing passion: For an
abusive persuasion, and credulity, or esteem of falsehood, do at first seduce a
man into a despising presumption of others, or into an indignation of
self-love, anger, hatred, or wrathfulness toward his Neighbor: From whence
indeed there is also an unbelieving Religion, Superstition, Scrupulousness,
Impenitent Arrogance, and Drunken desparation, together with Carelesseness. For
as Faith is the gate unto Humility, which is the truth of the Intellect or
Understanding; So a credulous esteem or judgment of Falsehood, is the entrance
of Presumption and Arrogance, and the first madness of the Soul. For therefore
among Miracles, one that was foolish from things imagined, is scarce read to
have been restored to health; because such do (for the most part) become
foolish from an impenitent pride, and refusing to return into the Truth. But
disturbances, as Love, Desire, Sorrow, Fear, Terror, are especially stirred up
by extrinsecal occasions; and therefore they do produce their Effects, not only
in the Soul, but also in the Body: For all Passions do in their Beginning, take
away sleep, and then they do at first weaken the desired act of eating: And at
length through a long, immoderate, strong, or sudden inordinacy, their Idea's
do infatuate the Archeus: The strength whereof is not elsewhere to be measured,
than from an exact piercing, and co-mixture of them with a great or small
quantity of the Archeus: For the Soul apprehending, or discoursing by little
and little, is accustomed to follow without strife, whereby it is oftentimes,
and violently led aside willingly with plausibility, or unwillingly, by reason
of a superiority of apprehensions: For the Soul is made conscious of that
journey, although a straying one, because an accustomed one: And deviations are
manifest, ^^d hidden, or unknown, continual, or those renewed afresh. Indeed
the manifest ones do presently bewray their excentricalness of madness, it
being conspicuous in all things, and about all things: but the more occult and
hidden ones, do not appear but in some points, and conceptions; to wit, whereby
the Soul has been once shaken out of its place, and the judgment sorely
shaken; whose Idea's have indeed been imprinted on the Organ, by reason of a
daily continuance, or plausibility; that is, by reason of strength and
superiority: But in the other points, they seem rightly to perceive. But as to
that which concerns the curing of conceptions, I profesly deliver the same
hereafter, in a Chapter by itself, and in a Theme or Argument plainly
Paradoxal. But now I directly behold or cast my eye on the Affects of the Womb:
For from the Effect, I am induced to believe, that in enchantments, the most
powerful part of the whole tragedy, does depend on the Idea's of the
bondslaves of the Devil, and so that they do originally proceed from
conceptions, even as I have demonstrated in its place; because those things
which naturally do help those that are enchanted, do also cure the passions of
the Womb, and on the other hand: but that the Womb which else is quiet, is
stirred up into animosity or wrathfulness, by anger, and grief, is so without
controversy, that it is known to poor Women, and old Women themselves: Neither
does any thing hurt the virtues implanted in the Womb, which is plainly a
non-being (as a cogitation is) unless it be made most nearly to approach into
the form of a Being, at the original of all motions in us.

But I have endeavored by a long tract of Words, to convince of this progress
in Idea's: Wherefore also I am constrained to ascribe the like nativity in
enchantments: For indeed, although Odoriferus and grateful Spices do weaken
many Women; yet any ill smelling and stinking things, ought not therefore to
cure them: For Example; For Assa, or the smell of fuming Sulphur, do not
refresh distempers of the Womb, as they do stink; for neither do they always
equally refresh all Women alike, or simply; but because they restrain, or slay
the Idea's that are imprinted without the Womb: So although sweet things do
weaken them; therefore bitter things, as such do cure them: For I have taught,
first of all, that contraries do not exist in Nature. Wherefore an argument
from the contrary sense, although it may be of value in the Law; Yet not in
Nature: because the contentions and brawlings of the Law are not found in
Nature: Neither is it to be thought in the mean time, that the Remedies of the
Womb do consist in that which is temperate, as it were the middle of Extremes,
the refuge of qualities mutually broken, being taken away from extremes, but
altogether in a free Arcanum: So indeed; that although no Simple be an
unpartaker of the first Qualities; yet things appropriated do least of all cure
the Affects of the Womb in respect of those Qualities: But such a kind of
Arcanum is the fire, or sweetness of the Sulphur of the Vitriol of Venus or
Copper; and likewise the volatile tincture of Coral, the Essence of Amber, the
Agath-stone or Jet, the Nettle with a white-hooded Flower that does not sting,
the black Gooseberry, Ballote or the kind of Horehound so called, Rue,
Southern-wood, Sage, Nep, the berries of Elder, of Wallwort or dwarfe-Elder,
Assa-fetida, the wart or hillock of a Horses Ham: Golden shining Coral
therefore is a stony Herb, or an herbie Stone born for the destruction of
Sorceries: For even as Sorceries are made by an Idea irregularly transplanted
in filths; to wit, the which Idea was already before seminal in its own Spirit;
yet while it it inserted in filths, it wanders into a Poison: So indeed the
seminal virtue in Coral is inserted into a stonifying matter: If therefore
there be he, who can separate the vegetable part from the stone of Coral, now
an endowment of Nature it attained, or the Idea of that Simple, which does
vindicate and transplant the Idea's transplanted into a Poison: For I have
observed how unvoluntarily the Devil could endure this Stone: Because I knew a
Nobleman enchanted, on whom, although Bracelets of Beads of Coral were
strongly bound, yet they would presently burst asunder from thence: The like
whereof does occur in that; because Women being ill at ease, bright golden
Coral does presently wax pale, as it were taking compassion on them; the which
notwithstanding, does resume it^ former brightness of redness, with the health
of the Woman's Womb. But not any kind of Simples do equally cure the enchanted,
as neither all Affects of the Womb alike; for all particular Simples have their
own Endowments, their Idea's, and do take away hurtful Idea's their compeers.
To wit, Southern-wood, Sage, and Rue, do drive away the Idea's of Fear:
Mugwort, the Nettle, Ballote, and black Gooseberry do prevail in cases
contracted from Grief: But Assa, Castoreum, the Elder berries, the Essence of
the Agath or Jet, in cases caused from Anger.

But Nep, Valerian, and Venus or Maidenhair, in cases resulting f^^m the Idea
of Hatred: Even as Saint John's Wort and the third Phu, in Idea's that are ^^l
of Fury: So an Hare dried, the Stones of some Beasts being dried in the Smoke,
the rod of a Stage, Agnus Castus or the Willow Vitex, and Amber, in Idea's bred
through the suggestion of Lust: But the mineral Electrum, Coral prepared, and
the greater Arcanums, do after some sort ascend unto a universality: whereunto
the Secundines of a firstborn Male, the Gaul of a Snake, etc. do most nearly
approach. Truly the greater Secrets perpared by Art, or things appropriated by
natural Endowments, do scarce leave any one destitute.

Furthermore, how much the method proposed does deviate from the Schools, let
themselves judge: for they do acknowledge the Disease of the Womb, after a
rustical manner: To wit, they have only known the inordinacies of the
Menstrues, and the Gonorrhea's or Whites; because they refer the inordinate
lusting of the Woman with Child, and stranglings of the Womb among Sumptomes:
For they weigh the retaining of the Menstrues by a stoppage, and are vainly
intent to Cure it by opening things: For they have been so accustomed not to
heal, or make sound their Patients, that the name of Sanation, has departed
into Oblivion, and Curation has obtained its place: For so they will have
immoderate Courses to be cured by an inordinate opening of the Veins, it being
an undistinct observance with the common sort.

In the next place, it is a thing full of Mockery; that they do endeavor only
by Phlebotomy, to help as well the retained, as the immoderate flowing
Menstrues. In those being retained, they do only cut a Vein of the Ancle; but
(...) their inordinate Fluxes, the liver Vein in the Arm: In both Cases I say,
they do draw out venal Blood in equal quantity; because they have sometimes
found, that Nature being as well full of Danger and Fear, as empty of Blood and
Strength, has now and then desisted for a space, from the begun fury of a
Flux: Perhaps it shall be alike, if they shall make an Horse that is too
wanton, to halt through hurting of a Tendon. But the Menstrues failing, the
Schools have now forgotten Obstructions, and as if the suppressing thereof did
involue a necessary Plethora or abounding of Humors, they command a Vein to be
cut; the which is to have fought against the Effect, but not against the
obstructing or stopping Cause. They know not, I say, that the Menstrues being
detained, do offend through a fury of the ruling power or faculty: They
sometimes give Solutives repeatedly to drink, and those things which are
feigned to be hot in the third degree: In the mean time, as being unmindful of
these, they hand forth Steel diverse ways vexed, to drink. I wish the World had
known with what vain succors they do disturb Women, how earnestly they labor
in unstoppings, throughout the whole Christian World, and how much the Schools
are busied, that they may derive the errors of their ignorance on the
omissions of others: For they enjoin a strict obedience of diet, the which
command, if they shall not obey in all things, even but once to a very smell,
they cry out that they have labored, and endeavored in vain.

In the mean time the strange, or inordinate lustings of a Woman with Child,
although they have discerned that they are in vain attempted by their
Purgations; yet while they are destitute of better Remedies, they do never
theless, every where administer Purgations in curings of the Womb. The
stranglings thereof also, the cruel spectacles of Death, they endeavor to
withstand by stinking things applied to the Nostrills, others do present
Theriaca or Triacle to the smell; but most do violently thrust the Conserve of
Rue with Castoreum, in at the Mouth: Being ignorant at leastwise, how much the
sweetness of Sugar does stir up the sleepified fury of the Womb.

Lastly in so great an Agony, a conjectural healing is hoped for, by stinking
and sweetsmelling things, being applied unto diverse places. Ah cruel
wickedness, that would pacify the furious or mad raging Womb, by a
fantastical or imaginatory revulsion: Vai^ are the counsels, and helps of
Physicians, which are administered without a knowing of the immediate Causes:
For they know not how to apply a finger in the easing of the Malady, and they
leave the whole burden on the Women's Shoulders, until they being strangled, do
voluntarily give of or die, or by a strong fortune do return unto themselves,
the circle of fury being measured or passed over. Frequent Visiters the while,
do exhaust their Purses and Strength.

Most kind Jesus, who when living on the Earth, barest so great a care of
Widows and Virgins, and now alone administering the Monarch-ship of Heaven and
Earth, have pity on Physicians, that hereafter they may take a meet care of the
more harmeless, and miserable Sex, and may search after due Remedies: Bend
their Minds, that they may not refuse to learn, and that under a blessed
Unisone of Harmony, we may all alike meditate the one thing altogether
necessary, which is to fulfill thy most lovely Will, by worshipping thee with an
annihilating of our own will into the supercelestial Ocean of thy sanctifying
Will. Amen, ah! I wish Amen.

CHAP. LXXXIII. The Magnetic or Attractive Power or Faculty.
AS concerning an Action locally at a distance, Wines do suggest a
demonstration unto us: For every kind of Wine, although it be bred out of
co-bordering Provinces, and likewise more timely blossoming elsewhere: Yet it
is troubled while our Country Vine flowreth, neither does such a disturbance
cease, as long as the Flower shall not fall off from our Vine; which thing
surely happens, either from a common motive Cause of the Vine and Wine; or from
a particular disposition of the Vine, the which indeed troubles the Wine, and
does shake it up and down with a confused tempest: Or likewise because the Wine
it self, does thus trouble it self of its own free accord, by reason of the
Flowers of the Vine: Of both the which latter, if there be a fore-touched
conformity, consent, cogrieving, or congratulation: At leastwise that cannot
but be done by an action at a distance: To wit, if the Wine be troubled in a
Cellar under ground, whereunto no Vine perhaps is near for some Miles, neither
is there any discourse of the air under the Earth, with the Flower of the
absent Vine: But if they will accuse a common Cause for such an Effect, they
must either run back to the Stars, which cannot be controuled by our pleasures,
and liberties of Boldness; or I say, we return to a confession of an Action at
a distance: To wit, that some one and the same, and as yet unknown Spirit the
Mover, does govern the absent Wine, and the Vine which is at a far distance,
and makes them to talk, and suffer together. But as to what concerns the Power
of the Stars; I am unwilling, as neither dare I according to my own liberty, to
extend the Forces, Powers, or Bounds of the Stars, beyond or besides the
authority of the sacred Text, which says, it being pronounced from a divine
Testimony; That the Stars shall be unto us for Signs, Seasons, Days, and
Years: By which rule, a Power is never attributed to the Stars, that Wine bred
in a foreign Soil, and brought unto us from far, does disturb, move, or
render it self confused: For the Vine had at some time received a Power of
increasing and multiplying it self, before the Stars were born: And Vegetables
were before the Stars, and the imagined influx of these: Wherefore also, they
cannot be things conjoined in Essence, one whereof could consist without the
other. Yea the Vine in some places, flowreth more timely; and in rainy or the
more cold years, our Vine flowreth more slowly, whose Flower and Stages of
flourishing, the Wine does notwithstanding imitate; and so neither does it
respect the Stars, that it should disturb it self at their beck.

In the next place, neither does the Wine hearken unto the flourishing or
blossoming of any kind of Capers, but of the Vine alone: And therefore we must
not flee unto an universal Cause, the general or universal ruling air of
worldly successive change; to wit, we may rather run back unto impossibilities
and absurdities, than unto the most near commerces of Resemblance and Unity,
although hitherto unpassable by the Schools.

Moreover, that thing does as yet far more manifestly appear in Ales or Beers:
When in times past, our Ancestors had seen that of Barley, after whatsoever
manner it was boiled, nothing but an empty Ptisana or Barley-broath, or also a
Pulpe was cooked; they meditated, that the Barley first ought to bud (which
then they call Malt) and next they nakedly boiled their Ales, imitating Wines:
Wherein first of all, some remarkable things do meet in one. To wit, there is
stirred up in Barley a vegetable Bud, the which when the Barley is dried, does
afterward die, and loses the hope of growing, and so much the more by its
changing into Meal, and afterward by an after boiling, it despaires of a
growing Virtue; yet these things nothing hindering, it retains the winey and
intoxicating Spirit of Aquavitae, the which notwithstanding it does not yet
actually possess: But at length in number of days, it attaineth it by virtue
of a Ferment: To wit, in the one only bosom of one Grain, one only Spirit is
made famous with diverse Powers, and one Power is gelded, another being left:
Which thing indeed, does as yet more wonderfully shine forth; When as the Ale
or Beer of Malt, disturbs it self while the Barley flowreth, no otherwise than
as Wine is elsewhere wont to do: And so a Power at a far absent distance, is
from hence plain to be seen: For truly there are Cities, from whom pleasant
Meadows do expel the growing of Barley for many Miles; and by so much the more
powerfully, do Ales prove their agreement with the absent flowring Barley; in
as much as the gelding of their Power, has withdrawn the hopes of budding and
increasing: And at length the Aqua vitae, being detained and shut up within the
Ale, Hogs-head, and prison of the Cellar, cannot with the safety of the Ale or
Beer wandering for some leagues, unto the flowring ear of Barley, that
thereby as a stormy returner, it may trouble the remaining Ale with much
confusion. Certainly there is a far more quiet Passage, for a magnetical or
attractive agreement, among some agents at a far distance from each other, than
there is to dream an Aqua vitae wandering out of the Ale of a Cellar, unto the
flowring Barley, and from thence to return unto the former receptacles of its
Pen-case, and Ale: But the sign imprinted by the Appetite of a Woman great with
Child, on her Young, does fitly, and alike clearly confirm a magnetisme, or
attractive faculty its operation at a distance: To wit, let there be a Woman
great with Child, which desires another Cherry, let her scratch her Forehead
with her Finger; without doubt, the Young is signed in its Forehead with the
Image of the Cherry, which afterward does every year wax green, white, yellow,
and at length looks red, according to the tenor of the Trees: And moreover, it
much more wonderfully expresses the same successive alterations of maturities:
Because the same Young in Spain (where the Cherry-tree flowreth about the end
of [the 12th. Month called] February) has imitated the aforesaid Tragedies of
the Cherry, far sooner, than amongst us: And so hereby, an Action at a distance
is not only confirmed; But also a Conformity or Agreement of the Essences of
the Cherry-tree, in its wooden and fleshy Trunk; a consanguinity, or near
affinity of a Being, unfolded on the part by an instantous imagination, and by
a successive course of the years of its Kernel: Surely the more learned ought
not to reject those things unto the evil spirit, which through their own
weakness they are ignorant of: For surely those things do on all sides occur in
Nature, the which through our slenderness we are not able to unfold: For to
refer whatsoever Gifts of God in Nature our slenderness does not conceive of,
unto the Devil, wants not an insolent rashness: Especially when as all
demonstration of Causes, from a former thing or cause, is banished from us, and
especially from Aristotle, who was ignorant of whole Nature, and deprived of
the good Gift which descends from the Father of Lights, unto whom be all
honor, and sanctification.

CHAP. LXXXIIII. Of Sympathetical Medium's or Means.
I Deferred above, to close up the Treatise concerning things Injected, until
it should be sufficiently and over-manifested concerning things conceived: For
I have conjoined things Injected, unto things Conceived, because they stood
connexed in the root of the imaginative faculty: But I have shown how much both
of them may hurt and weaken us: one indeed as it were a foreign being drawn
from some other place, and derived from far into the Body, heaping up a various
Calamity; but the other bred at home in our possession: There was only
remaining to be searched, Whether those Brans had nothing of fine Wheat
adhering unto them? whether nothing could be fetched from the same Beginnings,
which might be as a recompense for so great maladies? I have therefore
discerned first of all, that Sympathetical Medium's are co-bound together with
them. In the year 1639, a little Book came forth, whose Title was the
Sympathetical Powder of Ericius Mohyns of Eburo, whereby Wounds are Cured
without application of the Medicine unto the part affected, and without
superstition; it being sifted by the Sieve of the reasons of Galen and
Aristotle; wherein it is Aristotelically, Sufficiently proved, whatsoever the
Title promises: but it has neglected the ditective Faculty or Virtue, which
may bring the Virtues of the Sympathetical Powder received in the bloody Towel,
unto the distant Wound: Truly from a Wound, the venal Blood, or corrupt Pus, or
Sanies from an Ulcer being received in the Towel, do receive indeed a Balsam
from a sanative or healing Being: I say from the Power of the Vitriol, a
Medicinal Power connexed and limited in the aforesaid Mean: But the Virtues of
the Balsome received, are directed unto the wounded Object, not indeed by an
influential virtue of the Stars, and much less do they fly forth of their own
accord, unto the Object at a distance: Therefore the Idea's of him that
applies the Sympathetical Remedy, are con-nexed in the Mean, and are made the
directresses of the Balsam unto the Object of his desire: Even as we have above
also minded in Injections, concerning Idea's of the desire. Mohyns supposes
that the Power of Sympathy does issue from the Stars, because it is an imitator
of Influences: But I do draw it out of a far more near Subject: To wit, out of
directing Idea's, begotten by there Mother Charity, or a desire of good will:
For from hence does that Sympathetical Powder operate more succesfully, being
applied by the hand of one, than of another: Therefore I have always observed
the best process, where the Remedy is instituted with an amorous desire, and
care of Charity: but that it does succeed with small success, if the Operater
be a carless, or drunken Person: And therefore I have thenceforth, made more
esteem of the Stars of the Mind, in Sympathetical Remedies, than of the Stars
of Heaven.

But that Images being conceived, are brought unto an Object at a distance; a
Woman great with Child does manifestly prove; because she is she; who presently
transferres all the Idea's of her Conceptions on her Young, which depends no
otherwise on the Mother, than from a Communion of universal nourishment. Truly
seeing such a direction of desire is plainly natural, it is no wonder that the
evil Spirit does require the Idea's of the desire of his Imps, to be con-nexed
unto a Mean offered by him. Indeed the Idea's of desire, are after the manner
of the Influences of Heaven, cast into a proper Object, how locally remote
soever; To wit, they are directed by the desire, specificating, or specially
pointing out an Object for it self; even as the sight of the Basilike, or Nod
of the Cramp-fish, is reflected on their willed Object: For I have already
shown in diverse foregoing places, that the Devil does not attribute so much as
any thing in the directions of things Injected; but that he has need of a free
directing and operating Power or Faculty. But not that I will disgrace
Sympathetical Remedies, because the Devil operates something about things
Injected into the Body: For what have Sympathetical Remedies in common,
although the Devil does cooperate in Injections by wicked natural Means
required from his Bondslaves: For every thing shall be judged guilty, or good,
from its ends and intents: And it is sufficient that Sympathetical Remedies do
agree with things injected in natural Means or Medium's.

CHAP. LXXXV. Of Things Inspired or Breathed into the Body.
AN undistinct novelty of things, has long detained me in mental Receptions:
Now at length I prosecute the third kind of things Received. I call them Things
Inspired; for they enter into us from without, and for the most part, together
with the Air: To wit out of Dens or Caves, Fens, Mines, Mountains, Winds,
Provincial places, Serpents, or Creeping Things, Filths, dead Carcasses, or
growing Things. For they are the Exhalations of Things, which do treacherously,
and unsensibly filch away our Life: For Illyricum and Dalmatia, being in times
past, populous Provinces, and likewise Alexandria sometimes most famous;
although they have the Ground of a fertile Soil, are now almost forsaken, by
reason of a cruel Poison, which presently tends unto the conclusion of Life. So
an Alchymist daily draws a wild and pernicious Gas out of Coals, Stygian
Waters, and fusions of Minerals; and the which being once attracted inwards,
does disturb the Archeus, according to the disposition proper unto every
Poison. So the Air being infected with the importunate or unseasonable ferments
of a place, produces a Gas, which affords accustomed sicknesses unto places:
The which others have rashly referred unto the Tartars of places. For truly any
kind of Smoakinesses do, through delay, defile the Walls of their Vessels: To
wit, from whence under the sixth Digestion, diverse Excrements are forged, most
apt for the putrefying of the last nourishments, and corrupting of the Vessels:
because if the smoakinesses of Salts are encompassed with an hurtful mixture,
they being presently melted within, do pierce and gnaw the tenderness of the
Pipes; Yet they are more mild, than those which are there collected by a dry
Smoke or Fume: For if they shall besiege the tender branches of the rough
Artery, they stop them up, cut off the hope of dissolving; whereto, if the
excrements of the place do grow, so as that they shut up the Air behind, they
are made continual guests, and do stuff the part, that they are also corrupted,
and become an Imposthume full of matter. But those things which enter together
with Vapors, the watery parts being consumed, they are cruelly joined unto the
similar parts: For so many Endemical things have made Provinces unhabitable.

And moreover, the Sea, however it be Salt, yet it is not free from so great
Evils. The which, Shoares, by the Scurvy and a various slaughter of Fevers do
testify; and the Equinoctial Line most manifestly of all.

In the next place, the Ministers or Servants of the Sick, do inspire or breath
in cruel things, being now fermented by a mark of resemblance. So they which
Guild, do Melt Lead, Copper, Fire-Stones, etc. the Diggers, and likewise the
Seperaters, and Boylers of Minerals: For although they do not presently take
away Life, at leastwise they shorten it, and subject it to diverse disasters.
So they which labor in Sublimed Cinnabar, Arsenick, Orpiment, and in Stibium;
and they who prepare Minium, Ceruse, Verdigrease, the Azure of Zaffar or
Saffron, and which do serve Painters. For things from under the Earth are far
more constant, than to hearken unto our heat, than to be tamed or expelled
thereby; and much less that they should depart into nourishment: For therefore
the Products of these are wont to remain for Life, unless through the ascending
brightness of a more bountiful Sulphur, those very enemies are converted into
Friends, or do seasonably depart. For the Diseases of Minerals have been
touched by none but Paracelsus; but have been neglected by the Schools, who
have always dreamed of new Illiad's or commendatory Fictions upon the
Commentaries of their Ancestors, and therefore have been very like to the
Levites passing by in Jericho: Because they have scarce lifted up their head
above Heats and Colds. For truly I have sometimes proved, that the Stomach
draws the odours of things in the cup of things given to be drunk: Indeed the
places about the short-ribs do tremble, at the offered cups, with however a
grateful smell they are masked. therefore also the Air bringing the Odours unto
the Stomach, it passes through the Midriff. For from hence every Endemical
thing is born immediately to affect the hollow bought of the Stomach, and there
to imprint Odours, Smoakinesses and Ferments: So as that they being married
unto the nourishable liquor, they confound the services of Digestion, and bring
forth diverse Excrements. For so the Plague, with Endemicks breathed into the
Body, do for the most part originally rage about the Stomach: For the passage
of the Windpipe, seeing it stood subjected unto the Inclemencies of the Air,
is to be believed to have received its Armories from the goodness of God, no
less than the bladder of the Gaul-Chest have been fenced against the Urine, and
its Gaul. But the Membrane of the Stomach being of a great heap, is for the
most part busied about its own Digestions, is interrupted with Endemicks, is
disturbed by an Endemical Being. Therefore the Cough, Asthma's, Imposthumes
full of matter, Heart-beatings, and very many Anguishes do occasionally depend
on Endemicks being imprinted upon the hollow bought of the Stomach. There is
the same reason of malignant Fevers, of Camp, and other Diseases, which do
popularly molest.

Fernelius being not contented with the Doctrine of Galen, seeking the seat of
all Fevers beneath the Pylorus, has not rid himself of feigned Humors; nor
has ever dreamed any thing of the hollow bought of the Stomach, and that a
light Endemick being breathed in, should be sufficient for transplanting of the
nourishment of the sixth Digestion.

Tell me, what the Air, the tempest of Times or Seasons can concern the equal
temperature of Humors? For shall the hot Air of a scorching day, bring forth
Choler, or an Excrement, which a more temperate day had transchanged into the
venal blood of Life? Shall thus therefore the primary Shop of Humors, be by
every prerogative of right, constituted in the Lungs? I have learned, that the
Digestions are substantial generations of the transchanging Archeus, not of
internal heat, and least of all of the external Air: And that the Digestions
are troubled by the drinking in of an hurtful, or at least a troublesome
Endemick: Also that the errors of Digestions do scarce want a diseasifying
Product; because it is proper to a Digestion to produce something in Digesting.
I deny not indeed that intense cold, or heat do hurt the tender Lungs, or
Brain, seeing they do also scorch the skin: But does such a kind of damage
consist only in a degree more superior than humane Nature? And there is a
certain largeness in every degree, which consists beneath an hurt. I now
have respect unto things Inspired. But Mineral Inspirations do expect no hope
of Remedy from Vegetables. I grant indeed that perfumes do hinder a speedy
adhering of Smoaks in our Pipes: But they having gotten possession within, they
will not refuse it by Vegetables: For they will scarce receive a healing
Medicine, unless by Secrets of the same Monarchy. Wherefore I have not found
any help from the Manna of a Nettle, and likewise from Semper-vive boiled in
the beestings or first-stroakings of Milk, etc. The which, I with the leave of
Paracelsus, do thus maintain; and they who shall be willing to make trial, I
trust will subscribe with me.

CHAP. LXXXVI. Things Suscepted or Undergone.
THe fourth kind of things Received, I call things Suscepted; such as are
Wounds made by a Point, or a Cut, or Stroke, by Darting, Beating, Casting,
Renting, Biting, Bruising, Congealing, Scorching or Burning, or Straining;
Likewise, breaking of a Bone, Displacing, Binding, close Pressing together, and
in brief, whatsoever things are immediately subjected unto the Chyrurgion. For
truly Ulcers which are bred not by a Wound rashly cured, seeing they are
nourished by an internal Principle, they singularly have respect unto a
Physician. And by so much the more evidently, because any kind of Ulcers, and
how malignant soever, are perfectly cured by Arcanums taken in at the mouth:
Therefore Arcanums being obtained, the Chyrurgion (being in penury) will at
sometime be idle, who is to be occupied in manual labor only, about things
Suscepted or undergone. But because the fullness of days has not yet brought
Arcanums into use, hence there is a Liberty for Chyrurgions to invade the
Physician. In the mean time I stay not in the difference between Diseases of
the similar and organical members, which is so greatly enlarged in the
Schools: Because I measure a Disease by its Archeal and immediate Causes, but
not by the hurtings of the Functions: Especially because all parts how
organical soever, do not depart from their homogeniety or sameliness of kind:
For neither do I judge it to be of concernment, whether many Offices do
concur in one part, or whether there be a particular defect of particular
Offices: Because the eye being thrust out, a Disease does not succeed, but a
Death of the power of Seeing: And therefore, an incarnating being introduced
over it, causes an healing of the Wound, but does not restore the Death.
Neither likewise do I clash with my self, although I have elsewhere said, that
all Diseases do arise and are nourished from seminal Beginnings. But I will
teach in this place that Wounds undergone by a Sword, do operate, in entering
after the manner of artificial things; Because the Diseases of things Suscepted
are not so long as they are in their being made, but after their being
undergone: For things suscepted have that thing peculiar unto them, that by
themselves they rather introduce Death than a Disease: For it is by accident
that a Wound does cut asunder the fleshy part, or the Heart it self, or an
Artery: And therefore a Wound in its beginning, does threaten Death on the part
whereon it is inflicted, and Susceptions do always savor of the nature of
artificial things: For Susceptions have first of all deceived the Schools; For
they have argued after this manner:

A Sword wounds, that which is continual or holding together being divided,
is wounded: But dividing is nothing but a relation of terms, and yet a Wound is
a Disease; Therefore every Disease consists only in a relation, or at
leastwise in a disposition, or effect of that relation. Which is to say, That
a Disease is either a Being of Reason, or a Non-Being, (such as is the relation
of Terms) or that a real Being does arise from the Being of Reason. But I who
do not destinguish Internal connexed Causes from the thing it self, do call
Poisons, Foods, a Sword, etc. Occasions. I call a Wound, an absolute or sore
threatened Death of that which is continual: But when they have brought their
force into the Archeus, so that this shall be wroth through things applied unto
himself, I refer that which is imprinted by things Suscepted among Primary
Diseases: For as soon as a Sword has divided that which held together, the
action of a violent occasional Cause being darted into the Archeus, is present,
and this Archeus soon begins his tempests, that is, Diseases.

CHAP. LXXXVII. Things Retained [in the Body.]
THe Treatise of things Received being finished, I now proceed unto things
Retained. But in things Retained, let it be sufficient once, and seriously to
have admonished of this: That although they are only the occasional Causes of
Diseases, yet I have been willing to distinguish of Diseases according to the
things Retained, that I might Retain the ancient names of Diseases: But that
the Chapter whose Title is, That the Knowledge of a Disease in its universality
has remained unknown hitherto: is sufficient for a forecaution of those things
which are to be spoken of things Retained: Whither I refer the Reader.

For truly all particular things which are Retained, do stir up their own
Invasions on the Archeus, and from thence also, the differences of Diseases.
But those are things Retained, which are either taken into the Body from
without, or are bred as domestical things within, by an internal inordinacy.
For seminal things, whether they shall be foreign, or homebred, do on both
sides stir up a memorable effect of their disorder on the Archeus: Which thing
is easy to be seen, even in a simple Lacryma or Tear of the Eye: Because it is
that which by a healthy motion of the Spirit is wholly discussed or blown away
without feeling or trouble: The Spirit of the Eye being badly disposed, it is
wholly thickened, waxes clotty, or is changed into a gnawing Liquor.

In the next place, things Retained do not only vary in their unlikeness of
Form; but also are changed by reason of the dispositions of the Body: For the
Body as it is more or less transpirable, does vary Diseases: For some things
retained are discussed, neither do they leave behind them the Root of stirring
up a Relapse. Sometimes also they are forgetful of this bounty, they leave an
occasional matter, and herewith oftentimes, fermental adulterous impressions,
as offsprings which do stir up new Heirs or Products from themselves in the
Archeus. Because the inward pores also do sweat, as the whole Body is
transpirable, and as liquid things are derived into a strange harvest: The
which, because they are brought out of their own cottages, they are therefore
soon spoiled of their common Life, are most speedily coagulated (as I have said
concerning the Tear of the Eye) or do remain resolved into a liquid Poison. For
so the matter of Coughs, the Dropsy, Pose, Flux, Pissing-Evil, Apostems, and
Ulcers are bred. For the retained curdlings of some things do stick the more
stubbornly fast, are slowly or never resolved, or they do of their own accord
think of a dissolving and melting; or they leave an impressional symptom in
the Archeus, introduced for a perpetual remembrance of relapses: For so the
seeds of Diseases being ready to depart elsewhere, do depart awry or misshapen.

And so in the next place, Diseases do vary in respect of a six-fold Digestion,
being hindered, inverted, suspended, extinguished, or vitiated.

Diseases also do vary in respect of the distribution of that which is
digested: For a proportioned distribution does exercise the force of
distributive Justice, due to every part: But if they are disproportioned, now
there is an infirm and necessitated distribution, and that as well in respect
of the natural functions, which are never idle, as of a continual
transpiration, and from thence, for the sake of an uncessant necessity. But
that disproportion is voluntary, and as it were an overflowing distribution, in
respect of a symptomatical expulsion, by reason of a conspirable animosity of
the disturbing Archeus; or at length the distribution is disproportioned, as it
is necessitated in respect of penury or scantiness; whence at length also, no
seldom damage invadeth the whole Body: To wit, while in some part, the
nourishment degenerateth, is ejected, and so is wasted: Such as is the
Consumptionary spittle in Affects or Ulcers of the Lungs, a Snivelly Glue in
the Stone, in the Gonorrhea or running of the Reins, etc. For seeing the part,
its nourishment being once defiled and degenerate, is thenceforth never
nourished, but despises and thrusts that forth, yet by reason of a sense of
penury, that cease not continually, with importunity to crave new nourishment
from the dispensing faculty, and to obtain it by its importunity, that it may
satisfy its thirst. Therefore new nourishment is many times administered unto
it, and is withdrawn from its other chamber-fellows, because a sufficient
nourishment for all parts is wanting.

From thence therefore, is Leanness, an Atrophia, a Tabes, or lingering
Consumption, and an impoverishment of all necessary nourishment: So indeed,
Fluxes, Bloody-Fluxes, Aposthems, Ulcers, and Purgative things do make us lean
and exhaust us: For the infirm parts are like the Prodigal Son, because they do
waste and unprofitably cast away, being those which have badly spent whatsoever
was distributed unto them, and the other parts do lament that lavishment.

Things Retained that are taken into the Body, offend only in quality, or
quantity, or indiscretion, or inordinacy: For if they are immoderate in
quantity, if frequent, or too rare (for numbers are in quantities) also one
only error does sometimes give a beginning unto a Disease, whereas in the mean
time otherwise Nature makes resistance for some good while. But Poisons
received, Solutive Medicines, and likewise, altering things, which are too much
graduated do chiefly hurt in quality. Discretion also does offend in things
assumed, if they are taken rashly out of their hour, and manner: As if the
Menstrues be provoked in a Woman with young, or in a Womb that does excessively
flow: For indiscretion does every where bring forth a frequent inordinacy, when
as any undue thing is cast into the Body or required the scopes of Causes and
betokenings of being unknown. Also harmless things which are cast into the Body
are vitiated only by their delay, and long continuance of detainment; And they
become the more hostile, by how much they shall be the more familiar, or the
further promoted: for truly, by reason of a mark of resemblance sometime
conceived, they do the sooner ferment, and more deeply and powerfully imprint
their enmities. And as by things Assumed, things Retained are sometimes at
length made inbred: So by things inbreathed, Diseases are oft-times made like
unto those made by things Retained. For some inspired things are Retained, and
do affect the same parts which things Retained do. Otherwise, they differ in
their internal Root, as much as breath does from drink, and as much as food
from blood.

But before I descend unto inbred Retentions, it is necessary to represent the
unknown Tragedy of the chief or primary Diseases: Because inbred Retents do for
the most part, take their beginning from primary Diseases: For indeed, I have
already before distinguished of all Diseases, that they do either affect the
Archeus implanted in, or inflowing into the parts: Although in both cases,
Diseases do proceed by the forming of Idea's. The which I will have to be
understood of primary ones: To wit, out of whose bosom superfluities do arise,
or degenerate, which give an occasion for new Idea's, or onsets of Diseases.
For it is scarce possible, that the Archeus being remarkeably smitten by a
voluntary Idea of a Man, or the Archeus, a lot of Disaster should not arise in
the inferior family-administration of the Body, from whence the Digestions
themselves first of all wandering from their scope, do frame the pernicious
collections of Superfluities, whereby the primary distemperatures of the
Archeus are nourished (to wit, if they shall proceed from the same root: That
is, if the root of a primary Disease shall produce its like, to wit, the former
Idea of exorbitancy persisting) or the new offsprings of Diseases are stirred
up. But at leastwise, after either manner, the aforesaid Excrements are the
Products of primary or the chief Diseases. But primary Diseases are either of
Idea's Archeizated, to wit, by the proper substance of the influous Archeus
issuing into the composure of the Body, the which indeed he by reason of his
madness, wastes: And such kind of Diseases are oft-times appeased by Opiates;
yea are also utterly rooted out: Because they are, for the most part the
offsprings of a more sluggish turbulency: The flame of the chafe either
ceasing from a voluntary motion, or being silent at the consuming of the
Archeus, informed by the vitiated Idea. But Idea's arising from the implanted
afflictions of the vital Spirits, whether they are the governing Spirits of the
similar or organical parts, they do for the most part disturb the
family-administration of Life, especially, if the Archeus being badly
disquieted in some principal bowel, shall form the Idea's of his own hurt: For
then he brings forth most potent afflictions: Yea, sometimes those remaining
safe for term of Life. For as they are the Rulers of a greater nobleness and
more eminent power: So also they draw forth the more efficacious Idea's, and do
propagate Diseases of a prostrating nature: Because the Powers themselves, the
In-mates of the more noble parts, are defiled with the same Images, as it were
with Seals; the which, diseasie Products arising from thence, the foot-step of
the Seal being as it were received into themselves, do afterward linkingly
express through the ranks of the Digestions: For so the primary Diseases of
the Bowels do abound; neither do they hearken unto Remedies, but of a more
piercing wedlock; yea and do bequeath their inheritances on Nephews. The
Arcanums of which sort I have reckoned up in the Book of Long Life, to wit, the
which do every one of them represent the Majesty of an universal Medicine:
Although I will not deny but that there is that Majesty in some the more
refined Simples, which can heal particular primary Diseases.

The Galenists do laugh at the promise of a generality: but every Bird does
utter his voice according to the tune of his own Beak; and every one talks of
the Faires according as he has profited in them.

From what has been before mentioned in sundry places, it now plainly
appears.

1. That the Sanation or sound Healing of a secondary Disease, is vainly
intended, unless the primary Disease which nourished it, be first brushed off
and trodden under foot.

2. That then the Healing of a secondary Disease is conversant only in a
removal of the Product.

3. That Primary Diseases do continue even after the generation of a Secondary
Disease, if its Idea's do issue from the implanted Spirits.

4. That Primary Diseases do also voluntarily cease, whose Idea's have failed
in their first on-sets.

5. That the Causality, Succession, and Propagation of a Disease, being
hitherto unknown, the Healing of the same has remained unknown.

6. That the Schools have esteemed Secondary Diseases, yea and the Products of
Diseases, to be the Causes of the same: and therefore they have directed the
whole endeavor of Healing unto later things, or to the Effects.

7. And that they had more rightly proceeded by taking away of the Product,
than by the contrarieties of Qualities, and they had sought out due Remedies
which (their virtue remaining safe) would have been able to pierce unto the
places affected.

8. That whatsoever has happily succeeded under healing, that is to be
ascribed to conjecture, and the goodness of Nature alone, because they being
seduced by false persuasions, have wandered about Distemperatures, Humors,
Catarrhes, and Tartars by Solutives, not drawing forth Electively, but
putrefying every thing furiously.

9. That they have learned some Remedies from Old Women, or Countrey-Folk,
which besides the Maxims of the Schools, might cure diseasie Idea's by a
specifical gift.

10. That they have accounted as many primary Diseases as did persist by their
own Ferment, to be uncurable, and those that did not transplant their Vigors
into their Products.

For primary Diseases do for the most part respect the transmittings of seminal
causes in Idea's, and disturb the action of Government: From whence, not only
the framing of Diseases; but also the Critical, or judicial freeings of the
same, do issue of their own accord, by unwonted expulsions, wandering
conspiracies, labors, anguishes, and convulsive assaults, especially if they
subsist in the matter, by a Seed, and an efficient Ferment: to wit, by which
signs they distinguish themselves from the family of Symptoms. But I have
confirmed the Doctrine of primary Diseases, above, by hereditary ones, unequal
strength, the torture of the Night, and silent Diseases; the which indeed do
not only presuppose the necessities of Idea's; but moreover also, primary
Diseases. Truly, Nature has no less variously sported in defects, than in
integrity: but also, by a Systeme of the Universe, she (being everywhere
conformable to her self) has seemed to walk up and down, that also in things
of a different kind she may every where represent her self in a proportionable
agreement.

I have now done as much as I promised in the beginning of the work. I have
demonstrated the errors of the Schools in natural things, so far as they
concern the faculty of Healing: and that they have been more ignorant of
nothing, than of Principles, Means, and Ends, to wit, the Essence and Causes,
manner of proceeding and making, the means of Preparing and Remedies.

Of things retained which are assumed, because they are by themselves known, I
have said something: Now I must come unto the Products of Diseases which are
inbred, domestical, and degenerated within our Cottages: For indeed our Retents
do offend in abounding, quality, intimateness of place, or in their
strangeness, or long continuance of delay; and because they have crept into
another harvest, through a vice of the distributive Faculty, therefore I call
all of them things transplanted or transmitted. But other Retents, I call
transchanged ones, for their distinction sake from things assumed: Truly things
retained, whether they are transchanged, or indeed transmitted; yet they are
always made remarkable by an intrinsecal Idea: I say, by a diseasie Being,
from whence they have received an hostility of degeneration: Wherefore the root
also of a primary Disease, does for the most part adhere unto them, and
therefore they do imitate and represent the same, as they are the Products of
it: But because all the particular Digestions do first of all contribute their
own Citizens, to wit, the nourishable Liquors unto homebred Retents, which
were prepared in their Kitchins, and those otherwise ordained for the solid
substance of our Body: Therefore domestical things retained, have degenerated
from the scopes of Nature.

But I do as yet divide homebred Retents, that some may be the dungs of things
assumed, which I call Relics, or they are things which from a good Citizen
have degenerated into a Traitor: From whence indeed, I have drawn things
transchanged and transmitted; for they are those which do descend from the vice
of the Digestions and Ferments, to wit, from a universal offense of the
inflowing Spirit, or a particular error of the implanted Spirit, through a
voluntary defilement of a wantonizing Idea produced by humane, or Archeal
Passions.

Also the Relic of things Assumed, Inspired, and Suscepted, not unfrequently
bringing aid hereunto: Therefore Relics, next after things assumed, do offer
themselves unto the public view or exercise of Products: For although things
taken into the Body, and things there left, are not the Products of primary
Diseases; yea, do often produce primary Diseases; yet I have accustomed my self
to reckon them among secondary Diseases and Products. But not that I am
ignorant, that they could have no relation unto a primary Disease, as a Parent;
but I refer them among Products, by reason of their strict affinity with those;
where we must again seriously admonish, that it is an abuse to distinguish
intimate Causes from Diseases: For truly the thingliness of causality is
obscured, if it be never so little banished from the rank of Diseases: For
external Causes, as long as they are external, are only occasions by accident;
but after that they are admitted, and transchanged by the force of Digestions,
although they may seem internal Causes; yet they become not Diseases, but
occasions by themselves, which disturb the Archeus, stir up an Idea, and defile
the material part of the Archeus with an Ideal Seal: For so things assumed, do
wander into Relics or things left, and do lay up their troublesome
remembrance into the Archeus, that he may presently tumult, and stir up a
Disease his offspring: for they are not Products, although they dissemble the
marks of Products; but they leap froth abroad under the name of Relics: For
if by a proper vice of malignity they shall violate the right of their Inn,
they are for the most part cast out, crude, half digested, and badly seasoned
by Vomit, Stool, Urine, yea, and now and then, do by an Imposthume, pass over
into things transmitted: From whence are Pains, Gripings of the Bowels,
Un-concoctions, Fluxes, Lienteries, Sranguries, and Miseries of the Parts
through which they pass. But if a Vice subsisteth in the Shops of the
Digestions, and not sprung from things assumed; Now a primary Parent of
confusion is supposed, which has neglected, and defiled the things assumed:
Oft-times also things assumed do scarce continue changed in the Relics, which
is called the Coeliack or Belly-passion, invading with a remaining delight of
eating, no less than with a dejected Appetite; that we may know that in the
ferment of the spleen, diverse Offices, and dispensations of Properties do lay
hid; to wit, those of Digestion, and Appetite.

Things assumed also, which are less grateful or convenient, if they floate
about diary Fever, burntish unnamed Contents, likewise inordinate Appetites,
etc. are made; but if they shall the more stubbornly adhere, they bring forth
diverse, and stubborn Disasters of one Stomach: From whence are Sobbings or
Hickets, Swoonings, Faintings, Convulsions, Gripings or Wringings of the Guts,
Dissolvings or Loosenesses of the Paunch, Vomitings, Atrophia's or Consumptions
for lack of Nourishment, etc. the which do manifestly enough appear in the
labor of the Duumvirate. But if indeed the Ferment in the first Digestion,
shall be diminished through age, or the promoted difficulties of Diseases;
Things assumed howsoever good they are, are vitiated: Because Ferments do no
otherwise govern things assumed and left, than the Digestions themselves.

Wherefore I refer the Lientery or Smoothness of the Bowels, Fluxes, Choler,
because they are as well the Heirs of things assumed, and of Relics, as of
things transchanged, unto the Vices of Digestions. But Stranguries, although
they do often happen from things transmitted from the first Digestion unto the
third, as the native sharpnesses of things, have remained stubborn in things
assumed (even as is especially conspicuous in the drinking of new Ale) yet they
happen through a defect of the Ferment of the second Digestion, and therefore,
such a kind of Strangury is familiar unto old age: Therefore I have ascribed
Stranguries, as well to things left, as to things transchanged in the second
Digestion.

Let it be sufficient also, to have admonished by the way, that I have been
every where less exact about the splendor, and order of division, in so great
Paradoxes, than about the Essence of a thing: For neither do things assumed;
only offend through a double fault, to wit, through the error of Relics, and
local Ferments: But also the things digested themselves, are after a twofold
manner, badly affected: For the Stomach does cook, not only for the whole Body,
but also for it self.

So also concerning many Organs, in the diverse Offices of whose digestions and
functions, their own errors do alienate their Products: Yet the Stomach is
manifestly subject unto a double Calamity: To wit, of its own Digestion, and of
the sixth: Because every part lives by its own Kitchen; which in the Stomach,
being subjected unto that which is assumed, rushing on it, is most easily
disturbed, even with every shaking of the mind.

Therefore in the first, second, and third Digestion, obvious, manifest, and
frequent stumblings and omissions of Digestions do happen.

But in the sixth, although they do manifestly, every where leave Products; yet
these the Schools have referred unto the four feigned diversity of kinds of
the venal blood: Yea, and far more absurdly also, have they for the most part
dedicated the Vices of the sixth Digestion, unto the Snivel lifted up by a
feigned Vapor of the Stomach, and from thence distilled. Wherefore they have
devised, that Rheumes do fall down into the Commonweal of the sixth Digestion;
but they unbashfully affirm, that Phlegm also, which they contend to be
generated by a vital Beginning in the Liver, together with the venal Blood, is
now a Relic, through a casual distillation of Art.

But in the fourth, and fifth Digestions (because they are altogether vital
ones, with much care, first refining all things from Filths their Inmates)
although there are not so manifest superfluities of things assumed; yet it is
not absurd, that inbred Retents should there be procreated, because the Nature
of Mortals being now wholly corrupted, is in no place free from all contagion
or blemish.

Authors do rehearse, that small Ulcers have been found in the bosom of the
Heart: and likewise, that a Woman being dead of a four Months disury or
Difficulty of Urin, two small Stones, together with some Pustules or Wheales,
have shown themselves to the Dissecters, etc. in the substance of her Heart:
Although indeed, these things do rather convince of the Vice of the sixth
Digestion, than of the fourth, or fifth. But daily beatings or pantings of the
Heart do accuse of Relics, or rather of things transchanged, although not
plainly manifest ones.

It is sufficient that Idea's tinged with Poison, do as much as may be, and
often spring into the Spirit of Life, as the causes of unthought of Death: For
neither does the madness of Dogs, otherwise corrupt by their Tooth, the Spirits
which are the authors of discourses; because the Tooth being vitiated in its
disposition, infects the cases of the Brain, and Spleen, which has assumed the
Nature of a poisonous Relic. Simples also although they are but once only
assumed, do oftentimes make mad for term of Life: As they do defile the Spirit
of the Bowel with a slow Poison, that it self degenerates into the condition of
the Poison left. And moreover also, the very Itch-Gum or tenderness of
tickling, is folded in the naked sensitive Spirit, that as often at it being once
set at liberty; is by a retrograde motion carried into the Arteries, it causes
that feeling in healthy folk, as it being snatched out of its own Hinge, does
abound with a strange, and infatuating Poison. But in sick Folks, the aforesaid
original of tickling, a manifest Poison now sufficiently or plentifully
abounding, stirs up the dance of S. Vitus, and the Trippings of the Tarantula,
by the Arteries derived into the Head. The same Spirit also, because it is of
the race of Salts (as of long Life elsewhere) being degenerate in this point,
does receive a Poysonsomness into it self, stirs up a proper Idea in it self,
and therefore being chased into the Skin, does receive the blemish or contagion
of itching into it self, from whence Scurvinesses or Manginesses,
Scabbidnesses, yea Erisipelasses, and a various troop of Ulcers does spring up,
some whereof do afterward, there sustain themselves by the proper Poison of a
Ferment, and do now and then propagate: Therefore the inflowing Spirit does
also suffer its own defilements by the fourth, and fifth Digestion.

In the mean time, through occasion of a wandering Spirit, if that which was
once dedicated to motion, does repeatingly re-pass into the Head, and from
thence be again dispersed into the Sinews; because it is marked with a double
Idea of exercising motion, (the which I have taught mutually to pierce, and
co-suffer with each other) it brings forth tossings of the Members, and Fools
become fourfold stronger than themselves. But indeed if in the first
Digestion, that which is assumed does not answer unto the ferment of the
Stomach (for many do not desire, do not bear, do not concoct very many things)
however good it shall be in it self, it degenerates into Relics, and brings
forth oftentimes no mean troubles of it self, and seals them in the parts;
and they are the faults of some things, as when Minium or Red-lead is cast into
the Body, being too hard, stinking, or rebellious: But those are rebellious
things, whose middle Life cannot be subdued and taken away by the Ferment of
the Stomach; which things every one does against his will experience and
acknowledge.

And then I have said, that there is a twofold Ferment in the Stomach.

One indeed for the first Digestion, which flows unto it out of the Spleen.

But the other is proper for the sixth Digestion, which is natural or homebred
unto it, from the implanted Spirit, and proper to its own Cook-room.

But both of them are diminished, altered and estranged through Diseases,
Griefs, Age, etc. For the ferment infused by the Spleen is peculiarly silent,
and altered in Fevers: for instead of a sharpness, a burntishness is
substituted, whereby Eggs, Fleshes, Fishes, and Broaths become averse, and do
sooner putrify within, than they are truly concocted into Chyle: And these
Hippocrates calls Impure-Bodies, the which, by how stronger a refreshment or
nourishment thou shall endeavor to refresh them, by so much the more, thou
shall hurt them: For heat does then more strongly burn in the Stomach; but the
Ferment is withdrawn from the Stomach: Therefore things cast into the Stomach,
are not digested, but putrified. So under a dog-like hunger, the Ferment of the
Spleen is doubled.

In the next place, if not the Ferment it self, but a strange sharpness does
increase, there are sharp pains in the Stomach, co-pressings of the Breast,
irregular Appetites, Headaches, Diseases called Cholers, etc. In like manner,
the Ferment of the Gaul being exorbitant, failing, or otherwise vitiated by a
foreign Poysonsomness, Products agreeable unto those Roots do soon bewray
themselves: For from hence are Giddinesses of the Head, Swoonings, Apoplexies,
Fluxes, Cholers, and likewise bitter, or bloody Vomitings, Atrophia's, etc.

I again admonish, that although I leave the ancient names of Diseases; yet I
understand the Idea's, the causers of these, by abstracted names: Therefore in
the first, second, third, or sixth Digestion, I understand vicious
transmutations to be made by diseasie Idea's there bred and transchanged. But
those kind of Relics, or things transchanged, are voided out by a washing
of, being made by Sweat, or Urin, or are voided by the Paunch, and an
unsensible transpiration.

Indeed the Relics of the first Digestion, are expelled through the
accustomed Emunctories or exspunging Places.

But those of the second and third, are regularly driven out with the Urin. But
because inordinacies do happen in most Digestions; therefore there is place for
things transchanged and transmitted: But things transchanged are the produced,
Excrements of primary Diseases, or the Fruits of things assumed: The which,
because they were once domestical, therefore they are bred by the vice of the
transchanging Archeus.

But indeed the Retents of the second Digestion, are made, either by reason of
a weakness of the Ferment, or a riotous exorbitancy of the same. Hence a
sharpness of the first Digestion remaining, and not sufficiently corrected,
proceeds unto the Bowels, for Wringings or Gripes: Moreover, it passing through
into the Veins, does stir up diverse Fevers, a contracture of the Abdomen,
Dropsies, Obstructions of the Meseraick Veins, likewise Palseys of the Joints,
and Stranguries or Pissings by Drops. But if the Ferment of the second
Digestion shall too much increase, or be joined with a vitiated quality: From
hence are Jaundises, bitter Vomitings, Faintings, Giddinesses of the Head, etc.
But if that of the third Digestion which is digested, be too much delayed under
the third Digestion: for although the venal Blood shall in it self, nothing
offend: yet a doubled Ferment of the Shop increases, and in this respect it is
estranged through inordinacy. For truly, nothing keeps Holiday within, all
things do proceed unto the scopes appointed for them, no otherwise than as the
water of a defluxing Brook. The venal Blood therefore, although it be the
treasure of man's life, being detained beyond its just term, degenerates into
Menstrues, Hemorrhoids, etc. And whatsoever things the Schools do generally
attribute unto black Choler, they are nothing but the Retents of the third
Digestion, retained in the third Digestion. But seeing the Members are not
nourished, but under a certain proportion, unknown to Mortals, to wit, of the
Blood of the Veins unto the Arterial Blood; it must needs be, that in the sixth
Digestion, an inordinacy does spring up, which the Schools attribute to the
heat of the Liver, and do falsely bend themselves to cure by cooling things. For
the Liver in it self is a dead Carcass, and cold, unless it be nourished by the
Spirit of life: And therefore, all heat being a stranger to the Liver, is
foreign. For it has it self, just even as a finger which is rightly tempered
in it self, whereinto if a thorn be infixed, although it be in act, and power
cold, yet the finger presently swells, beats, waxes hot, and is enflamed, etc.
So also, the Liver is never hot, unless it shall conceive a troublesome thorn
within it: Wherefore also we must diligently employ our selves in plucking out
of the thorn, but not in cooling. Therefore the Liver has a double thorn: to
wit, one from a hurtful Retent; but the other from a troublesome Retent, to
wit, the Blood burdening it: For so the Liver has oftentimes, from a hurtful
Retent, darted forth Impostumes and Vices of the Skin, the which, by reason of
that which is transmitted, do manifoldly degenerate in the way, and do so
co-defile the Skin, that whatsoever (at length) of Blood is distributed unto it
for nourishment, is corrupted in the same through a Title of contagion: Of
which sort, are Ulcers, the which if they are healed up, they sorely threaten a
greater damage within.

Therefore in Retents of the third Digestion, Cauteries have oft-times
performed help, unknown in the Schools from a foundation, who endeavor with
the uncertain conjecture and hope of Events: For they are rare Defects, which
are from a plurality of good Blood not vitiated (even as in the Book of Fevers)
and the scantiness of abstinence of two days, does easily reduce the venal
Blood suspected of abounding, into a due proportion: Therefore the Blood
offends, if it has a thorn its Companion; and then, if it stay within beyond
its due time, as I have said.

And thirdly, if the venal Blood be disproportioned with the Arterial Blood;
Gluttony is for the most part, the Mother of these three.

Whence it is wont to be said: The Throat smites more than the Sword. Also for
the most part, a plurality of venal Blood is bred, not because more venal Blood
is begotten than is meet; but because less is consumed than is meet, by reason
of want of exercise, an idle. Life, abundance of Fat, etc. For the Gout, and
those Diseases which are thought to be the bastard births of Catarrhs, do
withdraw themselves from this order: Because that they have a Seed of their
own, and therefore also do oft-times rage under the penury of venal Blood. But
in this case, an unequal strength flourishes, seeing that the more weak Organs
are quickly filled, loaded, nor do desire to be abundantly nourished, according
as the more stronger Organs do: For from hence the Archeus of the more weak
Organs is sadned, does through delay, and impatience, wax wroth, and stamps on
himself diverse Diseases: Wherein, while Issues weep a plentiful Pus and
Liquor, the Ancles do swell in the evening, a more plentiful Snivel is dashed
out of the Head, and unthought of Phlegms out of the Lungs, under a consent of
the wandering Keeper: To wit, a total deluge of the Archeus, and prone
Excrements, do grow or spring up according to the weakness of every part: For
the term of the Moon as a Law, does prescribe to the quantity of the Blood,
that it may be wasted in both Sexes, nor may make a longer delay: For from
hence it is, that because there is little transpiration under cold, there are
the more frequent Spittings. Also under cold, more of meat is Injected, yet
there is not therefore more of Blood composed.

In brief, in Diseases of strength, a Vice of the Distributive Faculty is
always present. At leastwise, it is manifest from what had been said before,
that the force of Appetite is not to be measured from sanguification, as
neither from a consuming of the Blood.

But things of the sixth Digestion that are transchanged, have been neglected
by the Schools, and dedicated to their own Humors and Catarrhs: As if all
Diseases should arise from the Vice of the Liver, and a defluxing Phlegm of the
Head. They have moreover neglected the primary Offenses of the Members
containing, which are to be attributed unto the inordinate enforcements of the
Archeus, but not unto things retained.

For I have seen the Liver, in a temperate Duke of Catafractum, to have weighed
16 Brabant Pounds: For he complained of the swelling of his Belly; he had drunk
of sharpish Fountains, and at length of Wine steelified, who when he was
variously disturbed or handled by his Physicians, as for an Hydropical Man, and
but the day before had walked through the Streets, suddenly died.

I have seen a Woman who lived a single Life, always thirsty, and pressed with
a diseasie thirst; for she was thought to be Hydropical, and being tormented
with many solutive Medicines, died: But when after Death, her broached Belly
did not afford Water, she being unbowelled, appeared sound within, but that her
Liver, harmless to the sight, did weigh 21 pounds and a little more.

I have seen a Man, who after a long torment of his Belly, voided many
Membranes, the which being dried and affixed to a Board, with Nails, did
dissemble Parchment. We have seen a little Pouch grown to the Stomach of a
certain Governor, filled with small Stones. Likewise a new Sack to have grown
to the Abdomen of a Woman, wherein were fourteen Pounds or Pints of Water and
more.

So very often, another of the Kidneys being stopped up with Stones, to have
monstrously voyded them forth: Which primary Diseases, are to be attributed
unto the local Spirit of the parts containing.

I sometimes believed, that growth ceasing, the growing Power was extinguished,
because all things did stop from increasing: But after that I saw many things
to increase through Error, which were of the first Constitution, I thought
that the growing Faculty was detained from its progress, only through the
disobedience of the bony Matter. But Pores are bred in Broken-bones, and the
Ribs do become longer through an enlarging of the Breast, long after the
cessation of growth: A swollen burstness of the Veins is bred anew, and becomes
by degrees like a Sinew. A Lobe growing every year unto the Liver of an Wolf,
bewrayes his age. Wherefore I refer the Excrescences of Flesh of a remarkable
bigness, troublesome through Pain, and endowed with a beating Motion, among the
Diseases of the patrs. containing, which have been neglected by the Schools:
As also new Fibers having arisen on the Muscles, I have observed to have
brought the Palsy, and those being taken away, this to have been Cured: For in
the Grease, not only fatness alone is bred, but also Fibers, or the Honey-combs
thereof, which are of the condition of solid things. So there are notable
Super-crescences of the Gristles and Ligaments, which are subject to the
Chyrurgion, not as the occasional Causes of Diseases; but as erroneous Products
which are to be taken away, they being sometimes annexed unto their primary
Diseases: For from an injured Bone, a nourishable Liquor does oftentimes
distill, which dissembles the hardness of a Bone: Yet with rottenness as being a
partaker of a bony curd.

Therefore if I shall reckon up the Diseases of the part containing, among
Retents, think thou that that is done, because they are nourished by a Root of
their own, nor are taken away but by Mortification: Unto these Diseases
voluntary Excrescences, Bunchinesses, Strainings, and Disjoyntings have also
regard: The which because they follow an inbred unequality of Strength, they
for the most part show a receipt from the seed of the Parents, or from the
Defects of Nurses: For from hence whole Families are inclined unto an Hectic
Fever, Asthma, Gout, affect of the Stone, Jaundise, Dropsy, and Madnesses: For
if they are not drawn from the Parents, they are drawn from Nurses: For the
Young does easily drink some Defects with the Milk, and derives them into the
similar Parts. For seeing our Powers do uncessantly operate, hence Retents
cannot make a long stay in their former state and place, but that the term of
their motion being finished, they do revolt from their fomer Disposition, and
being estranged, do decline into a worse: For so things retained do degenerate
into things transmitted, as well because they offend through an inordinacy of
their own vitiated matter, as through an exorbitancy of distribution caused
from the Archeus being provoked. For among things transmitted, the Carrier
Latex first offers it self, which by floating up and down, does manifoldly
err: For seeing that is ordained to wash off the filths of the parts; it first
offends by a strange Vice, which it has contracted on it self: From whence are
some Vices of the Skin, which at length a Ferment being called to it, do
frequently persevere: But if the attractive Faculty labors, Oedema's are made,
and the Latex overflowes into the Liver and Veins: Whence are Disuries or
Difficulties of Pissing, Pissing-evils, and a various household stuff of
Diseases: As also in Squinances, the Toothach, and elsewhere, is oftentimes
easy to be seen, especially if by a singular adulterous Allurement, the Latex
be derived (...) certain part: So also Poses, Cataracts, and Pins and Webs in
the Eyes, Defects (...) Ears, and Teeth, do arise, if the Latex finds either
the Vices of Digestions, or brings strange ones thither with it; because it is
that which from its appointment, drinks up the strange defects of the parts: So
also the Latex does of its own desire, slide into a Sunovie or spermatick
glewiness, from whence it stirs up the torture of the night: For it floats
about according to the coursary successive changes of stations, and subjects it
self unto the government of the Moon: Wherefore it afflicts the Sinews,
Tendons, Ligaments, and Membranes, as well by reason of its own transmutation,
as through the draught of a foreign Seed.

In the next place, if Dross (which elsewhere, I call a liquid Dung) from the
Bowels, be joined beyond a just proportion with the Latex, and does float
within the Veins, now the Stone shall be present. Or next if it putrify, it
adornes or promotes Dotages, and diverse ranks of Fevers: Even as elsewhere
concerning the History of the Humor Latex, of Fevers, and likewise of the
Stone in man. In things transmitted also, the Errors of things transchanged
are especially regarded, and their Effects are esteemed according to their
Qualities, or the Degrees, or Powers of Quality: To wit, the which especially,
do on both sides occasionally determine of the varieties of Diseases.

Furthermore, if the things transchanged of the first Digestion, are brought
down unto the second; too strange and hateful Guests, do bring forth Fevers,
Wringings of the Bowels, Loathings of the Stomach, Faintings of the Spirits or
Swoonings, etc. But if they proceed even unto the third Digestion, Dropsies,
Cachexia's or ill habits of the Body, Jaundises, difficulties of Urin, pains of
the Hypogastrium or nether Belly, etc. do subsist. But if indeed the Defects
of the first Digestion are brought into the sixth: sudden Fevers, Pleurisies,
Peripneumonia's, etc. do arise. But if the things transchanged of the second
Digestion, do re-gorge into the first; Un-concoctions, bitter Vomitings, the
Iliack Passion, the Disease of Choler, the Lientery, Caeliack Passion, Flux,
etc. are stirred up. But if those of the second Digestion shall reach into the
third; now Cachexia's, Fevers, Jaundises, various Obstructions, are at hand.

In the next place, if things of the third Digestion which are transchanged,
are derived into the first; bloody Vomitings, bloody Fluxes, the Piles, etc. do
bewray themselves. But if into the second; Fluxes, and diverse Fevers are bred:
For things retained, are on every side hostile, and much more things
transchanged which are transmitted; and therefore the Archeus cannot but stir
up feverish Storms. But if indeed things transchanged of the third Digestion,
do proceed into the fourth; It will presently come unto Heartbeatings or
Pantings, Swoonings, and sudden Deaths. But if things of the first Digestion
transchanged, do go into the sixth Digestion of the Stomach; From hence are
Giddinesses of the Head, Apoplexies, Palseys, etc. And likewise, if the
transchanged Retents of the third Digestion, do go into the sixth, there are
soon Apostemes, and almost all local Maladies; for truly, through the error of
the sixth Kitchen, as well Diseases of its own proper transchanged Retent, and
of a strange one transmitted, do happen, as whatsoever is falsely attributed to
Defluxions out of the Head: But things transmitted, are sometimes mild; and
those things, which as it were through repentance of their deed, do repent them
of one only Error, and for that Cause, do cease through one only Importunity:
but otherwise they are fountainous ones, which owe the substituting of their
continuation, unto the part transmitting; if they are not also con-centred with
the implanted Spirit of the place: For a ferment of their defilement being
drawn from thence, they are Poisonous, and defile the part by a certain
Contagion remaining; so as that their Fuel being there laid up, they have as
it were by one only stroke, established their Center. I say, they afterward
erect a Colony hearkening to the importunate circular motions of the Stars:
They therefore err, as wandering out of the way, as many as by cuttings of a
Vein, solutive Medicines, Diaphoreticks or transpirative Things, Cauteries,
Vesicatories, Baths; and by Diminishers of the Body and Strength, do hope that
fountainous Transmissions are to be Cured: For those kind of things do desire
renewing Arcanums, after the manner of the Leprosy; as of the Leprosy in its
place.

In the sixth Digestion therefore, Nourishments do either degenerate presently
before assimilation, and a curd of their solidity being received from the
place, they afterward lay it up for a durable Disease (the Moderns accuse the
Tartars of the Blood;) or if a thing transmitted be a forreigner in the place,
neither while it has not also associated unto it a Poison; the Powers do
presently conspire for its banishment, for the most part, with much co-shaking
of the Strength or Faculties. But although four Degrees of nourishable Liquor
are determined by the Schools; yet have they found in none of them an Error,
Degeneration, (...) of Diseases: And although they take notice of a mattery
Imposthume in the Lungs, and a great harvest of obstructions elsewhere, yet
they refer all things into the four first and feigned Humors, as if they knew
not that the Liquors of man's Body were slideable, and subject to Corruption
every hour: But I determine of much household stuff of diseasie occasions, in a
numerous aversion and degeneration of the Liquors which do immediately nourish:
And likewise I place not, I know not their number, because I know that it is
not knowable, where one only thing runs down with a continual Thread, by a
multitude of coursary Dispositions. At leastwise, it is to be admired at, that
no Error has hitherto been found out, or believed by the Schools, to be in
transchanging, while as, notwithstanding some degenerations do offer themselves
to the sight, and every degeneration does occasion its own Diseases: For so the
Giddiness of the Head, makes the Sense and Motion to stumble, because a
nourishable Liquor being degenerate, has joined unto it a be drunkening
Faculty: Also if it shall be sleepifying, it becomes next neighbor unto an
Apoplexy: And the which, if be also made stupefactive, it now bears the
conditions of the Falling evil. Let those also take notice, who intend to Cure
Mad-folks by sleepifying things: For stupefactive Medicines do scarce procure
sleep unto mad Persons by a fourfold Dose; but they increase the Madness: for
Madness is nothing but an erring sleepifying Power; because every Madman
dreameth waking: Therefore stupefactive Dreams, are added unto doting Dreams
in waking: For the sealing Character in a Madman, presupposes a restoring of
the Member, and a Correction of the Poison by its Antidote, but not a
stupefactive Poison.

In the mean time, it nothing hinders erroneous transmutations from being bred,
and likewise the Digestions from wandering, through the importunity of things
transmitted, and from obeying an offspring of their own condoling Sympathy,
agreeable to the impediment: From whence are painful Fluxes, distrubed by a
sharp Chyle of the first Digestion, and likewise con-folded and double Fevers:
Neither does it also forbid a primary Disease to be con-folded with its own, or
with a secundary one bred from else where: In such a manner as is a primary
Fever which brings forth a Product, from whence there is a resolving of the
Blood into the putrefying Disease of a malignant Flux, matched with a feverish
Ferment. At length, neither is there a necessary passage of the three first
Digestions unto the sixth, by the fourth, and fifth: Because the greatest part
of the venal Blood never comes unto the Heart, and much less is it snatched
into its left Bosom: Because all particular parts are nourished no less with
Venal, than Arterial Blood.

From hence indeed it happens, that the Vices of the three first Digestions, do
oftentimes immediately pass over into the sixth: And therefore the transchanged
Retents of the three first Digestions, if they shall reach unto the sixth, they
offend not by transmission of a proper name, but only by transmutation; because
a transmission from the third into the sixth Digestion, is regular, lawful, and
ordinary. I will add concerning the Spleen.

If from the first Digestion, a sharpness of the Chyle be immediately brought
unto the Spleen, A Quartane Ague is soon present, to wit, from a curdled Retent
being there a stranger.

But if the sixth Digestion in the Spleen be troubled, seeing it is the Couch
of the first Conceptions; The Excrements or things transchanged, which are made
of its proper nourishment, are for the most part endowed with an imaginative
Power (such as occurs in many Simples, and which is most plainly to be seen in
the Spittle of a mad Dog) and the which therefore I call inebriating or
be-drunkening, dreamifying or befooling Simples: For therefore, of one Wine,
there is a many-form condition of drunken Men: That is, one only Wine does stir
up diverse Madnesses; For a mad Poison halts with the similitude of Wine: For a
mad Poison by reason of its excelling Power, does not follow the conditions of
the Man; but the very Conditions of the Man are constrained to obey the Poison:
As is clearly seen in the Poison of him that is bitten by a Mid-dog. Poisons
therefore, which of a degenerate nourishment, are bred in the sixth Digestion,
do follow their own Nature: For by how much the nearer they shall be unto
assimilating, by so much the more powerfully do they infatuate: For by how much
the nearer the Ferment of the Bowel, and an in-beaming of the implanted Spirit
shall be present with it, by so much also the nearer, it calls unto it the Idea
of a certain imaginative Power, which at length it transplanteth into a
venomous Poison, not indeed so destructive unto the Life, as unto the Power of
that Bowel. But from what has been before declared, any one shall be hereafter
able to erect unto himself the Stages of Diseases. But it has been sufficient
for me to have shown, that every primary Disease, does objectively, and
subjectively fall into the Archeus, and so into the Life it self; whereof, to
wit, it is immediately formed: But that a secondary Disease, falls objectively
indeed into the Archeus, but subjectively into a Matter, either the solid one
of the part containing, or the fluide one of that contained. And thus indeed to
have shown Diseases to be distributed in Nature, by their Causes, Roots and
Essence, according to their Inns; I repose my Pen.

Barrenness also, seeing it is among Defects beside Nature, has hither
extended its Treatise. Wherefore Coldness, Heat, or moistness is not in either
of the Sexes the cause of Barrenness, however lowdly others may sound out this
thing.

For truly first of all, there is no dryness possible in living Creatures, or
the vicious moisture of the Womb, is not of the complexion, but a mere
superfluity of Digestion, or Transmission.

So in the next place, Heat, and Cold, are signs of Defects in Nature, but not
Causes: Because these Qualities do want a Seed, vital Properties, and
potestative Conditions: Therefore indeed Barrenness, and Fruitfulness is in
every Climate of the World: Yet an Ethiopian Woman, is far hotter than the
most hot Woman of Muscovia. But the excrementitious and superfluous Moistness
of the Womb, is an Effect of Diseases: Yea, if it shall be a companion of
Barrenness, yet not the containing Cause thereof: For an internal Cause differs
not from the Being it self: So neither is the Defect of the Menstrues the cause
of Barrenness; if that Defect contains a denial, or proceeds as an Effect of a
nearer Indisposition. Women of unripe Age have oft-times conceived, even also
before their Menstrues; and those of more ripe years, their Menstrues being
silent. Also oft-times Women affected in their Womb, being trampled on by many
Perplexities, do succesfully conceive, and accordingly bring forth. In the mean
time, some Barren Women are in good health: Also many conceive while their
Menstrues is urgently present; As also the Menstrues being afterward silent,
has deceived many of Conception. Some Women do take notice of their Menstrues
all the time of their bearing; but many for some months only: For indeed,
although Barrenness may after some sort bespeak a privative respect; yet it is
merely a positive, and diseasie Being; for it arises from singular positive
Defects: Because by it self, and in self, it is a Malady of Nature: Even as
fruitfulness bespeaks an entire Cause: For in a Man which is not Gelded, not an
Eunuch, not hindered or disturbed, not mischieved, Barrenness has scarce place;
For from hence an Old Man does as yet generate: Whence it follows, that there
is not so much perfection to be attributed, as neither to be required in the
Male, as in the Mother: But I call those hindered Males, who do labor with a
Gonorrhea, or who have from thence retained a Vice: And likewise who do labor
with the notable Vice of some Bowel. In a Woman the Menstrues abounding, being
Deficient, Irregular, Watery, Yellow, looking Blackish, Slimy, Stinking, a Pain
in her Loins, Belly, Hips, and movings of the Womb upwards, downwards, to the
Sides, are indeed Witnesses and Signs of the Sicknesses or Feeblenesses of the
Womb; and therefore also they fore-slow, overflow Conception, move Abortions,
and gushings forth of the Courses; yet they do not altogether take away the
hope of Conception, nor are they the Disease which is called Barrenness: For
indeed old Women are Barren without all those: For I find the one only suitable
and coequal Cause in Time and Age, to be described in the holy Scriptures for
a positive Being (which is called Barrenness) in these Words; God opened the
Womb of Sarah: For it is the Gift of God derived into Nature, whereby the
Parchment or Membrane of the Womb being most exactly shut in its Foldings, is
opened and enlarged at the co-agreeing moment of Conjunction. There is I say,
an attractive drawing Blas, whereby for fear of a Vacuum or Emptiness, an
attraction of the Seeds, and a suitable filling up of the opened Wrinckles,
follows that opening: To wit, the aforesaid opening causes a sucking for fear
of a Vacuum; which if it be made at an undue moment, it now becomes Vain: For
the Womb of a Virgin, does scarce show the largness of two Fingers; because it
is that which wrinckled into it self by the least foldings: but the opening of
it does not consist in the will of Man, as neither in the tickling, or
luxurious desire of Pleasure; but altogether in the good Pleasure of God; from
whence also Endowments are dispersed into nature, of opening and shutting: So
that some Simples have obtained this Faculty. Neither is it sufficient for the
Womb to be opened at the set Moment, unless the Guest which comes unto it be
acceptable to the Place: For if it be defiled with a blemish, the hope of
generating for the future is void with that Man; because the Womb being wroth,
does conceive a fury of abhorrency, which is scarce appeasable.

CHAP. LXXXVIII. A Preface.
I Have already demonstrated elsewhere, that the Schools have passed by the
knowledge of Diseases, and Things, the neglect whereof is a Fault: Neither is
it therefore a Wonder, if there be nothing hitherto of unheard of things: For
it has been an unwonted and difficult matter to be willing, to be wise in
departing from the Opinions of the Schools, while they should fall from those
things which I substituted in the room of acknowledged Errors.

There are few also, who Phylosophize only for the sake of Charity toward
their Neighbor. Most of the more preferred ones refuse to learn, as if the
Greeks, and Arabians had known all things; and they despair that more can be
known: And therefore they have put on sluggishness as their Skin. But it is a
frequent thing for him, who presently after Promotion, runs up and down from
House to House, to be intent upon Gain only, and he prostitutes a saleable
health for Visits: Therefore he is most rare who is admitted unto the privy
Chamber: Many in the mean time, walking before the doors of Chemistry, do
boast of great Matters, being deluded with vain hope. But indeed I first
(unless I am deceived) have written the History of Life, and Death, hoping that
thereby God his own Honor will redound unto him from his free gift of the Tree
of Life, and a useful Fruit unto those whom he reserves unto long Life, after
me: For Paracelsus, who before me, has treated of long Life, has indeeed
given a Title, but has been altogether ignorant of the Matter.

In the mean time, unless the Lord shall avert it, I guess from a just fear,
that the Life of Mortals will daily be shortened, and at length to pass unto the
Grave in its green ear, through the Offense of Cutting of a Vein, and
Purgings: Unless I say God do make almost all things new: For the attainment of
the Tree of Life is most difficult, of much Labor, and revealed unto few: for
it behooves that the innocent in Hands and Heart, does ascend by the Mountain
of the Lord; Who has not betaken his Soul to Vanity, nor has prepared Deceit
for his Neighbor: For he only shall receive this blessing from the Lord: Until
at length in the extreme confusions of times, Man shall dare to teach Man those
things, which otherwise for the conserving of mutual Commerces of Men, do
remain in secret. For most Physicians at this day, suppose that they know
enough,, if they being initiated in the Paganish Doctrine of their Ancestors,
wax rich only, and by the Rules of Writers are excused from Death among the
common sort. Most of them also deride at long Life, because they are ignorant:
But these Men will at sometime be at the full, and their Mocks shall fall on
their own Authors: Because in the Age to come, it shall grieve God for so great
neglect toward the Neighbor and Poor. Vices also succeed one another
throughout Ages, in a Chain. It has already been sometimes an honor to have
drunk down many large Cups; elfewhere, to have slain many in a single Duel.
Fraud and Deceit flourishes at this day under the Title of Quicksightedness;
and virtue does lay hid as Rare among Few, although it be always nominally
esteemed: It shall again wax feeble, while the number of pernicious Wits shall
depart from the delicate Idleness, and evil curiosities of Studies, unto Arts
and Workmanships: For a tranquillity of times shall spring up, when the root of
Worms living on idleness, and that which is other Men's, being covered with the
cloak of Piety, shall be driven away. At length repentance to come, bids us
hope for reformation: For which happy age I have decreed to write of long Life,
praising God, that my Pilgrimage is shortly to be devolved unto a period. But
while I open unheard of things, if in any place I shall discover the Errors of
Predecessors, I have constrainedly done that, that those who shall follow me
may not dash themselves against rough places, and be deprived of the scope of
Truth: For I my self by Degrees, beholding from my Youth, the empty Husks,
wherewith the Beginnings of Nature did incrust themselves, I began to be
accounted an Apostate from Galen; and I exposed my self willingly unto the vile
esteem of Physicians, supposing it a laudable thing to have my Stupidity to be
derided by ignorant Men; because throughout my whole Life, I have neglected the
common Applause: For by Haters, I am called a Paracelsian, and a Forsaker of
the Schools; and yet I am esteemed an Adeptist, the Obtainer of some Secrets.
And although under this Title, I have been invited by two Emperors to Court,
yet have I refused Honors, and a Courtiers Life, who all my life time have
despised the Sents of Ambition: And now much more (I being detained at the Ship
of the Mote, by the Bank of old Age) do I as careless, avoid and neglect
whatsoever Posterity shall think of me alive or dead; because I in dying,
desire the tranquillity of my Soul. Therefore do I every where protest, that I
have never taken notice of the Errors and Neglects of the Schools, but that I
might satisfy my calling, and profit credulous Mortals.

CHAP. LXXXIX. Of Time.
1. Why the Author Treats first of Time. 2. The Proposition of the Treatise. 3.
The Profession of the Author. 4. That Time has nothing common with any Motion.
5. Negations of Time. 6. The Error of the Schools. 7. Some Absurdities
following from thence. 8. What has deceived the Schools. 9. The Consideration
of Mathematical Science differs from the Truth of Nature. 10. A third Error.
11. A Fourth. 12. A Fifth. 13. A Sixth. 14. Some Absurdities spring from
thence. 15. A Conclusion drawn from thence, does unfold the true Properties of
Time, against the will of the Schools. 16. A Seventh Error is proved. 17. A
false Definition of Time. 18. A continuance of Motions is essentially included
in the Seeds of Things. 19. Time cannot be the internal measure of Motions. 20.
An Eighth Error. 21. Some Absurd Errors following from thence. 22. The Praise
of Unity. 23. The Schools have been decieved by their sloathfulness of
narrowly searching. 24. What has deceived Augustine in Time. 35. Some
Considerations of the Author about Time. 26. What it is to have said in
Genesis, In the Beginning. 27. The Error of Aristotle concerning Place. 28.
Duration is more intimate to a Thing than Place, or a Thing is to it self. 29.
The true and essential property of Time. 30. Why Time is not of the
Predicaments. 31. Men being badly initiated or instructed do also badly
accustom themselves. 32. What has deceived the Hero's in the consideration
of Time. 33. Some Demonstrations even from the holy Scriptures, in the Authors
behalf. 34. Priority or Formerliness is difficultly abstracted from Time. 35.
Duration does not show a respect to things. 36. The Suppositions are now
solidly proved. 37. The Law of Fate or Destiny. 38. A Consequence upon the
Positions of the Schools. 39. Priority is in respect of Fate, But not of Time.
40. What Succession may be. 41. A Treatise of Eternity in respect of Time. 42.
It is answered unto an Objection brought out of the holy Scriptures. 43. An
Error is demonstrated by the Operations of Angels. 44. An Argument
contradicting the Schools. 45. The Author proves it many manner of ways. 46.
The Authors profession concerning Time. 47. A certain Dullness in the true
Division and Measure of Motions, as to the Motion of the Day. 48. Clocks or
Dyals. 49. The Error of Clocks or Dyals. 50. A Measure found out by the Author.
51. Concerning Critical or Judicial Days. 52. Paracelsus is noted. 53. A
Crisis or Judicial Sign brings forth Infamy to a Physician. 54. Frivolousneses.
55. The Consideration of a Climaterical or Dangerous Year of ascent. 56. A
stubborn privy shift of Astrologers. 57. They now cease from their asserted
Climaterical number, for the half of it. 58. The Sabbatary Jubilean, and
Ninteenth Numbers, etc. 59. A week is introduced, not so much by reason of
Number, as by reason of Jewish Perfidiousnes. 60. A Treatise for Long Life is
concluded.

I Being about to write of Long Life, it has seemed good unto me, to premise a
Treatise concerning Time, because Long Life owes an unseparable respect unto
Duration:

Paradoxes indeed, I confess, they are, but nevertheless true Doctrine. For
Aristotle I have elsewhere shown to be altogether ignorant of the Beginnings of
Nature, and to be very scanty in the matter of Natural Philosophy, and
therefore he being wholly ridiculous has exposed Time, Place, a Vacuum,
Infinite, Fortune, and such like abstracted Considerations, and plainly
foreign, in the order of Nature, as though they were the Institutions or First
Lessons of Nature.

But I have premised the speculation of Time, hitherto unknown, unto Long Life:
Wherefore for the clearing up thereof, I state this Proposition. Time is no
otherwise separated from Eternal Duration or Continuance, than the Light of the
Day, the Sun not appearing, from the most lightsome or bright Light of the Body
of the

For I believe that God, most Glorious, is the Way, the Truth, the Life, and
Essence of all Things: Likewise that he is the Principle or Beginning, in whom
all things are

In like manner, I understand Time not to be tied up to Place, not to a Body,
lastly, not to Motion; but to be a Being separated from the same. Therefore
neither do I beg Time

For indeed a Year, a Day, a Month, and Night, are not Time; but Measures, and
Accidents of things happening in Time, plainly foreign and external unto Time:
For

For the Schools, besides that they teach Time, either to be the very Measure
of the first Moveable, or at leastwise, that it is concluded under the same
(for that thing is not

Therefore it necessarily follows from their Suppositions being granted, that
every part of Time is not of Time, but a certain Mathematical point,
undividable, and so without

They mind not, I say, that an undividable negative thing can never grow
together by connection, into any present, actual, long, short, great, or little
Thing; because it in it self, comprehends a mere nothing, in a Natural, that is
a Real Being. Therefore they contradict themselves in the Word [undividable]
They have beheld indeed a Long, and a Short Time, and for this Cause they have
reduced them under Quantity.

In the next place they have constituted also the whole Essence and
Circumscription of Time in succession, which should actually stand in infinite,
and infinitely undividable Points of Duration, being connexed in every the
least Point of an instant Natural Being.

Truly they on both sides have too much addicted themselves unto Science
Mathematical, while they have seemed to themselves to have Repaired Nature:
Indeed Science Mathematical,

And then Schools have separated the Consideration of Greatness or Magnitude
from the Consideration of Number, and they will have Time to be more like unto
Number,

At length, they have thought that Numbers do cast out Unity, while as
notwithstanding a connection of Unities produces all Numbers: Wherein also,
that is a blockish thing, Zero's for Unity, while as a thousand subscribed
Zero's do not contain a Principle of Unity.

Last of all, this also is frivolous, that a Binary or twofold Number, differs
in Species from

Therefore I know those kind of Species, and Metaphors to be Strangers from
Nature; therefore they have from the Schools reputed Time, (because it
consists in a point

For if otherwise, any the least thing infinitely corresponding with the points
of Duration, undividable, and infinite in Act, should bind the points of Time
with a proportioned

Therefore Time (contrary to the prescription of the Schools) is neither Long,
nor Aristotle, but gross Ignorance, environed with Absurdities, and
Impossibilities: Wherefore I have been compelled to write true things from a
compassion on Youth, which has been seduced through credulity.

First of all therefore, the Schools command, that the Time which is of their
consideration, is the Measure of Motions, when as it is already manifest from
the convicted Suppositions

In the next place, If the Succession of Time should happen through a Concourse
and Aid of an undividable infiniteness, and that all Motion should be enrouled
in a term according to Duration, and that there is no suitableness or
proportion of a Finite with an Infinite; and least of all where both are
considered by a sight of the same Duration; it must needs be from the Doctrine
of the Schools, That Time should be an unequal Measurable Measure, a vain,
lying, and incomprehensible Measure of the first Motion or Moveable: Because
they define Time, that it is a Measure of Motions, in relation unto Duration,
and that it is as it were appropriated unto Motion by Accident, and unto
Succession Aristotle has (although falsely) conjectured the first Mover to be
of necessity Unmovable: Why do they not also give Stability unto Duration? To
wit, under which, all Motions and Proportions of successive Motions ought to be
co-measured.

For in all Seeds, there is from the beginning, not only a Principle of every
Motion, but also their own limited Period of Durations proper unto every
Motion: Seeing all variety

In the next place, the Schools suppose natural Species to be in continued
quantities; when as notwithstanding continued, or disjoined, are not Things,
but naked Considerations

Let it be a shame, I say, that the Schools of Natural Philosophy have more
bestowed

For truly in a Binary, both the Unites are as yet different and distinct, yea
they are entire in their own Essence, neither have they ceased or departed into
any third thing,

Indeed the Schools, as often as they have conceived any thing by Science
Mathematical, that thing they have presently wrested into Nature, under the
generality of Rules:

By which method indeed, they have fitted a continual speculation in Science
Mathematical, unto lineal points, and at length also unto Time. B. Augustine
confesses indeed, Paganism. Wherefore I blush again and again, that I am
willing to explain the Essence of Time: But this man I fear not to be my hater,
who already beholds truth in the Heavens.

For first of all, I have withdrawn all succession from Time, who from great
Authorities had already shaken off the Yoke of the Heathenish Schools. For
truly I meditated at first, and a separation thereof, from the darkness.
Therefore the Heaven, Earth, Abyss of Waters, Darkness, and the Day it self,
were before that the circular Path of the Heaven did determine of the Day.

In the Beginning I say, of the Creatures, but not in the Beginning of Time:
Because that Beginning of Things includes some [Dum] or [While] that it may be
of Sense: Although [Dum] or [While] was before a Creature, because God had no
need of a Creature, or a created Duration; neither had the things that were to
be created, need of a created Duration, as a concurring Principle of an unlike
Dignity, with the Creator of an infinite Power: For if the Creature did not
depend originally, totally, to wit, absolutely, and intimately on God, as on
the Beginning and End of its Duration; verily, neither should God also be the
immediate and total Principle, as neither the immediate Life of things; that
is, he should not be their Alpha and Omega. Therefore I from thence understood,
if Nature had at sometime stood rooted in Duration, flowing forth without a
Mean, from Eternity it self; that it ought also at this day so to stand, by
reason of the same rules of necessity.

For presently after, I knew that Duration which they name Time, was a real
Being: And likewise that if Time has been from the Beginning, before a
Creature was made,

I also thoroughly weighed, that as a moveable Body is so in place, that the
place does not Aristotle in the mean time so thought) but place pierces the
very moveable Body on every Side; so that every intimate part of a Body, is no
less in place than the superficies thereof; Yet place is not therefore on the
other hand, comprehended by the moveable Body.

So indeed, and also much more abstractedly, Duration is indeed intimate to
things;

Hence therefore have I meditated of a Duration plainly divine, to be in Time,
and so

Wherefore Time has neither parts, neither does it admit of a division of it
self, and by consequence, it knows not succession; neither also does it approve
of Dreams: To

But because we being concluded in a sublunary place, and being rashly seasoned
by the Priofity, if they are weighed in the Balance of Truth, they are only
the Atributes of Motions, but never of Time or Duration; because Priority,
Slowness, etc. do bespeak only an unseparable Relation unto the parts of
Motions immediately following, and slowness compares the swiftness of Motions
with each other; and therefore Priority, Slownesses, etc. do not so much
measure Time or Duration, but only in respect of a daily Motion. For truly a
humane and undistinct weakness, has through a certain sluggishness and
dullness, meted out all peculiar Motions with a diary or diurnal Motion: Because
they do not regard, that the Priorities of Motions are not properly the
duration of Time it self, but rather a universal distance of a general Motion:
And although Duration it self of Time be, and be present in all things; yet
that this is altogether a Stranger from the succession of Motions. From hence
therefore, Time has begun to be considered as it were a successive and frail
Being by every instant: Especially, because the Schools having imitated the
blockishnesses of the Vulgar, have at length accustomed themselves to confound
Time with the Motion of the Heaven.

It Is no wonder therefore, if the great Heroes or Worthies, considering the
thingliness of Time by such Beginnings, have not been able to conceive of the
same: Because, seeing it involveth an actual Infinite (which one only thing is
Eternal) it is from it self of necessity, not to be comprehended by that which
is Infinite.

For Time is thought to succeed, and to have parts, because parts should follow
themselves

For if God would have the whole course of the Heaven for the future, to be so
unequally inordinate, that no Motion could be made equal unto it; should
therefore Time also be in it self unequal? Or should that cease to be, which
now is? Yea if the Motion of the Heavens should cease (as at sometime it shall
cease) shall Time therefore cease likewise? Shall [Now] it self be no longer
[Now] for what does that belong unto Time, which happens in Time? For truly
it has its own free Being without Respect, Reflection, or Reciprocation unto
any other thing.

Indeed Time is not given unto us for a measure, or that in it self it is to be
measured; but it has a free Being in him from whence is all Essence.

For Example: God is in every Creature: For God is Good as he is all Good, but
not this or that Good; but in as much as he is this or that Good, he is not all
or every Good, and in such a respect, he has a Being in created Things: For as
God is one only Good in all things, so in like manner also, all Good is
essentially this one true Good: Likewise God is every where present in all
things, and his Continuance or Duration, is the Duration of all and every of
things.

In like manner also, the light of the Sun is a Being, and something in it self
(because it enlightneth and heates) yet without and on this side the Sun, it is
nothing: After the same manner, eternal Duration is Time in created things:
Because without and besides an eternal Duration, it is a mere nothing
privatively and negatively. Wherefore as long as there shall be any created
things, Time shall never cease to be. The Lord has said, Thou art my Son, this
Day have I begotten Thee: Because Eternity is nothing but one only [Now] but
one only [To day] I have begotten Thee from the Womb, before the Day Star was:
Christ was born from the Womb in Time, and yet before Lucifer or the Day Star
was: Because in Time, there is no Priority or Succession. [Before] therefore,
denotes a Priority of the Succession of Motions, and an excellency of Dignity,
but not a Priority of Time: Because from the Beginning even unto the finishing
of Age, it is nothing but one only [Now:] For so, The Lamb was sacrificed from
the Beginning of the World, and his death saves the dead before the Lords
Incarnation; as the Incarnation which makes blessed, has respect unto Motion:
Indeed it saves the Ancestors, which precede according to the course of Life,
and in respect of Motions conferred among each other; but not by the sight or
beholding of Duration: That the Lion may not snatch them, nor the infernal Pit
devour them: For those Prayers are for the deceased long after Death, when as
notwithstanding, Souls do for the most part, undergo their Judgment presently
after expiration.

Wherefore such kind of Prayers should be in Vain, and made too late, if Time
should be successive.

The Church triumphs in the Comforter her Guide; therefore she has known,
that all future things are in the same [Now] of time, as if her Prayers had
happened before the party died. For the Wise Man affirms, That God made all
things at once; but Genesis writing the History of the six days Work, says
also, that as many days were spent: Which sayings should therefore contradict
each other, if Succession be granted unto Time: All things therefore were
created in six days space; yet one only point of time remaining: For so the
Devil has known future things in the succession of Motions; as they being
present in the one only [Now] of Time. The Stars indeed are for Times, that is
for the successive changes of Times, or varieties of Motions; but not for the
continuance of our Life, the bound whereof is appointed by the Almighty.

But indeed Priority or Formerliness is most difficulty sequestered from Time:
For although we abstract Time from Place, Motion, and a Body; Yet by reason of
an opposite

But it is sufficient for me, for the distinguishing of things, that Duration
never depends on Motion in its own Essence, but that it carries in it self and
before it self, a certain uniform constancy of the Divinity; to wit, whereby it
is so permanent, that it remains altogether free from all successive change,
and succession of Priority, a Sranger, and plainly independent for things, and
the successive Motions of things: Therefore Duration is to be placed in no
Predicament.

And seeing that, it after no manner pertains unto the order of Relatives,
therefore by consequence, Duration shows no internal respect unto things,
unless by accident; and

Indeed, certain Fluxes of formerlinesses and latternesses, have respect unto
frail moveable things in their Motions, wherewith they hasten unto the
appointed ends of their Period; and so unto their own Death or Destruction: But
what relation has all that unto Time? For therefore also ought Time to run
with all and every Motion? Verily, so there should be as many Times and
Durations, as there are Motions; or if one only Time does universally run with
all and every of Motions, and seeing such a very Time should most swiftly
outrun other Motions, the slow course of the Life of the Crow shall flow in
unequal Time, with the Circle of its roulable Wheel: Wherefore they could not
flow at once, under one only Duration: Therefore Time has its own Being or
Essence, immovable, unchangeable, undivideable, and unmixed with things, not
successive, but simple and free from all intrinsecal respect of it self unto
the Creature: Although Time be more intimate unto things, than things
themselves are to themselves.

I suppose therefore, Time to be in the thrice glorious God, Eminently and
Essentially, but in the Creature, Dependently, Subjectively, and from an
issuing forth to without,

The Law of destiny indeed, permits the Motions of Life, immediately to
follow according to a disposition inhering in moveable things, being affixed
unto a certain and

For nothing can be thought to be more absurd, than that one only Time should
be moved by a certain succession, should follow after, and make it self a
Vassal unto infinite should by such an undivided and mutual coupling of Points,
and uncessant succession thereof, be constrained to be moved, and successively
to follow: And that at length, this Motion by the Infinites of an undivideable
Point, should be the distinct rule, and temperament of all Motions: Yet these
so blockish Opinions or Precepts they hand forth to Youth, under the first
spring of its Age, for the natural auricular Document of Aristotle.

Priority therefore, is never terminated in respect of Time, but of destiny,
related in order unto Motions, without respect of one Motion unto another: For
local Motion does

Truly, by a stronger right do I understand these things to be done with Time,
because Time is not a Relative from any internal respect; but it is a certain
more abstracted thing, and nearer to Eternity in understanding, and in matter,
than Place is.

Time therefore knows, not Succession, neither in respect of Motion, nor of the
thing moved; because Succession is nothing else but a Proportion of successive
things in order unto

For perhaps the Text has seduced them: Hereafter, Time shall be no more; they
not [Now] wherein another Soul separated from the Body, does exist: Because the
changing of the place and condition of Souls does not any thing touch, affect
Duration, or Oblige the same unto themselves, that it may therefore pass into
their Essence: But the same Duration of Eternity, issuingly flows into all
things, and sustaineth all things; yet it does not therefore loose its own
simplicity, although the things which do participate of it, receive the same
after a diverse and different manner: For a thing subsisteth in, and under
Duration, from the which if it shall fall or depart, it departs into nothing.

For an Angel therefore, in his Substance and Being, enjoyes a continual Time
without succession and parts, nothing whereof is great, little, long, short,
former, latter, measure, [Now] of Duration, it should of necessity be, that
both those Durations do wholly melt into one only Being, diverse only in the
accident of Respects, that is in a feigned and mental [non-Being:] into one
only Duration I say, through a necessary real Act of the existance of Number:
And so that Time is in very deed, plainly the same with Eternity, and does
remain unchanged for ever.

But it is sufficient for me, that the Schools do acknowledge some continual
Time, and not successive, which they call Eternity. I am not constrained, by
reason of their mental Diversities, to disjoyn Time from Eternity.

For if they separate Time, as being a successive change of Things, and
Motions, from Eternity;

Time is a Being: Therefore the Creator or a Creature: if it be a successive
Being, therefore it is not the substance of the Creator, or of a Creature. But
if they will have it in God we are, do live, and are moved. So also in
Duration, which neither also was created: For otherwise, if Time does inhere in
all particular things, as an accident or concomitant; truly besides innumerable
Absurdities, there shall be even as many diverse Times, as there are atoms of
things: And whosoever does now subsist at once in the same Duration, shall have
as many diverse Essences and Existences of Durations, and Time shall be
actually divided into an Infinite: And every accident which is naturally the
Object of some one of the Senses, shall not by any sense be perceivable in the
Duration of Time.

Wherefore I am constrained to acknowledge in Time a certain universality, and
together also a singularity proper to all particular things, and more intimate
unto things, than

Time therefore, ought to be unto us a manuduction or hand-leading unto the
Super-intellectual, One, Eternal, Infinite, Intimate Being in every Thing; yet
in no wise Mixed, Concluded, Apprehensible, or Detainable therein; in which
Being, is the Thingliness or Essence of things; to whom be praise and glory in
its own Eternity.

It is therefore a Paganish, barbarous and absurd Speech, that Time Consumes or
Devoures us, because there is no action or passion of Time on us, or from us:
We perish not through the Vice of Time, neither is Death made any more by Time,
than by God: For the dispositions of Motions, are the second Causes of Death,
but Time is not of the Nature of Motions: For the divine Judgments do dispose
of all things, for reasons known to themselves.

In the mean time, it is to be admired, that the Day is the measure of Motions,
and yet that that they have prescribed no precise measure unto the day. They
have indeed made subdivisions of hours, minutes, seconds, etc. by the number of
sixty: But none has hitherto shown the precise space of one sixtieth part of a
minute; for they stuck in the practice. Yea, besides Noon there is no stable
moment of the day: That also, does almost every where vary, so that the
certainty of the Meridional point, depends not so much on the Motion of the Sun
and Heaven, as on respect of the situation of the Sphere. None therefore has
perfectly taught a certain or defined [Now] or constant point, wherein any
thing shall happen, unless a respect being had unto Ecclipses.

They having imitated the Globe of the World, while they have divided the
Sphere by the point of the Meridian, and the altitude or height of the Pole:
But seeing the Sun is

The measure of days by an unvoluntary wresting of the Steel, is as yet more
uncertain; because an exquisite proportion between the Strength of which
in-writhed Steel resisting,

Therefore from the measuring of Motions in Duration; I have first meted out
the strength and goodness of Guns, and any sort of Gunpowder: For if the
warlique Engine

I say therefore, that all and every of the Beatings which do follow, even unto
the last, shall in every place be equal to the first beating: For by how much
the first. Thump is greater, by so much, those that follow are less, and
therefore they may be so much the slower in their Motion, but not in the
Beginning, or End of the same.

Likewise, whether one only pound, or more, be hung on a Thread, yet they shall
not therefore be unequal: But if the Thread be two-footed, all the knocks shall
be percisely slower by twofold: therefore according to the length of the Thread,
the Thumps or Pulses are hastened, or slackened: And so the delay of every
Motion may precisely be known: But the Musician shall note the equality of
those Pulses.

Lastly, seeing the motive Power is on both sides, the one only equal Beginning
of motion, the moderative principle of swiftness according to the distance of
place; therefore it must needs be, that the beating of one Pound is as equal,
as that of more.

I suppose therefore, that the Pulse of a two-footed length, is of a middle or
moderate Pause, therefore that Pulse or Beating may be sub-divided into sixteen
distinct lesser Pulses, and it may be observed in the Pin of a Dial, how many
Pulses or Knocks of the footed Thread, a quarter of an hour shall yield; and so
the year shall be precisely co-measured.

But as to what pertains unto Critical or Judicary Days, Observation indeed
has a

So likewise, the seventh day also has the half of opposition, as also a
quarter aspect of the Moon as to the point of her Beginning: For therefore the
7th and 14th days are evil in respect of the Disease; but good in respect of
Man's Archeus. Therefore, there is seldom a Critical day, out of sharp or acute
Diseases, however otherwise Paracelsus has thought.

Yet I have diligently noted, that there is never a Crisis or Judicial Sign,
where the Physician being skillful in his Art, has taken away the Disease
before the expectation of

For as Nature rejoices in ordinary Motions, and is accustomed unto them, and
is willingly governed by a Unity of the motive virtue; So when the whole
business of the

For let the Schools boast of Crisis's, let them determine of a Crisis, let
them teach, Hippocrates) things cocted, and not crude, are to be moved; The
quicksighted, and mitigated Governor of Nature, has known his own Maturities
at set moments, the which himself alone is compelled to perfect, not indeed by
reason of a distinct animosity of Diseases, in contention; But the Filths being
ripened, they desist from adhering unto the solid Parts. But to what end is
there so great a commentary of critical Days (I being a Junior, wrote five
Books concerning Critical days, the which I afterward committed to the Fire)
if it behooves a Physician to be instructed, that he may render a dangerous
Disease harmless, and may abbreviate a long one; that is, may cut it off, that
it be not spun out into a Crisis. A Crisis therefore, as it sounds of Judgment,
let it be the Judge and Accuser of Physicians, and a testimony of Nature alone
bearing the burden; because a Crisis only happens, where a slimie or tough
Matter does adhere, or a noisome or hurtful Matter is enclosed, and wishes to
be sequestered by an ultimate or final Maturity.

But as to what respects a Climacterical year or year of gradual ascent,
drawn from a seventy Years are the Days of a Man, etc. Therefore among
Christians, they accuse the holy Scriptures of the imposture of Falsehood; and
so it is an invention of the Devil, who being an Enemy of our Life, does
procure through the fear of Death, to smite Old Men with astonishment before
their appointed hour: For otherwise, what does the production of a number into
a number, make or tend unto the course of Life? Years indeed do hasten, and run
back into their own Harvests and Maturities. Wherefore also the revolutions of
Years, and numbers of revolutions, do rather respect an identity or sameliness
of recourses, than the Number, or Life directly, and they after no manner refer
themselves unto a past number, because all particular years do end into their
own precise singularity, neither do they reflect themselves upon a plurality of
Years foregoing.

Among the rest, some one does sottishly betake himself unto the number
numbering. and do grow or flourish by virtue of the Word, it is a shameful
thing for a Christian to have yielded the life of man, and the powers of his
Duration and Existence unto Numbers numbering. Therefore a Clymacterical Year,
whether we respect the Numbered Recourses of the Stars, or a recoursive Number,
or next, the Number numbering, is a vain prattle, repugnant to the holy
Scriptures, which call our wretched Life from seventy unto eighty Years, not by
reason of Years past, as neither by reason of their Number numbering, but
because necessities are increased in the Seeds, they being so appointed by the
Prince of Life.

But they boast of a Sabbathary Number, because it is the Seventh. Add to
this, that is repugnant to the Fiftieth Year, which is that of the Jubilee, and
wholly Sabbathary;

For Astrologers do will the 56 Year in Nativities of the Night, by reason of a
doubled coldness of Saturn; surely a shameful one: but the 63 Year in Births of
the Day, by reason Mercury, and Mars, to be most exceeding dangerous: But these
Men, besides that for one half of Births, at least, they bid farewell unto a
Clymacterical Year, they contradict the Text: The Days of a Man are Seventy
Years, etc. In the next place, they desist from Numbers, while they call the
Qualities of Elements unto their help, and by doting, do transfer them on
the Stars. If Death in the Vale of Miseries, be the end of Calamities, the
Clymacterical Year ought to be the Fiftieth, which is the Sabbathary Year and
that of Jubilee.

God indeed has distinguished the Week into Seven Days, not by reason of a
Mystery or Dignities of the Number, but because he foreknew men would scarce be
at leisure

At length, after who manner, if Seven and Nine should have a Mystery in them,
will thou make it, that the Number from the Product of Seven into Nine, shall
be holy? Seeing that according to you, nothing can be added to, or taken away
from the Species of Numbers, but that the Species it self is continually
changed?

God commanded ten days for unleavened bread, before and after the Feast; But
what authority does that afford for a Denary or the number of Ten.

The Lord commanded that Days were to be vacant for himself, wherein he had
been bountiful unto them, yet are they not therefore to be observed by us: And
therefore neither has he addicted a holiness to Numbers: Therefore that
Doctrine contains the future perfidiousness of the Jews, which things
afterward, from the foolish frivolousness of Astrologers, and melancholy or
mad thoughts, they have fashioned into Arts and Rules fitted to their vain
pleasure or desire; and some of whom I have Cured by Remedies for madness,
seeing such kind of obstinacy wants not its own madness.

Finally therefore, it is manifest, that Long Life which I treat of, is not in
respect of Duration or Time; but of Motions issuing forth from the Beginning,
even unto the End: to wit, the Measuring whereof in the constancy of Duration,
is not Duration it self, but another Motion, such as is the Day, which by its
plurality, only measures the longitudes or lengths of Life: Wherefore the
holy Scriptures do speak dis-joyntly: In those Days.

And likewise they describe the contingencies of things, by the Days of Men,
but not by the Successions of Times, which Paganism has introduced by a
speech altogether fabulous; because of Time there is no Part, Succession, or
interchangable Course.

CHAP. XC. Life is Long, Art is Short.
1. The Life deservedly ought to be shortened. 2. The Consideration of Long Life
issues from the gift of God. 3. Some Factions of the Scholars of Paracelsus,
about Long Life. 4. An Objection for the despairing of Long Life. 5. How great
the length of Life is, according to the Author. 6. Why the term of Long Life is
so Diverse. 7. Long Life is proved. 8. The unsufficiency of Galen is noted.

WE all almost do complain of the shortness of Life; but the space of Life is
long

These things Seneca sometime judged: But Christians who hope Death to be an
entrance unto Life, ought never to lament them of the shortness of their Life:
For there is a certain number of Elect, and Reprobates, the which that it might
be the sooner fulfilled, by reason of the Iniquities of many, the Day of Life
ought to be cut short, as also the number to be speeded, for the hastening of
the last Day: For else, although the World should be fruitful in its whole
ampleness, yet it should not be sufficient for the nourishing of all that are
brought forth, and to be brought forth, by reason of the aforesaid hastening,
if every one of these should attain unto the term of Long Life.

Furthermore, although the Righteous ought deservedly to rejoice concerning the
shortness of their Life, and in a contrary sense, the Unrighteous do most of
them wish for a long continuance of Life (for perhaps they shall be amended in
old age) yet seeing it is manifest to none, whether he be accounted Righteous
in Gods sight, especially because, In his sight shall no man living be
justified: I have therefore judged, that every one is to be seriously employed
for the obtainment of the ancient blessing promised unto him that is obedient
unto Parents. Therefore Long Life has seemed unto me to be the top of all
Philosophy, because it ponders of a pleasant and most profitable Meditation.

The Death of a Person is first of all most greatly to be lamented, which might
be a Pillar unto mortals, to his country, or family, but that by the command or
permission of God, he should dye for some better end: For therefore every one
is of his own free accord carried into the love, desires, and wish of Long
Life; and only a miserable loss of Health, or Fortunes, brings on a Desire of
Death, and wearisomness of Life unto the desperate; But a despairing only of
Long Life to be obtained, does affright those who diligently search after it:
Because that in the Ages preceding Paracelsus, the dumb silence of the Schools
teaches, that they have meditated nothing concerning Long Life.

Because Death crept in through the subtilty of Satan, therefore I conjecture
also, that

The late Adeptists despising the wedlocks of the first Qualities, the
collections of Humors, their Prerogatives, and Decayings, or Cessations, have
by little and little aspired unto a Unitone of Healing, under which, they at
first supposing that they had found the entrance of Remedies, gloried that they
were made partakers of their desire, whom those succeeded, who could find that
the subtilties of things, or purities of Medicines, were not as yet sufficient
for so great a Spire, to wit, that they could enter unto the length of Life;
because the Offices of our growth being finished, they could no longer pierce
unto, and comix themselves with the first constitutives of us.

The natural endowment, I say, which things have obtained in growing, if they
do not put it off within at their first entrance; at leastwise, they do not
carry it far inwards toward the roots of the homogeneal parts; but they are as
yet far absent from detaining the vital powers from their flowing unto Death.

For therefore the more learned from Paracelsus, have afterward declined into
diverse factions of Opinions, and into a despair of Long Life.

Others also being allured with greater courage and hope, more by the Promises
of Paracelsus, than as being supported by Experience, the Witness of things,
have promised many things, whereunto the events have not afterward answered;
because they together with Paracelsus, have not known the root of Long Life.

The more sloathful also have despaired in matters of difficulty, in saying,
The bound of our Life is set, the which none shall over-pass.

They therefore thinking it to be vain, whatsoever those who were somewhat too
rash Paradise, and in vain had the Creator created Medicine out of the Earth,
from the Beginning, unless the natural terms or bounds of things might be
prolonged by Healing or Medicine: For if I use not Remedies my bound is set,
which I shall not pass over; according to that saying, We is me, that my
Pilgrimage is prolonged!

If Adam does not eat of the Tree of Life, he had a bound of Life appointed
him: But if he had eaten, verily neither had he been Dead. There is therefore a
hope for Long Life, but the knowledge of the Mean only has been wanting: For
neither do I speak of Long Life issuing out of the Scaiolae or four spiritual
powers of the Mind; such fables I Paracelsus.

Nor in the next place, am I he, who extend the Years of Long Life unto the
days of Mathusalem: But I greatly esteem of the Age of Nestor, or of Johannes
de Temporibus or John of the Times.

But Paracelsus calls the Life of three hundred Years (by a despised name) a
short, natural, and curtailed one; yea if it be not prolonged unto the Year of
Fire, he esteems it unworthy, and promises, that by the virtue of his
Arcanums, the Life of Nestor should follow, as it were with no difficulty: But
with me, a Long Life has the term of one Hundred and Twenty Years, but the
utmost of Three Hundred Years, because they are those which some living
Creatures do daily of their own accord reach unto, but man very seldom, and
that not but in some unwonted places.

But why Long Life may be extended with so great a largness, it comes to pass,
because it is on both sides received after the manner of the Receiver: For the
Modern Tree of He shall fulfill thy desire in good things, and thy Youth shall
be renewed as the Eagle.

For neither is it said, as of the Eagle; because the former Youth of an Eagle
is not restored: But the Eagle is renewed no otherwise than as the Serpent puts
off his skin, and the Stag his horns; although in the mean time, they do not
cease to wax old under that renovation: So that the Eagle hastens into gray
Feathers.

Therefore I thus speak of Long Life, not indeed which may be extended even
unto the last day, according to the rashness of Paracelsus; as neither do I
speak of a sound Life, which is plainly free from Diseases: but of that which
under some certain kind of Protection of the Faculties does for some good while
enlarge the bound of Life: Which means if they are administered unto a Child
and strong Infant, are to bring the same unto the aforesaid term, if he proceed
to use the same.

What if at length certain Climates do protract the Life, shall that thing be
denied unto a Medicine, unto which there is a natural endowment of Long Life?
For oft-times, he

Why shall not that therefore be done totally by Art, which happens in the Eyes
from a voluntary vigor. But I have always supposed, that whatsoever was once
Natural (to wit, in Nestor, does not resist a possibility of Nature: Neither
also does it move me, that Arch-Physitians have found this place untouched and
dumb, and therefore also have left it: Because the Schools do long since
despair to be wise beyond Galen, who notwithstanding, like an Apothecary, does
substitute one thing for another; and indeed has set forth ridiculous Books of
Preserving Health, as for Long Life: For he encloseth this, in straight,
crooked, athwart, and circular rubbings: to wit, he acting great motion, and
being a great Circulater in these things which are of his own Invention, even
as an ignorant transcriber of others: For as often as he fails, from whence he
may copy out serious things, he so discovers the wonderful poverty of his
wit, that he has seemed to have doated throughout some Books, in a figural
friction or rubbing: And therefore none of his successors has hitherto counted
the Books of Galen, of Defending Health, worthy of a Commentary, or has
attempted to lift them from the ground; but rather by a successive
Interpretation, every one has bound that Doctrine of Galen unto the obedience
of the huckstery of the Kitchen and Diet. For so through the craft of the
Devil, Long Life has wandered into defending of Health, and from thence into
the Kitchins.

The Art therefore of some Years is Short, and the Life Long; if we must have
respect unto the Hope of Life, which the loose Doctrine of the Heathens has
neglected.

CHAP. XCII. The Entrance of Death into Humane Nature, is the Grace of Virgins.
The Index of the Contents.
1. Why it is Treated of Death before of Life. 2. A final Cause is not in
Natural Things, as neither is it the first of Causes. 3. Some Absurdities of
Aristotle. 4. The Author prostrates this Treatise to the Censure of the Church.
5. God indeed made Death for bruit Beasts, but not for Man. 6. What may be
denoted by the Etymology of Death. 7. The Devil could not make Death for Man.
8. Man prepared Death effectively for himself. 9. Of what sort the Immortality
of our first Parents was. 10. By what means Immortallity did stand in Man. 11.
Why the Mind is not capable of Suffering. 12. The necessity of the sensitive
Soul: 13. The eating of the Apple did contain in it the second Causes for a
necessity of Death. 14. The inward Properties of that Apple. 15. Man before the
Fall wanted a sensitive Soul. 16. The Mind Imprints its Image in the Seed. 17.
A chain flowing from the eating of the Apple. 18. To what end the Author has
written this Treatise.

LIfe was indeed before that Death could be; and therefore although Life be
before Death

Truly, I have not studied to imitate Aristotle in this thing, who teaches,
That the End is the first of Causes: For I have elsewhere plentifully
demonstrated, that Aristotle was plainly ignorant of whole Nature: Wherefore
that his Maxim, as well within, as out of Nature, is false.

Because, if we speak of God the First Mover, the Arch-type of all things, and
of the invisible World; be it certain, that with him there is not any Priority
of Causes, but that

Likewise, seeing whatsoever is made or generated in Nature, is made or
generated from a necessity of the Seeds, and so that Seeds are in this respect,
the original Principles, and natural Causes of things, and do act for ends, not
indeed known to themselves, but unto God alone: From a necessity of Christian
Philosophy, a Final Cause has no place in Nature, but only in artificial
things: And therefore also from hence is verified what I have elsewhere
sufficiently proved, That Aristotle has understood nothing less than natural
things, and that he has deceived his Schools by artificial things: And he is
wholly impertinent in this place, because he has reduced artificial things
under the catalogue of natural Causes. Yea in more fully looking into the
matter, Aristotle remains alike ridiculous: For truly a builder, before the
bound or figure of Houses made out of Paper, does presuppose a knowledge of the
Place, an attainment of Means; in the next place, of Lime, Bricks, Stones,
Wooden, and Iron materials: a computation of which Means, does go before a
Figure of the Houses. And so neither also is the Final Cause (if there be any)
the first of Artificial Causes, in the Mind of the Author. Therefore it is a
foolish thing to reckon a Being of Reason, a Mental Being, or a Non-Being,
among Natural Causes.

Moreover I had willingly hastened unto the bound which I have proposed unto my
self, concerning Long Life, unless Death should cut off the intended thread,
interlacingly prefixing its priority as it were a Remora or stop: The Paradox
also whereof, I had willingly detained among Secrets, but that the Treatise of
Long Life did require its right after Death, whereby it has naturally
stablished an entrance into the Inn of Man.

Surely this Mystery of God is an unheard of Paradox, and the which therefore I
humbly

But let it be in stead of a Proposition: That God made not Death.

But that thing I first understand to be denied for Man only: For otherwise,
for bruit Beasts, Death was already naturally ordained before Man was Created,
and indeed from the same Root whereby Death entered into Man: For truly most
Beasts live not but by the slaughter of each other.

In the next place, Death does not in this place, signify a naked separation
of the Soul from the Body, as it denotes a mere privation, as if the sense
were; That God has not made a Non-Being, which is called Death: For such a
Declaration or Proposition, in the holy Scriptures, should be ridiculous. For
the very Word, (He has made) and a denial thereof is the same, and respects,
that he made, and they were made: And so a denial thereof bespeaks the absence
of a positive, and not of a privative Being, and is equivalent to this
Proposition, God made Man without an Inclination unto Death, Neither made he
Natural Causes in him whereby he should be Mortal.

In the next place, neither has the evil Spirit made Death; Because there is
not a kingdom of Infernal Spirits in the Earth, and much less was there in
Paradise: Neither can

Therefore if neither God nor the evil Spirit have made the Death of Man
efficiently,

For he was in the possession of Immortality, and he was able not to dye if he
would, Adam had need of the Tree of Life, therefore in respect of his Body he
was not absolutely Immortal, and therefore also he stood in need of
nourishment: but he was to be Immortal from the free goodness of the Creator:
And he who had preserved Adam from Death by Grace, and had given him the
natural endowment of the Tree of Life, had therefore defended the same Adam
from any kind of Injuries: Therefore Immortality in Man had been continued by
the Tree of Life, and he was therefore banished out of Paradise, lest also
after the Apple being eaten, He stretch forth his hand unto the Tree of Life,
and eat, etc. For as the Apple included the Cause of Death, so the Tree of Life
contained a superiority of Life over the Causes of Death. For it was not
convenient for Man, who had eaten his own Death not to Dye, and to deride
threatened Death, and therefore he ought to be bannished in Paradise.

But Man was Immortal, as his Immortal Mind did immediately perform all the
Offices and little failed, if he had not been supported by the Tree of Life.

Yea, in speaking distinctly, all plurality of his Powers was supt up into the
Unity of his Mind: And at this day, the Mind is not capable of suffering
through Duration, and

Therefore that Death might make an access and entrance into Man, it behoved
that the Mind did first desist from its immediate and former Function of the
Offices of the Body; and that another Soul, to wit, a Mortal one, Sensitive and
Seminal, being as it were the Band of the Body, should enter.

The which indeed, being far different from the Mind, is begged in the course
of Nature by the vital Air, from the Father of Lights, the giver of Life (even
as elsewhere

For if the Seed of a Dog does voluntary issue even into a living Soul
exclusively: Therefore it was meet that Man should be conceived without Seed,
and a manly Copulation; or at leastwise, that the Seed of Man should not be
without the disposition of a seminal Life, but to be limited by the common
guidance of created Nature, into a living Soul, exclusively: the manner whereof
I will explain afterward.

Furthermore, that Death was placed in the eating of the Apple, that is, that
the natural Cause of Death, the producer (after a dispositive manner) of the
sensitive Soul,

For from what moment of Time, Man made a Seed within himself for the
propagation of his own Species, he delineated (at leastwise dipositively) by
the same endeavor, the Beginnings of a mortal Soul, occasionally, it being the
covering and wrappery of the Mind, that it might receive on it self, the whole
ministry of the Body.

For truly the Creator had already obliged himself unto the Seeds of things in
Nature, that as often as the Seeds of sensitive Cratures had come unto the
bound of multiplying, the Parent himself of vital Lights, might infuse meet
Souls into all particular Seeds; the which I elsewhere in the birth of Forms,
have profesly prosecuted.

And therefore, there was in the Apple a Faculty of producing a fructifying
Seed, and after a brutal manner, containing a seminal dispositive Archeus of
the Young, and by request For on the same day where in they should eat of the
Fruit of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, they should die the Death:
because by the approach of the sensitive Soul, there was made another, and a
new Generation, by reason whereof the Mind being astonished, withdrew it self
from the Stern of Life.

In this thing indeed, did the necessity of Death, and Immortality stand: For
Man had wanted a mortal Soul, as long as he had wished to be immortal; not only
because one only

But moreover, because there was no need of a Seed, which might contain in it a
Disposition unto a mortal Soul. Therefore the whole seminal Disposition to
propagate Seed, was in our first Parent, Present^ after the Apple was eaten,
and before the sensitive Soul was born, as well in himself, and his Posterity.

From thence indeed it is manifest, that the Mind, although it has withdrawn
its hand from the Stern of the Body; Nevertheless that it is no less guilty in
every production of

Indeed that thing, the words of the Text contain. In Sins my Mother has
conceived me.

But after what manner, under the Mean of the dissuaded Apple, the most chaste
innocence was defined, being free from the Concupiscence of the Flesh, and from
the contagion of a brutal Impurity, I will profesly demonstrate afterward.

But let it be sufficient to have now said by the way, that a vital Seed has
arisen, and was conceived through the lust of the Concupiscence of the Flesh,
for the begging of a

Therefore from the Concupiscence of the Flesh, as the Seed, so also the Mortal
Soul, and the Life thereof, and by consequence, the flesh of Sin have drawn
their original; and by consequence also, Death.

But indeed Athiests and Libertines, do even at this day, take the Text of the

Therefore the History of the Deed, which Genesis describes, is true. But why,
and after what manner, that eating of the Apple has naturally, unavoidably,
unremissibly, and irrevocably caused Death to be equally continued on all
Posterity; so as that the one only transgression of the Admonition, being
among the most heinous of Sins, has committed an original Crime, and
afterward should enclose in it the Reason of a second Cause by propagating,
from an unexcusable necessity of Mortality, or after what manner, the
withdrawing of Life, and Cause of Death are necessitated in the eating of one
Apple, I desired not to have narrowly searched into the reason of the good
pleasure of God, and the motion of his Decree, from a former Cause, or from a
consequent Effect; seeing it abundantly suffices me, that I know and believe,
it was so appointed of God; but that truly, I had hoped it might be for his
Glory, the Splendour of Chastity, and Instruction of Libertines, to have more
fully sifted this Par^^^, and therefore also to have applied it unto my
Treatise of Long Life.

For now is the hour come, wherein that Evil shall, from the North, be spread
over all the Inhabitants of the Earth.

CHAP. CXII. A Position.
1. The substance of the Position. 2. A summary Objection compacted of the Law,
Sin, and the Curse. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. are Arguments against the Objection. 8. A
new Objection. 9. The Objection is solved. 10. The quality of the Sin in our
first Parents. 11. Why the Serpent assaulted the Woman. 12. The Man is not
cursed. 13. The Woman is not cursed. 14. The Text which is thought to contain a
curse, confirms the Position. 15. The likeness of Conception, and bringing
forth after the Fall, and not before the Fall, does strengthen the Position.
16. The Text proves the Position. 17. An eight Argument against the Curse. 18.
A ninth. 19. A tenth. 20. An eleventh. 21. A twelfth. 22. A thirteenth. 23. A
fourteenth. 24. It is shown that Sin has not caused Death, much less if there
had been any Law. 25. What kind of knowledge was included in the Apple. 26. Two
faults in arguing, of not the Cause, as of the Cause. 27. From what Causes the
Corruption of Nature has arose. 28. From whence is the continuation of the
original of Sin. 29. Some Errors about the abuse of those faults in arguing.
30. The Corruption of Nature, from what immediate Cause it has proceeded, from
what occasional Cause, and from what mediate Cause. 31. A fifteenth Argument
against the Curse. 32. A sixteenth. 33. A seventeenth. 34. An eighteenth. 35. A
nineteenth. 36. A twentieth. 37. A twenty first. 38. A twenty second. 39. A
twenty third. 40. A twenty fourth. 41. After what sort Death entered the Apple.
42. A conjecture from things going before. 43. The conjecture is proved. 44.
Brawlings about Goats-wool. 45. A twenty fifth Argument. 46. It is concluded
from the Truth of the Text. 47. Death does not exspect an hec-ciety or this
very momentnesse, as neither does Sin. 48. The intention of the Creator placed
in the Text is proved, because he has no where admitted of incest between him
that goes before, and him that follows after in generation. 49. The place of
Man's corrupted Nature is narrowly searched into by eight Arguments. 50. A ninth
is also added. 51. The chastity of the Text is celebrated. 52. The excellency
of those that are regenerate, beyond the happiness of Adam.

THe Almighty, out of his vast, and voluntary goodness of Love, has loved, and
raised up Man peculiar for this purpose, that he might intimately and as nearly
as might be, Eve, and ordained that she should be the future Mother of all
Humanity; and Adam after the Fall, called the name of his Wife Hevah, because
she should be the Mother of all living) who was to conceive her offsprings,
not indeed from carnal Copulation, and after the manner of Bruits, nor from the
concupiscence of the Flesh, or by the will of Man, but from God, or from the
overshadowing of the holy Spirit alone, after the manner whereby the Humanity
was conceived and born; in which, and by which, all that are to be saved ought
to be regenerated: That is, the Virginity of the Mother remaining entire, and
her Womb being shut, she had brought forth without Pain; Eva was constituted
above the Man.

This indeed is the great and new Paradox, which I have undertaken to
demonstrate, in this Treatise. Wherefore in the entrance, obstacles that are
obvious, and devious, are to be removed.

And first of all, they object the Text: The Earth shall bring forth unto Thee,
Thistles and Thorns. In the sweat of thy Face thou shall eat thy Bread. I will
multiply thy Miseries, and thy Conceptions. In pain thou shall bring forth thy
Sons, thy Husband shall rule over Thee. Thou shall die the Death: And by
consequence, ye shall be afflicted with the Calamities of Diseases and old Age.
All which things issued forth on Posterity, from the curse of the Sin of
Disobedience, even unto the destruction of the World, upon no account to be
redeemed, and by no act of sanctity to be expiated: Because God had appointed a
Law to Adam, that he should not eat of the Fruit of the Tree of knowledge of
Good and Evil; the transgression whereof has defluxed as into original Sin; So
also it stirred it up into the perpetuity of a Curse, from our first Parents,
equally on all their Posterity. These things have been thus diligently taught
hitherto. Whereunto, under the peace and censure of the Church; I will humbly
sub join my own Conceptions.

First therefore, I negatively affirm the contrary; because the Words of the
Text do not precisely contain any Curses, except on the Serpent, and Earth;
but not at all on

For it is a foolish thing to believe that God should now curse Man, whom
presently after The Woman shall bruise thy Head: I will put Enmities between
Tree and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her Seed. The which, seeing it is
not understood of the Seed of Man, it promises the Messiah the Savior of the
World, to come of the Seed of the Woman: So far is it, that he had there cursed

In the second place, I deny that a Law was given, and by consequence also, a
contradiction Of every Tree of the Garden eat Thou; but of the Tree of
knowledge of Good and Evil, Thou may not eat. The Word [he commanded] Seems
to include a Precept, and so also a Law; Yet that one only Word obtains no more
the force of a Law or Precept for the affirmative [of every Tree of Paradise
eat Thou; than for the negative [Thou may not eat:] For it included not a
Sin, although he had not eat of every Tree of Paradise: And therefore it did no
more contain a Law, for the forbidding of one Tree, than for a Liberty of all
the other Trees. Therefore the Text contained a fatherly Liberty for the
affirmative, and likewise for the Grant; as also a fatherly Admonition of
Caution for the Negative: no otherwise than as if a Countryman being expert of
the way, shall say to a Traveller; If thou shall go that way, thou will Perish
and die the Death So the Admonition of the Creator [thou may not eat; and in
whatsoever day thou shall eat, thou shall die the Death,] do show, not a Law,
but a Persuasion, and Wish: But the transgression, and Act of the despised
Admonition, does indeed contain a Sin, but not of Disobedience; and
Disobedience, as much differs from a despised Admonition, as a Law does from an
Admonishment it self. The Prohibition therefore [thou may not eat,] sounds
as an Admonition, to wit, least he should eat his own and posterities Death by
an unextinguishable Guilt; because that Death was placed in the Apple, but not
in the opposition of eating: And therefore that Death from the eating of the
Apple was natural, being admonished of, but not a Curse threatened by a Law: For
the threatenings of Death, which was unknown to Adam, could not terrify the
same Adam: And therefore threatenings had been void, but not an admonition: For
Adam had not as yet seen a dead Eve know what it should be to die in Paradise.
Therefore with our first Parents, Death was as yet a non-Being, and unknown;
but of a non-Being, and of that which is unknown, no Conception answers, and
there is no fear at all: Therefore, neither has God foretold Death for the
threats of Terror, or a Law; but from his mere goodness: That when they had
eaten of the dissuaded Apple, they might know that God had not made Death; but
themselves for themselves.

Neither does the Text in Chap. 3. hinder these things; Because thou have eaten
of the Tree, whereof I had commanded thee that thou should not eat, etc: For
the Words do manifestly [I had commanded] is the same which before in the
second Chapter; [and he commanded him, saying] signifies an Admonition only,
and not a Law: Otherwise under an equal original Sin, they had been obliged
from eating of every Tree of Paradise, which none of a sound mind will ever
affirm.

For the great Sin was in a suspicion of deciet, falsehood, and fallacy of God,
and that they gave more credit to the Serpent, than unto God, and that they
despised a fatherly

In the next place, the crafty Serpent assaulted not the Woman as being the
weaker; but because the Admonition was given unto Adam from the Mouth of God,
but signified Adam.

First of all, it does not contain a cursing of the Man, that the Earth should
be cursed in its Work, and should bring forth Cockle, and that he should in the
sweat of his face

Again, neither do these Words sound of a Curse, that the Woman should be
thenceforth obedient and subject to her Husband, although therein, the intent
of the Creator In Pain shall thou bring forth thy Sons; the Text expressly
confirms the mystery

1. That Eve was not created, nor appointed, as that she had brought forth in
Pain: Wherefore this Message is not decleared unto her for a Curse: But there
is set before her eyes, how much Calamity she had caused unto her self, that
she should hereafter conceive and bring forth after the manner of Bruits, in
Pain: For it is not to be doubted, but that Bruit-beasts are not guilty of Sin,
yet do they bring forth in Pain: Not indeed that they have sinned in Adam, as
their Father, or that they are partakers of his Sin; because they had brought
forth in Pain whether Adam had sinned or not. Neither also is it agreeable with
divine goodness, that Bruit-beasts should bear an undeserved Punishment, while
as they from a Faculty of Nature, and from an appointment of Creation, do bring
forth in pain.

2. If Bruits bring forth in Pain, a likeness of Conception, and bringing
forth in Bruits, and in Woman after the Fall, is denoted; which Likeness,
seeing it was not before the Fall, therefore this Text strengthens the Position.

3. If Eve had not eaten the Apple, and consequently from the Apple, the
concupiscence of the Flesh from the tickling of a corrupt Seed, verily she had
brought forth without Pain.

Where the Text promises a Virginity in conceiving, and bringing forth, and so
a perpetual Virginity appointed in propagating: To wit, that she had conceived
and Eve, is in very deed, only a commemoration of the good lost through the
copulation of Man, of Seed, and of the concupiscence of the Flesh, in the Flesh
of Sin, after the manner of Bruits, henceforeward? The hope I say, was lost of
conceiving by the holy Spirit, after that she had conceived by the will of Man,
as every Mother in Sins does.

For otherwise, if Death had been of the punishment of a broken Law, and not
from the concupiscence of the Flesh, there should be every day as many new
Deaths, as there are Transgressions; or God should not make so much account of
his Commands of the Decalogue, Good and Evil: For he would not have those Laws
to be alike seriously observed, which he would not have to be chastised with an
equal Punishment.

Therefore it being as yet supposed, that there had been a Law concerning the
denied eating of the Apple, even as there is a Law of forbidden Worshipping of
Idols, Adultery, etc. But these Laws are not punished with a continued
unpurgeable Impurity on Posterity, in such a manner as the opposition of that
eating is. From hence therefore, it most easily appears, that original Sin
was not so much from the force of disobeying a command, as from the effect of a
defiled divine Generation, being changed into a beast-like one: For else there
is not an equality of distributive Justice, nor therefore a conformity in the
goodness of God, whether we have respect unto the ingratitude of our first
Parents, or next unto the disobedience against a Law: Because the first
disobedience should pay a punishment derived on all, even on the innocent
Posterity rather than any tenths or hundreths afterward, and than innumerable,
and far more great or heinous Sins.

Indeed, I think that there is the same rule of Justice with the same Lawgiver,
of every command preceptively, and defensively given and pronounced, that the
breaking thereof ought always to draw after it an equal Fault, neither
therefore to be punished in all the Posterity, and those that are innocent: and
then that none of Mortals, nor any one of them had been sufficient for the
original punishments of their Ancestors, and a hundredfold of Deaths, (to wit,
if Death had taken its original effectively, and immediately from the opposing
of a Law) or the unchangeable God had not appointed his future Commands to be
alike observed as at first, if Death should not have its root in Nature, the
application of which root had been only from man.

Therefore If Death should be immediately from God alone, from the curse of
Sin;

In the next place, if Death had proceeded from a Curse, and had been from a
supernatural Adam: Yea, which is far more absurd, our Death should not proceed
from the same primitive Beginning, from which the Death of our first Parents
began: And by consequence, our Death should not be the effect of original Sin:
And so, unless Death do happen from elsewhere, than from the punishment

Again, if Death should be immediately caused from a Curse, or from Sin; should
not the On the same Day thou shall die the Death; while as it should not say:
Presently in the same Moment thou shall die: For a Curse does not want twenty
four hours that it may operate, as neither likewise does Sin require an
interval for the Guilt, and deserved Punishment of the same, which was expressly
seen, while an impure Man endeavoring to vindicate the reeling Cart wherein
the Arc of the Covenant was carried, from a fall, paid the Punishment of his
boldness by sudden Death. But seeing Death consisted in the procreation of
forbidden Seeds, and of the Concupiscence of the Flesh, it presupposes the
eating of the Apple, and its Digestion: And therefore those Words, [On the same
Day thou shall die the Death, or shall be made Mortal;] also thou shall suffer
punishment by Death, doubled in thee and thy Posterity, do strengthen the
proposed Truth of our Position.

But there is no original Sin accounted of from the first, afterward or
unremissibly derived My Spirit shall not remain with Man, because he is Flesh.
But that Sin, if it has not been sufficiently searched into by Predecessors,
I will add freely what I conceive.

For indeed in this History of Genesis, do concur together.

1. The Sin of Distrust or suspicion of an Evil Faith, of Deceit, Fallacy or
Falsehood in God. For Eve says to the Devil: Least perhaps we die: And so she
doubted that the Death admonished of, would of necessity come unto them. And
likewise the Sin of a despised Admonition, and that they more trusted unto the
Serpent than to God; neither was there disobedience, where there was not yet a
Law.

2. An act of eating of the Apple, not so much forbidden, as admonished of
bewarying of it.

3. An effect of the Apple being eaten. For in the midst of Paradise, there was
a Tree, whose Property is said to be of Life: Least he eat and live for ever;
and there was another Tree, whose Property was that of the knowledge of Good
and Evil, unto whom there was not another like; but the other Trees, except
these two, served only for nourishment. The property therefore and effect of
this latter Tree, was to stir up an itching concupiscence of the Flesh, or
madness of Luxury: But it is called The Tree of the knowledge of Good Lost,
and of Evil obtained: For they knew not that they were naked, and they were
without shame, that is, without the Concupiscence of the Flesh, like Children,
because they wanted Seed.

4. A carnal Copulation concurreth: From thence at length, a certain beastlike,
frail, Mortal Generation, contrary to the intent of God, who was unwilling that
Man should conceive in Sins (in Sins has my Mother conceived me) not indeed
that all Mothers afterward should eat of that Apple, but because presently
after the Apple was eaten, all Conception should not be made but by the will of
Blood, Flesh, and Man: And so that from thence, should all Flesh of Sin
necessarily proceed.

Therefore while the immediate Cause of corrupt Nature, and Death is ascribed
unto the Sin of disobedience; Or while the immediate Cause of corrupt Flesh, is
attributed unto

For in speaking properly, the very Corruption and Degeneration of the Flesh of
our Eve as a Virgin.

And therefore original Sin is defluxing altogether on all Posterity, because
after the Virginity of Eve was taken away, the race of men is not possible to
be generated but by

1. Why that Apple was with so loud a voice forewarned of, that they should not
eat of it. 2. That they have esteemed that to be a Curse which was not. 3. That
they have ascribed original Sin unto one Disobedience, as the most near and
containing immediate Cause. 4. That they have thrown an unexcusable Death, on
the Curse and Punishment of a broken Law.
For although a grievous Sin has concurred with an original declining of the
Generation intended by God, together with an impurity of the Flesh, the
corruption of Nature, by etc. as from an immediate Cause; but from the effect
of the Apple being eaten, as a new Product of necessity, Naturally depending
thereon: that is, Death has proceeded from its own second natural Causes
existing in the Apple: Even as a total Corruption of Nature has issued from
thence, because both are supported by one and the same Root of necessity.

But the Causes of these natural Causes, were by accident co-bound unto the
Sins of Distrust, etc. in the Unison of eating. For the very guilt of the Sin
of suspicion of an evil that a Death and Misery of every Body ought to enter
and perpetuate it self on all Posterity, even although they should have
guiltless Souls: For God does sometimes punish the Sins of Parents, upon one or
a second Generation: But it is no where read, that he has chastised the Sin of
the Grandfather on all his Posterity afterward, who had acted evilly for five
thousand Years before: For that pain of Punishment exceeds the love of God
toward Man, whom he so greatly blessed, presently after Sin: It exceeds I say,
the Rules of Justice, if the Punishment of him that is guiltless in that Sin,
be refered unto his Balance.

And moreover I think, that if God out of his goodness, had not admonished our
first Parent of Death, If he should eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and
Evil: But if the Devil Eve should be conceived from the holy Spirit, after her
Virginity was corrupted: And so Death, a Disease, and the very Corruption of
Nature, and Beast-like original Inversion thereof had been, and yet not from
Sin: Because the Apple contained a natural efficient Cause of Luxury.

For how unaptly do these agree together: Death proceeds from the Sin of an
infringed or broken Law, and so from a supernatural Curse: And those Words of
the Paradise; Least he stretch forth his Hand unto the Tree of Life, do eat of
it, and live for ever. For against the Curse of God, no Creature is able to
resist. From hence therefore it becomes evident, that the Apple contained the
natural Cause of a defiled Generation, and of their own Death; and that the
Tree of Life, did likewise contain naturally a conserving of eternal Life; that
is, a Superiority over the necessities of Death.

At length, if death had happened from a Law, from the Punishment and Curse of
Sin, it should be false that God had not made Death; because in very deed and
immediately,

Last of all, Sin is a mental Being, or a Non-Being, which cannot produce a
real and actual Being.

And therefore, Death at its Beginning had not proceeded from natural Causes,
even

And therefore the Text should speak that which is ridiculous, God made not
Death; if by reason of disobedience he had cursed Nature that it should die.

It is therefore of necessity, that the Death of Man in its Beginning, began,
and was

Indeed although Adam became Mortal from eating of the Apple, yet his Death
happened not but naturally some Ages after, and from Old Age, as from second
Causes: Far

For although we are now Mortal, yet we die not when we will, and when we
desire:

Wherefore it is likely to be true, if the Serpent had not been able to obtain
of Man, that

And that thing is sufficiently gathered from the Text, which does not say, If
thou shall eat of that Tree; but he says, In whatsoever day thou shall eat,
thou shall die the Death: As if he should denounce, that that danger of Death
to come, was foreordained. For, for this purpose the World was created, and
the Instruments of Generation were given unto Man, because the Corruption of
Nature, the necessity of regeneration in a Savior, and the virgin Purity
thereof, was foreseen.

Let therefore, those brawlings cease, whether Eve ate an Apple, or indeed a
Fig.

For the Text calls an Apple, That which is pleasing to the Eye; but a Fig does
not so allure by the sight of it: And that one only Tree was of that Property,
whereof then there was

Finally, the Words of the Text; I will multiply thy Miseries, and thy
Conceptions: so far off is it, that they do signify the Indignation of God,
and much less his Curse; Yea rather

For truly, there is none which knows not, that by how much the Life of the
devoted Sex shall be the more miserable, by so much also that it is nearer to
the Son of Man: for otherwise tribulations which God sends on his Saints, and
Martyrdom it self, should by an equal right, be Curses.

I will add last of all, that as the Works of the Flesh are devilish: So the
Text, I will put Enmities between the Seed of the Woman, and thy Seed; does
fully or plainly confirm

For first of all, the Woman of whose Seed God there speaks, is the
God-bearing Virgin; which as a Virgin, has left no other Seed an Enemy to the
Serpent, but the Sons of Light, the Sons of God, and those who are renewed by
the holy Spirit, who have no Enmities with the Eggs of any creeping thing, but
only with the Sons of the Devil, and Darkness, forasmuch as they keep the Seeds
of Sin. Therefore the Text there promises a future Regeneration in the
God-bearing Virgin, calling those that are not renewed, the Seed of the Devil;
because they are Adamical Flesh.

Therefore those things being heeded which I have already above demonstrated;
original Sin does not properly expect a quickening, or the moment of hecceity:
For although For behold I was conceived in Iniquities (before the coming of the
Soul,) because in Sins my Mother has conceived me: For Sin is in the same
point wherein Death consists; the which indeed is in the very mixture of the
Seeds: For Death is immediately in the Archeus, but not in the Soul; which
thing the sometimes mortal indisposition it self of the Archeus, proves; from
whence the conception is made void, which before now was in its whole hope,
vital: And although the impurity of the material thing supposed, be before the
Flesh thereby generated, and therefore also before the Soul; yet there is not
properly Sin, unless the Soul ^all put that on. There is therefore a far
different infection of original Sin, than of any other Sins whatsoever, which
require a consent of the Soul: For other Sins the Soul it self commits: but
original Sin defiles the Soul not consenting; because the Thingliness or
Essence of that original Sin, is the very Flesh of Sin: For neither therefore
is it called the Soul of Sin, but the Flesh of Sin, because the Soul is defiled
by the Flesh: But the Devil not from elsewhere than from himself: Therefore Man
admires mercy, but not the Devil. Therefore from the good pleasure of the
Creator, the Apple did carry in it not only the Concupiscence of the Flesh, but
consequently also, the generation of Seed: but there was not therefore a
Faculty in the Apple, of propagating the sensitive Soul.

The Arbitrator of the World in creating, would oblige himself to create every
living Soul in every soulified Body, when corporeal Dispositions had come unto
the bound of enlivening: For therefore the Apple, presently after it was eaten,
disposed the Arterial Blood unto a Seed, and from thence into a sensitive Soul:
And that thing was proper unto no nourishment, which was unto that Apple, so
that it not only begat Seed in our first Parents a few hours after, but also
Dispositions to obtain by request a sensitive Soul from the Creator: And that
which otherwise happens in the Young, in set Terms of Days, and is perfected
by certain degrees of Digestions, that was presently completed in the very
vital Archeus of our first Parents. And the Text does insinuate that peculiar
thing to be in the Apple, because, In the same day wherein he should eat of
the Apple, he should die the Death: Because the Apple, although it should
anticipate or forestal the term of Days, yet it should require a certain term
of Motion, that after it should be turned into vital Blood, it should also be
endowed with a sensitive Soul. For they who in the very point of Creation were
formed into a Man, and a Woman, and not into Children, in a short space also,
grew old or decayed on the same day, into the maturity of Seeds, and every
necessity of Death, and properties of second Causes. For in a straight way, all
this falls perpendicularly or point blank on the post of the foundation of my
Position, on which the giddy or unconstant business of our Mortality, is
whirled about even unto this Day.

But at leastwise, seeing Eve was made of the Rib of the Man, that very thing
does insinuate a mark of Chastity, and forbidden Copulation of the Flesh:
Because it is that Adam: Of which notwithstanding, the Almighty after the fall
of sin, seemed to dispense withal, granting Matrimony.

Therefore through occasion hereof, it remains diligently to search into,
whether the Act of Lust were completed in Paradise?

Many will have Paradise to be free from filthiness, because the Text says,
Chap. 4. But Adam knew Eve his Wife, who conceived, and brought forth Cain;
saying, I have possessed a Man by God.

But let these men pardon me; For the contrary appears from the very Text.

First of all, The Text cited, does convince of nothing, but that the
ravishment of true Virginity (because it is bloody) does not admit of
Conception as a Companion: And therefore Cain was not Conceived at the first
turn, but out of Paradise. For

1. On the same day ye shall dye the death; according to the truth of the
Position, denotes, that in the same place the filthiness was committed.

2. The Woman is not called the Wife of Adam before the Fall, as she is
immediately after: But the name of a Wife is not given, not indeed unto
Matrimony confirmed, but only unto it being finished.

3. It was said only to the Man, Thou may not eat of this Tree: Therefore
it is read, concerning the banishment of the Man, to be made in the singular
number: Not indeed but that both Sexes sinned, but because the Man had
singularly deserved to be banished for his Whoredom.

4. Therefore it is said; Lest he stretch forth his hand unto the Tree of Life,
do eat of it, and live for ever: But it is not said, least the Husband and Wife
do eat.

5. Adam at the first sight of the Beasts, knew their Essences and Properties,
and also put right Names upon them: But the Woman being seen, he at first
called her Wo-man, because she was taken from Man: But after the Fall, he
called her Hevah, or, The Mother of all living: Because he at the first sight
of her, as yet knew not, neither as yet had she that property from the Man, and
she learned it, because she put it not on, and stirred it not up but by sin:
For why had he changed the Essential Name of the Woman, if she had not also
changed her whole Nature?

6. And next, He withdrew her unto the Shrubs, rather to commit his
filthiness, than for a cover of his shame: For truly he might have covered his
shame with Fig Leaves, and have neglected his hiding through the Shrubs, if he
had not also had the signs of chastity corrupted.

7. For truly, if my Position be true; That Death was caused only through the
Luxury of the Flesh; His banishment followed not, but after the act of
filthiness.

8. For he who but presently before, knew not that he was naked; After what
manner did he presently know his Wife to be the Mother of all living, unless he
had committed something?

And Lastly, The Text which says unto the Serpent, I will put enmities between
the does clearly denote, that the Woman that before wanted Seed, and altogether
all the tickling thereof, had now Seed.

However it is, at leastwise, I cannot but remarkeably admire the excellency
of the Text, which has no where made even any deaf mention of the
Concupiscence of the flesh:

Finally, Nature being now degenerate, it has pleased the Almighty to raise up
the Fall of Adam by Regeneration or a being born again: And although he has
not restored Adam in Paradise: For before the Fall, Faith was unknown, the race
of Virtues, especially also the superexcellency of Divine Love, and they lived
only in the happiness of the purity of Innocence: And therefore, God by the
permission of his foreknowledge and ordination, has bound the unequality of
blessedness, issuing or springing up from the new Birth, with a certain
excellency of Riches: Because the Tribulations of his Life, are not worthy to
be compared unto the great or vast things, which the goodness of God has
prepared for us that are renewed.

For I had rather know those things which God has revealed by his only
begotten Son the Savior of the World, than to have known the faculties of
Living Creatures, and Herbs, with a clear Understanding: It being abundantly
sufficient for me to have an Humanity in God, whereby he has adopted us for
the Sons of God, and made us far more like himself, than Adam was in his
greatest felicity.

CHAP. XCIII. The Position is Demonstrated.
1. A first Prooof of the Position. 2. A second. 3. The Divine manner of
generating cannot be conceived by man. 4. A conjecture from a like thing. 5. A
Repetition of Demonstrations. 6. An Argument for the Position. 7. Another
Argument. 8. A third. 9. A fourth. 10. A fifth. 11. A sixth. 12. That the Mind
does not create the sensitive Soul, as neither that another Mind is drawn from
the light of the Mind. 13. A seventh Argument. 14. The Mind imprints an Image
on the seed of the Body, but not the Image of God, that is, it self. 15. It is
proved. 16. An eighth Argument. 17. What is generated by the Parents, after
sin. 18. Even unto the 74. Article or Content, a reasoning from the holy
Scriptures. 75. That it resists Christianity, for Man to be called an Animal.
76. Some Agreements of Fathers with the Position. 77. An every way convincing
Argument out of Augustine, for the Position. 78. A solid Argument for the
Position. 79. From the rule of falsehood. 80. The progress of Satan. 81. The
birth of Faunes and Nymphs. 82. That there are Tudes-quills in the Canaries.
83. Objections against the Position unto the 88. Article. 89. An irregular race
of Fishes. 90. There is no figure of the Water, neither does it fall down
circularly. 91. The fructifying of Trouts. 92. The unvalidity of the seed of
the Male. 93. The prosperousness of Fishes strengthens the Position. 94. Worms
are the admonishers of a Resurrection without a material seed of the Male. 95.
The Chick is formed of the yolk, and the seed of the Cock does materially
remain without. 96. A seventh Objection unfolds the Causes of the Flood. 97.
The common divulged explication of this Text confirms this Position. 98. An
Interpretation about the motive Principle of the Flood. 99. Giants were not
from the first intent of Creation. 100. The proof of a Prophetess.

NOw therefore the suspicions of a Law, Disobedience, and of a Curse, being
removed,

And then, the Text has strewed the way for me: Except ye shall be born again
of Water and of the holy Spirit; That is, unless ye are co-partakers in the new
regeneration of those For whatsoever is born of the flesh of sin, and of the
concupiscence of the flesh, is flesh; incapable of eternal Life, and of the
Kingdom of Heaven. And he which sowes in the flesh does reap in corruption: And
whatsoever he shall reap is flesh and corruption it self.

For after what manner the holy Spirit had generated in Eve, all the posterity
of men, that the mind of man is not able to attain unto, unless the sacred Text
had manifested the way Gabriel had foretold only to overshadow the Virgin her
self, who was perpetually unspotted.

And therefore the Church calls the Eternal Father, The first person of the
holy Trinity, The Father of the Eternal Son: Neither does she suffer the holy
Spirit to be called the Father of the humanity of Christ, because the material
generation of Christ was drawn only from his Mother: Wherefore neither does
his conception from the holy Spirit, include any Paternity or Fatherliness: But
as that generation proceeded without a begetting of the holy Spirit (the which
indeed about the conception of Christ, was busied without begetting) so it is
safe for us to contemplate, that wholly after the same supernatural and divine
manner of over-shadowing in Eve, had the generation of adoptive children, and
of the divine Image been established. Therefore the Father of Lights, is the
only Creator of all Souls, as also supereminently of the Immortal Mind:
Therefore the generation of Man, by the Father of Lights, the Giver of Life, in
the creation of the Mind, had been finished or perfected from the substance of
Eve, and from a cooperation of the holy Spirit in conceiving: For as that
conception of men had been plainly supernatural; so also there had been a
supereminent chastity of the Mother in the state of Innocence, such as is now
in the regeneration by Water and the holy Spirit.

Wherefore I will endeavor to stablish the stated Position.

First by a Reason from Nature.

And afterward to confirm it by Reason, and Authority fetched from the holy
Scriptures.

And Lastly, To fortify it by the Opinions or Precepts of Fathers.

First of all, it is agreeable to Reason; that if God would make his own Image
in flesh, Adam, least God should have Man his competitor in the intended
Incarnation of his own Image. Otherwise, if man should prevent, and by
preventing, overthrow this holy and unpolluted production of mankind (for whose
sake he has seemed to have framed the Universe) afterward also, every
generation of men so to be produced, should happen after a bruital manner, and
whatsoever should be born thereof, should be naturally incapable of eternal
glory. For it is agreeable unto Reason, that the Immortal Mind, before the
Apple was eaten, had never made an offspring Immortal in Duration, because
nothing is able of or by it self, to produce that which is infinite in
Duration, but God alone; whom therefore as yet unto this day, in Adamical
generation, the Church confesses to be the one only Creator of the Immortal
Soul.

Else if the Mind should be able to produce any Infinite and Immortal Being,
thenceforth

Therefore the Mind never could, nor never shall be able to produce an Immortal
substance, and by consequence, it fights with the Divinity, that the Mind,
which before the eating of the Apple, had immediately undertaken on it self,
the whole government of the Body, had of it self generated the Image of the
infinite God, and had generated a substance infinite in Duration: Wherefore
there is altogether an unlike reason, whereby the mortal Lights of Life, or
mortal Souls do issue forth, and whereby an immortal substance is created.

So that it is unpossible to the whole Nature, that the Mind should generate a
substance like unto it self; Seeing that to produce a spiritual, and immortal,
is reserved for God

In the next place, neither had it ever been the intention of the Mind, to
generate a mortal or sensitive Soul, because it is that which is besides and
against the appointed government

Wherefore from a sufficient account or enumeration, I conclude, that before
the Apple was eaten, neither could the Mind have generated an immortal Soul,
neither that it

But it is lawful to confirm by the rule of a supposed falsehood, that we are
bound by Faith to believe, that indeed the Mind is created immediately by God;
but not to be

It is proved as to the first: For truly, seeing the Speech is of the progress
of Nature, the which therefore ought to be ordinary; And therefore also, that
thing should constantly happen in Bruit-beasts; but this does not happen;
therefore not from the progress of Nature.

The subsumption is proved by a Young, from its Father being a Dormouse, and
its Mother a Coney; to wit, the which except that its Tail is like a Dormouse,
is wholly a Coney, as well within, as without, also in its Skin, and Hairs:
But if any Faculty of its Soul should issue from the Father, it should of
necessity have a fatherly, and not a motherly Faculty: But by the Example
proposed, the contrary is manifest; therefore not from the Father.

Yet neither therefore, are the Souls of offsprings begged from the Mothers
Soul: For otherwise, from that which the Soul proceeds, from the same
likewise, and at least, the formative Faculty also should proceed.

And by consequence, offsprings should not only always be made of the femal
Sex, and always like unto their Mother; but also a Mola or Lump of Flesh,
should never be made where the Faculty or Virtue of the Seed of the Male flows
down as barren: As neither should the imagination of a Woman great with Child,
transchange the Young, being already formed in its Mothers Womb, into a
monstrous, strange, yea and bruital Figure: because the Seed now having a Soul
borrowed from the Parent, could not be any longer subject unto the foolish
imagination of the Mother, especially while as the Young is now nourished in
its own Orb and Kitchen.

The same Argument also prevails in supposing, that the Soul was begotten
from the Soul of both Parents; for whatsoever is denied disjunctively, may
truly be denied copulatively: Whither also this conclusion has regard; to wit,
that that being granted, the Seed should now be actually soulified from its
Beginning: And likewise, that of two Souls, a certain composed and mixed
soulified and Spiritual Light should be made; which resists a formal
simplicity by reason of a composed duality. Therefore the single homogeniety of
the Soul, is averse unto duality, and to a heterogeneal composition of Souls.

Whence I conclude, That the Soul is not so much as in Bruits, derived from the
Parents, and by so much the less, in Man.

Wherefore all Souls are immediately created by the very Life it self, and
Father of Lights, who will give his own honor of Creator unto no Creature:
Wherefore from hence it is easy to be seen, that Man is not able to produce an
immortal Mind, nor the divine Image: And so also, from hence it is manifest,
that the first intention of the Creator, was not that Man had in any respect,
immingled himself in generating; but that the alone hand of the Creator had
perfected every Young, which alone creates all Souls, but especially and
singularly, that Soul which should thenceforth be eternal, the which he by an
essential ordination had directed unto his own Image.

Lastly, it must needs be, that a true Image or Likeness can never naturally
be made, but

In Nature indeed, every Spirit of generating Seed, does comprehend (because it
does contain) the Idea of the thing to be generated: But Man, seeing he is the
immediate and true Image of God, cannot by any means transfuse the divine Image
into his own Seed, the which in himself, and out of himself, he is plainly
ignorant of.

But seeing that in Nature, a like thing generates its like, Man may imprint on
his Seed

Therefore if the Mind, ought or could be able to produce the Image of God, now
the

Wherefore the pure Essence of the Image of God, did by all manner of means
require in its conception of creating or generating, God himself, the immediate
Creator and one only Father of it, who is in the Heavens, and besides whom
there is no Paternity in the Heavens: Otherwise, there is a carnal Paternity or
Fatherliness in Man, and Bruits; and therefore the Text says, Honor thy
Father. And another Text, That there is no Paternity, but in the heavenly
Father.

Therefore it is denoted, that there is not for Man a fatherliness of his Mind,
but in God alone; and therefore his original Generation and Propagation was
reserved in the Power of God the Creator: And especially, while as its
knowledge of it self, is wanting

Therefore indeed, neither can the immortal Mind ever bring the Seed of Man
unto that which it self shall never have in it self, to wit, out of it self to
decypher the Image of God.

For Man is so made the Image of God, that he is the clothing of the Deity,
the Sheath The Temple of the holy Spirit.

Man therefore being essentially created into the Image of God, after that he
rashly presumed to generate the Image of God out of himself, not indeed by a
certain Monster, but by something which was shadowily like himself, with the
Whoredom or Ravishment of Eve, he indeed generated not the Image of God, like
unto that which God would have therefore unimitable (as being Divine) but in
the vital air of the Seed, he generated Dispositions careful at some time to
obtain a sensitive, discursive, and motive Soul, from the Father of Lights, the
Fountain of all Paternity, yet Mortal, and to Perish, into which nevertheless,
he of his own goodness inspires ordinarily, the substantial Spirit of a Mind,
showing forth his own Image: And so that Man in this respect, endeavored to
generate his own Image, not but after the manner of Bruit-Beasts, by the
copulation of Seeds, which at length should obtain by request a soulified
Light from the Creator, and the which they call a sensitive Soul.

For from thence has proceeded another Generation, conceived after a
beast-like manner, mortal, and incapable of eternal Life, after the manner of
Beasts, a bringing forth with Pains, and subject to Diseases and Death, and so
much the more sorrowful or full of misery, by how much that very Propagation in
our first Parents, dared to invert the intent of God.

Therefore the unutterable goodness forewarned them, That they should not taste
of that Tree: And otherwise, he foretold, That the same Day they should die the
Death, and should feel all the Root of Calamities which accompanies Death.

Deservedly therefore, has the Lord deprived both our Parents of the benefit,
and seat of Immortality: To wit, Death succeeded from a conjugal and bruital
Copulation:

Furthermore, because that defilement of Eve shall thenceforth be continued in
the propagating of Posterity, even unto the end of the World: From hence the
Sin of the despised fatherly Admonition, and natural Deviation from the right
way, is now among other Sins for an impurity, through an inverted, carnal, and
well nigh bruital Generation, and is truly called Original Sin; that is, Man
being sowed in the Pleasure of the Concupiscence of the Flesh, shall therefore
always reap a necessary Death in the Flesh of Sin.

But, The knowledge of Good and Evil, which God placed in the dissuaded Apple,
did contain the Concupiscence of the Flesh, that is, an occult forbidden
Conjunction, diametrically opposite unto the State of Innocence; which State
was not a State of Stupidity, because he was he unto whom, before the
Corruption of Nature, the Essences of all living Creatures whatsoever were now
made known, according to which they were to be named from their Property, and
at their first sight, to be essentially distinguished.

And moreover, S. Hildegard unto the Moguntians or those of Mentz, says, Adam
was formed by the Finger of God, which is the holy Spirit; in whose Voice,
every sound before he sinned, was the sweetness of all Harmony, and of the
whole musical Art: So that if he had remained in the State wherein he was
formed, the weakness of mortal Man could not have been able to bear the virtue
and shrilness of his Voice: But when the Deceiver of him had heard, that Man
from the inspiration of God, had begun to sing so shrilly; and that, hereby to
repeat the sweetness of the Songs of the heavenly Country, he counterfeited
(behold how far now Man has departed from thence with his hoarse Voice) the
Engines of Craft; seeing his wrath against him was in vain, he was so
affrighted, that he was not a very little tormented thereby: And he always
afterward busily endeavored, by the manifold Devises of his wickedness, to
invent and search out, that he may not only cease to interrupt or expel divine
praises from the Heart of Man, but also from the mouth of the Church. These
things she.

It is a devoted Opinion of mystical Men, That Birds do sing Praises unto God.
I under a humble correction, do think otherwise: For if that should be true,
they should sing all the year, neither should they cease, as soon as the lust of
generating is fulfilled; which argument is serviceable unto our Position.

For truly, seeing the Males only do sing, but not the Females; That from a
common Nature, Adam was the more leacherous, and incontinent, and from his Sex,
more lustful than Eve; whose Chastity therefore being beloved of God, seems
proper to that Sex.

Man therefore, through eating of the Apple, attained a knowledge that he had
lost his radical innocence, and that instead thereof, he had made an empty
exchange of the sordid Concupiscence of the Flesh: For neither before the
eating of the Apple, was he so dull or stupefied, that he knew not, or did not
perceive himself naked; but with the effect of shame, and brutal Concupiscence,
he then first declared that he was naked.

For the sacred Text is every where so chaste, that the most High would not
name the Concupiscence of the Flesh it self, at leastwise, by a proper name;
yea, nor also accuse Adam after his Creation, from the Earth, into Paradise,
and for that Cause also, he formed the Woman in Paradise, least she whom he had
made and appointed to remain a Virgin, should behold the copulation of
Bruit-beasts in the Earth.

For in the Beginning, God created the Heaven and the Earth, and every Creature
contained therein: But he made, and formed those things materially, by the
passive and [Let it be done,] to wit, he spoke that Word, and all things were
created: But in six days space after, he made the Forms of things created, and
all things were orderly made into the Life and Soul of soul^fied Creatures: For
in that, those Words did differ, to say, Let it be made, and to make: For in
the sixth or last day, Adam was formed: But on the seventh day, God rested. At
length, he afterward translated Adam from the Earth into Paradise, and
deliberated to make Woman of the Rib of the Man, but not of his Reins, Thigh,
or Belly: Therefore on the eighth day, that it might be the Beginning of a new
week, for a new and supernatural Generation of an offspring to come.
Wherefore it may be collected, that Woman being wholly an Outlaw, ascended
into a new heap of Choiceness, as being a Vessel of Choiceness or Election.

But we may after some sort conjecture of the quality of humane generation in
Eve, a Virgin, before the Fall, by the most glorious Incarnation of our Lord:
For indeed the

Indeed the Father Almighty would, that the glorious incarnation of Christ
should be conceived of the Person of the holy Spirit; the which it self, to
wit, therefore was not generated, but proceeded from eternity, from the Father
and the Son: For the Spirit of God had caused a humane conception of
offsprings in the Arterial Blood of the Heart of the Virgin Eve, it being the
Image of the Divinity, with all its free Gifts, without the pleasure of the
Flesh: But the Mind being thus in the garment of Arterial Blood, conceived in
the Womb of the Virgin, in a humane Shape, had took an increase, and full
maturity from thence: For he, who the Womb being shut, and the Gates being
closed, came into the World, and unto his own also, out of the Case of the
Heart wherein he was conceived, was by a foregoing consent, brought unto the
Womb of the Virgin, and kept even unto the maturity of his Body: For he
piercing all Members, was brought into the Womb: For therefore our Lord's
Incarnation happened altogether, besides the order of Nature now accustomed.
For,

1. The Incarnation of the Lord, happened not first in the Womb, but in the
very Sheath of the Heart of the Virgin.

2. Of the most pure, and most lively Blood of the Heart; but not of the Seed
of the Virgin: For truly, the God-bearing Virgin, in that singular respect, was
not only cleansed from Original Sin, but was conceived altogether free from
Sins; to wit, that she might be so much the more void of all Seed, than a Child
that is newly born: For Seed is composed of a mixture of Venal; and Arterial
Blood, or from a co-mixture of Bloods; which mixture was no manner of way, not
so much as materially, in the conception of the Son of God, who was conceived
not of Bloods, nor of the Will of the Flesh, or of Man; but of God alone, and
born of a Virgin.

3. He had not a Man to his Father, nor a masculine Matter from whence he
should be made; which thing surely confirms, that a feminine Matter, was the
more excellent governess or deputy, and alone fore-elected from the Beginning.

4. He fore-elected the most chaste and unspotted Virginity of a Mother, which
he formed with a divine Hand.

5. He was materially conceived, only, and of most pure Arterial Blood; To
wit, whereinto the seal of the holy Spirit, inspired an humane Mind, and a most
pure Image of it self, made or framed by his Father, God.

6. That conception was brought from the Heart, into the Womb of the Virgin,
with a piercing of Dimensions.

7. Lastly. He exspected an increase and just maturity of Nativity, as it were
in the celebration of a Sabbath.

Furthermore, that the knowledge of Good and Evil signifies nothing but the
Concupiscence of the Flesh, the Apostle does manifestly testify, calling it
the Law and Desire of Sin.

From whence, to wit, the first Bruital and Original Sin, the fuel of the
other Sins, has immediately issued, and is hereafter to endure for a continued
Seed of Mortals. In the Romans: God sending his Son into the likeness of the
Flesh of Sin, has also, concerning Sin, condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the
Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. Original I say, because it
is the Beginning of the original of a humane Generation, whereby all contagion
of Impurity is derived on Posterity, and Death became natural unto Man, even as
unto Beasts: So that, although the eating of the Apple did contain a note of
distrust, and ingratitude; and the which also, is a Companion unto every Sin;
Yet therefore, even every Sin afterward, ought with the same Punishment of
necessity also, to descend unto Posterity, unless the unwonted transgression of
a loving Admonition should not so much consist in the disobedience of eating or
abstaining, as in the horrid Distrust of doubting, and confidence of Faith
given unto the Devil: And so that the generation of the Flesh of Sin (which is
an effect of the Concupiscence of the Flesh) has of necessity defluxed into
Death, even unto all Posterity.

For it pleased the Lord of things to insert in the Apple, an incentive of the
Concupiscence of the Flesh; to wit, from which he was able safely to abstain,
by not eating

Therefore the Apple being eaten, Man presently from a natural property of the
Apple, conceived the lust of being luxurious, and from thence was made an
Animal Seed, which hastening into the previous or foregoing Dispositions of a
sensitive Soul, and undergoing the Law of other Causes, reflexed it self into
the vital Spirit of Adam: which therefore like an ignis fatuus, or foolish
fire, presently receiving an Archeus or ruling Spirit, and animal Air, I say, a
household Thief, it conceived a Power of propagating an Animal and mortal Seed,
ending into Life: At the arrival whereof, at length the immortal Mind, putting
off the Rains of the Life, and government of the Body, substituted the
sensitive Soul as its Chambermaid.

From hence therefore we are conceived, born, and do die after the manner of
Beasts: For the day before, the immortal Mind acted all in all, and was the
very immortal Life

For then the immortal Mind, being moved from its place, descends, that it may
imprint a seal on the forbidden Seed, for a common destruction.

Then, although the sensitive Soul was not yet born; yet every natural
Disposition requisite for the obtaining that sensitive Soul from the Creator,
was forthwith present. And seeing two Souls at once, cannot perfectly preside
in one only Plain or Region of the Body, without discord, no more than it is
lawful to serve two Masters at once: Therefore the immortal Mind has departed
into the innermost Parts; whether that was by the Command of the Creator, or
grieving at the wearisomness of a bodily Impurity; at leastwise, it afterward
delegated the government of its Body on the sensitive Soul, in which it is now
bound, because it is involued in it as long as we live. For from hence we do
afterward, for the most part, wax of ripe years, and live after a bruital
manner.

But the Mind has betaken it self into the Inn of a frail Soul, and does
thereby inspire hereinto its free gifts, although for the most part, otherwise
it sleeps (perhaps even as that the principality of the Mind, seems to be
sore shaken at the Pleasure and Command of Diseases; which thing, the Dotages
of Fevers, Madness in affects of the Spleen, the Biting of a Mad-dog, and
Pricking or Stinging of a Tarantula, have the more strongly persuaded in the
behalf of Atheism: for in the former immortal Life, the Mind did by it self,
and immediately frame immortality, and gave also a perfect knowledge of living
Creatures and Herbs: But afterward, in the brutal Filthiness of generation,
the Image of God remained indeed, safe in the Mind, and its external Figure in
the Body: But so great a Corruption of it, has constrained the Mind to retire
unto the innermost Chamber of the mortal Soul: Therefore the Immortality
thereof, lived under the happy government of the Mind: And therefore Diseases
were banished with the declinings of Ages, and the threatenings of Death: And
therefore before the Fall, Man was dinstinguished from Blessedness, in that he
could Sin, Fall and Die: But in Glorification, the Mind shall again immediately
quicken the Body, and transsume it into it self. The Mind indeed before the
Fall, which did only shine upon the Body by its immediate Splendor, shall
forthwith after the Resurrection, through a transchanging of it, clarify it by
way of supping it up: For therefore the state of the Faithful, although
throughout their whole Life, also in Death it self, be far more miserable than
the primitive State; yet it is more happy than that, by how much it is a thing
fuller of Majesty, to be more like the Son of God Incarnate, dead, and
glorified, than to have lived with Adam free from Diseases, and at length to be
taken away without Battle: because the retributions or repayings of Life are no
way worthy of the Glory, or Expectation of the Age to come.

Furthermore, the sacred Text has in many Places compelled me unto a perfect
Position, Eve an Helper like unto Adam; not indeed that she should supply the
name, and room of a Wife; even as she is call straightway after Sin: For she
was a Virgin in the intention of the Creator, and afterward filled with
Miseries: But not yet, as long as the state of Purity presided over innocence,
did the will of Man overcome her. For the translation of Man into Paradise did
foreslew another Condition of living, than that of a Beast. And therefore the
eating of the Apple does by a most chaste name, cover the Concupiscence of the
Flesh, while it contains The knowledge of Good and Evil in this name, and calls
the ignorance thereof alone, the State of Innocence: For truly the obtainment
of that aforesaid knowledge did nourish a most hurtful Death, and an
irrevocable depriving of eternal Life: For if Man had not tasted down the
Apple, he had lived void of Concupiscence, and offsprings had appeared out of
Eve a Virgin, from the holy Spirit.

But the Apple being eaten, Presently their Eyes were opened, and Adam began
lustfully to cover after the naked Virgin, and defiled her, the which God had
appointed for a naked of the knowledge of Good and Evil, than that They knew
themselves to be naked, and that it shamed them of that their nakedness, or (in
speaking properly) of their Virginity being Corrupted.

Indeed their whole knowledge of Good and Evil, is included about their Shame,
and within their privy Parts alone: And therefore in the 8th. of Leviticus, and
many Places elsewhere, the Privy Parts themselves are called by no other
Etymology than that of Shame: For from the Copulation of the Flesh, their Eyes
were presently opened, because they had known that the Good being lost, had
brought on them a degenerate Nature, Shamefulness, Fowlness, and an Intestine,
and unevitable obligation of Death, sent also far away into their Posterity.

Alas too late indeed, they understood by the unwonted Novelty and
Shamefulness of that Concupiscence, why God had so lovingly forbidden the
eating of the Apple:

To wit, it shamed them more of their Chastity being Corrupted, and of the
Warning transgressed, than of their nakedness. For Adam who had Judged of the
Natures of the Adam: For God called him, and asked him where he was, and he
answers by accusing his Companion, and Help like unto him, that he might
excuse himself, being not yet accused. And by altogether a foolish Endeavor,
they offered their Nakedness, which was known to their Creator, in Leaves,
hoping that the Corruption of their Chastity might be covered with Leaves, so
they could but hide themselves: He accuses his Nakedness, not daring to make
mention of his lost Chastity: For it is the Part of the more gross stupidity,
to believe that they could hide themselves from the Face of the Lord, than not
to have known that they were naked; Especially with him, who had created them
Naked. Therefore, he being willing to lay hid, he accuses the guilts, and
effect of Concupiscence, by declining the thing committed: Otherwise, mere
Nakedness is not Shameful before God, if he had not corrupted his Chastity,
which he knew to be stained, and forbidden under the Apple. For in the last
Judgment, there shall not be a Shame of Nakedness: And therefore the shame of
Nakedness did involve rather the unrestorable Error of Chastity committed,
which was veiled in the Apple; the Effect whereof, unless they should perfectly
now feel, and acknowledge, they had rather convert themselves unto a Repentance
of the eating, than unto a hiding, and covering of their privy Parts.

The Shame therefore of Nakedness, involveth a chaste manner of speaking of the
Text, before the People of Israel.

For otherwise, it is sufficiently manifest from the Text, That that knowledge
of Good and Evil, is Carnal, Earthly, and Devilish, a carnal, and certain mere
folly of the Concupiscence alone, of corrupted Nature, in respect of the
Knowledge, whereby but a little before, he had put proper Names on the Beasts,
in the second Chapter of Genesis, v. 17.

The Fruit of that Tree is forbidden unto the Man alone, and in the second
Chap. of Genesis v. 25. They were both Naked, and without Shame. In the third of
Genesis v. 7. The Apple being eaten, Their Eyes were opened: For although Eve had
first tasted of the Apple, and had provoked the Man to eat; Yet the Almighty
speaks to the Man, not yet the Head of the Woman; and this Man endeavors to
excuse himself, because he had first stirred her up unto Copulation, and felt
the Disobedience of his Members; which is manifest: For he alone is accused,
being not yet the Head of the Woman; the which Fruit, he signified to the
Woman, was dissuaded unto them both: For Eve says unto the Serpent, that the
abstinence of that Tree, was equally enjoined unto them both.

This place in the Text signifying, that although the same Chance did respect
both Sexes; Antonomasia, or taking one name for another, called by John, The
Will of Man, which is that of Flesh and Blood. Whence I have learned, that Eve
was of the more firm Chastity; yea, and created more perfect in her Body, and
deflowred by the Man; because the Apple, seeing it was the Mean unto the
aforesaid end, and first tasted down by Eve, yet it was able to operate the
more slowly on Eve: But that Adam was the first which offended; but that Eve,
as repenting of her Fact, the longer resisted, and a long while struggled,
being deflowred by Adam by force; the which from thence sufficiently appears:
For truly, the will of the Man (and not of the Woman) is reputed for the
occasion of an eternal loss: and that thing was not unknown unto the Heathens,
who in the Silver Age, ascribed Shamefacedness unto Women, as a native
Endowment; by Men, being then long neglected. Levit. 3. and 4. The Lord
commands a Beast to be offered with his Tail, that its Filthiness may be
covered, or least any thing be offered, not being Adam was created Young,
without a Beard, flourishing, after which sort, Raphael is read to have Stood
before the Doors of Tobiah.

Wherefore that the first Infringer of Modesty, and deflowrer of a Virgin might
be made known; God would that Hairs should grow on the Chin, Cheeks, and Lips
of Adam, that he etc. To wit, whereby he had spoke the first Words of
Allurements, and afterward Threatenings. But Eve who was the more constant in
Bashfulness, and Chastity, he retained as graced with a polished Countenance.

So also the Beard grows on an in-humed dead Carcass, if he were lustful in
his Life, and ceased to live through a sudden Death; that is, the virtues or
forces of his Chi^ being as yet retained, the sign of Mortality grows, even
after Death. So also a hoarse Voice arises in Adam about his Youth, who
immediately before his Chastity was lost, sang most sweetly.

For among Signs wherein Angels are dinstinguished in Apparitions, one is
Capital.

If an Angel shall appear Bearded, let him be an evil one: For a good Angel
has never appeared

In the next place, Bruit-beasts do bring forth at this day, no otherwise than
as if Adam Eve after Conception, brought forth the Flesh of Sin in Pain. My
Spirit shall not remain with Man, because he is Flesh: That is, Man is now the
Flesh of Sin, but not any longer the Flesh of his first Creation.

For a Woman (...) the most part, a good while after Conception, loath and is
hurried about with diverse M^^^ries, which Bruits do want; which thing surely
argues, that Woman

Wherefore if Man were created, that (at leastwise from a foreknowledge of the
consequence) They which are to be saved, cannot be born by the will of Man, of
Flesh, or of Blood; and there was one only Man created; therefore all
Posterity, ought by a successive Continuation, to be born in Paradise, of Women
alone, to wit, the Birthplace of the Woman, and of necessity to be Conceived
from God, and to be Born of a Woman a Virgin, unto whom he afterward Gave
Power to be called the Sons of God, and to be made with an exclusion of the
Will of Blood, Flesh, and Man; which Chastity always pleased God, does please
him at this Day, and will please him always: And whatsoever has thus once
pleased the fountain of Chastity, can never again displease him.

And so that, Only those that are of a clean Heart shall see God, and shall be
called his Sons; wherefore the Prophet sings, Create in me a clean Heart (Oh
God! such as Adam had And renew a right Spirit (of the chaste, and ancient
Innocence, by the regeneration of the Spirit and Water) in my Bowels: Because
my Bowels being now impure, have contracted a Spirit of Concupiscence of the
Flesh of Sin: For indeed Man, as long as he was Immortal and Pure, Saw thy Face
oh Lord! and thou talkedst with him; which Face afterward, Man shall not see
and live. But after that Man defiled his Bowels through Concupiscence, thou
casts him from thy Face, out of Paradise.

I pray thee therefore, that thou cast me not from thy Face, and that thou take
not thy holy Spirit of Chastity from me. Restore unto me the Gladness (of the
Regeneration) of thy Salvation; and with thy principal Spirit (the Comforter)
do thou confirm me (against the inbred Impurity of the Flesh:) For truly I
shall teach the Unrighteous thy ways (of thy Regeneration; the which among)
the hidden things of thy Wisdom, thou have manifested unto me, and the Wicked
shall be converted unto thee. At leastwise, free me from Bloods (from the
Concupiscence of the Sexes) Thou who art the God (of Chastity) the God of
Salvation (as of new Regeneration) and my Tongue shall exalt thy Righteousness
(and thy just Judgment, whereby thou have condemned Man, who was born of
Bloods, and by the will of Man, in the Concupiscente, and of the Flesh of Sin,
as he has made himself incapable of thine Inheritance) For lo, in Iniquities
(aforesaid) I was conceived, and in Sins has my Mother conceived me (although
under a lawful Marriage Bed.

Therefore I confess, that besides the primitive scope of the Creator, an
Adamical Generation has arisen into natural Death, and is devolved into
original Sin.

The Woman therefore, as she has conceived after a bruital manner, she also
began to bring forth in Pain.

The Male also in the Law, was only circumcised, as for a mystery of the
deflowring of Eve: Yet both Sexes ought to expiate the Offense committed in
their privy Parts, to wit, whereby they had offended; which thing, although it
be chastely insinuated in the Text; Yet that was covered before Israel, who were
otherwise most ready for all Perfidiousness; to wit, that Godmight not seem a
contemner of Matrimony instituted after the Fall.

The Woman therefore was not circumcised, and yet she was saved: but not the
Pain of Childbirth, or the Obedience of her Husband, had expiated Original Sin
in her; For both a single young Virgin dying, was saved, as also a barren Wife.

Therefore from hence is manifested the mystery, to wit, that Eve, so much as
she could, resisted the Insolences of Adam, and was by force deflowred in
Paradise.

So that also, our first Parents were Murderers of all their Posterity through
Concupiscenc.

The Rabbis also confess, That Circumcision was instituted by reason of
unclean Virtues, walking in a circuit: The which I interpret, that the
diabolical, and primitive Enticements of Concupiscence unto Mortality were not
hid to the Hebrews, and that at leastwise in an obscure sense, the Sin arisen
from thence, was insinuated.

Also illegitimate Persons, were in times past driven from the Temple, and
Heaven, and those who should be born of an adulterous Conception, because they
did wholly show forth Adamical Generation: but those who were born of a lawful
(...) Bed, were as yet Impure, until that the foreskin being taken away, they
might seem to renounce the Concupiscence of the Flesh: And in this respect,
they represented in a shadow also, those that were to be renewed from far, by
the Spirit of God, and the laver of Regeneration.

Moreover, the very Word of Truth does profesly confirm the Position, 1 John 3.
Except any one be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.

B. Except any one be born again of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God. C. That which is born of the Flesh, is Flesh; and that
which is born of the Spirit, is Spirit. D. The Spirit breaths where it
lists: Thou hear the Voice thereof, but know not from whence it may
come, or whither it may go: E. So is every Man who is born of the Spirit. F. If
I shall speak unto you of Earthly Things, and ye believe not, how shall ye
believe, if I tell you of Heavenly things: G. None has ascended into Heaven,
but he who descended from Heaven. H. And as Moses exalted the Serpent in the
Wilderness; So it behooves the Son of Man to be exalt^d.
Christ Jesus descending from Heaven, took not on him the Flesh of Sin by
Adamical Generation, or by the will of Man; but he receiving the form of a
Servant, was made into the Likeness of the Sons of Adam, being found in Habit
as a Man; Yet being Adamical, was a true Man, such as Adam was, being newly
created: But he being made into the similitude of an Adamical Man, emptied or
humbled himself, taking on him the form of a Servant; But he was not made a
Servant or Impure: But in this glad tidings he denies the Vision of God, or
the sight of the Kingdom of God, and in b. an entrance into the Kingdom of God:
For not that the Glory which makes blessed may be seen, without entering into
Heaven, or the same thing is twice spoken in vain; or that a. does require
another new birth than b. but a. contains a denial of participating of the
Heavens for the Souls of the Dead, before the Resurrection, which b. also
denies for their Bodies, after the Resurrection.

Therefore it behooves that we are Born again of Water, and of the holy Spirit:
For as from the Beginning man was created, and had not proceeded from a being
born of Flesh; So whatsoever is afterward born of the Flesh, is Flesh: But the
Water, the Blood, and the Spirit, are one and the same in Christ. John 5. and
these three do denote an indifferent, and one only Baptism, in valor or
effect. Wherefore the only new Birth unto Life, Is by Water, and the Spirit, in
the participation of the virginal Body of Christ alone.

For truly it is alike impossible for Flesh to enter into, and see the Kingdom
of God, as for to ascend into Heaven by a Motion of ones own: and that is
granted to none, but to the Son of the Virgin, who for that end descended from
Heaven, who was in Heaven, while the same Son spoke these things to Nicodemus;
and the which, a little while after ought moreover for the same Cause, to be
exalted in the Cross: The same therefore which descended from Heaven, that he
might be incarnated of the Matter of the Virgin, is he in whom the Water, the
Virginal Blood, and the holy Spirit are one.

The Spirit therefore which makes the Corrupted and Adamical Man to be renewed
by Water, does so regenerate the inward man from a new Generation in the
Spirit, that it becomes a true Spirit to be glorified by rising again; whose
Voice the Sons of Adam shall hear; yet shall they not know from whence it may
come, or whither it may go: because the Spirit, the Regenerater, is the
glorious God himself, who breaths where he will, and thou now hear his
Voice by Faith, and the Sacrament: Thus every one, who is born again of the
holy Spirit, is made Spirit, and united to him, who is not known from whence he
may come, or whither he may go.

I call these earthly things, although they touch at a spiritual Generation,
and new Birth; because they have some things like unto them, in a sublunary
Nature, which things every one has not indeed every where known; and therefore
neither does he believe them: For the Generations of Bruits do happen from a
watery Liquor, and a seminal Spirit.

Notwithstanding, those things are not therefore plainly terrene or earthly,
and naturally intelligible by the Vulgar, which the Lord speaks to Nicodemus;
because the reason of the Love of God is no more conceived in this New Birth,
than of his infinite goodness: To wit, it remains unpassable why he would adopt
Man for a Son, and Coheir of his Kingdom; yea reduce him into a Spirit of a
God-like Form, who shall materially be born again of Water: For that mystery of
love exceeds all the understanding of Angels: Yea to believe, and contemplate
of the actual Person of Christ in an old Man, a Woman, a young Man, a poor
diseased Man, a miserable and naked poor or little esteemed Man, or Woman, none
can naturally understand it, unless he being compelled by Faith, has subjected
his understanding unto Faith: So neither are we able to conceive, what one
thing all are made, by that new Birth of Baptism in Christ, without a
difference of Sexes, or Nations, unless we are helped by Faith.

At length, it was not enough for the Love of Christ to be born in the form of
a Servant, and so to be exposed unto Scorn: But moreover, he ought to suffer a
most sharp, and most exceeding reproachful Death; the which so cruel, and
disgraceful Death, himself in the abounding goodness of his Love, calls his
Exaltation. But he brings it into the similitude of the exaltation of the
Serpent Nehushtan: Not indeed because the Serpent did any more represent the
form of the Son of Man, than the Fork did the Cross; but only the likeness of
impure Man slidden into Death, through the persuasion of the Serpent, the
likeness of whose Servant the Lord was to assume. Therefore the Son of Man
ought to be exalted, not indeed, as being unhurtful in the Fork, or as it were
an unsensible brazen Serpent, and the which otherwise, being a live one, was
perceivable enough to be most fit to hang up: But the Son of Man must be
exalted alive, he being full of Love, and also at length, to die in that Cross,
that the deserved New Birth or Regeneration, might be made effectual by his
Death. For truly, else without the Death, and Exaltation of him Crucified, a
Participation of the new Birth by Water and the Spirit, had not succeeded,
neither had Death Perished: So that plainly from a deep mystery, the similitude
of the Fork, Cross, and Savior, was fetched for a similitude of an incarnated
Servant, and him compared with the brazen Serpent.

Neither also did Israel Worship God in the Serpent; otherwise Moses, by the
Command of God, had been the Author of Idolatry: Neither therefore is a live
Serpent bound to the Fork; as neither likewise his dead Carcass: but his brazen
Image only, as being incapable of Life; that by this mystery it might be
manifest, that the whole similitude in that the exaltation of the Fork or Pole
and Cross, did manifest, and clearly hold forth unto us the Flesh of Sin,
(which the Son of Man by way of similitude represented) was plainly incapable
of Life, and of the Kingdom of God, no otherwise than as the brazen Serpent was.

Therefore it is simply, and absolutely true; That unless Man be born again of
God, and does partake of the unspotted Virginity, which the Lord Jesus drew in
his most glorious Incarnation, from the material substance of the Virgin his
Mother, the hope of Salvation is for ever cut off.

Wherefore also, from thence it is manifest, that from the intent of Creation,
nothing but a Virginal Generation was afterward required: And by consequence,
that a Seminal, Impure, Beast-like, and Adamical Generation, was by the Craft
of the Devil, drawn, and exhausted from the Apple, wherein the Fuel of Lust
was: Therefore unless the Adamical Flesh does again die, and an unspotted
Virgin-Flesh be restored in us in its stead, by the favor of the holy Spirit
(who saves those that are to be saved freely) it is certain that the first
intent of our Creator, should be frustrate, whatsoever may be otherwise done,
or hoped for. For in the Beginning, it was sufficient to be born; because also
then they had been born of God: But after the Fall, it thenceforth behooves the
Adamical Flesh to die, and perish, and to be again renewed, or re-born of
Virgin-Flesh, which the holy Spirit by Water stirs up in us, while we wish, or
desire to be Members of that Head, and Branches of that Vine. We are therefore
regenerated in the Lords Body, by Grace, unto the immortal Life of the Age to
come; and that we may be raised up again in the Participation of Virginity,
Death must interpose, and whatsoever is Adamical in us, be blotted out.

We all indeed shall rise, but we shall not all be changed: for those only
shall rise again changed, who shall rise again glorified in the Virgin-Body of
Regeneration: which change the He who is not born again, cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God: And therefore, He that shall rise again, being not born again;
by consequence also, shall not be changed from his ancient Being, if he shall
rise again from Death; neither therefore also, shall he have entrance unto Gods
Kingdom; because by the new Birth, the whole Man is made Spirit: And therefore,
he which shall rise again from the new Birth, shall rise again in a spiritual
Nature: Otherwise, He that is born of the Flesh, and not born again of the
Spirit, shall hear indeed the Voice of him that is born of the Spirit; but
shall not know from whence it may come, or whither it may go.

This indeed is the changing of Bodies into Spirit, and the change of Bodies in
the Resurrection; or it is the Glorification of those that are to be saved
after the Resurrection: But other Sins were expiated indeed through Repentance,
with the victory, and triumph of the Lamb: but the loss of that Virginity, and
primitive Purity, does without Regeneration, reserve an Eternal Spot of
Impurity, and Uncapacity: No otherwise than as a virginal conservation, and
Integrity of the re-born Faithful, gives unto Virgins that are born again, a
Golden or Laurel Crown, equalized unto Martyrdom.

Christ therefore, as he is the Father of this Virginity; so also the Father of
the Age to come: But those that are to be saved, are his own new Creature, and
new Regeneratition: Who (to wit) has given them Power to become the Sons of
God, unto these who believe in his Name; who are born not of Bloods, nor of the
Will of the Flesh, nor by the Will of Man, but of God, after a most chaste
manner of the holy Spirit; by whom, before the brutal Concupiscence of the
Flesh arose, it was decreed, that altogether every Man ought to be born of his
Mother, being a Virgin. Therefore Christ being the Top, and Lover of Chastity,
does distinguish Men as well in this Age, or Life, by Chastity, as in Heaven;
and will grace them with an unimitable, and eternal Privilege.

For a great Company followed the Lamb whithersoever he should go; and Sang the
Song which no other was able to Sing: But these are they who are not defiled
with Women: For there Because there shall not be there, Jew, or Greek; But they
are all one in Christ.

For the Almighty has chosen his Gelded Ones, who have Gelded themselves for
the Kingdom of God its sake, of whom is the Kingdom of Heaven: Therefore
married Persons,

Therefore the joyful Message has included as well an Abolishment of Original
Sin, as of other Sins consecutively issuing from thence: Who by dying destroyed
our Death, not his his lost and ancient purity, nor cease that he might again
begin to be otherwise and better; therefore the joyful message has brought an
assurance unto us, that Baptism should be unto us for the remission of sins,
through a new birth of Water and of the holy Spirit: That our mind as it were
through a new Nativity of its Inn, by Regeneration, might be partakers of the
unspotted Virginity and humanity of our Lord.

Which New Birth, does indeed repose the Soul into its former state; to wit, by
taking away the sin or debt, and the stinks or noisomenesses thereof: but by
reason of the continuance of Adamical flesh, in which the Immortal Mind lives,
the ancient possession, or inclination unto sin, is not taken away, nor is
there a translation of the corruption drawn from the impure original of the
blood of Adam. But that this is really so, we are persuaded to believe:

For God does manifestly, daily grant a testimony of that actual Grace and
attained Purity, to be derived into the Body of those that are Baptized,
through a true and substantial Mahometans are Baptized, for a proper reproach,
because. Baptism from the fact or deed done, however unlawfully it be
administered and received, takes away from them for the future, the noisomness
inbred in them, otherwise to endure for their Life time: such as in all the
Hebrews or Jews, in many places up and down, we do daily observe to be with
loathing and weariness.

The true effect therefore of Regeneration, and its co-promised character, does
much shine in Baptism, even outwardly also, in a defectuous Body: And the
enemies of the Christian Name, do serve us for unvoluntary witnesses unto this
thing: Yea the perpetuity of the same Effect, confirms the unobliterable
Character or Impression of Baptism, and the wickedness of it being repeated.

But the New Birth by Baptism does not yet, for that Cause, take away a
necessity of Death: For Baptism forsakes its own, with the fardle of a
defiled and Adamical body, begotten by the Will of Man.

And for that Cause also, the Soul as subject unto the Vices of the corrupted
Body, and of a Will long ago corrupted: Wherefore, by reason of the frailty of
Impure Nature, also an easy inclination and frequency of Sinning, Baptism
has been scarce sufficient for those of ripe years; otherwise for the more
younger sort, it is abundantly sufficient.

Therefore the Sacrament of the Altar, is Wine which buddeth forth Virgins:
Which is as much as to say, the end and scope of the Lords Incarnation, or of
the instituted Sacrament bud forth Virgins; as demonstrating, that the intent
of the Creator from the beginning, esteemed of, and reckoned upon Virginity
alone, and of how great abhorrency (Numb. 25.) Luxury is in the sight of the
Lord.

For although Bigamy or a Plurality of Wives, and likewise, a dismissing of
ones Wife, and much loosing of Matrimony, were in times past dissembled; Yet
Phinehas being neither a Judge nor a Prince, from his very own zeal, slew the
Fornicator Zimri, and the Harlot Cosby; and by that famous act, not only
diverted the wrath of the Lord from the whole People of Israel; But also,
although he were a Manslayer, and Man-slayers were repulsed from Sacrifices;
Yet by reason of that simple Death, the Priesthood was given unto him,
persevering in his offspring.

In the next place, the Potters field, Akeldama, called Acheldamah or The field
of blood, as long as it retained the name of a Field, confirms the Position;
because indeed by a supernatural Miracle it so consumes a dead Carcass inhumed
in it, in one only day; that besides a Sceleton of Bones nothing remains
surviving: which effect, that it was supernatural, I prove: For otherwise, if
it should naturally happen, that thing without doubt, should be done by a
corrosive force of the Earth, and the which therefore should be wholly a
corrosive Salt, or at leastwise, a certain Mineral vein co-mixed with very
much Salt.

1. But first of all, That corrosion of the flesh happened not only at
Jerusalem, as long as it was a Field, where there might be a suspicion of some
Mineral growing, but also its Earth being brought from thence, the same thing
happened in the burying-place at Rome, (for that cause called, The holy Field)
to wit, wherein that Earth scarce equalizeth the depth of one Foot.

2. But whether we may suppose a corrosive Salt, or next the Earth it self to
be Salt; yet seeing it is the property of Salt, and a thing unseparable from
Salt, to melt through Water being poured on it: Therefore long ago, before so
many Ages, that substance of the corrosive Salt, being melted by Raines, Snowes
and Hailes, had wandered even unto the bottom of the sand, and the rather at
Rome, where it found not its native place: Wherefore also that faculty of
corroding should cease, nor should it continue safe until now.

3. And so much the rather, because the corrosion of Salts, is by little and
little satisfied, and desisteth in gnawing.

4. Lastly, Such a corrosive of Earth is not any where found in the Earth,
whether thou shall respect a Vein of Arsenick, Orpiment, or any other: For all
the activity of such Corrosives presently after a good while, waxes mild and
is satisfied: Therefore the property of that Field remaining after so many
Ages, does clearly show withal (against the will of Atheism) that the Field
being purchased with the price of the Life, Blood, and Death of the Savior,
presently consumes the flesh of Adamical generation: Because that, for the
consuming and renewing whereof, by the body of Christ, which was sold for
thirty silver pieces paid for the price of that field, the coming of the most
glorious incarnation, is believed to be directed from God as its only scope.
The unsufferableness therefore of that Earth with the flesh of sin, continually
persevering now so many Ages (however the Bowels of the Atheists may burst)
convinces of an honor to be due to the Savior or Son of God for ever.

In the next place, a humane dead Carcass, was always buried for honor and
desert; yet in the Law, it caused an impurity for a time: Because neither did
it pollute the Soul, but the Body only, for the meritorious fact: And that
impurity did indifferently affect any one, not as the dead Carcass was deputed
to the Worms (for the Worms by their co-touching, are not read to have caused
an impurity) but because Adamical flesh is horrid in the sight of the Lord, who
indeed promises, that he will raise them up at the last day, as many as shall
reverently receive the Eucharist: For all indeed shall rise again by the finger
of God, to wit, by a supernatural Virtue. Therefore, whosoever in rising again
shall be changed, are reckoned only to be raised up again by the Lord Jesus;
to wit, in as much as in a Body which they have attained by the Wine which buds
forth Virgins, they shall rise again partakers of the unspotted Virginity of
Jesus. I will raise them up again at the last Day. What other thing I pray you,
does that Promise denote, but that the Elect shall rise again changed and
raised up by the Lord; not indeed in the flesh of sin, but in the flesh of the
Lord, which they have partaked of by Baptism and the Eucharist. Therefore the
horrid and damned flesh of sin, does besprinckle its touchers with no
undeserved spot of impurity.

There is therefore a distinct diversity of Virginal purity:

The First comes to hand before the Fall of Adam, and the which therefore did
contain a certain Immortality from the suffrage or consent of the Tree of Life.

But the Second is of them Who were sanctified in their Mothers Womb, the which
in it self is also twofold:

For such a sanctification, although it dismissed Original Sin, and did restore
the integrity of withdrawn purity; yet because they were conceived by the Will
of Man, and by Bloods, or of the flesh of Sin, they were also Mortal. But the
most holy Virgin Mother, presently after the seminal mixture of her Parents,
was preserved from the knitting and blemish of Original Sin, before hec-ceity
or the coming of her Soul.

But Jeremy and John obtained the same, but after quickening: In these two
indeed, there was a Remission of sin admitted; but in the God-bearing-Virgin,
there was a prevention before sin could touch her Soul, and therefore she was
taken up with her body into Heaven: but not John, or Jeremy.

Next, a Third Purity is in being born again of Water and of the holy Spirit,
which also happens two manner of ways,

To wit, Unto Little Children, and Unto those of Ripe Years.

For in these, Regeneration does not only remit Original Sin, but also every
grievous Sin: But in little ones, it remitteth only Original Sin, because it
as yet finds no other. But on both sides it leave^^ Death and Flesh hastening
into a dead Carcass, because stirred up by (...) copulation.

Fourthly, The purity of those is regarded, Who have made themselves Eunuchs
for the Kingdom of God its sake; and that as yet in a two-way-journey: For they
have either from a Child, devoted their Virginity to the Lamb, and have
observed it; and therefore also they follow the same whithersoever he may go,
do sing the Hymn, etc. but all that after Death. For otherwise, they are of the
flesh of sin, and therefore are of necessity also, guilty of Death and
corruption. But they who have lost their Purity through a proper Error, and
afterward rising up again, have vowed or observed chastity: These, although
they are chaste, yet are they not to be reckoned among Virgins. But moreover,
after that a Matrimonial generation was constituted by the Lord, Regeneration
by the holy Spirit and Water, does not fore-require Virginity.

Fifthly, The top of all Purity and Chastity, is the Lord Jesus himself, who
was not conceived by a copulation of the Sexes, for he was truly Immortal, (and
the first who therefore arose from the Dead, by his own Power) unless the
amorous or loving Embassage, for which he had come, had made him electively to
be born in the form of a Servant.

Therefore now the Question has seemed to me to be decided, which has driven
many that were in anguish about the unspotted Conception of the
God-bearing-Virgin, into many brawlings.

Furthermore, not only Regeneration by Baptism is enjoined; but also unless
we Adamical, miserable and mortal Life: Because that Heavenly Bread which
descends from heaven (which is the Wine budding forth Virgins, and the same in
supposition) from its own free property, takes away the spot contracted from
Adam, and the broken Virginity of Eve; Because the Merits of the Passion being
participated of in that Pledge, are communicated of from the unspotted
Virginity of the Body of our Lord. The Communion therefore, of that most Chaste
Body uniteth us unto his Mystical Body, and makes us partakers of his
Incomprehensible and Amorous Incarnation, as we participatively put on his
Virginity, (in which we ought to be saved) by being born again: For Christ was
born, that he might be crucified for us: Therefore his Death was, that it might
give us Life, and that for the whole Species of men in general: But in the
individual, as often as of the Bread, the Body of the Lord is made, as if Christ
is re-born again, not indeed, that he is crucified again: But that he may give
the intended scope of his Incarnation unto that individual Body, which there
eats the re-born Lamb, that is the Merits of his Passion.

Indeed there are two principal Ends of the holy sacred Eucharist; To wit, that
the Virgin nature of Christ, and the Merits of his Passion may be unitively
communicated unto us.

Truly Children that are Baptized, shall rise again indeed in a glorified Body;
Yet by so much the less lightsome, by how much they were remote from the Union
of the Beatifical Body.

And although there do not now appear the visible signs of so great an effect,
such as I have above related concerning Baptism, yet they are in very deed
communicated unto their immortal mind; Because it is that which shall therefore
at some time reduce their Body into the form of a Spirit: For otherwise,
Regeneration does not grow anew in the Resurrection, which has not
fore-existed in the Lifetime, by being born again: Neither is Faith of feigned
Non-Beings, but of things chiefly true, although not always visible, because
they do primarily operate on the Immortal mind which is invisible.

Wherefore, although the mark of resemblance of Union with God by the
Eucharist, be altogether unsearchable, and the fruits thereof are unto us
invisible; Yet a Mystical a^^ Nicodemus, it being as yet earthly, and as it
were natural: By which title indeed, I have transferred this free endowment of
Purity among natural Considerations; to wit, that under the Doctrine concerning
Long Life, I may speak also of Immortal Life, as it is understood by true
Christians, and actually derived into a true use.

For I contemplate of the Regeneration of those that are to be saved and of the
participation of Life in the Communion of the Eucharist, to happen and be
reckoned among earthly things, because there is shown something like unto it
el^^where in Earthly things: Verily, almost even as in the Projection of the
Stone which make ^^ ^old: For I

Indeed it was of the color, such as is in Saffron, being weighty in its
powder, and shining like bruised Glass, when it should be the less exactly
beaten. But there was once given unto me, the fourth part of one grain. I call
also a grain the six hundredth part of an ounce.

This powder therefore I involved in Wax scraped off of a ce^^ain Letter, least
in casting it into the Crucible, it should be dispersed through the
smoakinesses of the coa^s: which pellet of wax, I afterward cast into the
three-corner'd Vessel of a Crucible, upon a pound of Quicksilver, hot, and
newly bought; and presently, the whole Quicksilver with some little noise,
stood still from flowing, and resided like a Lump: But the heat of that
Argent-vive, was as much as might forbid melted Lead from re-coagulating: The
Fire being straightway after increased under the Bellows, the Metal was
^elted, the which, the Vessel of fusion being broken, I found to weigh eight
ounces of the most pure gold.

Therefore a computation being made, a grain of that powder does convert
nineteen thousand two hundred grains of impure and volatile Metal, which is
obliterable by the fire, into true gold.

For that powder, by uniting the aforesaid Quicksilver unto it self, preserved
the same at one instant, from an eternal rust, putrefaction, death, and torture
of the fire, howsoever most violent it was, and made it as an Immortal thing,
against any vigor and industry of Art and Fire, and transchanged it into the
Virgin purity of Gold: At leastwise one only fire of coals is required herein.

So indeed, if so be a just heat of the faithful shall be present, a very
little of this mystical and divine super-celestial Bread, does regenerate,
restore and renew, a huge number of the Elect: Which indeed was the one only
scope of so great a Sacrament.

And therefore it is said, With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with
yo^.

Let the Divine pardon me, who being to write of the Life of the World, if by a
similitude, I have drawn a demonstration from earthly things, in the persuasion
of the Lord to Nicodemus, to confirm the real and Celestial Regeneration of
Purity, and Restoration of man's Relapse; because it is by an Argument drawn
from Earthly things.

But that person, who is so regenerated, and preserved against the Fire, and
Death, the Lord will raise up the same in the last day, who gave his Life to
the righteous eater, for the Adamical Life of the World: For so a uniting of
the amorous Incarnation of the Lord, makes us partakers of his integrity, so
far, as by Regeneration we participatively attain unto the Virginity of Christ,
in which we ought to be saved.

This indeed is the most proper Circum-locution or expression of the sense of
those Words: The Wine which buds forth Virgins.

And without this Remedy, some shall rise again being not changed in their
former and ponderous Body of Adam, the wished for necessity of death, being
only taken away from them.

I return unto the Privileges of that purity, that it may be manifest, how
most nearly a single Life does come unto the Primitive state of Innocence: and
so that also from thence we may learn, that the intention of the Creator was in
a single Life.

For now and then, that word of Truth comes into my mind, which requires the
state of little Children, in those that are to be saved, under the penalty of
infernal punishment:

In the next place, neither do little Children want their pride of Life, and
despising of others, and especially their hatred of the poor, also a frequent
desire of revenge, cruelty, an itch of getting or attaining, the concupiscence
of the Eyes, and are wholly and perpetually addicted to, and drowned in
self-love. But neither are those the things required in them that are to
besaved under Gods indignation: But they want the concupiscence of the Flesh
alone.

This indeed is the Mark which with so loud sounds, it required for those that
are to be saved: Because it is that which was of a primitive intention in
Creation: And therefore from an opposite sense, I argue; That the chief fault
of the Fall of the Apple being eaten, was convenant about the infringement of
that chaste bashfulness; that is, that Original sin was situated in the
breaking of Virginity, in the act of Concupiscence, and propagation of feed:
But not in the very act of disobedience, and despised Admonition, and distrust
of the truth of the divine Word.

For B. Hildegard also, in the Third Book of her Life, seems to have
testified the same thing.

The Author says, She freed the Matron Sibylla of the City of Lausa^ium,
beyond the (who required her help by a Messenger) from a daily Issue of Blood,
by the subscribed Letters being sent unto her. Thou shall put these words
between thy Breast and (...) in the (...) of him who rightly disposes all
things. In the Blood of Adam arose Death, In the Bloo^ of Christ Death is
extinguished: In the same Blood of Christ, I command thee, Oh Blood, that thou
contain or stop thy Flux. And the Matron was cured by these written Words; the
which others have many times experienced.

Therefore Death was extinguished by the effusion of the Blood of Christ, and
the partici^^^^on thereof, in being born again; that is, by the offering up of
Chastity to God the Father for those that are to be renewed in his Blood.

And moreover, if we do well mind, it is acknowledged, that God has loved
women

For the first Apostoless, before the coming of the Comforter, by one only
Sermon, converted Samaria, the head of the Israelitish Kingdom, otherwise most
stubborn.

Only the Women from Galilee, being constantly, although disgracefully
serviceable, adered to Christ at his Death, and under all ignomi^^y, he being
left by his disciples, the witesses of so many Miracles, and that at the first
blast of adversity: For the poor Women rejoiced in their reproaches, so they
might but follow Christ, carrying his Cross upon his back.

Magdalen also, first preached the Gospel of his Resurrection, unto her own who
did not believe, and confirmed them in Faith, who doubted, and deserved to be
the first beholder of Christ after his Death, because she sought the same with
the fervor of the greatest Devotion.

God I say, has heaped very many Diseases, Adversities, and Subjections on
this Sex, that it should be by so much the more like, and nearer to his Son:
But the World despises Women, and prefers Men: But in most things, the
Judgments of God are opposite unto the Judgments of the World; so that also,
the World despises the Poor, of whom Christ calls himself the Father, but
not of the Rich.

Then in the next place, Christ calls himself in many places, The Son of Man;
But seeing Antonom^sia, he calls the Woman the Virgin, Man, by an absolute
dignity of Name, and worthy of, or beseeming the Femal Sex; as if for that
reason, the name [Man] ought thenceforth after sin, to be proportioned, and
stands for the Woman in the more famous signification: Showing at leastwise,
that in thing the Mother-Virgin, was after the sin of Adam, the one only Man,
such as the Divinity had espoused unto it self in the Creation of the Universe,
for the replenishing of the places laid waste by the Evil Spirit: And that what
Eve ceased to be through an infringing of Chastity, that, Mary the most
glorious Virgin, was; to wit, The one only Mother of those that are to be
saved, in the Regeneration of Purity. But neither (...) I undertaken a
laudatory Oration in behalf of that Sex: Only it is sufficient to have shown,
that God has loved the Femal Sex, by reason of its love of Chastity. For a
Virgin thin^^ on the things of her God.

The Apostle also Commands Widows, which are truly Widows, to be honored.

And in the old Law, those were reckoned impure, as many as (even conjugally)
had known their Wives, if they were not seriously washed, and were to be driven
from the Temple unless they were first duly rinsed.

[He] also violently fell by a sudden Death, because such an impure Man
(although from a good zeal) put his hand to the tottering Cart; wherein the Ark
of the Covenant, (the Image of the God-bearing-Virgin) was carried.

Indeed on both sides, the Truth being agreeable to it self, does detest and
attest the filthyness of impure Adamical generation: For the Impurity which had
conceived a contagion, from any natural Issue whatsoever, of Menstrues, or
Seed; and that by its touching alone, is reckoned to be equal to that which
should by degrees creep on a person from a co-touching of dead Carcasses; and
to be expiated by the same ceremonious right: That the Text might agreeably
denote, that Death began from the Concupiscence of the Flesh, lying hid in the
fruit of the Apple: Therefore also, the one only healing Medicine of so great
an impurity contracted by touching, consisted in washing; under the likeness
whereof, Faith and Hope which in Baptism were poured into us, are strengthened.

For as soon as Adam had known by Fratricide, that the firstborn of Mortals
whom he had begotten in the Concupiscence of the Flesh had slain his guiltless
and righteous Brother,

From that time therefore, Adam began to know his Wife, and to fill the earth
by multiplying, according to the Blessing once given him, and a Law enjoined
him: Yet so, nevertheless, that although Matrimony, by reason of the great want
of Propagation, and otherwise an impossible coursary succession of the
primitive Divine Generation, be admitted as a Sacrament of the faithful:

Yet because at length it seemed; by reason of necessity, as it were by
dissembling or connivance, to be indulged; Therefore the Comforter dictating
it, it was determined Greeks, by the Church, that the Priest (by whose
workmanship the Lords Body is incarnated in the Sacrifice, ought to be
altogether estranged from the act; whereby Death and the impurity of Nature
were introduced.

For the necessity of propagation, has indeed thus in times past excused the
offense of a coursary succession in Generating.

For as Augustine witnesses, If the propagation of Men could have been made
after any other manner, the Conjugal Act had been unlawful.

Wherefore Bigamy or a Duplicity of Wives, is not undeservedly expelled from
the Bishopric, even as actual Wedlock from the Sub-deaconship. For however it
be a Sacrament, yet it is unbeseeming the Sacrament of the Altar, to wit, by
which the chastity of the first constitution and intention of the Creator are
recompensed: For God despised that blood should be offered unto him, even in
burnt-offerings, and that Man should eat blood, being mindful that the blood
(in which the sensitive Soul is) had proceeded from the eating of the Apple.

But besides, bruit Beasts are indeed afraid, are angry, do flatter, do mourn,
do condole, do lay in wait; and those Passions, Man from the sensitive Soul
possesses, common with

From hence its manifest, that Concupiscence of the flesh, is Diabolical only
to Man; which in Bruits, is Earthly and Natural.

If therefore both our Parents presently after the eating of the Apple, were
ashamed, if they therefore covered only their privy parts; therefore that
shame does presuppose, and accuse of something committed against Justice,
against the intent of the Creator, and against their own proper Nature: By
consequence, that Adamical generation was not of the primitive constitution of
their nature, as neither of the original intent of the Creator: Therefore when
God foretells that the earth shall bring forth Thistles and Thorns, and that
Man in the sweat of his Face shall eat his Bread, even as was already proved
above, they were not Execrations, but Admonitions that those sort of things
should be obvious in the Earth; and because Beasts should bring forth in pain,
should plow in sweat, should eat their food with labor and fear, that the
Earth also, should bring forth very many things besides the intent of the
Husbandman, therefore also, that they ought to be nourished like unto
Bruit-beasts, who had begun to generate after the manner of Bruit-beasts.

And then, if the Text be more fully considered, it is told unto Eve after
Transgression,

Therefore, what has the pain of bringing forth, common with the eating of the
Apple, unless the Apple had operated about the conception or concupiscence of
the flesh? And by consequence, unless the Apple had stirred up copulation, and
the Creator had intended to dissuade it by dehorting from eating of the Apple:
For why are the genital members of the Woman punished with pains of
Childbirth, if the Eye in seeing the Apple, the Hands in cropping it, and the
mouth in eating it, have offended? For was it not sufficient to have chastised
the Life with Death, and the Health with very many Diseases? Moreover, why is
the Womb (which in eating is guiltless) afflicted after the manner of Bruits
with the pain of bringing forth, if the conception granted to Beasts were not
forbidden to Man?

After the Fall therefore, their eyes were opened, and they were ashamed: It
denotes, that from the filthiness of Concupiscence, they knew that the
copulation of the flesh was forbidden them in the most innocent chastity of
Nature, and that they were overspread with shame, when their eyes being
opened, their understandings saw the committed filthyness.

But on the Serpent and evil Spirit alone, was the top of the whole curse, even
as the bruise the head of the Serpent; And so that it is not possible, that to
bring forth in pain, should be a Curse; for truly with the same mouth of the
Lord is pronounced the Blessing of the Woman, and Victory over the infernal
Spirit.

And moreover, to be subject to the Man, was not enjoined unto the Woman in
stead of an Execution: But it denoted in the mind of God, humility chosen in a
new Law, and another method of living, appointed anew by the Son of Man: For
the Son of Man humbled himself even unto death; also to be extinguished by a
reproachful death, he called it, to be exalted. Therefore, while the Lord
depresseth the Woman under the power of the Man, he exalted the same Woman in
his presence, and made her the more like unto himself. After another manner,
because the Serpent should for the future, creep upon the Earth; The name of
Serpent proves, that, that was not proper unto him from a Curse, but from his
being made creeping; and that thing was sufficiently manifest to Adam: For
herein the Curse seized not so much on the Serpent, as on the evil Spirit,
because the lying Impostor had hid himself in the most vile of creeping things;
on whose head therefore, and not on the head of any creeping thing, the Woman
trod upon.

But because all Bruits which do generate by a long continued copulation, were
in times past reckoned impure, and also forbidden from Man's use in Kitchins
(among which etc. It contains, and likewise confirms the mystery of our
Position:

To wit, That the impurity of our Nature, draws its rise from the Concupiscence
of the Flesh:

And therefore the copulation in Beasts seems to be taken notice of in
Beasts, by God, which was distinct, and defiled with impurity.

In the next place also, in the Law, a Menstruous Woman, and the person
touching her, the Menstrues should by a Natural course, derive it self from the
same Causes, from whence Death happened unto us: And therefore also, for this
Cause, it being plainly impure in the Law, was reckoned a horrid thing with God.

But for that, Woman alone does suffer Menstrues before Bruits, surely it does
not attest any Prerogative of our kind, but rather every way a defect; to wit,
that it is Adamical Generation its self is constrained to carry, no less the
importunities of its own Nature, than Death it self.

Yea, seeing Chastity does not excuse a Virgin from the Menstrues, it is for a
token, that the Menstrues is not from a Curse, nor from the punishment of Sin,
but altogether from

The Menstrues therefore only in Woman alone, but not in Bruits, does accuse
that the Transgression of the despised fatherly Admonition happened in the very
privy parts, therefore branded as it were with an unclean bloody Seal, for a
perpetual sign: The which surely should not have place, if a Sexual Copulation
for the Propagation of man, had not inverted the intention of the Creator,
rather than in Bruit-Beasts.

In this place, a Paradox and impertinent consideration does occur, being
interlaced as it were by a Parenthesis: that Adam seeing he was created in the
possession of Immortality,

And it is exceedingly to be admired, and deservedly unworthy to be endured,
that the Schools of Christ do believe and confess these things; and yet that
even until now, they draw the Essence of a Man Essentially from an Animal
Nature; because, although Man afterward procured Death unto himself, and
therefore may seem to be made nearer unto the Nature of Animal Creatures, yet
it stood not in his Power to be able to pervert the Species of the Divine
Image; Even as, neither was the Evil Spirit, of a Spirit, made an Animal,
although he became nearer unto an Animal by hatred and brutal vices. Therefore
Man remained in his own Species wherein he was created; For as often as man is
called an Animal or Sensitive living Creature, and is in earnest, thought to be
such; so many times, the Text is falsified, which says, But also the Serpent
was more crafty than all the living Creatures of the Earth, which the Lord God
had made; Because he speaks of the Natural craftiness of that Creeping
Creature. Again, if the Position be true, Man was not directed into the
Propagation of Seed, or Flesh, neither therefore did he Aspire into a Sensitive
Soul: And therefore the Sensitive Soul of Adamical Generation, is not of a
brutal Species, because it was raised up by a Seed which wanted the Original,
Ordination, and Limitation of any Species; And so that, as the Sensitive Soul
in Man arose besides the intent of the Creator and Nature; So it is of no
brutal Species, neither can it subsist, unless it be continually tied to the
Mind, from whence it is supported in its Life.

Wherefore while Man is of no Brutal Species, he cannot be an Animal in respect
of his Mind, and much less in respect of his Soul, which is of no Species.

For a woman great with Child, while by reason of sudden fear, she changes the
Humane Young into a certain Bruit; the mind indeed does not wander into a
brutal Soul; but the mind departs, and a Sensitive Soul, begged of the Creator,
is substituted in its stead; And seeing that it is promoted only by the Idea
of the Woman great with Child, without an Original appointment, therefore such
kind of generated Creatures, do most speedily die: And the offsprings of Adam
had likewise presently perished, unless God had granted Matrimony unto him.

Wherefore in the Birth of Cain, she truly said; I possess a Man from the Lord.

Far be it therefore, to have placed Man among Sensitive living Creatures.

Truly, we must indulge Pagans who know not that thing; but not equally
Christians who too much adore Paganish Doctrine.

At least wise the Schools confess, that there is an ordinary Progress of
Nature, from not a sensible Creature into a sensible Animal: but that the Life
and Sense of Men is immediately iufsed by the hand of the Almighty.

They confess in the next place, that the Conditions of being, living, and
feeling or perceiving in Man, differ in their whole Condition from an Animal
Nature, because it follows the Faculty of the rational Form or Immortal mind:
But they shamefully believe, that a Man as well of the first Constitution, as
being now Divinely Regenerated by the Sacraments, is an Essential Animal.

Fie, let it shame man not to know that the Evil Spirit, and whole Nature also,
are not able by any means, or any way to change the Essence given unto him from
the foreknowledge of the Creator, but that he should continually remain such as
he was created; although in the mean time, he has clothed himself with
strange properties, as Natural unto him from the vice of his own will: For as
it wants not an absurdity, to reckonman glorified, among Animals, because he is
not without a sense or feeling; So, to be sensitive does not show the
unseperable Essence of an Animal.

And seeing otherwise, the definition of every thing is from the Essence of the
thing (as they will have it) but man according to his Essence, was made in a
full possession of Immortality, and henceforth of an Eternal Duration,
according to his Soul; the Schools could not believe, that man, by reason of a
sensitive Soul alone, was essentially an Animal; Especially while they believed
his Essence to depend on an Eternal Duration, and an uncorruptible Soul or Form.

All which absurdities, I acknowledge to have crept into, and to have remained
in the Schools, by reason of the truth of our Position being unknown.

Even hitherto, I have established the Position out of the holy Scriptures. Now
again the same, by the Authorities of Fathers; which matter B. Augustine has
seemed to have

After what manner had it shamed Man of the Transgression of a Law, when as his
very Lib. 14. De Civitate Dei, Cap. 17.
Members had not known shame?

As if he should say, His Members were stirred up unto the Concupiscence of the
Flesh, and acts of his Privy Parts, presently after the Eating of the Apple.
Their Eyes were opened; but for this they were not opened, that they might
know, what might be performed by them, through Lib. 4. Contra Jul cap. 10.
the clothing of Grace, when as their Members knew not how to resist their
will.

And do thou not blush at that Disease, or that thou, although shamefaced,
do confess, that that Lust entered into Paradise? And to impute it unto
Husbands and Wives before Sin?

He who was to be without Sin, would be born without the Concupiscence of the
Flesh, not in Lib. of Marriages, 12.
that Flesh of Sin; but in the likeness of sinful Flesh: As if he should say,
whatsoever is born from Copulation, although it had been born in Paradise and
before Sin, would have been, and is the Flesh of Sin; Seeing that alone, which
is not born of Copulation, is not the Flesh of Sin.

Whatsoever offspring is born from Concupiscence, or of the Flesh of Sin, is
obliged unto Flesh of Sin. cap. 24.
Orignal Sin, unless it be born again in him, whom the Virgin conceived without
Concupiscence.

The Flesh of Christ drew a mortality from the mortality of his Mothers Body;
because she Lib. 5. Cont Jul. cap. 15.
found not the Concupiscence of a Copulatresse.

For indeed, as Original Sin is not derived on the Posterity any other way,
than by the Concupiscence of the Flesh; So it must needs be, that in the Apple
was included the Concupiscence, from whence the humane stock degenerated, and
was vitiated in generating: For truly if offsprings Lib. 5. Cont. Jul. cap. 12.
could have been generated any otherwise than by carnal Copulation, the
Matrimonial act had been unlawful.

Whereunto this every-way convincing Argument; serves,

That act, before the Apple was eaten, was either unlawful, and not thought of;
or it was lawful.

If it were unlawful, now our Position is proved. But if lawful, therefore
whatsoever I have above described out of Augustine, is false.

Seeing therefore they had now actually felt the effect of the eaten Apple, or
the Concupiscence of the Flesh in their Members in Paradise, presently it
shamed them, because their Members, which before they could rule at their
pleasure, were afterward moved by a proper incentive of lust.

At length, how greatly Virginity has always pleased the Bridegroom of the
Soul, does clearly enough appear out of diverse Histories of the Saints.

And indeed, in Cana of Galilee, the Bridegroom having left his Bride, followed
the Lord Jesus, and it is that Disciple whom Jesus therefore so greatly loved.

The same thing was familiar unto Alexius, Aegidius, and to very many others,
especially with poor Women-Virgins.

For indeed the infinite goodness, from the proper motion of its good pleasure
from Eternity, created Man and fore-loved him with so great a love, that he
determined to which enlightneth every man that comes into this World; and to
Adopt him for the Son of God, giving him Power to become the Son of God by the
new Birth; which new Birth, before Sin, was not necessary.

Seeing therefore he requires People to be re-born of God, therefore before
Sin, they were all born of God; which thing, Lucifer with his own Spirits,
seeing, through a longsince Pride of his Beauty (and since his fall, being
wholly become Envious) supposed that he was wiser than God, who had raised up a
vile creature unto that height: wherefore he aspired to exceed God, whom he had
not yet seen, and to throw him down from his Seat of Majesty: Presently
afterward, he, after that he had paid the punishment of his Sins, being more
cruelly wroth, saw also, that Eve being a Virgin, was by the only Goodness of
God, without all desert, and freely now appointed for the aforesaid Instrument
of that Adoption, and Mother of Men:

Therefore he endeavored to hinder the Love of God through the Eating of the
Apple; Because, as seeing that the Lasciviousness and Concupisence of the Flesh
implanted in the same, was Diametrically opposite unto Gods intention:
Therefore the Eating of the Apple was not forbidden unto man by a Law, but by a
fatherly Admonition: neither is Original Sin from the Transgressions of a Law,
from the Eating of the Apple, as being forbidden food; but by Reason of the
effect arising from the Apple, and the properties inserted in the Apple.

After another manner, the Transgression or Eating, did offend only in a
Voluntary Act, but not for Posterity; unless Naturally, and by the second
Causes of a brutal Copulation following from thence (otherwise in our first
Parents impossible) it had inverted the intention of Divine Generation; Yea,
Original Sin, fell not so properly on the guiltless Posterity, as the effect of
Generation: the which indeed has brought forth an Adulterous, Beast-like,
Devilish Generation, and plainly incapable of the Kingdom of God, and of Union
with, and Enjoyment of God: By Reason of the Similitude whereof, those that
were born in Adultery, were excluded from the Participation of Heaven.

But let us feign the opposite thing; to wit, that our Parents were conscious,
that there was a Law declared by God the Creator of the Universe, touching the
forbidden Apple,

Therefore I collect from thence, that on the same day, not only Mortality
entered through Concupiscence; But moreover, that it presently after also,
entered into a conceived Generation; Paradise: Therefore Original Sin was
effectively bred from the Concupiscence of the Flesh; but occasionally only in
the Apple being eaten, and the Admonition being despised: But the Poison of the
Concupiscence was placed in the Admonished (or rather dissuaded) Tree, and that
Property was radically inserted, and implanted in it. But when Satan (besides
his Hope, and the Deflowring of the Virgin, nothing hindered it) saw that man
was not taken out of the Way, according to the forewarning (for he knew not
that the Son of God had constituted himself a Surety before the Father for man)
he indeed looking into the Corrupted and Degenerated Nature of Man, and so that
a Power was withdrawn from him, of Uniting himself to the God of infinite
Majesty, he most greatly rejoiced; but he grieved after that he knew, that
Matrimony was now granted; To wit, that the divine Goodness did as yet incline
toward man; and that Satan's own Fallacies, Deceits, and Thoughts were thus
Deceived: And so that also, from hence he conjecturing that the Son of God was
to restore every Defect of Contagion, and therefore perhaps to be Incarnate; He
ruminated or searched, whether he should defile the Stock that was to be raised
up by Matrymony, with a mortal Soul, that he might render every Conception of
God, Vain: Therefore he stirred up not only his Fratricides, and notoriously
wicked Persons, that there might be much Evil at all times; but he procured
that Atheism might arise, and that together with Heathenism, it might increase,
and wax strong daily; whereby indeed, if he could not hinder the Co-knitting of
the Immortal Mind with the sensitive Soul, he might at least, by destroying the
Law of Nature, bring man with himself, under infernal Punishment: But
especially he meditated, after what sort he might by Degrees expunge the
immortal Mind out of the Stock of Posterity:

Therefore he stirred up detestable Copulations in this Atheistical Libertines:
But he saw that from thence nothing but brutish or savage Monsters Proceeded,
to be abhorred by the Parents themselves; and that the Copulation with Women,
was far more Plausible unto Men; and that by this Method, the Generation of Men
should equally, and constantly continue. For neither was it sufficient for the
infernal Enemy to have rendered man incapable of Heaven; but moreover, he
endeavored to prevent, that there should never be a hope of restoring a
Remnant; that is, to hinder the Incarnation of the Son of God; therefore he
attempted, whether he could by an Application of active things, frame the Seed
of Man according to his own cursed Desire: The which, when he had found to be
in vain, and impossible for him to do, he tried again whether an Impe, a Witch,
might not be fructifyed by Sodomy: And when as, neither thus did the event
every way answer his Intention, and that he saw elsewhere, that of an Ass, and
a Horse, a Mule was bred, which was nearer akin to his Mother, than to his
Father: Likewise that of a Coney, and a Dormouse being the Father, a true Coney
was bred, being disstinct from his Mother, only in his Tail like a Dormouse,
he declined his Crafts: And indeed through a remembrance of these Things, the
old Law also very much abhorring such co-mixtures of Species to be horrid unto
God; although at this day, they are among Christians so admitted, that the
Primates or chief Men of the Church, do Ride on Monsters horrid in Gods sight.

Therefore Satan instituted a Connection of the Seed of Man (being first for
some while nourished with Warmth) with the Seed, and in the Womb of a Juniour
Witch or Sorceress, be ye Multiplied) from such a new polished Conception: And
afterward came forth an adulterous Generation of Faunes, Satyrs, Sylphs,
Gnomes, Nymphs, Driades, Nerides, and other Monsters, according to the Various
Disposition which the Seed of Man did undergo.

And seeing the Faunes, and Nymphs of the Woods were preferred before the other
in Beauty, they afterward generated their offsprings among themselves, and
the Posterities again contracted their Copulations among themselves, and at
length began Wedlocks with men, feigning that thus they did obtain an immortal
Soul (as credulous Paracelsus witnesses) for themselves, and their offsprings
which should be born by that Conjuction: But they feigned that thing through
the Persuasion of the Devil, that men as doing a pious Work, might admit those
Monsters unto carnal Copulation: Which thing the Ignorant also were easily
persuaded of, as if the Creation of the immortal Soul, and the knitting thereof
unto the mortal Soul, did depend on the free Will, and Seed of Man: the which I
will beneath teach to be false, as well from the holy Scriptures, as from the
Relation of D. Antonius in the Life of Paul the first of Anchorets, described
by Jerome: And therefore those Nymps were anciently named, Sccnbae: Although
Satan afterward, that he might commit a worse Wickedness, frequently
transchangeth himself by dissembling the Persons of the Incubus and Succubus,
in both Sexes: But they conceived not a true Young by the Males, except the
Nymphs alone: the which indeed, seeing the Sons of God (that is, Men) had now
without distinction, and in many places taken to be their Wives, God was
constrained to blot out the whole race begotten by these detestable Marriages,
through a deluge of Waters, that the intent of the Evil Spirit might be
Frustrated.

A Merchant of Aegina, our Countryman, an Honest-man, Sailing diverse times
unto Canaries, or Fortunate Islands; was buisily asked by me, his Serious
Judgment about certain Creatures, which Boys did there bring home from the
Mountains, as often as they would, and named them Tudesquils, or little Germans:
for they were dried dead Carcases, almost three-footed, which any Boy did
easily carry in one of the Palms of his Hand, and they were of an humane Shape:
But that whole dead Carcass was clearly like unto Parchment, and their Bones
were Flexible as it were Gristles: Against the Sun also, their Bowels and
Intestines were seen: Which things, when as afterward, I by Spaniards there
born knew to be true, I considered, that at this day, the destroyed Race of the
Pygmies was there: For the Almighty would render the expectations of the evil
Spirit, supported by Mankind, vain, and void: For he has therefore manifoldly
saved us from the Craft of the encompassing Lion, unto whom Eternal Punishment
is due in his extreme, and perpetual Confusion, unto the everlasting
sanctifying of the divine Name.

But now I will propose some doubts against our Position.

First therefore, that nothing withstands it, that the most due or worthy Work
of Married-folkes is the very Copulation of the Flesh: Because from thence it
does not follow, that matrymony was lawful from the Beginning of Creation: Yea,
neither is that true in any other Sense; but that afterward Children are not
procreated without the Copulation of the Flesh: To wit, if any Married-folks
shall live as they ought, and those that have Wives, be as they had none, and
never using their Wives but for fructifying sake, unto the Honor of God: These
indeed do deserve the Favor of Increase: But as yet do they far differ from
those unto whom God, from the title of Gelded-persons or Eunuchs alone,
promises the Kingdom of Heaven: But it is said unto Married-persons, When ye
have done all these things, ye shall be as yet, unprofitable Servants: But that
is no where read to be spoken unto one abstaining from lawful things in
Patients, and not in Agents; and least of all, does that touch at the Flour of
Virginity: For abstinent, and chaste Persons, seem by a certain fore-choice to
be sanctified, also to be promoted unto a further Degree of Perfection: And
therefore, They follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. For those that do well,
as they suppose a hope of reward; So Virgins abstaining, and suffering, do
contain themselves within Love, and Humility.

Neither does that argue on the contrary, because it is said, Genesis Chap. 1. v.
27. God created them Man, and Woman. and Genesis Chap. 1. v. 28. that He blessed
them, that they might increase, and be multiplied, and replenish the Earth: As
though Wedlock had been from the appointment, and first intention of the
Creator: For the first Chapter of Genesis does briefly finish the whole History
of the Creation: But the second and third Chapters do prosecute the Creation of
the Woman in Paradise; likewise Sin, etc. And therefore the blessing of
Generation was not described in Genesis 1. v. 28. For truly, not as though the
blessing of Generation had been given in the Beginning of Creation, before the
Woman was created; the which was neither given in Paradise, after the Woman was
framed; but after Sin, and after their Banishment out of Paradise, into the
Earth: For it is said, That they should fill the Earth with Offsprings, but
not Paradise: And a full Dominion was given them over the Bruits of the Earth;
wherein is manifested the goodness of the Creator, that he blessed a guilty
Creature (nor as yet repenting) in offsprings, being also Corrupt, and Impure.

Indeed he foreknowing the Restoration for which his Son had appointed himself
a Surety before the Justice of the Father: For otherwise, on the same day
wherein they had tasted of the Apple, they had actually, and of necessity died,
unless the Father had accepted of the Death of his Son, for the Remission of
Sin.

Thirdly, it might be objected; God made nothing in vain; but he framed the
sexual Instruments of Generation from the Beginning, the which, while they did
denote a necessity of appointment, God also from the Beginning sufficiently
exposed his own intention, and modern manner of Generating in their Bodies.

I answer, By granting that the Creator conferred on them Members, and a
Freedom of Will; otherwise, if they had wanted Instruments, a liberty of
Sinning through the Concupiscence of the Flesh had been in vain conferred on
them: As therefore the Intention of God for a future Regeneration, is not
rightly turned unto a freedom of will of sinning; So much less rightly, is the
same Intention inserted by reason of the framing of Instruments: For this
Argument is like as if it should be said;

God made Remedies against Diseases, and Death; therefore God made also Death,
and Diseases.

The Consequence is false; Therefore also the Antecedent.

For the Almighty foresaw from Eternity, the Fall of Adam: Neither therefore
being content with Paradise alone; he moreover, created the Earth, and from the
Earth, Medicine against Death, and Diseases: So also, he made Genitals in our
first Parents.

It was sufficient for Adam, that he never felt any Spur in himself, either
from his Members, or from the beheld nakedness of the Woman; as neither the
Woman likewise from the Society of the Man, which unsensibleness was called,
The State of Innocence: Otherwise it might likewise be concluded; God created
Man, that he might live happy in Paradise: Therefore he in vain created the
Earth before the Fall, or Corruption of Nature; especially because Sin was from
a free Contingency: For both of the aforesaid Arguments is from a
non-premeditated end of Contingences or Things which happened; and therefore it
contains an Implicit Blasphemy: For God had not created the Earth for himself,
and the Bruit-beasts; So also the Instruments of the Sexes do denote indeed a
foreknowledge of future things, but not a divine Intention in creating them.

Next the Atheists strive, and will have the Text to be Fabulous, and
Ridiculous,

And likewise they Argue; If Shame be from Original Sin, truly as Sin does
equally touch all: So also Shame should touch Children, those of full growth,
the Blacks, Americans, Egyptians, Aethiopians, etc. And neither indeed has it
hitherto shamed the Abyssine or Ethiopian Priests who are Christians:
Therefore Shame is not from the Apple being eaten, not from the Sin of
Disobedience, as neither from an unwonted newness of Generation, or
Concupiscence of the Flesh.

But Sophisters know not that Shame was forgotten in Barbarians by Degrees, and
that the loss of Bashfulness grew up through a scurrilous accustomedness, and a
foregoing Penury of Raiment: Which Shame that the People of Israel therefore
might not loose (they being for a great part of them Wicked) God suffered not
their Garments to be worn out for 40 years in the Wilderness.

By that Miracle I say, God continually diverts the loss of Bashfulness, and by
that Sign shows, that nothing could be alike hateful unto him, as is the
loss of Shame.

From whence it becomes conspicuous, That the Shame attained by the eating of
the Apple, was not troublsome unto, nor forbidden by God; but that under the
Etymology of Shame, the chaste Speech of the holy Scriptures, whereby it covered
the forbidden Concupiscence of the Flesh, lay hid.

In the next place, as many as do lay Barbarism aside, do also likewise
re-take their Shame that was at first lost. Yea neither is it a wonder, that
People have lost their Shame through the persuasions of that Mocker, which
teaches Shame to be in the knowledge of evil.

At length the Athiests do oppose, that it is a ridioulous fable, if it
believed, that the Serpent spoke with a Humane Voice, and as persuading Adam,
who had given unto Bruits their proper Names, and therefore neither could he be
ignorant that Speech was wanting to the Serpent: for he ought to have been
amazed, but not to believe such a perswader. But the miserable men are deceived.

The Serpent dissembled the countenance of a Man, unto which wonder, if Adam
had not yet given the name of a Monster, it is no wonder: And if he ought to
give that Name from the Essence, as to other Brute Beasts, he had called that
Serpent a Scholastical and speaking rational Animal: The not unlike to which
appeared to B. Anthony in the Wilderness.

For first, there came to meet him a fourfooted Monster, the which, when it had
begun to speak, it spoke imperfectly, and avoided or ran away: And afterward,
another, which in the Form of a Satyr, did perfectly speak the Dialect of the
Country: For neither must we judge, that Monster to have been the Devil
(because he is he, who never requires Prayers to be made unto God for him) and
therefore, by the Church, it is called an Animal or sensitive living Creature,
from the same Authority whereby Paul the first of Hermites was Reckoned among
the number of Saints: but it is not called, a Devil or Spirit; and it is
Decyphered by B. Jeroms by its tokens borrowed from B. Anthony: Therefore Adam
might speak to the Serpent, no otherwise than as Anthony to the Satyr.

The present Text therefore of Genesis, has hitherto had no Arch-heretick
since Origin, and Athiests, because it shows a true and literal History.

Last of all, I will add some things, as it were by way of impertinency. For
indeed, I have said that Fishes do Generate indeed, but not by way of Sexual
Copulation, although

First of all, I think that there is an Univocal or single Generation of Fishes
bringing forth Eggs: Therefore, I shall say enough by the example of one Fish.
For neither were it meet for me narrowly to search into Fishes which are under
the Waters, by their species or particular kinds.

There is a certain Fish in stony Waters, a devourer of Flesh, and easily the
most swift of Fishes, called by our Countrymen, a Trout; For nigh a little
River or Brook, where Tyber Perpendicularly falls from a high Rock, he is seen
to ascend the whole height of the Rock in a straight line, five hundred foot at
least: therefore he swimmeth threefold swifter against the Gulf, than the steep
Water does fall downwards.

First of all, here the Opinion of the Schools is false, to wit, That the Water
does always fall down in a Circular Figure: For there is seen a certain small
drop of Water with a

Furthermore, the Female Trout, her Eggs growing big within her, feels the
Membrane of her Secundine to be broken, and to cleave asunder by Degrees,
wherein the Eggs are

In this Species therefore, there is not a Carnal Copulation, and the
Copulation should be void, the which within indeed, should not touch at so much
as the thousandth part of the Eggs.

In the next place, neither is there an annexed Seed seen laying on the Eggs;
and therefore neither is the Seed of the Male of the Constitutive part of
Fishes; Although

For it is seen, that Fishes have in this thing almost kept the shadowy Image
designed for Humane Generation, before the fall. But as there is an innumerable
Fertility of

So in the Lake of Lemane, a Trout does oft-times ascend unto an hundred pound.

A Pike also, by a sign hung on him, is noted to have lived unto three hundred
years, and to have grown unto an amazing bigness, and then neither as yet to
have dyed, but by a violent Death.

An Eele in the Rivers of Lire nigh the Village Rumst, being sent to Bruxells
unto the Emperor Charles the fifth, is observed to have been 17 foot in length.

Worms (in the Silkworm by a Famous Example) after a Death or sleep of two
Months, do Degenerate into Butter-flies. They Figure out a shadow of the
Resurrection (for because they never go together or Copulate before, they rise
again changed) neither has the Female conceived besides an inspired Chaos,
while as the Male being plainly without blood, and the whole Female is melted
into her own Eggs. That Worm by its own will as by its own Funeral,
co-weavingly encloseth it self in the Bombast, it represents the Image of the
Death, and Resurrection of the Faithful, while as being a winged Bird, it flies
out from thence, being before not instructed to fly, neither does it
afterward stand in need of food; For we are taught by the abject Creeping
things, of how much esteem it is with God to have abstained from Copulation
throughout our whole Youth and Manhood.

Moreover also, if thou shall look more fully into the matter, that very
wrapping being the Masculine Seed, does adhere to the yolk without (almost
after the manner of Aristotelicks may grin to the contrary; and that thing
after 12. days from thence, it has listed me to behold and prove against
Idiots, by breaking the Egg daily. Truly the Curde of a Cock, adhering to the
yolke, does by Degrees melt, and is thoroughly mixed with the putrefying white,
the Chick in the mean time, forming it self of the yolke.

For from thence I have learned, that the Curdy Seed of the Cock, does breath
indeed a Spirit, the stirrer up, but not the former or framer of Life; And that
thing a Coney with the Tail of a Dormouse, has more plainly confirmed unto us.

At leastwise, there is a fruitful multitude of Fishes, and a prosperous
Benediction thereof, and a less necessity of things requisite for bringing
forth, a long continuance of Life, and a constant and easy Endurance of Cold
and Hunger: Nimbleness also and swiftness of Motion, lastly, they bring forth
without Pain; which thing, Beasts that do admit of a Copulation of the Male, do
not likewise do; and so they unfold something concerning the first Intent of
God, in Man.

At length in the last place, the Sophistical Atheists do oppose themselves by
the Text of Genesis, That God overthrew the World by a Deluge: Because the Sons
of God had chosen and taken Wives of the Daughters of Men, which were fair; and
because these had generated Giants, being strong and famous Men in their Age:
And that thing is there reckoned for much Wickedness; the which
notwithstanding, literally is seen to be none, in the Words of the Text, after
that Matrimony was now established, and lawful: Yea, especially because
Concubine-ship was a good while after dissembled in the Law, the which by
reason of that Impurity especially, they named the Mosaical Law, but not the
Law of God: For truly, the Text does not mention the Sin of David, but in the
Death of Uriah, the Adultery of Bathsheba, and the proud numbering of the People.

Wherefore they are wont to refer this Text of Genesis, unto the religious Sons
of God, and the free Daughters of Men.

But it has seemed a vain thing to me, to have fled unto a single Life, and
monastic Vows, and Evangelical Counsels, while as a plurality of men was
required from the Command, Increase ye, and be ye Multiplied, and Replenish the
Earth; which Words indeed did excuse Concubine-ship.

Then in the next place, seeing Virgins are far more prone unto a single Life,
Bashfulness, likewise unto Chastity and Monastic Vows, than Men; The Flood had
rather happened from the Sex being inverted or turned on the opposite Part; and
it has been Written, because the Daughters of God had taken the Sons of Men
for their Husbands. And moreover, neither can there be any thought or project
of keeping Chastity probably taught, which had then separated the Sons of God
from Virgins, nor any Apostasy in those Ages, which had provoked the
Indignation of God unto Flood.

Yet if that be so (the which I can in no wise through a Dream, persuade my
self of) at leastwise it is from thence proved in behalf of my Position, that
Chastity alone does

But seeing that before the Flood, there was no promise of a single Life or
Chastity, and Adam, and Nymphs, the Satanical-birth whereof, God always very
much abhorred: But there was an incredible Multitude of these in the Desert,
one whereof was sent unto B. Anthony.

Also in the Days of Constantine, a live Satyr was carried about to be shown,
and afterward was shown being seasoned with Salt.

So once, there were also diverse Monsters drawn out from the Ocean, which
spoke, were instructed in diverse Arts, and therefore rational; they also lived
among our Countrymen.

Indeed rational living Creatures were conceived as well in the Waters, as in
Wildernesses, from a detestable Copulation.

Seeing therefore, the first Monsters had begotten Offsprings by the Sons of
Adam of the Female Sex, they distinguished the Sons of Adam by the name of the
Sons of God; and these kind of Monsters, they name the Daughters of men: And
these Nymphs, Heathenism, thence-forward after the Flood, named Dryades,
Nereides, Naides, etc. The which seeing they were fair to look upon, and men
had taken them to be their Wives; God from so great a Filthiness, and
destruction of the humane kind (which the Text calls much Wickedness in every
Season or Age) abhorring them, determined to wash away the World with a Deluge.
From that Copulation of Monsters and Nymphs, they generated strong Giants, and
those famous men of their Age; and the which therefore, Heathenism long
worshipped as Gods and Heroes: For otherwise there seem to be frivolous reasons
of the Flood, according to the Letter: To wit, because men were married with
women, and these had generated Giants that were strong and famous men of their
Age. Therefore the Text ought to contain the Indignation of God, and a suitable
Cause of the Flood. The monstrousness is not only in the Figure and Forming of
their Body, even as in the beginning of Degenerations; but their Deformity
being by degrees withdrawn and diminished, the monstrousness stood in the
sensitive Soul; the which an immortal Mind did not accompany, however outwardly
they were Animals using Reason.

At leastwise, it is manifest from the aforesaid Text, that the true Posterity
of Adam were not Giants, but of the Stature of Christ the Lord, and framed by
the same Statuary.

The Law therefore forbad, that many Seeds should not be sown in the same
Field, nor that Webs of Linen and Woollen should be combined: To wit, it being
mindful of that most Ample and much Wickedness, for which God ought to destroy
the World. But the co-mixture of those Men before the Flood, with Nymphs, was
so usual and ordinary, and likewise the copulation of Faunes with Maids, that a
few only being excepted, and saved into the Ark, the whole Stock of Adam was
defiled, and therefore passed by in silent: Therefore God decreed to destroy
every living Creature, that he might likewise extinguish the guilty rational
Monster: For besides a few which the Ark shut up, there was not he who had not
contracted a consanguinity with that devilish Progeny.

For the B. Prophetess Hildegard, writes (for she is the Prophetess of this
Book, which was canonized in the Synod of Trevirum or Triers) unto the Clergy
of Triers: For very many People arose from the Sons of Adam, who had a
forgetfulness of God, so that they would not know themselves to be Men: From
whence they by shamefully Sinning, lived according to the manners of Beasts,
except the Sons of God, who separated themselves from those same Men, and their
Loves, of whom Noah was born.

These things she, who acknowledges the Sons of God in both Sexes, and clearly
approves of my Interpretation of this Text.

For Satan had tried by this Mean, to overthrow Mankind, and to hinder the
immortal Soul, that there might not be He, from whence the Son of God should be
born: Therefore there was need of the Flood, not only for the Correction of
Sins; but for the Salvation of the whole humane kind: For otherwise Cham had
not been saved by the Ark; for he was now wholly perverse from Atheism:
Wherefore I interpret the Text (yet under the humble Censure of the Church) to
wit, that the Sons of God (who did bear the Image of God in their immortal
Soul, and in their Body) Took the Daughters of Men (which only showed forth a
humane Image in the rationality of their sensitive Soul, and beautiful
Fairness) for their Wives, because they were Fair; And from them they generated
Giants, strong and famous Men of their Age: For there was much Wickedness in
every season, or at all times, so as that it repented God, that he had created
Man; according to that saying, All Flesh had corrupted its way; that is, every
Man had not only left the ways of the Lord; but he had also corrupted the way
which he had chosen to himself: For God had purposed to generate man by the
overshadowing of the holy Spirit, which was his immediate Image, and to conjoyn
himself intimately unto him: But Man perverted the Intent of God: Wherefore
afterward, God who is totally Good, permitted Wedlock. And then again, Man
bespotted the Generation of Adam, and had almost proceeded unto the Destruction
of the Species, unless the Miracle of the Flood had come.

And at length, the Devil had again prevented the Intent of God by Paganism,
unless in the fullness of times, the compassion of God had withstood him, he
sending his Son from his own Heart or Bosom: To whom be all Sanctification.
However God be no accepter of Persons; therefore neither of Sexes: Yet it has
well pleased him to stuff the female Sex with a straight measure of
tribulations, by reason of his unsearcheable Judgments: For the Hairs of our
Head are numbered; and a Leaf falls not from the Tree, but by Permission: And
much less is a poor Woman or Maid born, whom the Finger of God has not formed.
Therefore I have many times enquired throughout the Parishes, after the
knowledge of this Paradox; and I have every where found in the Books of those
that are yearly Baptized, twice more Daughters at least, to be Born and
Baptized, than Males. Also that twice more Males at least, are extinguished by
Diseases, Travels, War, Duel, Shipwracks, etc. than Females: From whence it
follows, that God does every year create more Daughters, and that more do come
to ripe Years; And from hence, lastly it is manifest, that so complete a number
of Maids is not appointed by God, but for the choiceness of Virgins; Seeing
that he which has forbidden Luxury, and Adultery, does nevertheless create,
and conserve a more plentiful Catalogue of Females, and a sparing Catalogue of
Males; and he therein denotes, that the Constancy of a single Life in the
Woman, is acceptable unto him: To wit, as she comes so much the nearer unto the
Purity and Innocence of the first Intention in Creation.

For a conclusion of this Treatise, I will adjoyn what S. Hildegard writes
unto the Grisean Monks, Page 186.

Virginity signifies the Sun, which enlightneth the whole World; because God
has adjoined Virginity unto himself, the which, Man being left, begat that
Virginity, which a Ray or Beam of the Divinity plentifully poured forth; and
the which Ray does govern all things: For the King which rules all things, is
God, and Virginity was conjoined unto him, when God and Man was born of a
Virgin. Thus the Queen stood at his right hand in Raiment guilt with Gold, with
an encompassed Variety; because Virginity resisting the Devil, stood to the
Virtue of the Divinity in its resplendent Work, being on every side encompassed
with the Multitude of diverse Virtues: For the Divinity has espowsed Virginity
unto it self, when as the Angel at first fell on the left Hand; and now also
has he elected a People of Salvation for himself, being in Adam; which People,
he has named his right Hand; concerning which People, he has adjoined
Vriginity unto himself, which has brought forth the greatest Work: Because as
God created all things by his Word; So also Virginity through the heat of the
holy Divinity, begat the Son of God: Thus Virginity is not without
Fruitfulness: Because a Virgin begat God and Man, by whom all things were made.
But also by this means, all the Virtues of the Old and New Testament which God
has wrought in his Saints, are beguilded, being as it were a Garment
beautified with Gold: And the Virgin shall freely collect these Virtues unto
her self; Because the Ligament of a man shall not constrain or knit her up. The
Wheel also which Ezekiel saw, has fore-signified Virginity; because the same
Virginity was pre-figured in the Law before the Incarnation of the Son of God:
But after his Incarnation, she wonderfully works very many Miracles; because
God by her Purged all Offenses, and rightly ordained every Institution. For
Virginity supports old Things, and sustaineth new things, and is the very Root,
and Foundation of all good things; because always and ever, it was with him
who is without Beginning and without End: For the Nature of Man, which was
destroyed by Sins, has by Virginity revived in Salvation; seeing that by
another Nature she has withdrawn Sins from Men.

These things the Prophetess; wherein indeed are confirmed, those things which
I have hitherto spoken concerning the entrance of Death into humane Nature.

CHAP. XCIV. A Supply, concerning the Fountains of the Spaw. The first Paradox.
1. Which are to be called Fountains. 2. Diverse Opinions about the exposition
hereof. 3. The diversity of Soils in the Earth. 4. Incorporeal Seeds are
Reasons entertained in the Elements. 5. The Root of Rocks is the Inn of
Metals. 6. The last Ground or Soil, is the springing Womb of true Fountains.
7. The Virgin-Earth. 8. In the last Soil the Waters do live. 9. When Waters do
as it were undergo Death. 10. After what manner the last Soil is in the
highest Mountains. 11. A vital reason of Fountains from the similitude of the
Microcosme. 12. What the Sea in Genesis is. 13. The External Sea is the Fruit
of a greater Sea. 14. The boiling Sand is a thousand times bigger than the Sea
it self. 15. A Paradoxal Explication of a Text of the holy Scripture. 16. The
last Soil is the internal Sea. 17. A Paradoxal Explication of a Text of
Ecclesiastes. 18. A Regression of the Waters from the Internal Sea unto the
External, and from this to that. 19. In this Regression, the benefits of Waters
and Minerals are granted unto us. 20. Night, Darkness, Oromasis, Iliadus, are
one and the same. 21. A Life of its own is attributed to the Internal Sea, from
a Similitude or like Thing.

WE must needs before all, sharply touch at the Original of Fountains in
general. Indeed I do not with the Vulgar, name any kind of issuings forth of
Waters,

Therefore whereby it may be manifest, that there is a certain vital Principle,
and spring Jesus Syrach, being hitherto an obscure one, yet a most true one,
comes to be considered: Whereby he would have all Rivers (by consequence also
Fountains) to proceed and issue from the Sea, and at last to finish their
Courses into the Sea.

Truly Syrach has hitherto left a disquieted or dubious Posterity of
Philosophers; to wit, in what manner the Waters do contend upwards from the
Sea: Seeing that the Earth every where constituting a Lip of the Sea, has
retained the Victory; because it has restrained it by a Superiority of
Situation: But it is not yet therefore sufficiently manifest, how the Sea
(seeing there is an offscouring of heaped-up waters into the lowest Valley of
the Earth) should besides, be able to ascend to the highest Rocks, and there to
stir up Fountains.

Certainly the Rules of the Art of drawing Water are here silent, if the
Sctipture be to be observed, as it ought to be done: Therefore some neglect
this place as un-touched; but others undertake to explain it with a Moderation.

To wit, that Rivers being indeed allured out of the Sea, in manner of a
Vapor, should at length, by Rains, Snows, and Showrs, an interjected tragedy
of a masked transmutation, require or return to the Sea: But this is to
contend, that all Fountains have arose from Rain, or at leastwise from
condensed or co-thickned air. And then they unjustly command, that not any
Vapor is fetched from the Earth, but from the Sea alone, or the holy Scripture
shall in vain affirm, that Rivers are begged only from the Sea; and not
likewise from the Face of the Earth, not to be separated in manner of a Vapor:
Which Straits, when as they seemed to many to be irreconcilable, or not to be
shaken off, they by chance drove and dashed a certain Author, of the Fountains
of the Spaw, against the Rock: For although I shall dissemble any thing that is
of Man's weakness in the same, yet Christian Piety in an honest man, does not
suffer public Blasphemy to pass over un admonished of: The which Author
therefore, I beseech to indulge my Liberty.

Aristotle (he says) would have all Fountains and Rivers to be bred of Air
resolved into Water: He had not read, I believe, although he were Plato's
Scholar, that those four River of Paradise, (in Phaedo) issued forth from the
Command of God. Why I pray thee, if thou say, that great Rivers are even at
this day also bred only by a constriction of the Air, have they not also
(Phaedo being read) and Nature moreover, being a Virgin, issued from the same
Constriction, forthwith after the Creation? And he who believed the World to be
from Eternity, to have left Phaedo neglected, nor to have expected any
condensing of Air; unless perhaps he doated before Goropius Becanus; That those
four Rivers were nothing else, but the Ocean sending forth Rivers into the four
Coasts of the World: in which Sense also, the Syrachian Preacher says, That
all Waters do come from the Sea, and again, that having passed their Course,
they render themselves unto the Sea: which Words do thus sound in the Schools.

Goropius doated, and Plato before him, if he said that the Ocean did disperse
four Rivers into the Coasts of the World, without any co-thickning of Air; in
which same sense notwithstanding, the Preacher has affirmed it: Therefore in
the same sense Ecclesiastes or the Preacher, doated. But is not yet enough
said, is not, I say, the Interpretation of the holy Scriptures as yet plain
enough?

Therefore we must of necessity, first of all, set before our Eyes, the
Diversity and Pavements of Soyles in the Earth: For elsewhere a Black-earth,
abounding with Muds and with a various Comeliness, is presented to our Sight,
according to the tempera ture of the Soil and Heaven, the Influences of the
Stars, and Suiting of Showrs, because indeed they are Fruits, but not an
Elemenr. The which first Soil of Nature, if thou shall Pounce, thou shall in
most places discover great or rockie Stones, again, Metals, or Mineral Juices;
but in some places, a Sand, and that here yellow, elsewhere ashie, there
skie-coulered, next a little greenish, according to the changeable and manyform
dis-junction of the lurking Spirit (for Nature is subject to the Soil) and the
appointment of the subterraneous Archeus received from the creating Word.

Indeed in the Cup and most rich Storehouse of the Elements, do lay hid Reasons
or

Furthermore, of Soyls there is not every where a like depth: For in some
places, much depth of Sand, but elsewhere, very much of Earth does occur: But
straightway under the Soil or bottom of the Sand, there is another for the
mostpart, rockie or stony: For that is by our Countrymen called [Keybergh]
whereon a race of Rocks being supported,

That last Ground or Soil of Nature, our Countrymen name the [Quellem] but
the French [Sable Bovillant] the which a Spade or Mattock has not hitherto
passed through: Because how much Sand soever, and how much Water thou shall
empty out from thence, yet presently others do fly unto it with an uncessant
and swift course, for the supplying of the former Defect: From thence therefore
I conclude,

That the aforesaid Soil, as it is the last in order of Nature, does so
continue even unto the Center, unless perhaps the neathermost does hold or
possess some miles of the heart of the earth.

It follows from thence, that that Sand is the matter of the earth, not
subject unto successive change; but is a perpetual and constant Sieve, whereby
Nature does strain

In this Soil I say, there is a vital Vigor of the boyling-up Water: For as
long as the Waters are conversant in the same Ground or Soil, they are lively,
being not subject

Yet as soon as they run down from thence, they presently die, no otherwise than
as out-hunted Blood, or a Hand that is cut off: for then they are at first
constrained to

In the fourth place it is to be noted: That even as this Soil being exposed
in the Air, in the superficies of the Earth, does express its natural
Properties, no less than that

For in Man, as long as the Blood does flloat in the Veins, there is a like
respect of Macrocosm or great World, as long as the Water does enjoy a common
Life in the former Inn, it hastens upwards and downwards without labor,
because it knows it not: But being once shaken from its vital Inn, it cease
not to hasten, until in its Iliad or Night, it recovereth its blessed
Retirances or Receptacles of rest: Therefore the Spirit nourishes the Waters
within, also the swelling of the vast Sea, as the mind being diffused through
the Joints, does stir the whole Lump. But from hence the Sea has not yet
sufficiently been made known, which waters the Fountains, and vomiteth out
Rivers, and whither the Scriptures says, the same do at length unweariedly
hasten.

For that which the Scripture calls the Sea, is a Collection of all Waters,
into their Ancient and continual Cup-board: Of which Collection this beholdable
and external navigable

Wherefore the Receptacle, congregating Root, and Collection altogether of all
Waters,

For the Arch-type or first Framer, separated the Waters from the Waters: Not
indeed the Sea from the Rivers (or the Sea should not be the Collection of all
Waters) or both

This Internal, I say Invisible (hitherto an Abyss) and great Sea, are those
waters, whereby the Prophet Sang, the The Foundations of the World were
supported; and the which, The Sea, by the Creator of Things.

From thence indeed also Ecclesiastes, has likewise fetched Fountains and
Rivers, which

They run down therefore, out of this Soil, and for fear of a Vacuum, the
External Sea does again pierce the same Sand, as it were by straining, and
presently almost in its

But because Fountains and Rivers have by a leasurely Decursion or Race,
dispensed the seeds and matter of all Minerals (which before they kept in their
Bosom, and the commerces Orpheus, the Darkness of Pluto, according to
Hippocrates, the Oromasis Persians, the Iliad of Paracelsus (where Reasons, and
Gifts, the Seeds of Minerals I say, being not as yet joined unto Bodies, do
lay) for the Water which is again to be gotten with Child by the Seeds.
Therefore there is not an idle sliding down of Waters into the Ocean: For they
are governed by Intelligence, and as if they were strong in understanding,
cease not to utter their Offices, the Testimonies of an infinite goodness and
providence. Surely as many as shall behold the Cabalastical Science, shall
admire at this in the forefront; yet most true: Because those that are
ignorant of most things, must needs admire at most things.

But the Ocean does daily hand forth some convenient thing to our sight, by a
double ebbing and flowing: To wit, the Navil or Boss of the Water ascending
contrary to the

CHAP. XCV. Another Paradox.
1. No Fountains are from Air thickened. 2. Elements are not changed, or
perish. 3. Whatsoever is generated, is generated by a Seed, and whatsoever is
made in Nature, is made from the necessity of a Seed. 4. There are only two
primitive Elements, and two secondary ones. 5. A Paradoxal Explication. 6. A
proof by handicraft operation. 7. The Heaven and the Earth shall perish, not
the Water and the Air. 8. The Art of Distilling unfolds Natural Philosophy. 9.
What a Vapor is. 10. A proof against Aristotle. 11. A second Mechanical Proof.
12. What, and of what sort the Magnal or Sheath of the Air is. 13. Why small
drops do not fall down in a Vapor and Snows, and when they do fall. 14. A
proof against Aristotle. 15. A proof. 16, 17. A handicraft operation.

WE have treated concerning the Spring, concerning the immediate original and
nativity of Fountains, more briefly than a Paradox, and more tediously (I
confess) Spaw, did require (for it is a most difficult thing to have kept a
mean in all things) to wit, as the Waters do proceed from a most rich Inn of
Waters, unto their appointments: Although in the mean time, they do now and
then as soon as may be reach the Air, but sometimes they run headlong down by
long journeys and Pipes of Earth, and rockie Stones, before they yield
themselves to the Light: yet there was the same reason, necessity, and end of
their Institution on both sides; to wit, the will of him who created all things
for our uses.

But it remains to crave leave, that Aristotelical spirits may indulge my
liberty, if I shall judge it a dream impossible to Nature, that Fountains
should be bred from a co-thickning of Air: For indeed that also is chiefly
true, That Air was never, nor is it to be in any Age, Water; even as, neither
was Water to assume the Form of Air.

For they are firstborn Elements, and the constant Wombs of things, stable
from the

For from an invisible and incorporeal seed, entertained in the Wombs of the
Elements, and putting on the Principles of Bodies, all Generation in the
Universe, which is called

Others have called that thing a Flux, from a Non-being, unto a Being; which
things that they may become more perspicuous, it is to be noted, that unto the
production of every thing, two only Sexes, if not one promiscuous one at
least, have concurred.

Therefore also, by the same Law of a worldly harmony, there are Originally two
only

The Earth therefore, and the Fire or Heaven, if they are Elements, they are
called secondary ones, proceeding from the former.

For whatsoever of Earths, rocky Stones, Gemms, Sands, etc. does exist, or
flows forth into a stinking Vapor, or is at first changed into Ashes, a Calx
or Lime; or at leastwise, through the Society of some Addittament, into a Salt
(the offspring of Waters) presently afterward they all (the volatile Sum,
exceeding or over coming the fixed Sum) are made aerie and vapoury Efluxes,
rushing-into water with a hastened Violence: And so that, whatsoever is earthy,
hard, solid, and compacted, seeing all that is reducible unto a more simple,
thin, pure, and former remaining substance (pardon the Novelty most resplendent
Prince) it must needs be, that it has no Efficacy of an Element at all; but
that they are more latter things than Air, and Water.

In like manner, we say of the Heaven, that the Heavens shall be changed, shall
wax Old and Perish; and so that the Heaven and the Earth shall at length
Perish; the like

In the next place, the Water, or Air, could never in any Age be reduced into
any other former Body, by Art, or Nature: This therefore is the Face, this the
Ordination, this in the next place is the Office, Combination, Fate and End of
the Elements; to wit, that the unchanged Essence of two most simple Bodies, and
their unmixed substance, may afford a vital Womb, or Prop, unto Seeds and
Fruits, until at length the number of things to be generated, being
accomplished, the heap of Principles, together with the Seeds, do constitute
strange Families and Colonies, (their Bride-bed being separated) in a more
blessed Seat: For the very many Dreams wherewith the World has suffered it
self to be hitherto circumvented, the handicraft Operation of the Fire does
deride with loud Laughter:

For a Vapor is in very deed, materially, and formally, nothing else but a
heap of the Atoms of Water lifted up on high: The which our School shows forth
more clearly than

The Air therefore, whether it be received in hot, or cold Glasses, and pressed
together therein, shall never afford Water, but according to how much of a
Vapor, that is, of an

But the Water is separated into very small conspicuous Drops against the Sun,
through the Glass, at the Beginning of Distillation, as long as the sides are
cold; to wit, while through

And that thing indeed happens no otherwise, than by a proper Magnal (which in
things mixed, and so also in the Water it self, is the Sky, thinner than the
Air, and dis-joynable Stagyrian Aristotle.

If Air be co-thickned into Water, seeing thou teach Air more to excel in
Moisture than Water; I pray thee why shall Cold which is natural to the Air,
change the Nature

In the next place, now Cold, and no longer Heat, shall possess the vital
Principle of Generation.

Wherefore, although a Vapor be Air generated of Water formally transchanged,
and of the same again alike water does grow together; Now thou differest from
thy own

CHAP. XCVI. A Third Paradox.
1. Concerning a Diet. 2. Seeds, from what things they are free. 3. A proof. 4.
The best Fountains, which, where, and of what sort they are. 5. Rivers from
sharpish Springs. 6. A happy keeper of Fountains. 7. Fountains generating a
Stone: From whence are Rocks in Banks. 8. Many Fountains do make a plurality
of Minerals. 9. From an invisible thing, is made a visible thing. 10. A hungry
or eating Salt is an Hermophrodite. 11. A twofold Excrement in us. 12. What
Tartar is. 13. A manifold hungry Salt. 14. How the best Vitriol is made. 15.
Another best Vitriol. 16. Iron is not changed in Fountains of Brass. 17. A
third Vitriol. 18. A fourth Vitriol. 19. There is not a hungry sharpness of
Vegetables. 20. The Salt of Sulphur is fixed. 21. That there is a hungry Salt
of Fountains. 22. Why a natural Salt is more noble than an artificial one. The
Error of some. 23. The Manna of Alume. 24. From whence the matter of Vitriol
is. 25. An error of neglect. Vitriol is in other Metals.

WE now approaching nearer unto the Fountains of the Spaw, it is convenient
first

Indeed, Nature, Essence, Existence, Gift, Knowledge, Duration, Appointment;
were at first connexed in the root of the Seeds, which afterward, by the
unfolding of their Gifts, and necessity of their Functions, being by degrees
drawn asunder into a plurality, do become subject unto disorder.

From whence it is, that an Oracle contains it self in the admirable
testimony of Hippocrates: Numbers being increased, to wit, that (in generating)
Proportions are diminished, and likewise that Proportions in decrease, being
increased, Numbers are diminished.

From whence it is undoubtedly manifest, that by how much a Body shall be
nearer unto its first and seminal Beings, whether in Nature, or by Art, by so
much it is more Powerful, Noble, and Famous.

Wherefore, Seeds entering into the World, are at the first free from the
Dimensions of

The same Humane seed does sometimes beget a simple, sometimes a manifold
Young,

From hence indeed it comes to pass, that in the highest Rocks, far from dregs,
and among rockie-stones and sand, sharp Fountains do arise, which are more
excellent than all others; but being so called, not because they bear a
tartness before Moly Homericum, to wit, by defending of health, and propagating
of the vital Powers, that they have seemed to have ascended as it were unto the
top of Medicine. Such a Fountain Paracelsus would have to spring up in Veltin a
little Village of Helvetia, in his Book of Tartarous Diseases, as he believed
that the whole compass of the World did scarce contain such another in a
Valley, for in the highest Rocks there are many.

For truly Danubius, the Rhene, the River Rhoan, Saw, Po, etc. do obtain such a
Fountain in their first Spring.

I will add more: What if the President of the Heavenly Host shall be appointed
chief keeper of the Den of Garganus, it shall not be from the matter, to
believe that there is a

On the contrary, there are other Fountains, wherewith a stonifying juice is
co-mixed, the which, through the Waters sliding down by degrees, do here and
there sow great Stones, Mose shall be for an Example; for this River, does from
his rise, longly and largly, with his brim imbibing a stonifying juice, strew
the little Hills, from hence, even as far as Visetum:

Which juice being now wasted, and having finished its appointment, Mose
afterward

Moreover, it is doubted, why Fountains may be called sharp, and from whence
that tartness is to be derived: I will briefly show it: For all the Seeds of
Salts, etc.

Wherefore it is to be noted, That a certain Hermaphroditical Salt of Metals
does exist, An hungry or sharpish Salt. Indeed it is a general one, and
accommodable unto all Metals, and therefore if it pleases thee, not to
account it the first, and as it were the remotest matter of the same; at
leastwise, it is the secondary matter of Metals, and co-natural to all
Metals whatsoever.

That Salt therefore being void of a strange co-mixture, is sharp, and
acceptable to our Body in a due quantity, because it cleanses away, and
consumes altogether every Humor which is not Vital, and which is Tartarous:

For there is a twofold Excrement in us;

One there is of ours, which is subject unto putrefaction and stink:

But there is another of things, which being a Traitor, perfects its Tragedy by
an hostile coagulation; and by a general Etimology, is called Tartar.

A sharpish Salt therefore, is now and then considered like an Embryo, in order
to a Metal: Also often times, as it were a solitary Individual, but not as yet
completed in

I will explain the thing by the example of Vitriol or Chalcanthum.

For the best for Medicine, is according to an imitation of Nature,
artificially made of Copper; and therefore that is by far the best, which is
composed of Copper alone, without earthly filths, and a mixture of foreign
things; the whidh notwithstanding cannot flow together in the Wombs of Nature:
But it is made after this manner.

First, Sulphur is cast upon the melted Brass, until the flame has consumed
the whole; but the Brass being straightway poured forth, is infused in
Rainwater, from whence it waxes green: And that thing is so often repeated,
until all the brass shall pass, as being pierced, into the Water: At length,
the Water being exhaled, thou have thy Vitriol: For that which before was
Copper, now moreover, from Sulphur, has attained a Salt.

Secondly, The most excellent Vitriol, grows naturally in Mines, wherein
Nature has Cyprian, Hungarian, Roman, is praised (...) means that which in
its examination has contributed the most of Brass: (...) juice of that
Vitriol, is thought to change Aqua Fortis is invisible: So that it is the
property of Iron to manifest the Brass dissolved in the Vitriol, by snatching
it unto it self, and also that by the same Act, the Iron it self is dissolved,
and does vanish away in the Fountain: Fountains are my Witnesses. For truly
Vitriolated Waters do become far more poor than themselves, in Copper after
that they have received the Iron, the benefit of the recovered Brass. Wherefore
also ^eed out of the Fountain (where, and as often as a continual inundation of
new Brass out of he Gulf, fails) after another manner the supposed
transmutation of the Iron does not happen.

Thirdly, in the next place, Vitriol is made by Art, of a Brassy-Fire-stone or
Marcasite, being begot with child by Sulphur. Indeed the Sulphur being
abstracted from thence,

Lastly, in the Fourth place, the hungry Salt is co-bred, being grown together
in the

From whence it is manifest:

First,
That a hungry Salt, although it be sharp, yet does very much differ from any
other sharpness,

Secondly,
That although the Sulphur be wholly fat, and inflamable, yet in the piercing
of the

Thirdly,
That the sharp hungry Salt of Fountains born in the Bowels of the Earth, is
the Salt of Spaw, from the properties of contained Minerals, even as they have
now proceeded into their last matter: For truly it is manifest from what has
been said above, that the hungry Salts of Sulphur do most far differ from the
property of Sulphur: And moreover, which is more, that the Artificial hungry
Salt of Sulphur does as much differ from that which is natural, as this
embryonated Salt is nearer in its Root unto its first Seeds. They err, I say,
in the whole circumference, who compare the hungry Salts of Lead, with Lead,
which is hugely distinct there from: For there is a very strange similitude of
the perfect Salts, to wit, of Alume, Nitre, Vitriol, and of the same, not
perfect. It is manifest by an Example: For the hungry Salt of Alume, which is
sweeter than any Sugar (it is called the Manna of Alume) knows no astriction,
being like unto its first Being.

Fourthly.
Seeing therefore the most excellent Vitriol, is materially nothing else but
the embryonated Spaw, I do not find as yet recorded.

For truly Vitriol is daily made of any Metal (except Gold) as well in the
progress of Art, as of Nature: To wit, as a metallic Liquor, a coagulable
Vitriol, I say, is

CHAP. XCVII. A fourth Paradox.
1. Things contained in the Water of the Spaw, according to the Opinion of
others. 2. The Falsehood of their Positions is proved. 3. Ingredients of the
Fountains of the Spaw. What the Vitriol of Mars may be. 4. Coagulation is never
made without Dissolution, nor this without that. 5. Bodies do not act into each
other. 6. Between an Action, there is the Odor of a dissolving Spirit. 7. The
dissolving Spirit is Coagulated. 8. Why a vein of Iron is Invisible in the
Waters. 9. Why Waters do smell of Sulphur. 10. Why Sharpness perishes in the
Waters, and when. 11. That which is manifest becomes hidden; and that which is
hidden is made manifest. 12. Why not the Iron but the Vein, may be said to be
in Being. 13. The Salt of Fountains does not grow in the vein of Iron. 14. Why
one Fountain is stronger than another. 15. The difference of Things contained
in Fountains. 16. Why the Fountain Savenirius is not translated elsewhere. 17.
Why the Water of Savenirius is the Lighter. 18. The Spirit of Salt does for
some time operate upon a Vein.

VVRiters do with one accord, affirm Water to be the continent of the Fountains
of the Spaw: But we differ from them only in their Original; because it is
Spaw, and that Calchitis or red Vitriol, Mysy, Sorry, Melantera or Blacking,
Salt, Nitre (that Nitre I say, has been found to be in them, by the
examination of Distilling, which elsewhere they never saw, because they
testify it is that which since the Age of Hippocrates, had failed from thence)
Bitumen, or a liquid Amber, the pit Coal, Alume, Bole, Oker, Red-lead, the
Mother of Iron, the Vein of Iron, Iron, Aerugo or Verdigrease, burnt
Chalcanthum, Burnt Alume, also the Flour of Brass and Sulphur, have therein
discovered themselves: These things I say, we read to be attributed by Authors,
unto the Fountain of the Spaw, under their Mistress Uncertainty; and so they
doubting unto what Captain they may commit so great an Army, do conclude, that
there are some Fountains, in which thou may most difficulty discern an
eminent Subterraneous Matter.

Elsewhere in the Fountains of the Spaw, that a Heat of Vitriol is tempered
with the Cold of Red-lead and Brass,

In another place, that the Fountains of the Spaw are actually cold and moist,
but in Power or Virtue (which one, Physicians do examine) to be hot and dry;
and therefore especially because they extinguish Thirst.

At length, they say that there is the Faculty of Iron, Sulphur, Vitriol, and
of other mineral Things in these Fountains, yet an uncertain Proportion of the
first Qualities remaining, whether thou do consider the Variety of
subterraneous Things, or the various Disposition of the Drinkers. And I also
read that, that is to be noted; That the Fountain Savonirius, puts on it,
rather the Virtues of mineral Things, than their Substance (that is, Faculties
above, without, or not substantial ones:) For elsewhere they say, that
Fountains wax sharp by Vitriol alone, and that Vitriol is of a most sharp
Savor; but in another place, with Diascorides, they find in Vitriol, more of
an ungrateful and earthy astriction, than of a sharpness.

Lastly, even as naught but the extreme torture of the Fires, does allure forth
a most sharp Oil out of Vitriol (to wit, a hungry and sulphurous Salt
elevating the brassy Spirits;) So from hence they suppose Fountains to wax
sharp, and not otherwise; to wit, that such an Heat in the Earth does stir up
the sharp Spirits of Vitriol, unto the Superficies of the Earth, which being
there constrained by Cold, and changed into a sharp Matter, are co-mixed with
the neighboring. Fountain: Which Position, many Anguishes do accompany.

First. Because there is no such voluntary Distillation in the Universe.

And then, because at least the inward parts of the Earth, according to
Hippocrates, Spaw is at best.

Thirdly, Because the Spirit of Vitriol cannot but gnaw the Earth or
Rockie-stones which it touches, and therefore put of all sharpness, which is
vainly dedicated to Fountains.

Fourthly, Because in Summer, the coldness of the Earth is not in its
Superficies only, because it is more in condensing the Spirits, than the more
inward Parts, from whence they imagine the Spirits to be chased, through the
force of heat.

Fifthly, Because the Spirits of Vitriol being immingled with the Water,
although negligently locked up, do neither lay aside their sharpness, nor are
they tinged with a ruddie color; the which notwithstanding, is altogether
social unto Fountainous Waters.

Hitherto the Opinion of others has led me aside.

I will confess my Blindness. I at sometime seriously distilled Savenirius, and
Pouhontius; and indeed, I found not so great a Catalogue of Minerals, yea not
any thing in

In which Act of corroding, there is made a certain kind of Dissolution of the
Vein it self, and a coagulation or fixation of the volatile Salt: The Salt I
say, as long as it is

In the next place, in all solution (as may be seen in the activity of Aqua
Fortis, distilled etc.) Some Exhalations are stirred up, being before at quiet,
which as they are wild ones, they do not again obey coagulation; therefore the
Waters do of necessity fly away, or being restrained, do burst the Vessels. But
besides that also is afterward to be noted, that how much of the Spirits has
completed the solution of the Body, so

From hence therefore, a reason plainly appears, why the Waters of the Spaw,
in so great a clearness or perspicuity, do hide in them the dark Body of the
Vein of Iron.

Next, why in the activity of an hungry Salt, they do cast a smell of Sulphur,
notwithstanding the corporal Sulphur be absent.

At length, it is also easy to be seen, why the Waters about the end of their
activity (for that speediness of solution does continue a longer or shorter
time, in diverse Fountains)

To wit, the Spirits being now partly chased away, or the same being weakened,
and coagulated at the end of Activity, the imbibed Vein settles, and is
manifested, which before

Furthermore, it is not idly to be denied, that Iron, or the Fragments of Iron
are in the Fountains of the Spaw, but the Vein of Iron to be in them: For truly
there does more

But if therefore, it be the longer detained in a notable hollowness about the
Vein, it suppeth up more of the Vein into it self, as does Pouhontius, and this
the Fountain Geronster Tonneletius being richer than the two foregoing
Fountains, in a hungry Salt; yet is poorer than the same in the Vein: For from
hence it is Cold, and more troublesome to the Stomach: Therefore which-soever
Fountain does more provoke Stool, is the more fertile in the Vein. Neither
indeed was that thing unknown to the Ancients, who used the Scale of Iron for
the loosing of the Belly.

Virgins also taking Stomoma or the Powder of Steel, are wont also to vomit on
the first days. Geronster therefore has received more of the Vein than
Tonneletius; but Savenirius is far more washy in Waters, having the least of
the Vein, and hungry Salt; and therefore it sooner

The presence therefore of the Spirit acting into the Vein, enlarges the Pores
in the Water, and works up the Water of the Fountain unto a lighter weight.

It is further to be noted, that even as in Wines, and unripe Oil of Olives,
there is a fermental boiling up; So the Action of the hungry Salt it self, is
made: And not only upon the Vein, while it gnaws and passes through the same;
but also it operates for some time, upon the same, being snatched away with it:
Pouhontius I say, far longer than Savenirius, etc. until that the Activities of
the Spirits being worn out of exhausted, as well the Agent, as the Patient, the
thing dissolving I say, like as also the thing to be dissolved, do decay or
fail in the same endeavor.

CHAP. XCVIII. A Fifth Paradox.
1. The virtues of a hungry Salt. 2. The effect of obstruction. 3. How far
Fountains may act in a Man. 4. Whom they may not help. 5. An example of an
effect by it self, and by accident. 6. A Woman is subject unto double Diseases.
7. The faculties of the Vein of Iron. 8. An objection. 9. A Solution. 10. After
what manner Iron opens, and after what manner it does bind. 11. A proof by an
allied Example. 12. Whether they are convenient in the Stone, and how far. 13
That is a Cloakative Cure, which does only expel the Stones. 14. The Waters
of the Spaw are for a Cause, that the Stone does the more easily re-increase or
grow again. 15. Wherein the true Cure of the Stone is placed. 16. From whence
the remedy is to be fetched, and of what sort it is. 17. The first qualities
are in Fountains. 18. Water, not Air is Internally moist. 19. The Virtues of
Rellolleum and Cherto. 20. An objection. 21. A resolution thereof.

WE being now about to Treat, in a brief Method, concerning the Virtues of the
Fountains of the Spaw, and being to speak by the Rule of a supply, will resume,
that no other Natural Endowments are to be found, than those which are drawn
out of a hungry Salt, and the dissolved Vein of Iron.

Wherefore, seeing a hungry Salt dissolves Muscilages, cleanses them away,
consumes

Therefore it deprives the parts which are behind it in a future order, of a
Vital Communion, Spaw being drunk, are convenient altogether in all Diseases
which arise from the Enemy, Tartar being received and Coagulated within besides
Nature; So that a sufficient Root of Life be remaining, that is, if they are
drunk seasonably enough.

Yet with that adjoined Limitation, that the Power of the Waters does not
Transcend the Hypochondrials or places about the short Ribs: For the Waters do
not reach beyond

Wherefore also, the Waters of the Spaw do not succor those affects which are
Naturally or peculiarly from a property of Passion, unless by accident: The
reason is, Because

In the next place, neither do the Waters of the Spaw profit in Epidemical,
Endemical, and Astral Diseases, as are the Plague, Plurisie, burning Coal, etc.
as neither do they very much profit in those Diseases wherein a Poison
subsisteth, being either inwardly received, or bred, or participated of from
contagion: As also, neither in Diseases of Tincture, such as are the Leprosy,
Pox or Foul Disease, the Morphew, Cancer, Falling-Evil, etc. Wherefore, we do
not well agree with those who commend the Water of the Spaw, for all Diseases
altogether without Exception: And so that, they extol the same, even unto
blasphemy: To wit, There is no cause, that we, having obtained the Fountains of
the Spaw, should now henceforeward be amazed at the Miracles of Ancient Waters,
or of the Fish-Pool of Siloah, or of Jordan curing of Naaman: seeing, here
also, we see those that labor with the astonished Disease, Convulsion, and
Palsy, and Leprous Persons to be Cured. Fie, fie, Miracles are manifested by
an Unimitable finger.

Besides, it behooveth rightly to distinguish effects by Accident, from those
which are due unto their Causes by themselves: As, if a Virgin, through the
failing of her Menstrues, Spaw, she be freed from the annexed disposition,
there is not cause, that therefore, we should commend the true Apoplexy,
Asthma, falling Evil, or Palsy to have been Cured by the Fountains of the Spaw.

For Diseases which proceed from the Womb, are, Uniuersally, the Client of
another Monarchy and do consist of another Root, than those which break forth
from the Condition

But besides it has already been spoken, how much a hungry Salt may profit in
Fountains: but hereafter we must show, what the Co^roded and dissolved Mine of
Iron

That therefore first of all, does manifestly bind, and therefore it
strengthens the Stomach, and any of its neighboring parts. In loose therefore,
and dissolute Diseases, the Waters of the Spaw do agree or are serviceable, to
wit in those of the Lientery Flux, Caeliacke Passion, and Dysentery or bloody
Flux, etc.

Whereunto, I exspect that it will be objected, that whatsoever Irony matter is
offered, it provokes the mouth Issues, and always the breaches or
enfeeblements of the Liver and Spaw are rather opening than Astringent: By
reason of which difficulties, some perhaps doubting, do rather fly for refuge,
unto the unlike parts in Mars.

I answer from the Adeptists; That there does oft-times wander up and down in
us, a certain resolved Salt, and Mineral one, plainly Excrementitious, a
resolved Tartar I say, existing either in the first, or in the last matter,
whereof, whether the Womb, Liver, Slpeen, Kidney, the Mesentery, or Stomach be
the Mine, we now reckon it all one; So that it be manifest, that it brings
forth remarkable troubles unto that labor with it.

Stomoma therefore, that is, Steel or Iron Administered in Powder, being drunk
down; as soon as may be, that hurtful Salt (which hearkens not to the commands
of purging things) Spaw waters) Nature, the same liquours being wasted, and
more inwardly admitted within, presently separates the Iron (because it is
unapt for nourishment) from that which was co-mixed with it, and sends it forth
through the Bowels: As may be seen in the blackness of the dungs of the
Fountains of the Spaw.

In which Sequestration of the Iron, there is straightway made a Con-flux of
Mineral Salts, no otherwise than as Silver dissolved in Chrysulca or Aqua
Fortis, does fly unto applied

It opens I say, by a specifical and appropriated power, but it constrains or
binds, by a Spaw do wash or rince the region of the Urine, both because they do
easily pass through, and also because they being many and abundantly drunk, and
Mineral, their hungry Salt hinders, whereby the Spirit of the Urin (the only
Architect of Stones in us) may by a property inbred in it, the less Stonifie
any thing: Because another more potent Salt does now derive the same Spirit,
being as it were bound, into its own Jurisdiction.

But because that is only a Cloakative or dissembled Cure, although the made
Stones

We therefore know a perfect Cure of the Stone, and the desired rest, to be a
far different

But neither shall that be sufficient, unless the Stonifying inclination be
taken away by restorers, to wit by the Collected harvest of a few remedies, nor
is any one able to hope

Therefore as to what belongs unto the first qualities of the Fountains of the
Spaw, although we are very little careful of those, because they are Momentary,
and those which

But it has been shown with an indulgence of Aristotle, and by the abovesaid
Inferences,

But because those qualities, as well of the water, as of the Minerals, are
Relosteous ones, or those which have not a Seminal Being in them, they have not
any thing of a

Last of all, notwithstanding, we must answer to an objection. To wit,
wherefore is the Fountain Tonneletius, with the Plenty of its hungry and hot
Salt, said rather to Cool and to be troublesome to the Stomach?

I will give Satisfaction.

The hungry Salt, although it be hot in its first qualities, no otherwise than
as Oil of Vitriol, Sulphur, Aqua Fortis, etc. are: yet it Cools by a third
and proper Cherionial

CHAP. XCIX. A Sixth Paradox.
1. In what manner Foods are not for hurt. 2. A Paradox out of the Text of holy
Scriptures, against the Dietary part. 3. It is proved also, 1, by an
Experiment. 2. From the destributive Justice of God. 3. From the indication or
betokening of Remedies. 4. From a Rule. 4. From whence the necessity of a Diet
came. 5. One Precept. 6. The praise of Sobriety. 7. How the Waters may pass
speedily through the Midriffs. 8. A Purgation. 9. The manner and requisites of
drinking. How much is to be drunk. 10. A commendation of Elecampane prepared.
11. The sick must drink speedily, an why. 12. Returning, after what manner. 13.
When he must Dine. 14. Whether the Water of the Spaw, be to be mixed with pure
Wine. 15. And indeed after dinner. 16. Three Digestions. 17. Why he must not
sleep after his Dinner at the Spaw 18. The hour of Rest.

I Will now subjoyn a few things concerning Diet, and the manner of using the
Waters of the Spaw. That thing in the first place, through experience being our
guide, we have (For God saw, that whatsoever he had made, was good; and
consequently that whatsoever he had ordained for meat was a good food) but that
its quantity only

A Testimony of which thing, Soldiers, and poor Folks shall give: Unto whom
the

Therefore the necessity of a Diet is believed to have been brought in from the
penury of the more profound Medicines, and not from the dainty allurements of
Foods.

That one Precept of Diet is to be observed, I counsel him that drinks of the
Waters of the Spaw, that he study Sobriety, and that he eat Sparingly, like his
neighbors.

For, what shall it profit to accuse the Health of our bordering neighbors, by
the Waters of the Spaw, if we live the more deliciously, and with too much
fullness. Therefore

By that only rule of Diet, the Waters will pass through him, safely, speedily,
and pleasantly: But besides it shall be profitable to brush off the filth from
the Stomach, but the Rufi being duly prepared, and not from the persuasion of
gain, be for the space of three days continually taken, before the Waters: Or
if he Roses in eight ounces of the Water of Pouhontius, adding thereto a
Scruple of Salt of Tartar. Let him drink the strained infusion.

He that is to drink of the Water of the Spaw, let him endeavor first to
unload his Belly Pouhontius, and ascend the Mountain: From whence when he shall
be come down, let him drink twenty or thirty ounces of Savenerius, at the first
of the Morning: For he must pass by degrees unto things not accustomed: As
also Pouhontius shall premeditatingly open the branching passages not with a
loaded quantity: He must add to the quantity daily, even unto a sufferance, as
every one is his own Judge: The which thereby shall be easily conjectured,
because if they shall drink as much as it behooves them, after the example of
Hippocrates, they are in a good frame, and do easily bear it.

But at the time of Drinking, in stead of Annise, Myva or Conserve of
Elecampane being taken, the Water that is drunk is easily strained through the
Midriffs.

But let the appointed dose be speedily drunk, seeing the progress of the
Fountain is

He returning from the Fountain to the Village, let him slowly proceed, that
not Sweat,

But let the hour of Dinner be, when the Stomach shall be dispatched of the
Waters, least

It has been doubted, whether the Water of the Spaw be with convenience to be
mixed with pure or unmixt Wine: I will say, That so Wines shall be made easily
passable, and Pouhontius at the third

For truly three Concoctions are completed in Man: To wit, the First in the
Stomach;

Seeing that every part ought to be nourished, the First and Second Decoction,
do more prosperously succeed in Walking and Motion, and therefore there is a
more plentiful Spaw, we do especially attend. But let the Third concoction be
in time of Sleep, to wit, while as the Vital light ought to inspire it self
into the cocted Humor, for assimilating sake: The which also, restrains all
avoidance of Excrements, except its own, which is that of Sweat.

But of the hour of Sleep, the ripening of the precedent Morning, and hastening
of the following Twilight, by Sleep it self, shall admonish him.

Blessed ye the Lord, oh ye Fountains, Praise ye and Super-exalt or Magnify
him for Ages.
CHAP. C. A Paradox of Supplies, being of the number of Judiciary Paradoxes.
1. Two Causes of the Stone among the Ancients. 2. In the Stone of the Bladder,
much muscilage or sliminess comes forth. 3. The curing of the Ancients
consists in a threefold succor. 4. A solicitous or careful Cure of the
Ancients. 5. A various household stuff of Stone-breaking things. 6. Why
Stone-breaking things are derided by most. 7. It is answered about the end,
unto an absurd Objection. 8. Despair among the Ancients. 9. Of what sort the
Curing of the Ancients was. 10. A Modern Paradoxal Opinion. 11. Why any one may
decline from the Ancients. 12. Why the Ancients have erred in their Cure. 13.
The matter of Stones. 14. The difference of Tartar and Phlegm. 15. A History of
Tartar. 16. A Mechanical Example. 17. From whence the Name of Tartar is. 18. An
Essential Reason in the Example. 19. Why coagulation is not from a slimyness.
20. Substantial Generations are finished by the limited Seeds; not by a casual
congress of the first qualities. 21. What, and where, the Seeds of Stones are.
22. The best Natural Philosophy is taught by an Analysis. 23. Another Reason
against the Ancients. 24. A third Reason. 25. A fourth Reason in the
Macrocosme. 26. An Objection. 27. It makes for us. 28. Gemms know no viscosity
or slimyness. 29. Against the Efficient Cause of the Ancients, a first and
second Reason. 30. From whence the heat in a Stony-Kidney is. 31. An Example.
32. Why in the Stone of the Bladder they do not complain of heat. 33. Why there
is a muckie snivel in the Stone of the Bladder. 34. A former Reason. Another.
35. Causes that are to be removed being unknown, Remedies have been unknown.
36. Safe Remedies which are meet in co-betokenings. 37. Of what worth the more
external Remedies are. 38. A Paradox in the distinction of an Effect by it self
and by accident. 39. How far they are profitable. 40. What an opening Medicine
alone may be. 41. That there is not made an enlargement of the Urin-Vessels, by
Drinks. 42. What can enlarge the Urin-Vessel. 43. A sounding Objection. 44. A
distinguishing of Effects according to the pertinency of their Causes. 45. A
Reason. 46. A Censure of the Remedies of the Ancients. 47. A Curative Method.
48. In all Urine there is a Stone. Who may be called, one that has the Stone.
49. What the inclination unto the Stone in the Kidney or Bladder may be. 50.
What Hope has afforded for Curing. 51. How the Inclination may be taken away.
52. The Quality of a Remedy which takes away the Inclination. 53. The Medicine
Aroph or of Mandrake. 54. An adverse Barking. 55. Hermetical, and Pythagorical
Philosophy do agree. 56. The quality of a Remedy resolving the Stone. 57. An
Answer to an absurd Objection.

SEeing that the frequent Monster of the Affect of the Stone, does call many
unto the Waters of the Spaw, through the hope of a perfect Cure; truly it shall
profit, more liberally to explain this Paragraph or sentential sum, least a
breviary should produce obscurity. I must show therefore what the Ancients, and
what the more Modern Disciples of the School of Hermes do think of the Birth or
rise and Cure of the Stones in Man.

First of all, they have accused the matter of the Stone, to be a Phlegm,
Snivel, Muscilage,

What else (say they) seeing from a Stony Kidney, much Sediment, but from a
Bladder besieged with Stones, a continual muckiness is violently disturbed or
expelled: and although

But these things being laid down, they go to the Cure, wherein moistening,
opening, and cleansing things are their confided succors: By Clysters I say,
by Baths, Fomentations,

But for that which is hereafter to come, not any thing has been provided.
Indeed they have not sluggishly thought of the Oil of Almonds, or the supplying
Medicines in

To wit, by these suppositions, not a little (through the facility of the Art)
suspected, they have thought, that in so great a Discommodity and lavishment of
Nature, they Lythontribon, may seem to have been annexed unto the former: But
they have been so called, because some have believed that they do break the
Stone; others that they diminish it; but most have believed neither.

They indeed smile one us with a Beautiful name delivered by the Ancients: but
they have been thus Administered hitherto, with an unfaithful event, and the Aid
never answering

Therefore others farther declining, do judge, that the Stomach, Veins, and
Kidneys shall sooner be pierced and bored through, or shall sooner yield to a
notable Corrosion, or

And therefore, whatsoever thing resisting the second and third qualities,
shall not obey a Medicine, that being as it were untamed, with the Elke, and as
it were Monstrous,

From whence we may understand, that the whole Method of curing the Stones,
does stand committed not unto a perfect but only unto a dissembled healing:
For truly they

But now, I will give you the Decrees of Juniours, by their Ranks or Orders.

And first, indeed, it shall not be for a Vice, to have declined from their
appointed

For if other Arts do profit daily, there is no reason (as if the Virtue of our
Mind were barren in us) why the Rules of Predecessors should deter us from a
further search into the truth, and should thrust us into despair: For by the
only Decree of Aristotle, That we must not dispute against him that denies
Principles, Philosophy being brought into obscurity has so remained. For if we
(following the Flock of those that went before us, not because we must go so,
but because it has been so gone) must not command, likewise, neither must we
be servants to the most free gifts of judgment.

The Fire therefore, which is the finder out of Arts, does perfectly teach
those of Hermes School, by Mechanical and manifest workmanships, That the
Original of the Stone does not consist of the matter and efficient cause
assigned. For neither for that reason is it a wonder, that, the causes being
not sufficiently known, improvident and unlike counsels have been hitherto
described for this grief.

As to what therefore concerns its material Cause, that is a certain Stonifying
juice (for, for want of a true word of expression, it is so called by me) so
intimately besprinkled

Therefore it is not a muckie Snivel, not Phlegm: In the next place, we do not
think that any Excrement or Putrifyable thing of ours, has suggested a matter
for the Stone; Tartar) perfecting its Tragedy within, by a Hostile Coagulation,
the which, when it is not rightly separated

For it is easy to be seen, that every one of us, being also very well
constituted or in a very good frame of Body, do send forth a Healthy, Yellow
Colored, clear Urine, void of Sediment and Muckiness, the which, if it does
also happen to be the longer kept even

But yet, there is on both sides the like Reason, Essence, Cause and Property
of the Stone arisen in us, with that, which of the same Identity, and material
subject, is Coagulated abroad in the Urine about the Urinal.

I will add further, that some detain their Urine for honesties sake, for some
hours, without any appearance of Sands: the which Urine notwithstanding, being
received in a Glass, has without all doubt, separated its Stone in an equal
time.

From hence therefore, at leastwise, it follows, that the sliminess of matter
is not for the material Cause of the Stone: truly it consists in the Race or
offspring of a more hidden, and therefore of a deeper search in Nature, than
that we should think its Natural

For whatsoever things are made in Nature, we must reckon them to be made from
a necessity, and Flux of a Seed.

The Seeds therefore of Stones do lay hidden in the Juices, until at length,
the Flux of

Wherefore an Analysis or solution by the fire, is to be undertaken, the which
indeed, as Materia Prima or the First Matter, Privation, Fortune, Chance, an
Infinite, and a Vacuum, does as yet with a scanty or fasting mouth, consume the
Spring of Young Men.

What think you I pray, if any Phlegmatic thing should of necessity and by it
self, give a Material being to the Stone, and an actual and excessive heat
should Coct that matter

I will therefore reassume: Let us therefore try, whether any muckie snivel
being dried Tophus or soft Sandy Stone: For from the snivel of the Nostrils, to
wit, the most tough of all, being dried, a Brickle Tophus, but not a hard
Stone, is at any time yielded. Besides, the Example lately given, concerning a
very clear Urine, which is wholly freed from a visible sliminess, and yet
affixing a Stone in manner of little Grains unto the Spondils or turning
Joints, forbids to acknowledge such a Material Cause, also the single
Progeny of Tartars, and likewise,

But if indeed, we say, that heat does not dry up the muckie snivel, while it
begets the Stone; but that it constrains or Coagulateth it by a property,
not indeed, of drying,

But that is to have said something on our behalf, and is Voluntarily granted
us; To wit,

Because else Gems should exclaim, that they have stood in need of the
sliminess of matter, whereby they may assume so great strength, and luster; yet
neither therefore shall thou

In the next place, seeing that hateful sense of heat is wanting in the Stone
of the Bladder, when as notwithstanding that Stone is for the most part, harder
than that in the Kidneys; it by all means follows, that the necessary efficient
Cause of the Stone, is not heat, or else that the more powerful heat should
preside, for framing of the Stone in the Bladder.

Therefore the Studies of the more Modern Physicians do Decree, that heat in
the Reins is not the Parent of the Stones; but a Symptom, but an effect
following upon

For as a thorn heing thrust into the Finger, is neither hot, nor hardened by
heat, nor by reason of heat thrust into the Flesh, yet heat follows the hurt,
as a companion: So Hyppocrates) is a Disease, and heat does also flow thither
as a certain latter thingor effect.

But that which happens in the hurt substance of the Kidneys, is not therefore
made in

For all particular parts in us do well perceive what things are so agreeable,
and what are extreme hateful and execrable; and indeed, they do every where
express no obscure have the Reason of a Cause, and not of an Effect of the
Stones.

But as to what belongs to the Cure thereof, we must diligently mark, that it
ought hitherto to be un-compleated by those unto whom the true Causes of the
Stone have not

Indeed I admit first of all, that the Bowels lying upon the Urin-Vessels,
being unburdened Hippocrates, it is wholly as well within, as without,
conspirable, and exspirable: Likewise within and without, above and beneath,
day and night, Fire and Water, have made three Circuits in us, and so that they
wander hither and thither, and that by course.

For in very deed, the more external Aids are not perpendicular, but oblique or
crooked Ones only.

In the next place, seeing nothing immediately reaches the Stone, but what
does etc.) have put off those kind of corporeal Qualities in the former Shops
of Digestions, as being plainly unlike to Urinary Qualities.

In the mean time, we grant that they so far succor those that have the Stone,
as by their more sweet Juice, they do assuage, and temperate the Sharpness of
the Urin; or as etc. But surely on both sides these are naught but even a
feeble and sluggish

Surely the Urin-Vessels consist of a moist Membrane, whereinto, as nothing
which

Let us therefore account them to be sent Dreams: because the Urin-Vessels are
never enlarged or extended, but by a more gross compaction of a Body; but that
was not the Office of Oil or Liquor: For indeed, a Urin-vessel is loosely and
softly moist of it self, and being content with its own Urin, refuses any
further Liquors.

Therefore it is enlarged only by the Stone, that is, by the diseasie Cause,
and being once amplified, it does not fall down, or contract again; As may be
seen, that Stones

But they will say, loosening Medicines being drunk up, that is, such as extend
the Urin-pipes the miserable Diseased, are sometimes helped; Wherefore
enlargments of

I wish that he may want successes, whosoever he be, that thinks Deeds are to
be taken notice of, in Philosophy, from the event, which Deeds, an Effect by it
self, is never wont

For if any thing that is drunk, should render the Urin-Pipes more extensive in
their Latitude, Truly that shall dissolve, and enlarge the Stomach, because it
being deputed urgent Stone, much Vomiting does excessively molest the Stomach,
and therefore should pluck it abroad, even unto a tearing. Hitherto, nothing of
Remedies has been heard of in so great a Calamity: Wherefore we coming nearer
unto a censure of those Medicines which have hitherto seemed by a gentle
Abstersion, also those which by a certain Property, have seemed to drive out
the Stone; with leave, we will ingeniously declare.

For although the Powders as well of Herbs, Seeds, Fruits, Liquors, and Waters,
as of Stones and Minerals, the Cruelties of Symptoms being appeased, have at
length brought

First, That an Expulsion of the Stone be not intended (for something less
cruel becomes a Physician, than that which Nature her self almost failing under
her weight, is

For indeed, it is manifest by the Example of the Urin abovesaid, that every
Man has a potential Stone in his Urin (for that thing the Condition of the
Microcosm or little Macrocosm or great World) but that he is only miserable, to
wit, in whose Urin a Power of stonifying lying hid, is actually unfolded within
his Skin.

Therefore it is altogether necessary, that there be in the Powers of the
things or parts of

But seeing that the sealing Notes and Impressions of Diseases, do not co-here
with Species, but with Individuals only, we must never despair, but that the
Impression being

Therefore that over-exquisite separating Faculty is to be laid asleep: And
that in no Casta Venus or Agnus Castus, by a specifical Property, so
restraining all elaboration of Urin in the Paracelsus described, in his Books
of the Faculties of the Members.

I here, do hear Whisperers (who are wont to swallow nothing but afore-chewed
things) accusing the unthought of darkness of Words: Those Coale-men (they say)
do expose their Medicines unto us, hand to hand, and afford unto us ocular
Demonstrations: But that is a new rule of learning the Philosophy of Pythagoras.

Let them first buy Coals, and Glasses, and let them first learn those things
which watching successive Nights, and Expenses of Moneys have afforded us: the
Gods do sell Arts Ac^aeon affrighteth me, from daring indeed to expose Diana to
an open view, being spoiled of her Garment: He that can apprehend it, let him
apprehend it. Depart thou therefore from thine own self, and bid farewell to
accustomed things, who presumest by an easy Compendium of readings, to search
into the innermost Chambers of Nature: But besides whereby we may give
satisfaction

1. Therefore it is fit, that it be changed into Urin, to wit, that it may
touch the Place affected.

2. That it have in it a Power of loosing the Bolts of the Stone. For it is the
Gift of God, which Art does not provide, but only sequestreth and extracteth.

3. That it possess that thing in a specifical and appropriated Property, but
not in second Qualities, because they are for the most part frail things,
failing in time of Preparation, or Infamous, through the Cruelty of Qualities.

4. That it be subtle, that it pass on every side, and be able to demolish its
Object at a far distance.

5. That it be friendly to Nature, least indeed it pervert all things: For not
every Messenger approaches unto the Mines of Stones; but he alone, who being
loosed from his Bands, has known the ways, being fited for his Journey, being
a Friend to the Places, and which has Virtues. They err therefore, who
ascribe this single Combat, only unto Corrosives; to wit, they too much
trusting unto second Qualities, as being badly secure, do sleep thereupon, and
through a neglecting of specifical Properties, also appropriated ones, (which
are only extended on their proper Object) being slighted, they have gone into
Obscurity.

For the Oestrich does not break or digest Iron; or little Birds, Flints,
Unions, small Stones, through an emulous quality of Corrosion: There is a
Virtue of loosing the

Blessed be ye God of Wonders, who at sometime converteth the Waters into
Rocks, and at sometime, the Rocks into Pooles of Waters.

CHAP. CI. The Understanding of Adam.
ADam put right Names upon all living Creatures; and therefore he had an
intimate, or intuitive or clear speculative Knowledge of these, which is called
the Attainment of Nature. Perhaps he had likewise a most full knowledge of
Herbs, Minerals, yea and of the Stars: For truly an Object not before seen,
being presented unto him, he had known the innermost Properties thereof.

From hence therefore, many do conclude, that the same Knowledge is given to us
by a natural Property, as to the successive Heirs of Adam; but to be obscured
through Sin: But others contend that it is wholly withdrawn, through eating of
the Fruit of the knowledge of Good and Evil. Of these things, I being long
since badly persuaded; alas, I also believed them! For I left something
untryed, that I might reach unto the promised Labor of Wisdom, the Paradise of
Long Life, through the knowledge of Adam: But at length, I observed many
things, which might subvert these very principles.

For First of all, I could scarce persuade my self, that Adam in the State of
Innocence knew those Things, and more, which afterward he through eating of
the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, was ignorant of: That indeed, was, when
he had eaten of the Apple of Oblivion, Drowsiness, or Ignorance; But not when
he had eaten of the Apple of Knowledge. But if in Original Sin, the Original
Transgressour, and Defiler of humane Nature, himself, as yet knew what he knew
before; after what manner indeed, by a super-attained new Knowledge, and that
of another Disposition, being as it were laid up in the forbidden Fruit, had he
withdrawn all knowledge from his Posterity?

And moreover, how had not he (who from his Creation had all Knowledge, except
that which by a hidden Paraphrase and Emphatical manner of speaking, is called
by the holy Spirit, The knowledge of Good and Evil) traduced this likewise on
his Posterity? For if through eating of the Apple, His Eyes were opened, the
which was even made known to him before (after some sort) they were closed, and
he became a knower of Good and Evil, and saw himself to be naked; why was there
not, at leastwise, in his Seed, as much knowledge as there was in the Apple?
Why, if through his Seed, Sin, be translated; is not also Shame translated,
that it might naturally Shame the Indians of their Nakedness? That likewise a
Child of three years old should be ashamed of its Nakedness? no otherwise than
Adam was, presently after the Apple was eaten.

In the next place, if he were endowed from his Creation with the knowledge of
the Natures, Societies, and Properties of Animals, and from hence it was
pithily essential unto him; How had God, who is so great a Lover of us,
withdrawn our essential, intellectual, and natural Gifts, whereby he will be
worshipped in the Spirit of Man, but has left natural Gifts unto the evil
Spirit, the most vile, despised, and worst of Creatures? Had he so greatly
impoverished our Spirit, and favored the Devil more than the Sons of Men, with
whom to be, he calls it his Delights? I indeed, after that I conceived in my
Soul, the Knowledge of long Life, and the Causes of Death, knew, that as long
as Adam was Immortal, his Mind did immediately quicken his Body, and governed
it; Yea that for that Cause also, he perfectly understood whatsoever things are
read to have been put under his Feet.

But after that the sensitive Soul was seminally introduced as a Mean between
the Mind and the Body, Adam afterward lived in the Soul, and middle Life; that
is, after a modern or mean manner: And his Mind (for the support of the
sensitive Soul) dispersed from it self, only a darksom Light, through the Mists
of the Flesh, upon the Life of a new and impure Generation. But the former
Knowledges which he had before the Fall, were in the sensitive Life, laid up
though remembrance; yet over-clouded with the Dim and wretched Discourse of
Reason* when as he had now generated after the manner of Bruit-beasts, and had
seminally transferred a middle Life; then all his Knowledge, as well former as
latter, of Good and Evil; to wit, the remembrance of the same were obliterated;
and Man thereby was born a vain or empty Table: From thence indeed arose a
sensitive Power or Faculty in Posterity; or the same Faculty of a middle Life,
which arose in Adam; the which, when through a just Maturity, it had waxed ripe
in the Seed, it was at length brought through, into a true Light and vital
Form, by the Creator; on which afterward, the Mind of Man transferred its
Vicarship; yet the Mind has remained, being as it were reitired into its own
bottom, as abhorring the Impurities of Nature, nor being any longer able
(unless by Grace) immediately to diffuse it self into the sensitive Soul: God
so disposing of it by reason of his good Pleasure, as shall be shown hereafter.

In Man therefore, there is actually a certain natural and formal Act, which is
the Soul, or Sensitive Life, very much distinct from the mind: For as the Seed
of a Dog tends into a living Dog, obscurely reasoning or discoursing; so
certainly the Seed of Man does not aspire into a dead Carcass, but at least
into a vital Soul; and indeed flows into a sensitive, and discursive one, after
a far more perfect manner, than in a Dog, Fox, etc. And that I might the more
firmly attain this real Distinction of the sensitive Soul from the Mind in us;
I have feigned a Young Man to be utterly lost for a Maid: For this Man wishes
with a full sense, and consent of his Soul, that he could be freed from that
disdainful Love: And likewise, he would not that he should Love so dearly, and
would not be freed from his Love: Not indeed, that he by turns, sometimes
earnestly wills one thing, but sometimes another: but at once, and in the same
Motion, and violent aslault, he wishes, and not wishes to be freed from that
Love: therefore he declares himself to be happy, and unhappy in one Love: And
he suffers many Contradictories of that sort, at once: The which seeing they
are not at once entertained in the same Subject and Respect; I long doubted,
from whence such Contradictories should happen on every side, in one only Man;
until at length the Apostle loosed this K not for me.

I seeing another Law in our Members, opposite to the Law of our Mind; which
Laws surely, he understands to be guarded not only with an Inclination and
Desire; but also with Discourse and Consent. Then I clearly beheld the
Affections of the sensitive Soul to be one, and those of the Mind to be
another; but these (because the Operation of the Mind is well nigh obscured by
the perturbations of the sensitive Soul) therefore they are weak: For in this
sense, the Apostle calls Anger, Envy, Grudgings, Worshipping of Idols, etc. the
works of the Flesh: For although they may seem to be spiritual Conceptions; yet
because they are the Operations of the sensitive Soul, the which it self also
is seminally stirred up in Nature by the will of Flesh and Blood; therefore
they are the mere works of the Flesh.

We are therefore uncessantly affected through the importunate Allurements of
the social Soul; because we being forthwith after Sin, become degenerate, have
lost Immortality.

Wherefore God does now require only a few things of us, that we may enter into
Life: To wit, that he that is Baptized, do believe the whole History of the
Creed, and that he keep the Commandments of God through the Mediation of his
Grace. But whosoever will aspire unto a higher Degree of Charity, let him
endeavor so far as according to his Talent he shall be able, in all Humility,
and by continuing in Charity, through amorous Acts, to run forth unto
abstracted Things believed by Faith; until that through the Grace of a daily
Continuance of Exercise, he shall feel his Mind to be overwhelmed by a
supernatural Light: For the Meditation of natural Forms, does much help in the
entrance, for the understanding of the Thingliness of the sensitive Soul: For
all Forms besides the Mind, seeing they are vital Lights which are to return
into nothing; I have certainly learned, that the Mind does by a most long
interval, differ from the sensitive Soul.

Seeing that the immortal Mind, however it be retracted into it self, that it
may not be defiled through the Wedlock of the sensitive Soul, its Companion;
Yet it is president in all Acts, as it is near at hand, and does totally inhere
in the whole sensitive Soul; and so operates herewith after a deaf manner: But
that this order of the Almighty, was on this manner, forthwith after the Fall
of Adam;

I collected first, because he has created some Men blind, and likewise mad,
no^ for their own, or Parents Sin, but according to his good Pleasure, for his
own Glory; for he made all things as he would, and most exceeding well. And
then, because he would be worshipped in the Spirit. And lastly, because in his
House there are many Mansions. Now, they should be in vain, if every Man should
be equal in Grace in his Soul and Life.

From whence I collect, that there ought to be a diversity of Spirits among
Men, and the Worshippers of the Divinity to be diverse in the degree of
Charity. For truly he created the Angels, that they might worship him in the
Spirit of Intelligency, without the Turbulencies of Bodies: But Man he
deminished a little less than the Angels; yet he primarily chose him after the
Image of his Divinity, for his own Glory and Worship, and for his adopted Sons,
yet subject to an unhappy and calamitous kind of living; because he is he, who
being (...) sunk or drowned within the Body, scarce understands that he does
understand, having almost forgotten his Immortality, as being subjected unto
the tyrannical Clientships of Diseases; so that the Immortal Understanding, in
distracted or foolish and mad People, appears to be almost extinct: For it was
the Almighties good Pleasure, that those diverse Mansions should be inhabited,
as it were by the Ladder of Deserts, and that Men being raised up by the
Character or Impression of Grace, should come unto higher Dignities of
understanding: To wit, according to that saying, The Learned shall shine as the
Sun.

The first thing therefore, is in the Simplicity of an operative Faith, to have
lived in Abstinency from Evils, and to have done good. And then, that they
Worship God in the Spirit of naked Truth, and that through an operative Faith,
they proceed through an attainment of a fatherly Love, worthy Deeds or Deserts
in Charity (although we not intending it) helping to be more and more
illustrated in their Understanding. And so at length, the Mind is loosed in
that dark Prison of Bloods, and intellectually beholds it self, and with
Humility admires the not before seen Light; and being led through unknown
Paths, does then without difficulty proceed by steps, unto the more abstracted
Contemplations of a Kiss; where, it being as it were raised up again out of a
drow^^^ Sleep, does (as happy) adore God in Truth, Righteousness, and the Union
of Virtues, under the Light of an abstracted Spirit: For neither, although God
will have other Recognisances or knowing Considerations from Man, than from an
Angel, ought he therefore less to rejoice in the Divine good Pleasure; but to
proceed in praising him, in an humble Adoration, wherein all understanding of
Wisdom, and clearness of all Spirits, are as it were supped up in a lively
Center: Through this reward therefore of Degrees, the unutterable God has
since the Fall, Crowned Man with Glory and Honor, although degenerate, and
has put other things under his Feet; for neither before the Fall, had Man ever
aspired thither: Therefore Man ought neither to have the knowledge of all
things which Adam knew in his Beginning, nor also of his own self, if it ought
to be a Desert: For a Crown presupposes a striving Desert, and Victory: For we
cannot bring back an increase of Grace for Victory, but by fighting. Therefore
I conclude, that as we are constituted in the middle and sensitive Life, we
know, have, are, or are able to do nothing, but only by Grace; Desert
cooperating, and the which Merit, that God might confirm the Moments of
Degrees, in the adoring Understanding were to be presupposed.

Therefore he that is of innocent Hands, and of a clean Heart, worshippeth God
in the Truth of Spirit; and the State of that mortal Man, is far more happy,
than was that of Adam being Immortal: For that poverty of Spirit, does in truth
know Wisely, knows Knowingly, believes Confidently, perceives or feels Truly,
and confesses Humbly, that he is a mere subject of all Defects, that is, an
unprofitable and evil Servant. In this Journey, the unutterable Kingdom of God,
meets Man, the Ocean of Light, which gives an un-asked-for clea^ness of
Understanding, and much more royal things, than the Desires of the Angels do
wish for. These things exceed the Philosophy of the Heathens, and of Modern
Atheists: So it is; Understanding and Truth has it self in this manner,
wherein our Philosophy does place its Alpha or Beginning: The which if it shall
not do, long Life is unprofitable, being unknown to so many Ages, being
neglected by so many Wits, and even unto the end of the World, known unto none
but Adeptists alone.

CHAP. CII. The Image of God.
THe Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom: But the Fear of the Lord
begins from the Meditation of Death, and Life eternal: But many with the
Stoics, suppose the end of Wisdom to be the knowledge of ones self: But I call
the ultimate End of Wisdom, and the reward of the whole course of our Life,
Charity or dear Love, the which alone will accompany us; when as other things
have forsaken us: And although the knowledge of ones self, according to me, be
only a Mean unto the Fear of the Lord; yet from this, is the Treatise of long
Life to be begun: Because the knowledge of Life does presuppose a knowledge of
the Soul; Seeing the Life and Soul (as I have the second time said) are
Synonymals.

It is of Faith, that Man was created of nothing, after the Image of God, into
a living Creature, and that his Mind is never to perish.

Whereas in the mean time, the Souls of Bruit-beasts do perish into nothing,
when they cease to live: The weights of which difference I have taught,
concerning the birth or rise of Forms. But hitherto, it is not sufficiently
manifest, wherein that Similitude with God our Arch-type, or first Example is
placed: For most do place this lofty Image in the Soul alone. I will speak
what I judge, yet under a humble Protestation, and Subjection to the Censure of
the Church.

It is thus: The original of Forms being already after some sort known, it is
meet also exactly to enquire into the Mind of Man.

But surely, there is no Knowledge more burdensome, than that whereby the Soul
comprehends it self, yea and scarce is there any a more profitable one; because
the Faith does stablish its Foundation upon the unperishable, and
un-obliterable Substance of the Soul. I have found indeed many Demonstrations
divulged in the Books, about this Truth; But none of them at all, for what, in
respect of Atheists, who deny the one only and constant Power or Deity from
everlasting. Plato indeed, makes three sorts of Atheists.

The first indeed, which believes no Gods.

A second Sort also, which indeed admits of Gods; yet such as are un-careful
of us, and ignorant Contemners of small Matters.

Lastly, a third Sort, which although they believe that there are Gods, and
those expert of the smallest Matters; yet they think them to be flexible
through the least Dead or cold Prayer. This sort is most frequent among
Christians at this day; even those who profess themselves to be the most
Perfect, and therefore they dare do any thing, and believe Religion to be only
for restraining People through the Fear of Laws, the Obligation of Faith, and
Pain of infernal Punishment: For these impose grievous Burdens on the Shoulders
of others, which they touch not so much as with their Finger, they wipe the
Purses of their own People, they prostitute Heaven to sale to dying Men, they
every where offer themselves to be employed in Secular Affairs, as if they
would declare that Religion does not subsist without the State: It should be my
greatest wish, that they might taste, at least but for one only Moment, what it
is intellectually to understand, that they may feel the immortality of the Mind
as it were by touching. Truly, I have not invented Rules, or a Manner whereby I
might be able to illustrate the understanding of another: Therefore I
deservedly testify, that they who always study, as enquiring after the Truth,
do notwithstanding never attain unto the knowledge thereof; because they being
blown up with the Letter, have no Charity, and do cherish hidden Atheism.

But this one thing I have learned, That the mind does now understand nothing
by imagination, neither by figures, and likenesses, unless the wretched and
miserable Discourse of Reason shall have access to it. But when as the Soul
comprehends it self, Reason and its own Image fails it, whereby it may
represent it self to it self: Therefore the Soul it never able to apprehend it
self through the discourse of Reason, as neither by Likenesses. For after I had
known, that the Truth of Essence, and the truth of Uderstanding are one and the
same thing; I knew the Understanding to be a certain immortal thing, far
separated from frail or mortal things.

The Soul indeed is not felt, yet we believe it to be within, not to be idle,
not to be tired, nor to be disturbed by Diseases: Therefore Sleep, Fury, and
Drunkenness, are not the Symptoms of the Immortal Mind being hurt; but only the
Pages of Life, and Passions of the sensitive Soul; Seeing that Bruits also
undergo such Passions: For neither is it a meet thing for an immortal thing to
suffer by mortal Ones: For as the Mind is in us, and yet is not felt or
perceived by us; So neither are the continual and unshaken Operations thereof
to be perceived; because, if they should be sensible, verily they should not be
spiritual, and merely abstracted: For indeed, although it may seem to us, that
we understand nothing by a total sequestration of Discourses, and abstraction
from all Things which may fall under Sense, under the Mind and Understanding,
and that under the Beginning of Contemplations; Yet the Soul in the mean time,
acts after its own un-sensible manner, and spiritual Efficacy; the which I have
thus understood: For he that confesses, does oftentimes not feel the Effects
of Contrition, and he greatly bewailes that his unsensibleness; yet being
asked, whether he would Sin? Perhaps he would answer, he had rather die: The
unsensible Operation therefore, of the Soul in confessing, is an Effect of a
supernatural Faith: Because the Actions of the Understanding, are the Clients
of another, and uncessant Magistrate. For therefore mystical Men do teach, That
the Soul does more operate in Faith alone, without Discourse, and Cogitation,
and in operating, does also more profit, than he that Prays with many Words,
and by Discourse stirs up Compunctions in himself. But he is happy, unto whom
it is granted to perceive those unsensible Operations of the Soul, and
issuingly to reflect the same upon the Operations, or Powers of the sensitive
Soul: Because they do for the most part, leave their Footsteps afterward on
the Life, and for the future, do stir up the Memory, operating with Grace, in
Faith.

The Libertines, of the Christians, and first Atheists, do deride the
similitude of God in us, as feigned, or that we are framed after the Image of
God.

But the other Atheists of the second and third rank, do not only grant that we
are created after the Image of God; but do feign an Identity or Sameliness in
us, with the vast uncreated Deity; and that neither does man differ any
otherwise therefrom, in his Substance, than as a Part from the whole, or that
which had a Beginning, with that which was not Principiated; but not in Essence
and internal Property; The which besides Blasphemy, has very many Absurdities
or blockishnesses: For truly, whatsoever began, for that very Cause, it is a
Creature; but it includes an Imperfection in God, that he could create any
thing out of himself, coequal unto himself in Substance: Because it is manifest
from Philosophy, that all the Parts of an Infinite, are of necessity Infinite:
Therefore a Creature cannot be more infinite in Substance, than as it was in
Duration co-like to the Eternal: And much less is the Soul a part of the
Substance of God, or essentially like unto him, the which, in Power, Greatness,
Duration, Glory, Wisdom, etc. in it self, and of it self, is a mere nothing. If
therefore it were not made from God, much less from it self; but of nothing:
Therefore they greatly err, who believe that the Thingliness or Essence of the
divine Image is seated in the Soul, by way of Identity of Substance: Seeing
they differ from each other by way of an Infinite: yea, it should of its own
free accord, be again dissolved into nothing, unless it were conserved in its
Essence, by the divine goodness. Truly the Souls of the damned could wish to be
dissolved into their former Nothing, which divine Justice, keeps in their Being.

Indeed the Soul has henceforeward, an eternal Permanency, from an internal
Eternity, freely bestowed on it, and preserved in it. It is sufficient
therefore, that the Mind is a spiritual, vital, and lightsome Substance.

And seeing there are many kinds and species of vital Lights; that Light of
the Mind differs from other vital Lights in that, that it is a spiritual
Substance; but that other vital Lights are not formal Substances, although they
are substantial Forms, and therefore also they are by Death, reduced into
nothing, no otherwise than as the Flame of a Candle. But the Mind differs from
the Angels, because it is after the Image and Similitude of the eternal God.
The Soul therefore has that Light, and Substance of Light, from the Gift of
Creation; Seeing that it self is that vital Light: But an Angel is not a Light
it self; neither has he a natural or proper, and internal Light; but is the
Glass of an uncreated Light; and so that, therein he fails of the perfection of
a true Divine Image: Otherwise, an Angel, seeing he is an incorporeal Spirit;
if he should be lightsome of himself, he should more perfectly express the
Image of God, than Man.

Moreover, whatsoever God more loves, that is more noble; But God has loved
Man more than the Angel: For neither, for the redeeming of the Angelical
nature, was he made the Figure of the evil Spirit, even as the thrice glorious
Lamb, the Savior of the World, took on him the Nature of a Servant: For
neither does that hinder these things, that the least in the Kigdom of Heaven
is greater than John: For the Son of Man is not less than the Angel; although
he were diminished a little less than the Angel. For in his condition of
living, while he was made Man, he was diminished a little less than the Angel.
For therefore an Angel always remains a ministering Spirit: but he is no where
read to be the Friend or Son of the Father, the Delights of the Son, the Temple
of the holy Spirit, wherein the Thrice-glorious Trinity, makes its abode; that
indeed is the prerogative of the Divine Image, which the eternal Light does
imprint on every Man that comes into this World.

But moreover, in the year 1610, after a long weariness of Contemplation, that
I might obtain some knowledge of my Soul, by chance, sliding into a Sleep, and
being snatched out of the use of Reason, I seemed to be in a Hall dark enough;
on my left Hand was a Table, whereon was a Bottle, wherein was a little Liquor,
and the Voice of the Liquor said unto me; Will thou have Honors and Riches? I
was amazed at the unwonted Voice; I walked up and down, delibreating with my
self, what that might denote. Straightway on my right hand there was a Chink in
the Wall, through which a certain Light dazzled mine Eyes, which made me
unmindful of the Liquor, Voice, and former Counsel: because I saw that which
exceeded a Cogitation expressible by Word; that Chink forthwith dispersed; I
from thence returned sorrowful unto the Bottle, took this Bottle away with me:
but I endeavored to taste down the Liquor, and with much Labor, I opened the
Vial, and being smitten with Horror, I awaked out of my Sleep: But a great
desire of knowing my Soul remained, in which desire, I breathed for 23 full
years.

At length, in the year 1633, in the sorrowful or troublesome Afflictions of
Fortunes, I saw my Soul in a Vision; But there was somewhat a more Light, in a
humane Shape, the whole whereof was homogeneal or simple in kind, actively
Seeing, being a spiritual, Chrystaline, and shining Substance: But it was
contained in another cloudy Part, as it were the Husk of it self; the which,
whether it gave forth a Splendor from it Self, I could scarce discern, by
reason of the superlative luster, or brightness of the Christaline Spirit
contained within it: Yet that I observe, that the Mark of the Sexes, was not
but in the Husk, but not in the Crystal: The Seal whereof was an unuttered
Light, so reflexed in the Crystal, that the Crystal it self was made
incomprehensible; and that, not indeed by a Negation or Privation (because they
are those things which are in respect of our Weakness, so called) but it
represented a famous being, which cannot be expressed by Word. And it was said
unto me; This is that which thou once saw through the Chink: But I
intellectually saw those things in the Soul, which if the Eye should see, it
should afterward cease to see. The Dream therefore showed unto me, that the
Beauty of the Soul of Man does exceed all Conception.

At leastwise I comprehended the Vanity of my long desire, therefore I
desisted from the wish of seeing my soul: For however beautiful that spiritual
Crystal was, yet my soul retained no perfection unto it self from that Vision,
even as otherwise, after an intellectual Vision, the Mind is adorned with much
Perfection of Knowledge.

I knew therefore, that my Mind in that Dreaming Vision, had acted the Person
of a third, and so that it was not worth the labor of so great a Wish: But as
to what has regard unto the Image of God in the Mind; I according to my
slenderness, confess, that I could never conceive any thing, whether it were a
Spirit, or a Body, or in the Understanding; or in the next place, in the
Imagination, or in a mere intellectual Vision; which through the same
endeavor, may not represent some Figure of it self, under which it might stand
in the considerer: Because surely, whether I conceive a thing by its Image or
Likeness, or whether the Understanding transchangeth it self into the Thing
understood: At leastwise, I cannot consider this thing to be done, unless it
should wander from it self, into the thing understood, with an interchangable
course of it self; the which seeing it has a certain actual Being, it has
always stood with me under a certain Figure, or Shape: For indeed, although I
conceived the Mind, to be an incorporeal and immortal Substance: Yet I could
not as soon as I thought of its individual Existence, consider of the same, as
deprived of all Figure; Yea, nor indeed but that it would answer unto the
Figure of a Man. For as often as the Soul that is separated, sees another Soul,
Angel, or evil Spirit, that must needs know, that these things are present with
it, that it may distinguish the Soul from the Angel, and likewise the Soul of
Peter from the Soul of Judus: Which Distinction, cannot be made by Tasting,
Smelling, Hearing, and touching; but only by a proper Vision of the Soul: Which
Vision or Sight, does of necessity include an interchangeable course of Figure.
For seeing an Angel is so in a Place, that he is not at once, in another Place:
Therein also is of necessity included, a certain figural Circumscription, no
less than a local one. And then, I have considered the mind of Man to be
figured after this manner.

For the Body of man as such, cannot give unto it self an humane Shape: For
therefore it had need of an external Engrave, which should be enclosed within
the Matter of the Seed, and which had descended into it from elsewhere: Yet for
as much as that Engraver was of a material Condition, he was not able to draw a
Virtue, as neither an Image of figuring, either out of himself, nor from the
Mass of the Body: it behooves therefore, that something does precede; which was
plainly immaterial, yet a real and effective Beginning, whereunto a Power
should be due, of figuring by a sealing impression, on the Archeus of the Seed.
The Soul of the Begetter therefore, while it slides downwards, and through
natural Lust, does lighten the Body of the Seed, it delineates the Figure of
its Seal, and the Seal of its Figure there (which is the one only Cause of the
Fruitfulness of Seeds) from whence therefore arises so lofty a Stature of a
Young: For if the Soul it self, were in it self, not figured, but that the
Figure of the Body, should arise as it were of its own accord; a Trunk in any
Member could not but generate a Trunk: Because the Body of the Generater not
being entire, does at leastwise fail in the implanted Spirit of that Member.

If therefore a Figure be implanted in the Seed; certainly it shall receive
that Image from a more vital and former Beginning. But if the Soul does imprint
a certain Figure on the Seed, it shall not counterfeit a foreign or strange
Face; but shall decypher its own Likeness: For so also the Souls of
Bruit-beasts do. And although our Soul, by reason of its Original, be above the
Laws of Nature; Yet by what foot it has once entered the threshold of Nature,
and is incorporated therein, it is afterward also, constrained to stand to its
own Laws: because there is a univocal or simple Progress, and end of vital
Generations: For neither otherwise, does it want Absurdities, that an Operation
of so great a Moment (as is the Generation of Man) should happen without the
consent and cooperation of the Mind; which if it be so, it must needs be also,
that fruitfulness is given to the Seed by the Soul, by a Participation of its
Figure, and other vital Limitations.

Indeed every Soul does to this end, Seal the Image of it self in the Spirit of
the Seed, that the matter being reduced unto a requisite Maturity, showing a
delineated Beauty, and also the similitude of the Begetter, may be able to beg
a formal Light from the Creator, or a Soul of that Species whose similitude is
expressed in the Figure. For we believe by Faith, that our mind is a true
Substance, which is not to die; but that the new Creation of a Substance out of
nothing, does belong to God alone: From whence there is not many, but one only
spiritual Father of all Spirits, who is in the Heavens; who if it has well
pleased him, to have adopted the mind only, into his own Image; it seems also
to follow, that the vast, and unutterable God, is also of a humane Shape; and
that from an Argument from the Effect; Seeing that the Body is like wax, on
which the Seal of the Image of the Mind is imprinted: but the mind has its
Image, and essential Perfection, from him, whose Image it bears before it:
But because the Body is now and then defectuous, and like unto a Monster; Most
have thought that the glorious Image of God, does wholly consist in the
rational Power or Power of Reason: They not considering that the Image of God,
does in the nearest, and more perfect manner, consist in the Soul, and from
thence also in the Body, being formed after the exemplary Character of the
Soul: In Operation of the Figuring, if there be an Error, that this be not to
be attributed unto the Image, but unto other Causes issuing from elsewhere.

Furthermore, how much is to be granted unto the rational Faculty, for the
denominating of the Image of God, I have taught in its own tract, concerning
Reason: Yet the more learned Part of Christians, hold that the Soul does most
nearly express the Image of one, and a trine God, by a single simplicity of its
Substance, and a ternary of its Powers; to wit, of Understanding, Will and
Memory: which Similitude has always seemed unto me Improper, that the Mind
should be the Image of God, from an excelling, nigh and singular Ability: For
truly, an Image involveth a Likeness of Figure, but not an equality of Numbers.
And moreover, if the Soul does in its Substance represent the holy sacred
Trinity; but understanding, Will, and Memory, a Ternary of Persons; it must
needs be, that the three Powers of the Soul, are not Properties or Accidents of
the Soul: Yea, that those Powers, are the one only Substance of the Mind; or
such an Image does badly square with the Type, whose Image it is believed to be.

I therefore consider, that not indeed the Mind of Man alone; but that the
whole Man was framed into the Image of God. Wherefore, although the Soul in
this sense, does express a certain Ternary in its Powers; yet in no wise,
Personalities: And then, because no Person of the holy sacred Trinity does
represent the Will alone, or the Will a Person; no Person does resemble Memory,
as neither any one being separated from the other two, the Understanding in
Property.

Then also, because the three Powers of the Mind, are considered for the most
part, as it were Accidents of the Soul; surely, these cannot in any wise
express an Image, or any nearer supposed thing, besides a naked Ternary of
Accidents collected into the Substance of the Soul: In which sense the Soul
does less denote the Image of God, than any piece of Wood: The which shows by
its Analysis, only Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; but not three Powers only like
the Mind, in the aforesaid similitude of the Vulgar.

Three Substances I say, being concluded under the Unity of a composed Body,
and diverse, the which notwithstanding, in their connection, made one only
Substance of Wood.

Furthermore, Taulerus divides the Soul into two Parts: to wit, the Inferior,
or more outward Part, which he calls the Soul; and the other the Superior and
Bottom, which he calls the Spirit: In which Part he says, it does specially
represent and contain the Image of God: Because the Devil has not access,
thereunto the Kingdom of God being there: But unto both Parts he assigns far
different Acts and Properties, whereby he distinguishes both. But at
leastwise, that good Man blots out Homogeniety or Simplicity of kind from the
Soul, wherein notwithstanding, it ought chiefly to express the Image or
Similitude of God: Yea, in this respect, he not only denies the Image of God to
be propagated in the whole Man, but also in the whole Soul: Surely, I shall not
easily believe a duality in the Soul, nor admit of the interchange of a Binary,
if in its Essence, it ought to express the Image of the most Simple Divine
Nature: But rather it behooves, that it stand in a most simple Unity, and an
undivideable Homogeneity of Immortality, and mark of indissolution, out of all
Connection, or Interchange. I say therefore, that the glorious Image of God, is
not only in the Soul; but the very Mind it self, is essentially the glorious
Image of God: And therefore the Image of God is as intimate to the Soul, as the
Soul it self, is to it self: For I consider the mind as a Homogeneal, Simple,
Immortal, Undivideable Spirit, to wit, one only Being, whereunto Death adds
nothing, or takes nothing from it, which is natural unto it in its Essence of
Simplicity.

But next, as a Partaker of Blessedness; because Damnation is unto it by
accident, besides it appointment, and by reason of a future Defect. Such a Soul
therefore being separated from the Body, makes no more use of Memory, nor of
Remembrance, through a beholding of the Place where it was, or of Duration; But
the one only [Now] does there contain all things: Therefore if any Memory
should remain unto it, it should be in vain; yea burdensome for ever. The same
thing is to be judged of Remembrance or calling to Mind; Because it is that
which breaks forth into Act, only through a Discourse of Reason; and therefore
in Eternity it has no longer Place, where the Soul, through the beholding of
naked Truth without declining, Wearisomeness, and Defect, stands out of
necessities of remembering. The blessed Soul therefore, should stand out of the
aforesaid Ternary of Powers; and therefore neither should it any longer
represent the Image of God, for which Cause alone it was created: Yea, by a
more full looking into the Matter, I do not find Memory to be a singular and
separated Power of the Soul; but a naked manner of Remembering: For therefore
forgetful Persons, do by the help of Imagination (which is the Vicaress of the
Understanding) frame an artificial Memory unto themselves, and they learn a far
more strong one, than otherwise, their natural Memory would be.

And moreover, Will departs from the Soul, together with the Life, because it
came accidentally to the Soul:

Seeing that God after the Creation, placed Man in the hand of his own free
Will; which thing surely denotes that the Will is not, after a proper manner,
essential to the Mind; but from a grant, that it may be instead of a Talent,
and that he may follow the way which he had rather choose: Otherwise, seeing
nothing is more pernicious than Free Will; beause it is that alone, which
breeds all discord between God and Man; surely such a Fa^^lty cannot have
place in the blessedness of Eternity: Because the freedom of willing being
taken away, the very Will it self perishes: For otherwise, what shall a power
of willing avail, where there is no longer a liberty of being able to will?

But (say they) in Heaven, the Will is confirmed: That is, the heavenly Wights
cannot will, but what God wills: For they that are in Charity cannot but will
those things which belong to Charity: Which is as much as to say, The heavenly
Wights, can no longer will, but God alone does there will and nill: Therefore
the Will cease, while as a liberty of willing is dissolved.

For truly, the Will cannot be serviceable, or profitable unto a blessed Soul
to Eternity, while as, neither is it able to be brought forth into Act: And
such a Will should be only a wishing: The which surely is not in Heaven, where
there is a full satiety of all desirable things, with all abundance.

The Will therefore, should be rather a burdensome Appendency of a blessed
Soul: Let it be sufficient therefore, that in this Life, men by a Power of
Willing, have well deserved, and have treasured up their Talents for advantage.

Indeed I speak with a consideration, concerning the power of Willing, for
after this Life, a substantial Will arises and manifests it self, which has
a distinct essence, from the power of that accidental freedom of Willing: For
as the imaginative faculty dies with the Life, so also, that free power of
Willing cease: Therefore I have believed, that the very spiritual substance
of the Soul, does show forth the Image of God, but not in its Powers: Namely,
herein, most nearly, God is an un-created Being, one incomprehensible, eternal,
infinite, omnipotent Good, a super-substantial Light and Spirit: But the Soul
is a creature being one, undivided, dependent, immortal, simple, and
thenceforth an eternal, spiritual, lightsome Substance.

In the next place, in God, there are no accidents; but every one of his
Attributes are the very undistinct most simple Essence it self of the Divine
Spirit: which thing also Plato his Parmenides, even after some sort understood:
So the Soul, if it shows forth the Image of God, it shall admit of no accident
in it self; but the whole substance thereof shall be a simple Light and
Understanding it self: For just even as Smoke being kindled by the Flame, is
the same in figure and matter with the Flame; so likewise, the Soul also is a
naked, pure, and simple Understanding, the Light and Image of an uncreated
Light: So that as the eye beholds nothing more truly or nearly than the Sun,
but all other things by reason of the Sun it self: So a blessed Soul does not
understand any thing more nearly than the Light it self, from whence it totally
and immediately depends. And as our eye does not bear the sight of the Sun,
so the Soul cannot understand God, and much less, as long as it makes use of
the Medium's of Powers, as being bound thereunto: Otherwise, the Understanding
being free, does by understanding, attain the Figure of the thing understood,
by a commigration or passing over it transforms it self unto Unity (as I have
taught concerning Reason.) And so indeed the Soul by Understanding, does
principally and primarily contemplate of God, and is formed into the true Image
of God.

Yet there are others also, who conceive of the Image of God in the Soul after
this manner. That seeing the Law is the Image of God; but the Law is engraven
on our Souls by Reason; from hence they will have it, That the Soul is the
Image of God as it is Rational: But that is plainly improper, yea and
impertinent; For so the Soul containing the Law, should indeed contain the
Image of God, but the very substance thereof it self, should not therefore be
framed into the very Image of God: Indeed no more than the Law and the Soul it
self do differ in essence and supposionality.

Surely I have hated Metaphorical Speeches in serious matters: As that, God
created Man into his own Image, should denote, that God had given Man the use
of Reason; and that him that is born mad, and deformed, he therefore had not
made into his own Image: And moreover, there was not as yet a Law, while the
Soul was created.

Furthermore, to attribute the Image of God to Reason, is to be injurious to
God, and blasphemous, even as I have elsewhere taught concerning Reason: For
there is no likeness or suitableness of Reason with God, of a frail and
uncertain Faculty, with an eternal Substance.

The Opinions therefore of others being left, I will speak my own: The
Understanding has a Will coequal to it self, not indeed, that which is a
power, or an accident, but an intellectual light it self, a spiritual
substance, a simple and undivided essence, being separated from the
Understanding only by a supposionality of its Being, but never in its Essence.

I find also besides, a third thing in the Soul, the which for want of an
Etymology, I name a Love, or Desire, not indeed of having, possessing, or
enjoying, but of well-pleasing; it being equal to the other two, and equally
simple in the Unity of Substance, and they are three Suppositions, under one
only, and that an undividable Substance of the Soul: But that Love is not any
act of the Will, but it proceeds from the substantial Understanding and Will,
as a distinct act: For it happens also in this Life, that we love those things
which we understand are not to be loved, and those things which we would not
love: We love also those things which exceed or overcome the Understanding and
Will: For in an Ecstasy, the Understanding and Will perish, and are laid
asleep, so long as they deliver up their Kingdom unto Love: For neither is that
Love a Passion, but a ruling Essence, and a glorifying act. Therefore Will and
Love in this place, exceed the circuit of Powers, neither have they any thing
common with the Will of the Flesh, or of Man; but they are essential Titles,
whereby (under a want of Names) the Mind represents the Image of God; because
the Understanding does then understand God, is intent on him, and loves him
altogether with all the Mind, by one only and undivided act of Love, by reason
of the every way simplicity of its Substance. But as long as we live in the
Flesh, we scarce make use of a substantial and purely intellectual
Understanding, but rather of an imaginative Power, to wit, of that quality its
Vicaress: For in an Ecstasy, Understanding, Will, and Memory do oftentimes
sleep, the act of Love only surviving; but so distinct from those three, that
notwithstanding, it stands not without the substantial Understanding and Will,
and those equally suited unto it self: For truly seeing the Soul is wholly
homogeneal in its substance, it should plainly loose that simplicity, if one of
the three should be without or besides the other two.

Love therefore, the other two being asleep, is then as it were in the
Superficies, or rather the other two are imbibed, and supped up in the Love. In
this World, Love is before Desire; because it is a Passion of the amative or
loving Faculty, which proceeds from that supposionality of the Soul, which is
truly true Love, and represents the Image of a corporeal Faculty in this
Life; no otherwise, than as Understanding, and Memory; now, as long as there is
a wedlock of the Body, whereinto the immortal Mind is sunk, constitutes a
certain third thing: But after Death, Love makes not a priority, as neither a
distinction from Desire; neither has it the nature of a Power, nor is it an
habit, or act of Willing, nor does it subsist out of the Understanding, neither
does Memory survive in a distinct habit from the Understanding: Therefore the
Intellect is a formal Light, and substance of the Soul, which does beholdingly
Know, Discern, Will, and Desire in the Unity of it self, whatsoever it
comprehends in it self, and in willing, judges: For it then remembers no
longer by a repetition of the Species or particular kinds of a thing once
known, neither is it any longer induced to know by circumstances: But then
there is one only knowledge of all things understood, and a speculative
beholding within it self; yet so, that the Understanding may know one thing
more presentially then another, while it reflects it self upon things
understood, to wit, because it is in truth it self, and in a distinct Unity.

What if the same thing does now daily stand in the artificial Memory, because
that recollecting Memory is not a distinct act from the inductive Judgment of
the Intellect? Shall not this thing therefore be more proper to the Mind, being
once dispatched of the imaginative turbulencies of Understanding? For neither
does that hinder these things, because in Wine, the Memory perishes, the
Judgment remaining safe, or on the contrary: For he that is drunk, or mad,
does oft-times remember all things before his drunkness, and in like manner,
the other returning unto himself, remembers all things which were done in time
of his madness. Indeed those things are heterogeneally distinct in the Body,
according to the manner of the receiver. Unto Inanimate things also, I observe
a certain deaf knowledge to belong, likewise a Sense, and Affection of their
Object, which things began to be called Sympathetical ones: But such a deaf
perceivance of Objects, is unto those things in stead of sight and
understanding.

There is moreover, a virtue in them, to wit, a certain vital natural
endowment, of a certain goodness and valor, for ends appointed by the Creator:
There is also a third Power resulting from both the foregoing ones; which is
that of Joy or Delight at the meeting of things helpful, and of turning away
from things hurtful, wherein a certain affection toward their Objects is beheld.

Likewise Fear, Flight, etc. which threefold degree of ascent, is more manifest
in the more stupid Insects, even as in mad or furious Men, in whom no
Understanding is President, and only the governing Powers of a visual Light
does shine forth: Yet besides, there is present with these, the act of Virtues,
and vital Functions, by reason of which, and by which, they are Insects.

Thirdly, There is in them a far more manifest formal act of Joy, and
averseness: The which again in other sensitive Creatures are as yet far more
clearly unfolded. Unto these indeed, a certain sensitive imagination does
belong, with a certain kind of discourse of Reason, which is unto them in stead
of Understanding, clearly appearing more or less in all; so that
Quick-sightedness, Will, Memory, and Remembrance, happens unto them under the
apprehension of Understanding: Yet their Objects, and Functions being
continually changed according to the matter which is inclined unto renting
Divisions and singularities.

There is also in them, an issuing Power of Goodness and Virtues, whereby their
Souls do more or less incline unto the exercises of their Virtues, or
Bruitishnesses: And there is at length also in them, their complacency, and
wearisomness, and animosity on the considerations of Objects, things so
co-united unto sensitive Souls, that it is scarce possible to behold two
persons, but we are presently addicted to one more than another; and these
things being incorporeal things according to the manner of the receiver, they
shall (for that reason) in man be more clarified. Nevertheless I will not that
the Image of God be considered in man by reason of any ternary of faculties,
which may thereto be found to belong unto other things in the Susteme of the
World.

Certainly the dignity of the Divine Image, is not in any wise participated of
by other created things: For trul^ (...) Divine Image is intimate only to the
Soul, and so proper unto it, as is its own essence unto its self: Yet any
properties of the Soul whatsoever, are not the very Essence of the Mind, but
the Products and Effects of Essences: For neither is it a thing beseeming the
Majesty of the Divine Image, to be drawn out of Qualities: For the properties
of other things do co-melt into the Essence of the Soul by virtue of the Divine
Image: But if they are reckoned as Attributes; that is by reason of the
miserable manner of the vulgar Understanding; for truly the Mind is one, pure,
simple, homogeneal and undivided act, wherein the Image of God, does
immediately and essentially subsist; so that, in that Image, even all Powers do
not only lay aside the nature of Attributes, but also, do collect their
supposionalities into an undistinct Unity: Because the Soul is in it self, a
certain substantial Light, and a substance so clear, that it is not
distinctguished by suppositions, from the Light it self: And the Understanding
thereof is so the Light of the Soul, that the Soul it self which is nothing but
Light, is only mere Understanding.

In which Light of its own self, the Soul being separated from the Body, sees
and understands it self wholly throughout the whole; neither has it need of
a brain, or heart: In which organs indeed, its substance seems only to
assume the race of Properties: For in the Body, the abstracted Intellect it
self, being drowned in corporeal Organs, and seeing it makes use of the same,
it represents and assumes a qualitative faculty, which is called Imagination,
the which, from the society of the Imaginative Power of the sensitive Soul it
self, and splendour of the Understanding, degenerated in the Organs, does by a
certain combination, arise into a qualitative Power: For therefore that Faculty
is wearied by Imagining, and fails, so as that it becomes mad, and the hairs
wax gray; but the mind being once separated, is never wearied in understanding.
And moreover, in living Persons, the Imagination is not only wearied, but
also, it has not of it self, intellective species, but those which it draws
from Objects: And therefore the faculty of Understanding, which in imagining
concurreth with the imaginative Office of the sensitive Soul, follows the
disposition of the organ, and will or arbiterment of the sensitive Life: Like
as, regularly in Nature, the effect follows the weaker part of its Causes. But
the Soul whatsoever it requires for knowing, remembering, and willing, whether
it be for once or for oftener times, all that, it has from it self, and not
from another: For neither in the Soul being abstracted or withdrawn, does a
Will arise from the thing understood: Yea, neither is there a Will in the Soul,
unto the thing understood; but it is the goodness of a formal love: The which
indeed, is not a proper passion of the Soul, not a habit, not an inclination,
nor any quality thereof: But a substantial act of goodness, whereby a blessed
Soul, is substantially, simply, and homogenially good, but not qualitatively:
And it has this prerogative, whereby it is the typical Image of the Divinity.

But Bodies, as well those which are believed to be compounded, as those that
are merely simple ones, do slide with a perpetual free accord, into the
Attributes of Forms, they being readily inclined, into the successive changes
of a diversity of kinds, and dissolution.

Therefore, now it is manifest, from whence the state, dignity, condition of
the Soul, and prerogative of the Divine Image in living Persons, may be
over-clouded. But the Desire, or Love of which I here speak, is not a function
of the appetitive power, nor the very qualitative power of desiring it self,
but it is a substantial part of the mind, or rather the Mind it self, flowing
from Understanding and Will: Because those three, are undividably conjoined by
the Creator, under Unity, in as great a simplicity as may be: Yet in live
persons, or mortal men, it is separated from Understanding and Will, in its
Functions, by reason of the condition of the Organ, and Nature of the sensitive
Soul.

For truly, now we desire, oftentimes, those things which the Understanding
judges not to be desirable, and which the Will could wish were not desired:
But it must needs be that things whose operations are different or dis-joyned,
that the same things are dis-joyned in their root, according to the manner,
whereby all particular things are separated: In the Soul indeed, only by a
relative supposionality; but in the Body, according to a corporeal and
qualitative Nature.

And therefore, that substantial Desire or Love, is an intimate Essence of the
Soul, being consubstantial, and coequal in age with the same: So that,
although, in Heaven, there be a full satiety of desirable things, and a
perpetual enjoymens thereof, yet that desire in the Soul does not therefore
cease, the which is a study or ^^^eavour of complacency: Neither does it
therefore infer a passion of the Soul, any more than Charity it self: because
they are conjoined in their root, as one and the same thing: For an amarous
desire ceasing, of necessity, either a fullness or glutting, or an
unsensibleness of fruition or enjoyment should presently arise, which in the
heavenly Wights, would be a shameful thing.

That desire therefore of Love, is the fuel of an unterminable or endless
delight; under which consideration, the Mind resembles the Spirit the
Comforter: For the unutterable Creator has placed Man in the liberty of his
own Desire, that he might live in the Spirit after the Image of God, in a holy
Desire, and perfect Charity. It is manifest therefore, that Operations are
distinct from the root of Faculties, while we understand those things which we
do not desire, but while we desire those things which we do not plainly know,
and which we would not desire.

In the next place, we will (as while a man goes willingly to Punishment) those
things which we do not desire; and desire those things which we would not (as
while any one commands his Leg to be cut off:) And likewise the Desire does
afterward, somesometimes overcome the Will, or the Will does oft-times compel
the Desire, and they by turns draw each other under mutual Commands; but wholly
in Mortals, because the sensitive Soul draws the Understanding, and the Body
the sensitive Soul into a manifold disorder of division: For so impossible
things happen to be desired, and things past are wished for as present: For
unless that Desire were from the root of the Mind, he should not sin, who
should see a Woman to lust after her, before the consent of a full Will.

Therefore very many things are desired, whose Causes are not willed; and many
things, whose Effects are refused by the Will and Judgment. The Desire also
does operate in one manner, and the Will in another.

Also, in the motion of the Day, or in duration, the Desire does oftentimes go
before, and sometimes follows the Will, and one overcomes the other by course,
that it may restrain something that is distinct from it self: And that wholly
in mortal Bodies.

But in Eternity, where Love, or Amorous Desire arises as the substance of the
Soul, nothing is Desired which is not Willed; and that as well in respect of
Act, as Substance and Essence: Because by reason of the simplicity of
Substance, they are collected into Unity: Although in the Root they have
diverse Suppositions, which plainly exceed the manner ^f Understanding in
mortal Men.

In the next place, the Kingdom of God in man is unutterable; that is, God
himself, by whose perpetual splendor all things are gathered together into
Truth.

Therefore the Primary or chief Image of God is in his immortal Soul; because
the very Essence [whereof] it self, is also the [veriest] Image of God, which
Image can neither be expressed by words, as neither thought by the heart, in
this Life, because it resembles a certain similitude of God.

But in the husk of the Mind, or in the sensitive Soul, and vital Form, there
is the same Image re-shining, yet received after the manner of an inferior
nature, and defiled through transgressions or Death, from whence at length, the
Body also borrows, not indeed the Image of God, but the Figure of him. But
the Soul is devolved into utter darkness, even as it has separated it self
from the uncreated Light, and from the virtue of the Image, and therefore it
has (by reason of appropriation) so lost its native Light, as if it were
proper unto it, as beseeming it, that thenceforth, it understands, wills, or
loves, nothing besides it self, and for it self. For the damned shall rise, not
changed; because their Body rising again, shall receive its limitations from
their Soul: The which, seeing now it is, with all depraved affections, reflexed
only on it self, after a corporeal manner: It shall not in rising again,
delineate the Image of God (which is as it were choked in it) in the Body, but
after a corporeal manner: That is, by way of figure.

Lastly, It being deprived through the flood-gate of death, of the helps of
Imagination, Memory and Free Will: It afterward understands, wills, loves all
things from a blind apprehension, as being only addicted to it self: For it
knows its Immortality, but feels Damnation, and complains of it, as that
Injustice is done unto it: Because the love of it self is only to excuse its
excuses in sins, as being committed in days of ignorance and innocence, with
much frailty of Nature, lyings in wait of Enemies, and want of sufficient
Grace: As neither that an eternal punishment is deservedly due, for a momentary
transgression.

For then it begins to be mad, and persists in hating of God; Chiefly, because
it knows the unviolable arrest of its loss, and an eternal impossibility of
escaping. It being therefore cut off in its hope, passes even from the very
beginning of its entrance, into the utmost desperation, in a place where no
piety, compassion, refreshment, or recantation is entertained.

It happens also, that seeing the Understanding does naturally transform it
self into the Idea of the thing understood, and therefore into the similitude
of evil Spirits its Objects: Therefore there is always a present hatred of
God, despair, cursing, damnation, and the furious torments of Hell.

The Almighty of his goodness, vouchsafe to break the snares that are extended
for us in our passage.

Amen.
CHAP. CIII. The Property of External Things.
THe spiritual beginning of Life being now finished, before I descend unto
corporeal and sensible Organs, and other supports of Life, I will propose
something concerning Places.

First of all, therefore, it is certain, That the Heaven has received no other
Law since Transgression, because the Earth alone has undertaken all the Curse
on it self: For from hence I have sufficiently demonstrated elsewhere, That the
Heaven is free from our sins, neither that it plays the part of a revenger of
iniquities: But if some places are subject unto Death and certain Diseases,
that is not to be attributed unto the circulation or whirling of the Heavens,
and blind influxes of the Stars: But it is altogether proper unto the
dispositions of the Earth: For although Eastern Provinces may seem the more
fruitful, or happy that is not to be attributed to the Heaven: Seeing that in a
circle, every part subjected under the same circle is alike Oriental or
Easterly: Otherwise a Circle should not want a Beginning, End, and Extremity of
parts: Therefore there is an inbred goodness in the soil, and the fertility of
the ground is helped by the continual cherishment of the Stars, and a perpetual
familiarity of visitation.

Truly, under the circle of the Sun, Climates have an ordinary and equal heat;
and so, that as many fruits as by ripening, do ascend unto a degree of
perfection, by reason of heat, are there, more happy; the which otherwise,
through want of heat, are not alike perfect: But the heat of the Sun has
respect unto Fruits, but not to Long Life, which is of no less length of
continuance in Cold, Mountanous, and Northern places, than else where, under
the Hot or Torrid Zone.

Surely the favors of the Soil do not depend on the Stars, as neither the
prolongations of Life.

The Stars are daily wheeled about, and do daily almost equally affect the
Climates of the Earth, which are under them; but they do every Year receive
their Winter and Summer according to the access and recess of the Sun: In the
mean time, the Tracts of the more adjoining Lands, do far vary from each other.

They are therefore the particular gifts of the Soil, but not of the Heaven,
which therefore keep a stable goodness, as it were Provincial to the same
Tracts of Land.

In the holy Scriptures indeed, The Land of Promise flows with Milk and
Honey, being fruitful in Wine, Corn, Pulse, and rich fruits of the Tree: And
likewise scarce requiring dunging, and the toils of Labor. And then I see
other Coasts of the World, to owe and pay the Tribute of the Land of Promise:
For from both the Poles, continual Rains do steep the Earth that the promised
Soil may without the trouble of Rains, take unto it self, its due Water, and
that Egypt may repay the favors of the Soil of Heaven, with a double usury of
fruits: For Seas and Rivers, strivingly hasten unto those places with a speedy
course: Yea, and from beyond the Tropic of Capricorn, Nilus brings down his
melted Snows through Egypt, unto the Mediterranean Sea, as it were a Yearly
Tribute of Nature, that may water the more fruitful Countries, if not with
Rain, at leastwise with Dew, and the blackish cloudy Waters of Nile, and that
the Vapors being lifted up from the Sea, throughout the Soil, it may most
plentifully repay a plentiful Dew round about: And so that the whole World
seems readily to serve those more fruitful Regions.

Under the Aequinoctial Line, it Rains many times every Day, because the
Tributary Waters do not reach thither: But they are supped up in the Countries,
which God in times past, appointed unto his own People, but now unto
Barbarians, by reason of Transgressions, fore-monished of by the Prophets.

He therefore blessed the Land of Promise for the People of Israel, from the
beginning, but for Reasons foreknown to himself, from Eternity, and the which,
he fixed stable into Nature: Yea, he not only appointed the Tribute of the
whole World unto these Lands, but unto most of them he added Reasons, Idea's,
Seeds, and Gifts; whereof the more intemperate Climate are destitute: Nor all
that, for any other ends, than because it so well pleased him, for his hidden
Judgments.

But these things do not make for the consideration of long Life; for in
Is-land, Men are found to be of a Longer Continuance of Life, than in
Palestina, Phaenicia, Egypt, etc.

Oftentimes also, in Mountainous, and rough Hills, Older Men are met withal,
than in a pleasant Champion: To wit, that we may know, that the Prince of Life
has granted a long continuance of Life, unto so miserable places, and to a
singular tract of Land, which he has denied unto whatsoever the most pleasant,
and wealthy Countries.

Nature therefore is subject unto the Soil, even for a stability of Life: For
we measure a Diseasie and short Life from Endemicks: Does happily an Endemical
Being breath out of the Lands wherein Life is prolonged? No surely: And it is
sufficient, that a place does want malignity, that a continuance of Life may be
attained, so far as is from the nature of the Place.

Lastly, Fountains are either without Savor, or Mineral, they not being those
which may have, positively, a long continuance of Life; But as being those
which unsensibly mow down the daily Superfluities or growths of oily Dregs, and
in this respect, Life is not untimely taken away, by and by: Neither also, does
much, and a sweet temperature of Air prevail hereunto: For truly, in the rough
Hills of the Forest of Arden, of Scotland, and Spain, in our Champion, a
longer Life does, for the most part occur, than in Aquitane.

For Hieres is a Valley nigh Apulia, environed with Mountains, being fruitful
in the sweetest Fruits, where the most sweet Station of the Spring, is almost
continued: Yet having Inhabitants of a shorter Life, being deformed with a pale
Countenance, so that it has crept into a Proverb of those that were Sick, and
Recovering; Thou seem to us, to be a Stranger come from Hieres.

For the pleasantness of Fruits takes up the suspicion of a Mineral Endemick.

Also, not only Mountainous Colds do extend the Life; but Old Age is frequent
among the Aethiopians.

Let therefore, those places be fit for Long Life, which being not polluted by
any Endemicks, have moreover, not unwholesome Waters, nor the which are infamous
for a stormy Wind.

CHAP. CIV. The Radical Moisture.
THe Schools with one Voice, promote the Radical Moisture of Life: For they
declame, That from it, and in it we live; and that, that only being consumed,
we die. For they, who together with Aristotle, attribute all things to heat, as
to an active Principle, do not say, That the Radical moisture is the Beginning,
as neither the Inn of Life; unless they derive the Primateship on Heat in the
moisture: But the moisture has more pleased others: From whence, they being
sore afraid, through the sloth of a diligent search, least they should err,
they will have our Life to depend on, and be prolonged, as well by moisture as
by heat, without distinction: And so they denominate it, not indeed heat, but
composedly, Radical heat, or the firstborn moisture: That indeed, the
firstborn or original moisture in us, and the radical heat, may be for
synonymals. But moreover, all do with one consent presage, that our Vital heat
would never fail us, if there might always be enough and to spare, of that
moisture and fodder: Which moisture, because they believe to be hereafter
wasted by a necessary action of heat, they finish the hope and Treatise of Long
Life, by a denial.

But alas! with what pernicious blindness has the School of Medicine, through
thinking stumbled in all things! It had also seen the Flame of a Lamp to be
nourished with Oil, and that through defect hereof, that also failed, but that
it was continued by the pouring on of Oil: Wherefore a plausible Invention
smiled on them, and therefore they drew that Invention into the History of
Life: Especially because, they by sense took notice, that heat was no less in
the four-footed Beast, and Bird, than in a Man: So greatly, with the Patronage
of Aristotle, have they confounded heat under the Etymology of Life. And then,
they presently drew out of heat, the token of true and presential Fire; Yet the
Question remained under Controversy.

The Aristotelicks indeed, attribute this Fire unto the Element of the Stars,
and contratrarily distinguish the sublunary Element of Fire, in its species:
But others attribute it unto the Element of sublunary Fire: And have about
this, and the other, their own Arguments of Brawlings.

In the mean time, the School has been wholly dumb, about mute and cold
Fishes, and although it confessed, that Fishes do live, are moved, and
nourished no more unprosperously, than four-footed Beasts; yea, although it
knew that they are enriched with a far more fruitful race of Offsprings; in
the next place, that they live a more healthy Life, and notwithstanding, that
Fires and heats are wanting under the Sea (especially the frozen Sea) wherein
in the mean time there was the greatest and most populous Commonwealth;
nevertheless it would not forsake the embers of the vital spark drawn in from
its tender years, although it took notice that it was deluded through a
Patronage of truth.

Wherefore the miserable Schools flee unto Decrees or Authorities: Therefore
they would have Man, Birds, and also four-footed Beasts, to be indeed in a
Trine Number, and that the Fish might be involved as a Fourth, and consocial
thereunto, and be constrained under their large Doctrine: That they might
determine of an equal right concerning the Fish, as absent, in the
participation of Radical heat.

But because the Soul comes as a Servant unto established pleasures, and does
also administer Reason even for a non-Being, at pleasure they have devised a
privy shift; and determine, to wit, That hot living Creatures are actually hot,
with a palpable Fire; but that Fishes are only potentially hot.

As if therefore Fishes, should only potentially live, if the Effect does not
badly square with its granted Causes.

The Schools I say, do feign Heat to be the total Cause of an actual Life, to
wit, they substitute an equivocal or doubtful Quality, like unto heat; but an
irregular, unnamed one, because an unknown, feigned, and dissembled one, to be
received under the name of potential Heat: For the Schools by imagining, have
abhorred to enter into the Depth of the Sea: wherefore the Speculation of
Fishes being left as barren (because it was resisted by a plausible Devise)
they have well pleased themselves (as it were wandering in a Dream) in hot
Animals, with the Application of Lamps and Life: Shall the radical Moisture,
thus, be no longer with Aristotle, Spermatick, Froathy, and Muscilaginous, but
now to let it be Oily, Fat, and Combustible? Shall thus therefore a Fat Belly,
which through much Grease, shall afford Fuel for the radical Moisture, be only
of necessity, Long-lived? A Capuchin in our Country, was Cold for almost an
whole year, at leastwise in both his Legs and Arms: because he shall loose
less of his Moisture, he shall of necessity retain his Oil the longer in his
Lamp.

But at leastwise, here a certain wan Stupidity of the Schools, elsewhere by
me demonstrated, is adjoined: To wit, that the Action of Heat (especially, if
it shall not be kindled by a lively Flame) does indeed dry up all Moistures
into a Sandy-stone and Coal; but never consumes them without the remainder of
a residence, even as is easy to be seen in us; so that it is even a wonder,
that they have not hitherto observed, that Consuming is not made in us, by Heat
alone. But at leastwise, there should be need of a torch in the Heart (which
thing also the Schools have not yet considered) least otherwise, the feigned
and vapo rous fatness of the Moisture (because it is that which in the Heart,
should be wholly Spiritual) like Aqua Vitae, should in a small moment, and
great breviary, burn up all at once, and cease to be: For else, without a torch
(neglected by the Schools) the feigned History of Life, shall badly square unto
Fires built from the firstborn Liquor, which are on every side kindled at
once. However they shall say, at least, from one Absurdity drawn out of the
Latex or Liquor of Life, there are many Anguishes. But let us freely feign,
that this idle Devise of the Schools might stand: To wit, that the Life is a
certain Fire wasting the radical Moisture, because it is Fat, and does thereby
live, and that Lean Persons alone, are of a shorter Life. But from whence is
that Moisture in us? Is it not from the Nourishment materially, and from the
vital Archeus efficiently? Certainly our Lamp shall never be extinguished, if
the Power of burning or blazing Heat (as they will have it) be for the making
of Oil out of the Bread and Drink, and if nothing of a Residence remains from
the fatness in the Torch, which may stop up and stifle that Torch: To wit, even
as nothing at length, remains from the Blood in Persons of ripe Years, which
may have it self in manner of a superfluous Coal.

And indeed, in a Feast, has it not its abundance of Nourishments? and heat
the Workman of that fat Moisture, resulting within from thence? Seeing that
Light proceeds from Light, and an uncombustible Fire from Fire, with no
difficulty? Why therefore does the Man die? For I find from the Positions of
the Schools, a perpetual Motion in the Theory, but not in the Practick:
Therefore Fraud and Deceit do subsist in their Positions; or at leastwise a
shameful Rashness. But they will say, that after growth, nothing is any longer
applied from the radical Moisture, unto the solid Parts: Therefore it must
needs be, that the true radical Moisture, seeing it does now no longer co-here
to the Root; therefore also the sound Parts do by degrees wax dry; and so that
the Fodder of the Heat failing, the same Heat dies.

But first of all, from hence is drawn, that the Death of Old Age does not
happen, but by reason of the dryness of the similar Parts: When as a Stag of
one Year old, is dryer than a Man of eighty Year old, and yet he easily extends
his Life, unto one or two Ages.

In the next, if the Moisture cease to be radical, because it reaches not
the end, or Application unto the Root; That indeed is to the moisture by
accident, and therefore it does not change the Essence thereof: For neither
does the Heat of the Fire cease to be propagated in the Neighboriag Wood,
although the burning Wood shall not receive a fuel of fatness from without.

Neither in the next place, does the aforesaid excuse subsist: For truly, for
every Event, the solid Parts shall have themselves in manner of a Lamp or
Torch, which is sufficiently able to burn, in what part Oil is supplied unto
it, and so that Oil being supplied from without, the Fire should be able to
live for ever: For they teach, that the Heat of the solid Parts is from the
Element of Fire, the which they think to be for the mixture of Bodies, and to
be enflamed in the fatness of the radical moisture or humor.

First of all, that Moisture is spermatick and muscilaginous, but not Oily.

And then, if the Fire passes out of the solid Parts, unto the Moisture which
it enflameth; it shall be sufficient for the Moisture to be consumed, and
always to be applied from without, nor to be incorporated in the Root
throughout the whole: Because if it pass out of the solid Parts, unto the
unsolid Parts applied unto it, during the whole life time, it shall always be
able to pass through the un-solid Parts: applied unto it: neither does that
excuse avail, that it cease to be radical, while it is no longer United unto
the innermost Root: Because then, prefently after growth, the vital Vigor
should be extinguished, because the Moisture does not then any longer receive a
Union with the solid or sound Parts. But why do I stay any longer in refuting
of Absurdities? It has been so sufficiently and over-shewn, that the Fire is
not an Element, that the mixture of the same, for the Subsistence of all Bodies
whatsoever, is false; because those of mixed Bodies are mere and ancient Fables.
The Fire therefore, if there were any in us, should be primarily in the vital
Spirit, for the which, enough Moisture does always supply it self out of the
venal Blood. Wherefore indeed, I grieve that they have hitherto so sloathfully
stumbled in the Subject of Life, and Doctrine of Integrity or Health: For I,
after the time of my Youth, conjectured that there was an Error altogether
shamefully committed, and omitted, in the Consideration of Defects and
Diseases: Because none truly knows that which is crooked, who has not first
known that which is right. This therefore is the feigned Doctrine of the
Schools, concerning Life, which they endeavor to establish by the supposed
Authority of a little Book (feigned on Hippocrates) concerning humane Nature:
Which says, That we on the first day of our Birth are most hot; and likewise
at length, on the last day, most Cold: As if there should be a different
Condition of our Heat, from that of any other things! For whatsoever things do
arise from elsewhere, do presently after assume an increase, and that without
ceasing, and at length decline and fail.

Wherefore if according to the Mind of the Old Man, Heat should most greatly
abound on the first day; yet neither is the Life tied up to Heat: For truly I
have demonstrated, that Heat is rather an Effect of Life in hot living
Creatures, than the Life it self, or the Cause of Lise; and therefore Fishes
can most safely want Heat, and now for that very Cause, it commits an Error in
arguing of, not the Cause, as for the Cause.

Truly, I am always wont to behold, search into, believe, and measure Heat as
Heat, and as a Quality, neither also to implore any other Witnesses or Judges,
besides the Sense of Touching, and an Instrument of Glass, which I have before
taught, for the searching out of Degrees and Moments of Heat in the
encompassing Air: In which Sense, I have found a Man of thirty Years of Age, to
be hotter than any Child, however in the mean time they may dote about the
diverse particular Kinds of Heat: For let them dispute of Qualities known by
Sense, as of Fables, and under potential Considerations; but I have accustomed
my self to divide, open, look into, and esteem of things even as they are in
themselves.

But moreover Paracelsus being ignorant of the radical Moisture of the Schools,
does now and then confound that with the Mummy of our Body; but elsewhere he
reputes it to be as it were the inward shadow of our Body, from whence he would
have shadowie Flames to shine round about us; To wit, that the radical Moisture
is the Image of the Man, extended throughout the whole Man, and deferring or
prolonging his Life.

In another place also, he judges the radical Moisture to be the Mercury, or
one of his three Beginnings (not divideable in living Persons) which is equally
participated of throughout the whole: For the Life being extinguished by the
Plague (for Death takes away the Mummial Goodness) the Mummy indeed has very
cunningly failed or forsaken the same Moisture in the Body.

At length, although the Schools confess, that younger People are oft-times
extinguished; the radical Moisture being not yet consumed, as neither through
Penury of Heat; and in this respect, they are not very careful for their; own
Position, whereby they may equally measure the Life by Heat, and radical
Moisture; yet they remain in the Bounds of their Ancestors, by reason of a
custom of Assenting; a sloth of diligent. Searching; and despair of Learning:
For indeed they have been ignorant of lightsome Lights of: Life, but that they
are indifferent, by reason of the distinction of the two greater Lights; For
that they may be hot, like as also cold: That is, they have not Learned that
Forms and: Lives are Synonymals: But I have always greatly pitied the confused
Tradition of this Moisture, which is of so great Moment (although in the
Moisture of the Root, they confess both the Hinges of Medicine to be rouled): I
bestowed much Iabout in my younger Years, by the Resolutions of Bodies, that I
might find some certain Messenger of the radical Moisture.

And at length, through the Favor of God, I was at last more assured, that not
any of those things were in Nature, which with a lofty Brow, are promised by
the Schools in this respect.

I acknowledge indeed, that there is a seminal Original Moisture, which is the
constitutive Moisture of us; but altogether of the same Species, Property, and
Identity, with that whereby we grow, and are afterward uncessantly nourished:
And so that the Bones, Bowels, Nerves, Tendons of Children, do consist of an
un-different, and do increase from a like Moisture, whereby young Folks, their
Increase being now finished, are nourished: According to the Maxim of the
Schools; We are nourished by the same thing whereof we consist: But we consist
of Original or firstborn Moisture, therefore we are also nourished by it. Yet
I have discerned, that the nourishable Moisture, as long as it is homogeneally
admitted for Increase, within the Root of the Mixture, is wholly the same with
that which is radical: But if afterward by accident, it be no longer admitted
into an unseperable Fellowship, because growth cease; Yet that this does not
in the least change, vitiate, alter, or alienate the Nature of the former
Moisture: Because that abundance of it is in every part eminently cast forth by
Dreams, it being of the same kind, with the original, and radical Moisture;
which two names are distinguished only in this, that of the original Moisture,
the Young is formed: But the radical Moisture is that same, and moreover, that
from whence we grow and are nourished: For as long as we are increased, there
is made not only a solid Application of the moisture, but a solid Application
and Assimilation of that which is applied (for that thing happens daily under
every Nourishment) but moreover, there is made a radical Union of the thing
nourished, with the Nourishment, which is presently afterward sealed by the
Spirit of Life, and vitally illustrated by the Form: Therefore the sealing
contains a Character, which fixes and confirms that Moisture into the
homogeneal Substance of the similar Part, to wit, from whose Archeus the
Nourishment it self is converted and assimilated; and so that by transchanging,
it departs into the Family of the Part containing, which before was only
contained; under which Flux, a true Information of the Soul happens.

From its lot only there, and happy success, the radical Moisture is
distinguished from the Dew of the secondary Humors, but not in Nature: To wit,
because the Dew being as it were a new and young Humor, is consumed as to a
great part of it, in time of growth, and as to its whole after-growth, neither
is it ever united into the Root of Mixture, that it may be made a partaker of
the aforesaid sealing, and attain the Dignity of a part containing. For
example; Calx-vive, or Quicklime, when it is quenched or appeased, becomes a
Pluss, which most intimately couples the Water to the Calx: But if more Water
than is meet be poured on it, the same Water abounding, is straightway
rejected, and swims a top.

In the mean time notwithstanding, in fullness of time, that Calx is dried and
stonifies even under the middle of the Waters; But that hardness being once
attained, although it be afterward most exactly beaten into the most fine
Powder or Dust, yet for the future, it keeps the Shape of a Powder, and
despises the intimate Wedlocks of Water, it assumeth not the Disposition of
the former Pulss, neither is the Water thenceforth, radically co-mixed with it.
Notwithstanding the Moisture of the Water it self, is individually the same,
whether it be secluded from the co-mixture of the Calx, or be admitted unto it:
And that, because it is contingently contingent to the Water, by accident, not
so much through Defect of the Water, as of the Calx or root. But yet, the
aforesaid Pulss of the Lime is plainly more slowly dried, than the Powder of
the Moisture is from without, on every side watered with the Waters.

I therefore considered, that however the Schools do resound many things
concerning the radical Moisture; yet that the nourishable Humor does not any
way differ from the radical Humor it self, as long as it pulsifies, and is
solidated within the Root of Mixture, being conjoined unto the first
constituting parts by a radical Union: Because that both the Liquors are the
same in Matter, Virtue, Substance, Purity, formal Identity, and Participation
of Life, the which, when our solid Parts do no longer pulsifie and admit of,
they at leastwise for the future, hinder an intimate Connection of the Root, so
much as they can, and fore-slow the dryness of the solid containing Parts, by
reason of their continual bedewing: For when that Pulss of the sound Parts has
obtained a just Solidity; to wit, because the power of Increasing, defluxing
from the Brain, is exhausted; then the Moisture is only made nourishable, which
before was made radical: For however Old Age cause dryness; yet Death is not
from a more dry Habit or State of Body: For truly, we may rather conjecture
Dryness to be from a Defect of the vital Powers, than the aforesaid Defect from
dryness: For the Moisture of the solid Parts, however in an Atrophia, and
Diseases of long continuance, it be equally, and throughout the whole entire
Body consumed; yet it is easily restored by a due Nourishment, and the more
bountifully by taking the milkie Element of Pearls: So also the Ulcers of the
Lungs are solidated or made whole by the sweet Corollate of Mercurius
Diaphoreticus; to wit, by Virtue whereof, the Epitaph of Paracelsus publishes,
that the Tabes was often restored: For I remembered, that I in the great Heat
of (the 5th Month called) July, bored the Head of a Toad with a sharp Stick or
Staff, and that I fastened the Staff at the other end, into the Ground, that
the Toad being hung up, might be dried. But it happened, that full four days
after, I returned to the same place, found the Toad alive, contracting his
Thighs, as if he had been there only the day before; because the hole was not
with a straight Line, in the middle of his Head, but inclined a little the more
unto the left side: Wherefore I drove the Staff into the middle of his Head,
and returning about the evening, I found the Toad not only Dead, but to have
been wholly dried up.

From whence I the more firmly persuaded my self, that a Defect or Failing of
the Vital Powers, was not from the Dryness of the solid Parts; but rather that
Dryness was, and did Increase in us, according to the proportion of a
Piece-meale extinguishment of the Vital Powers.

Let therefore the Radical Ignorance of the Schools depart, whereby, by an
unrepaitable Penury (as they will have it) of the Radical Moisture, they cover
their Fault under the Ground of the Place of Burial: For the Diminishment of
the Gifts and Vital Powers alone, sealed in the Family Administration of the
implanted Spirit, brings on Old Age, as also the Extinguishment of Death,
intestine Calamities: which is to say; My Spirit shall be Diminished, and my
Days shall be Shortened. Therefore let the Consideration of the Radical
Moisture for the Study of Long Life, depart.

For truly Hippocrates calls Natures themselves or, the Vital Powers, the
Physitianesses of Diseases; and the which therefore Languishing, daily Miseries
of Infirmities wax strong, and these departing, do proclaim with lofty
Shoulders, a Despair of Life, as often as the Faculties or Powers fail, whether
in the mean time plenty of Radical Moisture, or a scantiuess of the same be
present: For they cease not to extend a Crow and a Stage, which are dryer than
any toothless Old Man, unto some Ages, and to be Incumbent on the laboursome
gain of Reverence: For because dryness begins from, the Bones, Quicksighted and
provident Nature, comes to meet or prevent this same Dryness, with a more large
Nourishment of Marrow, and She would have it to be Fat, and less discussable,
or dispersable by Heates, that it may vindicate the Old Age of the Bones from
Dryness, by its Unctuous Moisture: For therefore there is a greater plenty or
Marrow in four-footed Beasts that are Aged, than in the little Young Ones,
because there is a greater necessity thereof.

I therefore do no longer highly esteem of the irrepairable radical Moisture,
for the Foundation of Life, as neither being astonished at Dryness, in as much
as it is such, neither also am I wont to measure out the Life, according to the
Pleasure of the first Qualities: Because I knew that the Life did not wax dry,
as neither was it to be drawn from the Bosom of the Elements, after that I
beheld the interchangeable Courses of a long and short Life, to be in the
Center of Life.

CHAP. CV. The Vital Air.
THe Schools have not performed enough, in teaching that Nourishments are
transchanged first into Chyle, and then from hence into the Digested Juice of
Venal Blood, and so that in the Liver, a natural Spirit is made, which by a
repeated Digestion in the Heart, is formed into vital Spirit, and at length,
that in the Brain it is made animal; So as that the natural Spirit should be
fit for using the Parts, but the Vital for quickening and conserving the same,
as also lastly, that the Animal Spirit should be appointed for the Functions of
Sense, Motion, and of the Mind.

But moreover, in my Judgment, it had behoved them more largely to discover the
Thingliness and History of the Deed, in so long a race of Studies, and
Repetition of Writers. Indeed they know that there is a certain Spirit, that
Maker of the Assault, according to Hippocrates, which holds the Stern of Life
in its Hand: It was to be sought for and pronounced in what Organs or
Instruments that Spirit should be made, or what it should act, and also they
ought to have explained, every Disposition, the Substance thereof, and the
Properties of its Substance, and also the manner of its making. I therefore
will declare, what I may meet with in this respect. That therefore we may be
led into the Knowledge of the Vital Spirit, the Blas of Man should first of all
be repeated in this place: but least I be tedious, I will here omit it, and
refer the Reader elsewhere, unto the Volume of the rise of Medicine.

I have elsewhere also, delivered a Mean or Manner, whereby through instilled
Ferments, an Aqua Vitae may be made of every Plant and Fruit whatsoever: Which
manner the vulgar Sort has known, and does exercise, while it frames an Aqua
Vitae or Liquor of Life out of Grains, Fruits, Ale or Beer, Hydromel or honied
Water no less than out of Juice of the Vine. But an Aqua Vitae is a volatile
Liquor, Oily indeed (as it is wholly enflamed) and likewise wholly Salt, for
as much as being an Air, it biteth, yea and being but a little while detained
in the Mouth, it burns and embladders the upper skin of the Gums.

I in this place, taking notice by the way, that two Beginnings of Chemistry
are one only and an undivideable Simple thing. I have shown also elsewhere,
after what manner one Pound of Aqua Vitae being combibed in the dried Salt of
Tartar scarce half an Ounce of Salt can be made, but that the whole Body may be
made an Elementary Water, as it was before: And so that from hence it is easy
to be seen, that Water is by Nature a more formerly and simple Body that the
Chemical Beginnings themselves. While as the Water, which at first was not in
act, in the most expurging or refined Aqua Vitae, is nevertheless, by its
reducement, thereby made its first Element of Water: The which handicraft
Operation, moreover, by transferring unto the Speculation of Life, I find that
the Wine in its winy Parts, contains the Aqua Vitae the Water of Life; and
therefore that is easily, quickly, and without the digested Maturities of the
Liver, and Gaul, snatched through the Arteries of the Stomach, unto the Heart,
or to be called unto it immediately, for the supply, and defect of the vital
Spirit; and in this respect to delude the Opinion of the Schools, which
presupposes that the Spirit of the Liver ought to precede: For if there be
more of the Spirit of Wine in the Stomach, than is meet, Drunkenness follows,
to wit, as the Spirit of Wine is more largely attracted, than can in a fit
Interval be changed into Vital Spirit: Which thing surely proves first of all,
a changing of, and also the Operations of a Digestion and Ferment.

In the next place, that also is remarkable; To wit, that there is a certain
more mild Spirit in the Wine, a Partaker of another and more noble Quality,
than that Spirit which is immediately drawn out by Distillation, and is called
refined or expurged Aqua Vitae: The which is easily beheld by the Sight, in the
simple Oil of Olives: because Oil being Distilled without the Additaments of
Bricks or Tiles, and the which therefore, is called Oleum Philosophorum,
differs much from its Oyliness, which is extracted, the simple Oil being first
reduced into unlike Parts, only by the Digestion, and Application of the
circulated Salt of Paracelsus: For truly the circulated Salt is separated the
same in weight, and ancient Qualities from the Oil, after that the Oil of
Olives is disposed into its diverse kinds of Parts: For then by this means, a
sweet Oil is separated from the Oil of Olives, even as also a most sweet Spirit
of Wine from the Wine, and that far distinct from the tartness of Aqua Vitae.
But in us, although the meat together with the Drink do after some sort
putrify (for that Purefaction is a manner and mean of transchanging a thing
into a thing) yet in our Digestions, the Spirit of Aqua Vitae is not, by such a
Putrefaction, and action of the Ferment of the Spleen, drawn out of Potherbs,
Pulses, Bread-Corns, or Apples: For truly it is not the Intention of our
Nature, to procreate an Aqua Vitae for it self; but there is a far different
Ferment in us, whereby things are resolved into Chyle; And a far different one,
whereby things do putrify, and are separated into an Aqua Vitae: For this
Ferment is introduced by many Mediums; but that is not attained but by a
specifical fermental Property of any Species: For while Herbs, through a long
steeping in Water, are made to putrify by their Ferment or Vicar, for the
extracting of an Aqua Vitae, the stalk branches, and entire Leaves remain in
their Figure and Hardness; the which notwithstanding being chewed, swallowed
and well concocted within, do in a few hours depart into Chyle, and loose the
first Nature of Herbs.

Wherefore I have also elsewhere pressed, to wit, that there are as many
specifical digestive Ferments, as many Varieties of Putrefactions, and as many
Dungs of one Bread, as there are particular Kinds of Animals nourished by
Bread: Yea, and moreover, there are more Ferments for the Corruption of Bread;
because also, Bread does putrify after many manners, as well of its own
accord, as through the Odor of Places, and Impressions of Agents: And that
which is said of Bread, the same thing may be understood of other Foods.

The Schools taking notice also, that nothings will profit us, but that which
in its Root contains the Flourish of Life, therefore also they would, that
the Spirit of the Liver being actually natural, should glisten in the Venal
Blood like an Air: And they have thought it to be a Vapor, and therefore also,
they have confounded it with an Exhalation: Not knowing that a Vapor is Water;
but that it is not a Gas, a wild Spirit, an uncoagulable Air and Sky:
Therefore they have thought, that a Vapor exhaling out of the out-chased venal
Blood (even as elsewhere, it breaths out of any lukewarm Liquors, was that
Spirit of the venal Blood, from whence the vital Spirit should afterward be
materially framed: Of which I have elsewhere profesly spoken.

For indeed, whatsoever defcendeth into an healthy Stomach, if it be concocted
by the Ferment of the Spleen, it waxes sharp through the fermental and
specifical Sharpness of our Species: And Superfluities being first sequestered
from thence, it is at length turned into venal Blood: Which Blood after the
Bound of its Digestion, is transferred into the Heart, and is made Arterial
Blood, which in the holy Scriptures, is called A ruddy or red Spirit, wherein
the Soul inhabiteth: For it is made fit to pass over into Vital Spirit, and the
remainder thereof to undergo the last Digestion of the solid parts; and at
length, without that its residence, to exhale into the Air: Therefore also for
that very Cause, it ought to be volatile, and to have assumed the Disposition
of a Spirit in the Heart.

Furthermore, that Sharpness of the Stomach, by Virtue of the ferment of the
Gaul, is converted into a Salt, even as elsewhere concerning Digestions: And
the Actual Saltness is separated with the Urin, and Sweats, because it became
Excrementitious.

But the Mass of the venal Blood it self, seeing it cannot pass over into
Spirit, but by the Vital Ferment of the Heart; I say there is made a
substantial Derivation or Translation of the Venal Blood into Arterial Blood,
and of the Arterial Blood into Spirit, wholly throughout the whole, without any
residence and separation of heterogeneal Parts; because the Excrements are
first withdrawn from thence, and the Substance of the Heart is restless, being
continually busied about this Office of Transmutation, that it may uncessantly
effect Arterial Blood out of the Venal Blood, and of this vital Spirit: So that
a certain natural Spirit, does not fore-exist in the venal Blood, from whence
as it were of the matter [whereof] vital Spirit may be made: But the whole
venal Blood it self, if there shall be need, is made Arterial Blood, and from
thence, ^ital Spirit. Therefore the making of Venal Blood in the Liver, and the
making of Arterial Blood in the Heart do differ: For one is a true
transmutation of the Chyle into venal Blood, and the generating of a new Being.
But the other is an extenuating of the Venal Blood, into a volatile Arterial
Blood, and into a Vital Air: For venal Blood is made with a thickning of it
self, and with a Separation of the liquid Excrement, or Urin. But the Vital
Spirit is made with a melting of that which is thickened, and an Aerie
extenuation thereof, to wit, whereunto the Arterial Blood affords a Degree or
Mean.

I confess indeed, that the Spirit of Wine is snatched as a Spirit, into the
Arteries, as a certain simple Symbolizing, and previously disposed thing, that
it may easily passover into vital Spirit: but the Schools do from hence
conclude nothing for their Spirit of the Liver. Therefore let the venal Blood
be the Spirit of the Liver it self coagulated, and the fore-existing Matter of
the Vital Spirits: Which Spirit indeed has the Nature, together with the Power
of a Body, that it may be Spiritualized. Therefore, even as from the Ferment of
the Heart, the venal Blood is made arterial Blood, and a volatile Spirit: So in
the Arteries, as it were in the Stomach of the Heart, and the Ferment of the
Heart being drawn, the Arterial Blood it self passes over into the
Commonwealth of Spirits.

Yea the secondary Humors also, or the immediate Nourishments of the solid
Parts, are by degrees made Volatile, least they should leave a remaining
Residence behind them; but they make an egress with a total transpitation of
themselves. The Heart therefore by its Ferment, frames arterial Blood out of
venal Blood, the which by the same endeavor, it so fits and extenuates, that
moreover, so much of vital Spirits is made out of the arterial Blood, in the
Arteries, as it were in its Stomach, as the Grosness, and resisting Substance
of the arterial Blood, in so small a space, wherein it is agitated or wrought
in the Arteries, permits to be made: And there is well nigh a single Action,
while the venal Blood passes over into arterial Blood, and the Arterial Blood
into Spirit: Because they differ not in their Shops, and likewise in the
Degrees of Digestion, Extenuation, and Subtilizing: For as much of arterial
Blood is bred of venal Blood, and as much of vital Spirits is made out of the
arterial Blood, by the same Fe^ment of the Heart, as is needful for every one
of them, and the Faculties of concocting are able to make.

Neither is it sufficient also, to have known that the venal Blood does ascend
into arterial Blood; but that the arterial Blood passes over, partly into
vital Spirit, and partly departs into the Nourishment of the solid Parts:
Also that at length of vital Spirit, it is made animal, and the which receives
an ultimated or utmost Determination in its Nerves: so indeed, that it is made
visive or visible Spirit in the optic Nerves or Sinews of Sight, but being
exorbitant from thence, and being derived into the Tongue, it should be plainly
unprofitable for tasting; even as also the Aanimal Spirits, the Authors of
touching, are unfit for Motion, and those of this, for them.

But moreover, it behooves us to have known the Marrow of the vital Spirit: For
indeed, of the Sharp Chyle, partly venal Blood, and partly a Urin and sweat is
made: But that excrementous Saltness of the Urin, is a volatile and Salt
Spirit, the which being co-fermented with Earth, at length a Salta-peter is
formed; wherefore that Salt Spirit is excrementous. The venal Blood indeed by
Distillation, shows unto us also a saltish Spirit, plainly volatile, not any
thing distinguishable in Smell, as neither in Taste, from the Spirit of the
Urin: Yet essentially different in this, that the Spirit of the Salt of Venal
Blood cures the Falling Sickness, but the Spirit of the Salt of Urin not so.

From hence at leastwise it is manifest, that there is a Salt, and volatile
Spirit in the venal Blood. But after what manner the whole venal Blood may be
homogeneally transchanged by the Ferment of the Heart, cannot be explained by
Words: because Natures themselves are not demonstrable from a former Cause: For
the Operations of Ferments for the transmutation of things, are essential; but
not the accidentary Propagations of Accidents, for the causing of Dipositions
only. The vital Spirit therefore is plainly Salt; therefore Balsamical, and a
Preserver from Corruption: That although the Aqua Vitae does easily pass into
vital Spirit; yet this Spirit is not Oily, or combustile, like the Aqua Vitae;
but the Spirit of Wine, only through a touching of the Ferment, is easily,
wholly changed into a salt Spirit, and forthwith loses its inflamable
Disposition: Even as I have taught in the Book of the Stone in Man, after what
manner Aqua Vitae may by the Spirit of Urin, be in one only instant coagulated
into a subtle Gobbet or Lump: The which concerning the volatile Salt of the
arterial Blood, may through the effective Ferment of the Heart, be much more
evidently proved.

Wherefore, they who for some good while, do undergo the beating of the Heart,
although they shall then drink abundantly, and that, much of the more pure
Wine, yet they are not easily made Drunk: Because that by reason of an urgent
necessity, the Spirit of the Wine is most speedily attracted into the Heart,
and Arteries, which are scanty in spirits, and is suddenly formed into vital
Spirit. It restores I say, the Strength or Faculties; neither yet does it then
make drunk; because it is no longer a stranger; but being drawn into the Heart,
it easily becomes domestical, and then is on every side dispensed through the
Arteries: For it does not argue to the contrary, that the Spirit of Saltpeter
is sharp, and that therefore the vital Spirit ought to be sharp: For neither
was the Spirit from whence Saltpeter was made in the Earth, then sharp: And
therefore the vital Spirit is Salt, and nearer to the Spirit of Urin, than of
Saltpeter, the which by reason of Adustion, and Extraction, is always a new
Creature of its composed Body. That Foundation therefore, which is laid by the
Ferment of the Gaul, in volatilizing and making Salt; this afterward is
perfected in the Shop of the Heart: For the foregoing Digestions, are as so
many Dispositions unto vital Functions, and Necessities: for a Member being
once stupefied, if Sense or Feeling shall return, that surely is made with
sensible Spurs and Prickings, which are the tokens of true saltness. But that
the whole venal Blood is a mere Salt, may not from elsewhere be more clearly
deducted; than that because in the Dropsy, Ascites, and in Ulcers, it is
homogeneally through a most easy Degeneration, changed into a salt Liquor. But
a salt, sharp Quality, and subtle Matter was suitable to the vital Spirit, if
it ought to be sufficient for preserving of the Members. The redness also of
the venal Blood, assumeth a yellowness, while it is made arterial Blood,
because that which is Red through the tartness of Salt, waxes Yellow in its
dissolving: Neither yet has the arterial Blood lost all its redness, for truly
a Part thereof, ought to remain for the Nourishment of the solid Members.

It is a dead or invalid thing, whatsoever I have hitherto said, that the
Spirit of Life is a salt, sharp Vapor, and made of the arterial Blood, by the
vital Members their own Ferments.

I will therefore Speak of the Life of the Spirit: For seeing it ought to do
its Duty with the Offices of Life, it was not required that it should be in the
show of a salt Liquor, or arterial Blood, or that it should befool us under the
likeness of a salt Exhalation; but because it ought primarily to live, and
receive the Life, it was meet for it to be enlightened: not indeed with a
burning, enflaming, or fiery Light; but with a simple vital Light, of the
Nature of soulified Forms, of the sensitive Life and Soul; and that indeed of
a humane Species: For, for the Understanding thereof, suppose thou, that Worm^
named Glow-wormes, have by Night, a Light in their Belly, which not only shines
like the Eyes of a Cat, but also pouers forth a thin Light round about; that
Light is extinguished with the Life of the Glow-worme. A like Light suppose
thou to be, which enlightneth the vital Spirit; as long as it lives it
shines, and is propagated into Spirit newly made, being duly elabourated: And
by how much the more impure, and the less elabourated it shall be, by so much
shall that Light be the Darker: But that Light is extinguished in us, the
Matter of the Spirit remaining, in the Plague, Poisons, etc. even as by
Swooning and Beating of the Heart, the Light is extinguished, and the Spirit
vanishes away.

In time of Death also, the Membrane of the Eye is destitute of a manifest
Light, plainly to be seen; Yet the Essence of that Light in Glowworms, is not
so alike to that which is in us, to wit, as they differ from us only in Degree:
But there are as many Species of these Lights, as there are of vital Creatures:
That is unto us a token of divine Bounty, that there are so many Species and
vital Differences of Lights, which by us are comprehended under one only
Notion; because that those Lights, are the very Lives and Forms themselves of
vital Creatures: So that the thrice most glorious Father of Lights does
recreate himself in the abundance of the kinds of Lights, with no less a
Lavishment, than as in one only humane Countenance, he has fashioned almost as
many Varieties as Men: because there is in his Power a certain Commonwealth of
vital Lights, and Band of innumerable Citizens; a certain Similitude whereof he
expresses in vital soulified Creatures, by a Life, a Form, that is, by a vital
Light. The vital Spirit therefore, Is Arterial Blood resolved by the force of
the Ferment and Motion of the Heart, into a salt Air being vitally enlightened;
which Light in us, is hot, but in the Fish it is so actually cold, that it is
never able to aspire unto a Power of Heat, as long as it lives and subsisteth:
Our Heat therefore is not a consumer of the Original Moisture; as neither
therefore, through want of Heat do Fishes hitherto escape Death, although their
Moisture be not lifted up into an Exhalation; and least of all, in the frozen
Sea: For neither shall the Capuchin our Countryman, who is cold for the
greatest part of the year, from his Feet, even unto his Belly, nor feeling
himself to have Feet, therefore not undergo a daily transpiration of the
nourishable Moisture, or does he refuse the Refreshment of Nourishments, or is
the Capuchin changed in those parts into a Fish; the which otherwise, should be
necessary for him to be, if Heat should be the primary Foundation of Life, but
not an adjacent and concomitant thereof. God forbid, that we should not know,
that there is one Consumption of the Moisture by Heat; but another which is
promoted by an extenuating Ferment: For truly, this leaves behind it no Lee or
Dreg, or any Remainder; but that leaves a sandy Stone, or Coal: And therefore
the former tends unto a thickning, but the latter unto an extenuating. But if a
great Heat does sometimes arise in us, which scorcheth the Members with the
Fire-coal or burning Fever, and Persian-fire, and does gangreen them, move an
Eschar, and sometimes gnaw the Flesh like a Dormouse; For so are the Works of
Corrosive Salts, the Acts of the Degenerations of Outlaws, banished from the
vital Commonwealth: Truly that is even as by laxative Medicines, the whole
venal Blood is resolved into Putrefaction; for they are Errors to be ascribed
unto the violences of strange kinds of Seeds, under which the vital Light does
degenerate, no otherwise than as the pressing together of Hay stirs up Fire.

Moreover the vital Spirit climb into the Head, through the principal
Arteries: But there is one only Bosom in the very middle of the Brain, which
being beheld from above, seems to be double; but its Arch or Vault being
lifted upwards, it shows a Unity.

But in this Bosom, an Artery ends into a wrinckled Vessel, and that of
another weaving, than the other compaction of Arteries. Hereby therefore, vital
Spirit flows forth into the Bosom of the Brain, for the service of the
Imagination, Memory, and the spiritual Faculties their Chamber-maids; all which
are likewise founded in the implanted Spirit, an inhabitant of the Brain.

But if the inflowing Spirit proceeds from hence, into the Mouths of the
Sinews, beginning from the Brain, or the Cerebellum; it attaineth Properties
fit for the Functions of the Parts there ordained.

I have said elsewhere, that this Spirit does not essentially differ from the
vital Spirit; but that in the latitude of its Essence, it is capable of very
many Properties, according to the latitude of Idea's imprinted on it: for that
which defluxeth to the Tongue, causes tasting, the which notwithstanding in
the Finger, does not taste; because it puts on a particular Limitation of the
Organ, without the transchanging of its Nature, least there should be as many
Sub-divisions of the Animal Spirit, as there are Services divided by
pluralities of Offices.

In the mean time, call the thing as it lists thee.

CHAP. CVI. The manifold Life in Man.
I Have shown elsewhere, that there is in the Womb a Monarch-ship, and
therefore also a singular Life: To wit, whereby after the Death of a Woman, it
as yet casts forth the Young.

I have also seen a Woman, which was never taken with the Falling-evil, but
when the Pain of Travel was urgent; neither also did it cease, but after
delivery. I have shown also, that there does live a certain piece of Flesh of a
spleen-like Form, grown up indeed between the secundines, and hollow places of
the Womb; and that its Life is proper to it self, so as that it lives not by
the Life of the Mother, or Young, but by a certain promiscuous Life, not indeed
by a sensitive Life, although it flourishes with a certain vital Power; but
not through favor of a certain herby or vegetative Soul.

At length also, that the Veins have their own Life as yet remaining in them
after the Death of a Man, whereby it preserves the Blood detained in them,
from coagulation, and in this respect, illustrates it with a certain Life for
many days after the Death of the Persons.

Wherefore that there is another Life of the Veins, whereby they not only live;
but do also conserve the Blood it self, in Life.

Last of all, I have also demonstrated, that there is a certain peculiar Life
in the Muscles, together with the sensitive and motive Faculties, whereby they
all extend themselves with a fearful Convulsion, at the percievance of Death:
As is manifest in a Tetanus, in Rigours or cold shaking Fits, and Convulsions,
wherein as well in those that are alive, as after Death, the Muscles are moved
with an unvoluntary will, even after the extinguishment of Life. And although
these Lives are distinguished by their various Subjects, and are manifested by
their diversity of Offices, yet they all arise originally from the Seed, they
are furious or cruel ones, they are implanted in their own Subjects, and are in
the whole or entire Life, as in the total Form of the Parts. Wherefore neither
are they to be considered in the Treatise of Long Life; because they are those
which perish without the hope of Fuel, at leastwise presently after the Death
of the Man: Yet are they memorable in the successive Alterations, and curative
betokening of Diseases.

CHAP. CVII. The Flux, or flowing unto Generation.
I Have seen the Beginnings of our Generation by way of Dream, and I will
describe them with my Pen, so far as can be expressed by Words.

First of all, I saw a Womb contracted with Folds or Plates after an unimitable
artifice, and in time of Conception, to open it self by a proper attractive
Blas; and that suitably according to the extension of the Seed: To wit, which
Extension or opening of the Folds, causes a sucking, and attraction of the
Seed, by reason of a Vacuum: And therein lays a Rhombus (or Figure on all
sides equal) of conception for the femal Sex: For truly, it contains the
immediate Cause of complacency, and attraction of the Seed into the Womb. For
neither otherwise in Copulations, however voluptuous they are, is there made
any enlargment of the folded Womb, except in the very instant of Conception:
For from hence it is, that the Conception of Bruits is almost infallible. For
truly there is not any voluntary Extension of the Womb, as neither is it
subjected unto Artifices or Crafts: But rather it after some sort, exceeding
Nature, plainly shows that God is the president of humane Generation,
continued on Posterity, according to the Word of blessed Propagation, Increase
and Multiply: Because it is the Finger of God, which extends these Purses,
without an organical Mean: The which is called in the holy Scriptures, God
opened the Womb of Sarah. Truly, the whole History of Generation should seem to
exceed Nature, unless it had been received within Nature from the right of an
attained Propagation, and a continued frequency of it self. Whosoever therefore
meditates on the expectation of Offsprings, let him expect not the tickling or
leacherous lust, not the abundance of Seed, yea, nor health; but altogether and
primarily, the aforesaid Magnetisme or attraction of the Womb: And on behalf
of the Male Sex, that the Seed be not infamous through any Contagion: For
otherwise, the Womb once receiving a Seed badly seasoned, does reject that
Seed, neither does it thenceforth open it self, that it may suck the Seed of
that Man, inward, for Life: For the Womb does oft-times conceive in second
Marriages, which in the first Marriage Bed, was Barren: But therefore the
extension of the Womb ought to be suitable to the Seed, by reason of avoiding a
Vacuun: And then, every strange thing, is a hostile impediment to Generation.

Then in the next place, after that the Seed of the Man is joined with that of
the Woman, the sucking of that Lodestone in the aforesaid hollowness of the
Womb, presently cease, and the Door of the Womb is shut, nigh its Neck. But
the Womb, does by shutting out all Air, on every side, and equally embrace its
Content, with a bountiful Favor, and a more exact co-mixture of them both,
begins, by reason of an occult co-marriage unfolded in the Seeds on both
sides. Presently after, although the conceived Seed, be at the first disturbed,
and a thick or dark Liquor; yet two days after, it assumeth the likeness of
the transparent white of an Egg.

But on the Sixth day (but not before) the Archeus the Inhabitant of the Seeds,
appeared unto me, as it were a cloudy Vapor, the which on the thirteenth day
after, was shadowily endowed with the Figure of a Man, together with a certain
clarifying of its own thickness: For then the Seed had increased, perhaps in
the tenth part of it self, and had married the nourishable Liquor unto it self,
being the original or firstborn Liquor.

In the mean time, I wondered at the begun Self-love of Selfishness, which even
in Seeds, should presently begin to meditate of their Increase: For as lukewarm
Milk does presently incrust it self in a thin Skin; so also the Seed,
straightway after three days, arms it self with a Skin, the which
notwithstanding becomes more manifest by Degrees; Yet both the Garments do
differ in that, that the Milk over-spreds its Skin, only against the Air; but
the Seed on every side: because the thin Skin is not extended over the Milk by
a Spirit, the Former or Framer thereof; but by Heat, which separateth the
Diversities of the Milk: For from hence it comes to pass, that the more slymie,
and more Fat, and more Neighbourly parts of the Milk, are always designed for
the making of a skin, by a separation from the rest; and the which being
consumed, the skinnifying of the Milk cease. In Milk therefore that tends
to Corruption, unlikenesses of matter are made; The which does not happen in
Seeds collected, and disposed to Generation.

Furthermore, although the Air was seen under the Figure of a Man; Yet a sexual
Character could not as yet be noted by me (after some days from the Vision, I
lighted on that place of the Apostle, There shall not be Greek or Hebrew, not
Male, or Female, but they are all one in Christ.) About the 17th day, I saw
that this figured Air did sink, and plainly espouse it self within the White,
and did as it were sleep for full three Days space and about 12 hours, and was
again a certain dark Chaos in the Seed: In which interval, it covered it self
with a visible Secundine, and the hardness of a Membrane which it found not in
the Matter, it had made unto it self by a formative and transchangative
Faculty: Indeed this forming Air, while it engraveth the Body, it uses not
separation, neither therefore has it need of a diversity of matter, whereby it
may frame or fashion the Diversities of Alterations of Organs proposed unto it
self in the Figure: Which three days being finished, that Spirit the Framer,
then first appeared, being markable with the Signature of the Sexes, yet no
longer undistinctly walking up and down throughout the whole Lump of the Seed,
but under a certain confusion, proper unto that three days space, all that
very Air had grown together, in every of his Parts, although they not yet
appearing: For neither was there as yet so much another wandering and floating
Spirit in that Mass; but one only implanted Spirit continual unto it self,
through the Rudiments of the Parts, did finish the whole distributive Divisions
of Generation; and that its own Pains was uncessant, yet without toil, and
grief or wearisomness: And although it was not wearied in its Work, yet it
required a Vicar for it self: for a distinction of the Parts is more and more
unfolded, and there is made a growth or increasing of the whole Lump, by the
Mothers, and that more pure Blood, and it forms unto it self a Radical
Moisture, the constituter of the solid Parts: Wherefore also, it draws an
Increase, and Fuel to it self, from the vital Spirit of the Mothers arterial
Blood, the which, to wit, it soon assimilates unto if self by a most perfect
Union.

Indeed the Spirit is nourished, and increases in the delineation of the Seed,
no otherwise than as the corporeal Lump of the Embryo it self: Yet the
inflowing Spirit was not seen by me, before the thirty second day after
Conception. It was then indeed as yet thin, and drawn from the arterial Blood
of the Mother, being translated into a neighboring Species. But this Spirit,
about the one and fourtieth day, had obtained a certain vital Light or
Splendor; and also it expressed the stature of a Man, but heaped round
together; yet deformed by reason of a disproportionated bigness of the Head;
which Light was as it were a shining or brightness from a flame, which Aqua
Vitae shows in burning: And not much after some moments of time, this Light
was on a sudden made more Lightsome than it self.

The sensitive Soul, although it make a Species in Bruits, and therefore
subsisteth by it self; yet in Man, it contains not a Species, but only a
subordinate Diversity of Light, or a Degree unto the Mind, therefore scarce
subsisting without the Mind. And although in Man, there be a sensitive Life;
yet it is not a specifical Being by Creation; but a seminal Being occasioned
through the Lust of our first Parent, the Character whereof is wholly
restrained by the Mind: The sensitive Life therefore, does presently inform the
Spirit of the Seed, under a skie-coloured and obscure Splendor, and is also
informed by the Mind, and that with a clearer Light.

Yet 4, 5, 6, or 7 Points of the Cord of a Foot-length, do interpose; because
Seeds do differ in the Perfection of Dispositions; and therefore the Spirits,
the Formers of Seeds, do differ in their Perfection, and cheerfulness of
Acting. For from hence it is, that that which happens unto one Conception in
one forty Days, that happens to another in the second forty, or in the third;
neither yet therefore are the more slow or sluggish Quicknings more imperfect
than swift ones, no otherwise than as fore-ripe Wits are oft-times to be set
behind, or less esteemed than the more slow ones.

At leastwise, the whole race of our Generation breaths forth some famous
thing: For although the Archeus the forming Workman, contains in it a humane
Figure, and figureth the Body after its own likeness; yet the Fabric of Man,
is not from the Beginning, in an erected or upright Stature, as neither
confusedly rouled into a circle, but bent or hooked, after which manner the
Young is defective in the Womb: It is false therefore, that Nature is every
where circular; Because she is that which would every where give satisfaction
to his ends, who is clothed by the glorious Workman of Nature, and not by
Nature,

For neither after another manner, is there a re-bent Reflection put into the
seminal erected Spirit, by the Generater; but it proceeds from the Finger of
him, who disposes of all things sweetly from end even to end: Therefore the
Seed being conceived, the Womb forthwith shuts its nether Gate, least any
foreign thing should rush into it, which might disturb its Conception.

In the next place, the Vessels of the Womb which are subject unto its command,
as if a Doorkeeper were added, are also shut above; because then a new
Commonwealth arises in the Womb, as a new family-administration of a future
Young; and therefore also a singular Kitchen is erected in the confining
Vessels: Even so that the Embryo is a good while nourished and increases, not
by the venal Blood of the Liver, but by pure, and fined arterial Blood: But
presently after, as soon as this Kitchen is furnished for the Embryo, which is
about to live in his own proper Orb, the Womb prepars venal Blood, which it
may hand-forth unto the Embryo, and therefore, whatsoever less profitable thing
it meets withal, it is brushed out; So that in that whole Motion, the Mother
for the most part is ill at ease.

For truly, seeing Filths can no longer be expurged through the emunctory of
the Womb, and the which neither are able to expect the Maturity of Delivery;
the Filths go backward into the Veins, they obtain the condition of an
Excrement, and are thrust forth by Vomit, and other Sinks: That which is not
equally done in Bruits, seeing they want Menstrues, and do not admit of an
unseasonable Copulation.

Again, the Conception of Men was not from the first intention of the Creator,
after the manner whereby we are conceived in Sins.

At length also, because for Bruit-beasts, pure arterial Blood was not equally
required for Nourishment: Therefore the teeming Woman alone, shall pay for the
Itch of one Copulation, through a cruel expiation of many Punishments beyond
Bruits. The Embryo therefore, or imperfect Young, is at first nourished by
arterial Blood, prepared in the neighbor Kitchins of the Womb, until that
after the first forty days, he obtaining a living Soul, lives of his own
right: But the preparatory Kitckin is exercised in the spleen-form Flesh,
whereby the secundine cleaves to the Womb: Therefore Succors for the Young
are slow and oftentimes void, and also those that are administered to the Mother
by way of the Mouth; because that before their entrance unto the Embryo, all
things are recocted; And again in the Young it self, before they can augment
the same.

But the Infant being born, before he is fit for bearing of the more hard
Meats, he is accustomed to the more gentle ones: For so he is a good while fed
with arterial Blood, which leaves no Dungs be-hinde it: For those things which
fall from a little Infant that is born, presently after his first Cry, are the
Relics of the Blood of the Liver, the which for the most part, is not first
admitted into the aforesaid Kitchins, but after the third forty days: And
these indeed, are the Excrements which do ripen and provoke the necessity of
travail or delivery.

But moreover, the Spirit that was once implanted in the Seed, being sunk into
the Seeds, does presently, if not foreknow the necessities of the Body, at
leastwise perfectly learn them, and afterward draws unto it self a
Consanguineal or nearly allied Spirit, or Nourishment, by a certain Harmony of
Affinity.

At length, the Womb feeling the Maturity of the Young, by co-wrinckling
contracteth it self, which the Ancients have called, Striving to expel the
Young or Offsprings. For I have oft-times withheld Abortion threatened and
begun: But sometimes I could not. But I have known that I have detained it, as
often as the abortion should be caused from a Symptomatical animosity, without a
fore-ripe expulsive Faculty, to wit, from the digression of the Womb; And the
Remedy did operate by restraining, and sleepifying, appeasing and pacifying the
aforesaid Furies of the Womb; But I could not prevent Abortion or miscarying as
often as there was a fall of the Mother from an high Place, and much disturbance
of Affrighting, Grief, Anger, etc. they being inordinate things.

And likewise, if the Young had a remarkable Monstrousness, which adds no
slugguish Spur unto Expulsion: Or if the Young die, or pines away or fails
through a notable Weakness: And likewise if the Mother being strongly smitten
with astonishment before the Young could live in its own Quarter, has
withdrawn the Arterial Spirit unto her self: The which, if it shall
straightway return from thence, yet it finds the same Young as it were in a
sound, whereunto as unto a Plant so tender, Life is scarce re-connexed.

By this means, the semi-vital Conception is now and then wont to miscarry into
a hard lump of Flesh, or a foolish Branch: But that thing scarce happens
through a defect of the Fathers Seed; because that a barren or foolish Seed, is
either not attracted, and so neither is it conceived, or if it be attracted,
it, through a foolish Lust of the Womb, soon falls out again, and frustrates
Conception: But the Seed degenerates into a hard Lump of Flesh, by reason of
external Incidencies lighting upon the Seed; whereby Hippocrates says, That
Seeds are withdrawn whither they would not.

Therefore a hard Lump or Moale is made, while as the Spirit is funk into the
Body of the Seed, and is spoiled of a humane Figure, yet retaining its former
growing Faculty.

The drowning or sinking therefore alone, is able to command the Figure out of
the forming Spirit, if being to long sleepifyed within, it becomes fast asleep,

But although the dreaming Vision, did scarce fill up the space of half a
quarter of an hour, yet it at once represented all the successive Periods of
Generation, as it were in a Glass of the Thing: To wit, its Moments, Fluxes,
Motions, Aspects, Diversities of interchanges, and also its Errors stood
collected into Unity.

But I being awaked, alas, how I sighed at the likeness of our modern
propagation with that of Bruit-beasts! And therefore Adam not undeservedly
bewailed the Death of Abel, for the space of an Age: He grieving the while, at
the hateful brutish Generation, and knew not his Wife in all that time: As
well weighing, that Nature being now defiled in its Root, was to suffer
original, and of necessity, durable Miseries.

CHAP. CVIII. A Lunar Tribute.
Seeing Woman only among living Creatures (the Ape perhaps excepted) suffers
Menstrues or monthly Issues, and seems for this cause to have experience of
the operations of the Moon-star; but since the Schools do prattle of very many
things concerning the Menstrues, as if it were the ordinary nourishment of the
Young: Surely it has behoved me to discover their boastings, in the Treatise
of Long Life.

For first of all, the Moon does not heap up or expel this venal Blood although
the purgation of the Womb be co-incident with the course of the Moon: For that
coincident is unto both terms or limits by accident; for otherwise, if that
purgation of the Woman should be from the Moon it self, verily all Women should
be Menstruous on the same day, and at leastwise, those which should dwell in
the same Climate: Or at leastwise all young Virgins, should likewise suffer
the same with the new of the Moon; which is false: For if some Ships do follow
one Pretorian or chief leading Ship, which in a dark night, has a Lanthorn in
stead of a Flag: The Lanthorn indeed, affords only a Sign of their following:
but the Wind, Stern, and Governors of the Stern, shall be the immediate
efficient Cause of their following.

So the Moon like a Torch, finisheth the task of her circle, in four weeks and
six hours: So also a Woman for Reasons straightway to be added: For the Woman
ought to increase and nourish her conceived generation from her own blood, unto
a just stature of the Young, and to feed the Infant being brought forth, with
her own blood being turned into milk. Therefore she had need of a greater
plenty of venal Blood, and therefore while it should not be supt up for those
ends, it should also become superfluous, and by consequence, be voided or
expelled: Yea although a Woman eats and drinks much less then a Man; yet she
abounds with more blood: That is, the shop of the venal Blood makes more
arterial Blood in the Woman, than in Men, even out of a more sparing meat and
Drink.

From whence it of necessity in the next place, follows, That in the Woman,
more is turned into a profitable nourishment, and in the Man, that more is
changed into excrements.

But how it is manifest, what, or of what sort, that superfluous blood may be;
let all know, that the venal Blood of Man ought to be renewed in a space of
days, wherein the Moon measures all her particular courses through the
Zodiac: For that is the space, wherein the venal Blood is kept in its Balsam,
it being longer reserved, it is corrupted. For truly, he that abounds with
Blood, it must needs be, that by nourishing, he spends the same on the family
of Life, or that he transchangeth it into fatness, phlegms of the Latex, or
other drosses; as Sweat, or diseasie Excrements: For the Woman has small
pores, the fleshy Membrane under her upper skin, does enrich her with much fat,
neither therefore can she consume so much Blood superabounding in her, as she
daily makes or concocts. The bound therefore of the course of the blood being
finished, that which is barren becomes all superfluous, the which therefore
Nature is busied in casting forth, and sequesters it unto the veins of the
Womb, as unto its appointed emunctories: For the blood departs unto those
proper places, nor those likewise strange ones, because for the ends already
declared, the Menstrues is the superfluity of the Blood of the Woman alone: And
it becomes burdersome, by the very title whereby it is superfluous: And as yet
by so much the more, because then it puts off the vital Spirit; no othewise
than as some Wines, after the Years end, become strengthless.

For these ends therefore, and by these means, the venal Blood is made an
Excrement, afterward a poison, and attaines worse faculties in going. But at
length it assumes the horrid properties of a new dead carcass: For therefore
the Menstrues of the first days, is more infected than that which flows forth
in the following days: For although the expulsion of the Menstrues be the
proper office of the Veins: Yet the collection of the same, even as also its
renewing, and sequestring, do belong unto the Monarchal Archeus of the Womb.

Therefore indeed, that which is most hateful, is the more speedily cast out of
doors, whereby it first separated it self from the good blood; and for this
cause, it being the longer detained about the Veins of the Womb, for that cause
also, it is the more poison some.

In the next place, although this Poison masks it self with the show of venal
Blood, yet the favor of the vital Balsam being by degrees laid aside, it
ascending unto the malignity of a cadaverous or stinking Liquor, assumeth the
disposition of a poison, and has degenerated from the former nature and
properties of Blood: The which handy-craft operation proves.

For truly, a Towel that is dipped in the Menstrues, if it be plunged into
boiling water, it contracts an un-obliterable spot for the future, and the
which at leastwise in the third washing, falls out of the Towel, it being made
full of holes, no otherwise than if it should be corroded by the sharp Spirit
of Sulphur: That which after another manner, is a forreigner to the blood of a
Man, whether it shall flow forth through the Nostrils, Wounds, Hemerhoides, or
Bloody Flux; or next, if it shall fall out from Ulcers like a more wan clot.

From whence also, it is manifest, that the Menstrues has an aluminous tinging
property, any besides, a cadaverous sharp poison fit for gnawing or erosion.
But as it once enjoyed the Seal of the Archeus of Life, whereof it being
afterward deprived, it obtains a fermental faculty, full of a powerful
contagion, as also hostile sharpnesses: For that Blood through its diverse
degrees of malignity, stirs up diverse passions within, on the miserable Woman.

For when as it being once sequestered from the other blood, unto the Inns of
the Veins of the Womb, has received the aforesaid sharpness of malignity, and
from thence is supped back again into the branches of the hollow vein by a
retrograde motion of revulsion (which is made through large cuttings of a vein,
or symptomatical wrothfulnesses which are the stirrers up of Fluxes of the
Womb) it causes Swoonings, Heart-beatings, Convulsions, and oft-times horrible
stranglings.

But if the Menstruous Blood, being not yet derived unto the Veins of the Womb,
or plainly severed from the rest, and so neither has as yet had its utmost
mischief or corruption; It is detained with a certain inordinacy, and stirs up
diverse conspicuous Symptoms in many places.

From what has been said before therefore, it is manifest, That Women great
with young, Nurses, weak or sick Persons, blood-less Women, those that are
become Lean, those that are not of a ripe age, and swift or circular movers, do
want Menstrues, because also Superfluities.

It is also false, that all Menstruous Blood without distinction, is poysonsom
or hurtful: And likewise that we are nourished and grow big in the Womb, by the
Menstrues: For truly the venal Blood of the Woman has not the condition of
Menstrues, before that until it being unfit for nourishment, is enfeebled, or
deprived of Life, and brought bound unto the sink.

For neither does he who drinks Wine, drink Vinegar, although this be made of
that: As neither is he fed with Excrements who eats Meats: Yea, which is
more; The Blood which is avoided in or presently after delivery, is not
Menstruous through the defect of its condition, because it is not superfluous,
from a foregoing course of the Moon.

And then also, because it is not heaped up, fleshy, not aluminous or tart, not
staining linen Clothes, nor separated from the whole, nor banished unto the
places of the Womb, for expulsion.

For that blood which is plentifully voided in time and after delivery, and the
which being retained, a doting Fever does soon after, threaten death, is
indeed venal blood, yet not the Menstrues of the Mother: For it is left by the
Young, who seeing from his quickening, he lived in his own Orb, had a kitchen
out of himself, in the Vessels of the Womb.

Wherefore it has taken to it self another property, than that of the Mother,
and than that of the Menstrues: For that guest has indeed the shape of
Menstruous Blood; Yet being an adoptive of another Family, and become a
forreigner to the Mother, it is seriously to be expelled, surely no otherwise
than as the Secundines themselves: But being omitted and left behind, it is
corrupted, and brings on death. But seeing that in a Woman great with Child,
there is no Menstrues at all; by consequence neither is that Young nourished:
but with the pure arterial blood of the Mother, and afterward with pure venal
blood, being also first refined in its kitchins.

Therefore the Schools are deceived, who teach, That the small Pox, or Measels,
are due almost to every mortal man, by reason of the tribute of Menstruous
nourishment: For they observed, that there was seldom any smitten twice with
that Disease, and perhaps seldom excused from it: Wherefore they searching into
the common Cause from whence the Young should be nourished, in the beginning,
have referred the Effect on the Menstrues: But in all things, they, without the
knowledge of things, have mutually subscribed to each other, and have slidden
into Fables, and Conjectures.

For first of all, they have not considered, that it is almost impossible for
any one to be made free from that Disease, if all are alike indifferently
nourished with Menstrues. And then, because they should be afflicted as it
were, at one certain and appointed term of the Crisis.

I confess indeed, that the Measels do spring from a Poison, and draw a Poison
with them, infect the blood with their ferment, and defile others that stand
by, but especially Children, and that the internal essence of Poisons, is not
demonstrable by a former Cause: and therefore we measure the Property of a
Poison by the Effects; even as a Tree by his Fruits.

1. Therefore, The Poison of the Measels, is proper only to humane kind.

2. That Nature is prone to the framing of that Poison.

3. But that it is kindled about the Stomach, and so in the Center of the Body.

4. That the parts being once besieged with this Poison, do most swiftly
repulse that Poison from themselves, toward the superficies of the Body.

5. That the shops of that Poison, after that they have once felt the tyranny
thereof, being afterward thoroughly instructed with a hostile averseness and
horror, do with great fore-caution prevent or hinder the generation thereof,
even from the very beginning, least they should even at first, unwarily fall
thereinto.

Therefore the Poison is made in Man, but not co-bred in him from the
Menstrues. But of what quality that Poison may be, cannot be described by name,
because it has not a proper name out of its effects.

It is sufficient in this place, that the Menstrues cannot be drawn into a
Cause for the Distempers aforesaid.

At first therefore, The Menstrues offends in its matter, by reason of its
abounding alone: And then it undergoes a degree, that the first may be, wherein
that blood is superfluous, from the foregoing course of the Moon.

But a Second degree, is as soon as it is separated from the rest of blood.

But a Third degree is, while, as designed, it has resided about the Vessels
of the Womb.

A Fourth is that which has stuck some good while in the same place, and has
entered into the way of death.

At length, the last degree is, while as it now has slidden forth as a dead
Carcass, and into the Air.

Therefore the Schools offend, while as by cutting of a Vein, they are busied
in succouring of Virgins (who in respect of their Menstrues do feel an
heart-beating or trembling) without distinction: For although the Menstrues of
the first degree, appeaseth heart-beatings or pantings, by a revulsive
blood-letting; yet in the third degree of the Menstrues, I have foretold it to
our chief Physicians, to be a destructive Remedy: Because that the Veins of
the Arm or Hams being emptied, I have observed the Menstrues to be drawn
backwards from the neighboring places, into the Veins: And truly those Veins
which do not remain emptied, but which are filled again by a communion of
continuation: So also, after great heart-beatings, and pauses of intermitted
pulses, or after most sharp pains of the sides following from the Womb, to
wit, by reason of an aluminous Poison of the third degree, Virgins have
suddenly died, by reason of Phlebotomy by me instituted at unawares.

In the first degree indeed, the abundance of venal blood is taken away: But it
is the less evil, although a part of the barren blood be left surviving.

Truly I had rather to help Nature in her sequestration, and expulsion, than by
drawing of undistinct blood, to have weakened Nature.

Moreover, that is to be noted, That although I have distinguished Diseases by
the Ranks of Digestions, yet I have scarce made mention of the Menstrues;
Because the Menstrues is neither digested, nor is it a superfluity of
Digestion, and so is of another condition: For at first it offends with a good
abundance, and then, with a burdensome superfluity; presently after it is
deprived of Life, and becomes a Poison; yet it cures Swine which are inclining
into the Leprosy; even as Horses, straightway, which were contracted or
convulsive from unseasonable Drink, if they drink up but a small quantity of
Menstrues.

And likewise the poysonsom and true Menstrues of another Woman, being
administered in a few drops, has presently strangled a Woman laboring with a
Flux of the Womb.

But the blood which is at length avoided in plenty, in Fluxes of the Womb,
being drunk in a few drops, stays those Fluxes.

Furthermore, because Woman only, (the Ape perhaps excepted) does suffer
Menstrues; and although the Menstrues do accuse of an abundance alone; yet that
the Cow, her Dug being dried, suffers not Menstrues, otherwise she flows down
with very much Milk, denoting that the abounding of venal blood, is indeed the
material Cause, but not therefore the final, and the which therefore, I have
not reduced among natural Causes: For that the Almighty alone encloseth all the
final Causes of all things within himself, who sweetly disposes of all things
according to the unsearchable Abyss of his own Judgments. But if it lists
us to enquire into the cause hereof, It is certain, that Eve, after the eating
of the forbidden Apple, made her self subject to the itch of Lust, stirred up,
and admitted the Man unto copulations; and from hence, that the conceived
humane Nature was corrupted, and remaining degenerate thenceforward: Through
the Cause of which corruption, Posterity are deprived of an incomparable purity.

From whence there is place for conjecture, that Eve did by the Member through
which she became subject unto many Miseries, testify among posterity, a
successive fault of her fall, and bloody defilement in Nature: For the part
wherein the Image of God ought to be conceived by the holy Spirit, became a
sink of filths, and testifies the abuse, and fault of an unobliterable sin, and
therefore also suffers: Because, In sorrow shall thou bring forth thy Sons, in
manner of bruit beasts, because henceforward, thou shall conceive after the
manner of bruits: For so that Curse has entered into Nature, and shall there
remain. And by the same Law also, a necessity of Menstrues: For before sin, the
Young going forth the Womb being shut, had not caused pain.

Wherefore, it is lawful to argue from the Premises, That the incomparable
Virgin Mother of God, the Ark of the Covenant, never admitted into her any
corruption, and by consequence, was never subject to Menstrues, as neither to
have suffered womanish discomodities: Because she was she, who by the good
pleasure of God, has the Moon, and the Properties of the Moon subjected under
her feet. Unto Whom, next unto God, be Honor and Praise.

CHAP. CIX. Life.
IF I must at length Phylosophize of Long Life, I must first look into, what
Life is, and then, what the Life of Man, what immortal and Adamical Life is,
afterward what a Sensitive and Short Life is, what a Diseasie, what a Healthy
Life, what the Life of the World, and what Eternal Life is.

To which end, it is convenient to repeat some Lessons from my Premises.

First of all therefore, Life is a Light and formal Beginning, whereby a thing
acts what it is commanded to act: But this Light is given by the Creator, as
being infused at one only Instant, even as Fire is Struck out of a Flint; it
is enclosed under the Identity and Unity of a Form, and is distinguished by
general Kinds, and Species: But it is not a fiery, combustive Light, a
consumer of the radical moisture: It is as well Vital in the Fish, as in the
Lion, and as well in the Poppy, as in Pepper: Neither also does heat fail in
us, by reason of a consumption of the radical moisture: Neither on the other
hand, does moisture fail through a defect of heat, but only through a
diminishment and extinguishment alone, of the vital Powers, and also of the
Light. The Fire, Light, Life, Forms, Magnal, Place, etc. are neither Creatures,
not Substances, as neither comprehended in the Catalogue of Accidents: Neither
therefore, do I distinguish the Form in vital things, from their Life, the mind
of Man being on both sides, excepted: To wit, there is a certain Life which is
mute or dumb, and scarce appears; such as is met with in Minerals; The which
notwithstanding, do declare that they live, and perform their Offices, by their
Marks and remarkable Signs of vital Faculties.

And then, there is another Life, which is a little more unfolded or manifest:
Such as is in the Seeds of things, tending to the period of their Species.

In the next place, a Third Life is seen in Plants, increasing themselves, and
bringing forth offspring by a successive multiplying.

Next, a Fourth Life is manifest in bruit Beasts by Motion, Sense, and a
voluntary Choice, with some kind of Discourse of Imagination.

At length, the Last Life is now obscured in the Immortal Mind and Substance,
and is after some sort unfolded by the sensitive Soul its Vicaresse.

The Life therefore is not the Balsam, not the Mummy, not, in the next place,
the Spirit of the Arterial Blood, although this Spirit be the Conserver of the
Body: Because the Life is not a Matter, yea nor a Substance; but the very
express Form of the Thing it self.

Moreover, I being about to speak of the Immortal Life of Men, I will follow
the Text: For indeed, because the punishment of the broken Precept was Death:
For Death came not from God, but from the condition of a Law; I say, the
Almighty made not Death, as neither a Medicine of Destruction in the Earth: And
that must be understood only in respect of Men: For neither ought the whole
Nature and Condition of the Universe to be bespattered for the Sin of Adam, so
as that Bruits are made subject to Death through the corruption or deviation of
our kind: For truly even before Sin, Bruits ought to dye; to wit, some whereof,
the Lord of things had substituted for meat and fodder to others: For they
ought naturally to dye, every annihilable Life and Form whereof, were only one
and the same thing.

Indeed it was of necessity, that those Forms should perish, whatsoever do
obtain their first or chief antecedent and subsequent dispositions from a
corporal wedlock of the Seeds.

The Death therefore of Bruits, was not worthy of the word Death, which
included an extinguishment and annihilating of a Light, but not a separation of
the same, with a preservation of the Light separated.

Therefore it was the great God his good pleasure, that he made Man into the
nearest Image of the Divine Majesty, as a living Soul, nor subject unto death:
Therefore neither is it said that God made Death.

It is therefore believed that Adam before transgression, was Immortal, from
the goodness of the Creator: Therefore I knew that Adam indeed was Immortal,
before the transpression of a Law; Yet that it was not natural unto him from
the root of Life, but for the Tree of Life's sake: For otherwise, the planting
of this Tree in Paradise had been vain, if Man could not have suffered the
successive alterations and calamities of Ages.

That Tree therefore, was created, for the powers and necessities of
Renovation, renewing of Youth, yea and prevention of Old Age: For although the
Body by Creation, was not capable of being wounded, nor subject unto Diseases;
yet it had by little and little, felt the successive changes of Ages, if its
vigor had not been continued by the Tree of Life.

For neither is it to be believed, that the Lord of things, the Savior of the
World, was of a worse constitution than our first Parent. But that the Redeemer
of the World died, and so felt the Calamities of Ages, that in his thirty
second year, he was reckoned fifty years of Age.

That happened not from his Nature, nor from the root of his Life: For Death,
as also the rottenness of Days, had no right over him; but out of his infinite
goodness, whereby he had appointed himself a Surety for our Sins, he would
subject himself to miseries, and so also to Death, in his most glorious
nativity, wherein the Lord took on him the Form of a Servant. But how much he
departed from that former and proper or natural dignity of his humane nature,
wherein he was conceived in the Womb, himself shows: Because he who came
forth into the World, the Womb of the Virgin being shut, and the bolts of
dimensions being contemned, presently prostrated himself to the ordained
condition of Death, and willingly felt every necessity of a servile nature: For
both Adams in their beginning, were immortal.

For the first Adam ought to be preserved by the Tree of Life: But the second
did wholly contain the Tree of Life in himself.

Both of them indeed chose to dye, before a possibility to live: For the former
chose it from a Vice; but the second from Charity.

The Tree of Life therefore, and wholsomness of the place of Eden had
vindicated Adam in his ancient vigor, from Death, until that a number of years
being finished, he as happy had departed, translated, without death, unto the
Country of Glory.

Moreover, it is of Faith, that Adam never tasted of the Tree of Life; and that
lest he should eat of it, he was cast forth of Paradise, who ought to dye the
death: Yea he being now banished out of the Garden of Pleasure, was of so
perfect a constitution, that he had lived unto some thousands of Years (who was
immediately formed by the hand of the Almighty, without the commerce of Nature)
and had far exceeded the age of Mathusalem, from the voluntariness of his own
nature; but that through the continued mourning and grief of one Age, he had
cut off the thread of a most Long Life from himself.

The Death therefore of Adam is not to be bewailed (as otherwise, Paracelsus
badly persuaded himself) because that the vital Spirit, and knowledge of Long
Life, had fallen at once together with him.

For those are contradictions, to enjoy Long Life from Knowledge; and likewise
to be Immortal from the forming of the hands of God, and the suffrage of the
Tree of Life; also after sin to have retained the gift of Long Life, by reason
of his most perfect and noble constitution of Life and Body.

From whence, the Spirit of a flourishing and abounding Life, being at length
translated on Posterity, its vigor by degrees declining through a passing over
of Generations, the injuries of Life, and Diseases, and through the rottenness
of Years, the Curse cooperating, manifested it self as a Magnum Oportet or a
thing of great necessity: The which having once entered into the Bowels of
Mortals, presently took possession of the same.

For the Life of those which at first, was by the Tree, without Death,
presently also without that Tree, languisheth, as being enrouled in a short
term of Time, and underwent an increase, state, or height, declining, and
cessation, after the manner of other things.

For so indeed, Death, through the persuasion of the Devil, stablished it self
into its Empire: For Poisons that were harmless under the Tree of Life, were
afterward supported for a Medicine of Destruction: For I think that the
Conditions, and presence of the Tree of Life, were hidden from Adam; Else that
he had extended his hand unto this, sooner than unto the Tree of the Knowledge
of Good and Evil.

And although the Tree of Life, which the bounty of the Creator has of late
discovered, may be so prepared, that it may proceed unto the first
constitutives of us, with a refreshment of the decaying faculties; yet I do not
understand it to be that which is read to have been implanted in the Paradise
of Pleasure, whereunto no mortal man shall ever stretch forth his hand: But
ours is a shadowy one, and the Vicaress of the other: To wit, the which has
nothing excellent and famous, unless that under a retainment of properties, it
be reduced by Art, into such a juice, which may be able by its least parts, to
co-mingle it self with the solid parts: Neither indeed does our Tree, (of which
I as the first do treat) contain a non-sufferance, unsensibleness of the pain
of Diseases, and an uncapacity of Death, as the other did.

And moreover, although the Tree of Life of Paradise, should at this day be
present with us, yet it should not cause immortality: Because the condition of
the receiver is changed: For indeed man is become composed by the bond of
another generation, of corrupted Nature, and of another Long Life, wherein the
immortal mind has no longer immediately sustained in it all the actions of
Life, but a frail or mortal sensitive Soul succeeded exercising the Vicarship
of the mind, and providing for the necessities of Life, it self being like the
flame, slidable and extinguishable every hour.

CHAP. CX. Short Life.
THe Air which is the former in the Seed, ascending by degrees unto its
Maturity, at length conceives the Light, or essential Form of its own Species,
which is made immediately by the Father of Lights, and is of a proper name,
Life: For as many things as differ in their particular Kinds, which are
involved in Darkness, so many also ought the Forms to be, under the species of
Light: For if a thing is what it is, by reason of the Form, in diversity from
any other things whatsoever: But the Form of living Things (except the Mind)
and Life, are Sunonymals, there must needs be as many Lives, as there are vital
Forms: Therefore the Light of Life, is by it self every where simple, and
specifical, but not fiery; because vital, formal, and essential. But that the
Light of Life is hot, or cold, it denotes that the Life has not married Heat,
or Cold, but accidentally: so that Heat, or Cold proceeds from Life, but not
Life from Heat, or Cold: Life therefore cannot be otherwise understood, than
under the Conception of Light: And neither Light is more demonstrable from a
former Cause, than the Forms of things themselves, and whatsoever issues
immediately out of the Bosom of the Almighty. A vital Light therefore, by its
species, wants a proper name.

We may indeed make a fiery Light to be given unto us for great necessities;
but it is not in the Power of the Artificer, even immediately to produce a
vital Light from himself: Which thing the Chemists say, The Artificer cannot
introduce a substantial Form. The Generater indeed, is the begetter and
producer of a vital Air, forasmuch as he contributes Matter after the likeness
of himself, and Dispositions thereof, in order unto Life; but is in no wise
able to produce Life, or an ultimate perfect Art.

In Diseases also, sometimes the Light of Life ascends unto the degree of
Fire: Because the Archeus, from a threatened distinction or nothing of
difference, strikes out a fiery Light: Not that the Archeus produces this
Light, as he that generates his Like: But the Archeus through Fury, presses
together the moist Hay, and it is enflamed; the which being dry, comes not so
to pass.

After another manner also, Woods by a co-rubbing, and Iron by striking against
it, do conceive the fire which they have not: For truly, the same effects in
Specie cannot proceed from things which differ in the whole Genus or general
Kind, unless by accident, or an equivocal Action: So indeed, the sensitive
Spirit, by reason of Grief, or the Archeus by Poison, does by accident become
fiery besides his own Nature, through a proper wrothfulness of Anger: For he
has a Blas, whereby he departing from a vital Light, declineth unto the other
extreme of Destruction, wherein the Beams of his Light do as it were strike
Fire out of a Flint, from the corruptible Matter, where both Lights of the
Archeus, and corruptible Matter do pierce each other, are united, and are
promoted into a fiery Light; because Fire is on both sides the Death of a
Thing, which from a proper effect of deficiency, is capable to be stirred up in
things consisting of a certain inflamable Fatness: For indeed, although there
be one only Spirit in the Seed, which is plainly uniform, and the singular
Architect of the Embryo, which is durable unto the end of the Tragedy; yet that
was the vice and destruction of a material Nature, that the Spirit being
divided through a plurality of Offices, may by degrees decline unto the
manifold diversities of kinds of Singularities: And it is in very deed a Vice,
as it strews the way unto disorder. For otherwise, seeing the Spirit ought to
serve the necessities of Ends, surely it were a noble thing for it to be
severed into a number of Offices: For necessity has made the Organs themselves
servile unto it, the which therefore has framed for it many and diverse
Organs; and in this respect, it has drawn it self unto the same Law of
necessity: To wit, it having imitated a monarchical State, wherein there is a
certain Independent Prince, the moderatour of Laws and Government; wherefore
also it fashioning a certain Sunny issuing Life on the Heart, but as it were
Independent on any other part, has there placed the Fountain of Radical Life:
But because a Commonwealth cannot long subsist, unless it be nourished;
therefore after Kings, Husbandmen, and Fishermen are chief, who bring forth
unto us Grain, Herbs, Flocks, Fishes, Woolls, Flaxes, Wines, Woods, Honeys,
Oils, and Hides: Because also, before Kings were thought of, happy Shepherds
and Husbandmen, had now their Flocks: For for that Cause, Saturn is feigned to
be the Parent of the Starry Gods, unto whom the Heathens have delivered a
necessity of Nourishment in us, as a clear Life of vegetation, by a commutative
or exchanging Ferment sliding from the Spleen.

Next, they vote for Husbandmen, who should prepare Grain for making of Bread,
Woolls, also Flax, and Hides for Garments: Straightway, Jupiter being
substituted in his Fathers place, succeeded by craft and force; and therefore
also another disposer of Nourishment, founding its Mansion in the Liver, is
adjoined unto the nourishing Life, and does of necessity suitably answer from
its place, for a Monarchy.

In the next place, Mars removing the disagreeing Relics in the former
Digestions, being as a supply placed in the Gaul, is agreeable with the
Soldier. There has seemed to be a need only of these three, and those
sufficient, to wit, of Sol, Saturn, and Jupiter, as long as all things or parts
should agree in Harmony: But the life of Mars was afterward subjoyned, not
indeed that it might be a Commonwealth and State, simply; but that all parts
may keep Peace, and their mutual Offices among each other, nor a rout of
Impurities growing up, that Unity may be ordained.

Furthermore, to increase, follows to be present: For a thing first is, before
it grow or increase: Yea, seeing it cannot be a nourished thing, unless it be
nourished, to be nourished, goes before increasing: For the Moon being the last
of the wandering Stars, in respect of things nourished, is nearest to the Earth:
Therefore the immediate and unexcusable necessity thereof, has dedicated this
family-administration to the Brain, as being sacred to the Judge in the
Monarchy: For we live from the Heart, but Nourishment is from the Spleen, and
Liver; the correction of Digestion from the Gaul; but the growing Faculty is
from the Brain: Therefore to be quickened, or refreshed, and to increase, do
differ in their Beginnings, like as also in their Organs: And that indeed, not
by accident, or by reason of a stubbornness of the Parts hereafter refusing to
increase; but by reason of each particular natural Endowments of the Bowels:
For Indeed what I have said, is beheld even in the birth of the Embryo: For
truly, because the increasing or growing Faculty flows from the Brain (which
thing, none has hitherto supposed) the head of the Embryo, and of the Young it
self, is far bigger in Proportion, than the rest of the Members: For if the
hand be dislocated or put out of joint, it not only cease to increase, but
moreover it decreaseth even in Persons of ripe Age. Crump-backed Persons also
do stop from growing, although their turning Joints being by degrees writhen
awry, do burgen or tumifie only outward, or toward the Side: Not indeed that
Feeling is withdrawn from, or diminished in Crump-backed-folks, who have no
less feeling than any others: Wherefore the defect of Growth, depends not on
any Dislocation of the Sinews, Veins, or Arteries; but from the beholding of a
Crookedness alone in the Marrow, the very right influx of the Brain, is a
little incarnated.

Neither is that humoural Flux, to wit, through the Veins and Arteries (for
truly, in the wreathen Branches of Trees, even as also in crooked Legs, a
defect of growth is not seen) but it is a Flux of the Light of the Brain; even
as concerning the Action of Government, elsewhere.

Flesh grows in an hollow Ulcer, and Marrows increase after the manner of the
Menstrues, although the other parts do cease from growing: The Ribs also
increase in persons of ripe years, together with an enlargment of the Breast;
the Pores do overgrow in Fractures; the Liver through a Disease, grows up after
a wonderful manner: Teeth do oftentimes grow in Old-men: And all that, because
the growing Faculty obeys the Brain. Astrologers attribute the growing Faculty
to the Moon; yet none to the Brain.

The Bones of Old living Creatures (as I have said) by a singular Secret,
contain more Marrow than those of younger Ones; Because the Moon makes into the
first matter for Transmutation, Rest, Death, and Reducement. Therefore the Moon
being very powerful in old Animals, hinders not the Marrow from increasing.

Furthermore, seeing every thing in Being, desires to grow or increase, and
does even from the Beginning, meditate of the Propagation of it self; and
seeing Nature is of no other thing, more solicitous, than of the Sex; so that
she has marked Insects, which she stirs up from corrupt Excrements, with the
difference of the Sexes: there was also need of Venus or carnal Lust; to which
end, the Schools think the Reins to serve: But I disagree, because I have
observed those that were Stony in both Kidneys, to have been more wanton than
was meet.

For neither otherwise can I believe, that the fundamental Part of Venus being
hurt, tickling lust is able to subsist: Because that this is the necessity of
the Parts, that a proper Organ being hurt, the Function thereof is of necessity
intercepted.

I have sometimes spoken of the Venus of the Spleen: At leastwise, here it is
sufficient, that the Femal kind is by a divine Testimony of praise, exceeding
necessary, and most profitable for the subsistence of a Commonwealth: But at
length, seeing every Land does not bring forth all things; in this respect, for
a good and commodious way of Living, the custom of Mortals has introduced
co-bound Provinces, and Conspiracies of Merchandise: Therefore Profit has made
the Lungs to be its Mercury, and agreeable unto Merchandise with the foreign
Parts; that, after that the Young should be now increased, it should have the
vital Vigor of breathing and voice: A participative and distribvtive Life, I
say, throughout the whole, to be blown abroad in an equable Air: To wit,
without which, all the Blood should be thickened through nourishing, into a
Tophus or sandy Stone, and the Body should soon increase, either into a huge
Monster, or presently from the Beginning, should be choked: Even as elsewhere
concerning the Blas of Man.

But notwithstanding, I will not, that the Architect of the Seed shoud beg this
Commonwealth and Harmony (thus compared unto the wandering Stars) for himself
from far, to wit, from the Stars of Heaven, elsewhere: For the Archeus
intimates the Stars through a proportionable Conjunction, because he has a
heaven-like Being in himself: For he, who by a small Word, made the Stars of
nothing, has constituted a co-like Power of the Word (Increase and Multiply)
within the innermost Parts of Seeds, which is to endure throughout Ages.
Therefore the Seed has drawn that unto it self from a free gift, that it is
able to stir up and imitate the proportionable Respects of the Stars in its own
Blas: wherefore it happens, that more succesful Emulations of the Stars, than
those that are inbred, do follow at set Periods, because they are the more
powerful and famous Sealings.

Neither in the mean time, is there that Power in the Stars, that they should
be chief in the forming of the manners, health, calling or vocation, and
fortunes of Mortals: For he who is all in all, and created all things for his
own Glory, from an immediate end, would not that his own Image should be
subjected to the Stars, least they should excuse themselves of their Fault, by
the importunate revolutions of the Stars. But it is well, that there is a
seminal Being, a proportionable thing, which may after some sort answer to the
Stars, and to the whole Universe.

Wherefore in Man, the Seed at first clothes it self with the Secundines,
straightway after it earnestly labors about its own family-administration; in
the next place, it meditates on the aforesaid Commonwealth, it variously
disposes of all particular Parts, and constrains them by the Laws of free
Denizons; then indeed also, it thinks of a Kingdom and Empires; At length of
the whole Earth; and last of all, of the Heavens: And so, by virtue of the
Word, he delineates the whole Universe in himself, as he is the Image of God:
For he has put under his Feet the flying Fowls of Heaven, the Fishes of the
Sea, Sheep, Oxen, and Beasts of the Field: Because he has set him over the
works of his Hands: But the Heavens are the Works of the Hands of God: Which
dignity of appointment surely, seeing otherwise it contains a command, it does
not indeed contain a certain feigned, or remote, and allegorical Power:
Therefore it must needs be, that we do after some sort resemble the Heavens in
the Image of the Arch-type: But the command, seeing it is already planted into
Nature, Man shall have that his proper nobleness in him, from his original, but
not from the Stars that are placed under him.

But seeing that by the Schools and rustical Persons, the defects which shall
be in deformities, and a vitiated forming, are more considered, than those
which were to rise from erroneous Faculties: Hence they have given an occasion
that Astrologers should at their pleasure, draw all things unto their own
dances of the Stars: But after that a diversity of Offices was by the more
refined Men, known to imply a diversity of kind of Faculties, and Organs, those
Men therefore began to fetch, interchange, number, and deformity, from the
Stars, and to refer them unto the Directions of the Seeds. For neither under
Nature now once radically corrupted, could Seeds be long kept fruitful under
Unity, neither by this Unity, could so many distinct Offices of the Organs be
completed, but that almost from the Beginning, an unlikeness of strength in
the Bowels; yea and an unequality of strength in all particular Parts, should
under-creep and be sealed in those places: From whence there should at length,
be a breaking asunder of the Thread, a dissolution, an offspring of
Infirmities, and much Destruction: All which things, the Soothsayers of Heaven
(the Schools not resisting it, but being astonished thereat) have without
punishment transferred unto their trippings of the Stars: Wherefore (a
standard-defending Goat, being as it were, taken by the Beard) the whole
following troop of Posterity have admired them: For there is so great a
diversity of kind in the bosom of the Matter, that there is scarce a Golden
thread made, which in some part of it, is not the more infirm, and does not the
sooner burst asunder: Therefore, neither is it a wonder, that in so great a
distraction of Members and Functions, an unequal strength increases in the
Members: Wherefore whole Families do perish with a Tabes, or Consumption, or
Dropsy.

In some Persons, their Going fails after the fiftieth Year of the Age, whose
Sight persisteth unto their eightieth Year.

But in others, their Sight is dull after their fourtieth Year, whose Going
promises a Long Life: Because, from a simple and universal Spirit of the Seed,
the Rulers of all particular Organs do increase: Which Rulers surely, being
there alienated, either through a Vice of the Organs receiving, or through an
error of Dispensation, do oft-times depart from their aim: For the Spirit
which has distinguished the Parts from each other, and formed them, has
presently also received all its Limitations in those very Parts: For the optic
Spirit sees in the Eye, and tastes in the Tongue; because the inflowing
Spirit is there limited by the implanted Spirit.

As besides, there is a certain principiating Life in the Spleen, another in
the Muscles, and lastly, another in the Womb of a Woman, even as I have often
demonstrated elsewhere.

All which, are by so much divided from the common Life, by how much they are
those things which have diverse existences. Seeing therefore Plurality includes
a certain Duality, it is no wonder, that the Life being tossed by many diverse
Governors, did easily rush into Dissolution, after that the immortal Mind
suffered the Rains of the Life that was to be governed, to slide on the neck of
the sensitive Soul.

CHAP. CXI. Life Eternal.
THe Gospel promises to mortal Men, not only that the Son of God was
Incarnate, and suffered for the Salvation of Man; but that these two Mysteries
are to be applied unto Individuals, which else should be as it were in vain:
But I have considered of that Application, after this manner.

For indeed by Sin, Man brake no less the Intent, than the Decree of God, from
whence humane Nature was corrupted in its Root; because there followed another
almost beast-like Generation thereupon, which of it self is incapable of life
Eternal: Wherefore the Gospel ought to include the abolishment of Original Sin
and of all other things issuing from the Corruption of Nature: Therefore,
seeing Man thenceforeward ought to be born no longer of God; but naturally only
of the Bloods of the Sexes, of the will of the Flesh, and of the will of Man:
neither yet could his Body rise again (through any Power of his own) into its
ancient Dignity, and much less cease to be, that it might again, and otherwise
begin to be: Therefore the joyful Message was brought unto us, that one
Baptism should be given for the Remission of Sins, whereby Man should be so
renewed by Water and the Holy Spirit, that his Soul should be born again as it
were by a new Nativity, and be made partaker of the unspotted Humanity of
Christ the Savior, being framed by the holy Spirit: Which new Birth also,
reposeth the Soul into its ancient State of Innocence, taking away Sin; and we
believe that thing altogether really thus to be; but not as if we should
embrace Allegories or Metaphors for truth; but these things do so really and
actually happen in Baptized Persons, that God does grant a Testimony of that
actual Grace, which is conferred by Baptism, to be sensibly derived into the
Body: In which respect indeed, Mahometans receive Baptism, as it takes away
from them an inbred Stink, otherwise durable for Life, and the which, we
observe to be otherwise in all Jews, at this day: And so the more inward effect
of Baptism does even outwardly shine forth: Yea and that thing confirms, that
there is a perpetual and unobliterable effect of one only Baptism.

But that new Birth does not take away Death, but leaves Christians with the
Fardle of a corrupt Body, generated by the Will of Man: and in this respect,
nevertheless, leaves the Soul subject to the Vices of a corrupted Body:
Wherefore unto those that are of ripe Age, Baptism was not sufficient,
although unto those of younger Years, as long as they are innocent, it is
abundantly sufficient.

There is therefore, another Privilege promulged, whereby Persons of ripe
Years may have eternal Life: that he who shall not eat unworthily the Lords
Body, Christ shall raise him up unto Life in the last Day; but if he shall not
eat, he is to have no Life in him: For this Mystery was given unto us for the
Life of the World: For the Life of the World is Adamical, Frail or Mortal, and
well nigh Brutal: For the transchanging whereof, a Pledge is given unto us, and
likewise an actual and real Participation of Life eternal. Therefore the Merits
of the Lords Passion are comunicated unto us, through a participation of the
unspotted Virginity of Christ the Lord; for the Communion of his most pure and
chaste Body, unites us to himself, and does actually regenerate us in himself,
and so gives us a Life conformable unto himself: The Body of the Lord is given
for the Life of the World. And although the Body of Man, which was conceived of
Bloods, does not presently perish; Yet in that very Moment, wherein we are
united with the Lords Body, and his Humanity, it makes us partakers of his
incomprehensible Incarnation, and restores us into the ancient Integrity of
humane Nature; as we do partakingly attain the most pure Virginity of Christ,
wherein we ought to be saved. And so by reason of his amorous Union, a
participation of the Merits of his Passion is attributed unto us: Therefore the
most principal effect of the holy sacred Eucharist, is a Participation of the
Purity, and Virgin-uncorrupted Nature of the Lord Jesus: And so for this Cause,
it is declared by a proper Circumlocution, to be Wine budding forth Virgins.

Furthermore, that this Mystery of the unutterable Love of God, does operate
the aforesaid real effects of regeneration in the Nature of Man: The Apostle
teaches, We shall all indeed rise again; but we shall not all be changed: As
if he should say; All Mortals shall at sometime rise again from Death: The
Damned indeed shall rise again, being not any thing changed; but in their
former Adamical Body, being ponderous, not piercing, etc. to wit, only the
wished for necessity of Death, being taken away from them. But Children being
regenerated by the Laver of Baptism, shall rise again in a Body, after some
sort Glorified, but by so much the less perfect, by how much they were remote
from so great an happiness.

But they, who were united in the communion of the Lords Body, shall rise
again, plainly glorious throughout their whole Nature; because they were most
perfectly regenerated in their lifetime: of which Regeneration, although
visible Signs appeared not; yet they were in very deed within, for neither are
they made anew in the Resurrection, unless they had first fore-existed in the
Lifetime, by an every-way regeneration. Our Faith is not of things not in
Being, but of true things; not Visible, because he will have us to profit by
Faith: Wherefore, although this Mark of resemblance of Love, and Union with
God, be altogether unsearchable, even as also its Effects are only invisible;
Yet the aforesaid mystical and real New Birth, is as yet reckoned earthly by
Nicodemus, and from that Title, I have transferred it hither.

I therefore contemplate of the New Birth or renewing of those that are to be
saved, to be made in a sublunary and earthly Nature, just, even as in the
Projection of the Stone which makes Gold: For truly, I have diverse times seen
it, and handled it with my hands: but it was of color, such as is in Saffron
in its Powder, yet weighty, and shining like unto powdered Glass: There was
once given unto me one fourth part of one Grain: But I call a Grain the six
hundredth part of one Ounce: This quarter of one Grain therefore, being rouled
up in Paper, I projected upon eight Ounces of Quicksilver made hot in a
Crucible; and straightway all the Quicksilver, with a certain degree of Noise,
stood still from flowing, and being congealed, settled like unto a yellow Lump:
but after pouring it out, the Bellows blowing, there were found eight Ounces,
and a little less than eleven Grains of the purest Gold: Therefore one only
Grain of that Powder, had transchanged 19186 Parts of Quicksilver, equal to it
self, into the best Gold. The aforesaid Powder therefore, among earthly things,
is found to be after some sort like them, the which transchangeth almost an
infinite quantity of impure Metal into the best Gold, and by uniting it to it
self, does defend it from cankering, rust, rottenness, and Death, and makes it
to be as it were Immortal, against all the torture of the Fire, and Art, and
translates it into the virgin-Purity of Gold; only it requires Heat.

The Soul therefore, and Body, are thus regenerated by Baptism, and the
communion of the unspotted Body of the Lord; so that a just heat of Devotion of
the Faithful shall be present. Let the Divine pardon me, if I as being beyond
my Last, have spoken of Life eternal by way of a Parenthesis: For I willingly
confess, that a regenerated Body is not belonging to my Employment: I treat
only of prolonging the Life of the World.

This only I have said, that Baptism does bring with it a real Effect of
Purity perceivable by Sense, and that the holy-sacred Communion of the
Eucharist, has something like it in earthly things, whereby we may the more
easily believe Regeneration.

CHAP. CXI. The Occasions of Death.
I Have compared the Fire and Light, unto Life, because it bears something
before it, which seems to be vital: For vital Forms are either the Lives, or
Lights of things: Therefore there shall likewise be as many occasions of Death,
as there are withdrawings of Light.

First therefore, the Light is blown out, and likewise the Flame perishes by
pressing together, which they call, through defect of Air. But I have
demonstrated, that that happens through want of a new Magnal; but not that the
Fire is nourished by Air: So also by the constriction of a strange Smoke.

So indeed in Vaults, and Burrows, Lamps are extinguished, but the Light is
blown out by the Wind, or another Flame: For oftentimes Candles are
extinguished by a filthy or deformed Flame, being stirred up by the Powder of
Rosin, or Gunpowder.

Lastly, Fires die through want of Nourishment.

Death in like manner, does many ways rush on us: For either a live Body is
suddenly dashed together, or sore shaken by weight.

Also a speedy pouring forth of Blood from a large Wound, pours forth the Life,
and blows out the Light of Life: So an inordinate Prodigality of corrupt
Matter, Water, or Wind being abundantly made; likewise Baths, Hunger, loosening
Medicines, introduce an untimely Death.

Also by the pressing together of the Breath in Burrows, of the Asthma, of a
Cord, of drowning, of Smoke, and by the Symptoms of the Womb; likewise by the
Resolutions and Palseys of the Sinews subjected to breathing.

In like manner, by Burnings, Destructions, Coalifyings, Gangrenes, and
Congelations of Cold.

Also by Poisons, Alculies, gnawing Things, Escharrers, Putrifiers, or Things
that trample upon us by a fermental Contagion.

Likewise by retained Excrements, Obstructions, and the denied Commerces of
Parts.

Likewise through Defect of some certain Digestion, an Atrophia and
Consumptions of a Part, or of the whole Body.

Also by over-pourings of the Blood within the Skull, Breast, bottom of the
Belly, by corrupt mattery Impostumes, Pleurisies, affects of the Lungs, etc.

Likewise by displacings of the turning Joints, Contractures of the Parts
apppointed for expurging of Filths.

At length, by reason of a Feeble, Decrepit, and woren-out Death of the Seeds
and Powers.

And also by reason of the more grievous Passions of the Mind, and Enchantments.

Death therefore, does so many manner of ways steal away Mortals, whose Life
notwithstanding, is always simple and single: For therefore, there is a
diverse and differing Consideration of Life and Death; for a Sword takes away
Life; Yet there is far different Speculation of preserving Life, than of
healing of Diseases by the removals and hindrances of the Cause: For truly,
Causes are partly external, as a Wound, the Plague, Scorching, etc. the healing
whereof therefore, does not depend on the removal of their Causes: For neither
therefore is the Fire which had burned any one, to be extinguished from the
Hearth, that he may be cured; even as, neither is the Sword to be broken, that
the Wound may be healed up. But for the preservation of Long Life, the
contemplations and removals of external Causes do no less occur or come to
hand, than those of a vital Fuel: For indeed, although no Infirmities should
molest, yet Death should not for that Cause cease daily to strew a way for its
entrance: For although health has respect to Life as its Foundation; yet Life
does not include health: For a Blind, Lame, Gowty Person, etc. does no less
live, than a Healthy or Sound Person.

What if Life ends through a Disease, that is foreign and by accident unto the
Life; as a Sword contains Death, but not but by Application.

Otherwise, Death does by it self respect Life; but diseasifying Causes become
Mortal only by accident, or by their Application unto the Spirit of Life: For
from hence it is, that the Impediments of Long Life are seriously to be heeded,
and diverted, if we expect length of Life. From the Beginning therefore, the
meditation of Life consists not without, but in the Life it self: To wit,
after what manner Life may be preserved in the Body.

For the sensitive Soul, now forthwith after Sin (as I have said) drew the
whole property of Life unto it self, and became the bond of Life with the Body:
But seeing that very Soul is in it self Mortal; it must needs be, first of all,
that all the vital Powers co-aeval, or of a like Age with the Life, should be
slideable and mortal: From hence at length, Death. For a long continuance of
Life therefore, first, a curing of Diseases is required, as well of those which
touch at the Life of the whole Body, as those which have regard unto the
Damages, or preservation of a Part and Functions, and which in this respect do
lay in wait for the Life: For truly, seeing there is a single conspiracy of the
Members, certain principal Powers cannot choose but at length go to decay, also
the subordinate ones being only diminished: Wherein I disagree from Paracelsus,
because he thought that every Disease was of necessity to be taken away by a
Medicine for long Life: Because that good Man was no less ignorant of a
Medicine for Long Life, and the use thereof, than of the very Essence and
Properties of Long Life: And therefore his Arcanums do very much conduce into a
healthy or sound Life, or unto a removal of Impurities; yet they do not any
thing directly and primarily tend to long Life, as unto their ultimate end:
Because that, as the Life; So the Tree of Life chiefly concerns the
preservation and renewing, or making young again of the vital Faculties
implanted in the Arts.

In this therefore the Arcanums, or Secrets which are for the taking away of
Superfluities, differ from the Tree of Life: That those indeed do cure
Diseases, even those which our parent Nature does by her self, never Cure: To
wit, the Leprosy, Stone, Palsy, Consumption of the Lungs, Dropsy, etc. but
the Tree of Life does not heal these Diseases being now admitted: For if
Hippocrates has dictated, that Natures themselves are the Physitianesses of
Diseases; that is, to be pardoned in his Age, and beginning Art.

After another manner, Arcanums (which had not then as yet been made known, and
do at this day, lay in a manner hid) do exceed the Powers of Nature, even as
Art does very often overcome Nature: And that is not only true in Secrets which
heal Diseases; but also in the Tree of Life, which restores defective Nature:
Therefore the Ordination of that tree, is the Preservation of Life, with a
certain kind of renewing of Youth; but with the Remedy of the Tree, the
Leprosy, Stone, etc. continues. Therefore, there is plainly one Consideration
of the Secrets of Paracelsus, and another of the Tree of Life: The which I thus
confirm.

Let a young man be considered with some of the aforesaid Diseases: For his
flourishing and lively youth does not cure these Diseases, therefore neither
also the Tree of Life; Because this has respect only to the Fuel of that
flourishing Life; the which surely, is as yet received after the manner of the
receiver: Therefore there always remains in the part receiving, a diseasie
disproportion of strength in respect of the parts that are in good health,
which was before the Medicine of the Tree of Life was taken: For although all
particular parts should equally participate of that Medicine; yet they should
not be re-amended with an equal strength.

First therefore, the impediments of Long Life are universally to be removed:
But among impediments, some do shorten the Life actively, such as are Diseases,
Inordinacies of living, etc. But other impediments do limit and curtail the
Tree of Life in its goodness, that it cannot attain the ultimate end of its
appointment.

This indeed, concerning our Tree of Life, but not concerning that of Paradise;
and concerning a corrupted Life, not of the Life of Adam before the Fall.

Those are therefore some Diseases; and likewise much profound strong
speculation, and that not pleasant, and perturbations, yea and enchantment:
Even as in its place.

Happy therefore are they, and for the most part long-lived, who being far from
the cares, usuries, busy affairs, and storms of their age, can Till their
fathers lands with their own Oxen in peace, and live cheerfully.

Whatsoever therefore is to be thought of for the obtainment of Long Life, is
to be thought of in a peace void of care, with a full resignation unto the most
pleasing will of God: For that cause we must think, how much ridiculous
thoughts do weary in Fevers, how much serious studies do weaken the strength,
and how much anguishes do overthrow the number of Days: Because thus the
Spirit is lessened, and the Days are abreviated.

Furthermore, Venus or carnal Lust obtains its chiefdom among the impediments
of Long Life; because it does abundantly exhaust the Life.

Much, and unseasonable Gluttony or Drunkenness succeeds Venus; and the rather
if the Drink be hurtful.

Also Tobacco, and Mushroomes do hurt, and what things by reason of a hidden
poison largely creeping, do prostrate the vital faculties: For Tobacco does not
allay hunger, as if it did satisfy the defect; but inasmuch as it takes away
the sense of the defect, and also the exercises of the functions.

In the next place, the impediments of Life, are frequent Baths,
Blood-lettings, Wounds, also the frequent use of loosening Medicines: To wit,
which things make the generation of the begetter to be the less flourishing,
and therefore also do hasten Old Age.

Lastly, As Climates do make for Long Life, so also some do hinder it: For
there are some with which an Old Man is rare: Others with whom Old Age is in
honor. For Endemicks of Arsenick which are under the Earth, do mow down a
flourishing Life, being as yet in its Flower.

There are some Climates also, whereunto there is a nearness of overflowed
Countries: For whatsoever has of its own accord waxed hot, and was resolved in
water from putrefaction, ought also to be brought to be brought to us together
with the Vapor, and to be supped up by us.

Therefore pernicious are the Vapors of the Fens which breath forth a
putrified matter; and then, those Vapors which puff out a semi-putrified
Salt, together with the filths of a dissolved Clay or Mud.

For I have seen at Antwerp, after the Field of Austerweele conceived of
Waters, the leaves of the Teil-Trees in the Walls, to be dried from August, and
that as it were with a gnawn rottenness; the which, before the Inundation, were
kept green in the Tree, even unto October.

The same thing is seen at Amsterdam, whenas the leaves of the Trees of Leidon
do as yet counterfeit the Month of May: For the leaves do suffer this
destruction from a Semi-salt-Vapour.

What at length is not to be thought to be done on the tender coat of the
Lungs, and the sponge of its Substance?

Truly, so many Enemies do on every side lie in wait for our Life, that unless
we shall depart far from the hurtful contagion of the Air, there will scarce
under a full grant of the Tree of Life, be awished for participation of Long
Life: For the original Tree of Life in Eden, was for its own Inhabitants; but
not for the Natives of the Vale of Miseries.

Therefore whosoever will enjoy the Goodness of the Tree of Life, and profit by
the labor of Wisdom; let him make choice of a Region, which in all places
nourishes many Old Men; and wherein Diseases do in all places seldom rage.

Then Lastly, Let him begin to make use of the Tree of Life from a Child, (the
more rightly, if the Child begin first in both parents, presently afterward
also in the Nurse) while the nourishment is snatched away for the increase of
the solid stems.

But those things which hinder and diminish the Medicine of the Tree of Life,
that it cannot ascend unto its height, are hereditary and inbred weaknesses,
total, or in part; and in whom attained weaknesses drawn in through inordinacy,
do succeed, and the which, have happened through the undue torments of the
pains of Diseases and Labors: For whosoever has suffered a notable injury of
Life, let him despair to be fully renewed by the Tree of Life: But he who being
a Child, has admixed the Medicine with the first constitutives of Life, and
has thus waxed of ripe years (for truly, the Tree of Life is not more perfect,
as that it is able to restore decrepit Bodies into their former state) let him
hope that he shall attain that which the Court Physicians of Kings can scarce
believe.

CHAP. CXII. Of the Magnetic or Attractive Curing of Wounds. A Disputation
concerning the Attractive, Natural, and Lawful Curing of Wounds; against R. P.
John Roberti, Doctor of Divinity, an Elder of the Society of Jesus; no less
than also against Rodolph Goclenius, Professor of Medicine.
1. Witchcraft, Sympathy or Co-suffering, and Magnetism or Attraction do
differ. 2. One Ointment is called Sympathetical, another Magnetical. 3. What
Mummy is. 4. Philosophy is immediately reproved by Reasons only. 5. The
difference of Law, and Philosophy. 6. From an ignorance of the Cause, Magnatism
is accounted a Devil. 7. Who may be the Interpreters of Nature. 8. Why
Alchymists only can Interpret Nature. 9. He is proud, who from an ignorance of
the Cause, believes a thing to be of the Devil. 10. Who are the Devils
flatterers. 11. Magnetism is no new Invention. 12. The Armary or
Weapon-unguent. 13. The intent, aim, remedies or ingredients, and manner in the
Ointment, are good, 14. Why the Unguent is not unlawful. 15. Why it is not
Superstitious. 16. What Superstition is. 17. Why the manner of the Unguent
being unknown to the censurer, can nothing disprove it. 18. What Magnetism is.
19. Some Effects of the Lodestone. 20. The Magnetical Cure of incurable
Diseases is perfect. 21. Milk being burned dries up the Dugs. 22. Vitriol dies
through Magnetism or Attraction. 23. Mummy operates from Italy even to Bruxels.
24. The Carline Thistle, under the shade, draws wonderfully. 25. Likewise the
same Disease in number changes its Subjects. 26. That from Magnetism, Flowers
are followers of the Sun. 27. Mummies which are Philtrous or pertaining to
Love, how they are attractive. 28. That the Arcanum or secret of the Blood, is
the Lodestone of Alchymists. 29. Herbs, why, and after what sort they are
Attractive. 30. Asarabacca, and the Elder are Magnetical. 31. An implicit
compact or covenant, is the Anchor of the Ignorant. 32. Sympathy presupposes a
sense or feeling. 33. The Mummy of a Dead Brother, being long since impressed
on a seat, is as yet attractive. 43. The Sapphire is an imitator of the Unguent
in Magnetism. 35. The Sapphire, by touching of one Carbuncle, cures others. 36.
Why the Prelates of the Church wear skie-coloured Rings. 37. Man has his
Lodestone. 38. An Amulet for the Plague. 39. It is of necessity, that the same
accident should pass from subject into subject. 40. Magnetism is an heavenly
quality. 41. A Thief, Robber or Murderer, and an honest Man, or Woman, afford
the same Moss of their dead skull. 42. From whence, and what the seed of that
Moss is. 43. The fruit of the Air. 44. That Usnea or Moss is a fruit of Fire.
45. In that Moss also, is the Back of the Lodestone, the scope being changed.
46. God in Miracles, follows Nature. 47. God approves of the Magnetism of the
Unguent by Relics. 48. A supernatural Magnetism proves a natural one. 49. A
lock of that Moss being incarnate in the forehead, is a defense against a
sword, but a Thread or rag of the stole of S. Hubbert, against the tooth of a
mad Dog. 50. A rag being incarnate in the forehead, preserves from the biting
of a mad Dog for ones whole life time; an impression of blood does the same in
the Zinzilla. 51. Pepper degenerates into Ivy. 52. How we must judge of
Persons. 53. Paracelsus the Monarch of Secrets. 54. Every thing has its own
particular Heaven. 55. From whence inclination is. 56. From whence a Disease is
Astral in us. 57. Whence sick persons have a fore-feeling of the storms of the
times. 58. What may cause the flowing and ebbing in the Sea. 59. Whence Winds
are stirred up. 60. The Heaven does not cause, but pronounce things to come.
61. The Being of every seed has the firmament and virtue of its own influence.
62. The Vine, not the Heaven, disturbs Wines. 63. Antimony observes an
influence. 64. The Lodestone directs its self, but is not drawn. 65. Glass is
Magnetical. 66. Rosin is Magnetical. 67. What Garlic acts against the
Lodestone, and why the same thing also concerning Mercury. 68. The virtue or
power of operation on an Object at a distance, is natural, even in sublunary
things, and it is Magnetical. 69. Every Creature lives in its own mode, or
after its own manner. 70. What the Unguent can draw from a Wound at a distance.
71. Every Satanical effect is imperfect. 72. Why Satan cannot cooperate with
our Unguent. 73. What may be called the Will and Imagination of the Flesh, and
of the outward Man. 74. A twofold Ecstasy. 75. The Ecstatical power of the
Blood. 76. Corruption makes that lurking power manifest. 77. The Essences of
things do not putrify. 78. The putrefaction of Alchymy, to what end it is. 79.
The Cause of Attraction in the Unguent. 80. The heart is drawn by the treasure
magnetically, or after the manner of a Lodestone. 81. Necromancy or the
Black-Art, from whence it is. 82. What Man is as a living Creature, and what
Man is as being the Image of God. 83. After what manner the Eagle is allured by
the Magnetisme of a dead Carcass. 84. How the venal Blood is drawn in the
Unguent, unto its own treasure. Why Eagles are allured to a dead Carcass,
magnetically. 85. A natural feeling or perceivance, and an animal feeling, do
differ. 86. The Effects of Witches are wicked ones. 87. The power of a Witch is
natural, and of what sort that power may be. 88. Where the Magical power in man
is seated. 89. Whether man bears command over all other Bodies. 90. Why a man
may act per nutum or by his beck or pleasure. 91. What the Magical faculty may
be. 92. The Magical power lies hid in man after diverse manners. 93. The inward
man is the same with the outward fundamentally, but materially, diverse. 94.
What the vital Spirit its knowledge and gift is. 95. In a Carcass which dies of
its own accord, there is no implanted Spirit. 96. The divining of Spirits
according to Physicians. 97. The Soul acts in the Body only per nutum,
Magically. 98. The Soul acts in the Body, only by a drowsy beck, but out of
the Body, by an excited beck. The knowledge of the Apple, hinders Science,
Magical or Wise Knowledge. 99. The beginning of the Cabal is drawn from God in
Dreams. 100. The defect of Understanding is in the outward man. 101. What Satan
can do in Witches. 102. What are the true works of Satan alone. 103. Sin has
withdrawn the endowments of Grace, and has obscured the gifts of Nature. 104.
Whither the pious exercises of Catholics tend. 105. The most powerful effect
of the Cabal. 106. There are two subjects of any kind of things. 107. Man acts
as well by his Spirit, as by his Body. 108. What kind of ray or beam is sent
from a Witch into a bruit. 109. How a Witch may be bewrayed. 110. How a Witch
may be bound up in the heart of a Horse. 111. The Intention depraves or
vitiates a good Work. 112. The Seminal virtue is natural Magic. 113. Why blood
issues out of the dead Carcass when the Murderer is present. 114. Why the
Plague is frequent in Sieges. 115. Works of Mercy are to be exercised at least
in respect of avoiding the Plague. 116. Plagues from Revenge and execration,
are detestable. 117. Why Bodies were to be removed from the Gibbet. 118. Why
Excrements cannot cause the Plague. 119. Why the blood of a Bull is mortally
venomous. 120. Why the fat of a Bull is in the Sympathetical Unguent, to wit,
that it may be made an Ointment of Weapons. 121. Why Satan cannot concur unto
the Unguent. 122. The Basis or Foundation of Magic. 123. From whence Vanities
are accounted for Magic. 124. A good Magic in the holy Scriptures. 125. What
may be called true Magic. 126. The cause of the Idolatry of Witches. 127. The
Sirrers up of Magic. 128. Satan excites it imperfectly. 129. From whence
beasts also are Magical. 130. The Kingdom of Spirits nourishes strife, and
love. 131. Why man is a Microcosm or little World. 132. The mind generates real
Entities. 133. That Entity or Beingness is of a middle nature between a Body
and a Spirit. 134. The descending of the Soul begets a conformed will. 135. The
cause of the fruitfulness of Seeds. 136. Why Lust does as it were estrange us
from our Mind. 137. A Father by the Spirit of his Seed, generates out of
himself, in an Object presently absenting it self. 138. What Spirit may be the
Patron of Magnetism. 139. The Will sends a Spirit unto the Object. Unless the
Will did produce some real thing, the Devil could not know of or acknowledge
it; and unless it did dismiss it out of it self, the Devil being absent, could
not be provoked thereby. Where therefore the Treasure is, thither does the
Magical spirit of man tend. 140. Magnetism is made by sensation. 141. That
there are many perceivances in one only subject. 142. From the superior
Fantasy commanding it. 143. Why Glasse-makers use the Lodestone. 144. The
Fantasy of attracting things is changed. 145. Inanimate things have their
Fantasy. 146. Why some things by eating of them, induce madness. 147. Why a
mad Dog by biting of a Man introduces madness. 148. The Tarantula by his
stroke or sting, causes a madness. 149. Why other bruit beasts do not defend
themselves against a mad Dog. 150. The Sympathy betwixt Objects at a distance,
is made by means of a certain Spirit of the world, which Spirit also governing
the Sun, and the Sunny Stars, is of a potent sense or feeling. 151. The
Imagination in Creatures endowed with choice, is various at pleasure; but in
others, it is always of a limited identity. 152. The first degree of power
dwells Magically in the forms of the three Principles. 153. The second degree
is by the fantasies of the Forms of the mixed Body, the which, to wit, being
destroyed, the Principles do as yet remain. 154. The Third degree arises from
the Fantasy or Imagination of the Soul. 155. What Bruits are Magical, and do
act out of themselves, by beck alone. 156. The fourth degree of Magical Power,
is from the Understanding of Men being stirred up. 157. The word Magic is a
proportionable answering of many things, unto some one third thing. 158. Every
Magical power or faculty rejoices in a stirring up. 159. What may be called a
subject capable of Magnetism. 160. How Magnetism differs from other formal
Properties. 161. Humors and Filths or Ex^rements have their Fantasy. 162.
Why the Scripture attributes Life to the Blood, rather than to any other juyces
of the Body. 163. The seed possesses the Fantasy of the Father, by
traduction or derivation; from whence nobility arises. 164. The skins of the
Wolf and Sheep have retained through impression, an hostile Imagination of
their former Life. 165. What the Fantasy of the Blood being freshly brought
into the Unguent, can effect. The manner of the Magnetism or attraction in the
Ointment. 166. The difference between a Magnetical Cure which is done by the
Unguent, and that which is done by a rotten Egg. 167. The notable Mystery of
humane imagination, is the foundation of natural Magic. 168. The Understanding
imprinteth the Beingnesse which was procreated or produced on the outward
object, and there it really continues. 169. How efficacious Seals or
Impressions may be made. 170. The Imagination holds fast the Spirit of a Witch,
by a nail, as it were a Medium. 171. If Satan does naturally move a Body
without a corporeal touch or extremity, why not also the more inward Man? and
why not rather also the Spirit of the Witch? 172. The virtue of the Ointment is
not from the Imagination of the compounder, but from the Simples co-united into
one. 173. The Author makes a profession of his Faith.

IN the eighth year of this Age, there was brought unto me, an Oration
Declamatory, made at Marpurg of the Catti, wherein Rodolph Goclenius (to whom
the profession of Philosophy was lately committed) paying his first fruits,
endeavors to show, That the curing of Wounds by the Sympathetical and Armary
or Weapon Unguent, invented by Paracelsus, is merely natural.

Which Oration, I wholly read, and I sighed within my self, that the Histories
of natural things had lighted into the hands of so weak a Patron. The Author
nevertheless highly pleased himself with that Argument of Writing, and with a
continued barrenness of proof, in the year 1613. published the same work, with
some enlargement.

There was very lately brought me a succinct Anatomy of the aforesaid Book,
composed by a certain Divine, rather in the form of a fine or jocond censure,
than of a disputation: my judgment therefore, however it should be, was
desired, at leastwise in that respect, that the thing found out by Paracelsus,
concerned himself, and me his follower.

I shall therefore declare, what I think of the Physician Goclenius, and what
of the Divine the Censurer.

First of all, the Physician proposes, and boasts, that he will prove the
magnetic or attractive cure of Wounds to be natural: But I found the Promiser
to be unfit for so great a business: Because that he no where, or at least but
slenderly, makes good his Title or Promises: He collecting many patcheries here
and there, whereby he thinks he has sufficiently proved, that there are
certain formal virtues in the nature of Things, which they call Sympathy and
Antipathy; and that from the granting of those, the Magnetical Cure is natural.

Many things I say, out of the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Persians, Conjurers, and
Juggling Impostors, he gathers into one, whereby he might prove or evince the
Magnetism which himself was ignorant of: Partly that by delighting minds that
are greedy of novelties of things, he may seduce them from the mark; and partly
that they may admire the Author, that he had rubbed over, not only trivial
Writers, but also any other the more rare ones.

Wherefore the Physician does rashly confound Sympathy (which he after diverse
manners, and fabulously, often alleges) with Magnetism, and from that,
concludes this to be natural. For I have seen also, that Vulnerary Ointment to
cure not only Men, but also Horses, between whom and us, certainly there is
not so great affinity (unless we are Asses) that therefore, the Sympathetical
Unguent should deserve to be called common to Us and Horses.

In like manner, the Physician badly confounds Sympathy or Co-suffering with
Witchcraft, and Ligation or Binding up, and both with Magnetism: To wit, he as
in anguish, undistinctly alleges any the more abstruse or hidden effects
whatsoever, whereby (he being destitute of reasons) might make good his own
Mag^etism.

I will by an Example distinguish Witchery from Sympathy, and both from
Magnetism.

A Dog has an Antipathy (for Sympathy and Antipathy are daughters of the same

Moreover, what Examples the Physician brings concerning Seals or Impresses,
Characters, Gamahen or magical Images, Ceremonies, and for the most part vain
Observances, are altogether impertinent to this purpose, and do rather destroy
Magnetism as rendering it suspicious, than build it up: my Genius or Wit carries
me not to determine any thing of these things.

And then, Goclenius Errs, and that indeed rashly, like as also ignorantly:
dreaming from the Prescription of Paracelsus, that the Weapon which wounded, if
it be involved in the Weapon Salve, does cure the Wound: For the Weapon or
Point of the Sword shall be in vain anointed with the Unguent by him
prescribed, unless it be made Bloody; and the same Blood shall be first dried
on the said Sword. For with Paracelsus, the Sympathetical

Last of all, Goclenius, that he might satisfy his own Genius, has altered
the Description of Paracelsus, affirming that the Usnea or Moss, is to be
chosen only from the Skuls of hanged Persons; of which his own and false
Invention, he enquiring the Cause, blusheth not to dream, that in Strangling,
the vital Spirits entered into the Skull, and there remain so long, as until
that six years from that time being accomplished, the Moss shall under the open
Air grow up thereon.

Paracelsus has taught the express contrary, and by practical Experiences it
is confirmed, that the Moss of the Skuls of those that have been slain or
broken on a Wheel, is no less commendable, than that of those who were
strangled with an Halter.

For truly, the Quintessence is not extracted out of living Creatures (because
the principal Essence perishes together with the inflowing Spirit and Life)
but only the Mumial

What things Goclenius has delivered concerning Remedies for repairing of the
Memory, as we acknowledge them no way agreeable to the end intended; so also,
we not any thing doubt to prove them to be impertinent flourishes. There is no
Question (between our Divine and Physician) about the truth of the Fact; for
both of them grant, that a cure happens to the wounded Person: the controversy
lays only in that, that the Physician affirms such a Cure to be natural, but
the Divine will have it to Satanical; and that from a compact of the first
Inventer: of which Censure, he brings not any positive reason in his Anatomy,
as thinking it satisfactory, if he in his own judgment shall abolish it,
although he shall openly produce no grounds of that abolishment; to wit, he
acquiescing in this, that he has removed the feeble Reasons of the Affirmer,
the which to do, is a matter of no labor, of no skill, nor also is it a matter
of any authority: For, to what end tends it, to give judgment on the thing it
self from the foolishness of the Reasons of some unskilful Brain? and to
declare it to be wicked, if he has not so much as dreamed of one petty Reason
of his Sentence? What if I, who am a Laick, should commend Presbitery with
untrimmed Reasons, and some one should reject them as unworthy ones, shall the
Priesthood it self therefore be to be rejected? What I pray you, does the
Unskilfulness or Rashness of any one touch at things themselves: Surely
Philosophy submits

I therefore who have undertaken to prove (against the Divine) that this
Magnetic cure is even natural: First of all, have supposed Goclenius worthy of
excuse, if he has labored in vain in the finding out of the immediate Cause
of this unwonted effect. What wonder is it, when as the Divine consesseth that
he is ignorant of the same: and therefore conjectures Satan to be the Author
thereof: for such is our Infirmity, that we are destitute of the knowledge of
the most, and most excellent things: For therefore we unwillingly wrest very
many things aside unto the sacred Anchour of Ignorance, and refer them to the
Catalogue of occult or hidden Causes. For who among Divines ever knew how to
demonstrate to the full, the Cause of risibility or capacity of laughter, or of
any other formal Property, to wit, of heat in the Fire? Is not the Fallacy of
Begging of the Principle, committed, if thou shall say, The highest degree of
Heat belongs to the Fire, because it is of the Nature thereof? Truly the
Essences of Forms, because they are unknown to us from their Cause, therefore
also the race of formal Properties is wholly scanty, and unknown; and where we
observe any formal Passion to lay under, the Mind as if it were tired in vain,
presently cease from a diligent search thereof, and reposeth it self, being
contented with the name of occult Properties.

Go to I pray you, has the Anatomist the Censurer, happily known the Cause why a
Dog that rejoices, swings his Tail? But a Lion in like manner, when he is
Angry? A Cat also making merry in token of Favor, lifts up the same? What
therefore, if himself has not known so much as the reason of the moving of a
Tail; will he wonder that Goclenius has given an unsolid Reason of Magnetism?
and from the refuting of that, presume that he has more than sufficiently
demonstrated the dure which belongs to Magnetisme, to be Satanical? Far be so
great a rashness of Judgment from him.

Come on then, why do thou call that Cure diabolical: Truly it had behoved
thee, to have added a reason of thy Censure, unless thou expectest to have it
denied by others, with the same Facility wherewith thou declarest it to be of
the Devil.

Lawyers require only the affirmative Part to be confirmed; but Philosophers
both parts, least either the Ignorance, or also the malepartness of the denyers
should seem

Do thou perhaps, maintain it to be diabolical, because it cannot be
understood by thee, that a natural Reason thereof does subsist? I will not
believe that thou could utter so idle a Sentence, from thine own Infirmity,
of its Virtue: For thou know that the weakness of Understanding is our
Vice, not that of things. Make have therefore; From whence know thou, that
God has not directed such a magnetical Virtue unto the use or benefit of the
Wounded.

Show thy Evidences: has God chosen thee to be the Secretary of his Counsel!
Surely however thou may variously wander or waver, at length thou shall
find, that the

What wonder is it, if no Divine has smelt out these things? For after that
the Priest and the Levite had passed on to Jericho, a Samaritan, being a Lay
Man, succeeded, who etc. Certainly we also, who are the only faithful
Interpreters of Nature, do by the same helps draw forth the Properties of
things from Darkness into Light. But that the Divine may judge of that which is
a Juggle, from that which is Natural; he must needs first borrow the Definition
from us; to wit, least the Cobbler shamefully slip beyond his Last.

Let the Divine enquire concerning God, but the Naturalist concerning Nature.

Certainly, much was the Goodness of the Creator every where extended, who made
all

Truly unto me, it seems no way a Wonder, if God had given unto things, besides
a Body, a Virtue co-like to the Lodestone, and that to be unfolded by the name
of Magnetism or Attraction alone: Ought it not to be sufficient for the
affirming of Magnetism, that one only single natural Example be alleged (I
shall anon declare it by more, and that, such as fit the purpose) of that
Stone, according to the square whereof, other Endowments also variously
distributed in the Creatures, may be understood? Because therefore the thing is
a new Paradox and unknown to thee, shall it for that Cause, ought also to be
Satanical?

Far be it from thee to think so unworthily of the divine Majesty of the
Creator: Neither certainly ought we to flatter the Devil by conferring that
Honor upon him: For

Ye grant that material Nature does daily draw down Forms by its Magnetism,
from the Superior Orbs, and much desire the favor of the celestial Bodies, and
that the Heavens

Magnetism therefore, because it is every where vigorous, contains nothing of
Novelty in it, but the Name: neither is it Paradoxical, but to those who deride
all things, and banish into the Dominion of Satan, whatsoever they do not
understand.

Truly that knowledge does never spring up to him that seeks Wisdom as a
Derider.

But I pray, what has the Weapon Salve of Superstition in it? Whether because
it is composed of the Moss, Blood, Mummie, and Fat of Man? but the Physician
uses these

Subdue thy self, and rage not, thou shall anon have better satisfaction.

For the manner of using it, contains nothing of Evil therein.

First of all the Intent is good and holy, and tends only unto a good End; to
wit, to

In the next place, the Remedies themselves also, are natural things,
whereunto, that that Faculty was granted by God, we shall by and by prove by
Arguments.

I wish, that thou also had thus confirmed to us thy negative; to wit, that
God the chiefest Good, has not given unto the sympathetical Ungent, that
natural Faculty, and Mumial Magnetism.

This magnetical Remedy, can no way be rendered suspected, seeing it has no
Superstitious Rites, it requires no Words, no Characters or Impresses, no
admixed Ceremonies,

For that is called Superstition, as often as Men rely upon Faith or
Imagination, or both, above any kind of Virtue which is not such, or which is
not directed by the Creator to

Wherefore, do thou, O censuring Divine, that art full of Taunting, make trial
of the Ointment, at leastwise with a design to deride Satan, whereby thou
may overthrow that implicit compact: Nevertheless, will thou, nill thou,
thou shall find plainly the same Effect as there is with us, the which does
never happen to superstitious Causes.

Whosoever he be that thinks the magnetical Cure of Wounds is diabolical, not
because it consists from an unlawful End, and of unlawful Means; but because it
proceeds after a

He also as convinced by the same Argument, shall render the essential Causes
of all the Operations of the Lodestone, of which we are about to speak; or
shall confess that those

A Lodestone being laid upon a thin trencher of Wood, and swimming on the
Water, is forthwith on one, and that a certain side, turning toward the South,
but on the other

In like manner also, the South side of the Lodestone is varied: Yea which is
more, if a Lodestone, by its rubbing on a piece of Iron, does make it to be
Magnetical, that is, an attractive of other Iron, let the same Iron which is
now Magnetical, be rubbed again, being turned upwards, and downwards upon the
Lodestone, it will presently put off its attractive Power: Of which Effects if
they relish thee, enquire thou of William Guilbert a Physician of London, in
his Treatise of the Lodestone; than whom, none ever wrote better concerning
this Subject; and by whose Industry, the variation of the Compass may be
restored.

The Needle which now bends to the North, under the Aequinoctial Line, staggers
to and fro; but beyond it, bends it self unto the other Pole.

I shall add this medicinal Faculty of it: The back of the Lodestone, as it
repulseth Iron; so also it drives back the Gut, cures Burstness, and every
Catarrh or Rheum which is of the Nature of Iron: for all Magnetisms, are
ordained for the use of Man. The Iron-attracting Faculty, if it shall be
married to the Mummy of a Woman, then the back of the Lodestone being
emplaistred within her Thigh, and the Belly thereof on her Loins, does safely
prevent a Miscarrying already threatened: but the Belly of the Lodestone, being
applied within her Thigh, and its Back to her Loins, does wonderfully
facilitate or dispatch her delivery. All which Effects of the Lodestone, our
Anatomist shall illustrate by Reasons drawn from foregoing Causes, and explain
to us the manner thereof, as made known unto him: Or I shall by a like Argument
of Ignorance conclude, that these likewise are the Delusions of Satan, and not
natural Effects.

I will now produce some Examples of a co-like Magnetism, that we at length may
come with the more seasoned Judgment, unto the positive Reason, and refuting of
all Oppositions. What can I do more? the Reasons which thou have not brought in
thy own behalf, I my self will devise.

Every Effect (thou will say) proceeds either immediately from God the
Workman, and so is a Miracle: or from Satan, and so is Monstrous: or from
natural and ordinary Causes, and then is natural: but Magnetisme is not a
Miracle, neither is it a natural Effect; therefore Satanical.

I answer: Although I am able to show this aforesaid rehearsal to be
insufficient, in regard the inward Man acts even after none of the
forementioned ways (the which hereafter, we are plainly enough to declare)
nevertheless, we now, with a dry Foot, pass over the Assumption, as being about
to deny the Subsumption or Inference; to wit, in that part wherein it is
affirmed, that the effect is not natural: For that was first to be proved,
least a begging of the Principle or Question should be committed: but herein
our Censurer has and will be defective, to say that it is not a natural
Effect, unless he thought, that for him to say it, was all one as to prove it,
and to have placed his own Authority in the room of Reason: For there are many
Effects natural, which do not ordinarily happen; to wit, those which are the
more seldom incident: Therefore, in favor of our Anatomist, I shall every
where not only defend the affirmative part; but also, I will declare it by
Reasons, and confirm it by Examples: For so the Argument now alleged, shall
violently fall with its own weight.

There is a Book, imprinted at Frankford in the year 1611, by Uldericus Balk a
Dominican, Paracelsus, the true magnetical Cure of many Diseases; namely, of
the Dropsy, Gowt, Jaundise, etc. by enclosing the warm Blood of the Sick in
the shell and white of an Egg, which is exposed to a nourishing Warmth; and
this Blood being admixed with a piece of Flesh, thou shall give unto a hungry
Dog, or Swine, and the grief is presently drawn, and departs from thee into the
Dog, no otherwise, than as the Leprosy of Naaman passed over or was
transplanted into Gehazi, through the Execration of the Prophet. What, will thou account this also to be diabolical, to have thus restored the sick Party
by the Magnetisms of the Mumial Blood alone? But yet he is wholly and
undoubtedly restored.

A Woman weaning her Infant, whereby her Breasts may the sooner grow barren,
Milks out her Milk on hot burning Coals, and her Dugs soon grow Flaggy. Does
happily the

If any one shall Foul at thy Door, and thou intendest to prevent that
Beastliness for the future; lay thou a red hot Iron upon the new laid
Excrement, and by Magnetism, the voyder of that Ordure, shall soon grow Scabby
on his Buttocks; to wit, the Fire roasting the Excrement, and as it were by a
Dorsal or rebounding Magnetism, driving the sharpness of the Roast, into his
impudent Fundament.

Perchance thou will say, that this is Satanical, because the end is a hurting
of the Party: But surely the abuse of Powers is in the liberty of Man; Yet it
is not the less natural in its use.

Make a small Table of the lightest, whitest, and bafest kind of Lead, and at
the one end hereof, put a piece of Amber, and three spans off, place a piece of
green Vitriol; this Vitriol will forthwith visibly loose its Color and
Tartness: Both which Effects are found in the Preparation of Amber.

At leastwise, this very Experiment, shall be free from all Illusion of Satan.

A certain Inhabitant of Bruxels, lost his Nose in fight, he comes to
Tagliacozzus a Chyrurgion, living at Bononia, in expectation of another Nose:
and when as he feared the Incision of his own Arm, he hired a Porter for his
end, out of whose Arm, he having given him his Price, the Chyrurgion at length
dug a Nose. About thirteen Months after his return into his own Country,
presently on a sudden, the ingrafted Nose grew cold, and after some days fell
off through Putrefaction: By the buisie enquirers of the unexpected chance of
which thing, it was found that the Porter gave up the Ghost, perhaps at the
same moment, wherein the Nose grew cold. There are those yet surviving at
Bruxels, that were eye Witnesses of these Things.

Is not that Magnetism of manifest affinity with Mummy, whereby the Nose, by
the right of ingraftment, rejoicing for so many Months, in a common Life, Sense
or Feeling,

The Root of the Carline-thistle (which is that of Chamileon) being plucked up
when full of Juice and Virtue, and co-tempered with the Mummy of Man, does as
it were by

But this thou will say, is full of deceit, because Paradoxical: as if the same
Leprosy were not tranferred out of Naaman into Gehazi; and the same numerical
Jaundises transplanted

The Solisequous, or Sun-following Flowers, are carried after the Sun by a
certain Magnetism or Attraction; not indeed by reason of his heat which they
may desire (for in a cloudy

I might speak of Amorous or Love-Medicines, which require a Mumial
co-fermenting,

I have known an Herb, in many Places easy to be seen; the which, if it be
rubbed, and cherished in thy Hand, until it shall wax warm, and thou presently
shall hold fast the hand of another Person, until that also grow warm; he shall
continually burn, with a total Love of thee, for some days.

I held in my hand, the Foot of a certain little Dog, and this Dog, presently
so followed me, a stranger, that his Mistress being renounced, he howled in the
night before my chamber Door, that I might open unto him. There are some
present at Bruxels, who are my Witnesses of this deed: For the heat first
heating the Herb, I say, not a bareheat, but being stirred up by a certain
Efflux of the natural Spirits, limits the Herb unto it, and individuates it to
it self; and this ferment being received, does by Magnetism, draw the Spirit of
that other Person, and subdue it into Love.

I leave the Cures of many Sicknesses, which the secret of humane Blood does
magnetically perfect: For unless the Blood, yea the corrupt Pus or Matter [of
Wounds or

The herbs Arsmart or Water-Pepper, Comfry, Flixweed or Luskewort, Dragon-Wort,
Adders-Tongue, and many others, have that peculiar Endowment, that if being
cold, they Ulcer, they grow warm, and are presently buried in a muddy place:
When they begin to putrify, they are also busy in drawing from the sick
Party, whatsoever is hurtful unto him: And that thing the Herbs accomplish, not
as long as they grew in the Earth, nor also as long as they remain in their
ancient Form (for it behooves the Grain to die, that it may bring forth Fruit)
but in the Putrefaction of their Body, their Virtues being now as it were
loosed from the Bolt of their Body, do freely uncloath themselves of that
Magnetism, otherwise sleeping and hindered; and according to the contagion and
impression received from the wounded or ulcerated Place, do suck out much
remainder of Evil, even at a far distance.

If any one in gathering the Leaves of Asarabacca, shall pluck them upwards,
they will

Here at leastwise, does no Superstition subsist, or lurk: for why do I here
make mention of Imagination; seeing ye grant that nothing can thereby operate
on a third Object, especially where that Object is ignorant of the manner of
gathering which the Cropper used?

Will thou perhaps again accuse of an implicit compact, and lay hold on the
sacred

But that, not only Plants, but also almost all created things have a certain
delineation

Another new Fit of the Gout surprised a noble Matron of my acquaintance, after
one

But if in the same Seat, another gowty Person happened to have sit, no
renovation of the Disease happened unto him: Therefore the Mummy of her Brother
already dead, deservedly rendered the Seat suspected of Contagion, which
piercing, through all her Clothes, stirred up in the Sister, and not in any
other gowty Person, those Fluxes of Fits, which otherwise would have been
quiet: Indeed the Magnetism was to the Mummy of the Sisters Womb, and that a
long five Years space after his burial.

I pray, what implicit compact is here with the Enemy Satan? A Sapphire that is
of a deep sky Color, if it shall touch, and be for some time rubbed on a
Carbuncle, whereby grows black a little while after, as being immediately
scorched by the Pestiferous, that is, Arsenical air, going forth in that very
Path or Part, and not in any other: For where the Poison does continually
exhale, to wit, by the venomous Beams being recollected into a crest or
pyramidal Point, the place does there of necessity suffer violence, wax black,
and is burnt or scorched: which Effects, as they happen in a succession of
time, they perfectly instruct us, that the Poison does also successively flow
forth according to the attraction of the absent Gem.

Perhaps thou will answer, that every Agent requires a certain duration of its
impression; that the Sapphire did not benefit this sick Party in an instant, but
that it left an Impression behind it, which was to vanquish the remainder of
the Malady by degrees; but not that the Gem being absent from the Carbuncle,
did afterward attract any thing: Where thou shall take notice, that every
Agent of Nature does act in an instant, unless there be some obstacle or
hinderance in the Patient.

But in the Body being infected, that there is no Impediment, because it is
that which requires help with the greatest speed, and earnestly Paints after
it, in all its Veins.

It would be altogether another thing, if in the pained Place the Sapphire were
to be prepared, concocted, or altered; that the imprisoned Agent which should
afterward be spread through the Body, might be drawn out thereby: But seeing
it remains entire and incorrupt, it requires only a certain time, to this end,
that it may couple its own influential Ray (through a touching of the Mummy)
unto the Ray or Beam of the pestilent Air, whereby it being forthwith absent,
may require or command it forth: For the said copulation I say, that there may
be made a fast binding of the Virtue of the Sapphire to the Venom, there is
required a certain time (grant one eighth Part of an Hour) wherein the
Circle-Line is encompassing the Carbuncle; for if there were a certain
impression of the Sapphire, which by degrees should subdue the Poison within,
and not a magnetical attraction of the absent Jewel, there could be no reason
why that certain or particular place of the Circle should wax black and be
scorched, nor also why the Poison should not more largely range, than in the
said Circle: And which is more, if the Carbuncle does freshly show it self in
diverse Places at once; yet that Carbuncle only, which was circumscribed with
the Sapphire, is burnt, the other settling, and vanishing away.

Therefore, what attractive Impression (I beseech thee) shall the absent
Sapphire, leave behind it, if not a magnetical one? especially, because the
thing attracted, bespeaks

Yea, if the Sapphire had delivered any Virtue from it self into the sick Body,
it (after one or a second using) should be weaker than it self was (for so the
hoof of the Elke, driving away Fits of the Falling Sickness, is by little and
little, rendered barren or unefficacious) the Faculty which it imprinted being
lost, which plainly in the Sapphire is truly unlike; for it is commended as so
much the more powerful, by how much the oftener it has sucked out the Venom.
Perhaps thou will say, that the Sapphire generated a Quality in the sick Person,
by reason whereof it began to attract, and pluck forth the Poison that way; and
although the Sapphire be then removed, yet nevertheless, Nature being once moved
or provoked, perseveres in expulsion, and that through that passage where the
Poison began to be expelled. First we ask, whether the Sapphire draws by its
first quality (suppose heat) or by a formal and magnetic Property? But this
desires not a previous or foregoing Generation of a new Quality within the
Body; but only a coupling of its attractive Virtue, for to draw: Therefore that
an attraction is made by the absent Gem: The Subsumption is proved; because
every natural attracter, draws unto it self; for indeed, to this end only does
it attract. Wherefore a new Quality being generated within the Body, should
draw the Poison inwards to it self, and should never be allured outward by
attraction.

Secondly we enquire, whether happily, the Sapphire has produced a Virtue from it
self, and has imprinted it only on the Skin? But indeed, neither can that
stand together, because then it should not be necessary for a Circle to be
drawn by the Gem, about the Carbuncle; but it should be sufficient, for any
other remote, and more commodius part of the skin to be touched, which is false.

Thirdly, whether the Sapphire can perhaps, open the Pores of the Skin? And
whether Nature could not make use of the same expulsive Faculty, without the
touch of the Sapphire? Which if not, then the Sapphire shall not attract, but
shall only strengthen the expulsive Faculty in the sick Party: But that
contradicts this, because the place is not scorched either beyond, or on this
side of the Circle; and because those Carbuncles which begin to bud, being not
touched also by the Sapphire, do settle down, and perish. For truly, if the
expulsive Faculty were only strengthened, it would expel the Venom every way
round, and not be tied up unto a certain and elect place.

Fourthly, Nature before the touching of the Sapphire, had already denoted its
own strong Ability in expelling of the Carbuncle.

Whence also it is false, that Nature being once provoked to expulsion, does
afterward continue it of her self, seeing otherwise, the Sapphire came too slow
for the Beginning of Expulsion: Therefore whatever thou shall say, the Poison
must needs be magnetically attracted by the absent Gem.

Will thou therefore, that the natural Magnetism of the weapon Salve, be more
clearly manifested unto thee? Or will thou reprorch the attraction of the Gem,
and also write to the reproacher? Thou will judge (I suppose) that it is better
and far better to be of Opinion with us, that as Death, Wounds, a Disease,
Slaughters, crept in by the Devil, from whom there is naught but Mischief; So
that every good Gift, descends down from the Father of Lights; all Men judging
that to be good, which neither the Subject, nor the Object, nor the Means, nor
the intended End, dare to accuse of wickedness.

For this Cause, the Prelates of the Church, were wont heretofore to wear Rings
enricht

I have been the more tedious about the Sapphire, because it contains a Case or
Condition, wholly like and equal to the Armary Unguent or weapon Salve.

In this respect therefore, Man also has his Lodestone or attractive Power,
whereby Zenexton or preservatory Amulet against the Plague.

Will any one account these Effects also to be diabolical, and attribute them
to a Covenant

It is sufficient, that we have brought a few, yet satisfactory Examples, and
such as contain the like condition of the Armary Uguent: we shall now
seasonably turn our selves unto thy Arguments.

Thou reprovest Goclenius of Ignorance of the Doctrine of Aristotle, for that
he insinuates the same accident to pass from Subject into Subject (I wish thou
had been as ready in proving, as thou art in refuting) for as much as this
also is a Mother of great Stubbornness, to think that a scar in a dead Carcass
is not the same, which it was in the Man that was yesterday alive: For in vain
do we reverence the Relics of Saints, if only the impossible matter of the
Aristotelicks remains, and there shall not remain certain accidents in the
corrupted Body, whih were heretofore in the live one. Behold! whither whither a
Paganish error does hurl those that unadvisedly carpe at others: To imagine
(I say) that to be impossible, which is altogether necessary, is the part of
the grossest Ignorance.

Indeed the Light from the Sun, even unto the Earth, does even more swiftly
than the twinkling of an Eye, also through the smallest Atoms of the Air,
produce new Species, and Species of Species of Light: truly this is to wax
blind in Sunshine: for if we should not have the Light and Virtue of the Sun
amongst us, but only the thousandth (of thousands of Millions) Species of its
Light and Virtue, not any thing could grow, and Fire should never be produced
by the re-bounding or union of its Beams: For the Species of Species of Light,
seeing they are no more Light, than the Species of Colors are Colors, they
should never cause Fire. Certainly, I rejoice in the behalf of the Ignorance
of such a Doctrine, whereof Goclenius is accused as ignorant: Does not the
Needle of the Compass through a Glass that is sealed with scalding Sodder
(wherein no Pore is found) incline it self to the northern Pole? And is it not
drawn unto a neighboring piece of Iron, the Pole being the while neglected?
Therefore the same accident passes through the Glass from the Lodestone into
the Air, and perhaps reaches to the Pole it self.

And Magnetism also, is a celestial. Quality, very like to the Influences of
the Stars, neither is it restrained unto distances of Place, even as neither
the magnetical Ungent of

Thou smilest, because Goclenius chooses that hereby Moss which is gathered
from the Scul, of a Man of three Letters: Nor is there here, truly any ground
for thee to think Jesuit being put to Death by Hanging, or any other kind of
Martrydom, be left to be dried according to the Influence and Obedience of the
Stars, his Head will afford a springing Moss, every way alike useful, and also
alike in time for shaving it off, co-agreeable to the Skull of a Thief: for
truly, the Seed of the Moss falls from Heaven on Mount Calvary: For sometimes
there rains a Froath, which is called Aurora; and now and then a more tough
Muscilage descends, which is called the Sperm or Seed of the Stars: Sometimes
the Heavens showrs down Frogs, Spiders, etc. the which in falling, are made a
tangible, and vital Substance.

In Mountainous Places elsewhere, it rains Milk, no less than Blood: Oft-times
also, there lies upon Stones and Bones, a white and slimie Substance, let down
from Heaven,

Hitherto the Dew or Balsam of the Air Manna, Troni or the sweetest celestial
dewie Manna's, Tereniabin or the Fatness of Wood-hony found in good quantity in
the three Summer Months, Nostock or that which is called a falling Star, being
a kind of slimie or gelly found oft-times in Fields and Meadows, Nebulgea, or
the Salt of the Moisture of a Cloud falling upon Stones in Meadows, and
hardened with the heat of the Sun, Laudanum (which in the place, may not be
taken either for the Paracelfical preparation Laudanum, or for Laudanum which
is the liquid Sweat of the shrub Cistus or Ledon, but for some Aereal Meteor or
Production, arrsing from the Conjunction of some seminary celestial Influence,
with the fatty evaporation of Plants) and such like Aereal Productions have
regard, although these partake more of the Substance of Air.

Whereas in the mean time, Mosses growing on dead Skuls are of a higher
pedigree, being the Excretions or Superfluities of the Stars, and are named
celestial Flowers: By

A certain, and that notable Soldier, bare a small Lock of the Moss of a Man's
Skul artificially fastened between the Skin and Flesh of his Head; who friendly
interceding between with his Skin unhurt: Conjecture your selves, to what Cause
the safeguard of the Skin may be ascribed. I have not accustomed my self to
perplex my Mind with uncertain Conjectures: for truly Lightning, which is more
powerful than a Sword, if it shake or smite a Bay Tree, yet at leastwise, not a
Sea-calfe, neither does it touch upon a Horse, whose Snaffle is anointed with
the Fat of a Sea-calfe; neither does it smite the Stable, whose Posts are
besmeared with such Fat: the Experience is trivial or frequent; Yet I pass by
this Controversy, and leave it to others, when I shall have first put you in
mind of a like Example.

In Arduenna, St. Hubert is worshipped, whither all that are bitten by a mad
Dog have address (even as others flock unto the Chapels or Temples of St.
Domine and Belline:) there, a small lock of the Stole or upper Garment of St.
Hubert is fastened within the Skin of the Forehead of him that was bitten by a
mad Dog, and for the future, he can be smitten by no mad Beast whatsoever; and
that small Lock drives away or secures from their Teeth.

Thou will answer, that that is a Miracle of God, by the way of Relics: be it
a Miracle; Yet that God, does for the most part, in Miracles, walk side by side
with Nature, and observe the custom or rules hereof, those bitten Persons, by
their small Lock of the Garment, do show: For He who can do all things by his
Word alone, does now and then also make use of Means. So let the Sweat in the
Stoye of St. Paul, be a magnetical Unguent: But let the Sweat of the Sick, or
also the unsensible Efflux issuing from them, be the Blood of the Wounded, put
on a piece of Wood within the Box of the Unguent, forthwith all hurt is on
every side, magnetically drawn out of the sick Party: And that is the more
powerfully done, by how much that supernatural Magnet is of the greater
efficacy.

Indeed there is on both sides, a like reason, and a like manner of Operation:
but that, in the material World, it happens through the Blood and the Unguent,
as from corporeal Means; but in the supernatural, through the Relics of the
Friends of God, which even in this respect, are much to be reverenced: which
Relics, that they may become of a nearer Affinity with the magnetical
Unguent, our merciful God, has out of some of them, raised up a Fountain of
Oil, uncessantly dropping Liquors of Balsam.

Whereby we being indeed on both sides supported or relieved by a magnetical
Remedy, etc. because it is of necessity that the Magnet or Lodestone, be
rubbed and stirred, if it must attract.

I return unto thee Usnea, thou seminal Offspring of Heaven: for he who has
recovered Hubert; the Poison of the mad Dog being in the mean time, silent and
suspended.

Nature has also afforded a magnetical Remedy Cozen-Germane to the other. The
Zinzilla (which is an Excrement of the Diaphragma or Midriffe, departing into
an Inflammation)

For he who has once recovered of that Disease, has obtained not only a
Balsamical Blood, from whence for the future he is defended from the Disease;
but also he cures the same Effect in his Neighbor, and by a touching of his
Skin with the same Blood, through the Power of Magnetism, transplants his blood
into the like Balsam.

Thou will say, if the Magnetism be in the Usnea or Moss, other Ingredients are
in vain.

Physicians answer, that some of them are principal Ones, but others less
principal; that some are as the hinderers of Contrarities, but some as spurs or
exciting ones; some also are Promoters by increasing the less active Magnetism:
That this indeed was the necessity of a Composition in the Ungent. Wherefore as
it was an impertinency to say; if the Usnea contains the Magnetism, therefore
Man is embowelled in vain, for other Ingredients; so also, it would be an
absurdity to press, if the Usnea has not of it self a sufficient Magnetism,
nor the Fat, nor the Blood, etc. Therefore, neither shall that Magnetism that
is attributed to the Ointment, enter into the whole composition, since single
Ingredients cannot bring into a Composition, that which before they had not in
their Simplicity. I shall now and then be constrained to supply thy Place, and
to devise Cavils for thee; notwithstanding thou oughst first to have learned
from rustical Experiments, that in a Composition, a new and unwonted Quality
does frequently arise, which before was not at all couched in the single
Simples: for it was convenient for thee to have known, that neither Vitriol,
nor Gauls are black; yet being joined, that they make Ink.

Thou will again object: If the Usnea preserves in it self a Magnetism from the
Mumial Virtue of the Bones, and the circular Tract of the heavenly Bodies, then
the same shall be to be gathered, not only from the Skuls, but also from the
other Bones of a Sceleton: that Argument also is ridiculous; because Nature
also is subject to the Soil; and therefore new Pepper being planted in Italy,
begets or brings forth Ivy.

Hellebour that grows in the Region of Trent, is deprived of a purging Faculty:
And Thebes (now called Stibes or Stiber) it self: Therefore the Moss is
various, as it grows in a various Soil of the Bones: For if Lightning melt
Money without scorching the Purses, and often Companions sitting close
together, takes one out of the Middle, and dashes him together or to Ashes, and
that I say, happens, not casually, but by Permission of him, who would not have
so much as a Leaf fall from the Tree without Command, and by whose Power alone,
all Virtues are established; It also shall be no Wonder, that one Magnetical
Seed of Moss, distills from Heaven upon the Skul, and the Seed of another sort
upon the rest of the Bones. Only the Bone of the Head, prevails again the
Falling-evil; the other Bone, not so. Then lastly, the whole Brain is consumed
and melts in the S^ul; through the continual bedewing of which Liquor I say, of
the Bowel, the Skul attaines other Virtues, which we observe to be absent from
the other Bones.

I have sufficiently known the customs of Contradicters: For when they have
nothing more of moment to say against the thing it self, they become the more
reproachful, and fall foul upon the Man: Wherefore perhaps, some or other will
say, that Magnetism is a certain novelty, invented only by Paracelsus; but that
he was a wicked and ignorant Man. And then, if there had ever been any such
natural Virtue, it had not remained hidden to so many Ages, and its Revealment
not have waited for the coming of Paracelsus.

I answer, as to the Scoffs, and Mocks or Taunts of many showre'd down on a
Man that was the Ornament of Germany, they are indeed not worth a Nut, or not
at all to be regarded, and for that very Cause, render the asserter of them the
more unworthy; because he is such a one, who attempts to judge not only the
living, but the dead also: For there is no reason, that I an unequal or unfit
Person, who have undertaken the Song in Commendation of no Man, but do sift out
things themselves, should enter upon the praise of those things which his
Monuments hold forth concerning his Learning, Wisdom, and obtained Gifts.

The Objection therefore is Barren through its Pride, the which indeed, besides
the Living, and the Dead, takes upon it to judge even God himself; to wit, that
he ought not to have infused that Secret into Paracelsus, but into some other
(perhaps a Jesuit) nor to have disclosed so great a Consonancy or Harmony of
Nature in the Age of Theophrastus; but much sooner: But I pray, why came
Ignatius Loyola so late, for the establishment of a Society so profitable to
the whole World? Why sprang it not up many Ages before?

Alas! whither do thou wretched Man, hurry thy self through Presumption: Is
not God the free-giver of his own benefit? and is he not well pleased in an
undeserved bestowing That by their Works we shall know them. But w^^t the Works
of Paracelsus were, and how much greater than the expectation of Nature, and
the biting of Tongues, his Epitaph, hung on that well-deserved Monument of his,
by the most Illustrious, and most reverend Prince, the Bishop of Saltzburg, in
the despire of Envy, sufficiently declares.

The Epitaph of Paracelsus, which is seen Engraven in Stone at Saltzburg, in
the Hospital of St. Sebastian, on the erect Wall of the Temple.

Conditur hic Philippus Theophrastus, insignis Medicinae Doctor, qui dira illa
vulnera, Lepram, Podagram, Hydropisim, aliaque insanabilia Corporis Contagia,
mirifica Art sustulit; ac bona sua in Pauperes distribuenda collocandaque
honeravit. Anno. 1541, Die 24 Septem. Vitam cum Morte mutavit. Here lies
entombed Philippus Theophrastus, a famous Doctor of Medicine, who by a Wonder
working Art, took away those cruel and mortal Wounds, the Leprosy, Gowt,
Dropsy, and other uncurable Contagions of the Body; and honored his Goods so
as to be distributed and disposed of to the Poor. In the Year 1541 on, the 24
Day of the Seventh Month, He made an exchange of Life for Death.

Paracelsus therefore, is so far from having deserved his Ill, because he has
disclosed Magnetism, unknown to Antiquity, and in the room of that natural
Study which is barrenly

All things are of vile esteem with me, whatsoever deserves Credit only by
custom; Seeing there is nothing that involves us in greater Darkness, than that
we are conformed to custom, assenting as credulous, unto Rumor, and Dreams: We
must therefore proceed to enjoy our Liberty, not to enslave the gifts or
habilities of our Judgment.

Thou will object; that in sublunary things, there is not an influential.
Virtue like to the Impression of the celestial Bodies: but if thou shall
stumble at this, thou will also reprove all that have rightly Phylosophized,
who have rightly observed, that in inferior Bodies, there is a superior
Tribute paid after an Inferior manner, and a proportionable resemblance of the
Tribute of Inferior Bodies in the Superior. Do not Herbs, Animals, and Sick
or Diseased Man, fore-feel and presage of future changes of Times or Seasions?
Is not the more cruel Winter to be expected, by how much the deeper, a Frog
shall scrape his Inn in the Earth for harbor against the Winter at hand? For
from hence arise meteorical Divinations; not indeed that those happen from a
fore-timely Motion of celestial Bodies, and that as yet to come, because then
it should cause that presagious feeling in Sublunary Bodies, before it be
present: Far be it: For the Firmament does only foreshew future Events, but not
Cause them.

But indeed, all particular created things have their own Heaven within them,
and the Revolution of that Heaven depending on the Being of their Seed, in
whose Spirit (because

This indeed is the Cause of every natural Inclination: and where a Creature,
by the persuasion of its own proper Heaven, wanders from that Motion of Heaven,
as the most

Winds also, if they were stirred up through the guidance of the celestial
Mercury only, and not from their own Chaomantical or seminally signal Star,
truly there could not be any provincial Winds in any Place, and (because there
is one only Mercury, and one single Moon in the Heavens) a co-like Wind should
blow throughout the whole World, and the Sea should every where flow, if not at
the same time, at leastwise in the same harmonious Motion; which modern
navigation disproves. Sufficient it is therefore, here to have shown by the
way, that there is a celestial and impulsive Nature in things themselves, the
which notwithstanding, does excite and govern it self according to the Harmony
of a superior tributary Motion, so long as it will not be accounted
refractory: That the Firmament also does not Cause future events, unless
remotely, and that only by the first Qualities, playing the part of a certain
Cook; but otherwise does largely or

But that things themselves do contain a particular Firmament in their seminal
Being,

But what other thing is this (I pray) than to deny Magnetism, without, or
besides Magnetism? For if we universally call every Influence of Sublunaries on
each other, Magnetism, and for want of a true Name, do name that Occult
co-suitableness, whereby one absent thing acts on another absent one by way of
Influence (whither that be done by attracting, or impulsing) a Magnetism; truly
whosoever denies an Influential Power of Sublunaries toward each other, to be
by Magnetism, and requires an Instance to be given him to the contrary, he
requires an Absurdity, to wit, a Magnetism, without Magnetism, and knows not
what he may deny, or what demand.

For truly I have alleged Examples of the Fact, in Sublunary things, and
brought very many and suitable Instances, namely concerning the ingrafted Nose,
of the Sapphire, of Water-Pepper, Asarabacca, and most Herbs: But ye deny (I
sufficiently know, because ye are ignorant thereof) that either those Effects
do not thus happen, or thou will affirm (which thou art more ready to do) that
they come to pass through the assistance of the Devil.

It is not suitable to the custom of Naturalists, to dispute from naked
Authorities: we must come up to Handy-blows with those that contend with us, to
wit, unto Experience.

Make trial therefore, and convince us of a Lie: if thou can not, at least,
believe us. Therefore it is an Action of insolent malepartnesse, for any to
deny the Being of that Fact, which is every where frequent, because indeed he
has not searched out the Truth thereof, nor has endeavored so to search: and
much more insolent it is, indifferently to ascribe that to the Devil, which is
every where consonant to Nature, as shall be hereafter taught: and that indeed
for one only Fault, to wit, because the manner of its Operation by its Cause
cannot be understood by our Censurer; by a Censurer, who by the sharpness of
his own Understanding, and the Study of Aristotle's Physics, presumes that he
has on every side exactly viewed the whole Circle of Nature: by a Censurer I
say, who although he can discern nothing of Superstition in the Ungent, and
nothing of unlawfulness; yet by reason of the manner of its Application, being
Paradoxical to him, he condemns, and detests it as Impious, and affirms that it
contains, I know not what diabolical Juggle in it. But for what I beseech thee?
Indeed, because the Sword, or Splinter thereof besmeared with Blood, is
emplaistred with the Mumial and Magnetical Unguent; because the Blood which is
once expelled out of the Veins, knows not how to hold a correspondence with
that which is as yet nourished within the Veins: and because he does not
believe that the Action of the Unguent is extended unto an Object scltuated at
a far distance.

But return to thy self; because anon thou shall both understand, and believe
those things, unless thou art stubborn.

We will now for thy sake, recall the Action of Magnetism in Sublunary things,
unto the Bar of Light.

For indeed, I will now show, that there is without the Classis or order of
things and Herbs, undeservedly suspected by thee, an influence of some things
on each other, and that it is observedly between objects at a distance. The
Vine which is in its Flower, disturbs Wines a far of.

Thou will excuse, that the same Perturbation is made by the violence of the
Heavens: We prove that it is not: For if the Heaven should cause the flowrings
in the Vine, and

I gratefully applaud public Studies, and I bear good will to him, who first
discerned,

I am willing to have the same measure I mete, to be measured to me again:
Therefore

But that otherwise, the Lodestone is of it self elevated upwards toward the
Zenith, there is a certain Instrument invented by William Guilbert (the glory
of which Invention Lodowick Fo^seca lately endeavored to arrogate to himself,
in the presence of his Catholic Majesty) this Instrument I say, by a
voluntary elevation of the Lodestone, in a Brass-Ring hung up, shows not only
the latitude, but also the altitude or height of the Pole in all Places of the
World.

Thou viewing for a way of escape, wilt contend in behalf of the Pole, that the
Pole indeed attracts the Lodestone, but that it pulls the same Load-stones, not
in a direct line toward it self (for such is the condition and will of the
Attracter) but unto a neighboring place: Which is to say; The Pole or North
Star draws indeed the Lodestone unto it in a right line; yet the Lodestone
is not attracted in a right line to the Pole, by reason of a certain unknown
Impediment (which thou call a certain Disposition thereof) existing in the
Lodestone, which resists the attraction of the Pole, and is more powerful and
superior than it; although the same influential allurement reach safe and
sound unto the Lodestone at so many thousand miles distance.

Do thou see, how much truth thou have granted by thy Evasion? And how that
against thy will; thou notwithstanding affirmest, that there inhabites in the
Lodestone some certain motive Disposition (thou call it certain, yet
feigned to thee, and to all others wholly uncertain) which thou rejectest from
being in the Lodestone; besides and above the attraction of the Pole? Which is
as much as to say, that there is in the Lodestone a directive virtue unto some
distinct Place; but that it is not drawn by the Pole.

Thou will retort in behalf of a neighbor to the Pole, by saying, that the
Lodestone is drawn, and does not direct it self; not that it is drawn by any
one point of Heaven, or Star, but by a certain whole Circle nigh the Pole.

I answer, this Shift is far fetched; for that Circle shall have a latitude
even of eight Degrees at least, to wit, from three Degrees to eleven: Because I
have seen Load-stones of so great a variation. Therefore if there were a Power
of attracting, in the whole Circle, the same Lodestone should continually
vary, and in the same hour, declien, sometimes to three, and anon, to eight,
or eleven Degrees from the Pole; which is false: Therefore, there shall in a
Circle of so great latitude, be at least diverse lesser rounds, every one
whereof shall allure its own Lodestone; which being granted, thou will fall
again into the same Gulf; to wit, that there is a certain disposition in the
Lodestone, why it can rather be enticed by this, than by the other Circle; and
by consequence, thy fictions being stretched according to thy own desire, there
will nevertheless be a motive Virtue in the Lodestone himself.

We are not yet satisfied: if the Pole should draw the Lodestone, this should
be done,

Thou will say, that by rubbing on them, there is a participation of the
Lodestone made in the Pores of the Steel, or Spondils of the Glass.

A miserable excuse! For the Rosin of the Firr-Tree, is of it self coagulated
into the hardness of the Stone; the which, then allures Iron unto it, no
otherwise than the Lodestone does.

Here at leastwise, thy feigned participation of the Lodestone sinks to the
Ground.

The Lodestone only by the affriction or rubbing of Garlic thereon, neglects
the Pole, its Form, Matter, and Properties being the while preserved; indeed
because that spiritual

A swimming Lodestone is carried in one certain part thereof, to the North, in
its other part to the South: Therefore if that positional conversion should be
made by the drawing Pole, the whole Northern side of the Stone would be always
drawn by the North Pole; which is false: For if it shall touch a piece of Iron
with its North side, it shall not incline that Iron according to its own
Property, to the North, but to the South, although the dust of the Stone shall
adhere to the Iron: but if it shall touch the Iron with its Southern side, it
shall turn that Iron to the North.

Likewise the Lodestone, in what part it has always inclined it self to the
North beyond the Aequinoctial line, it tends to the South.

As yet a little longer, let us prosecute this Argument.

A Lodestone swimming in a Skiff of Cork, on a quiet Poole, if in its Northern
Part it shall be violently turned to the South; presently that that North side,
as it were by a forcible conduct, re-addresseth it self to the North: Therefore
if the Lodestone should by the Pole it self, be pulled toward the Pole, and
that direction of the Stone were not voluntary, the whole Skiff should of
necessity, by the same drawing, float and be drawn or towed to the Northern
Bank of the Poole; which is false: for the direction of the North side being
attained, both the Load-stones and Skiffe, stand unmovable upon the water.

There is therefore in the Lodestone, an influential Virtue, which without
respect had unto the nearness of its Object, is after the manner of Celestial
Bodies, freely carried as far as the Pole it self; seeing there is a voluntary
eradiation or darting forth of the Rays

The Lodestone therefore, or Iron touched by the Lodestone, seeing they
voluntarily convert themselves to the Pole, a certain Quality is of necessity
extended from the Lodestone to the Pole: the which, seeing we have known to be
done without any corporeal Efflux, therefore we denominate the same to be a
spiritual Quality, herein disagreeing from our Divine, who distinguishes a
Spirit in opposition to every corporeal Nature, as it were something besides
Nature.

But Physicians only in opposition to the more gross compact of a Body; and in
this respect, we say, that the Light of the Sun, and Influx of the Heavens, the
ejaculation or stupefactive darting forth of the Cramp-Fish, the sight of the
Basilisk, etc. are Qualities plainly Spiritual; to wit, because they are not
dispersed on an Object at a distance, by the Communion of a substantial
Evaporation; but as by the Medium of an unperceivable Light, they are beamed
forth from their Subject into a fit Object.

Which things being thus supposed and proved, it is sufficiently manifest, that
our Divine not having as yet understood Goclenius, has nevertheless many times
undeservedly carped at him.

First, because Goclenius would establish a Spiritual Quality in a Corporeal
Unguent.

Secondly, because He affirmed, that it being drawn or conveyed as through a
Medium or Vehicle, is carried unto its appropriated Object, like as a radial or
darting Light.

Thirdly, inasmuch as such Qualities are derived unto a remote, and appointed
Object, by a certain feeling of the Spirit of the World, the causative Faculty
of all Sympathy.

This Spirit, the Divine interprets to be a Cacodaemon or evil Spirit, but by
his own, and I know not what Authority; seeing it is the more pure and vital An
of Heaven, which Spirit nourishes the Sun, and the sunny Stars within, and
being a mind or intelligence diffused through the Limbs of the Universe, acts
the whole help thereof, and so governs the World by a certain Communion,
Conspiracy of Parts and Faculties, according to the consent of all that have
rightly Phylosophized.

For Examples sake, the Sun-following Flowers, do feel the travall or journey
of the

In Sum, every Creature does by its self (Let us worship the King to whom all
things live) Essence, Existence and Sensation or Perceivance, bear witness to
the Majesty, Liberality or Bounty, and Presence of the Creator. Wherefore our
Censurer is deservedly to be reproved, in that, before he understood the
Physician Writing in a Phylosophical Style, he has plainly carped at him with
an unsufferable boldness: For so hard a thing has it been to have kept a Mean
in all things.

Thou ask us, what can be attracted out of the wounded Party? and after what
manner an attraction can be made by the absent Unguent? But surely I should not
answer injuriously, when thou thy self shall show us, for what Cause the
Lodestone shall attract Iron, and convert it self to the Pole: Then shall I
also show thee, after what manner Mummy can cure another Mummy being touched on
by a third mediating Mummy: but because we have determined to repair the
insufficiency of Goclenius; in this respect, we are also presently to show by a
doctrinal Argument from the Cause to the Effect, how a Magnetical attraction of
the Unguent happens, yet provided that I shall first satisfy thee what can be
drawn from the Wound.

It is to be noted therefore, that in a Wound, there is made not only a
Solution of Continuity or disunion of the part which held together, but also
that a foreign quality is introduced, from whence the lips of the Wound being
enraged, they by and by swel with heat are apostemized, yea and from thence,
the whole Body is in a conflict through Fevers; and a various concourse of
Symptoms: For so an Egg whose shell is but even slenderly hurt or cracked,
putrifies, whereas otherwise it might be preserved.

The Magnetism therefore of this Unguent, draws that strange disposition out of
the Wound, from whence its lips, being at length overburthened or oppressed by
no accident, become without pain, and being no way hindered, suddenly hasten
unto a growing together. Natures themselves are the Physitianesses of a Wound,
the Physician only the Servant thereof; Neither does the Medicine beget flesh
in a Wound, it has enough to do, if it shall but remove impediments: Which
impediments, the one only Armary Unguent or Weapon Salve, does otherwise,
sufficiently, securely, and plentifully expel.

Thou will Object, That the Weapon Salve ought not rather to allure forth the
forementioned strange quality, than the natural strength and powers of the
Veins; and that the Blood, seeing it is sound or incorrupt in the Unguent,
ought to call to it the Health, but not the indisposition of the wounded party;
even as indeed was written of the Carline Thistle.

I Answer, that there are diverse Magnetisms; for some attract iron, some chaffs
and lead, some flesh, corrupt pus or matter, etc. but such is the favor of
some Magnetisms, that they extract only the Pestilential Air, etc. Yea, if
thou shall couple the effect of curing in our Ointment, with thy own Argument,
thy own Weapon will wound thee.

For from thence, that the Effect of the Unguent is to heal perfectly,
speedily, without pain, costs, peril, and loss of strength: hence I say, it is
manifest, that the Magnetical Virtue in the Unguent is from God, in a natural
way, and not from Satan.

Because, if this Satan should be a co-worker of the said Cure (which thou
affirmest) the same Cure would be imperfect, together with loss of Strength,
Weakness, Damage,

As many as ever have been cured by this Unguent, will give in their Testimony
for us.

Satan is never a teller of Truth, never a perswader unto Good, unless that he
may deceive thereby; yea, neither does he long continue in the Truth: For
always, if he shall bring any thing of good to any one, this Enemy
under-mixeth somewhat more of evil therewith.

And surely he would (according to his custom) observe the same rule also in
this Unguent, if he were the Author or Favourer thereof: At leastwise this
Remedy would then fail, when the wounded Person is recalled as it were from the
pit of death, who otherwise through the mortal contagion of Sin, had through
his dangerous wound, soon poured forth his Life together with his Blood:
unless happily thou shall say, that Satan then takes compassion on us; and that
he has now attained to himself a right or jurisdiction over such a wounded
person, himself leaves it in doubt, to wit, in curing him by the Magnetical
Unguent, whom he had rather should perish; perhaps because Satan is now in your
esteem a strict observer of his Word and Bargain, and no longer wholly a
turn-coat, fraudulent, impostor, and liar.

Besides, we deny the supposition also, That the out-chased blood, is perfectly
sound or incorrupt; but rather, that it being now deprived of a common life,
has also entered into the beginnings of some degree of corruption; only that
it obtains a Mumial Life.

Hitherto conduces the putrified, and yet Magnetical blood in an Egg.

I therefore pass by the absurdity of thy Objection, in that it has been so
bold as to wrest the Magnet or Attractive faculty of the Unguent, according to
thy own pleasure, and not to that end for which it was given of God.

Positive Reasons of Magnetism, more nearly brought home unto us by
Metaphysical and Magical Science.
It is now seasonable to discover the immediate cause of Magnetism in the
Unguent.

First of all by the consent of Mystical Divines, we divide Man into the
external, and internal Man, assigning to both the powers of a certain Mind or
Intelligence: For so there does a Will belong to flesh and blood, which may not
be either the Will of Man, not the Will of God; and the heavenly Father also
reveals some things unto the more inward Man; and some things flesh and blood
reveals, that is, the outward and sensitive or animal Man. For how could the
service of Idols, Envy, etc. he rightly numbered among the works of the flesh
(seeing they consist only in the Imagination, if the flesh had not also its
own imagination and elective Will?

Forthermore, that there are miraculous Ecstasies belonging to the more inward
man, is beyond dispute. That there are also Ecstasies in the Animal man, by
reason of a intense or heightened Imagination, is without doubt: Yea Martin del
Rio, an Elder of the society of Jesus, in his Magical disquisitions or
inquiries, brings in a certain young Lad in the City Insulis, that was
transported with so violent a cogitation of seeing his Mother, that through the
same burning desire, as if being rapt up by an ecstasy, he saw her being many

Many the like Examples daily come to hand, the which for brevities sake I omit.

But that, that desire arose from the more outward man, to wit, from Blood, and
Sense, or Flesh, is certain: For otherwise, the Soul being once disliged or
loosed from the Body, is never but by a miracle reunited thereunto.

There is therefore in the Blood, a certain ecstatical or transporting power,
the which, if it shall at any time be stirred up by an ardent desire, is able
to derive or conduct the Spirit potentia, or by way of possibility; neither is
it brought into act, unless it be rouzed up by the imgination enflamed by a
fervent desire, or some art like unto it.

Moreover, when as the Blood is after some sort corrupted, then indeed all the
Powers thereof, which without a foregoing excitation of the Imagination, were
before in possibility,

Therefore when a Wound through the entrance of air, has admitted of an
adverse quality, from whence the blood forthwith swells with heat or rage in
its lips, and otherwise

Lo, thou have now the positive reason of the Natural Magnetism in the
Unguent, drawn from Natural Magic, whereunto the light of Truth assents;
saying, Where the Treasure is, there is the Heart also.

For if the Treasure be in Heaven, then the Heart, that is, the Spirit of the
Internal Man is in God, who is the Paradise, who alone is Eternal Life.

But if the treasure be fixed or laid up in frail or mortal things; then also,
the Heart and Spirit of the more external Man is in Fading things: Neither is
there any cause of bringing in a Mystical sense, by taking not the Spirit, but
the Cogitation and naked Desire, for the Heart; for that would contain a
frivolous thing, that wheresoever a Man should place his Treasure in his
Thought or Cogitation, there his Cogitation would be.

Also Truth it self does not interpret the present Text Mystically, and also by
an Example adjoined, shows a local and real presence of the Eagles with the
dead Carcass: So also, that the Spirit of the Inward Man is locally in the
kingdom of God in us, which is God himself; and that the Heart or Spirit of the
animal or outward sensitive man is locally about its Treasure.

What wonder is it, that the astral Spirits of carnal or animal men, should as
yet after their funerals, show themselves as in a bravery, wandering about their
buried Treasure,

I say therefore, that the external Man is an Animal or living creature, making
use of the reason and will of the Blood: But in the mean time not ba^ely an
Animal, but moreover

Logicians therefore may see, how defectively they define a man from the power
of rational discourse. But of these things more elsewhere.

I will therefore adjoyn the Magnetism of Eagles to Carcases; for neither are
flying Fowls endowed with such an acute smelling, that they can with a mutual
consent, go from Italy into Africa unto Carcases: For neither is an odor so
largely and widely spread; for the ample latitude of the interposed Sea hinders
it, and also a certain Elementary property of consuming it: Nor is there any
ground, that thou should think these Birds do perceive the dead Carcases at
so far a distance, with their sight, especially if those Birds shall lie
Southwards behind a Mountain.

But what need is there to enforce the Magnetism of Fowl by many Arguments,
since God himself, who is the beginning and end of Philosophy, does expressly
determine the same process to be, of the Heart and Treasure, with these Birds
and the Carcass, and so interchangeably between these and them?

For if the Eagles were led to their food the Carcases, with the same appetite
whereby four-sooted Beasts are brought on to their pastures; certainly he had
said in one word, That living Creatures flock to their Food, even as the Heart
of a Man to his Treasure; which would contain a falsehood: For neither does the
Heart of Man proceed unto its Treasure, that he may be filled therewith, as
living Creatures do to their Meat: And therefore the Comparison of the Heart of
Man, and of the Eagle lies not in the end, for which they tend or incline to a
desire, but in the manner of tendency; namely that they are allured and carried
on by Magnetism, really and locally.

Therefore the Spirit and will of the Blood fetched out of the Wound, having
intruded it self into the Ointment by the Weapons being anointed therewith, do
tend toward their My youth shall be renewed as the Eagle.

For truly, the renewing of her youth proceeds from an essential extraction of
the Mumial Spirit, being well refined by a certain singular digestion proper to
that Fowl, and not from a bare eating of the flesh of the Carcases: otherwise,
Dogs also, and Pies would be renewed, which is false.

Thou will say, that it is a reason far fetched in behalf of Magnetism; But what
will thou then infer hereupon? If that which thou confessest to be far remote
for thy capacity of understanding, that shall also with thee be accounted to be
fetched from far. Truly the Book of Genesis, avoucheth, That in the blood of all
living Creatures, does their Soul exist.

For there are in the blood certain vital powers, the which, as if they were
soulified or enlivened, do demand revenge from Heaven; yea and judicial
punishment from earthly Judges, on the Murderer: which powers, seeing they
cannot be denied to inhabit naturally in the blood, I see not why they can
reject the Magnetism of the blood, as accounting it among the ridiculous works
of Satan.

This I will say more, to wit, that those who walk in their sleep, do by no
other guide than the Spirit of the blood, that is, of the outward man, walk up
and down, perform business, climb Walls, and manage things that are otherwise
impossible to those that are awake: I say by a Magical virtue, natural to the
more outward man: That Saint Ambrose, although he were far distant in his Body,
yet was visibly present at the funeral solemnities of Saint Martin; Yet was he
Spiritually present at those solemnities, in the visible Spirit of the external
man, and no otherwise: for inasmuch as in that Exstacy which is of the more
internal man, many of the Saints, have seen many and absent things; this is
done without time and place, through the superior Powers of the Soul being
collected in Unity, and by an intellectual vision, but not by a visible
presence: Otherwise, the Soul is not separated from the Body, but in good
earnest or for altogether; neither is it re-connexed thereunto: which
re-connexion notwithstanding, is otherwise, natural or familiar to the Spirit
of the more outward man.

It is not sufficient in so great a Paradox, to have once or by one single
reason touched at the matter. It is to be further propagated, and we must
explain, how a Magnetical attraction happens also between inanimate things, by
a certain perceivance or feeling, not indeed animal or sensitive, but natural.

Which thing that it may be the more seriously done, it behooves us first to
show, what Satan can of his own power contribute to, and after what manner he
can cooperate in the merely wicked and impious actions of Witches: for from
thence it will appear, unto what cause every effect may come to be attributed.

In the next place, what that Spiritual power may be, which tends to a far
remote Object; or what may be the action, passion, and skirmishing between
natural Spirits; or what may be the superiority of man as to other inferior
creatures; and by consequence, why indeed our Unguent being compounded of
humane Mummies, do thoroughly cure Horses also: We will explain the matter by an
Example.

Let a Witch therefore be granted, who can strongly torment an absent Man by an

The First Supposition.
First o^ ^^l, Thou shall take notice, that Satan is the sworn and
irreconcilable Enemy of Men, and to be so accounted by all, unless any one had
rather have him to be his friend; and therefore he most readily procures
whatsoever mischief he is able to cause or wish unto us, and that without doubt
and neglect.

The Second Supposition.
And then, Although he be an Enemy to Witches themselves, forasmuch as he is
also a most malicious Enemy to all Mankind in general: yet in regard they are
his bondslaves, and those of his Kingdom, he never, unless against his will,
betrays them, or discovers them to Judges, and exposes them to scorn to other
men, and that for three Reasons.

First,
Seeing he is the parent of Pride, he is not ignorant that hereby it much
detracts from his Reputation, Authority and Dominion.

Secondly,
Seeing he is the unsatiable Persecuter of Souls, he has known, that through
certain punishments and flames of Justice, such as were otherwise ready and
willing to slide into his Protection, are affrighted and plainly diverted.

Thirdly,
Because he has many times seen a Witch, which this Tormenter could (by
wresting round of her neck, or stopping of her breath) wish to destroy,
sometimes repenting even before the Flames, and so to be snatched out of his
clutches.

From the former Supposition I conclude, That if Satan were able of himself to
kill a Man who is guilty of deadly sin, he would never delay it; But he does
not kill him; therefore he cannot.

Notwithstanding, the Witch does oftentimes kill; hence also she can kill the
same Man; No otherwise than as a privy Murderer at the Liberty of his own
Will, slays any one with a Sword.

There is therefore a certain power of the Witch in this action, which belongs
not to Satan; and consequently Satan is not the principal efficient and
executer of that Murder: For otherwise, if he were the executioner thereof, he
would in no wise stand in need of the Witch as his assistant; but he alone had
soon taken the greatest part of men out of the way.

Surely most miserable were the condition of Mortals, which should be subject
to such a Tyrant, and stand liable to his command: we have too faithful a God,
than that he should subject the work of his own hands to the arbitrary dominion
of Satan.

Therefore in this act, there is a certain power plainly proper and natural to
the Witch, which belongs not to Satan.

Moreover, of what nature, extent, and quality that power may be, we must more
exactly fifth out.

In the first place, it is manifest, that it is no corporeal strength of the
Male Sex; for neither does there concur any strong touching of the extreme
parts of the Body, and Witches are for the most part, feeble, impotent, and
malicious Old Women: Therefore there must needs be some other power, far
superior to a corporeal attempt, yet natural to Man.

This power therefore, was to be seated in that part wherein we most nearly
resemble the Image of God: And although, all things do also after some sort,
represent that venerable

For peradventure by this Prerogative, All things are put under his feet.

Wherefore if God act per nutum or by a beck, namely by his Word; so ought Man
to act some things only by his beck or Will, if he ought to be called his true
Image: For neither per nutum or by his beck alone, seeing he has not
extreamities or corporeal Organs, whereby to touch, move, or also to snatch a
new Body to himself.

That privilege therefore ought no less to belong to the inward Man, as he is
a Spirit, if he ought to represent the Image of God, and that indeed not an
idle one: if we call this

That Magical power therefore, is in the inward man, whether thou by this
Etymology or true Word, understandest the Soul, or the vital Spirit thereof it
is now indifferent to us;

Wherefore this power or faculty must needs be dispersed throughout the whole
Man; in the Soul indeed more vigorous, but in the Flesh and Blood, far more
remiss.

The vital Spirit in the Flesh and Blood performs the office of the Soul; that
is, it is that same Spirit in the outward man, which in the seed forms the
whole figure, that magnificent

For which reason, Physicians divide this Spirit, into the implanted or Mumial,
and inflowing or acquired Spirit, which departs, to wit, with the former Life.
And this influxing

The soul therefore being wholly a Spirit, could never move or stir up the
vital Spirit, (being indeed corporeal) much less flesh and bones, unless a
certain natural power, yet

After what sort I pray, could the corporeal Spirit obey the commands of the
Soul, unless there should be a command from her for moving of the Spirit and
afterward the Body?

But against this Magical motive faculty, thou will forthwith Object, That that
power is limited within her composed Body, and her own natural Inn: Therefore
although we call this Soul a Magitianess, yet it shall be only a wresting and
abuse of the Name; for truly, the true, and superstitious Magic draws not its
foundation from the Soul: Seeing this same Soul is not able to move alter, or
excite any thing out of its own Body.

I Answer, That this Power, and that natural Magic of the Soul, which she
exercises out of her self, by virtue of the Image of God, does now lie hid as
obscure in Man, and as it were lay asleep since the Fall or corruption of Adam,
and stands in need of stirring up; all which particulars, we shall anon in
their proper place prove, which same power, how drowsy, and as it were drunk
soever it otherwise remains daily in us; yet it is sufficient to perform its
offices in its own Body.

Therefore the knowledge and power Magical, and that faculty in Man which
acts only per nutum, sleeps since the knowledge of the Apple was eaten; and
as long as this knowledge

But because in sleep, the whole knowledge of the Apple does sometimes sleep:
Hence also it is, that our dreams are sometimes Prophetical, and God himself is
thereofre the nearer unto Man in Dreams, through that effect: To wit, when as
the more inward Magic of the Soul not being now interrupted by the knowledge
of the Apple, does even on every side diffuse it self in Understanding: to wit,
even as when it sinks it self into the inferior Powers thereof, it safely
leads those that walk in their sleep, by moving or conducting them whither
those that were awake could not climb.

Therefore the chief Rabbis of the Cabal, affirm, that it was learnt or
conceived in time

Satan therefore stirs up this Magical power (otherwise sleeping, and hindered
by the

When as otherwise, that kind of power was freely conferred by God the workman,
being

For truly through sin, not the gifts of Nature but those of Grace, were
obliterated in Adam: And moreover, that the same natural gifts, although they
were not taken away,

For hitherto have contemplations, continued prayers, watchings, fastings, and
acts of

Hitherto, I say, has the art of the Cabal regard, which as it were by sleep
shaken off, may restore that Natural and Magical power of the Soul.

I will (after the manner of Mathematicians) yet further explain my self by
Examples, and will assume the very works of Witches; the which although they
are wickedly mischievous and detestable, yet are supported by the same root,
namely a Magical power, without difference as unto good, and also unto evil.

For neither does it blemish the Majesty of free Will, or the Treatise of the
same; although we now and then discourse of a Thief, Robber, or Murderer, a
Whoremonger, an Apostate, and Witch.

Grant therefore that a Witch kills a Horse in an absent Stable; there is a
certain natural virtue derived from the Spirit of the Witch, and not from
Satan, which can oppress or strangle the vital Spirit of the Horse.

Suppose thou that there are two subjects of Diseases and Death, namely one of
these, the Body wherein a Disease inhabits: And because all Beings act on this
Body, as that

The act therefore of the foregoing touch of the Witch, is plainly natural,
although the stirring up of the virtue or power be made by the help of Satan:
No less than if a Witch should slay a Horse with a Sword reached unto her by
Satan; that act of the Witch is natural and corporeal, even as the other
foregoing act is Natural and Spiritual.

For truly, Man naturally consists no less of a Spirit, than of a Body;
neither therefore is there any reason, why one act may be called the more
natural one, or why the Body only etc. but in no wise the Body and dead Carcass
it self: Every act therefore does more properly respect its agent than the Body
the Inn of the Agent.

Therefore some certain Spiritual Ray, departs from the Witch into the Man, or
bruit Beast, which she determines to kill: According to that Maxim, That there
is no Action made unless there be a due approximation or most near approach of
the Agent to the Patient, and a mutual coup^ing of their Virtues, whether the
same approximation be made Corporally, or also spiritually: Which thing is
proved to our hand by a visible testimony.

For if the fresh Heart of a Horse (for that is the seat of the vital Spirits)
slain by a Witch be empaled upon a stick, and be roasted on a Broach, or
broyled on a Gridiron: Presently

Therefore there is made in the fresh Heart, a binding up of the Spirit of the
Witch, before that by a dissolution, the Witch her own Spirit return back to
her again: which Spirit is retained by the Stick or Arrow being thrust into the
Heart, and through a roasting of both Spirits together, from whence by
Magnetism it happens, that the Witch in the utmost limit

We must not think, that the whole Spirit of the Witch departs into the Heart
of the Horse (for so the Witch her self had departed from the living) but that
there was a certain univocal or single participation of the vital Spirit and
Light, even as indeed a Spirit which is the Architect or Master-workman of the
whole Man is propagated in the Seed at every turn or act of Generation, being
sufficient even for many offsprings, the Spirit of the Father remaining entire
notwithstanding.

Indeed that Spiritual participation of Light is Magical, and a wealthy
communication by Virtue of that Word: Let Animals and Herbs bring forth Seed;
and one Seed produces ten times ten thousand of Seeds of equal Valor or
Virtue, and as many entire seminal Spirits, as Light is kindled or inflamed by
Light.

But what a Magnetical Spirit may properly be, and the Entity or Beingness
begotten by its Parent the Fantasy; I will hereafter more largely write: I am
now returned unto our Ends proposed.

Neither is there any ground for any one to think, that this rebounding of the
Heart into the Witch, is a mere Supposition, or plainly a superstitious and
damnable Juggle and Mockery of Satan; seeing she is infallibly discovered by
this Sign, and is constrained, will she, nill she, to bewray her self openly,
which is a thing opposite to the intent of Satan, as in the second of our
suppositions, is above sufficiently shown: for the Effect is perpetual, never
deceiving, having its Foundation in reason, and the spiritual Nature, but not
in the least supported by Superstitions.

Has not likewise a dead Carcass also that was murdered, be-bloodied it self
before the Judges or Coroner and his Inquest, when the Murderer was present,
and has oft-times procured a certain Judgment of his Offense? Although before,
the Blood had already stood restrained?

Indeed in the Man dying by reason of his Wound, the Inferior Virtues which
are Mumial (for those are unbridled ones, and are not in our Power) have
imprinted on

Therefore not Abel himself, but his innocent Blood cries notwithstanding, unto

But such kind of Plagues are outrageous, sparing none, and as it were
immediately sent down from Heaven; and because they being spiritual, do implore
help from corporeal

For that reason also, God, in the Law, forbad the Bodies of those that were
hanged Heathens) to be left on the Gibbet, and the Sun should not go down upon
them. Thou will answer, that the Plague of Sieges arises, by reason of the
manifold Filths of Excrements.

But on the contrary, Curriers, Tanners, or Leather-dressers, Emptiers of
Jakes's, and

Do thou desire to know perhaps, why the Blood of a Bull is Poisonous, but
not that of his Brother the Ox?

Indeed the Bull in time of Killing, murmurs against his Executioner, and
imprinteth on his Blood a Mark and potent Character of revenge: But if it
happen, that in slaying of an Ox, through one stroke, he has become furious,
and has the longer continued in the same Fury; he leaves his Flesh but
unwholesom, unless first the disturbance being pacified, he as idle and shut up
by himself, be left to return to himself by fasting. The Bull therefore dies
more excelling in revenge than other Animals; and therefore his Fat (but not
his Blood, unless the humane Blood in the Unguent be conquered by expected;
truly the Usnea or Moss, together with its fellow Ingredients, are not
sufficient, that a Cure should be made without fresh Blood had out of the
Wound, for a more violent Efficacious or taurine Impression is required, and an
aereal Communication of the Honey of Flowers.

From hence therefore, it is sufficiently manifest, that the Efficacy of the
Unguent is not to be imputed to the Concurrence of Satan (who also could Cure
the Wound without

Our Adversaries will prate, rejoicing, that the Power of the Magnetical
Unguent could scarce have been proved, but by a Witch, by Satan, and the
spiritual Magic of the invisible World, which is a suppositious or imaginary
Science, plainly of no weight or worth, and a damnable Error.

Notwithstanding, not any sinister perverting of the matter in handling, but
the gross Ignorance of others, and the miserable Condition of humane Frailty,
has required that thing; which more promptly inclines to Evil, knows Evil,
and is more readily taught by Evil than by Good: But certainly, whatsoever we
have here alleged concerning Satan and Witches, it is not, that from thence,
others should hope for a conformity or suitable resemblance of the Ointment
with Witches: for neither are the spiritual Virtues of the Unguent, and the
Fantasy of the Blood, stirred up by Satan, as a Guider, or Enforcer. But this
is that I aimed at; to wit, that there does inhabit in the Soul, a certain
Magical Virtue, given her of God, naturally proper and belonging unto her,
inasmuch as we are his Image and Engravment; that in this respect also, she
acts after a peculiar manner, that is, spiritually on an Object at a distance,
and that much more powerfully, than by any corporeal helps; because, seeing the
Soul is the more principal part of the Body; therefore the Action belonging
unto her, is spiritual, magcial, and of the greatest Validity: That the Soul
does by the same Virtue which was rendered as it were drowsy through the
knowledge gotten by eating of the Apple, govern and stir her own Body: but that
the same magical Faculty being somewhat awakened, is able to act also out of
her Prison, on another distant Object, only by her Beck, conveyed thereunto
by Mediums: for therein indeed is placed the whole Foundation of natural
Magic; but in no wise, in

But we do not tremble at the name of Magic, but with the Scripture, interpret
it in a good-sense:

Yet we have granted that it may be indifferently employed to a good or evil
Intent, to wit, by the use or abuse of that Power.

And so that, under that Word we understand the most profound inbred knowledge
of things, and the most potent Power for acting, being alike natural to us with
Adam, not

Therefore we show, that Magnetism is exercised, not indeed by Satan, but by
that which belongs not to Satan; and therefore that this Power which is
co-natural unto us,

Whether that Exciter be the holy Spirit by Illumination, as the Church
mentions to have happened in the Eastern Magi or Wise Men of the East, and
which at this day sometimes

Also Man himself is able through the Art of the Cabal, to cause an excitement
in himself, of so great a Power at his own Pleasure, and these are called
Adeptists; or Obtainers, whose Governor also, is the Spirit of God. That this
same Magical Virtue is also in the more outward Man; to wit, in the Flesh and
Blood.

Yet after its own, and far more feeble manner; yea not only in the external
Man; but also proportionally in Bruits (for so the Book of Genesis minds us,
that the Soul of Bruit-Beasts is in their Blood, and upon this account, it
deservedly enrouls the same out of the Bill of our Food) and perhaps in all
other things; Seeing all particular things contain in them a delineation of the
whole Universe, and upon that account at least, the Ancients have seriously
signified unto us that there is a God, that is, an All in All: that the Magic
of the more outward Man has need of exciting no less than that of the more
inward Man; neither that Satan does stir up any other Magic in his Imps, than
what belongs to the more outward Man: For in the more inward bottom of the
Soul, is the Kingdom of God, whereto no Creature has access.

We have further taught, that there is a connection between things spiritually
acting, David and Jonathan, etc.

Last of all, we have endeavored to show, that Man predominates over all other
corporeal Creatures, and that by his natural Magic, he is able to tame the
Magical Virtues of other things; which predominacy others have falsely and
abusively transferred on the authority of Verses or Charms, and Enchantments:
By which Hierarchy or holy Dominion, we have sufficiently, and
over-sufficiently cleared up, that those Effects whatsoever they be, are
wrought, which those (who not but too rustically and corporeally Phylosophize)
have referred unto the dominion of Satan.

It must needs be, that those who were ignorant of all things that have been
spoken, should as yet doubt of many things; therefore we determine to repeat
all things.

First of all, whereby those things may become the more clear, which we have
spoken above, concerning the Duel of Spirits, or their mutual friendly
Conspiracy; It is worth our labor to define the Weapons of Spirits, and the
Commonwealth of the same. Wherefore we must seriously note the Example of a
Woman great with Child, who, if she has with violence of desire, conceived a
Cherry in her Mind, the Foot-step thereof is presently imprinted on her Young,
in that Part whereon the great-bellied Woman shall lay her hand: Nor is it
indeed only an idle Image or Spot of a Cherry, but that which flowers and grows
to Maturity with the other Trees in their season; to wit, the Signatures of
Colors, and Figures being changed: Truly, high and sacred is the force of the
Microcosmical Spirit, which without the Trunck of a Tree, brings forth a true
Cherry, that is, Flesh ennobled with the Properties and Power of the more
inward or real Cherry, by the Conception of Imagination alone: from whence we
understand two necessary Consequences.

The First is, that all the Spirits, and as it were the Essences of all things,
do lay hid in us, and are born and brought forth only by the working Fantasy
of the little

The Second is, that the Soul in conceiving, generates a certain Idea of the
thing conceived; the which indeed, as it before lay hid unknown, and as it
were, Fire in a Flint; So by the stirring up of the Fantasy, there is
produced a certain real Idea, and a quiddative, or some particular essential
Limitation of a Cherry, which is not a naked quality, but something like unto a
Substance, hanging in suspense between a Body and a Spirit, that is, the Soul.

That middle Being is so spiritual, that it is not plainly exempted from a
Corporeal Condition; since the Actions of the Soul are limited on the Body, and
the inferior orders of Faculties depending on it; nor yet so corporeal, that
it may be enclosed by Dimensions, the which we have also related to be only
proper to a seminal Being. This Ideal Entity therefore, when it falls out of the
invisible and intellectual World of the Microcosme, it puts on a Body; and then
also it is first enclosed by the Limitations of Place and Numbers.

The Object of the Understanding is in it self a naked and pure Essence, not an
accident, by the consent of Practical, that is, mystical Divines: Therefore
this Protheus or transformable Essence, the Understanding does as it were put
on, and cloth it self with this conceived Essence.

But because every Body, whether External, or Internal, has its making in its
own proper Image; The Understanding knows or discerns not, the Will loves and
wills not, the Memory recollects not, but by Images or Likenesses: The
Understanding therefore, put on this same Image of its Object; and because the
Soul is the simple Form of the Body, which turns her self about to every
Member; therefore, neither can the acting. Understanding have two Images at
once, but first one, and anon, another:

Therefore the whole Soul descends upon the Intellect or Understanding, and the
comprehended Image being as yet tender, and forms this Knowledge of the Essence
into a

As often soever therefore, as the Cogitation or Thought draws the Sense and
Will into a consent; so often a filthy Skin is bred and put on, being a
bastardly Ideal Entity, by which birth the Will is said to be confirmed: Also
that Ideal Entity, whithersoever it is directed by the Will, thither it goes;
by this means the Will moves, sometimes the Arm, sometimes the Foot, etc.

Furthermore, when the said Entity is spread upon the vital Spirit, for to
love, help, or hurt any thing, it wants only a light Excitement, whether made
from the asistance of God, of the Cabalistick Art, or of Satan, that indeed the
small Portion of the Spirit which has now put on that Entity, departs far off,
and perform its Office enjoined it by the Will.

So the Male lays aside his Seed out of himself, which through the Entity
which it has drawn, is very fruitful, and performs its Office without the
Trunck of its own Body.

He who well receives this Wisdom, shall easily understand, that the Material
World is on all sides governed and restrained by the Immaterial and Invisible:
But that all other created Corporeal Beings are put under the Feet of Men: for
indeed, this is the Cause, why also the Mummy, Fat, Moss, and Blood of Man, to
wit, the Fantasy existing in them in the Unguent, overswayes the Blood of a
Dog, of a Horse, etc. being conveyed by a Stick, into the Box of the Unguent.

There has not been yet said enough concerning the Magnetism of the Unguent.

I will therefore resume what I spoke of before; namely, that the Magnetisms of
the Lodestone, and of inanimate things, are made by a natural Sensation or
Feeling, which is the Author of all Sympathy, is a certain Truth.

For if the Lodestone directs it self to the Pole, it ought of necessity to
have known the fame, if it be not to commit an Error in its Direction: And how
I pray, shall it have

Likewise if it self to Iron placed aloof off, the Pole being neglected, it
must needs have first been sensible of the Iron: Therefore one single
Lodestone, has diverse Senses and Images: Neither also-shall it be sufficient
that it has Sense, unless we add the Spurs of Friendship and Self-love; and so
that it is endowed with a certain natural Fantasy, and by reason of the
Impression whereof, all Magnetisms are forged: For it is directed by another
manner of Fantasy toward the Iron, than toward the Polo; ^or then its Virtue
is dispersed, only through a neighboring Space.

Its Fantasy is changed when it restraines the abortive Young, Catarrhs, or
Rheumes,

For although the Lodestone it self be filled with a red Color, and be
consumed by the

The Fantasy of Amber draws Chaffs and Moates, by an attraction indeed, slow
enough, but yet with a sufficient perfect Signature of attraction: for it being
married to Zenexton or preservatory Amul^t against pestilential Contagions: But
Amber being mixed with Gumms, its imagination being now transplanted, draws the
Poison and Bullet out of a Wound, indeed its pleasure and desire of drawing,
being on both sides varied. But what Wonder shall it be (unless with those who
being ignorant of all things, do also admire all things) that inanimate things
are strong in Fantasy:

When as he, who is wholly the Life creates all things, and has therefore
promised The Spirit of the Lord has filled the whole Globe of the Earth: Yea
this Expression, That he contains or comprehends all things, carries the
force of the World. Do we not believe that there was much Knowledge in the
Apple? and that through the eating thereof, our first Parents both are it up,
and together also conceived it within? and does not that Knowledge presuppose a
Fantasy proper to its kind? for so some Simples induce an Alienation of the
Mind, but etc. Sometimes also, perpetually, as in lunatic and mad or
Bedlam-persons.

Does not the Madness of Dogs thus pass over into Man? For the maddish
Fantasy of

From whence at length, comes a Binsical Death, that is, from the sole Sickness
of the Mind, to wit, the magical Virtue of the Dog being exalted and excited,
or stirred up above the non-excited, but drowsy Imagination of the Animals.

Plainly after the same manner, is the Fantasy of the Tarantula imprinted by
a slender stroke of his S^ing, and the Wounded or Stung Persons being presently
alienated in Tarantula differs from that of a mad Dog, in this, that this acts
by a Magical Power being stirred up, and so, by the Magic of a true name: But
the other by a drowsy Magical Faculty (even as the same difference is manifest
in Wol^s-bane and other destructive Plants* which kill with a very small
quantity;) because no living Creature Secures or defends himself against a mad
Dog; because there is in him, a binding magical Power, against which, Teeth or
Horns do not prevail: which cannot be said of the Poison of the Tarantula.

In the External Man therefore, even as in his fellow Animals, the magical
Power is as it were laid asleep, neither can it be stirred up only in Man
(although indeed much more easily in him) but in some living Creatures his
Consorts.

Yea, neither is it sufficient that Spirits do observe this Law of Concord and
single Duel with Spirits; but moreover, there lurks a certain Spirit in the
whole Universe, which we

Why are we so sore afraid of the name of Magic? Seeing that the whole action
is Magical; neither has a thing any Power of Acting, which is not produced
from the

The formal Properties therefore, which issue from the Forms of the three
Principles, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, or Salt, Fat, and Liquor, from whence
every Body is composed, etc. in things.

There are also besides these, other more noble Properties, arising from the
Fantasy of the Forms of the mixed Body; and those of this sort, are in the
whole composed Body,

Likewise Antimony, as long as it remains in its Form, obtains most
excellent Properties, the which, it never attaineth in its Principles, and
these are also from a corporeal Bosom; and therefore the spiritual Magic is
also hidden in these, and is thought to be due only to Nature, by unfitly
distinguishing this in opposition to Magic.

So the Leaf of the Rose has another kind of Virtue, which the Stalk or
mossie yellow tuft thereof, has not: and that Virtue in the Leaf is not from
the three first things, but from its native Life, which when its destroyed,
then it has other Virtues; as suppose thou a grain of Corn, which nourishes
in its first Life, the which, if it loses, then it fructifies.

And then thirdly, there is a magical Virtue, which proceeds from the
Fantasy of

But moreover, the Soul of every Bruit-beast, has a Power of Creating a real
Entity, or Beingness, and through the Will, of dismissing the same to a far
distant Object: The Olaus, etc. Such also is the Virtue inhabiting in the Blood
of many Animals: For from hence the holy Scripture says, That the Soul is in
the Blood though hunted out of the Veins, and although boiled by Fire; perhaps
also, being plainly putrified through a keeping warm.

Last of all, there is a magical Virtue, being as it were abstracted from the
Body, which

Every magical Virtue almost stands in need of excitement; for the lowest sort
wants an

But that of the highest sort, which is that of Bruits, and Men, is stirred up
from an intellectual Conception: and indeed that of the inward Man is not
excited but by the holy Spirit, and by his gift, the Cabal: but that of the
External Man, is stirred up by a strong Imagination, by a daily and heightened
Speculation; yea and in Witches, by Satan.

But the magical Virtue of the out-chased Blood, wherein the Soul dwells,
which is as yet made to lurk in Potentia, or by way of possibility only, is
excited either by a more strong ascending Imagination, conceive it of the
Magitian making use of the Blood as a Mean, and establishing his kindled Entity
thereon; or conceive it through the ascending Fantasy of the Weapon Salve,
the excitress of the Property lurking in the Blood; or by a foregoing
Appointment or Disposition of the Blood unto Corruption, to wit, whereby the
Elements are disposed unto Separation, and the Essences (which know not how to
putrify) and the essential Fantasies, which lay hid in the Power of the
Properties, come forth into Action.

The Fantasy therefore of any Subject whatsoever, has obtained a strong
Appetite to

Let every Magnetism therefore, be either Sympathetical, or Antipathetical; yet
every Sympathy shall not be Magnetical.

We returning to our scope proposed: I think, ere this, that it is well
understood, that there is not only in the Blood, a fantasy, and magical
Appetite; but also in the Humors, Meats and Excrements; since the various
offspring of Diseases does also make manifest that thing: For teeming Women
desire strange Meats, and Virgins, through a natural sting or fury of the
exorbitant Womb, do with paleness, and speediness digest what they them by
fully satisfying of the mad Fantasy of the same Humors: Therefore the Blood
has its own Fantasy in it, the which, because it there more powerfully
flourishes, than in other things; therefore does the Scriptnre, by a high
Elogy or Publishment of praise, call the Blood, as yet boiled and ready to be
eaten, an animated or soulified thing.

And because this same Fantasy therein, is capable of Derivation; for that
reason indeed, the Manners, Gestures and Conditions of the Grandfather, shine
forth in his

Does not also the enmity conceived betwixt the Wolf, and Sheep, remain in
their Skins? Wherefore the stubborn Fantasy of an Animal is imprinted not
only on his Blood after Swethland, and of a most devouring Nature) is
constrained to dream continually of Feasts, devouring, and laying Snares for,
or catching living Creatures therein, to wit, according to the Disposition of
that Animal while living; and so that only by an external covering, the
Fantasy of the Beast which when once alive, was entertained in his skin, is
derived into a Man that sleeps under it: Therefore by the Ministry of the
Fantasy of the Blood, it come to pass, that the outchased Blood being
received on the Weapon, is introduced into the magnetic Unguent.

For then the Fantasy of the Bloods being otherwise, as yet drowsy, and slow
as to Action, being stirred up by the Virtue of the magnetical Unguent, and
there finding the

Otherwise, the Blood putrefying with its entire Faculties or Vigours, under
the enclosure of an Egg-shell, and the Spirit thereof being now as it were
freed from its Fetters, through the foregoing Putrefaction, draws by the
mediation of the Mummy of a Dog, and really translates the Grief which sits in
the Fantasy and astral Virtue of the Filths of the Sick, into the Dog himself
that eats it.

Indeed for no other Cause, than because the Magnetism is not perfected without
the interposing of the Balsam of the Ointment.

We have also observed, that if a wounded Man happen to have received many
Wounds at once, it is sufficient that Blood be had only out of one of his
Wounds, and indeed, that by that one endeavor the rest of the Wounds are cured
also; because that Blood keeps a concordant Harmony with the Spirit of the
whole, and draws forth from the same, the offensive quality communicated not
only to the Lips of the Wound, but also to the whole Man: For from one Wound
the whole Man is wont also to grow Feverish.

I have hitherto deferred to make manifest a great Mystery; namely, to show to
our hand, that in Man there is placed an essicacy, whereby he may be able only
by his beck, and Fantasy, to act out of himself, and to imprint a virtue, a
certain influence, which afterward perseveres or constantly subsists by it
self, and acts on an Object at a very far distance; by which only mystery,
those things which have been spoken hitherto concerning the Ideal entity
conveyed in a Spiritual fuel, and departing far from home for to execute its
offices, concerning the Magnetism of all things begotten in the Imagination of
man, as in that which is proper to every thing, and also concerning the Magical
superiority of Men over other Bodies, will come to light.

It is a clear truth, and manifest without controversy, that of Steel is to be
made a

Which things, seeing they are undoubtedly true, it is now convenient to frame
a Mariners Needle only by a Magnetical beck: On the Anvil therefore whereon
the Needle is hammered out of Steel, let the North Point be marked out, and
that in a straight Line; then stand thou the Vulcan, with thy back toward the
North, that when the Steel is drawn under the Hammer, for making of the Needle,
thou may draw it toward thy self and the North.

I say therefore, that such a Needle so made, shall without any other help
observe or point out the Pole; and that indeed, without any wonted variation,
which is a great Mystery.

Moreover, the Needle which is made upon the said Line, by chance, and without
the knowledge or intent of the Workman, is void of that quality and does not
observe the Pole.

From hence it consequently follows, that the Imagination of the man that
frames it, does as it were in that moment of the Needls Nativity, when as now
indeed the greatest heat or glowing of the fire has ceased, and as yet, under
an obscure redness of the Steel, imprint this kind of Magnetical faculty, and
that indeed on the Steel or an appropriated subject: But not that the Heaven
does then make that impression; because then it also should influx it self into
the Steel, without the intention of the Smith, which is false; for if the
Heaven should give forth its influence at a certain Hour and Position; now
might the Characteristical or Notary and Sigillary or sealing Science of the
Stars triumph; which we pass by.

But the Constellation which flows into the Steel, and perhaps every Seal or
Impression,

So indeed Asarabacca, and the tops of Elder, hearken to the commanding
Imagination of the Cropper, who imprinteh on the plant, but this Magnetically
on the absent leaf: seeing otherwise, the leaf being boiled (as the Needle that
was re-heated in the fire) and administered as a Potion, the virtue of the
Fantasy imprinted on it, would perish, if the Magnetism were not cherished
from the entire plant. That blood which is boiled, and ready to be eaten, does
as yet contain the Soul, is true: But that virtue consists not from the
impression of the humane and external Fantasy, but from the proper endowment
of its own Fantasy.

After this manner also, a Nail, Dart, or Arrow that is thrust into the heart
of the Horse,

For if the Work be limited unto any outward Object, that work the Magical
Soul never attempts without a medium or mean: therefore it makes use of the
Nail, or Arrow aforesaid.

Now this being proved, that man has a power of acting per nutum or by his
beck, or of moving any Object remotely placed:

It has been also sufficiently confirmed by the same natural Example, that
that efficacy was also given unto man by God, and that it naturally belongs
unto him.

It has been hitherto an absurdity, to have thought that Satan has moved,
altered, and transported any thing, and to have applied Active things to
Passive by local motion, per nutum; since indeed they doubt not that he himself
was the first moover in the said motions, that by those outmost parts or
extreamities whereby he touches, he can snatch away, transfer, or any way
move, at least an aerie body (which they feign) yet wanting a Soul.

Absurd I say, it is to think that Satan since his Fall, has retained a
Magical dignity, whereby he acts any subjects, by beck alone, because that
was once his natural gift; but that the same natural faculty was withdrawn from
man, as denied unto him, and given unto the Devil, the most despicable of
Creatures: But if there are any such effects proceeding from man, they have
also attributed them at least to a suppliant or servile compact with him.

Open your eyes, for Satan has hitherto promiscuously gloried in your so great
ignorance, as if thou did make his Altar smoke, with the Incense of Glory and
Dignity, and did extract thy own natural Dignity, as pulling out thine own
Eyes, and offering them up unto him.

We have said, that happily every Magical faculty lies dormant or asleep, and
has need of excitement, which is perpetually true, if the object whereon it is
to act, be not most nearly disposed, if its internal fantasy does not wholly
conform to the impression of the agent, or also if the patient be equal in
strength, or superior to the agent therein.

But on the contrary, where the Object is plainly and most nearly disposed, as
Steel is for the receiving of a Magnetism: or plainly weak, and conscious to it
self, (as the Murderer, Adulterer, Thief, Witch, are) then the Patient without
much stirring up, the alone fantasy of the more outward Man being drawn out
to the work, and bound up to any suitable mean, yields to the Magnetism.

The Magitian I say, always makes use of a Medium: for so unless a Woman with
child shall stretch forth her hand unto her Leg, Forehead, or Buttocks, the
Young will not be marked in the Leg, Forehead, or Buttocks. For so the words
or forms of Sacraments do always operate; Because from the work performed. But
why Exorcisms or Charms do not always operate, the defect is not in God; but
only because the unexcited mind of the Exorcist or Charmer, renders the words
dull or uneffectual.

Therefore no man is a happy or succesful Exorcist, but he who has known how
to stir up the Magical virtue of his mind, or can do it practically without
Science.

Perhaps thou will say, That in the Armary Unguent or Weapon Salve, there was
obtained no other Magnetical Virtue, than what was begotten by the Fantasy of
the Compounder.

Thou errest: Yet if that should be granted, thou would be never the better
thereby; because the effect should thereupon happen not to be ascribed to
Satan: For so the Unguent would be Magnetical or attractive, not from a
Fantasy inbred in it, but from that which was imprinted on it from without,
by the compounder; since there can be no nearer Medium of the said Magnetism,
than humane blood with humane blood.

Truly the blood alone, as the most disposed subject, should be sufficient for
the Ointment, and the other Simples would be in vain: (which is false)
especially Bulls blood, and honey, where there is a sufficient cure without the
blood of a Bull, by the Weapons of the Wounder being bathed in the Unguent,
without being distained by the blood of the Patient; which is false.

Lastly, the Magnetism of the Unguent should be plainly general, because the
person compounding it, had intended by his Fantasy, to effect an impression,
too liberal, wandering,

Fie, What has Bole Armeniack, what Lynseed-Oyle, what Honey, and lastly, what
has the blood of a Bull, of disposition to the Wound of a Horse, or Man, that
on those as on a proper mean, and not on any other, the Fantasy of the
compounder should be imprinted? the which notwithstanding, if they shall be
banished out of the composition, they will render unguent Barren, and void of
Efficacy.

The natural Fantasy therefore of the Unguent is the cause of the Magnetism,
or attractive influence, and the proper cause of the Cure; and not the
Imagination of the Compounder.

Behold! Thou have our, that is, a Christian Philosophy, not the Dotages or
idle Dreams

Beware I beseech thee, that thou for this cause, cast not me also into
censure, who have been too ready in thy censures.

I am thine, and a Roman Catholic, whose mind has been to ponder of nothing
which may be contrary to God, and that may be contrary to the Church.

I know that I was not born for brawlings, or contentious debates, not to Write
the Commentaries or Patronages of another: Therefore what I knew, I was willing
to divulge abroad in the liberty of a Philosopher.

I shall as yet subjoyn this one Clause.

Whosoever attributes a natural Effect, so created by God, so bestowed on the
Creatures, unto the Devil, he estrangeth the honor due to the Creator, and
reproachfully applies the same unto Satan: The which (under thy favor I shall
speak it) if thou shall well recall under thy Anatomy, thou will find to be
express Idolatry.

I beg of God our most Clementious Father, that he would be favorable or
merciful to the Faults which from humane (not stubborn) ignorance, and frailty,
we have contracted. Amen.

There are three bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the holy
Spirit; and these three are only one: (and presently speaking of the humanity
of Christ) There are three that bear record in Earth, the Blood, the Spirit,
and the Water; and these three are only one.

We therefore who have the like humanity, its no wonder if we contain Blood and
a Spirit of a co-like Unity; and that the action of the Blood is merely
spiritual: Yea therefore in Genesis, it is not called by the Etymology of
Blood, but is made remarkable by the name of a Red Spirit.

Depart thou therefore, whoever thou art, from thy stubbornness, and
acknowledge thou another Spirit in the Blood, besides the evil Spirit, unless
thou can go on in opposition to the Scripture.

CHAP. CXIII. The Tabernacle in the Sun.
THe Schools deny the Sun to be fervently hot: For they will that they also
should [herein] be believed without demonstration. Because they think that a
man is generated by a man, and the Sun: And therefore that it becomes Nature,
least if the Sun should be of a fervent heat, he should consume himself, his
Inn, and all neighboring things into hot Embers:

For seeing he is of a huge bigness, and also heats afar of, why should he not
commit a cruel outrage, if he should be fervently hot in himself? For how
should he generate a man and also all sublunary things?

As if first of all, the Sun being exceeding hot, the substance of the Heavens
should therefore be burnable! And that it should not be more meet to admit the
Sun to be hot without nourishment, than to deny all the Senses; to wit, that
the effect does exist, being produced by no proper Cause! To deny I say, heat
indeed, which makes hot with so great a force, and at so great a distance!
Chiefly, because according to the proportion whereby we do the more approach
unto the direct beams of the Sun, by so much we meet with the greater heat.

I believe this fear of the Schools to be vain, because the Light was made by
the Word, which contracted the whole Light into two Globes: That the Sun should
be the Light of the Day, and the Moon of the Night.

The lightsome Globe of Sun is said to exceed the Diameter of the Earth and
Water 160. times:

Out of which Globe of the Sun, the beams of Light are dispersed, as well above
as beneath himself, on the whole Universe: And they most thoroughly enlighten all
traseparent bodies but dark or thick bodies in their superficies only.

But I have shown, that the beams of the Sun being united by a Glass, are true
fire shining in its properties: For whether the beams are united or not, that
is to the Sun by accident.

And therefore, if the beams of Light being connexed, are true fire, and do
burn, the Sun also, as the very Center of the connexed beams, shall of
necessity be most exceeding hot: For the Fire of the Sun persisteth without
nourishment, by the command of God. Also seeing the fire in the middle of the
crest, wherein the Sunbeams are united, subsisteth without nourishment:
Kitchen fire only bears before it a Light subsisting by it self, without the
intervening of the Sun: Yet in that thing, being different from the Sun, that
it ought to be nourished that it may subsist. But the Sun because he is of a
heavenly Nature, wants not food; because he is void of Usuries and appointed of
God that he may thus burn.

The Sun therefore, is a most fervent fire, the principal Center in Nature, of
created Lights. Peradventure, when at sometimes, days shall be at their full,
and the harvest of things shall be ripe, the watery vision of the Heavens, the
Waters I say, which are above the Heavens, through a divine virtue, shall
assume a ferment, and the seed of a comb^^^ble matter, and it shall rain fire
from Heaven, and the Stars shall fall.

For the Sun by the command of God, breaking open the floodgates and bolts of
his Globe, shall burn the Heavens, as well those which are nigh, as those which
are very far of, and shall consume the World into hot embers. For the Heavens
shall be changed, shall wax old, and shall at sometimes melt like wax: And the
Stars shall fall down on the Earth, not indeed whole, (because they are for the
most part bigger than the Globe of the Earth) but the parts of the Stars that
are burnt, shall make an Abyss of fire upon the Center.

Therefore, the Sun is a fire in himself, and being nigh; but by how much
further his beams are dispersed throughout the Universe, they shall give the
more apt nourishing warmths unto the seeds of things; because the Sun does
suggest only a general and common Light, which is fit for exciting and
promoting the seeds of things, and for this cause it is vital: But not that it
conferreth Life, and that which gives Essence to the seeds of things.

In Caire of Egypt, Eggs are nourished by the fire of a furnace, and Chickens
are abundantly bred without the nourishing of any Hen; yet the fire of the
furnace neither gives, nor has a seminal virtue, neither does it burn the
Eggs; nor because it nourishes, does it cease to be burningly hot in its
Fountain.

So the beams of the Sun being dispersed throughout the Universe, are no longer
fire; but a simple Light. Kitchen fire therefore, does after some sort dispose
it self according to an emulation of the Sun: To wit, it enflames, burns, and
consumes things that are near it; but from far, it only heats, and at a very
far distance, only shines. Yea, neither is it reckoned true fire, unless it be
hot in the highest degree, unless it centrically stick fast with its connexed
beams, in the crest of Light. But it differs in nobleness from the Light of the
Sun, that it is not of the first created things, not of an heavenly
disposition, not subsisting without fewels, nor therefore is it universal. The
Almighty therefore as he has created the Sun a singular thing; so he has
created as it were one only Sun in every species of sensitive Creatures, which
should suffice even unto the end of the World, and should propagate them
thenceforward, not indeed being hot in the highest degree; but that it
subsisting by the points of dispersed beams, may not cover to ascend unto
further moments of degrees. Therefore in the smallestminutes of specifical
Lights, a formal Light of species or particular kinds, is restrained by a
Divine virtue, which has tied up every species unto a particular moment of
Lights, general indeed in respect of the Sun; yet made individual by the
co-ordination of my Lord: For the Sun of Species's shall endure for ever no
otherwise than as the Species themselves shall. But because it does not subsist
but in individuals; therefore the sun of Species is daily slidable in
individuals, even at every Moment, unless it be nourished as it were by a
continual fuel.

Therefore the light of Life has some similitude with the Sun, and a part
agreeable unto Kitchen fire: To wit, in this, that our Sun ought to have vital
Spirits for an uncessant Fuel, and those capable of an administering to a
depending Light that is to follow: ^^ot indeed that the Spirits do in
themselves, and of themselves, heat any more than the beams of the Sun; the
which the light of the Sun being withdrawn, do presently die from heat and
light. Nevertheless they bear a mutual resemblance with the Sun, because they
seem to propagate an enflaming, and subsist centrally in the heart. For when
the Schools took notice that the heart did voluntarily and of it self, hasten
into a cold dead Carcass, and that the Spirits being dissolved or spent, it
indeed was presently cold, they thought that those in-blown Spirits, were the
beginning Center, and primitive sunny point, and that of heat; not regarding
that the Spirits themselves are of themselves cold, and that their heat does
perish in an instant, as soon as they are snatched away from the beam and aid of
the heart. A very great wonder it is, that it has been hitherto unknown and
undetermined, unto what heats the whole Tragedy of things vital and not vital,
is ascribed: Whether of the two may prevail over the other in the original and
support of heat: For seeing neither the heart nor vital spirit of the same, are
from their own nature and substance, originally hot; for this cause, it has
not been so much as once thought, from whence our heat comes, or from what
original it is in every one of us: For seeing the knowledge of ones self is the
chief of Sciences, as well in Moral as Natural things, the Schools ought never
to have been ashamed, to have enquired into the Fountain of Heat and Life in
things. How great darkness has from thence remained in Healing, and in
preserving of the Life, God has known. This controversy therefore, I have
discussed with my self, from my youth, after this manner.

First I knew, that fire (even as in the Chapter of Forms) was not an Accident,
nor a Substance; and much less, an Element: The which, I have elsewhere
demonstrated with a full sail of Philosophy.

And then that the Sun was hot from a proper endowment, and that the fire of
the Kitchen was likewise given, although for the workman, and a death subjected
to the hands of Artificers: But when as both of them forsake us, that we have a
Flint and a Steel, from whence we make a fire: To wit, we strike fire out of
two cold or dead things. So also the waters of hot Baths under the earth, are
enflamed by Salt and Sulphur, which are volatile things, and that the arterial
blood is partly Salt, and partly fat and Sulphurous.

Then in the next place, that there ought to be a smiting of Pulses together;
not indeed for a cooling refreshment (as the Schools do otherwise dream) but
indeed, that as butter is made of Milk by charming or shaking of it together:
So a vital Sulphur, of the arterial Blood: The which afterward, by a smiting
of the same endeavor, conceives a Light in the volatile Spirit, and a formal
or vital Light is propagated, as it were Light being taken from Light: To wit,
the salt Spirits, and Sulphur of the arterial Blood, do by the Pulse, rub
themselves together in the Sheath of the Heart, and a formal Light together
with Heat, is kindled in the vital Spirit; from the Light I say, of the most
inward, and implanted sunny Spirit, in which is the Tabernacle of the
specifical Sun, even unto the Worlds end.

In this Sun of Man, the Aimighty has placed his Tabernacle, and his delights,
his Kingdom, together with all his free gifts. But the Light which is conceived
by smiting together, is not indeed, made a new, as from a Flint and Iron; but
it is propagated by the obtainment of matter from the sunny, specifical, and
humane Light, or is kindled, and enlarged by it.

It is there indeed universal, and vital, consisting in the points of a
tempered Light; and it is in Nature indeed specifical in respect of its
production, and limited for the Life of Man; but it is every way made
individual by him, who has placed his vital Tabernacle in the Sun of the
Species: Out of which Tabernacle, he thereby enlightneth every Man that comes
into this World: Because the Lord Jesus is after an incomprehensible manner,
the Light, Life, Beginning, Way, Truth, and the All of all Things: For as the
Life cannot subsist for a moment, without the lightsome Spirit, by which it is
enlightened and soulified in the habitation of the Sun; So neither can the Soul,
nor Life in any wise subsist for one only moment, without the Grace of the same
eternal Light.

But I have conceived of the quality and intension of Heat resulting from the
Light, as a whole humane Body weighing perhaps 200 Pounds, is hot with an
actual warmth, and the which, without that Light of Life, should presently be
cold, and be a dead Carcass.

There is therefore so much Heat in the Heart, as is sufficient for diffusing
warmth through so many Pounds of Water, otherwise cold. The Life therefore of
Species, as it consists in a simple, and ununited Light, contains a mystery
of divine providence: For a fiery Light, however (by reason of distance) it be
mitigated, and reduced into a nourishing luke-warmth; Yet naturally it cannot
stop, as that it cannot conspire for the top of a connexed Light, and so
contend for its own ruin or destruction. Therefore the Father and dispenser of
Lights has provided, who sitting in the Tabernacle of the Sun, has
constrained or tied up Lights by Species or particular kinds, and bolts.

Here it is sufficient to have shown, that they are the Relics, and plainly
the Blasphemies of Paganish Error, to have said; A Man and the Sun does
generate a Man; Seeing Life belongs not to the Sun; but the Fewels, Excitements
of sublunary Actions alone, as also the necessary supplies readily serviceable
to the Life.

CHAP. CXIV. The nourishing of an Infant for Long Life.
IT is already manifest, that Life is not from the Stars: but that from a
seminary Faculty of the Parents, Life is short, Diseasie, Healthy, and Growing:
For it is limited according to the Disposition of the Seed, and Truncks of the
Body, no less also according to the goodness of Nourishments and Climates.
Among the Impediments of Long Life, is an infirm Constitution of the Young, and
a bad nourishing of the Infant.

The Young therefore being generated and brought forth, the quantity and
quality of the Nourishment is to be regarded; seeing its little Body ought to
be nourished, and to wax great, and so to be settled or confirmed: And it is now
chiefly known, that the nourishable Juice in a Child, is adopted into the
Inheritance of the radical Moisture: For Nature has appointed Milk in the
Dugs, for the Meat and Drink of the little Infant; which Nourishment has
rendered it self common unto him, with Bruit-beasts.

It might be thought by some, that it would be injurious unto God, if we should
think of any other Nourishment; as if he had not always chosen out of Means,
that which should be most exceeding good: But surely, shall not the God of
Nature be a Step-father, and Nature her self a Stepmother, because he made not
Bread, not Wine, but Grain and Grapes only?

Nature is governed by the Finger of God. It is thus.

Milk therefore, as an ordinary Nourishment, has afforded a sufficiency for
living; but not that it should be serviceable for long Life: For Nature no
longer meditated of long Life, after that she knew her Author had cut short the
Life, nor would have every one to be long lived: But he has given Milk for
Food, unto every one alike: For he has sent an Army of Diseases into Nature,
that a thousand fore-ripenesses of Death might bend unto the Foundations of
Life, for Ruin.

Nature therefore by Milk, satisfies the ends of her Author, and has afforded
a beastlike Nourishment: But the Doctrine of long Life, is exceeding diverse;
in its unfolding and I know that it has remained in secret, even among those
that have been divinely chosen the Sons of Art.

The present Doctrine therefore, has not regard unto the ordinary course of
Nature; but unto a new mark.

Therefore, I do not think that I am injurious to Nature, if I shall prefer an
unwonted Nourishment before Milk: For truly in Milk, very many Discommodities
do invade.

First of all, Milk waxing clotty, very often produces frequent Vomitings,
Worms, Wringings of the Bowels, Fevers, Fluxes, Falling-sicknesses,
Convulsions, and contains many unthought of Occasions of Death: For Milk in the
Stomach, obeying the proper Ferment of the place, does of necessity wax sour
before that it turn into Nourishment; whereunto, if a new sucking of milk
succeeds, an hard clot of milk lays on the little tender Stomach, which
becoming callous or brawny hard, into small clods, counterfeits tough Cheese;
not much otherwise, than as milk does oft-times grow together within the Dugs,
and breaks not forth but with an Apostem: the which, seeing it stubbornly
resists Digestion, if it shall not also be exceeding hurtful, at leastwise, it
presently putrifies, grows bitter, waxes yellow, becomes green, contracts a
burntishness, and estrangeth the Pylorus or lower Mouth of the Stomach; from
whence the aforesaid Slaughters of Diseases are often stirred up: For an Infant
sucks long, and frequently repeats it. The first Milk is curdled, another new
milk is sent in the third and sixth time, and there is made a co-mixture of
them all, and a strange one being sharp or four, besides Nature, is stirred up
with howlings, and a common curd is made of them all: In which are the
manifestations of Heterogeneity or diversity of kind, and a co-resemblance of a
cheesed, burntish, and putrified matter follows the new Milk.

These Vices are almost unavoidable, and they are the material offenses of the
milk, which the new Young being brought forth, begins from the beginning to
expiate; as though from the birth, the Mother does frame snares, and the
threatenings of Death for her little Infant.

There are moreover, other faults of the milk, pernicious by a more hidden
gore: For not only the Pox, Leprosy, Plagues, and Fevers (infamous through
contagion) are sucked from the Nurses: but also, a diseasie Inclination of the
Nurses, is stamped on the Child from his Cradle, no otherwise than as if it
were hereditary.

Surely, it is a Character to be bewailed from his Life time.

I knew a certain Governor, blessed with a Sixth, and sound Offspring, whose
seventh (because he was nourished by a Nurse who was subjected to the Stone of
the Kidneys) with a mournful Disease of the Stone, finished his Life on the
13th Year of his Age, under cutting for the Stone, at the third cutting.

In the next place, it is not sufficient for the material Diseases of the Milk,
the hidden Consumptions of Diseases, and their hereditary Roots, to be
transplanted by the milk into the sucking Infant, and to be most stubbornly
incorporated into the Life: But also the morral Seminaries of any kind of
Vices do pierce inwardly with the milk, and preseveres for the term of Life.

So I have observed, that a leacherous, theevish, covetous, and wrothful Nurse,
has transferred her Frailty on the Children.

So an unwonted blockishnesse, anger, madness, and many Passions of the Mind
(also beside moral Defects) sleeping a long while, and at length, being under
the maturity of Days, unfolded, do bewray themselves on Families, they being
begged from Nurses, and propagated by the Milk.

Then in the next place, the Milk being as yet in the Nurse, is in danger to be
mortified or wax stinking, if the Nurse be privily gotten with Child, does
partake of Fevers and Maladies which are after some manner bred, for the
infecting of the Milk.

Lastly, the Milk undergoes diverse Impressions every hour, from all the
disturbances of the Mind; from whence it not only waxes clotty, and putrifies
or stinks: but also by an unsensible quality it puts on Deformities, which the
guiltless Infant drinks, and is held to pay the punishment of: For the Nurse
does not always bridle her Mind with one tenor; but she fails, being sore
smitten with a thousand Apprehensions of Anger, Sorrow, Agony, Envy,
Wantonness, Theft, Covetousness, etc. all whereof, there is no doubt, but that
they badly dispose the Milk, as well in respect of the Body, as the Soul: For
they are most of them unavoidable, yet dangerous.

Whosoever therefore would study long Life from the Birth, let him not expose
his Children unto this sort of voluntary, unthought of, and certain Dangers. By
how much the rather, because a Medicine for Long Life, as it is daily (from the
Cradle) extended for a long and healthy Life, by drops, cannot be digested, as
neither Penetrate, if it be burred within the gross clots of Milk: Because so
also, Poisons in the Milk, do well nigh become unhurtful, and being as it were
gelded, become barren.

I therefore have hated the often extended nourishing of an Infant by Milk: For
this Cause, I am not wont to eat milk, unless it be mere or unmixt, alone,
without other Meat and Drink, until that it being fully digested, has slidden
out of the Stomach.

I praise, for our Child, Nourishments which are made of Bread boiled so long
in thin Ale, with clarified Honey, if not, with Sugar, until they shall come
together into the likeness of a Museilage, or Glue or Jelly: Then as much thin
Ale is mingled with, and washed on this Jelly, as is sufficient for it to serve
instead of Drink.

Nevertheless, he must abstain from Rye-bread, if he be nourished with Honey,
because it breeds Worms: Yea, a piece of that Bread being cast into a Vessel
of Honey, it passes into Ants.

After this manner, I bad (among others) the Son of an Earl to he nourished
from his Birth, who far exceeded his three Brethren in Strength, Health,
Stature, Wit, and all Valor, and so that, if he had not died in war, as being
pierced through with a Bullet by a warlick Hand, he had been of great hope. For
indeed, as the aforesaid Meat and Drink is harmless, not putrefying, not
coagulable, not stubborn against Digestion (for whatsoever things are fetched
from living Creatures, do easily putrify in the more tender Stomachs) as
neither a partaker of Malignity, or of a foreign unstable Disturbance, or the
Heir of an induced vicious Impression: So it is always equal, like, and
constant to it self, becomes most familiar to Nature, not wormy, not sharp, not
stinking, or of a burntish Savor; in the next place, not tart, acute,
feverish, yea, nor ever hurtful, although it shall exceed in quantity, for
more, or less, may be washed off: So also, the Infant grows and waxes of ripe
Years without Diseases, and is made capable of a Remedy for a Life of long
continuance.

Therefore also according to the Letter, it is not badly read concerning the
thrice glorious Messiah being incarnated, That he shall eat Butter, and Honey:
For truly, the one contains the Glory of a Dew, together with the extraction of
Flowers: But the other is the Magistery almost of all Herbs: Therefore he shall
eat Butter, but not Milk: From whence the discerning of the Good from the Evil,
and the sharpness of Judgment is promised. But the strength of days
increasing, let our Child accustom himself to the more vigorous and hard Meats;
yet I fitly praise a Mean or Moderation. But let him take twice every day, four
Drops of the Tree of Life.

CHAP. CXV. The Arcanums or Secrets of Paracelsus.
BUt moreover, we believe by Faith, that the Life of men was by the divine
Will, shortened; but that the Sins of mortal Men gave an occasion hereunto. The
Will or Command of the Lord has entered into Nature, and the Reasons of Death,
which it found not, it made before the Flood, as it were in a successive order,
the Life was continually changed by Offsprings, at length it was extended unto
the hundred and twentieth Year.

And last of all, the Days of a Man were seventy Years; which moreover, is a
Misery; except in the Powers which he would should attain unto eighty Years:
This therefore is a short Life, an ordinary Life, unto which, Man (necessary
supplies being brought unto him) does by the free will of Nature, flow and
come, the which, was (by a divine Testimony out of the holy Scriptures)
appointed. The Roots therefore of short Life, have henceforward a place in
Nature.

First of all, the Mind, which knows not how to die, waxes not old.

But the sensitive Soul, although it be at length extinguished like Light; yet
the Light it self does not wax old, because it comes not unto it by Parts or
Degrees: For if the sensitive Soul, or the vital Light it self should wax old,
seeing nothing can be added unto this, perishing, which may be of the
Disposition thereof, I should meditate of long Life in vain.

Therefore the vital Powers only, wax old, which are implanted in every Organ
under the Beginnings of Generation: The which, I do not contemplate of, as
naked Qualities; but I behold them as Governors failing by degrees, in an
aerie Body; and therefore also, that the Powers of the Spirits do follow the
Nature of that Body which is worn out by little and little: For Sorrow gnawes
the Life, no otherwise than as the Moath does a Garment: So also, the
Inordinacies of Living, do violently overthrow the Life.

In the next place, Man is a Wolf to Man: Which things surely, do mow down the
Life in many, being as yet in its flourishing estate: Neverthelese, these are
not the natural Reasons of a short Life; as neither the necessities of a
connexed Species, or of an inbred shortness.

Surely, besides accidentary Contingences, we do bear about with us the Cause
of short Life, in the middle of our delights.

For first of all, the memory decays; and then, the sight, taste, hearing, and
walking, wax dull: For to savor, does not undeservedly signify, as well
tasting, as a judgment of the Mind without distinction; because they oftentimes
die together: but the Taste, first fails in the Stomach, by reason of the
Spleen: Wherefore I have elsewhere sufficiently distinguished the tasting of
the Tongue, and the tasting of the Stomach.

Presently, by reason of the unequal strength of the Parts, the inbred Ferments
of the Shops, do here and there, by degrees, fail: but the Ferment of the
Spleen being astonished, the Power of the first Conceptions goes to decay; And
old Men are said to become Children.

For the Schools grant a lively Memory to be in Children, by reason of the
tenderness of their Brain, easily receiving any kind of Seals: but that the
Brain being the harder through dryness, the Impressions of the Seals should be
by so much the harder, by how much the more stubborn they are from dryness, to
retain the marks of Conceptions. But the Comparison of the Schools is
frivolous, that the Brain should have it self after the manner of Wax; as
neither do the cogitations express the interchanges of a Seal.

For first of all, there should scarce be a fit place for ten Seals: For if
those kind of Seals should be so corporeal, as that they ought to follow the
disposition and alterations of the Brain, they shall of necessity square
themselves unto the extension of the place; because Place is more difficulty
sequestered from a Body, than to be hard, or moist: And therefore let the
Schools show, how great an extension all particular Seals of Conceptions in the
Brain, may require. Does the Memory for the seal of a Conception, require a
bigger place in the Brain of an Horse, than that which is of a Mouse, or Fly?
Therefore also consequently, the extension of place in the Brain for a Horse,
should be also ten thousand times bigger, than for a Mouse; and so the whole
Brain should scarce suffice for the remembering of two Horses: That since place
should fail, I should rather remember the good things of the middle half, than
of the whole; Yea, I should far better remember things past for one Year ago,
than those things which at sometimes happened unto me in my Childhood: For I
have seen a Boy, who at the second time, had learned the Aeneides of Virgil by
way of Memory, who scarce understood the hundredth Verse: And so every
particular Word did require as many Seals, and Places of these: But if the
Seals of Conceptions should require no place, nor do occupy an Extension of
themselves in the Brain; Therefore nothing is sealed, and there is no Seal; and
also the Comparison of the Schools is dull: For the Schools are too muddy, who
ascribe the Offices of the vital and principal Powers, unto the first, or
second Qualities.

But what will the miserable Schools do, if they scarce dare to withdraw their
Finger from these accidents of Bodies.

Therefore Scholastical Respects of hardness, dryness, and tenderness, being
neglected, I descend unto the Cause of short Life. I have said indeed, that
from a decaying Vigor of the vital Powers, the Life is of necessity and
proportionably diminished:

From whence I will truly repeat, that the Powers themselves wax old, as it
were with a covered Rustiness, and do by little and little cease; because the
Arterial and Venal blood are at length, successively transchanged into the
nourishment of the Parts to be nourished, and the growth of youth being
finished, truly the Juice that is prepared from thence, is bedewed or
besprinkled on all the solid Parts, and a certain muscilaginous and spermatick
or seedy Liquor is glewed unto them: but it does no more, long remain with
them; but being consumed, and concocted by the Ferment of the parts no longer
coagulating (even as otherwise under growth was wont to be done) it wholly
exhales without a residence, lee or dreg, or remainder of Relics.

That therefore, is the conclusion of the Venal blood; that for the end of its
Tragedy, it is at length wholly expelled by way of an Exhalation, through an
unsensible transpiration, after that it has undergone the Offices of
moystening: Therefore, while as that Liquor being now co-mixed through the
innermost Parts, and the Dgestion having thoroughly performed its Office, does by
way of effluxing, exhale, it cannot but have assumed the disposition of an
Excrement.

From whence it alike unavoydably follows; That the vital Spirit inhering in,
and conjoined to the Bowels; and also the implanted Powers of the same, are by
a continual, and necessitated Fumigation, blunted, alienated, and at length
extinguished: This therefore is the containing, and natural Cause of short Life.

Therefore the whole consideration of long Life, is conversant about the
conserving of the vital Powers: For it is not sufficient, that venal Blood be
present with all the Members, to be delightfully nourished with their desired
venal Blood.

Neither again does it suffice, that the implanted Spirit be thus far
sufficiently refreshed from the inflowing Spirit, by a continued substituting
of Nourishment: For nothing is done in the Stage of Life, unless the seminal
Powers, the vital Characters, I say, be preserved from the destruction already
mentioned: For otherwise, the Spirits are reduced unto nakedness, and are
lessened, from whence our days are of necessity abbreviated: For truly, it by
degrees loses the Character of the Powers, or Gifts of the Seed, and is made
a Spirit like unto that which is not soulified, or like unto a Gas. For
although in Figures, and Engines, a perpetual Motion does not fail, because
there is not required in the Powers moving, a subsequential proportion of a
greater unto a less, that it may move some other thing; Yet surely this has
not place in things which shall not move themselves, nor are of ability to
grow, or be strengthed by moving: And therefore they are things unworthy to be
considered in seminal things: For truly, natural Generations which are constant
even unto the Worlds End, shall be sufficient; to wit, that the Species and
Strengths of these do continue entire, and that they do beget a Seed from them
which is never diminished.

By consequence also, if a Man of forty Years old, does generate one in times
past like unto himself; his Life of forty Years shall be able to be continued,
being co-equalized in Vigor, unto himself being a young Man; if the vice of a
broken Thread does not from elsewhere, rush on it, as I have said.

Therefore we must diligently search into, whether the Relics of the Tree of
Life, or its surrogated Substitutions are to be hoped for in Nature: to wit, by
which, whatsoever does at length vanish out of us, may be unto those Powers
instead of a nourishing warmth, nor may any longer through its sorrowful
Fumigation, bear before it the condition of an Excrement: But it lists us to
acknowledge the quality of our aforesaid Fumigation, not only in the Odours of
some Sweats; but especially, because Wall-Lice, Lice, Gnats, and the like
Insects, proceed from thence; indeed, the mere offsprings of filthiness and
stink.

First of all, it has seemed to me, an unprofitable Question; Whether the
Garden of Eden, and the Tree of Life thereof, have ceased, or indeed, whether
they do remain even unto this Day? and in what place? Whether Enoch, Elias, and
John do there even till now, live happy under the fellowship of Angels, without
the Discommodities of old Age and Infirmities?

It is sufficient for me, that the Tree of Life began from the Creation, that
it was in Nature; but not fabulous, or parabolical. It suffices, that that
Tree was, and should be unknown to Mortals; and so also that the impossible
obtainment thereof, deprives us of hope.

In the mean time, I search into a succeeding Plant, although inferior by many
numbers.

Yea, there is no doubt, but that if there be any Plant in this Vale of
Miseries, which resembles the Faculties of that primitive Tree, a Place may
contribute its Parts unto long Life, as well in respect of the Plant, as of the
Man using it: For that the same Plant is ennobled through the Variety of its
native Soil, and that our Life is prolonged by places of the better
nourishable Juice, and through the Drink of the more sweet Air, Climates
themselves do afford me Credit: For neither is it to be believed, that that
thing happens altogether from the favor of the Heaven, for that, in the same
degree of distance from the Equator, and altogether in the same Circuit of
Heaven, the Parts subjacent to the East, do bring forth more noble Fruits, than
those which decline more toward the West.

And moreover, much Variety is oftentimes planted nigh, under the same Circle:
both which Parts notwithstanding, the same aspect of Heaven does sometimes
daily affect with the same Motion: For Paracelsus promoting it, a hope is
raised up in some Physicians, for long Life: For every one promises himself to
have been an obtainer of long Life by his Writings, if he had not described his
Medicines in so great darkness of Words.

Wherefore most do diligently search to have his obscure Novelties of Names
signified unto them: Also others, deservedly suspecting his every where simple,
and curtailed Description, heartily wish for a more manifest method of
operating: But none (the Veil being uncovered) has attempted to dig unto the
bottom of the Matter, and Basis of the Truth promised: For every one either
derides, or despairs, or being too credulous, admires all things with a bending
Nose: Yet, if these are better than those, because they have not cut off the
way of the hope from themselves; None notwithstanding, has chosen a middle
way; to wit, of doubting and diligently searching, how much of truth the things
promised may contain: For indeed Paracelsus promises that he could attain
extreme Old Age by his Elixir of Propriety, and boasts, that it was granted him
from heaven, to design or choose the Condition and Hour of his Death: but vain
are his boastings of long Life, his knowledge, and choice of Death; who the
while, dies in the 47th. Year of his Age.

In the mean time, his own followers are astonished, and wonder, by what
Disease, or chance the true partaker or obtainer of that Stone which makes
Gold, was snatched away, being as yet in his flourishing Age; and who, with
Hercules Club, slew thousands of the more grievous Diseases up and down, as it
were by mowing them down with a Sith. Truly I make no Apology for any: I
willingly confess, that I have profited much by his Writings; and that he was
able by Remedies ascending unto a resembling mark of Unity, to heal the
Leprosy, Ast^hma, Consumption of the Lungs, Palsy, Falling Sickness, Stone,
Dropsy, Gowt, Cancer, and such like (commonly) uncurable Diseases; Yet I have
gathered that Paracelsus was ignorant of the Root of long Life, as well from
his Writings and Medicines, as by his Death: For truly, the renovations and
restorations, whereof he deservedly in many Places, and much oft-times,
glories in, are only the purgings of the Parts containing, with a correcting
and banishing of those contained: and thus far he was the revenger, and healer
of almost all Diseases; yet his secret Medicines, do not so much respect a long
Life; as an healthy one, and the Commodities hereof: For the Hairs, Nails,
and Teeth are renewed, and although these are most hard, yet they first feel
the Flesh. And therefore it is not written in vain, That Moses had all his
Teeth at the 120th. Year of his Age: For as they live obscurely, they have
their Kitchen out of themselves, also they most easily putrify. For perhaps
Egypt and the neighboring Places, have that thing unto themselves, from a
Property: For truly I remember, that Prince Radzvil the Poloman, has thus
written of the Mummy of Egypt: For those Bodies are preserved entire, with the
least putrefaction of any Member, even unto this Day. But so great is the
multitude of these dead Carcases, that there are few who are able to endure
with Patience, the disdainfulness of seeing them all: They are so condensed
with the Fat of Spices and Ointments, that they shine as being hardened after
the manner of Pitch. Especially, their Brain, Muscles, and Shoulder-blades,
which are the more fleshy Parts: for the Breast, Hands, and Feet, seeing they
have little Flesh, and are extended after the manner of a Membrane, they do not
provide for with Mummy. It may be collected from the Judgment of their
Nostrils, how much Myrrh ought to have been admixed with these Unguents.
Likewise, those Ointments preserve a wonderful Whiteness in the Bones. About
the Caves or Vaults without, a great Power of Bones lays cast aside, from
which the Mummy was withdrawn: among which, we did not by the way, nor in a
short time, contemplate of the Skuls, and the nether Cheek-bones, where the
Teeth were fastened: we found none at all, which might have so much as one
rotten Tooth, or any mark of plucking out; So in all the Cheek-bones, they were
full, sincere, and somewhat white: For among so many hundreds of Cheek-bones;
there were also those of old People, whose Teeth were short and worn (such as
are seen in old Folks) but there was none, which had any putrified, hollow,
holey Tooth, or sign of a Tooth slidden out.

From whence I collect, first; That Moses might naturally, have all his Teeth.

2. That as cold things do hurt the Teeth; So also, the cold Air of our Country
is hostile to the Teeth.

3. That therefore, the Ethiopian, and Spaniard have white Teeth.

4. I take comfort for the Dutch from the Words of the same Prince. In Caire,
of those commonly reckoned up, they are reported to ascend to the number of
seven Millions; of the Jews unto the number of one Million, and six hundred
thousand, Women and children being computed: But in so great a multitude of
Men, scarce a third part of them have their full Sight: All do in many places,
labor in their Eyes, from the eating of Fruits, and the Drink of Water being
over-added.

But, 5. Paracelsus put confidence in himself, not altogether in vain, touching
his Elixir of Propriety, prepared of Saffron, Myrrh, and Aloes, so he had not
erred in the preparation of the same, but had composed that Medicine, after the
manner of the Tree of Life: For as Myrrh keeps Mummy from an aptness of
putrefying; if a passage of Myrrh unto our constitutive Parts, be granted, the
authority of Myrrh for long Life, shall not be vain. But as to a renovation so
greatly praised by Paracelsus, which renews the Hairs, Nails, and Teeth,
together with an excluding of all Diseases: Surely the Hairs and Nails, as
they do sometimes fall off of their own accord: So also in any Age, they do
easily grow, and their renewing is of little moment.

I have seen also, an old Man and old Woman, whose Teeth having been once lost,
were of their own accord renewed in the 63d. Year of their Age, also with
childish Pains; Yet it denoted no long continuance of Life, because both of
them died the same Year: For the promise of Paracelsus concerning the renewing
again of Childhood, has raised up many unto a hope of long Life: To wit, they
have thought, that from a renewing of the Teeth, and Nails, there would of
necessity, be a renewing of Childhood: Chiefly, because they should put off
grayness, the token of Old Age, and the former color of hairiness should
return: But their error was from an undistinction: For Alexander makes
mention, that he saw a Man of eighty Years of Age, in whom, as many Teeth as
failed, new ones grew up; but he does not therefore mention also his length of
Life: And although he might also by accident, have been long lived; Yet seeing
one does not contain another in the Root, or necessary Causes; it was a faulty
Argument, to derive from the one, the other, by a sequel:

Because Nature has often attempted such kind of Renovations, under which, in
the mean time, she has cut off the Thread of long Life: For it is not unlike,
that the Pear Tree is every year renewed with Leaves: Yet not, that therefore,
that Tree is long lived: the Turpentine Tree, or Cedar, or Firr Tree, of a
short Life:

Yea, neither does the Pear borrow any virtue of Long Life, because its Tree is
renewed every Year.

Therefore the renewing of Medicines, has deceived Paracelsus; because it is
that, which proves health only, by reason of an intimate and supreme cleansing
of the similar Parts; but not the renewing Root of Life, or a prolonging of
Life thereupon: For they have been deceived, because the Stag puts off his
Horns, and the Snake his old Skin, and are long-lived Bruits: And therefore,
they have abusively referred that Renovation unto the Cause of a Life of long
continuance: For Crabs, Spiders, Grasshoppers, and Insects of a shorter Life, do
oftentimes happen to put off their Skin:

But on the opposite Part, a gelded Stag changes not his Horns, because
neither does he make new ones; Yet he cease not therefore, to be alike
long-lived: For the Stag casts not away his Horns in time of Autumn, or
Winter, while as great Beasts compose themselves unto a greater rest; but while
he is fed with a new bud of Branches, wherein a renewing Faculty of his Bud is:
as also, it is transferred on Stags, but not on Oxen; because the Stomach of
the Stag, by a proper and specifical Ferment, preserves the budding Faculty or
Virtue of young Sprouts, and derives it into the middle Life of the Stag: Which
thing happens not unto a gelded one wanting Horns; as a Beard is denied to
Eunuchs.

This sort of renewing therefore, is an Effect indeed, of a more flourishing o^
growing Life; yet not an unseparable token, as neither a conjoined Cause of
long Life: For neither has Renovation, long Life as a necessary Adjunct; nor
on the other h^^d is Renovation annexed to long Life: As is manifest in the
Stag, Goose, etc.

Be it therefore, that every of the Arcanums of Paracelsus, do take away almost
all Sicknesses, renew the Nails, Hairs, and Teeth; yet they cannot, first of
all, make equal the unequal Strength of any failing part, much less vindicate
the failing Powers from Death; and least of all, restore the same into a
youthful Vigor. Therefore those Arcanums or Secrets, do not respect the Powers
of the Organs, as neither long Life depending thereupon; but only the greatest
cleansing or refining of all the Members, and Health sprung from thence.

All Diseases indeed, which either issue from Filths, which lurk in the Fil^^
themselves, or lastly, which do further propagate Filths by their Contagion,
are cured by the aforesaid Arcanums; but not those which do primarily concern
the vital Powers: Not those I say, which contain a weakness inbred, or attained
from a Disease, or Old Age, together with a diminishment of the Powers: For
those of this sort, return not into their ancient State, but by the Remedies of
long Life; neither yet, into their ancient ^tate with a perfect and full
restoration: For otherwise, this thing should conclude an absolute Immortality.
For the Weaknesses which invade Men from Gluttony, or Drunkenness, Leachery,
etc. are very little restored by the Secrets of Paracelsus; but not unless an
infirm Nature does accompany them: For Madnesses which arise from an evil
framing or composure, are not any thing restored; but those which have arisen
from a remarkable Animosity of Pride, stand always in fear of a relapse: But
otherwise, the Phtensie, Doatage, Falling-evil, Raging Madnesses of the Womb,
of the Hypochondrials, and whatsoever Weaknesses are made from some offsprings
of Impurity, are perfectly and completely healed by the Remedies of Paracelsus.

Madnesses therefore, which proceed from a notable Arrogance, are indeed
presently cured, but with the fear of some less relapse; because those do argue
a mere Defect of the imaginative Power: and therefore they so defile the Seed,
that they being thenceforth translated into some Generations, do oft-times
shine forth.

So also the Sons of Drunkards, do oftentimes retain the Tokens of vitiated
Powers, as though the Sons, being Heirs of their Fathers Crime, ought to pay
the Punishments thereof: That is, strong or valiant Men, are generated by
strong or valiant, and good Men. And on the other Hand, a bad Egg of an Evil
Crow. For the Sons of Drunkards, are for the most part, drowsy in searching
into things, stubborn or steadfast in their Conceits, Cup-shot or giddy in
things to be done, and easily to be drawn aside into Vices.

At leastwise, I doubt not, but that Paracelsus made use of his Arcanums,
because he was he, who saw not only prosperous Cures to succeed; but also, that
some who the longer used them, were renewed in their Hairs, Nails, and Teeth:

Notwithstanding, seeing he had not a long Life, his aforesaid Arcanums shall
be for a Testimony unto us, concerning my Judgment delivered: For indeed a Will
or Testament of Paracelsus is born about; the which, because it contradicts the
public Authority drawn out of his Epitaph, which is seen in the Hospital of
Saltzburge, in a Wall near the Altar of St. Sebastian; and the which mentions,
That he appointed his Goods to be distributed to the Poor, and to be honored
thereby; Therefore that Testament, I believe, was feigned by the Haters of
Paracelsus. Others therefore of that leaven, affirm that Paracelsus (a limited
term being compacted with Satan) died in full Health: The which, contradicts
the aforesaid Testament, from the published Language of his Enemies: To wit,
wherein it is said, that himself was some days before his death Diseasie: And
that Act of so great Guilt, contradicts, that he was so bountiful to the Poor.

There are also others, who say that he was taken away by Poison; For which,
seeing Remedies were no less known unto him, and in readiness, than for other
Diseases, they supposed him to have been slain by the Powder of the Adamant
eating out his Bowels: But I no way admire at the untimely Death of the Man,
who was solicitous or carefully diligent from his Youth, about Chemical Secrets.

Most especially, if a too much Curiosity of searching into Science day and
night, has vexed those who were careless of their Life. For which of Mortal
Men, may not the Fumigations of live Coals infect? those of Aquae Forte's,
graduating or exalting, and Arsenical things: And likewise a new daily
examination of Antimonials: The which, we through the long tediousness of
experiencing, being not yet experienced, draw in from the malignity of those
things, as being not admonished but by late experience: For what can the
somewhat curious, and undaunted Young Beginner, in an Art so abstruse,
otherwise do, and he refusing any other Master, besides the torture of the
Fire? Where indeed the Speculations of Art, are obscured from his desire, not
indeed, that they may be abruptly known; but rather, that they may not be
known? For Understanding is given only unto those that are chosen through a
long preparation of Days and Works, to those that are furnished with
sufficient Health and Money, nor those that have deserved Indignity through the
load of Crimes.

I grant, that there are some Universal Medicines, which under a most exceeding
grateful Unifon of Nature, do unsensibly lead forth the bound Enemy after them,
together with a famous clarifying or refining of the Organs.

I grant likewise that there are some appropriated ones, whereby they imitate
the largeness of a Universal Medicine, in the Specifical directions of
Diseases, take away the foreign Society of Impurities, and plainly lord it
over the already contracted Vice; no otherwise, than as an Axe plucks up a Tree
with authority.

An Index or Table of the Secrets of Paracelsus; is,

First of all, the Tincture of Lile, reduced into the Wine of Life, from an
untimely mineral Electrum or general composure of Metals; one part whereof is
the first Metallus, but the other, the Essence of the Members.

And then follows Mercurius Vitae, the offspring of entire Stibium, which
wholly sups up every Sinew of a Disease.

In the third place, is the Tincture of Lile, even that of Antimony, almost of
the same efficacy with that going before, although of less efficacy.

In the fourth place, is Mercurius Diaphoreticus, being sweeter than Honey, and
being fixed at the Fire, has all the Properties of the Horizon of Sol: for it
perfects whatsoever a Physician and Chyrurgion can wish for, in healing; yet it
does not so powerfully renew, as those Arcanums aforegoing.

His Liquor Alkahest is more eminent, being an immortal, unchangeable, and
loosening or solving Water, and his circulated Salt, which reduces every
tangible Body into the Liquor of its concrete or composed Body.

The Element of Fire of Copper succeeds, and the Element or Milk of Pearls.
But the Essences of Gems and Herbs, are far less Arcanums than those aforesaid.

Lastly, the volatile Salts of Herbs, and Stones, do show forth a precise
particularity; neither do they reach unto the efficacy of Universal Medicines.

But his Corollate, the which one alone, is purgative by Stool, cures the
Ulcers of the Lungs, Bladder, Windpipe, Kidneys, by purging; so that it also
utterly roots out the Gowt.

Indeed it is the Mercury of the Vulgar, from which, the Liquor Alkahest has
been once distilled, and it resides in the bottom, coagulated and powderable,
being not any thing in^reased, or diminished in its weight: From which Powder,
the Water of the Whites of Eggs is to be cohobated, until it has attained the
color of ^oral.

I praise the Lord of things, in an Abject or lowly Spirit; because he reveals
his Secrets unto the little Ones of this World, and does always govern the
Stern, least these his benefits should fall into the hands of the unworthy.

I have therefore discerned, that the Secrets of Paracelsus do take away
Diseases; but that they reach not unto the Root of long Life.

I have also discerned, that Mineral Remedies, unto whatsoever the highest
degree they are brought, yet that they are unfit for yielding Nourishment unto
the first constitutive Parts; because they reserve the middle Life of the
concrete Bodies from whence they were extracted: For, for that cause, they
never wholly lay aside a mineral Disposition; Yea, and therefore they depart
from the tenor of long Life.

Yea, neither shall I ever be easily induced to believe, that the Philosophers
Stone can vitally be united with us, by reason of its exceeding immutable
substance, which is incredibly fixed against the tortures of the Fire, being
undissolvably homogeneal or simple in kind; that is, by reason of its every way
impossibility of separation, destruction, and digestion; so far is it from
conducing to long Life: Histories subscribe unto me, that none who obtained
that Stone, enjoyed a long Life; but that a short Life has befalle^ many, by
reason of the dangers undergone in laboring.

But moreover, neither let Hucksters hope, that Meats which do mightily
nourish, will perform long Life: For although they may afford strength unto
those that are upon recovery; yet they afterward weaken them, being nourished:
The which, Caesar also testifies: For the more tender Meats are easily
consumed, breed tender Flesh, and suffumigate or smoaki^e the vital Powers
through their more greatly adust savor. But the Studies of Physicians, are
buisied about the delights of the Kitch^^, which they name the Dietary Part:
for they have been misled into error, by thinking; that if Food of good Juice,
and tender, being administered in a due dose, does profit those upon recovery;
they have thought also, that the more strong Persons, being manifoldly
nourished with the same Food, shall be raised up into the highest increase of
strength: For there is not a process made in seeding, as in Arithmetic, where
ten Pounds lift up nine; and by donsequence, a hundred Pounds, ninety: But he
that eats very much, and drinks abundantly, shall not therefore become stronger
than he that shall live more moderately: For truly, Nature keeps no^ so much
the proportions of Numbers, as the proportions of the Powers of things
alterable according to the Power of their own Blas. However it is, at
leastwise, it succeeds with Physicians according to their desire: Because
plenty of venal Blood breeds Excrements, Physicians are called for, and so they
command the rules of Food at leastwise to profit themselves, and they shorten
the Life in those that live medicinally, and miserably.

CHAP. CXVI. The Mountain of the Lord.
Who shall ascend into the Mountain of the Lord? Or who shall stand in his
holy Place? He that is innocent in his Hands, and of a clean Heart, who has
not betaken his Soul to Vanity, nor has sworn in deceit to his Neighbor: this
Man shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his Savior:
The Words sound, Eternal blessedness. It is so. Notwithstanding, nothing
hinders, but that that figural and typical Speech, may also unfold its Truth
according to the Letter; seeing it must needs be, that the Type does co-answer
to the thing signified by the Type.

Truly, I have always observed, that almost all the Mysteries of God were
celebrated in mountains: For Abraham was commanded to ascend a Mountain, and
there to sacrifice his only begotten Son, for a Figure of the Sacrifice that
was to be offered in Mount Calvary. God commanded Moses to ascend up into a
Mountain, that he might talk with him; and he gave him the Law: And Moses
talked with him face to face, for the space of forty days and nights. In Mount
Horeb, the Lord was transfigured, etc. All which things might have been done in
the Desert, and the God of Armies could have encompassed Moses with Lightning
and Fire, as well in a Plain, as in a Mountain, that no Mortal might have
approached thereunto: but a Mountain was always chosen from a privilege: And
the blessing from the Lord is promised, in ascending unto the Mountain of the
Lord: For the Lord could have signified his Precepts unto Moses in a shorter
space; neither was there need of forty continual Days and Nights, but that
also, delay, might by its weight (for delay in natural things, is required for
a just or due Efficacy of the maturities of things) denote some hidden Mystery:
For naturally, I understand that in Mountains wanting an endemical malignity,
there is, not only a most pure Air, far remote from Dreg and Corruption,
commonly separated from Errors, and Defects, and by reason of Colds, most
refined from all defilement: but also that there is the Place, from whence,
through the continuation of its Magnal, there is a most dispatched in-beaming
of the heavenly Bodies, or Influences; because a drinking in of a most pure
Sky: For I remembered, that one Morning, I being fasting, felt in the Alps,
the sweetness of an inbreathed Air, the which I never before nor after, felt in
all my Life: For it is certain, that the Almighty has not framed so great a
Bunch in Nature, in vain: And it is certain, that all the Riches of the World
are issued out of Mountains: And then, the best Fountains, and most famous
Rivers are conversant with us out of Mountains, by reason of their steepness.

In the next place, all Nations which are the inhabitants of Mountains, are of
an hardier Body, and of a more vigorous or flourishing Life, than those who
inhabit pleasant Fields: Which Effects do manifest their Causes, because a more
sweet, and purer Air is there in-breathed, and every Gas being deprived of its
Filths, returns into the pure matter of Water. But that God lifts up so great
an Earth, or the very face of the Earth into an heap, or has built so many
great or rocky Stones upon the same, or has conjoined it into one rocky Stone,
nor yet has enriched it with any Mineral, in which respect he might seem to
have collected so great an heap; neither does he rain down Fountains, nor
lastly has poured forth Fruits worthy of so great Borders; but that he has
exalted it above all Turbulences of Air and Clouds, whirlings of Winds, and
monstrous omens of Thunderbolts, into a most pleasing rest of Air; Surely,
that thing seems to me, to be dedicated unto a famous Mystery: For the promised
blessing did of old, for the most part, respect long Life, and the Commodities
thereof, and the fruitfulness of offsprings (that thou may be long lived
upon the Earth, etc.) Blessing therefore, unto those that ascend into the
Mountain of the Lord, according to the Letter, seems in Nature, to have respect
unto the Endowments of long Life: For he, who is alone, and wholly the Life,
and Prince of Life, does likewise, give long Life unto none, not so much as by
natural Means, who has betaken his Soul to Vanity. Therefore the blessing of
ascending into the Mountain of the Lord, seems to contain a long continuance
of Life.

Therefore those most high Mountains, which are read to be endowed by Nature
for no Fruits sake, and the which pertain unto the sweetness of a not much
disturbed Air, seem to promise a singular (...) or Likeness of the Mountain of
the Lord and of a long Life: And that thing is from a certain singular
prerogative before other Mountains, and that they may as it were by that right,
have the surname of the Mountain of the Lord: for if it reach beyond all the
incidencies of inferior things, it after a singular manner, promises unto me,
that God is there after a peculiar manner. For he that was not in the
Whirlwind, but in the sweet Air, was perceived by Elias: He, he I say, has
his Mansion in the same place; that is, the Prince of Life does there give his
blessing: Not indeed, that which may be communicated in a few hours; but being
signified to Moses in Mount Sinai, in the revolution of forty days (to wit, by
two full Moons:) For he who could every year continually stay for forty days
in the Mountain of Rest, about the Feast of the building of Tabernacles, the
Commodities of living being called unto him from elsewhere, I divine that he
might much profit himself for long Life, especially if he were there daily
refreshed with a Medicine prepared of the Tree of Life; because that in such a
Mountain, by reason of a notable Purity of the Air, there is a greater
co-mixture of the Nourishment with the Body nourished, and a more piercing
access unto the first constitutive parts. Lastly, although the highest
Mountains do bear before them the privilege of long Life; Yet those that are
less high, promise some singular thing, from the sense perceived in the Alps.
Nevertheless, I always reject Mountains, which breath forth some Mineral Gas:
For therefore, in Chemical things, Arsenick has obtained the name of the fume
of Metals. But unto whom the Commidity of living in a healthy Mountain, should
be granted, and that not great with Child with the Fruits of Minerals, they
certainly should rejoice in the benefit of long Life, so far as the Nature of
the place has bestowed.

CHAP. CXVI. The Tree of Life.
I Am constrained to believe that there is the Stone which makes Gold, and
which makes Silver; because I have at distinct turns, made projection with my
hand, of one grain of the Powder, upon some thousand grains of hot
Quicksilver; and the buisiness succeeded in the Fire, even as Books do
promise; a Circle of many People standing by, together with a tickling
Admiration of us all. But it was not a thing extracted out of Gold, because it
should change as many weights of Quicksilver, as there were of Gold from
whence it had been extracted. First of all, that being granted, as yet, at
leastwise, a true transmutation of one thing into another, and that indeed, a
manifold one, should stand. Secondly, those that work on Gold, and
Money-makers, have known, that nothing which is not Mercurial, can enter (by
flowing) into Metals, or be co-melted with them; but swims a-top in the
flowing. Therefore thirdly, that Extraction should be fatter than any Metal
is, if it ought to tinge so many thousand Parts. Fourthly, that Extraction
should be no longer a Metal, seeing it should exceed the perfection of the
purest Metal, so many thousand times: For a Metal does not suffer so many
degrees of largeness in its perfection, by how many times the Powder which
makes Gold, converts an inferior Metal into true Gold. Fifthly, He who first
gave me the Gold-making Powder, had likewise also, at least as much of it, as
might be sufficient for changing two hundred thousand Pounds of Gold: But there
is none who may have more than a tenfold quantity of Gold; and if he should
have it, he should destroy it, that he might at length, make as much Gold from
thence: For he gave me perhaps half a grain of that Powder, and nine ounces and
three quarters of Quicksilver were thereby transchanged: But that Gold, a
strange Man, being a Friend of one evenings acquaintance, gave me. However
therefore the Philosophers Stone be in the Nature of things; yet I have always
supposed for the reasons aforesaid, that no Metallic Remedy contains the
blessing of the Tree of Life. I willingly confess in the mean time, that that
Stone is in its Beginnings, partaker of the Life of a Zoophyte or Plant-animal,
and that it has that Life, distinct from a vegetative, and sensitive Life; the
which, for this Cause, is an un-named Life: For according to the unanimous
Writings of wise Men; The Principles of the Stone being once conjoined to a
glassen Egg, if through the Vice of interrupted Warmth, it once happen, that
they are even but a little while plainly cooled, they so die, that there is no
remaining hope of a future Stone: the which likewise happens also in the
nourishing warmth of Eggs: And therefore I have judged, that it is to be
believed, that these do live also in a like Life, with the Beginnings of the
Stone: And that is a true Life, which a true Death testifies; because that that
error is never to be corrected by any Pains; it being thus once dead, there
is no hope of restitution left for the future. I know in the next place, that
the Tree of Life is in vain to be ^ought from Animals, how long lived soever:
In all which, I have found a voluntary Death, a frail Body, and slideable every
hour, or the way of all Flesh: For how shall they give a long Life, the which
they contain not in themselves? Seeing, if they are long lived, at leastwise,
they have put off their own Life, while they are taken into use. I have
sometimes beheld Stones, that they did contain sometimes live Creatures within
them, that they live for the space of five Years, and are preserved from Death
without Nourishments. Paracelsus thinks that the whole heap of Stones, and the
whole World, was at sometime, one only Stone, or at leastwise a single stony
Liquor, the which being by degrees distinguished into Metals, the fire-Stone,
great or rocky Stones, small Stones, and Salts, afforded the beginnings of
Vitality by many creeping things; and so that, if they detain Toads, and
Salamanders alive, perhaps for an Age, without Food, and as it were snorting
with a deep drowsiness; I doubted, whether the Stones, the Sheaths and Wombs of
those living Creatures might be the partakers of long life. But the Scripture
persuaded me, that the life of creeping things is horrid and hateful unto us:
Wherefore I looked back unto the more precious Gems: Notwithstanding, neither
have I found in those, the Footsteps of long Life, whether they were Essences,
or next, the magisteries of those; because they cannot be immediately
assimilated, or adjoined unto our first constitutive Parts: or if at length,
they are after some sort adjoined unto them, and as long as we grow; at
leastwise, they are spoiled of their former length of Life, after the manner
of other Nourishments, they nourishingly put on the Nature of Flesh, and are
constrained to follow it. I have learned therefore, that Gems or precious
Stones, however they might be endowed with a medicinal Power, to make for long
Life; Yet that they never wholly put off a mineral disposition; and so that
neither are they co-mixable with the first constituting Parts: Yea, although
they should be co-mingled with them, yet they should not be serviceable for a
long Life: Because, whatsoever refreshes not the vital Powers, does not also
withstand the intestine necessities of Death, and much less, if it resist the
Wedlock of our solid Members. But Aromatical or spicie Herbs, should snatch
away this victory from their Companions, if the Tree of Life should be herby;
as they are the more grateful, and spiritual: But that which is the most
refined Liquor, and whatsoever contains the whole Crasis of the Herb, does
notwithstanding, respect only Singularities, and Healing, for that the composed
Body from whence it issued, is not it self, partaker in it self, of long Life:
For the Liquor which knows not how to preserve its concrete Body, the which,
it from the Beginning, married through its least parts, from destruction; after
what sort shall it be able, being spoiled of its Virtues or Faculties, to
defend our Flesh, which is soon flowing abroad with a hastening Corruption,
from Death: And so from hence, the Tree of Life began to be accounted immortal
with me, not subject to Old Age, not to the discommodities of Ages, and the
which should contain, or admit of no Excrements, and much less should propagate
the same: But rather, should by a certain excellency, if any had once, at
sometime lighted on it, brush them off, by reason of the Virtue of its
expelling and repulsing: But seeing it is the property of Poison, by
corrupting, to convert Good into Evil; it has seemed meet to me to search
diligently into the Tree of Life, wherein the Poisons themselves might die,
being overcome by the goodness of the Tree: Wherefore also, it should refuse
them being not yet admitted, and which should correct and overcome those
Poisons which were once admitted: For if it ought not to admit of Excrements,
which are certain Poisons of the lowest degree; much more shall it divert,
drive back, and weaken those which are of a more profound, and manifest
hostility or enmity: For unless it shall do that, it shall assume the name of
the Tree of Life to it self, in vain. I have observed, that the Colts which
were generated of a laboring Beast, and an old Horse, were soon enfeebled or
barren, weak in the vigor of their Life, and that they had deeper Pits above
their Eyes, than he which had sprang from a younger Horse: But that an old
Willow, yields new Sprouts, nothing more barren if they are planted, than the
Sprouts of a new stem: Therefore I have found, that together with the Seed of
living Creatures, Old Age departs into their offsprings, but that thing is not
so easily manifest in the Young of a Tree: Yea, if there be a Long Life in some
Beasts, yet it is so enclosed, that it does not depart from a singularity, and
is not communicable out of the Species. In the next place, I have examined Dew,
by a resolution of its Parts: For it afforded a sugary Salt, helping great
Diseases, but surely not any thing profitable for long Life: For by reason of
the unlimited generality of its goodness, it contained not so much Life, as the
Properties of Nourishment. At length, I concluded with my self, that whatsoever
it were that should supply the Place of the Tree of Life, it was the Young or
Offspring of a Tree: And then, that this Medicine was to be fetched out of a
most wholesome, odoriferous, balsamical, and almost immortal Shrub: And the
which, should be of the subtilest and purest Parts, from a proper Endowment,
and native constitution of its composed Body; and the which, should every way
resist any kind of Corruptions, bred, or obtained through the Error of Art, or
Nature. At length, that by Art and labor, it should obtain the utmost bound of
perfection, and a liberty of co-mixing with us: wherefore, it was chiefly
necessary, that that manifold natural Endowment should not any thing be broken
in time of its preparation, or be changed by the Fire; and so that there is
need of a not burning Fire, for the exaltation of its Faculties, and
sequestration of Impediments; to wit, that it may make any Mortals, partakers
for the completing of uncorruptibleness, or for the long continuance of Life,
to take us by the hand (so far as might be possible for the receiver, corrupted
Nature) by a communicating of its Faculties or Virtues: Surely, it cannot
therefore feel any singular Property of passion of a Member, or obey
partialities: But it is of necessity, that it be an entire Balsam of Life,
reduced unto a seminal Being, remaining in its natural Endowments, grateful in
its Odor, throughout all the diligent examinations of its middle Life, and
Magnum Oportet: So that, when as the Nourishments, at length thoroughly mingled
therewith, are dead to their Office; at leastwise, the smoakiness of the same,
may by their fumigation, no longer batter and extenuate the implanted Spirits;
but rather, may refresh them; and thus far it emulates a certain permanency of
uncorruptibleness, and keeps it continued and propagated in the nourishable
Humor, under our middle Life: The favor therefore, of its native Endowment,
procures its Love with the sealed Powers of the implanted Spirits: its
preparation therefore, refuses an alteration of its native Virtue, and
performs a more full entrance, and application of Virtue; So that, as it were
an Outlaw, and besides an accustomed wont, it is admited as conscious; within
the secret Chambers of Life, that it may there undergo an Information: For in
some Climates, all things are produced more strong and excellent, by reason of
the nobilities of a nourishable Juice; and the which therefore, it is certain,
do very much excel as for long Life: For so the Sweat of some Persons smells of
the Goat or Rank; but that of others, does not far differ from a Fragrancy.
That one thing, I say, in long Life, is only to be procured, least the
nourishable Humor, after that it has ceased from its Offices, being dismissed
by transpiration, loses its Grace, through defect whereof, I have described a
short Life: For I have taught elsewhere, that a Sow, or a Goose being nourished
only by Fishes, do yield Fleshes, which tastingly resemble the detestable
Grease of Fishes. Wherefore, let the Medicine of the Tree of Life, be an
odoriferous Balsam, Spicie, grateful to Nature, seasoning the Blood with an
excelling goodness, and a nourishment now applied after the manner of a Dew:
Even so that, through the vigor of its uncorruptibleness, its balsamical
Faculty may be continued even unto the utmost Limits of its exhalation out of
the Body. Wherefore we must beware of this one only thing, that the fire do not
alter this Fruit by a seperating distillation; but that a proper division of
that which is heterogeneal, be appointed, as being sequestered into its bottoms,
for a greater subtilizing of Purity and Simplicity, and sealing of its Virtues:
For in Eden, the Stomach subdued the Food from a proper vigor or force; for
all things willingly obeyed the Stomach, without the strife of a middle Life;
it being that, which they through the decision of the Stomach, kept after some
sort sase, even until the deluge of Waters, till that, through a succession of
Years and Propagations, all things by degrees, went to ruin: Then the seminal
Being was no longer drawn out of Meats, after that the term of Life was
restrained unto 120, and afterward, unto 80 Years: For the Being of Essence,
which before, was fetched out of Meats, bewrayed it self no longer; because the
Stomach had enough to do, only to draw forth the Being of Nourishment. From
hence it is manifest, that although the Tree of Life was present with us from
Eden, yet that it will not profit us as it did the first of the Fathers: By
consequence also, that the Balsam of our vital Tree, is not so profitable unto
Persons of ripe years, as unto Children: For he that has almost run out the
stage of Life, every such one perceives an help according to a Model, or after
a small manner; Seeing all things in Nature, are received after the manner of
the Persons, and place receiving, and of circumstances: For the Friends of Job
wept with him seven days and nights, without eating, drinking, and difference
of health: The which, is now at this day, scarce possible for any mortal Man to
do: Therefore the strengths of such a life, should more profit by our Tree,
than I, an old Man, who almost worn out with the offenses, and labors of
Chemistry, and the injuries of Tribulations and Persecutions: So we Bees do not
provide Honey for our selves. Whereunto is added, that Eden was of it self a
preserver of Long Life, through the wholesomness of the place; but that, but a
few Paces from thence, there was the command of Death, Corruption, and
Infirmities: For if Credit be to be given to Histories, there are also places
at this day, whereunto a Life of three hindered years is ordinary: For where
long-lived Persons are born, they are also nourished: But there are other
places near at hand, where a renewed tyranny of interchanges, shortens the
Life; for so, some Provincial Diseases are accustomed. Therefore mountainous
Places which have not the Gas of Minerals (as the Forest of Arden, Asturia, or
the Pyrenean Mountains, etc.) nor those subjected unto the natural Moisture of
Lakes; because the bountiful Communications of the Stars do reflect and breath
a pure Air, and do make for Long Life: Even as also, a plain Field which knows
not the Incitements of the Throat, adds as much to long Life, as fullness is an
enemy to long Life: for the stuffings of Meats do weary the miserable Powers,
to wit, that they being as it were worn out with labor, die or go to ruin
before their time: which things being thus revolved with my self for full three
days space, from whence a Medicine for long Life was to be fetched;
Opobalsamum notably smiled on me; not indeed that of Peru, or the Gums of
Capaida of Brasile; But the true Egyptian opobalsamum noted in the Scriptures,
and primitive, it being the Queen-tear of a low Shrub, scarce saleable to
Kings: For I confess I have worthily attributed very much perfection to this
Being: And although there were enough of it to be found; yet it does as yet
decline from the perfection of the Tree of Life, because that Shrub is so frail
or mortal. And while I variously wandered in Nature, that I might view the Tree
of Life; at length, without the day, and beyond the beginning of the night, I
saw in a dream, the whole Face of the Earth, even as it stood forsaken, and
empty or void at the beginning of the Creation; then afterward, how it was,
while as it being fresh, waxed on every side green with its Plants: Again also,
as it lay hid under the Flood: For I saw all the Species of Plants to be kept
under the Waters; Yet presently after the Flood, that they all did enter into
the way of interchanges enjoined to them, which was to be continued by their
Species and Seeds: I saw, I say, in the top of Mount Libanus, the Cedars to
have remained whole under the Deluge, by the Word of the most Glorious God, and
that they, in a certain number, did as yet there remain: And presently
afterward, I returned to my self. But I afterward considered at leisure, that
the Ark which ought to save Mankind from destruction, was commanded to be
framed of the incorrupitble Wood Cetim: For the World had endured, perhaps 1652
Years: but Noah proceeded slowly in its building, for an hundred solary years:
And therefore he took Wood, and Rafters which were not to undergo any damage
in all that time. A leprous Person being separated from the People, coming to
the Priest, bare the Wood Cetim in his hand, that he might be cleansed. In the
feast of the building of Tabernacles, every Hebrew carried Cedar, and Branches
of Myrrh, that God might be mindful in the rain of the whole Earth, that he
appointed the manners of the Times, and the Stars: I therefore understood by
the Cedar, long Life, likewise the blessings of the Times or Seasons, and of
the Stars, and also, that in a mystical sense, cleansing was denoted; but that
in this Age it was also to be obtained: For other vital things, do soon wither
with Old Age; but the one only Cedar in number, by a famous mystery, through
the uncorrupted substance of its Wood, and its vegetative Faculty surviving,
promises long Life, because it contains it: For the folding Doors of the
Temple of Solomon, were commanded to be framed of the Wood Cetim, with Gold, as
it were a more vile covering or involvement. Moreover, it is without
controversy in the Church of God, that the Cedar in Libanus, in the Temple, in
the Figure of the Ark, in the cleansing of the Leprosy, and in the feast of
the building of Tabernacles, did represent the Mother of God, the Virgin Queen
of Heaven, an incorruptible Vessel, a Tree which brought forth for us, Eternal
Life in the Flesh: the Patroness I say, of the Poor, and Mine: But the place of
the Cedar in Libanus, exceeding the coldest folding door of the Air, covered
with Snowes, denotes the unspotted Integrity of the God-bearing Virgin: And so,
if the Tree denotes the holy Virgin, especially, conjoyntly with so many
mysteries, its no wonder that the Cedar does signify the Tree of this Life
also in the world: For indeed, there was in the days of David, an aged Cedar
in Libanus, because it was that, which by reason of its excellent taleness, was
from that time, worthy of a mystical sense: Wherefore, either it being there
planted after the Flood, does as yet hitherto continue the same in number,
safe: or a good while before, and perhaps from the cradles of the World,
according to the Vision of the Dream: Which thing, after what manner soever it
may be taken; at leastwise, it shows that the Cedar despises the
discommodities of Old Age: But he is not from a Cedar his Parent, planted after
the Flood; because that Parent also of the Cedar, was preserved under the
Deluge; and much more easily afterward, than that which remains from the days
of David, even until this time. Let those laugh that will, at that age of the
Cedar in Libanus, and let them say, that Modern ones were raised up by a new
Branch, or by Seed falling down: But that being supposed, at this day also, new
ones had daily come forth into a great Wood, where notwithstanding, no new
Cedar grows. But moreover, from thence I gather, that the same Cedar in number
does now persist, which was even before the Flood, yea even from the Creation
of the World: Because it was given for a Mark of resemblance to the blessed
Virgin.

But moreover, for our Magistery, the Fruit of the Cedar is not to be taken;
for that, the end thereof is not for a simple Being in the appointment of the
Properties of the Cedar; but only for a propagation of the Species, which
contradicts long Life from the Foundation: The Wood Cetim it self therefore,
is to be taken, which is so much exalted in the holy Scripture: Therefore not
the Bark, not the Fruit, not the Root, nor the Leaves, are the ultimate end
whither Nature has had respect for long Life: And so that the Cedar, perhaps
also is herein distinct from the Tree of Life in Eden. A matter therefore, of a
Tree which knows not how to die, is found, whose unputrifiable Wood (and by
reason of its many Properties being in a mystical Sense designed to the holy
Virgin) is that which brings forth Life to the World, that it may redeem Death.
But the preparation thereof, is the most exceeding difficult of all those
things which fall under the Labor of Wisdom: For this Cause indeed, Monarchs
want a long Life; because there is none which has known how to prepare it: For
none who is truly a Philosopher, is a Minstrel, neither does he follow Princes,
and flatter them; for because he stands in need of nothing, he despises
whatsoever a Prince can give. The Tree of Life therefore alone, refreshes the
decayed Faculties, and for some time, detaineth the Life in its flowing: But
the difficulty of preparing it, consists in this, that the Wood ought to be
resolved without a dissolution of its Faculties, by a luke-warmth, such as is
that of the Sun in March, even unto its first Being: In which Being only, is
granted unto it, a fermental Power of preserving and seasoning, with an ingress
unto the first constitutives of us, and of insinuaring it self into the
familiarity of the Spirits implanted throughout all the Organs. But there is in
the Juice of this kind of resolving, the entire Virtue of the Cedar; to wit, a
vital one, together with every seminal and formal Property of long Life: For
the whole lump of the Wood is dissolved into a Juice, which being otherwise,
distilled, is transchanged, and made a certain new Creature; the which Aqua
Vitae being distilled out of Grains, or Ales, does also prove; likewise the
Oil that is distilled out of Woods, yea out of the very Oil of Olives it self.
The practice thereof, is this; Resolve the pieces of the Wood Cetim, with a
like weight of the Liquor Alkahest, in a sealed Glass, under a nourishing
luke-warmth; and within seven days, thou shall see the whole Wood to have
passed over into a milky Liquor: But presently, about the fifteenth day, a
twofold Oil distinctly swims a top, the which, is increased even for a Month,
and is more clearly separated: But then, let the Oil be separated from the
Water by manual Operation: Then distill thou the Water in a Bath, and the Liquor
Alkahest remains in the bottom in its own original weight: but let the Oil be
nourished with the Water for full three months space, with a slow luke-warmth,
and the whole Oil assumes the Nature of a Salt, and shall thoroughly mingle it
self with the Water: and it is the first Being of the Cedar. But as yet, a few
things concerning the length of Life; because I being an old Man do pursue
these things, and I my self am about to die. My Mind breathed some unheard of
thing within: but I, as unprofitable for this Life, shall be buried: Because
the Spirit the Porter, withdrew the Bottle by the command of him, before whom,
the whole World is as a Mushrom. Let the praise be to him, who has given, and
who has taken away that which was his own. The Schools therefore, may
deservedly upbraid me: Thou miserable Man, a Man of small note, a Man of great
ambition, an old Man, have paradoxally come to late, that with thy Song in the
commendation of Cedar, thou should overspread the World with mists: The
Histories and Virtues of Plants are known to our Herbarists: But thou, that
thou may vaunt of an unheard of devise concerning long Life, as a Paradoxal
Man, proceedest to be mad with thy Cedar: Go to, if there be so great Power in
the Cedar, for Life, why are not all Kings long-lived? From whence do thou as
a new guest, come? produce thy Learning, and experience whereby thou will be
believed: For as a Lawier blusheth to speak without Law, so does a Physician
without Experience: For thou can not deny, but that the decoctions of the
Leaves, Kernels, Wood, Bark, Root, or Rosin of Cedar, had long since produced a
continued Life: But nothing of these things is manifest by our Herbarists: Thou
there fore do deter or fright us away, through an hidden manner of
preparation, and by a crabbed Style of a smoak-selling Art, desire to involve
a feigned mystery of Cedar: Which thing (the Alkahestical Mask being laid
aside, it being taken up, only to hide thy improvident rashness) almost all the
learned will laugh at, who suffer not themselves to be led aside into new
precepts, by Dreams, or feigned Exstasies. This Argument springs partly from an
inv^terate hatred toward us, and partly from an ancient Simplicity: For how
much soever it concerns my person, of writing unwonted rashnesses; God has
known that I write those things which I know to be true. I give him thanks,
that when as he had conferred on me five Talents, and I had made my self
unworthy, and for this Cause, had made a divorce before him, it pleased his
divine goodness, to take from me three, and to leave me as yet two; that so he
might expect me for better Fruit: He had rather I say, impoverish me, and
suffer me not to be profitable to very many, so he might but save me from the
Perils of this World: Let eternal Sanctification be unto him. But as the
argument of the Schools is supported with the appearances of Decoctions and
Broaths, surely that had proceeded from a simple rudeness: For truly none has
hitherto, in acting, plowed up the Faculties of things: Therefore it is
supposed, that although many things are made more acute by distilling, and so
the more active; yet by that very thing, that they depart and are estranged
from the genuine Property of the Seeds; because the Fire is an artificial
Death, the which, if there be made an open Flame, happens through an
extinguishment of the Seeds and the Archeus: But a natural Death of things,
presupposes a weariness of the Seeds: But an artificial Death, which is not
made by a consuming of the Flame, separates indeed things volatile from things
fixed, together with a dissolution and death of the last Life of the composed
Body: But therefore also the former Faculties are altered and estranged by the
Fire, and a new Creature rises again out of the fire, from a material
Disposition, from the ancient Properties of the Being, through an inversion or
turning in and out, which is easy to be seen in the artificial Death: So
indeed, most volatile Salts, which by a co-melting, do make a conjunction with
the Oil of the thing, are fixed into a Coal, the which, at length, the fatness
being burnt up, returns into ashes.

There are also fugitive Salts, which do act by lurking within the fatnesses of
Oils, do attempt a new product: So that Oils, otherwise sufficiently slowing,
are changed through the combination of Salts: Some things therefore become
soapy, some things lay up smoakinesses; at leastwise, all adust things
contract a Corruption of Matter, and are thoroughly changed into another thing;
for nothing of the old remains: Because that is the property of Fire, not
indeed, simply to separate; but by its own authority, to alter and change under
it self. Therefore it is not lawful to weigh the Faculties or Virtues of
distilled things, by the composed Body from whence they issue: neither is it
lawful to believe, that although the Virtues of things are not abolished, not
extinguished, or plainly killed by the fire, therefore the ancient Virtues of
things are not renewed within, by Adustion: But those things which are made new
by the fire, are oftentimes made worse, but also they are oft-times, so
distinct from themselves as they were before, that they are made an
hundredfold better.

In the next place, there are Simples, which by seething, do melt their
Muscilage or Gum, and in this respect, do transmit their Virtues into the
Broth of the Decoction.

First of all, they do not therefore notwithstanding, retain the same Faculty
which they had in their entire composed Body; but their Action is always
feeble.

For first of all, they ought to be concocted in the Stomach, after the manner
of Meats: Most of whom, although from the property of Magnum Oportet, they do
in savor show forth some thing of their former Virtues, yet these are either
cast forth of doors together with Excrements, or being rashly concocted, and
appropriated, do stir up nothing but the brawlings of an unaccustomed
heterogeniety or diversity of kind, instead of a Remedy: Or at leastwise, if
they affect the Blood and Flesh with their Odor, they promise nothing but a
feeble help; So that also, from hence, a Quartane the inhabitant of the Spleen,
does hitherto remain untouched, to the mockery of Physicians. But that
something may be admitted into the Family-administration of the Spirits, and
Family of the solid constituting Parts, it is not that that may any way be
hoped for by Decoctions, as neither by Distillation, which through the
intervening of an artificial Death, wholly puts off every perfect Act of long
Life, which the Wood encloseth in it self. But the Juice, Powder, or Conserves
fetched from the Cedar, are such strangers unto us, that unless it be subdued
by the method of its first Being, it promises not any thing of Familiarity
with us: Far off surely, that it should overcome our Nature, and endow it with
its uncorruptibleness. Distilled things therefore, have nothing of moment, and
crude Simples nothing of moment (with whatever noble Faculty they may shine)
for long Life: For it behooves, that the uncorruptibleness of the Cedar being
exactly preserved, as ignorant of Death, nor the bounty thereof toward us being
in the least worsted or diminished, every foreign impediment be separated from
it, the which, else through the much strife of our Archeus, is reflected into
the Being of Nourishment, but not into the Being of Essence; Yet so that a
Penetration, Communication, and Conspiracy with the first constituting Parts of
u^e and refreshment of the in-existing Faculties, be over and above added
thereunto (...) the Schools of Galen be in the mean time, amazed at the
unwonted manner of prepa^^^ and describing it, and let them laugh at my
promises, let them believe them to be ^eer Dreams, let every Bird sing
according to his own beak; be it lawful for me to be vilely esteemed by them:
For truly, I have long since covered my Ears with a thick covering, against
aged Obloquies expressed for the sake of Gain alone.

I have written concerning long Life, what I know to be true; not indeed for
Young Beginners, as neither to be comprehended by readings; for God has known
why he has given unto the Goat, a short Tail. There shall at sometime be an
Adeptist (in its own maturity of Days) who shall understand that I have spoken
Truth. But as to that which pertains to the Sentence attained in the Dream; He
may read the Dream of Nebuchadnezzar, which was known to Daniel alone; Yet he
had commanded all his wise Men to be limited to the Fire, unless they should
show the undoubted Explication of the Dream: surely such Dreams do promise a
certain certainty within, neither that they are vain: He who oft-times gives
the Dreams, may presently also unlock the same with so great a certainty of
them, that Death nor Hell are able to bring in a doubt. But although I prefer
the Cedar before all Woods; yet perhaps India affords Woods not any thing
inferior to the Cedar of the Shore of Palaestina; Yet I have always given a
Primate-ship unto the Authority of the holy Scriptures; Yet not that therefore
the hand of the Lord has bound up it self to the Cedar: but what things I have
written of the Cedar, I have offered for a memorial of honor toward God, who
has been propitious or favorable unto me. But other things which there are
concerning the Cedar, shall be buried with me; for the World is not capable
thereof. But that which the Moderns do boast of the Elixi^ of Propriety, that
does not succeed according to the Description of Paracelsus: For the three
Simples being shut up together in a most large, and sealed glassen Vessel,
afford at least, a few small dorps of a milkie Liquor, and some small drops of
a somewhat palish Oil, after two days space, and as many, not more, after two
Months; but scarce a third part of the matter suffers by the Fire, but that a
collection of corrupt Matter is threatened: but if it be but a little more
strongly urged, the Vessel, how most large soever, bursts asunder: But if the
Ingredients be connexed with the middle Liquor, the thing it self is at length,
of no worth. Indeed Paracelsus has been silent (even as in most of his other
Descriptions) as to the addition of the Liquor Alkahest, wherewith the whole
matter is presently solved throughout its whole, and the Medicine succeeds
according to his Description: For there is in this Elixir, a subtle Fragrancy,
by reason whereof, it preserves the liquid matter of our Body from Corruption,
as it were a Balsam: for with one only small drop being given to drink in Wine,
I have oftentimes so refreshed those that were desperate through a contagious
Fever, that they have as yet dined with me at noon, who at midnight had
received the last or extreme ^unction of holy Oil. Truly through want of the
Being of Cedar, the Elixir of Propriety does relieve. But what shall I say? The
Alkahest is required; which is not granted to thinkers, but only to knowers,
and that indeed, to those on whom Knowledge is doubled. Wherefore I will
declare a certain trivial thing for the use of the vulgar, for the preservation
of long Life.

In the Year 1600, a certain Man serving in the accounts for military
Provision, but being burdened with a numerous and small offspring, complains
that he was in the 58th. Year of his Age; but if he should fail, it would
happen that his Children would beg their Bread from door to door: He begged of
me some defense of Life: I being as yet a young Man, condoling his Condition,
considered that the Odor of a Sulphurous Torch being enflamed, did preserve
Wines from Corruption: Therefore I inferred in my mind, that the sharp
distillation of Sulphur, did so necessarily contain this Fume of Sulphur, and
plainly all the Odor thereof, that it self was nothing but the very Fume of
Sulphur combibed into its Mercurial Salt.

Then in the next place, I supposed, that our venal Blood was the Wine of our
Life, and that being preserved, if it did not give a Long Life, at leastwise,
it would defend from many Diseases of Corruptions, through the efficiency
whereof, the Life would at least, be after some sort defended in Health, free
from Diseases, and at rest from Pains: Wherefore I gave him a Bottle full of
the distilled Liquor of Sulphur and I likewise taught him the art of preparing
that Oil from enflamed Sulphur. Moreover I bed him, that at every meal, he
should take two small drops at least, of that Liquor, in his first draught of
Ale or Beer, neither that as wanton, he should easily exceed that Dose; I
supposing that two small drops did contain much Fume of the Sulphur. That Man
obeyed my admonitions, and he as yet walks through the Streets of Br^nels, in
the Year 1641. And which is more famous, he never at all lay by it with any
Diseas^^ in all that forty Years; although he once, through a fall upon the
Ice, (...) his Leg nigh the Ham; Yet he always remained free from a Fever,
slender and lean, although the old Man lived in the penury of conveniences:
The name of the old Man, is John Mass, who served in the Bedchamber of
Rythovius Bishop of Yper, when the Counts, Egmond, and Horn, were beheaded; and
then was he five and twenty Years of Age.

FINIS.
Opuscula Medica Inaudita: THAT IS, Unheard of little Works OF MEDICINE. BEING
TREATISES 1. Of the Disease of the STONE. 2. Of FEVERS. 3. Of the HUMORS of
Galen. 4. Of the PEST or PLAGUE.

Written by John Baptista Van Helmont, Toparch or Governor, in Merode,
Royenborch, Oorschot, Pellines, etc. And now faithfully rendered into English,
for public good, and increase of true Science; By J. C. Sometime of M. H. Oxon.

Col. 4. 14. Luke the Beloved Physician greets you.

Deuteronomy. 32. 39. See now that I, even I am he, and there is no God with me: I
kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that can
deliver out of my hand*

Res ardua est ignotis dare scientiam, obscuris lucem, obsoletis nitorem,
in-speratis fidem, dubiis certitudinem, ac naturae suae omnia.

Judiciorum desiderio, tribunitia potestas efflagitata est; judiciorum
lenitate, alius ordo ad res judicandas postulatur.

LONDON, Printed for Lodowick Loyd, and are to be sold at his Shop next the
Castle in Cornhill. 1662.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS MAN THE LORD CASPAR ULDARICK, BARON of Hoensbroeck,
COMMENDATOR of the Teutonick Order, of the sacred Roman Empire in Gemert; A
FAVOURER of good ARTS, and his singular FRIEND and PATRON.
THou remembrest, that the Illustrious Lord, Lord Werner Spies of Bullensheim,
Provincial Commendator of the Teutonick Order of the Confluence of Baillive,
and Commendator of the House of Pitzenburg of Mecheline, Lord in Elsen and
Herrn-Mulheim, etc. of late thy Uncle, the most favorable of my Friends, three
days before his Death, sent his Horse-litter for me, because he lay sick of a
cruel Tertian Ague; and when I came unto him, that he as yet saluted me with
his Head, and offered to embrace me in both his Arms: I was willing presently
to succor the same man, because an intermitting pulse bad me to make haste;
but that his Friends deferred the promised help, till the afternoon, that the
Physicians might be present: Who when they had explained their own endeavor,
and that now in 13 days, they had cut a Vein twice, and as often purged him;
but that they had nourished him with Broaths and Whey; Lastly, that they had
strengthened him with the Confections, Alkermes, and De Hyacintho; and
therefore, that they must proceed in the same path, except, that at length, his
Legs and Arms were to be Ulccrated by Cantharides: But that I answered; Ye see,
oh my men Friends, how much hope these same Remedies have afforded, increased,
and left: Wherefore if ye proceed on in the same way, to morrow will yield
horrors and the agony of Death, for a conclusion of the Tragedy. I pray you let
five hours at least, be granted unto me, and it will as yet appear, whether
that famous man commanded me, his most loving Friend, to be sent for yesterday
in vain.

They readily consented, except one Fonseca, perhaps, because he was a
Portugal, who despised Chemical Remedies, as being fiery, and that they poured
Oil on the Fire. And so by the Vote of one Physician, that Knight underwent
Death. For although Priests, his Friends, stood by, also Noble Persons of his
household; yet they more hoped in the accustomed Remedies, and the Votes of
many, than in, as yet, unknown Medicines. Therefore he began to be left by good
ones, because thou were absent, when these things happened: For as just
Indignation brings forth a Song, so I being provoked by the unskilful,
determined to set forth a Little Book of an Unheard of Doctrine concerning
Fevers: And it fitly fell out, that Cardinal Ferdinandus, our Kings Brother, is
killed by Portugals his chief Physicians, through an immoderate exhausting of
his Blood, and inordinate cooling: But that that would so come to pass, I had
foretold in my Writings, unto Carmelita his Confessor.

But forthwith after his Death, that thing was disputed by a controversal
right: Fortunatus Vopiscus Plempius, a Dutchman, very well learned, and
Professor at Lovaine, was Victor in the Controversy. But I have prefixed a
Verse to my Book, whereby not so much the Malice, as the Brutish and
unpunished Blockishness of those Physicians might be manifested. Therefore I
have added, that none was ever made free from a Fever by the method of Galen,
as neither that he who otherwise labored with a more grievous sickness, did
escape, but whom the strength of Nature did the more timely snatch out of their
hands: Because that in the Schools, as well Fevers essentially, as the Remedies
of the same, were hitherto unknown.

Therefore I set forth a Book which might confirm that thing; but bespattered
with so many faults on every side, that I blushed to acknowledge it for my own:
But however it was such, yet by reason of the novelty of the matter, it began
soon after its birth, to be desired, because it was wanting or not to be had.

For I show that a Fever is unknown: That its Remedies are unknown: And
likewise, that a Quaternary or Fourfold number of Humors, are old Wives
Trifles, whereby credulous mortals do as yet to this day, fat the places of
Burial. Therefore let it be a Problem; to wit, that I have altogether erred
therein, or not indeed I, but the Humorists have erred: And the whole School of
the Huniourists has gone to the Wall; Because now, the Hinge whereupon the
posts of Healing are supported, does lie on the ground.

That matter, since it touches the Life, the Commonwealth, and most Families;
I entreat the Christian World, that from Charity, it would take good heed to
the deciding of a difficult Question, so unthought of, and of so great moment.

I in like manner, add a Book wherein I have demonstrated, That the Causes,
Remedies and also the Manner of making the Stone in Man, have been constantly
unknown hitherto. That the Pest also, Apoplexy, Palsy, Leprosy, Lethargy,
Convulsion, and that sort of Diseases, are as yet alike unknown in the Schools.

But I have written these Paradoxes, for a Pledge of a bigger Section promised;
wherein I will lay open the Beginnings of Natural Philosophy, and new Maxims of
Healing, for a public good; To wit, that the Schools may learn, and repent.

Let them learn indeed, not of me (who otherwise, have always despised all vain
glory) but from the Giver of all Good. But I have endeavored so to manifest my
Talent received, for the profit of my Neighbor, that hereafter any one of a
sound mind, ought to confess whether he will or nay, that very darkness it
self, has hitherto banished Truth out of the Schools of the Gentiles.

And since I wish my Labors may speak to the whole World; therefore I decreed
to dedicate the same unto thee, for a Pledge of Friendship; because thou were a
Patron of the Muses, and a Favourer of the Art of the Fire. For I have never
dedicated my Books unto chief men, that I might represent their famous deeds,
and the pictures and pedigrees of their Ancestors: Indeed I would not seem, to
have been willing by flattery, to corrupt their integrity. I know also, that
whatsoever is of flatterers, does no less displease thee than my self.

Lastly, neither do I offer my Writings, that they may be fenced under thy
authority: Far also, be such stupidity, which knows not, that Kings themselves
are unfit for such Protection: Nor that any thing can subsist, which has not
obtained its Patronage from God.

I give therefore, (O Illustrious Man) and dedicate these my Labors unto thee,
with a naked title, that thou may proceed to love me, thy most loving
Friend; who entreats God, that he would preserve thee in health! In the mean
time, Enjoy thou, Rejoice, and Farewell, as thy Friend

Bruxels, the 6th. of the Kalends of October, 1643. JOHN BAPTISTA Van HELMONT
desires.

On the WORKS of the Noble and most Famous D. J. B. HELMONT. A Verse of the
Noble and most Honourabl-Lord, Janus Walhorn. D. Counselor to his Majesty.
SHut up thy Schools, O Galen, for, enough of Men are slain,
Ho, now it is Sufficient; full Graves do ring again!
For Blood and Clyster are thy Medicines: nothing oftentimes
Thou giv'st: but to a Critic day thy hope alone confines.
In touching of a vein, the while, and eke of parched tongue,
And in the Urine wholly thou art dismayed, and so in Dung.
A Med'cine's to be got for him, this helps not the sick man:
No need of tests of the Disease; but of a Physician.
Yet thou expect'st a great reward, after the man's enshrind.
So does the Dog look for and love, the Cattle sickly kind.
Helmont is one, who able is by his Apollo's art
To snatch from the jaws of Death whom t'oher left to dye in smart.
TO THE Medicine-Loving Reader, John Baptista Van Helmont of Bruxels, Toparch
or Governor in Merode; Royenborch, Oorschot, Pellines, etc. Being a Philosopher
by the Fire; wishes Peace, Joy, and Knowledge.
I Lately sent forth a new Doctrine concerning Fevers, wherein I have shown,
That a Fever is unknown to the Schools, in its Essence, Root, Properties, and
Remedy: That matter diversely affected Physicians, and especially it perplexed
those that refuse to learn: For they who persuaded themselves to be wise
enough, said; Shall therefore the Universities sustain this Calumny without
punishment? and have so many famous Wits, and we our selves been Blockheads?
does Helmont alone sit at the Table of the Sun, that from those Dainties, he
has dared to arrogate the Adeption or Obtainment of Healing to himself? But
although my ignorance does most poorly accompany my Intention, and the
Confession hereof, does not blot out the Stain of Ignorance; yet the Integrity
and Sincerity of my Intention deserves pardon: For truly, in healing, the truth
of every thing comes to be judged or esteemed, from the Work which it leaves
behind it: For neither ought those to be accounted Calumnies, if the Errors of
Predecessors are discovered, their names being suppressed. A public humane
affair is treated of by me, for the sake of Charity alone: If therefore I shall
say, that the first of those, who fetch the Fundamentals of Medicine from the
Heathens, who has known, not only the root of Fevers, but also of any Diseases
whatsoever, and their just Remedies, is as yet desired; and I shall demonstrate
that thing; I am void of blame, neither shall I seem to be injurious: But if
not, I pray let those who take pity of my Ignorance, instruct me; even as I
suppose my self to have been moved only from a compassion on mankind, lest any
one should hereafter entrust his Life in the hands of unfaithful Helpers, who
hitherto have made none free from a Disease, from a certain knowledge; but as
many as have escaped, that they have recovered through the bounty of God alone,
and the goodness of their Nature: For this is that Paradox, which I promise
that I will demonstrate, and in promising, to stand to my Promises. But I had
said, in the aforesaid Book of Fevers, that I owed to the Stone also, its own
Treatise; because the Disease of the Stone, is like unto a Monster, and
therefore that it was to be separated in a fold or section by it self: For
other Diseases are no where bred but in our possession; but the Stone alone,
does also grow together in the Urinal: It becomes stony indeed, as it were the
product of Universal Nature; but it grows, inas-much as it is the product of
Nature changed to another use; and that it may be made a Stone in Man, but not
a rockie Stone, it requires a matter disposed by Man. By this entrance
therefore, the Universities will see, that they have not touched at the Causes
of the Disease of the Stone, so much as in its utmost coasts: and they who
grieve, that they are blamed for their Ignorance of Fevers, will acknowledge
that they have more Companions of their Calamity: For I would never be
injurious to all that went before me; and it is sufficient for me to protest,
that I want a mind of doing injury: For, far be it from me to be ignorant, that
an unknown matter demonstrated for the uses of ones Neighbor, should want
reproach; especially, while the ignorance of Physicians has it self in manner
of a crime, and Man is at sometime to render Skin for Skin: No otherwise than
as a Pre^or or judicial Officer, accusing any one of a Crime, is excused from
Calumny. I have always greatly grieved, that in the devout Profession of
Medicine alone, it has been subscribed to so (...), fluggish, and ^rivolous
Principles; But that in other Professions, they have so ingeniously labored:
For indeed, what of subtilty has not been attempted, about the five Words of
(...), which they name Predicables? and what subtle wiles, have they (...)
about (...) things? Prattles I say, the witnesses of a discursive industry?
Raymand (...) not contented with these, invented nine other most Universal
Words; and afterward added unto these same nine, twenty eight other Words,
less Universal: and lastly, he at length subjoyned seventy two other Universal
Words, whereby any things may seventeen thousand, four hundred, forty six times
be described, predicated of, and distinguished. Those unprofitable pratlings
are the great Husks of Sciences, without a Kernel. Surely, humane Wits, are of
their own accord, prone to subtilties without Spurs, if the ends of those
subtilties are vain: But in things that regard Life and Health, they have
snorted with a continual Lethargy. The Law also, is so incumbent on subtilties,
about the Explications of Decrees, as the Sublimities, wherewith the Wit of Man
is snatched away with so wonderful an Admiration, and beholds it self in its
own delight, that by a singular Prerogative, they are called the Subtilties of
the Law: These indeed are less vain than talkative Faculties; because that they
are provided to attain and defend right. But in matters of Divinity, what
famous things do not the Chairs hope for, by their accute discussings of
Questions? I would to God, that Man's necessity might want all these things;
that meum and tuum, or mine and thine, might be rendered to every one, without
any false Paint! that the Faith also (as in Mahometism) might stand without
disputation; that every subtilty may depart, whereof an account will not be
required in the last day: for so Apostolical Sincerity should return; So I have
received, and so I have delivered unto you. At leastwise, they shall undergo
the milder Judgment, who in their Life time have been most estranged from these
Subtilties. But in Medicinal Affairs (alas for grife) where a diligent fe^rch
is most necessary, profitable, and commended for charity, almost all things
have remained untouched; because careless sloth is on every side, readily
inclined to subscribe unto the ancient blockishnesses of the ignorant: it is
also more damnable among those, who wander through the Streets, and run through
them from house to house, that they may prostitute Health to Sale, and put a
Disease unknown unto themselves, to flight: For it has not been once by the
way, doubted by the Universities hitherto, about the belief of the Speculations
delivered by the heathens; which otherwise, vail a folly, even with their
facility alone, and at the first view, ought to stir up a suspicion of
themselves; because nothing in humane Affairs has been now for so many ages
received, which is more hardened in shame, and blockishness, nothing more full
of lying and deceit, nothing more wonderful in cruelty, and also in credulity,
than a profession which makes Experiments daily, by the Deaths of Men, under a
con-centrical subscription unto the Wills of the Heathens: For the Nations who
live without a Physician do confess that thing with me, by what a Life they
lead. That thing I say, the more refined Physicians, also, do confess: For a
godly and sober Man, but a very famous Physician, Doctor Johannes Vander Wegen,
being not so long since asked by me, Why (for truly he dwelt at Lovain, and had
Friends in the Court, and Potentates which he cured, and he was most fit for
the Chair) He did not desire some Lecture? He ingeniously answered, It was not
lawful to give a taste of any other kind of Doctrine unto Youth, besides that of
Galen; and so (said he) I should knowingly damn my Soul, I knowing better
things, and teaching worse. Therefore others know what I discover that I know,
but they dare not to discover what they know.

Good Jesus, how long shall the drowsiness of Physicians remain? and so great
cruelty against the Works of thy Hands? Grant, grant thou oh Infinite Goodness,
that mortal mankind may know, that the Devil Moloch, envieth no Subtilties, but
those which are sifted about Charity, and which regard and preserve the Life of
thine own Image. For I grieved at the first, at so great rashness of belief of
Principles, and at so great a sluggishness of Mortals about things of so great
moment, and the pity of this thing increased with me daily. Hence at length, I
having obtained a little Light, I knew with great grife, that the Errors of
the Schools ought by me, plainly to appear: But indeed, in the entrance, that
thing seemed to me to be full of untamed arrogance, that I, the least of all,
should brand all before me, with the ignorance of Phylosophical truth, but
should attribute to my self only, the obtainment of healing: Therefore I
oftentimes begged of the Lord, that he would re-take that his own Talent from
me, and vouchsafe wholly to take it away, and to bestow it on another more
worthy than my self: For I knew, that he who had well lay hid, had well lived,
at leastwise, morally, and in this ulcerous age: Therefore I resisted, and a
good while deferred to propose this ignorance of the Principles of Medicine, to
its own World, until that now being an old Man, the last necessity constraining
me, and being placed in an Agony of Death, I promised the Lord, that I would
sincerely divulge his Talent, least I should at sometime be accounted in the
strict Judgment of God, to have come into the world in vain, and to have
departed as unprofitable from hence: For by a Vision in a Dream, I understood
that I was more afraid of gainsayings, than of Gods Indignation; that Nature
was crafty, as long as she made a pretense for Pride, in purely obeying God, by
reason of deceitful humane respects. Also I saw not, that my own Arrogance,
which was placed rather in fear, did make me less freely or generously to
perform what was required against Judicious Men, that would rise up against me
for so many ages past, than in purely obeying the most glorious Giver of Truth:
Yea, that I did not commiserate my Neighbor, and that I buried my Talent in
the Earth, in looking back on the uncertain Censures of the World concerning
me: I knew indeed, the doors of Medicine to have been locked, and the Bars and
Bolts thereof, to have been covered with rust, for so many ages; but I doubted
to open them; as if I should presume the Office of a Porter to be merely my
own, and not to be given to any other: Therefore I resolved with my self, to do
what Charity, not arrogance persuaded to be done, as knowing that he is not
injurious, who beholds a public good, although it may make those blush, who
have rashly subscribed to the trifles of Heathens, unto the damage of mankind.
At length therefore, I stood as a middle man, between the shame, and sore fear
of the greatness of the thing, and many times reposed my Pen: And again, I
seriously begged of the Lord, that he would vouchsafe to chose another more
worthy than my self: Wherefore the Lord being deservedly wroth, suffered this
Evil and unprofitable Servant to be sifted by Satan: For an Order, whose Zenith
or vertical Point, is the house of Powers, and whose Nadir or Point under their
Feet, are other Orders, began undeservedly to persecute me by unworthy Wiles: I
knew presently, that the hand of the Lord had touched me: And therefore, in a
full tempest of Persecutions, I wrote a Volume, whose Title is, the Rise or
Original of Medicine; that is, The unheard of Beginnings of natural Philosophy;
wherein I have discovered the accustomed Errors of the Schools in healing: I
have I say, afforded, and demonstrated new Principles; as also hitherto,
unheard of Speculations of Diseases, that the Universities leaving the Vanities
of the Heathen, may for the future, accustom themselves to the Truth: For from
thence, I found a rest in my Soul, such as I never found in the times of my
Prosperity; so that, I being full of suspicion, grieved that so great Storms
did not any thing disturb the rest of my Soul, or sleep of my Body: Wherein, O
God, my Protector, I am not able sufficiently to praise the abundance of thy
bounty, which suffered not my Soul even in the least, to fall out of a full
enjoyment of peace, under so great straits on every side: I fearing this one
only thing, least as an unprofitable Servant, I should be buried with my small
Talent.

Whosoever therefore thou art, who interpretest my Zeal to be proud boasting,
thou may do it for me, so thou shall not hurt thy self: for I will rejoice
to bear back all confusion for the good of my Neighbor, and of Posterity; and
I shall enjoy my wish, whether in the mean time, my boldness shall turn unto me
for rashness, or not: For God the Sower, will water what he would have to grow.
And moreover, in the Book of Fevers, I have declared the Beginnings of my
repentance, and in what manner I desisted from Galen and Avicen, to wit, by
reason of the discerned falsehood of the Pillars of Medicine; from whence a
singular boldness of confidence thenceforth increased in me, being as yet a
young man, whereby, for my Neighbors sake, I willingly exposed my self to the
infurious Censures of all; and the number of days by degrees running on, the
Lord beheld the Candor of my Zeal, and granted me, now a Man, to see, that
whatsoever is taught in the Schools of Medicine, is full of Miseries and Ruin,
and that it should be a laughing stock to Posterity. Good Jesus! how greatly
was I then amazed at the greatness of thy Clemency, which reveals those things
unto little ones, which were denied for so manyages, to men otherwise, most
religious and ingenious.

Moreover, although I was from thence more assured, that the manifestation of
my Talent of truth received, lay heavy upon me; yet Nature is ready to find out
excuses, and deceives it self, and its own Sorrows, by the Props of Reason its
Chambermaid: I presently therefore (fie, it s^ames me of my own unconstancy)
shook off the undertaken burden again from my shoulders, and said; who am I, oh
Lord? for the more solid things are defective unto me, which I should
substitute in the room of those that are to be depressed: For what things I
before believed, were commanded me, I again suspected to be suggested by the
subtilty of Satan, because secret Remedies were wanting unto me; to wit, the
Letters Patents or Signs of my message: Wherefore, in my youth, I had a good
while persuaded my self, that the very Art of healing, was nothing but a mere
imposture, devised by the idle Greeks, being at first framed for the
destruction of the Romans their subduers, and afterward confirmed for the
Calamities of Men, whereunto humane Credulity, by reason of a conceived hope,
had easily subscribed; and so that that Profession of Medicine had brought
forth its own authority; because for the most part, we too readi^^ believe
those things which we too greedily desire. Indeed I knew from that time, that
the ^^^icine of the Universities was a thing of no worth; to which end, they
afforded me their votes, since Diseases were incurable, and moreover, the
vanity of Experiments; and at length, succors abounded on every side; because
I saw Physicians every where exposed to a mock: and also the Philosophy it
self, before chosen in my youth, assented unto this my Error; To wit, that the
Logic, natural Philosophy, and Metaphysics of the Schools, were not that
Philosophy, for which Pythagoras in times past, took unto himself only a few
Scholars of the better towardness, to be instructed by him, they being bound
by the silence of many years, and by a secret Oath, that they should never
declare to any one, any of those things which they had there heard: for I
supposed rather, that the Essays of the Art of the Fire were there delivered,
than of that Science, which Galen lays open by much Greek tattle: For truly
also, long before Pythagoras, every one had accustomed, faithfully to note by
Hieroglyphics in Temples, whatsoever things had profited his own People: for
that thing, so great a necessity, and so intestine a Calamity had convinced of,
that they were thus delivered to Posterity without envy. When therefore the Art
of Medicine fell into disesteem with me, I lighted on a Text of holy Scripture,
having been often read, yet never understood; To wit, That the most high had
created the Physician, and had commanded him to be honored, by reason of the
necessity there is of him. Wherein I presently discerned,

1. That he who created all things, does notwithstanding, particularly glory,
that he is the Creator of the Physician.

2. That for his own glory sake, for the issuing forth of his goodness for the
necessities, helping, and succors of the Sick, and so by the Physician, the
Almighty will be appeased, in restoring health that was taken away.

3. That he to whom all honor and glory is due, has commanded, that Parents,
and Physicians only created by him, be honored; as if a Physician had
something of a fatherly, Nature.

4. And then, in my manhood, I not a little carefully inquired day and night,
what happy Man he should be, whom the Almighty from Eternity ordained, chose,
and created for a Physician, and from hence also, commanded to be honored.

Whether happy it were he, who having read over Institutions, and some
classical or renowned Authors, and having spent full three Years in the
University; and at length, who by disputations, and examinations by Professors,
having labored for. Preferment, was sent forth, being admitted as well by
Secular, as Ecclesiastical authority? Or indeed, whether it were he, who with
the same Title of a Physician, had waxed old under another mourning, being in
the mean time, full of Years, Experiments, and Moneys? Then straightway, I with
pity considered, that the Sick stood in need of a Physician, whom the Almighty
has created, he being furnished with full abilities; and that an healthy
Person wanted not a Physician standing by him, who should be chief over the
Kitchen, should number the Morsels, and prescribe rules of Diet. (Thou shall
hereafter find more things concerning the honor due to Physicians, under the
History of Duelech.) I considered on the other hand; That the Maker of sweet
Oils should compose the Varnishes of Sweetness; neither that his Works should
be consummated or come to an end: Neither that there should be a Medicine of
destruction in the Earth: Which sounds, that a true Physician, should mow
down all Diseases with an equal Sith, nor that Diseases were with him
uncurable: Surely, a notable difference between a Physician, which the most
high has created, and him whom Universities have created by the Doctrine of
the Heathen. A huge Catalogue of uncurable Diseases presently offered it self
unto me; as if the most high had been nothing careful for these; or as if such
sick Persons were not diseasie; Because that, for the necessity of whom, he had
neither created a Physician, nor a Medicine in the Universities: For truly they
not only cast such Sick folks into despair; but also, as many Diseases as are
not silent of their own accord, they reckon up for desperate ones: Yea, a
Quartane Ague, and those which take fast roots for Years, and which are for the
most part finished through a voluntary tiresomeness of Nature, they reckon to
be uncurable: And but that other Diseases do at the last hasten to a bound or
limit, truly all Diseases should be equally added to uncurable ones: For most
Physicians know not how to take away the pain of a Tooth, but by pulling of it
out: So perhaps, they would command the same thing for health, in an inveterate
Headache; to wit, a ^aking away of the Head, if the Life could remain safe.
After the notable Labors of some Years therefore, it grieved me, that I knew,
or had learned nothing else but that which was of no worth: For although I
believed the Physician to be created of God, even as also simple Medicines; Yet
I wholly stuck in the knowledge of that Physician, and of the things
subservient unto him: For I wished many times, Ah! I would to God, I might
sometime, at length become the Disciple of such a Physiti^^. In the mean time,
I knew clearly, that the Art of healing, garnished forth as well by the Greeks,
as by the Arabians; and that which the Jews feign to have been delivered unto
themby hand; from their Rabbis, under the Cabal, did very far differ from that
which the sacred Text decyphereth. At length therefore, I inferred in my mind,
That the Science of Medicine had a good beginning, from the mean, intention,
and end thereof; To wit, that it was a good gift descending from the Father of
Lights; and therefore, this gift had never, long since descended into the
Heathens, and Jews, however they were blown up with our rashness of belief;
because they are those, whom the Lord has not created Physicians, nor for our
necessity; as neither has he commanded them to be honored, but to be
seriously avoided: For a Physician created of God, is not defectuous, given to
Gain, and an Enemy of Christians; but full of Charity. But first, I have noted
this rarity of that good Gift, from Diascorides, who from the days of Plato
(wherein he lived) has indeed described the Histories of Herbs; yet unto this
day, scarce any thing has been added unto him, but very much detracted from
him: And so, scarce any Light has shined forth from above, into Herbarism, for
two thousand and three hundred Years, although it be a most plain or easy, and
necessary Science: Wherefore I have consectured that that Light from above has
soberly enough s^idden down into other orders of more abstruse Knowledges; Yet
least of all into Heathens, Atheists, and perfidious Jews, they being secluded
from the Truth, and Charity, and for that Cause forsaken of God: And as the
Nativities of things are banished into the fullness of times, covered from us;
so that the Gift of the truth of Healing does not descend, but in the fulness
of time appointed by God: For neither shall Light, which is freely given, shine
at our pleasure: For he who made all things as he would, makes the same things
when he will, and perfects them in whom he will: For I have waxed old, now, for
forty years and more, in the rout of Physicians; and at length, I being an old
Man, have known, that the Speculations of the Schools ought by me to be
subverted, that all things, in the Age that is soon to come, may fall into
dung, as they being destitute of the Lime of truth, do not co-here together.
There has been so great a certainty with me, of that Gift being obtained, and
so reverend an Authority thereof, that I perceived, that the Giver would
together with his Gift, be also the interpreter thereof; and that in this
respect, I should exclude every doubt whatsoever: and such a knowledge is far
more sure, than that which is formed by demonstration; because there is not a
Faculty in Words, to make this certainty common to others. I know also, that
all who are to read my Beginnings of Medicine, will not carry back an equal
Fruit from thence; because God is still to remain the dispenser of his own
Gift. I have spoken these things, that ye may also know, that my unworthiness
will overspread the Gift with darkness, that he may compass the race of Nature
who can: for I have hoped, that when he shall now increase the number and
fierceness of Diseases, he will inspire the Gift of Healing into the little
ones, and despised of this World. And since that in the aforepast Age, he sent
Paracelsus, a rich forerunner in the resolutive knowledge of Bodies, and t^stre
of Remedies; it might be, that he would now over-add the knowledge of an
Adeptist, which that other wanted.

Furthermore, if it likes thee without wickedness, to enquire into the reason
of the pleasure of that Divine Decree, for which the Adeptical gift of Healing
has not descended unto Christians; I suppose, that the Schools do resist it,
as they stubb^rnly insist on the Principles of Heathens: And then also, because
Medicine is wholly excercised for Gain, presently after its Beginning; the
which alone of Arts, is to be mercifully exspended from compassion; But not as
though Men were to live merrily and pompously, or to grow rich by the Miseries
of the miserable Sick: Wherefore gain has prevented a necessary Dsposition in
Men, and the falsehood of Paganish Doctrine has diverted the Adeptical or
obtained Gift of Healing: The searching out whereof, has therefore seem^d to
me, to consist in compassion toward the Sick, by un-learning of false
Theoremes, and by putting on deep humility of Spirit; The which, as it is not
then blown up with the Letter, nor pressed down through inordinacy; So in a
humble beholding knowledge of ones own nothingness, the Mind empties it self of
all Science or Knowledge introduced by the inducements of Reason: Then
afterward, then, I say, the Most High scarce suffers the Mind to be empty, but
he replenisheth the same with a fruitful Beam of his own Light. I have already
perhaps found some, who, because I say that the obtainment of Medicine
descends down from above, will have Medicine to be perfectly learned, after
the manner of other Arts: The Intellect or Understanding, they say, is a
natural Power; but every natural Power is born to work a proper Effect; but the
proper Effect of the Intellect it self, is Understandingness: Therefore Man
naturally understands all intelligible things, as the proper Object of the
intellect. Moreover, the Faculty of healing is intelligible, and therefore it
descends not from above. I answer; The Soul and the Understanding thereof, are
not the immediate Works of Nature, because they are those which arise from a
supernatural Fountain: And so, although the intellect, as to its beginning, be
a natural Faculty of the Soul, yet it is not altogether to be reckoned among
natural Faculties. It is of Faith, that God has created the Physician, and so
that the Art of healing be-speaks something b^yond the common rule of created
things, so as that the obtainment thereof, does not happen after the manner of
other Arts: For Nebuchadnezzar will testify a taking away, and a restoring of
the understanding. Likewise, do not ye become as the Horse and Mule, which have
no understanding; the which had been spoken in vain, if understanding were
equally given by Nature. Moreover, the Understanding given (whereof they here
declare) exercises not its own natural, or intellectual Act, but as by
discoursing, it draws some Notions from Observations, which it received from
the perceivance of the Senses; when as it is altogether ignorant of the Causes
from a former: But unto the Science of Medicine, a certain clearness of Light
is required, which exceeds that knowledge by the Senses, yea and by the
consequences of Causes to their Effects, according to suppositions brought on
them by reason, for the most part deceitful ones: For it is of Faith, that the
intell^ct, together with the totalness of humane Nature, and so from thence,
howsoever clear it be, does not perceive Propositions firstly or chiefly true,
which exceed sense, unless with the afflux or concurrence of a supernatural
Light. Suppose thou, I often read a place in a Book attentively; and although I
understood the Words, yet I once only draw in the sense thereof, unlooked for,
with an admiration of forepast readings: But such Knowledge, I call that of
Grace: For so the Understanding, how clear soever it be, does not always
assent to the truth; because neither does it naturally perceive this truth (for
from hence, are there Factions in Sciences and Religion:) So in the gift of
Medicine, there is something more noble and superior, than that which is
formed in the imagining Faculty, from a fore-existing knowledge of the Senses;
the which is true, solid, good, exceeding the authority of consequences; yea,
which can neither be properly taught, or demonstrated: Yet I would not be
understood, that the obtainment of healing is such an infused Science, as in
times past enlightened Bezaleel and Aholiab; and much less, such a one as on the
day of Pentecost, rained down with a large shower on the Apostles, so that they
forthwith spoke in diverse Dialects: Neither also, is the obtainment of healing
therefore of things plainly sublunary: For the Eternal Wisdom, has created its
Physician, after a singular manner, before other created things; and so, some
more famous thing seems to be required for him, than for other Professions;
the which therefore, neither has he commanded to be honored. After another
manner, truly all our understanding in Nature, arises only by way of
discourse, of the Observations of that which is supposed, of consequence, and
of a diligent enquiry, and all that from the effect: Wherefore all such
Knowledge is encompassed with uncertainty. Therefore, between an ordinary
manner of understanding, and infused science of the first degrees, there are
certain enlargements, every one being distinct in a particular degree, in an
understanding supernaturally arising. Which I thus prove.

Every good Gift descends from the Father of Lights:

The obtainment of Healing is a good Gift; Therefore it descends from the
Father of Lights.

The major Proposition is of Faith: But the minor is manifest, as a Physician,
as such, is created by the Father of Lights.

They reply by a certain similitude, and nothing to the Syllogism, after this
manner.

The Knowledge of God is more difficult, than that of Medicine:

But the Heathens have naturally found by the Operations of their
understanding, the existence of the Godhead.

Therefore they far more easily obtained the natural Science of Healing. I
answer, by granting the whole, if they shall not bring in four Terms.

Therefore, even as by Nature, none can draw the Light of Faith; but only a
certain shadowie knowledge: So also, in the Gift of Medicine I grant, that a
certain knowledge of healing is naturally attained by observations of what is
helpful and hurtful: but surely, that knowledge is so shadowie, and blind, that
it plainly resists the Text; which should say in vain, That God created the
Physician, as such, and him to be honored; unless there did shine forth some
Light in this created Physician, above the vulgar, ordinary, and natural
intellectual Power of the Soul.

At length, that neither Atheists, nor Heathens, as neither Jews, ever received
that Gift of healing, it is not elsewhere, nor farther to be drawn, than that,
De facto or from the deed done, a Disease, Remedies, and every appropriation
hereof, are as yet to this day unknown to Mortals: For it is an invincible
argument;

The obtainment of Medicine has been hitherto unknown: Therefore God has not
given that gift unto Paganism, in fore-past Ag^^, at neither to the Schools,
they following (...) Leaders:

The correlative whereof is, That whosoever assents unto the Doctrins of the
Paganish Schools, is secluded from the true Principles of Healing. For I will
demonstrate the Assumption, God favoring me, in an ample Volume: To wit, that
the Principles of knowing the Causes, and Roots, in Diseases, Remedies, and
Appropriations, have remained unknown. The Consequence is by it self clear,
unless they shall show, that every good gift is derived elsewhere than from
God: For it ought to be sufficient for the establishment of the Gift of
Medicine, that although the obtainment of Healing, be so near the Nature of the
Understanding, that by reason of the nearness of natural Objects, and their
necessities, it is accustomed to three natural Sciences, apprehended by a
simple Intellect; yet as at least, it includes the Gifts of Prudence, Counsel,
etc. which are the free Gifts of the holy-Spirit; truly the Gift of Medicine
ought to be brought, and expected from such a Beginning, which is plainly
carried above the path of Nature: For oftentimes, some one being sunk into the
middle of his Dreams, forthwith conceives a Knowledge, which being awake, he
had never attained: For Night unto Night shows Knowledge. So oftentimes, some
one reads a place that was many times read without Fruit, from whence at
length, he begins a more reformed Life. For do not those things des^end from
the Father of Lights? Therefore, such Knowledges are indeed infused, although
not ^^ the more excellent order: They are I say, Talents, upon which, the
Understanding being we^^ formed, does afterward build profitable Dostrins: For
the Learned, as such, shall shine before the unlearned) in the Kingdom of
Heaven, if for the sake of learning, their Souls have fitted themselves for
the greater free Gifts: For the Almighty has pleased himself in the diversity
of Mansions, Quires, Clearness, and Understanding of Angels, and of Men
accompanying these. At leastwise, in favor of the obtainment of Healing, he
causes, that among the seven Spirits that are next to the Throne of God, the
name of one is, the Medicine of God: For he is above Principalities, Thrones,
Powers, and Dominions. Nevertheless, the heavenly Wights are not sick, nor
stand they in need of Medicine: Neither is that Medicine of God, to be taken
metaphorically, which well knew the Properties, even in the Gawl of a Fish. But
in this place, I have undertook the Birth or Original of the Disease of the
Stone, which I promised, as the Stone contains a Metamorphosis or
Transformation, which in no wise can draw its beginning from Humors, but from
the mere excrement of the Urin. And therefore this Treatise, might easily want
a Treatise concerning the fiction of Humors and Complexions.

AN EXPLICATION OF SOME Words of Art.
1. THe Liquor Alkahest of Paracelsus, it resolves every visible Body into its
first matter, the power of the Seeds being reserved. Concerning this Liquor
Chemists do say; The common People do burn by Fire, we by Water. 2. The Archeus
of Paracelsus, it is the vital Air of Seeds, and the directress of Life, and
the (...) of Hippocrates, that is, the Spirit that makes the assault. 3. Blas,
for want of an Etimology, I call it the power of Motion, as well alterative as
local. 4. Bur, it is the juice of Minerals, or Metals, 5. The Duelech of
Paracelsus, it is the proper name of the Stone of man: For Calculus or a pebble
stone, is a Metaphor. 6. Gas is a Spirit not coagulable, such as is from
fermenting Wine; and also that red one, which through the operation of Aqua
Fortis, is belched forth, etc. 7. The Magnal, is the Sheath in the Air, being a
middle Creature between a Body, and not a Body. 8. Magnum Oportet, it is the
Thistle and Thorn of the Earth in the middle Life of man: whereof in a
particular Treatise. 9. The Leffas of Paracelsus, is the juice of the Earth,
newly drawn into the Root, as it were the Kitchen of a Vegetable. 10. The
Zenexton of Paracelsus, is an Amulet or Preservative Pomander against the
Plague. 11. The Powder of Vigo, it is known to Barbers. 12. The Element of the
Fire of Venus, is the Oil of the Sulphur of Copper. 13. Aqua Chrysulca, and
Regis, it is Aqua Fortis; and this same being married or joined with somewhat
less than a fourfold quantity of Sal Armoniack. 14. Horizontal Gold, it is Gold
in its Weight, but not yet sufficiently Yellow. 15. Diaceltatesson of
Paracelsus, it is the Quicksilver of the Vulgar, being coagulated in the
Alkahest, and tinged with the water of Eggs: And it is made the Coralline
Secret, of the Essence and condition of Aureity or goldiness; because it is
also Horizontal. 16. The Relolleum of Paracelsus, is a Quality not having in it
a seminal Being; even as are the Elementary Qualities; likewise the Color and
Signature of Simple things.
But the other Words less usual, are either Medicinal ones, or at least
described and cleared up in the present Text of the Author, and so are obvious
to, or easy to be understood by the Reader.

An unheard of DOCTRINE Concerning the manner of making, the Contents, Roots,
and dissolving of the Disease of the STONE.

And likewise of sense or feeling, Sensation, pain, unsensibility,
benummednesse, motion, unmoveablenesse. Even as of Diseases of this sort: the
Leprosy, Falling-Evil, Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, Coma, etc.

All things being new and paradoxal hitherto.

A Treatise profitable, as well for a natural Philosopher, and Physician, as
for an Alchymist: but most profitable for the Sick.

John Baptista van Helmont of Bruxels, being the Author.

A TREATISE Of the Disease of the STONE. PETRIFICATION, Or the Making of a
STONE.
CHAP. I.
1. THe Schools of Medicine did already doubt before Paracelsus. 2. The
opininion of the Ancients concerning the causes of making of a Stone. 3. A
sounder doctrine of Paracelsus. 4, The flux of seeds for a Stone. 5. The
disposition of Minerals from the Creation of the World. 6. What the Trival-line
is. 7. What the Flinty Mountain is. 8. From whence the diversity of Stones is.
9. The powder of the Adamant is always yellow. 10. Great or rocky stones, and
small stones, how they differ. 11. The seed of a stone, wherein it exceeds a
vegetable seed. 12. Stonifying in a man, and why a stone grows to the Tooth.
13. Some remarkable things. 14. Why some Insects do not become a stone, but the
more perfect Animals, sometimes, altogether. 15. That the form is not
introduced from the power of the matter. 16. After what manner a man is made a
stone. 17. Nothing of a rocky stone is common with the stone in a man. 18. The
Duelech of Paracelsus. 19. The praise of wild Carrot-seed, etc.

THe more refined Physicians of the late past age, were silently astonished at
the Doctrine of the Schools, concerning the Elements, Temperaments Paracelsus
(who by a most excelling testimony of Medicines, had drawn all Germany into the
admiration of himself) to persuade those that already doubted of the fiction of
his Tartar; that Tartar traiteroufly entering out of meats and drinks, was the
true cause of any disease whatsoever; which thought of his begat Credit, and
has now fixed so stable a Root, that there is not almost any one, who does not
flee unto the Tartar of Parabelsus. I did owe indeed a singular Treatise unto
Tartar, who was readily prepared for the History of the Stone, but that, I had
abundantly written thereof among the Beginnings of Natural Philosophy, and
therefore I had left that Volume maimed, if I had from thence transferred the
Treatise of Tartar hither. For truly, the Original integrity of Nature being
there placed within the matter, the Archeus, and the Life, or Form, together
with seminal Beginnings, hitherto unheard of, the Ferments also, the Authors of
any kind of transmutations whatsoever, being newly discovered: but the
Elements, Qualities, Complexions, and the fight, strife, contrarieties, and
victories of these being rejected: Also the fictions of Humors and Catarrhs,
being banished out of Nature, and Medicinal consideration: At length, Flatus's,
Tartars, and the three first principles of the Chemists, being excepted out of
the place of exercise of Diseases: and then I by degrees declining from things
Speculative unto Discourses, handling Affects, have explained the defects, and
successive alterations of Nature: and have pithily manifested to the World, the
true cause of Diseases, hitherto unheard of. Therefore, the Stone being as a
Monster bred at home in our own House, I have named this Book as it were on
Outlaw, and now the error of Tartar borrowed from Paracelsus, being forsaken,
I now come unto Petrification, or the making of a Stone, unknown to the
Schools.

For indeed, the Ancients giving up their Names to Aristotle, do (according to
the that metals being as it were frozen with cold (because they did again flow
through the torture of the fire) and the superfluity of water being dried up,
but the air and fire being well nigh excluded, remained as it were withered.
Thus the dry Philosophy of Aristotle has reported hereof; But they proved
their position as I have said: For Metals (as they imagine) flow all abroad
through a contrary heat. As if indeed, a frozen work could not melt, but by the
service of the Bellows! Or that earth should be capable of melting by fire; And
again, at its pleasure, could require the countenance of earth, as often as it
should feel cold! Are the Schools so unmindfull of themselves, in that they
not so long since said, that the Element of water is of it self vehemently
cold, and slackly moist? and so that Metals ought to be congealed not from
earth, but from Water? But that the earth of it self is vehemently dry, and
slackly cold? and so ignorant of congealing; so that from hence it follows: if
Metals in their chief part, are earth: they shall never be able to flow or be
frozen up, seeing that they shall be able to be at the most, but remisly cold.
Neither by a heightened heat, shall earth be ever able to be converted into
water, or a watery substance, while it melted in the metal. For truly, they
grant unto the earth an intense or heightened dryth, which cannot but be
fortified by the fire, but not destroyed thereby. In like manner, neither can
the remiss or slack cold of the most strong earth, convert this earth (while by
the force of the fire it should be dissolved into water) again into earth;
Because they believe the remiss qualities of the Elements, not to have so much
activity, as that they can break the intense qualities of another Element. For
with the same foot of stupidity, wherewith they began, they proceed to say,
that great and small stones, are earth hardened, and as it were withered, with
heat. The which they prove by Potters earth, which by heat alone, becomes a
stone, as they will themselves. For, because a stone melts not by fire, even as
otherwise, metals do; therefore they conjecturing of Nature from a Negative,
have supposed they have untyed every knot. And this gross wit ought to have
been suspected by every one long since, if they all did not sleep a diseased
drowsy sleep. For what will they say of Sulphur, which flows or melts with
the fire? Has frozen water or earth given a beginning to Sulphur, because it
melts? Or what will they say of the condensing or co-thickning of Glass, which
is again dissolved by the same heat whereby it is made? And what lastly
concerning Salt, which by one degree of heat, is coagulated and waxes dry, and
by another degree thereof, is melted, and a gain is dissolved by moist things?
Surely it is a shame to stay any longer in Aristotelical trifles, and the
Fables of Elementary qualities, while we must diligently search into the causes
and original of things.

Wherefore, Paracelsus first taught our Ancestors, that all Minerals (which he
believed Natural Philosophy. It has also been hitherto neglected, after what
manner these seeds of things may come to light, may cover themselves with the
wrapperies of Bodies, and dispose the same, and how those very seeds may at
length, of necessity hearken to the importunities of Bodies. Wherefore, neither
shall it be unacceptable, in this place, briefly to repeat the progress and
flux of Seeds to their form, and their maturities, in Minerals, out of the
Doctrine by me elsewhere more largely delivered.

For indeed, if a Stone be not made of a Stone, it must needs be, that
stonifying includes in potentia, or possibility: seeing nothing which is not
vital, is able to promote it self to perfection. And therefore it would be a
foolish and accidental perfection, which should proceed from a Body without an
internal Guide, and an end appointed unto it. Therefore, if a Body be
dispositively distinguished from the internal Efficient, and does issue in its
production, unto ends proposed unto it in Nature; then also the Etymology of a
seed, does of right belong unto it: because it proceeds wholly from an
incorporeal Beginning. But this Beginning, shall easily be granted by me, to
issue forth in vital things from the Image, or according to the Idea framed by
the Conception or cogitation of the Generater, which therefore is called the
imaginative power, or faculty, But that inanimate things have seminal Gifts
implanted in their first Beings, which after the manner of the Receiver, do
also proportionably after some sort, answer to the Imagination, the Sympathy
and Antipathy of inanimate things do teach. For a non-sensitive Body (namely
the Loadstone) must needs after some sort feel the Situation of the Pole or
North star; if it direct it self of its own accord unto it, but is not drawn by
the Pole (even as in the Book of the Plague, I teach by manifest Arguments)
Likewise that it feels or perceives Iron, if, neglecting the Pole, it by a
Choice, inclines it self to the Iron; which particulars, least they should be
here, after a tedious manner repeated by me, it is sufficient thus to have
supposed them by the way.

Moreover, This very Idea and perfect act of a new Being, to wit, the seminal
efficient cause, does even in unsensitive things perform its office, no
otherwise than if it Archeus, and by means thereof, does afterward perfect
the dispositions and Organs of the Body, and at length compleateth those
things, which in the delineation of its own seminal Image, are designed it for
Ends known to God alone. And in this respect also, every Creature depends
originally on God. For this God has freely put into living Creatures and
plants, a seminal faculty of framing such an Idea: that is, a fruitfulness of
multiplying and raising up Offspring, by virtue of the Word (Increase and
multiply) to endure for Ages. The which, under the correction of the Church, I
thus borrow from the Scriptures. In the Beginning, the Earth was empty and
void: For surely, it was beset with a double emptiness or vacuity. The which,
notwithstanding, is not so said of the Element of water. For the earth had not
as yet minerals in its Bosom, if it were void. Indeed the earth was a mere and
pure Sand, not yet distinguished by a numerous variety and ranks of minerals.
But the Spirit of the Lord was carried upon the Great Deep of the Waters. Not
indeed, that that carrying, was not an empty idleness wanting a mystery, or a
voluptuous ease of swimming: but it contained the mystery of a Blessing,
whereby the water might replenish the vacuity of the earth in one of its
emptinesses, with Fruits: But on the other hand, might satisfy the vacuity of
the earth, and fill up its emptiness by Vegetables and living Creatures.
Therefore, before the Light sprang up; all metals and minerals began at once,
in the floating of the divine Spirit. Of which thing, first of all, the hidden
lights of metals, imitating the Stars, and the foregoing Testimonies, which
are wont to shine by Night, in Mine-making Mountains, do persuade me. At
leastwise, the Spirit of the Lord, which filled the whole earth, being now
earnestly desirous of Creating, sealed by its Word the fruitful Idea of its
desire, in the Spondill or Marrow of the Abyss of the Waters, which in an
instant, brought forth the whole wealthy diversity of Stones, Minerals, and
Metals, whereby it replenished the emptiness of the earth with much usury:
which vaculty indeed, living Creatures and plants were not able sufficiently,
as neither suitable to fulfill.

But the Pavement, or Pantafle of the earth, which this most rich Offspring of
waters Paracelsus, the Trival-line, the Womb that was great with Child with the
seeds of minerals, wherein the Lord implanted Reasons or Respects, Endowments,
and seeds that were to be sufficient for Ages. For so indeed, the wealthy seed
of Rocky stones and minerals is implanted in the Water, that it may receive its
determination and Ferment in the womb of the Earth. But what the Virgin Earth
may be, without, and besides minerals, I have demonstrated in my Treatises of
Natural Philosophy. But the most rich seed of this Storehouse and Treasury,
seems to be profesly neglected by Moses, least Israel, by attributing divine
and immortal Powers to Fountains and Mountains, should sacrifice unto them. But
besides, the sand or earth being on every side, con-tinual to its self, having
received a seed, arose into Hills and Rocks, and divided the Pavements of
Stones. For, as the Rise of things began from a Miracle; so now it adhereth to
its second Causes, that the invisible Archeus's of things, and the hidden seeds
thereof may testify, that they are likewise Governed by the intelligible
World. For from hence it is, that the waters have remained gotten with Child
through the desire of the seeds, and the Almighty has disposed the Idea's of
his pleasure, or Precept, through the Water. Yet these seminal desires of the
water, do not fructify through a successive propagation of one thing by
another, after the manner of plants: but a seminal virtue lurking in the
Treasures of the water, does peculiarly stir up its own Of-springs from it
self, and successively perfect them. For a seed or seminal and mineral Idea, is
included in the water, which never goes out of it: but locks up and incloseth
it self in that matter, until at length, under the maturity of days, that be
made thereof, which was born to be made of it. The operative Image therefore,
in the waters, does receive a sensible, and presently a fermentaceous odor
from the flinty Mountain. But the new flints and stones do grow in Fountains
and Rivers. But whatsoever is made, and so long as it is in making, neither is
as yet in its perfection intended by the Archeus, has a seed in it self: so as
that I may understand an Univocal or simple Nature to be in its own constituted
parts. For the water being purely clear, having in it the seed and Fire-stone
shall concur; it is made a Gemme, following the hardness and properties of its
own coagulated Body. For just even as Tin (which affords to Painters a
yellow color, which they call Masticot) makes every metal (its lead being
taken away) brickle: So also it tingeth the hardness of Gemmes, or precious
Stones. Therefore the Adamant or Diamond alone, affords a yellow powder or
Jasper, Agate, Flint, red Marble, Marble, etc. and that according to the
rerequirance of the mixed seed.

In the mean time, Rocky stones are more easily dissolved than small
flinty-stones; and Glove of Frederick the Emperor, was stonified in one part
thereof, to wit, in that part which he had for some time moistened beneath the
water: but in the other half or moity, being fenced by a graven Impression, it
remained leather. So that, not only Herbs, Woods, Breads, Iron, Eggs, Fishes,
Birds, and fourfooted Beasts, are by a wonderful Metamorphosis, made a Rocky
stone; But also, as Ambrose Pareus witnesses, there was at Paris, a humane
Young cut out of the Womb, of a mature bigness, that was turned into a Rocky
stone. His Toe was broken, and the Tendons, and joints of his. Bones appeared
within. And likewise, his Gum being broken (for he was of a gaping, and as it
were howling mouth) showed a Tooth underneath in the sheath of the Cheek-bone.
The which, a Friend testified to me, who for the sharpening of Instruments, in
preparing Instruments designed for Mathematical demonstration, is wont
oftentimes to make a Whetstone in the back of this Young.

So likewise, Histories makes mention, that in Vaults nigh the City Pergamum
(now called Pergamo, or Bargamo) there were some dead Carcasses found, to wit,
of those whom the fear of War had forced into hidden places; that they were I
say stonified from their superficies, even to their Center. From whence, many
particulars worthy of note, do arise. 1. That rocky stones are generated of
their own and proper seed: and Tartar, as of their proper and near matter: but
that they etc. do become a rocky stone, is of a greater efficacy, than
otherwise the seeds of Vegetables are, which do fore-require a matter disposed
by the Generater. Therefore every Land does not bring forth all things. But a
rocky seed, snatcheth to it any bodies, even those that are far estranged from
it self. And then the other seeds require, that the matter subjected unto them
be reduced unto a tough or slimy Liquor, and such as is for receiving of the
seed; which Liquor, they have called the first matter of Generation; and they
require, that every figure and comeliness of the foregoing composed Body, be
also destroyed. But a stonifying seed does with a Reservation of the humane
figure, stonifie the man wholly throughout the whole, to wit, as well his bones
as his skin, without an intermediating putrefaction, or dissolution of the
matter. 5. That a stonifying seed consists in a stony odor alone, which is an
incorporeal and invisible Ferment. 6. That the matter of a Tooth, is not merely
bony: but a middle or neutral matter between a Bone and a Rocky stone. And
therefore also a Tooth does by its co-touching, at length stonifie whatsoever
shall the more stubbornly adhere unto it, whether that pulse shall be of that
which is made of Bread, Flesh, Potherbs, Fish, Apple, or Pease, etc. That is,
although in it self, nor of it self, it has not any disposition unto the
making of a rocky stone. This seed I say, has notably deceived Paracelsus and
his followers with the name of Tartar. For the stone of a Tooth is not
dissolved in boiling water, like Tartar: Neither is the Generation thereof of,
most near akinne unto the Tartar of Wine; but it is a neutral Animal
stonification, made indeed from a stonelike odor and seed, which the pulse
adhering to the Tooth, draws to it, by touching. 7. Hitherto has the
speculation of Horns regard; For the horn of a Cow, as also the pantafles or
hoofes of Herds, and of the flock of lesser Cattle, are by a proper and simple
name, of an horny matter. But the horn of a Stag, is partly of a bony matter,
and partly of a wooden matter: and so that also therefore it intimates Thorns
and Branches, and falls off yearly, by reason of a retained property of leaves,
and of a wooden part. Ivory also has a great part of bone, and another of a
stone, or of a Tooth-like form. 8. That although many Bodies do become rocky
stones, in Fountains: yet that comes not to pass, without a remarkable
stonifying odor. For therefore, as many things as are stonified, are
transchanged by the odor of the place: But not that the rocky stone sends
forth from it self, a seed like a Generater. 9. And that therefore, the
original seed of the rocky stone, was immediately sown by the Creator, and
constituted in places, being sufficient for a sufficiency, unto the end of the
World. 10. That if stonifying stands not in need of the device of Tartar, much
less surely does the Generations of Diseases.

11. That some Insects (especially the Toade) although they are bred in rocky
Archeus by way of a separation from the stones themselves: no otherwise, than
as the Fire-stone, or metal, is separated from the stony veins wherein they
are bred, and do keep their unspotted matter, dissolveable. Therefore that
separated Archeus remains unconquerable by a rocky seed.

12. That it is a false Maxim, that there is not made an introducing of any
form, Magitians of Pharaoh, when they had seen the Gnats to proceed immediately
from the dust of the earth, which they had known to be the immediate Ofsprings
of the water, they cried out: Here is the finger of God; because they could not
imitate this effect. For since there is a most difficult return of earth into
water, they knew, that it was a far more famous thing for Gnats to be made of
the dust of the earth, than for a Serpent to be made of the Rod, and this of
that: or for Frogs and Blood to be made of water. Which difficulty Satan well
knowing, said not: Say or command thou, that bread be made a stone (for this
happens in Nature immediately) but, that those stones be made bread. From
whence indeed, he had divined of the Omnipotency of Christ. For as through a
stonifying seed, having arisen from an hoary putrefaction of the bottom,
shell-fishes are fenced with a stony crust: whose seed is not so much
propagated by a sexual wedlock, as by the very fermental putrefaction it self,
of the bottom; and therefore a posterity grows to their shells from without.
So also, there are other Insects, whose Archeus could not be incrusted, nor
vanquished by a stony seed. From a like cause, as the Toad drives away from him
all troublesome stonification from without. Yet such kind of worms are not
sufficient for curing of the Stone; Because the last Life of these (under
which, a resistance against the rocky seed lays hid) has vanished away before
it be received into the use of Medicine.

Also, a hoary putrified stony odor; if it shall light on the vegetal juice of
the Paracelsus calls Leffas) stony Pavements arise under the earth. A man also
being shut up in a fermental putrified place, is first choked with a stony
odor; which odor afterward passing through his Arteries and solid parts,
transchangeth the dead Carkase, before it can putrify into a rocky stone. For
so the earth pierces the vegetal juice with a rocky odor, and a stony plant
arises, as it were out of a transplanted vegetable seed. As is manifest in
Coral, and the moss thereof. But from whence had the Young, according to
Pareus, drawn the odor of a stony seed? but that happened not at first, by
virtue of a rocky seed: but there was made a transplantation, through the force
of the teeming Mother, who the more attentively admited a stony Engravement;
otherwise, the Young being framed and transchanged into a rocky stone, a stony
odor afterward issued from thence: whereby it came to pass, that almost the
whole womb of the Mother, together with that Young, became stonified. For as
smoke pierces and tingeth fleshes that are moist and compacted with Salt, from
their Circumference even to their Center: so also does a stony Odor, Flesh; To
wit, that of a dead Carkase there may be made a true mineral Rock, Paracelsus,
name Duelech, by reason of its singular nature and properties from all other
rocky stones. But fume or smoke, although it may tinge fleshes: yet it
transchangeth them not. Wherefore, frem thence it is sufficiently manifest,
that, not every odor is for the transchanging of a thing; but that only,
whereunto a Ferment comes: from whence the odor becomes wholly great with
Child of the seed.

Bodies therefore are stonified, indeed naturally, by their own seed, but
plainly after a monstrous manner; they being supposed, to be strangers in kind,
because they are stonified Russia and Tartaria, in the Altitude of 64 degrees,
not far from the Fen of Kitaya, a Hoorde or Village of the Baschirdians, is
read to have been transchanged wholly into rocky stones, together with all its
Herd of Cattle, Wagons, and Furniture or Armory. And Men, Camels, Horses,
Flocks, and all the concomitant kind of Wagons, and Armory provisions being
grown together, even at this day are with a horrid Spectacle, said to stand as
yet stonified under the open Element. But if a miracle be absent from thence;
surely that whole Country is nothing but a continued Rock, passable or holy
with chinks: the which (the Wind being silent for many days, and the Air from
above, pressed down) a strong stony putrified hoary odor (such a killing odor
as is beheld to be in some Burrowes or Mines of the Earth) might have breathed
forth, and killed its walking Inhabitants in one night: which at length, by
reason of the cold of the place, restraining putrefaction, transchanged those
Creatures which but lately before it had killed, into a rocky stone. No
otherwise than as those of Bargamo, in the Vanlts, and the Glove in the
Fountain. And therefore, the drink of such Springs is exceeding unwholesome;
Because it disposes the Archeus into a stony disposition; molests with
gripings or wringings of the Bowels, shortens the Life; and therefore kills the
Midriffs, before that in drinking, they are transchanged into a stone. In the
red Monastery of Zonia, nigh Bruxels, and in the Vestry of the Temple, some
Springs breath forth, which apply or fastens stones to the Wall, contrary to
the Proverb; A drop by often falling, hollowes stones. For the stones that are
grown to the Wall, do oftentimes shake off by a Crook and Hatchet. But the
Monks complain, that they suffer frettings or wringings in their Bowels, unless
they daily use Daucus or wild Carrot-seed boiled in their Ales. As the Odor of
wild -Carrot, tames and represseth a stony odor, Therefore let young Beginners
learn, that the rocky stone has its seeds, no less than other things, in its
middle life, under the Cloak of a Fermental odor, but not in a Tartarous
coagulation of the matter.

CHAP. II. The Causes of Duelech, or the stone in man, according to the
Ancients.
1. The rashness of the Schools. 2. The supposed matter of Duelech, and the
effects of the same. 3. Those causes of the Ancients are rejected. 4. Thinking
has deceived the Schools, whereby they supposed the effect to be the cause it
self. 5. The progress of humane nature is every where alike. 6. The error of
the Schools, in the causes of Duelech, is proved. 7. Some Rashnesses,
disclemencies and sluggishnesses of the Schools. 8. A faulty Argument of the
Schools in the efficient cause of Duelech it self. 9. Arguments drawn from
sense. 10. That Duelech is made of the Vrin it self; but not of the contents
thereof, distinguished in opposition to the Urine. 11. Consequences upon the
ignorance of causes. 12. the wearisomenesse or grief of the Author. 13. An
handicraft operation of the Author, rejecting the causes of the Schools
assigned to Duelech. 14. A Maxim opposite to the Schools. 15. The vanity of
Tartar in the Stone. 16. Pray ye, and it shall be given unto you.

THe hoard of Tartars being already long since cast out and re-cleansed
elsewhere, Paracelsus had invaded Diseases. I must now in this place, wage War
with the Precepts of Galen, in the causes of Duelech or the stone in Man. For
indeed, the Schools having forgotten a quaternary or fourfold number of
natural Causes, have made mention of two causes only, for the Generation of
Duelech. And so that likewise, they agree with me, in the name and number of
Causes only; but not in the thing it self. For truly, they teach, that the
matter, and efficient, are the parents of the stone. And so, their own
conscience urging them, they deny its Form and End, or Causes; or do either
insufficiently treat of the stone, or at length, exclude Duelech out of the
Race of natural things. Yea, seeing they will have every efficient cause to be
external, they leave it to be concluded by their young Beginners, that Duelech
is naturally constituted, and does depend only from an external efficient
Cause.

The Schools therefore call the matter of the stone, a certain Muscilage,
which they slimy or snivelly phlegm: but they will have the efficient cause of
the stone, to be Heat, as well that external Heat of the Bed, etc. as that of
the Bowels it self being badly affected. Wherein, at the very entrance, they
forsake their own Patron; who denies the efficient cause in natural things, to
be internal. Duelech therefore, shall be caused only by heat.

I am of a contrary judgment. I have showed by handicraft Operation, that no
[ex qua] or [whereof] of the Stone. But if the muckinesse it self, be sometimes
laid hold of by the true matter of the stone, and be shut up under the same: it
stonifies indeed, from the seed of Duelech, together, otherwise, with the
proper matter of Duelech, but not by reason of its being a muscilage, or as it
is tough and slimy.

For first of all the undistinct observance of the Schools their experience,
has deceived Victory; and bare in hand, that they had found the immediate and
containing cause of the Stone. Truly, first the Schools are miserable: but
much more miserable are the infirm or sick. For if they had once looked behind
them, they had easily seen, that the stone being rightly cut out, that and
before accustomed balast of muckinesse or snivel, does also presently cease in
the urine of that infirm person. For from hence the Schools might have been
able certainly to know, that if, that muckinesse, which is voided before, while
the Stone was present, were any kind of cause and matter of the same, that
should surely be made, either from the Bladder it self, or from the stone, or
should be sent unto the Bladder from elsewhere. If therefore it was sent from
elsewhere, verily when Duelech was cut out, it ought as yet to be bred, sent
thither, and daily voided forth: since the cutting and taking away of the
stone, has respect only to the Bladder: but in no wise, unto the part which
is otherwise remotely distant, the bringer forth, and sender of continual
snivels. But if such a muckinesse proceeded from the stone, or next from the
Bladder, it shall not any way, be a cause; but rather an effect of the stone,
presupposing the stone to be present. For the Bladder is hurt in its digestion,
by so cruel and troublesome a Guest as the stone is; wherefore as impatient
thereof, it continually weeps out the undigested part of its own nourishment,
because it cannot perfect and promote it: and therefore it successively sends
for new. Therefore that snivel is not the matter [whereof] of the stone: but
the mournful effect hereof. And therefore they badly accuse that muscilage for
the matter of the stone: For they see, and do not know what they have seen.
They call phlegm, one, and indeed a separated humor of the four first humors
arising in sanguification or blood-making, which is the last nourishment in
digestion, and the immediate and spermatick or seedy nourishment of the solid
members proceeding from the venal Blood, being totally digested, it being
degenerated in its passage, by reason of the indisposition of the part to be
nourished. For the stone has nothing which is vital in it self, nor has it
any thing vital out of it self, which may afford, or stir up a muscilage from
its seed; And much less is Nature solicitous of, or does intend the increase
of the stone, that from its own continual nourishing warmth, it should think
of procreating that, whereby it may intend and confirm its enemy, and own
destruction within; especially, if the direction of the same does depend on an
un-erring intelligence or understanding.

For the Schools, if ever they made trial from Charity toward their
Neighbor, or Duelech: but not that the Tear is the cause of the web in the
Eye, or that the watery Latex being largely powered out, does stop up the spongy
bone in the forehead: or that mucky spittle does procreate the Squinancy. For
such is the perpetual commerce of the whole Body, that a member being hurt, or
the power thereof, its Inhabitant: the functions of the same do go astray, and
its digestion is forthwith vitiated, and the nourishment thereof, being
otherwise lively, does for the most part, degenerate, that if it declines not
into a spermatick disposition; at leastwise, it does into a mucky or snivelly
one. For so, the Bladder weeps out the continual muck of its own defiled
nourishment, while the stone is present: and cease so to do, when it is
absent. Therefore by such a muck being granted, they endeavor too frivolously
to prove, to wit, that the material cause of the stone, is that, which, the
stone being there placed, is by accident, and occasionally, effectually made.
In the next place, if such a mucky snivel, being bred [whereof] of the stone,
and heat were the proper efficient cause thereof: and that both these causes
being present, were sufficient; truly seeing the effect, when sufficient causes
are granted, does unexcusably, of necessity succeed: therefore, all such mucky
snivel, would of necessity, become a stone is the Bladder: No otherwise than as
the whole milk simply, is coagulated at once by the Runnet. And so, the
Bladder, should presently be filled up with one only stone, or it should be
false, that the causes being granted, which are requisite for the constituting
of a thing, the thing it self must needs be made, or be. Nevertheless, in the
terms proposed, that muckinesse being continually present (at leastwise
successively) under the heat of the Bladder, does not wholly pass over (as
otherwise should be required) into a stone, according to the similar, simple,
and homogeneal unity of it self: but is wholly voided out. Therefore the two
constitutive causes of the Stone, assigned by the Schools, can neither be
true, nor sufficient ones.

Wherefore, I greatly admire at so great a sluggishnesse of diligently
searching, nor he had learned and certainly known, whether a stone would ever
be made thereby; or indeed, any brickle sand-stone even as if he did dry the
snivel of the Nostrils in a plate of metal. It is therefore an intolerable
thing, that none of the Schools their Professors, has hitherto cherished the
Urine, together with the aforesaid Muscilage, with a due lukewarmth, that he
might have learned, that the stone grew together in Urinals or Chamberpots, not
from the snivel: but well or successfully in respect of the Urine. I am
deservedly angry, that in things of so great moment, from whence,
notwithstanding an infernal sentence of punishment hangs almost over the head
of the Schools: the extinguishment of Charity, yea, and the very denial of
Knowledge are manifestly proved: yet that they have never hitherto considered,
that as long as they live, nothing can ever be dried up or wither in the
Bladder: or that ever the action of heat is required for the hardening of the
stone, that the watery parts should be consumed; but that the more gross
parts, should at once, by the same endeavor, be more toughly co-thickned. For
otherwise, if they suppose the necessity of their efficient heat to be such,
that like Lime, in its maturity, the stone being cherished by heat, does grow
together; Now the Universities confound themselves, while they see, that clear
and transparent urine, lays aside its sandy or stony crusts in the cold, and
in Urinals or Chamberpots. They behold (I say) Stones to be brought to
maturity, without heat; and also that the Urine of healthy persons, does affix
sands and scaly plates on Urinals. Neither likewise, does this very thing thus
come to pass, if the Vessel being close shut, the urine be all the day long,
most grossly cherished by heat: therefore it is the part of ignorance, that by
all the clear-sightednesse of Physicians, the difference has not yet been
discerned between the coagulation of a flint, in a Spring or River, and the
drying of Clay that is made by heat. Learn ye therefore, oh ye Schools, of me
an unprofitable and the least of Schools. But moreover, although the urine may
seem biting and sharp as if there were the burning of fire, as in the
Strangury: yet being voided, it is not any thing more hot, or sharper to the
taste, or more salt than it was wont, or is meet to be. There is an apparent
burning and tartness of the urine: not indeed, from a true heat, or any
sharpness of the urine: but only, by reason of the forreignnesse of some
certain small quantity of sharpness, through a Ferment being co-mixed
therewith: which thing, the Strangury teaches, being contracted by new Ales,
and those as yet fermenting from a sharpness. Therefore Macc, or Saffron being
taken (for they must be sharp and hot Medicines, yea reaching to the very
place, if they ought to help; and therefore, by their odor testifying their
presence in the urine) the aforesaid burning heat for the most part, cease.

For it is a Philosophical truth, that the stone increases by the same causes,
whereby it arises, stuck about the sides of the Glass. And that thing had
thus happened in a cold encompassing Air. Wherefore, even from thence, any one
ought to be more assured, that that sand had not gone forth with the urine, in
the beginning of his making water (because it was not yet bred) neither that it
was actually in the urine, For otherwise, it had stood detained in the Towel,
however thin it had been, like the atoms of Potters earth. Or if the Towel
being not thick enough, had deceived him: yet at least, it had presently rushed
unto the bottom, in the likeness of sand, or a settlement: neither had it
affixed it self in its making, in so great a grain, and with so great a
distance of equality, to the sides of the Vessel: Because it had wanted a glue,
whereby it might have been able to glue it self thereunto. In the next place,
seeing that sand wants a glue throughout its whole Superficies, except in that
part; wherein it adheres to the Chamberpot or Urinal: it is sufficiently
manifest, that at one and the same instant, wherein that sand was made, it was
likewise also glewed thereunto. For from thence, any one ought to be the more
assured (if he had ever toughly labored in a diligent searching out of the
truth) that since that sand applied it self to the Glass of its own free
accord, that it was also generated, far after the making water, to wit, in the
immediate instant before its affixing: but that, it being affixed, however the
most small it was in it self, it afterward increased by additions. Which
effects, indeed, as they are wrought by a common nature growing or glistening
in the urine, and not from a particular atome of sand, which affixed it self to
the Vessel; Hence also, it equally departed, and that, at once, out of the
whole urine. For from this so ordinary and daily handicraft Operation, if the
love of Health were cordially seated in the Schools; they ought for some Ages
before now, to have known (nor indeed from an argument drawn from a Similitude,
and far fetched; but altogether from the Identity or same linesse of the urine
and stony sand it self) that for as much as that sand had grown together from
the matter of the urine, to wit, of the same matter, from whence the stone also
was: and that indeed though a muscilage of the matter, and heat of the place
were absent (for the pewter Chamberpot stands in the cold encompassing air) and
likewise without the suspicion of the affect of the stone, or an infirmity of
the pisser (for also any the unblamed urine of healthy persons, generates this
sand and applies it self to the urine) therefore the sand and stone in us,
proceeds from stony causes; to wit: the same, from which the urine becomes of a
sandy grain in the Glass without us, being also healthy persons. Which thing,
being by me Schools had erred in the knowledge of the cause, and that they do
even to this day stumble in curing of the Stone; the which, notwithstanding,
they rashly assume to themselves, and presume of. I greatly bewailed the
stupidities and false devices of so many Ages; and more, that the unhappy
Obediences, strict Clientships, pains, and deaths of the sick; the untimely
destructions of Families; and lastly, the spoils of Widows and Orphans, had
happened under unfaithful an ignorant helpers, who deceived the World with the
name of Physicians.

For then I knew in good earnest, that I knew nothing, who had learned my
princiciples

At length in a certain night, being awaked out of my sleep, I meditated, that
no Schollat was above his Master; yet I resolved in my mind, that many of my
School-fellowes had exceeded their Teachers: but the truth of that Text was
brought unto me, namely, That a man did watch and build in vain, unless the
Lord did cooperate. I knew therefore, likewise, that we do teach any one in
vain, unless the Master of all Truth shall also teach us within, whom none of
his Disciples has ever surpassed, Therefore I long and seriously searched,
after what manner I might attain the knowledge of the Stone, from this Master.
For truly, I most perfectly knew, that Authors had not so much as the least
light, and that therefore, neither could they give me that Knowledge: But I
confessed my self to be a great Sea of ignorance, and an Abyss of manifold
darknesses, and to or local pain. For I wondered, that having powered out my
urine, a sand should stick to the sides of the Urinal, and be so fastened
thereto, at so great a distance of equality, that it denied all fore-existence
of matter falling down. It once happened, that I was conversant with some noble
Women, the Wives of Noblemen, and so also with the Queen her self, from the
third hour after noon, even to the third hour after midnight, at London in the
Court of Whitehall; For they were the Holy-day-Evens of Feastings in the
Twelfdayes. But I made water, when those Women first drew me along with them to
the Kings Palace: wherefore, for civility sake, I withheld my urine for at
least 12 hours space. And then, having returned home, I could not, even by the
most exact viewing, find so much as the least mote of sand in my urine. For I
feared, least, my urine having been long detained, and cocted beyond measure,
would now be of a sandy grain. Wherefore I made water the more curiously
through a Napkin; but my urine was free from all sand. Therefore the next day
after, in the morning, I pissed new urine through a Towel, and detained it in a
Glass-Vrinal as many hours (to wit, twelve): And at length, I manifestly saw
the adhering sand, to be equally dispersed round about where the urine had
stood: lastly, pouring forth the urine, I touched that sand with my finger. And
being perfectly instructed by my own experience, I concluded with my self;
That forasmuch as the urine was by me the pisser, detained for 12 hours space,
and yet it contained no sand, neither that I had cast it forth: and that
otherwise, in the lesser space of a day, sand had been condensed in my urine,
and fastened to the Glazen-shell, in the encompassing air of [the Month called
J January: I knew more certainly than certainty it self, that a sliminess of
matter was no way required for that sand, and that the heat of the member did
in no wise effect the coagulation of the Stone. I thereupon taking my progress
home, cast from me, the Doctrine of the Schools, and presently the Truth took
hold of me. For I being confirmed, and no longer staggering by reason of doubt,
believed, as being certainly confirmed, that the internal and seminal cause of
the stones in men was unknown to Mortals. With a great courage therefore, I
again disdaining all the Books of Writers, cast them away, and expelled them
far from me. Neither determined I to expect the aid of my Calling from any
other way than from the Father of Lights, the one only Master of Truth. And
presently I gave a divorce to all accidental occasions and mockeries of Tartar:
and also to any whatsoever Artifices, more than those which more show forth the
course of Nature. Because I knew that Nature does no where, primarily work out
seminal transmutations by heat or cold, as such; although

I knew therefore that vain were the devices of Paracelsus, concerning Tartar;
to this end at least, invented by him, that he, as the first, might be reckoned
to have thrust Tartar of Wine. For although he perfectly cured Duelech (as his
Epitaph does premonish) yet he obtained not the speculative knowledge thereof
in the like measure, as he did the most powerful use of an Arcanum. For so,
very many experiments, wander about amongst Idiots: the causes whereof they
notwithstanding know not. Therefore the help of Books forsook me, and the voice
of the living forsook me, which might teach me, while present; yet I knew, that
woe was to the man, that trusted in man. Good God, the Comforter of the poor in
spirit, who art nearer to none, than to him who with a full freedom, resignes
up himself and his Endowments into thy most pleasing Will; and seeing thou
enlightnest none more bountifully, Oh Father of Lights, than him, who
acknowledging the lowliness of his own nothingness, puts confidence only in
the good pleasure of thy Clemency. Grant thou, Oh thou profound Master of
Sciences, that I may rather be poor in spirit, than great with Child or swollen
through knowledge. Grant me freely an understanding that may purely seek thee,
and a will that may purely adhere unto thee. Enlighten thou my
nothing-darknesses as much as thou will; and no more, than that I may suffer my
self to be directed according to length, breadth, and Depth, unto the Reward of
the Race proposed be thee unto me; nor that I may ever in any thing decline
from thee to my self. Because I am in very deed, evil; Neither of my self, have
I, am I, can I be, know I, or am I able to do any thing else. Unto thee be the
glory, which has taught me to acknowledge my own nothingness.

CHAP. III. The Con-tent of Urine.
1. The Art of the Fire is commended. 2. An Analysis or resolution of the
Urine. 3. The Author disappointed of his hope. 4. A second handicraft
Operation. 5. A third, which has taught the coagulum or Runnet of the Stone,
and some other remarkable things. 6. Some ways or manners of condensing. 7. In
the lime of rocky stones, there are two diverse salts: for neither could it
otherwise ever become a stone. 8. The error of Galen concerning Ashes. 9. The
Author, when he had learned nothing from coagulated Bodies, at length, examined
diverse spirits. 10. The error of Paracelsus concerning Tartar. 11. An
examination of salts. 12. The highest virtue of Vegetables. 13. From whence a
salt arises in urine. 14. Duelech does not stonifie after the manner of lime.
15. What the Sunovia is, 16. An examination of fermental savours. 17.
Paracelsus is taken notice of concerning Mercuries. 18. An abuse, in forbidding
the use of salt. 19. The handicraft Operation of the salt of urine. 20. The
vanity of Turnheisser, his signifyng by the urine. 21. Two the more fixed salts
in urine. 22. The differences of both those salts. 23. The difference of the
Volatile from the fixed salt of the urine. 24. The ferment of the stomach is
not any kind of sharpness whatsoever. 25. Burnt urine yielded not an Alcali to
the Author. 26, The Vulnerary drink of a certain Country man. 27. That an
Alcali does not fore-exist, but is made in burning. 28. A digression Unto some
ranks of Simples. 29. The calcining of Hartshorn is a thing of notable
blockishnesse. 30. Sea Salt, whether it hurt those that labor with the stone.
31. That salt is not to be forbidden for its own sake, as neither for its
spirit-sake. 32. The fittest salt for eating. 33. A wonderful handicraft
Operation in the distillation of urine. 34. The judiciary part in Vrines, why
hitherto, false. 35. What the stone being distilled may teach. 36. Earth,
together with the spirit of Urine, never makes Duelech. 37. The constituting
principles of Duelech. 38. How sands are made in the Vrinal or Chamberpot. 39.
The Confirmation of the stone, is fabulous. 40. A stone of a wonderful
bigness. 41. Paracelsus is ridiculous in the stone of a Thunderbolt. 42.
Duelech is made of mere volatile things. 43. Three spirits concur in the
Urine, for the nativity of Duelech. 44. Volatile Bodies, are oft-times through
their concourse, presently fixed together at once.

WE read in our Furnaces, that there is not a more certain kind of Science in
Nature, for the knowing of things by their radical and constitutive causes;
Raymund testifies) Of his Testament, Chap. 26.
However, a Logitian may have a profound wit, discourseable, or natural,
concerning things without: Yet he shall never, by any reason, which comes unto
sense, be able directly to know, nor judge, with what kind of nature, or
virtue, through a fortitude or strength within, the multiplication of grain
possesses it self, so as to grow or increase upon the earth, unless by reason
of a similitudinary example drawn from observation. Neither shall he ever know,
after what manner a seed buds, grows, and collects fruits in the earth, unless
he shall with an experimental Doctrine, first enter into our natural
Philosophy, and not that Sophistical, discursive one, which is bred in
Logitians by diverse fantastical presumptions: who with the Prognostications of
Sequels, contrary to the power of Nature, make many stubbornly to err in the
sophistication of their mind. Because by our handicraft knowledge, the
understanding is rectified by the force of experience, in respect of the sight,
and of a true mental Knowledge. Yea, our experiences stand over the head of the
phantestical or imaginative proofs of Conclusions, and therefore, neither do
they endure them: But they show that all other Sciences do livelily enter into
the understanding: From whence we afterward understand that thing within, what
it is, and of what sort it is. Because by such knowledge, the Intellect stands
uncloathed of superfluities and errors, which do ordinarily remove it from the
Truth, by reason of presumptions, and prejudiced or fore-judged things,
believed in the conclusions. For from hence it is, that our Philosophers or
followers, have directed themselves to enter through any kind of Science, into
all experience, by Art, according to the course of Nature in its Univocal or
single Principles. For Alchymie alone, is the Glass of true understanding; and
shows how to touch, and see the truths of those things in the clear Light.
Neither does it bring Logical arguments: because they are too remote and far
off from the clear Light. And therefore, the Smaragdine Table has it; By this
kind of demonstration, all obscurity will free from thee; and all the strong
fortitude of strength, which vanquisheth subtle things, and pierces all solid
things, will be attained by thee, Wherefore, I am called Hermes Trimegistus, as
having the three (that is, all the) parts of Philosophy, and the perfection of
the whole world. Thus he. Between praying therefore and knocking, a mean, in
naturals; namely, of seeking by the fire, is supposed.

I indeed hoped, by searching into the Contents of urine, visibly to know it;
no otherwise Duelech in a Glass: But the event answered not my attempt.

Again, my own urine was putrified anew in Horse-dung. That the unlike part
thereof Paracellus: and I found frequent Crystals therein, being yellow and of
a sharp top. The which, although they might be of conducement against the old
obstructions of Excrements; yet of none, against the affect of the Stone.

Thirdly, I mixed the spirit of my Urine, with Aqua vitae dephlegmed or
refined: and Aqua vitae. 2. That in coagulating, it had separated the sluggish
and watery part, which swum upon the aforesaid white lump, perhaps, no
otherwise, than as in coagulation of Duelech from the rest of the body of the
urine, and so, that it perfected its coagulation in the middle of the waters.
3. That the curdy Runnet or spirit of Urine, had undissolveably knit it self to
the spirit of Wine. 4. That it is not a perpetual truth (the which
notwithstanding, the Schools hand forth instead of a Chymicall Maxim) that
every sharp coagulating Body, did by the same endeavor dissolve its own
Compeere. 5. That the spirit of Urine had not coagulated it self in the Glass,
according to the powder of a beaten Duelech: but only, that it had mingled and
coagulated it self together with another thing; namely, with the spirit of
Wine. 6. That if therefore it had met with an earthly spirit, it had also
contracted wedlock with the same; so as that, of both spirits, it had made a
stony Body. 7. I likewise learned, after what manner the spirit of urine might
coagulate another spirit within the urine. 8. That such an association, is not
a certain naked co-mixture of parts; but an undissolvable wedlock of unity, a
certain substantial transmutation, a production of a new Being (by an Agent and
a Patient) into a neither Body. This experiment gave me an entrance, for a
diligent search into the Disease of the Stone.

Yet, I as yet remained wandering about. For after giving of thanks, I
transferred my self into Tartar of Wine, Soap, Borace, etc. are coagulated. 4.
And then, Muscilages being thickened by the wedlock of their seeds, and resolved
from their own Body, become Glews, Gums, Solder, etc. 5. But if a muscilage or
slimy juice carries a co-mixed fat with it, it is coagulated in both respects.
So are Aloes, a Chibal, Pitch, Rosin, Gum Ammoniacum, Frankincense, Myrrh,
Mastich, the Gum Opopanax, Sarcocolla, Assa, Elemi, etc. 6. Earth converting
into a salt or muscilage, if it be dried, is condensed and waxes hard. 7. A
mineral Salt that was bred in the earth, by burning, stonifies into stones,
shells or sheards, and earthen Pots. 8. The which, if they are urged by a
stronger degree of heat, they at length vitrifie or become Glass. 9. The watery
Leffas or planty juice of the Earth, by virtue of the seeds, is hatdened into
Woods, Herbs, etc. 10. So Water, by virtue of a seed is made a rocky stone. 11.
A muscilage being joined to a powder or dust, makes sand-stones: but with dust
and lime, it now dissembles diverse Marbles. 12. Whatsoever lime dissolved
comprehends or encloseth in it self, that thing coagulates with it; Because
there are in Lime, two salts, the lixivial Alcali salt, and the other, an acide
or sharp one; which two salts, while they demolish each other, are coagulated
together. 13. Metals, Fire-stones, Sulphurs, etc. do by virtue of their seeds,
obtain their own and proper coagulations. 14. Also, most things through an
inbred Glue, do voluntarily grow together; which afterward by drying, do
harden: As Blood, Cheese, the white of an Egg, Varnish, etc. 15. Glass is an
earthen stone, consisting of an Alcali salt; The which, while being fired, it
is dissolved, makes the sand, or powder of stone that is not calcinable, nor
otherwise capable of pouring abroad, to melt by corroding; and so they are both
together, turned into a transparent lump. Therefore, the Limestone, or rocky
stone, by reason of its sharp salt is unfit for Glass; because the lime thereof
destroys the Glassifying Alcali, and there is made a certain neutral thick or
dark Body.

Lime therefore, against the will of Galen, very much differs from ashes. To
wit, because Lixivium or lie, from it self; but the other contains a
sharpness that is not separable from the whole: Whereby it being at length
burnt by too much fire, is Glassified throughout its Lixivial part, being
unfit, for Building: According to Geber. Because all fixed Bodies are at length
Glassified with Glassifying things. Cheese also, as it is curdled by moderate
sharpness, so it is resolved with an eminent sharpness. Calx vive or
Quicklime: but not with the Alcali or Lixivial salt of Ashes. From all the
aforesaid particulars, I have collected, that the coagulation of Duelech is
singular and irregular. Lime also does by degrees stonifie in the middle of the
waters, as its aforesaid salts do coagulate each other. But the body of Man, as
it does not coagulate a rocky stone, so neither does it endure a Calx or
Limestone in the Bladder. For indeed that admirable Coagulum or Runnet,
always stuck before mine eyes, whereby more swiftly than in the twinkling of
an Eye, the spirit of urine had condensed the spirit of Wine into a lump.
Therefore I discerned that all other Coagulations had nothing common with
Duelech. Wherefore I determined to examine Spirits. Therefore first I distilled
Horse-pisse; But surely the spirit thereof wanted that Runnet. Wherefore I
noted with the highest admiration, the singularity of man's Urine.

Afterward, I observed that the spirit of Sulphurs, or of Salts, being sharp,
would with etc. And these Paracelsus rashly judges to be Tartars, or the
separated impurities of things over-covered with their own, and that an inward
Runnet: when as otherwise, they are nothing else, but the astonishment of two
mutual Agents: to wit, when both their strengths are spent.

Afterward, I long examined Salts, throughout every of their Analysis or
Re-solution: Sulphurs in Vegetables. Whose saltish tartnesses indeed, are fat
and sulphurous, neither readily reducible into a salt, unless by a tedious
inversion or turning in and out of the principles; which salts, being then, as
it were elixirated, do represent the etc. As neither Bodies coagulable, such as
are Milk and the venal blood: but it coagulates the spirit of Wine, or the like
thing which is entertained with it in the urine (for as was shown above: after
the fermenting of urine that urine contains, also a spirit of Wine, or Aqua
vitae) I desisted not seriously to enquire, after what manner, the stone is
coagulated in us, and in our urine.

1. First of all, it is an undoubted truth, that Duelech is not of a calcinous
or limy condition, Paracelsus may be carried on the contrary. 1. Because a
calcining degree of heat is wanting in us. 2. And then, because every Alcali,
is rather that which is destructive to a rocky stone, than a Coagulater
thereof. 3. Because a Calx or Lime presupposes a Chalky-stone, and therefore
Duelech should be calcined before it were a stone, 4. From the composing parts
of Duelech it shall by and by be made manifest, that it is not possible for
Lime to be in it; yea, nor that Duelech himself is calcined, or does send forth
a Lixivium or Lie. Likewise, neither is Duelech of the nature of a gowty Chalk:
because he grows together in the midst of the urine: but that Chalk is
coagulated from the Sunovia. But the Sunovie is a living seedy muscilage, which
degenerated in the journey of nourishment, and from a transparent and
Crystaline matter, has passed over into a thick, white, and slimy matter (as
of Gouty persons elsewhere) from a matter without savor, I say, it is
transplanted into a sharp one, though the tartness whereof indeed, it has
attained a thickness or grossness: For then also it is unfit for a total
diflation or transpirative dispersing of it self: To wit, whereby the
nourishable Liquor is wholly consumed without any remainder: But the Sunovie
being once infected with a tartness, its watery parts are pufft away; but the
gross remainder waxes dry by degrees, into the utmost dryth and hardness of a
Sand-stone. But Duelech attaines to the utmost hardness of it self in one only
instant of time. The Gouty Chalk therefore, differs from Duelech in its whole
matter and efficient cause. For therefore such a Chalk is hardened out of the
water, because indeed by drying. Neither for that cause does it imitate the
hardness of a rocky stone: but only of a sandy stone. I have spoken these
things to that end, that it may be manifested, that Duelech differs from any
other coaguted Bodies whatsoever, in its different kind of Agent and matter.
And seeing notwithstanding, I as yet knew not the manner or process of the
birth of Duelech; but I knew in the mean time, that Bodies do nor receive the
limitation of their hardening, but by the actions, appointments, and properties
of their own seeds.

Lastly, Since I knew, that whatsoever things do act corporally, are altogether
sluggish, Duelech: therefore I enquired into fermental savours and Odours, as
the Authors of many seeds. Therefore I found the savours and actions of Salts,
to be indeed famous ones: but not any thing reaching the virtue of the salt of
Urine.

And then also, I beheld the more weak or feeble Salts, which might follow the
Race of Sulphurs. But Mercury, although it alone according to Paracelsus, did
contain the Sulphurs from their Mercuries, I admired at their sluggishnesse,
and indeed at the dignities of these two Principles. Wherefore, I stuck in
Salts, for the searching out of the nativity of Duelech. I confess indeed, that
Mercury being a flowing metal, in its nature and properties, is never
sufficiently known. But that body has deceived Paracelsus through a similitude
of proportion: he thinking, because his Device had pleased him, because he had
endowed the watery matter of things with the name of Mercury; that therefore
the properties of Quicksilver, and its natures, without a peer, being never
to be sufficiently searched into, did agree as suitable to all Liquors which may
be drawn out of Simples. For all the Philosophers of former Ages, confess, that
nothing in the Universe, is not so much as by far, to be likened to Argent
Vive: Yet it has not been hitherto sufficiently unfolded, that Argent-Vive or
Quicksilver is a Simple, actually existing body: but not a constitutive part
of things: And so, that there has been nothing but a mere abusive passing over
of a Name. For this cause, I as yet persuaded my self, that seeing a
non-Duelech was made of Duelech, that ought to be done by the action of an
Agent on a disposed matter. And although I knew these and many the like things:
yet I discerned, that I therefore, knew nothing the more. Wherefore I as yet
more detested a wording or discursive Philosophy: because it was that, which
stayed me before the Threshold of Nature, and together with it self my
Conductress, I was shut out of doors. I again returned to my self, and after a
homely manner I considered, that Duelech was not bred but out of the principles
of the Urine: and since I knew the urine to be salt, I again had recourse to
the varieties of Salts.

And I stood amazed, that the use of Salt should every where be forbidden, as
well by Schools as by Physicians, to those that have the stone. Yet I
discerned, that the foundation of that prohibition was unknown amongst them.
Especially, because the use of Sea Salt, though much and often, never from real
experience, hurt any one that had the stone: But rather, I have exactly noted
that many, who by the plentiful use of salt, have cut off the relapse of a new
and growing stone from them. For I had seen the Rocks, as also the rocky stones
of the Sea to be gnawn or wasted in the Haven. In the mean time it had always
a recourse unto my mind with admiration, that the spirit of Urine had at one
instant, coagulated the spirit of Wine, together with a separation of its
watery part. Therefore I consulted first, to anatomize the salt of urine unto
the utmost veins thereof. Turnheisser does variously triflle at pleasure, of
as many species of Salts found by him in Urine, as there are, almost, of
Simples in the Universe: He being willing, that Microcosme or little World: but
also, that his urine should rejoice in the same prerogative. For on this
distillatory Vessel, he according to his own boldness, distinguishes it into
24 parts, and marks it outwardly with his Lines, and divides the body of man
into as many soyles. At length, he will have it, that the vapors lifted up from
the urine in distilling, ought to strike especially, the Region of the Glass,
and in that part, to grow together into drops, whereby, the business of a
Disease in man, whose urine it is, is finished. He likewise feigneth as many
diversities of vapors to arise out of the urine as there can be diversities of
a disease on the whole body: That we may thereby visibly, perfectly learn, not
only the places affected: but the diseasie matter; for as he thus excuses his
urine Inspections, suspected of the wickedness and vanity of Magic; he has
busied himself by his water-divining distillatories, to deceive the World. That
is, in sportings, he would seem to be altogether serious: but I have never
distilled that I might befool others, with my self. The unprofitable invention
therefore, of Turnehisser, is at least of a trifling value: if not also
wickedly introduced into Medicine.

Therefore in the lee of my urine, I distinguished of two salts: one indeed a
Sea-ee

1. If for some days there shall be no use or need of any Sea-ee-salt; yet the
urine fails

Furthermore, the fixed salt of urine distinguishes it self from the Volatile
salt thereof. Chrysulca dissolving the whole and homogeneal metal, therefore
made totally alike volatile. And this diversity does not break forth from
essential properties; but by reason of a partic pation of the properties of the
middle life of things.

Neither finally, is that ferment of the stomach, a naked sharpness or
sowrness; but a etc. In the next place, it reduces bones in the stomach of a
Dog, unto Chyle, that blood may again from thence be made.

The two aforesaid Salts therefore, are the more fixed. But one is exceeding
volatile in urine; but an Alcali, or any thing like to a Lixivium ot Lie, never
appeared unto me

For I have seen a Countryman, who cured great Wounds, with the drink of a
Lixivium prepared out of the Teile-tree: Yet the urine of those so cured showed
nothing at all of a Lixivium. Therefore have I taught elsewhere, that every
Alcali lixivial, is made by a dissolvative expression of the fire; Neither that
it was before in the composed Bodies.

But if indeed any volatile spirit does show forth the property of an Alcali;
(such as is the vulnerary matter of any Herbs whatsoever) that indeed is
abstersive or cleansing, and Alcali in the urine, I have held it an error, to
give an Alcali to drink for breaking of the Stone; seeing it cannot reach to
the places of the urine. For neither does the Ludus of Paracelsus or his
Medicine for dissolving of the stone, prepare a Lixivium: but a bitter salt of
a sharp one. Wherefore he calls his Ludus, the Gall of the Earth. For it is a
flinty stone, yet the etc. through an Alcali being joined unto them, are
glassified: but if they are boiled with the more Alcali, they are indeed
resolved into moisture: and being resolved, they by an easy labor of their
acide spirits, are separated from the Alcali, in the weight of their former
powder of stones. But these never come to the urine; as neither are they
profitable for breaking of the stone. But Rocky or Chalky stones which have an
inflamed Sulphur in them, are calcined indeed, but are not easily made Glass;
for that the residing and sharp salt of the Sulphur, consumes the Glassifying
Alcali. Metals also, by reason of the every way and unconquered simplicity of
their Mercury, and unpossible penetration, either as being unchanged, they
delude the work of the fire, or wholly fly away: yet so, as that although they
fly away in manner of a smoke: yet that fume may be reduced into the nature of
its ancient Metal, Wherefore Metals never yielded any Alcali: and much less,
do they reach unto the Innes of the urine. But Fire-stones, though they have a
burnable sulphur, which is a devourer of Alcalies: yet their mercuries do
resist; whereby they the less come down unto the Innes of the urine. The blood
also, although it has an admirable salt for healing, as well fugitive as
fixed: yet I have observed it not to be profitable in the Disease of the Stone:
But moreover, the shells of Snailes, of Animals of the Earth, or of
shell-fishes of the water, as to that part wherein they carry an acide and
Limy-salt, they profit indeed, persons having the stone, that want cleansing;
but they contain a resistance in respect of their Lixivium, to wit, as they
never reach to the urine. The burnt bones of living Creatures, retain no fixed
salt in them: but only a residing Earth without savor. It is therefore a part
of notable Blockishnesse, for Ivory and Hartshorn to be calcined for Quiners
do freely promise for me. For truly their Prooving-pots (which they call
Cap^lls) ought to consist of ashes, deprived of all salt: Wherefore those are
the best that are made of the ashes of Bones, and do far excel those that
consist of Ivory, and Hartshorn.

For indeed, in my first years, the Traditions of the Schools, were as so
many Oracles Schools were blotted out with the fire. They had persuaded me
(amongst other things) that the salt of the Sea was hurtful for those that
were diseased with the Stone; as well in regard, that it afforded matter for
the salt of urine; as that, it hurryed down a muckie phlegm for Duelech. The
examination of salt by the fire, taught me otherwise. First of all, I preserved
a man of sixty years old (belonging to my Distillations) sixteen years free
from the stone of the Kidneys (whereunto otherwise, he had been subject)
through a large use of Sea Salt. The which, afterward, I confirmed in many.
For the Schools, when they saw, that in the sharp brine of salt being cooled,
every salt was coagulated after its own manner; and that, that brine was not
made pure without mixture, but by an exhalation of the watery part: they
presently thought, that the stone was coagulated from a salt and drying heat:
and so they supposed, that indeed neither were salts corned in the said brine,
but by the heat of the inbred salt: the which therefore is not able to unfold
it self into effect, as long as there is very much water present with it.
Therefore when they tasted their own snivel to be salt: and that indeed, with
the savor of a Sea Salt, but not with the saltness of Urine: and they would
connex the efficient cause in the matter; they supposed that in the same
snivel, there was a slimy and tough matter joined to the salt: and that, the
salt also, was of it self salt: at length they establishd by a perpetual
Decree, that the stone was generated from a salt phlegm, and therefore also
being actually hot: and by consequence, that salt things were hurtful for
those that were troubled with the stone. Yea and that phlegm remaining such,
its qualities and proper passions being changed, did pass over into a stone,
through heat and a slimy dryth; just even as Glue and solder, their watery part
by degrees departing, do induce a thick toughness of themselves. Good God, how
unsavory are the Schools, and how unsavory do they bid us to be? as if thou
that do every where bear a care over Mortals, and art provident for salts;
had invented by thy study, that they might become stony. How great is their
sluggishnesse: that they have never attempted to sprinkle one only pugill or
small handful of salt upon the Urinal of those that have the stone, that they
might try whether Sea Salt would coagulate the future sands, which otherwise
would stick fast to the urinals; Whether I say, there be so great a saltness
of the urine, that it cannot dissolve any more of salt in it. For the Urine, if
it be for the dissolving of salt: now that salt shall not be the cause of
Corning. In the next place, they had easily found, that Sea Salt being cast
into the urine, does hinder its coagulation; but not likewise cause it. That
Sea Salt, Isay, does resolve the prepared matter of the Coagulum or Runnet, and
does not it self receive a curdling. But whatsoever meditates on the
destruction of that Runnet, shall of necessity also disturb the coagulation
proceeding from thence. For as the Schools do deride our Coagulum's in things:
so likewise I deride their unsavory Follies; that they think the pebble-stone
or flint to grow together, or wax dry in the bottom of the water, through heat.
For Fountains and Rivers do contend for a stony curdling, whose bottom
hisseth out heat and the Rules of dryth.

In the next place, for the curdling of Liquors, our flesh, and likewise the
blood; milk, and snivel promises: For if it were supposed, that phlegm be the
matter [whereof] of the stone, and that the recocted brine of salt, shaved off,
and with it self dissolved the mucky filths of salted fleshes: and at length by
boiling up, rejected them being thickened, into a froth; verily they had known
that the use of Salt is in no wise to be avoided or forbidden. But so great a
sluggishnesse of searching, has beset the Schools, that they being content
with a little infamous Gain, have neglected all things where they might profit
their Neighbor, if not also themselves. For if the stone were dissolved in the
urine, although being boiled therein, or that, urine were not for dissolving of
salt cast into it: they might indeed (at the sight of that) have wholly
banished salt out of the use of men. But the common people deride the Schools,
and the use of Salt has grown frequent, in despite of their Rules: So that
the Authority of the Schools being despised, Food is not only unpleasant, but
also unwholesome, without salt: But if the seasoning of salt smile on the
Palate; that is not any otherwise favored, than as salt resolves the
Excrements which burden the stomach with their muckinesse. For if salt be put
into the mouth of those that are Catechized or instructed in the Principles of
Religion, in the first hours of their Nativity, as a resembling token of
Wisdom; But the Schools have with much endeavor, forbidden all eating of
salt; Truly what other thing is to be presaged from thence, but that the
Heathenish Schools do not admit of Wisdom; to wit, the resembling Mark
whereof they advise to be excluded? And that the Church does from the
Beginning, intend the destruction of Infants? For salt is sequestered out of
Jakes's, by the Boylers of Saltpeter; such as was once received into the Body
together with the meats. Therefore it ought likewise, to remain in Duelech it
self. But there is not so much as the least of Sea Salt, found to proceed from
Duelech by Art. And that thing the Schools might have learned with no charge,
if any earnest desire of learning, and Charity toward their Neighbor had
acted them. At leastwise, the Boylers of Saltpeter have been more curious or
careful than so many ten thousands of Physicians. The reproach therefore
re-bounds on themselves, as every one of the vulgar sort, does now know, how
unpolished the Decrees of the Schools are: Since they know not in the Dietary
part of Medicine, to what end they forbid salted things. Nor indeed, had it
been to be feared, if not salt it self, but only the spirit thereof should
hurt the Diseased with the stone. 1. Because salt is forbidden Schools; Ages
and the Schools being hitherto ignorant, whether there be any spirit to be
found in salt, or of what condition it might be, 2. That power in acting, is in
vain, which is never brought forth into act. For it is sufficiently manifest,
that out of Sea Salt received into the Body, there is never any possible
drawing forth of its spirit in us. For it is most sharp, neither has it a
Remedy like unto it self, for extinguishing of the burning heats of the urine,
even while the stone is present in the Bladder; also, in the Stranguries of old
people, it hinders putrefactions, dissolveth mucky filths, and expels sands.
Therefore salt is profitable for those that have the stone, as well in its
body, as in its spirit. For indeed, Fountain-salt, was given by the providence
of divine Bounty, for the necessities of mortal men: That where the Continent
departs from the Sea, by a long Tract of Land, saltish Springs or Fountains
might supply that defect of the Sea. But the Schools are so far from repaying
thanks to God for his Benefit; that they accuse God to have given salt, not
only in vain, but also for the destruction of men: It is to be noted in the
mean time, that salt flows down into the Sea from many and plentiful
Fountains; yet that the saltness of the Sea is not increased thereby; because
something of salt ascends by degrees from the Sea, in manner of a vapor: and
however it may be converted into its first matter of water, at leastwise in the
Clouds it has some kind of constancy or perseverance in it. From whence, it is
no wonder, that Rainwater by it self, is not to be corrupted in any Ages. But
in the more hot Zone, that salt does exhale even out of the Sea, is manifest:
for there is none but smells out whether fleshes are boiled in a pot, with
salt, or without it. But the Sea Salt, seeing it makes for the preservation of
the Element, does difficultly exhale.

Therefore the Spanish Sea well nigh wants a vapoury salt, is stronger, and the
more Duelech. On the contrary, the Seas of Lorraine, abound with a vapoury
salt, and it in part, waxes sower in the stomach. Also, that vapoury spirit of
salt (which is sublimed, being as it were the flower of salt) differs from the
distilled spirit of salt; just even as Oil of Olives does from Oil of Bricks.
For the spirit of Oil of Olives which departs in its first moity, with me does
at length dissolve a silver thread in a Bottle: But Oil of Olives preserves Iron
from rust. And far more powerfully, does that remaind of Oil, from whence the
aforesaid half or moity was withdrawn, preserve (...) rustinesse. Therefore it
is to be noted, that there is not a more pure and (...), than that which is
re-cocted or re-boyled from the brine of Swines-flesh. For (...) seasoning, or
operating on the Swines-flesh its object, it lost its more vapoury spirit by
coagulation. And so the residing salt being almost fixed and freed from its
earthlinesse, is found to be clear and most fit for Sawces. It being also cast
into an Hogshead of sowring Ale or Beer, preserves the same, which other salt
does not so do. Wherefore it drinks up into its self, and transchangeth the
superfluous sharp spirits in us, which are the Authors of all Corruption, if
they shall be out of the shops of the first digestion. It being thus re-boyled
with Spanish-salt, it is almost equal in goodness, with that which was at
first dissolved in the bright burning-pot: Since therefore Sea Salt is not of
the composition of urine, but is wholly a forreigner unto it, and so remains:
yea, since Sea Salt being detained in the urine, keeps its nature unmixed and
unchanged, even until the last extraction of things, and separation of the
Saltpeter; it is certain, that it has not any business with Duelech. And
therefore, that neither is the least of Sea Salt ever found in the composition
hereof; seeing it more destroys the native birth of Duelech, than it does
promote it. Therefore Sea Salt is forbidden by the Schools unto those that
have the stone without a foundation. Thus much of Salts.

But I had hitherto learned, that Duelech was an irregular coagulated matter,
bred from the salt of Urine, which had not its peer in the whole Universe: for
that Man's urine is never found, out of man; For therefore it irked me not, many
times to distill Urine.

Therefore I decreed to putrify my own urine for full 40 days in a Horses
belly, that by a Pentecost, I ceased from it for fifteen days. But the Vessel
receiving it, was exceeding great, clear, Crystalline, and precious: the which
I had now sequestered from the long snout of an Alembick, all that interval of
time: when as therefore I returned to the Work; first I powered forth that which
had been distilled, into another Bottle: because I saw that the distilled
Liquor of the Urine had on every side touched the receiving Vessel (otherwise
easily capable of containing three Gallons) it being over-covered with a
duskish whiteness. I was grieved that a Glass so precious, was stained about
so sordid a matter. And then I was the more angry, when I saw that the blemish
contracted was not to be taken away by any ashes. For it repented me of my
wastfull, and so often repeated curiosity. Therefore I powered that that was
distilled, out of doors. But presently I had this prick of sloth and unwonted
indignation, suspected by me. I admired within my self, that man who before
spared no pains and Costs, should now be wroth at the destruction of one
Vessel. Therefore I well weighed with my self, that receiving Vessel, whether
its blemish were of a foreign tincture, or whether any thing had perished from
its concavous superficies being corroded. At length, I certainly knew, that out
of the most clear watery distillation,, a true dusky Duelech was adjoined to
the Vessel. But then, I being full of admiration, praised the Lord, who had
undertook the care of me: for those things which I judged I had committed
through my own carelessness, I knew had come to pass by divine Goodness so
disposing it. For unto whom he will, he converts all things into good. Indeed,
I had already long since beheld in my urine, a Coagulater of so great a moment,
to inhabit. And now at length, I had also learned; that that most clear Liquor
that was separated from the urine, putrified in the Vat, did contain a true
Duelech, which it had applied to the receiving Vessel. From whence, first of
all, it became an undoubted truth unto me, that there did in no wise concur a
slimy matter unto the Composition of Duelech. That Vessel therefore, although
precious, and now condemned for its blemish, was dear unto me, because it had
paid a Reward of Teaching to its Master. Therefore I again put it in the place
of a Receiver, as thinking, that I should at sometime shave of that Duelech by
Aqua Regis. Therefore I proceeded in distilling the residue that had remained
unto me after the fifteen days respite. And behold, I being astonished through
a new favor of divine Bounty, saw all the particular drops to dissolve the
adhering duskish Duelech, where they ran down, and the Vessel presently
restored to its former brightness. Also, that this second Liquor, although it
had the odor of the former, yet being poured on Aqua vitae, did not likewise,
coagulate this any longer. And so I being led by a divine beck (which others
suppose to be an Event by Chance) found part of that, which with care or
anguish I had long since sought with many charges, Therefore I praised the
Lord, that he had given understanding to the little one and poor. For if he had
not commanded me to be called away from my work; and if those Feasts had not
detained me until Duelech had grown together in the Receiver, and unless the
Vessel had been so clear and precious; And moreover, if I had finished the
operation with one thread: Surely I had wrought and attempted all things in
vain. The Lord therefore had respect unto the necessities of mortals; neither
despised he the prayers of the dejected in spirit. Wherefore, he gave me
knowledge of the diverse parts of a healthy Urine: that is, my own. One indeed
was after some sort the lighter and more swift, part having Duelech hidden
under a clear distillatory Liquor, without a dreg, snivel, and sediment; But in
a most clear distillation, and cold of the encompassing Air. But the other
part, was alike admirable, which in cold also, again dissolved Duelech that
took its rise in cold, and supt it up into its self. For I seriously admired so
opposite faculties in one only volatile salt of urine: afterward indeed, I
considered, that whose urine had more of the former spirit, he was subject to
the stone: and the other was free, whose urine contained more of the other
spirit; and that first conception smiled on me: but that discursive knowledge
was vain, and especially unprofitable for the managing of Affairs: For truly,
the urine does not undergo in us those foregoing marks of putrefaction;
without which notwithstanding, those Beings would sleep for ever. And then,
neither was there a mean made manifest from that Speculation, whereby more of
that latter spirit should always be made, or by what method a composure of the
former spirit might be restrained. And much less, after what manner, Duelech
being now composed, there might be given a relief against him. Notwithstanding,
least that Speculation should depart without fruit; I considered, whether that
latter spirit (the Urine being first evacuated) might be granted to be cast
into a stony Bladder, by a Syringe. Therefore the knowledge of mortals offers
it self to me as barren; which rejoicing in Speculation alone, withdrawes their
hand from the Art of the fire. For urine being duly putrified, yields spirit a
Coagulater, which coagulates Aqua vitae: And likewise afterward such a spirit,
which being wholly transparent and volatile, contains a Duelech [potential] or
in possibility, because it brings him forth, and at length such a spirit, which
presently sups up Duelech (being once bred) into it self: Notwithstanding, the
Devil straightway dissuading me, I as doubtful, began to stagger, and
considered, that those things were vain, which being found by me, I so greatly
esteemed. Especially, seeing the urine putrifies not in us unto that limit or
degree, whereby it had afforded these spirits. Therefore I detested my own
Curiosities: For although they after some sort suggested a Remedy, yet they
left the former ignorance behind them, concerning the causes and manner of
making Duelech. Wherefore I began to neglect all things lately seen, as if they
had not been done, and I left a sleepy drowsinesse to be stirred up in me; From
whence I was confirmed (the which, I have explained in many particulars in my
Preface) that no labor is more tedious or wearisome, and no kind of knowledge
(through the disswasion of the Devil) more to be disregarded, than that, from
whence mankind may at sometime receive fruit. Therefore it becomes a Christian,
to be of a constant mind in a good work.

At length therefore, my distillations being repeated, and that with a more
exact delay, I by prayer attained the causes, manner of making, and dissolving
of Duelech. Good God, I admire thy great Bounty, which has led the most unmeet
of Physicians unto the disclosing of so great a thing, which has been
neglected for so many Ages, and by so many great Wits. I therefore return
thanks unto thy infinitely Glorious Name; not because thou have led me on unto
these Secrets before others (for can the Earth boast it self, and say to the
other small Vessels [Vah] or [Fie] as a note of disdaining? because it is
brought under the Potters-Wheel, into a Vessel of a more choice form?) But
because thou have done thy will, which alone is good: I therefore ascribe unto
thee all the Glory, who have in this Age, disclosed this knowledge by the
basest and little Ones of this World: For that is according to thy accustomed
manner; and that, for the greater Glory of thy Name. For I knew, that the one
only sluggishnesse of those, who being deceived by the sweetness of the Odor
of Gain, have despised to distill a matter so stinking and base, has hindered
both the Ancient and Modern Physicians. For Wisdom despises those, who have
refused perfectly to learn the matter [whereof] Dispositions, Contents,
Properties, Progress, and Significations of the Urine, by the Fire. For neither
have they less stumbled in the matter, Content, and Judgments of Urines, than
Vronoscopia or Inspection of the Urine: the which, I heartily wish, that the
more fervent Judgments would hereafter practice. For truly, I prepare my self
for my Grave, under hope, that my Labors will not be unprofitable for humane
miseries.

I will now proceed to reckon up my blockishnesses, and the wearinesses of
experiences. For first of all, from Duelech being dissected, and distilled all
alone by himself: Ecligma or Lohoch, altogether the same Oil, and the same
Crystals of liquid dung do arise: For from Duelech there is left an earthy Lee,
being black, brickle, and burnt, no longer rocky, and scarce reserving any
thing of the more fixed salt of urine: Because the volatile Spirit is wholly
throughout its whole, changed into Duelech, and at length into an earth, with
other parts of the composition being adjoined unto it. Verily, for a sure
sign, that the fixed salt of Urine has not the faculty of an active Runnet:
but is only coagulated passively.

Furthermore, That earth that was left of the distilled Duelech, never lately
descended Duelech; and by consequence, that the invention of Tartar for Duelech
was also vain: For truly, I had already beheld in the Glass, that Duelech was
made of the same spirits (to wit, distilled and clear Liquors) matter, and
efficient cause whereof it arises in us. Therefore I concluded from my proofs
now mechanically made; That if the urine, together with its spirit of salt,
has in it the spirit of a volatile Earth, Duelech shall of necessity be
generated from those two, unless by the Book of Fevers, I call the liquid
Dung) the salt of the urine be filled or glutted; and for that cause, be
disturbed from coagulating: For I have often observed, that any one that had
the stone, being afterward afflicted with the Jaundice, has been free from
the stone as long as the Jaundice bare sway.

And so, Neither has it been undeservedly asserted by me in the Treatise of
Fevers;

Therefore it is fabulous, whatsoever the Schools do devise concerning the
stone, Duelech. I have also, said above, that unless the sand which is affixed
to the Urinal or Chamberpot, were coagulated in an instant, it had wholly
fallen headlong to the bottom, neither would it be fastened to the sides, and
so proportionably distinct.

An heretical Preacher nigh Barclay, in England, being safe and sound in
health, London under the Knife of the Stone-Cutter. But that stone weighed an
English pound, and two drammes beside: Neither do I remember, that ever I saw
the like stone: But an hundred pounds at Antwerp weigh at London 104.

But Paracelsus admiring this appearance of the stone, least a fiction should
be wanting to his Microcosm, calls it the stone of Thunder, and thinks that it
grew together Duelech cannot be formed out of the urine, or without urine, that
it should be made without matter, and fall downwards into the urine, that it
may be made in falling. 2. He erres, believing that the stone which is cast
down in Thunder, is generated by ordinary and wonted Causes: but not by
monstrous ones. Otherwise, if the matter that is natural to Thunder, should be
naturally coagulated in an instant, such stones ought to be accustomed to all
particular Thunders. Neither should there be a Cause, why a small stone of
about three pound weight, should pierce into the earth unto the depth of nine
foot, by its only and naked fall: unless it were thrust down with a stronger
force, even as concerning an irregular Meteor elsewhere. 3. In the next place,
Duelech bewraying it self by a sudden Tyranny, proves that its generation is
in a moment; For nothing hinders, but that he adhered to the Bladder with his
foot, and that being broken off through the steepness of his passage; he fell
down into the wideness of the Bladder. 4. Whatsoever is at any time condensed
into a true Duelech, whether it be a Central Kernel descending from the Kidney;
or in the next place, growing in manner of a Bark; every Generation thereof, is
always made in an instant. For indeed, I have learned by my Mechanical
Operations, Duelech, and what quantity there is in him, is wholly constituted
of mere volatile Beings: yet, not that of a urine of three or four ounces (of
which quantity that of him that made water might be) a Duelech of one pound
could be generated.

Moreover, although I knew man's urine to be only in our species: and that the
spirit of man's urine alone was in the possession of man; Yet I examined
Horse-pisse, in the name of the bigger Cattle; as being careful, whether
perhaps, there might not be another like coagulating spirit, which by reason of
Impediments co-bred with it, could not every where obtain the command of
coagulating. But however I labored, I found not that spirit the Coagulater in
Horse-pisse; As neither the spirit of a ferment, or of Aqua vitae.

Therefore I found a potential Aqua vitae intimate with man's urine, and that a
pliable one, between that spirit the Coagulater, and the putrified spirit the
Receiver Runnet or Coagulum. And it is chiefly to be noted, that the spirit of
urine does not coagulate, but by the Wedlock of Aqua vitae: the which I have
often approved by distilling. There are therefore, three things in the urine of
man, which must of necessity concur: and by so much the more powerfully, by how
much every person troubled with the stone, does now bear no light or small
principle of corruption in his urine (as presently in its place) from whence
indeed, a ferment is swiftly stirred up in the urine for the aforesaid Aqua
vitae that is capable of Coagulation. For neither does it withstand these
things, that as well the spirit of Life, as the Aqua vitae it self, are
exceeding swift of flight, and so, scarce fit for the stubbornness of Duelech:
for it is certain, that the spirit of Vitriol, does most swiftly fly from its
volatile Companion, yea and that it is presently fixed by the swift Sal
Armoniack: So that it undergoes a fusion or liquidnesse of substance: whereby
our followers being perfectly instructed, do presently cease to wonder; which
things, otherwise, affect the ignorant with amazement.

CHAP. IV. A process of Duelech.
1. The manner of making Duelech. 2. It is a singular Being, nor having its
like. 3. A mechanic or handicraft Operation of the Fountains of the Spaw. 4.
Oker in the Fountains of the Spaw, might have scared Paracelsus from his
device of Tartar. 5. A dissection in the actions of Spirits. 6. The Fire-water,
that has not an homogeneal Being like unto its self. 7. The difference of the
aforesaid dissolving liquor with all others of the whole Universe. 8. Some Oil
of Gold is of a Pomegranate or light-red color. 10. What the generation of
Duelech may bespeak. 11. The action of Bodies on Bodies, of what sort it is.
12. The Doctrine concerning the action of Bodies and Spirits. 13. The
participations of faculties out of metals without a metalick matter. 14. The
delusion of the Alchymist. 15. Diseases are appointed for a punishment and
Reward. 16. Some exercises, beginning from salts. 17. The spirit of salt is
made earthly. 18. A trivial Question. 19. The device of frosty Tartar. 20. From
whence the Strangury of old people is. 21. Four remarkable things issuing from
thence. 22. A second Question. 23. A third. 24. A fourth. 25. Catarrhs or
defluxions of the Bladder, are ridiculous. 26. A fifth Question. 27. A sixth.
28. Astrologers are taken notice of. 29. Paracelsus is noted, like as also
Galen. 30. The solving of a question proposed. 31. The heedlessnesse or
rashness of Galen.

THe spirit of the Urine laying hold of the volatile earth that was procreated
by a seed, [Potentia] or possibility: by the which, as it were, by two Sexes
concurring, the certain aforesaid earthly spirit, drinks in the one only
aforesaid Coagulater; by reason of which reciprocation or mutual return, a most
through connection of them both arises in acting: because they conjoyn in manner
of spirits, throughout their very least parts: And so the Coagulater does at
one instant, coagulate Duelech; surely, a Monster, this new something
coagulated in the middle of the urine; Nor therefore capable of being again
resolved into water. For it is a rocky Animal Being, like unto no other, and
the which therefore, Paracelsus names Duelech: And that Being, will the more
easily enter into Spaw present unto us. For they have a sulphurous spirit,
manifestly tart (from whence they are called the sharp Fountains) and also a
vein of Iron. For both being of an imperfect and immature shape, are contained
as dissolved, in the simple water. Therefore they both begin mutually to join
their reciprocal forces against each other: And at length, when as their
strength being tired, they have desisted from their action, they are condensed
into a stony body, which affixeth it self to bottles in the form of Oker: and
so the water returns into its ancient Element, as uncloathed of every strange
quality. Which Sharpish Fountains, if Paracelsus had sufficiently contemplated
of, or he had neglected the history of the Tartar of Wine, borrowed from
Basilius Valentine; for he had known that there is not the like birth of Oker
and of Tartar of Wine. At leastwise, he might have been with the more
difficulty convinced: Because Tartar is resolved into water; but Oker is not,
as neither is the stone: For neither have I ever attempted to deny, that solid
bodies are constituted of Liquors: But I refuse tartarous liquors, they being
forcibly brought into the Causes of Diseases (as in the Treatise concerning
Tartars) but on the contrary, I have reverently admired the activities of
spirits on spirits. Truly, since Oker grows out of the waters of the Spaw; or
since a stony crust is spread over bottles throughout their whole hollownesse;
let it first of all be wickedness to give the water of the Spaw to drink; if
we believe that Tartars are made just as Oker is in the Spaw-water: That is, if
we believe, that there is Tartar in the water of the Spaw, which is presently
to be coagulated in the Drinker, he commits wickedness, who gives the
Spaw-water to drink. For while the acide or tart salt of Wine corroded the Lee:
that salt indeed, which Tartar of Wine: Yea, before that it be fully
coagulated, it affixeth it self to the Vessel. For in the Generation of Tartar
of Wine, the spirit acts on a body; and there is altogether a far different
action, while two spirits act on each other: For in this action (even as in the
water of the Spaw, in Duelech, etc.) a new and neutral Being is constituted,
such as is Oker, of the spirit of Sulphur, and the volatile vein of Iron: But
in the Tartar of Wine, only the tart spirit, or sour liquor of the Wine, is
changed into a Salt, and the Lee remains such as it was before: And therefore
the matter constituted thereby, is again dissolvable. For a metal, stone or
solid Body is not unbodyed, changed or volatilized, by reason of the corroding
of spirits: That is manifest: For Silver, Pearls, Cor^als, Spongy-stones,
Crabstones, Snails-stones, etc. although, by Aqua fortis, (and other sharp
Liquors, they vanish out of our fight; yet they are stones, as before even as
concerning Fevers) indeed the spirit did what it could: but it operated as it
wore in vain upon the body, while in corroding that body, it coagulated it self.

For indeed, there is in the whole nature of the Universe, one only fire, the
burning Vulcan; Adeptists have known, and will testify: but in all other
faculties of Liquors, a body can never radically co-mingle it self with the
solving Liquor: And therefore it is corroded Paracelsus bad timely of fitly
contemplated, instead of his Tartar of Wine he had taken the Oker of the water
of the Spaw, and had spoken something more probable, than that there were
Liquors in all things, which were coagulated after the manner of Tartar in
Wine; and that they were the common mother and matter of any Diseases
whatsoever. Oker indeed, the daughter of the Spaw, is not again resolved, like
as Tartar of Wine is: and yet it differs from Duelech, as much as a Mineral
stonifying, does from the stone in man. For in this, the Spirit the Coagulater
existing in the urine, operates by virtue of its own and of a different salt,
upon a hoary and putrefying spirit of earth, without the boiling up, or
belching forth of a wild Gas: and so, it finisheth its operation, and
coagulates it self with the spirit of Wine that is proper to the urine, in a
moment, even as I have above declared in the handicraft Operation of the spirit
of urine, and Wine, or of a burning water. But the acide spirit of the water of
the Spaw, having sprung up from an Embryonated or non-shaped Sulphur, do
operate, first in a long Tract, do stir up bubbles, and a wild Gas, and at
length affix themselves to the Vessel. For otherwise, if that Gas cannot be
belched forth, the waters of the Spaw remain safe, being fit for healing. For
if the Gas be hindered from going forth, it hinders, whereby the subsequent
effect cannot follow, and the spirits are rendered feeble and barren in acting.
But the lee of Wine, seeing it has its own coagulation, and that which is
proper to it self, it has no need to attain it from elsewhere: But since the
sharpish spirit of Wine has gnawn the lee, there is no reason that it should
give that in gnawing, which it self has not in it self. Therefore in the
generation of the Tartar of Wine, that sharpish, saltish spirit, shall be
coagulated indeed, by reason of the earth of dreg: but it shall remain in the
shape of a dissolvable salt, and not in the form of a rocky stone; By reason of
that Rule; that a transmutation of the essence presupposes a transmutation of
the matter. Therefore the earthy body, whether it be dissolved by a Corrosive,
or not, keeps its own ancient Being: Because, that Dissolver does not pierce
the matter dissolved, in the radical bond of connection: The which
notwithstanding, in things that are essentially to be transchanged, is
exceeding necessary to be done. Therefore let the young beginners in Chemistry
learn, that bodies are not resolved by the calcinations of Corrosives, although
they are also, often repeated; unless a fermental impression through
putrefaction, whichgoes before every radical dissolution, does interpose.
Camphor indeed, in Aqua fortis, assumeth the nature of a swimming Oil: but that
Corrosive being washed away by common water, the Camphor is presently what it
was before, whether that be once done, or lastly, a thousand times.

For in my young beginnings, I rejoiced, that by a Retort, at the seventh
Repetition, I had dispatched Gold into the shape of a Pomegranate-coloured
Oil; As being mindful,

The generation of Duelech therefore, is not the imaginary stonifying of a
cocted muscilage, Duelech) but there is a passing over of three spirits at
once, into Duelech, by a true and essential transmutation.

Truly, Bodies do not act on Bodies by a natural action of Composition; but
whatsoever Bodies do perform on each other, that is done by reason of weight,
greatness or

Lastly, that Bodies do operate nothing on Spirits, but do only limit these by
suffering: Which operation of Bodies therefore, is not a true re-acting: but
father a meet effect of spirits, resulting from the proper activity of the
same. For therefore, Spirits, when their faculties are woren out and exhausted,
do voluntarily decay in the end of their motion. And although that action of
spirits be made with the suffering and loss of their own powers; yet they do
not therefore, transchange Bodies into their own nature; For they only gnaw
them, and grind them into powder: the which also, they interpret to be a
calcining by water.

By way of example, join thou a pound of Crocus martis, to a sixfold quantity
of Oil of Vitriol, then distill thou whatsoever shall be watery: Thou shall
find the Vitriol of Mars: Take from thence the Iron, and thou have the Vitriol
of Iron. A Salt I say, like Vitriol, whose taste is of Iron; Yet retaining
nothing of the Mars or Iron: For thou have a limitation from the Mars, as to
its efficacy, but not in respect of its matter: And the former spirit of
Vitriol, or Oil of the vitriol of Copper, shall be fixed into a certain salt,
only by the odor of the Iron. Again, Take the same and more clear example.
Conjoyn thou a pound of running Mercury or Quicksilver unto a four fold
quantity of Oil of Vitriol; Take away its phlegm by distilling, and a white
precipitate shall remain in the bottom like snow: Likewise, If thou shall pour
on it more Oil than is meet, the Mercury will unsensibly surmount, together
with the Oil. Furthermore, If by a Liver, thou shall take away the tartness
from the aforesaid snow, there will be a powder of a Citron color in the
bottom; which being revived or unto Life recovered, shall be of equal weight
with the former Mercury: But the water, which in washing off the salt, drinks
it up into it self, affords a true Alum. For so one only pound of
Quicksilver, only by its touch, should be able by degrees to change many
thousands of pounds of the sharpest Oil of Vitriol into an Alum, without any
loss of its substance: which same Oil, by the touch of the Iron, is in like
manner changed into the vitriolated salt of Mars, being a noble Medicine for
healing. Let the action of the Mercury without an essential ^^ suffering
Alchymists, are deluded by their own hope, thinking that fixed Bodies being
solved in Corrosives, gave unto these Corrosives their properties; at
leastwise, if those dissolving Corrosives, have from a voluntary motion of
activity, coagulated in their possession. They know not, I say, that Spirits
being wearied by acting, do degenerate into a new Being. To wit, while they
descend unto the limit of their power in acting. And then, we must know, that
every operation, which tends unto a transmutation of both (namely, the Agent
and Patient) consists only between mere Spirits: But that the operation of a
Body with a spirit of things without Life, begins from the spiritual odor of a
certain putrefaction by continuance; because seeds and fermental dispositions
depend thereupon, and according to their own will or arbitration, do command
Liquors appointed for Generation. Wherefore the Ancients have not unfitly
advertised us; That the rise and continuation of the visible world, is from an
invisible and incorporeal Essence (such as are Odours and Ferments.) And in our
own borders, Duelech grows together from an incredible Spirit, the Coagulater,
and from an invisible Beginning. For neither has it stood in need for its
nativity, of Tartar brought from without, of the Son of a more inward
muckinesse, or of the feigned curdlings of drying. It is a far more calamitous
thing, that we carry the very vulcan of the Stone about us, in our urine, unto
the importunate command whereof, the properties of a volatile spirit do
hearken. For God had seemed to have loved Bruits before us, if he had not
directed Diseases unto a

Moreover, before that I proceed unto the History of the Stone, I will premise
some Burgundy, there are at this day, no more than two pits, the pit of Brine,
and the pit of Gray. But if indeed, an hundred measures of both pits are boiled
apart, they yield far less salt, than if they are boiled in the same quantity,
being conjoined. The Inhabitants admire at the Experiment, and therefore they
henceforward confound both Brines together. For indeed, the one of them,
contains more of a vapory or volatile salt, which being boiled apart by it
self, with a flaming fire, flies away before its coagulation. Notwithstanding,
meeting with another more fixed salt, it is imbibed and constrained into a
solid salt. The example teaches this, That Bodies of Salts do drink up their
own Spirits, and that their spirits in like manner, do gnaw their Bodies: For
truly, the Brine of Burgundy being clearer than Crystal, does notwithstanding,
through its vapory salt spirit, drink up into it self, a great part of a rocky
stone; which therefore, in time of boiling, To wit, while the spirits are
coagulated in the more solid body of the salt, settles, and is scummed off with
difficulty. Therefore, that spirit of salt, although it dissolved the stone,
yet it therefore contracted not wedlock with the earth; as that, either this
should stonifie, or the other be made salt. Yea, it even from thence is
manifest, that although the Sea Salt had vapory or volatile parts; yet it could
not come unto the stone, as neither to the spirit of urine for an increase:
Because it is that which consists of far different principles: (even as
elsewhere concerning Digestions) but the Sea Salt, by how much it is a stranger
with the Urine, by so much it shall stir up consultations of dissolving
Duelech. For whatsoever dissolveth the stone of a Rock, and does hide it
invisibly in it self; that at least, shall not persuade the original of the
stone. Thus far concerning a fixed Earth, dissolved by the spirit of salt, and
of the vapory and coagulated spirit of Salt.

Now concerning a volatile salt decaying into a solid body. Sublime thou
Stibium Sal Armoniack, by a gentle or indifferent fire; thou shall see the salt
to arise tinged with diverse colors: Separate the color from the salt, by
water, and thou shall have a powder, which with Saltpeter, flies away almost
wholly into a flame. But if that which is left with the Sal Ammoniac, be as yet
twice sublimed by it self, and freed from its salt: thou shall have a powder of
Stibium, void of salt; wherewith, if thou shall then mix Saltpeter, it shall
be no longer inflamed: but as much Saltpeter as thou shall mix with it, is
changed into an earth, and neglects the nature of a salt: For the odor of the
Sulphur pierces the Saltpeter. So the odor of the salt of urine, and its
volatile spirit, presently changes the earthly spirit in the urine, that was
stirred up by a certain kind of putrefaction, into the stone. And therefore,
the urine is not corned or Why children and old men, are more stony, than
themselves being men of a ripe or middle age? Is it because they are hotter?
What if the Schools do in this place, without blushing accuse the coldness of
Children and old men, as having forgotten shame; because according to their
will, the affect of the stone does coagulate or grow together through heat
alone: what shall it help to have invoked a more plentiful quantity of
phlegm, if heat the one only efficient cause, be wanting? If I say, phlegm
(which as such, does stonifie) be wanting in Nature? Neither can they devise
the same Temperature or Complexion to be in Children and old Men, without the
disgrace and confusion of their own received Opinions: As neither shall they
find a likeness in the urine of them both. For the urines of those of an
unripe age, are grosser; but those of old people, watery and washy: the urines
also of such as have the stone, are watery. I have in time past, seen old men
molested with a continual strangury or pissing by drops, even until Death, unto
whom Diuretical (that is urine provoking) Remedies of Saffron, Mace, etc. And
likewise Lenitives or slippery Asswagers of the Mallow, Marsh-mallow, etc. were
vain and of no effect; and the which, Physicians had now pronounced to be
besieged with the stone: But Cutting testified that they were free from the
stone; (Michael Des Montaignes says, that the Bishop of Paris his Uncle, was
cut in vain) and so they also learned, not to divine of the presence of the
stone, from the urine. For these very stranguries, Paracelsus devised his own
frosty fiction of Tartar, which has not as yet been found in dissected
persons. Indeed afterward

So new Ales do stir up the strangury in many, by reason of the residing and
inherent tartness

1. That the affect of the stone does the more easily grow together, through a
scarcity of the dross or liquid dung in urine. 2. That it is a Remedy from the
Cause, to have Why the stone in the Reins is frequent, but that of the
Bladder, more rare? I have answered elsewhere: That as long as the urine is in
the Veins, it is not yet perfect: For neither does it as yet cast the smell of
urine, or has it the properties of urine; as neither is it convenient for the
venal Blood to be seasoned with the odor of an Excrement. The limitation
therefore of the urine, is from the Kidney; but the odor thereof belongs to a
putrefactive Ferment; because to an excrement: and therefore it volatilizeth
the earth of the urine. But moreover, although the Fermental putrefaction of
the urine may render the earth of a strong and putrefying smell; yet it stays
not in man as long as it putrifies. Therefore the hoary or rank earth hereof,
has need of the spirit of the urine, that it may become stony. For in the
Kidney (where a fermental putrefaction of the urine arises) a new and volatile
earth does easily associate it self with the spirit of the urine, and is
corned, especially while as the Dross, the preservative from the stone, has
not as yet come thither: But it becomes a Citron or light-red color, even no
less from the place, than from the aforesaid Dross. The Kidney therefore pays
the punishment of those things whereof it is the first or chief Author. I will
elsewhere teach concerning the Womb of Duelech, that there goes before the
Kidney, a disposition unto Duelech: which disposition, because it is vital, and
not a mere excrementitious one, even as in the Bladder; it is also, more
plentifully coagulated in the Kidney, than in the Bladder. For this, because it
is a mere sink, is wholly destitute of every Ferment: But the Bowels, as they
are the stomach of the Gawl (even as elsewhere concerning Digestions) are a
vital and cocting Receptacle: But the Bladder is a mere Reteiner of the
excrement alone.

It is asked, in the next place: Why the stone of the Kidneys is for the most
part, yellow, and that of the Bladder somewhat whitish? Truly, the Kidney has a
Ferment for the making of an excrement; and therefore it has need of a liquid
and tinging dross. And then also, the Kidney has venal blood as a neighbor
unto it, and a tinged substance of its own; But the Bladder couples of the Glue
of its own immediate nourishment, unto the hoary earth, and to the Spirit the
Coagulater, in the body of the Urine. Consequently, from hence, it is manifest,
why Duelech that is bred in the Bladder, is the harder. It Duelech; Even as
Lime with Meal, renders the mortar fat more tough.

The Reins also, being by Duelech their Companion, at length hurt even unto
their solid fibers: do afterward cast forth white, and sufficiently hard
stones. I have taught elsewhere, that the nourishment of the Bladder, by reason
of the stone, or some other importunity, is, before its full digestion,
separated from its solid part, and is wept from it like a mucky tear, and
co-mixed with the urines: That there is, I say, an excrement of the last
digestion, which goes astray and is let in the Bladder; being sometimes
indeed, an occasioned effect of the stone, but not the Cause [per se] or [by it
self] thereof, although it now and then be occasionally and by accident,
assumed.

For some Physicians admiring at so great and so continued a plenty of pissed
snivel; and knowing that it was not purulent or proceeding from corrupt matter,
seeing they pus or snotty matter could drop; at length, they being as it were
constrained by a sufficient enumeration of Causes; surely through miserable
stupidities, they brought Catarrhs or Rheumes (so ridiculous a thing!) into the
Bladder. But others, while they durst not implore vain Accusations on the
healthy Brain, and are in great doubt corrupt matter, they denounce the Ulcers
of the Reins, to be the Fountains of so great a Glut. So that without a
foregoing Aposteme, that mucky snivel does oft-times divide the half part with
the urine, in the Urinal, yet thy suppose, that from the Kidney being without
pain, so much snotty pus does daily shower down. First of all, I have taken
notice, that many have been cured at the Spaw, whom the shameful debates of
Physicians about the purulent Ulcer, Comsumption of the Kidneys, and Catarrhs,
had banished thither to dye: Who, when as they had beyond the hope of those
Physicians returned sound, they boasted that those sick were cured by them,
from the profitable Council of Traveling thither.

But why has my urine that was healthy, applied a sand unto the Urinal in the
cold: but not, being detained so long within, in heat? I have said, That urine
was from an inbred Balsame, alike easily preserved, both from stonifying, and
from putrefying. And then, that the Urinal was a vessel fit for affixing of
that sand: but not the Bladder. And lastly, that the earth is volatilized by
putrefaction.

It is also a doubt, why of Twins that are nourished by the same milk, the one
of them only is sometimes diseased with the stone? In which doubt, the
Schools, Women, Idiots,

Which inclination, Astrologers, although they distinguish not in the
Conception, or Quickening; yet they put a difference betwixt it, in the birth:
and in this respect, they confound [inclination unto the stone] does even in
the entrance, render Paracelsus suspected concerning Tartar. Yea, and thus far
Galen's own Schools have have forsaken him without light: Who being contented
with an unequal distemperature in Seminal (although Homogeneal) Constituters,
yet so it were now turned into nature, he thinks that he has abundantly
satisfied the question: and he prosecutes it with desperation, that for this
Cause, that unequal distemperature, is unseparable from him that is born. He
takes away indeed, the common name of Inclination; but the former if not more
gross Darknesses remain: While as he resolves a Controversy by a Controversy,
and with desperation cuts off the endeavor of enquiring.

It is certain in the mean time, that the duplicity of the question is not to
be drawn but Magnum Oportet or necessary remainder of the middle Life of the
place or Climate of the Womb. For the sides of Women do so differ, that we are
every one of us, as it were a pair of men distinguished side-wayes: and our
other inward Bowels do border side-wayes upon the Womb. For from the first
Constituting parts, there are indeed hereditary defilements drawn, which are
equally distempered on the whole Conception, if they were derived from the
Parent the Begetter: but those blemishes which are found in the place, are
adjacent unto those places, and invade us as more immediate unto us. A Wonder
it is! to consider, How easily our most tender Beginnings do hearken unto
foreign impressions; and how easily things once received, do wax ripe; and
finally, how stubbornly they persevere: Also those Seminaries of Diseases,
which are soon gotten by a proper error of Living; how friendlily they are
entertained in, and do bear sway over the same powers wherein, and over which
the hereditaries of Diseases are entertained and bear Rule. And by so much the
more powerfully they enter, and are the more insolently imprinted or stamped on
us, by how much their wedlock does defile the Archeus in us, being as yet the
more young. For as long as we receive an increase; the seeds of Diseases,
although they are drawn in, in manner of an Odor, they are also incorporated
in our radical Beginnings: and in some one such Beginning, do the stony perfect
acts of seeds wax ripe with us: The which also, even by the Odor being drawn
in, the Ferments of the seeds have more largely constituted elsewhere. For from
an entire nature, every man ought to be healthy, and of one inclination; but
that, by reason of the properties of the middle Life, nourishments,
perturbations, and Climates, disorders had crept into the Sons of Adam. But
those disorders which do privily enter with the Mothers blood, and Nurses milk,
do as Household Thieves, possess the Treasures of Life; neither do they easily
depart, but under the aids of Renovation.

But I coming nearer to the Knot, do say, That in the Kidney, there is a dungy
ferment, being a putrefactive of the urine; the which wandering, and the mark of
its going astray, being once imprinted, the urine does from thenceforth,
proceed by a voluntary flux, and by degrees tends unto the utmost
putrefaction of it self, under which lurketh a power of making the earth
volatile. Since therefore, there is in the Kidney, this power of fermenting:
The question, Why one of the Twins has his Kidneys the more strong in a dungy
Ferment, is resolved, by the Chapter of the unequal strength of the parts: To
wit, so as the stomach of one has an aversness, and another more strong
stomach, not so. For so the Kidney that is the more rich in a putrefying
Ferment, is more prone to the framing of the stone. The Begetter also, if in
time of generating, he has his Bladder filled with urine, is wont to raise up
an offspring subject to the calamity of Duelech; Because the fermental
putrefaction of his urine being the longer detained, does fermentally increase
it self in the neighboring seed sliding through. Galen indeed erres by so much
the more ridiculously, as that he will have something of urine, to be naturally
in every seed, and to be always added thereto, by reason of the tickling. As
being ignorant, To wit, that not so much as a foreign hair is mixed with the
Beginnings of Generation, without a total destruction thereof. But how the
afore-tasted particulars do serve our intention; take notice, That an unequal
strength of the parts, is as it were necessary to the most intimate nature. For
neither shall thou draw a thread of Homogeneal Gold, which may not be sooner
broken in one part of it than another. And so, that it is weaker than it self:
Disorder, unlikenesse or inequality, and diversity of kind, are only from the
innermost essence of things; although unto their essences, they are altogether
Foreigners. For from hence it is, That Twins which sprang from one only and a
single seed cannot escape an Heterogeniety or diversity of kind; especially
being that which is by so easy a Contagion, brought into the Beginnings of
Things.

CHAP. V. The History of Duelech is Continued.
1. From whence there is hope for those that have the stone. 2. Who is a
Physician given of God. 3. What kind of honor is due to the Physician. 4. A
fourfold ignorance of Physicians. 5. A phylosophical history of the stone. 6.
The error of Paracelsus and the Galenists, concerning the foregoing matter of
Tartar, and of the Stone. 7. An error of Paracelsus. 8. An earth in the urine
and venal blood. 9. What may be found in Duelech being distilled. 10. The
simplicity of Physicians. 11. The miserable simplicity of Galen. 12. An
Argument for the first matter of the Stone. 13. An examination of Diuretics or
urine provoking Medicines. 14. Some most wretched Histories. 15. A resolving of
a question of Diuretics. 16. From whence there is danger in Diuretics, and a
happy fore-caution or prevention hereof. 17. A numerical account of Diuretics.
18. That a distemperature being converted into Nature, is to be corrected. 19.
Whether a laying along on the sides, does promote the affect of the Stone. 20.
A various action of the spirit of Urine. 22. Vain are the fore-cautions of the
Schools. 22. A faulty Argument of the Schools 23. The inconsiderate rashness
of the Schools. 24. Why the touching may deceive him that has the Stone in
the Reins.

GOd made not Death, neither is there Medicine of Destruction, nor a Kingdom
of Physician, he had every where left scanty, in many degrees or particulars.

He is not a Physician therefore, that as an Impostour, he should thrust only
a Cloakative Schools therefore, drew the choice of Physicians to themselves,
and accounted them worthy ones, as many as would subscribe to the Ignorances of
the Heathen; that the Chaires and Life of man might be committed unto
themselves. This has now passed over through their hands, for a possession
amongst the Europeans, for some Ages past; Charity has grown cold, and sloth
being introduced under a safer Zeal; long use has also confirmed their
obtained Ignorance, pretending a right of prescription. Wherefore God has
withdrawn his Gifts, and has continued those, which he had bestowed elsewhere:
Truly, Saint Paul will have Widows to be honored, which should be truly
Widows in good works: As for imitation of that Command, which has appointed
the Physician to be honored, who should be truly a Physician in good works,
and should testify that he was so created and chosen of God: And whom indeed,
the worthy Works, Commissions, Signs of his Calling, and deserts of his
Honor, do follow.

Of which place, I meditating with my self, do find Honor to be denounced to
the Physician by reason of necessity: which necessity presupposes a proceeding
Fruit; otherwise in vain: Not indeed, that the force of the Precept has such
an influence on necessity, as that, when a healthy person stands in no need of
a Physician, this Physician is not then to be honored: For a Judge, Major.
Lawyer, Soldier, Sergeant, Executioner, Potter, Weaver, etc. should by the
same right of necessity, be appointed to be honored. Notwithstanding, in
things mental or pertaining to the mind, the whole contexture of Words, is
always nothing else but as it were the conception of one word. But they will
bear testimony to that thing, who have at sometime, perhaps intellectually and
after an abstracted manner, tasted down something. And that thing also, may
after some sort be demonstrated: For in the same Conception, whereby I consider
a Sword, I conceive; first of all, a long, plain, cleansed, sharp figure, also
a hard metallic matter, not flexible in the thread of straightness; lastly its
end, which is not to cut bread, or woods, etc. but to wound: For all those
things are in one only mental Conception of a Sword, at once represented unto
me. But in mental Abstractions, not only accompanying conditions; But
moreover, whatsoever may be spoken in many hours (yea, nor can be expressed)
is in one only Conception, as it were of one word, infused in an intellectual
Rapture. But Honor is prescribed for the Physician created by the Goodness of
the most High, by reason of the necessity of the sick, for the healing of them.
The which surely, in mental Conceptions, has a simple signification. But the
necessities of the Soldier, Judge, Executioner, Weaver, etc. are not perfectly
considered, as chosen by the most High: but as being promoted by men for the
performing of Offices required from the malice of men.

Therefore I have elsewhere considered, that a fourfold darkness of Ignorance,
Schools: and that preparation of Medicine which ought to bring Light unto a
Physician, is wholly accounted mechanical, and conferred on the Apo^hecary and
his Wife. Indulge my liberty, Reader, as often as I dispute concerning God, of
the Life, of Diseases, of the Commonweal, of my Neighbor, of my own Calling,
of that which is True, Good, of that which is hurtful, and of things that are
so serious, and of so great moment, in favor of mortal men. For I propose the
allurement of no man's favor unto my self. I have hitherto shown that blind
descriptions have arisen from an ignorance of the Causes and Remedies, or from
the sloth of diligent searches, and from the facility of assenting to false
principles: Wherefore also, we consequently divine of the unprosperous Cures,
deceitful Healings, and desperate succors of the Stone; as also of the
miserable obediences of the sick.

I will now proceed, For indeed, whatsoever arises anew in Nature, that is
made of something, and so of another thing or Being; To wit, as their immediate
matters being changed, it must needs be that the essences of those things are
changed, Archeus, as a new Being in possibility. But seeing that which not as
yet is, is not able as yet to act; it behoved, that that Being should after
some sort fore-exist in possibility or power, that it may fit or suit the lump
of the former Being subjected unto it self, for a future Being: But the
fore-existence of that same Being, subsisteth in a certain seminal spirit,
wherein the Types and shadowy foreknowledges of things that are to be performed
in its Tragedy, do inhabit. But this spirit, I name the Archeus or
Master-workman; call thou it as thou will. Be it sufficient to know, that
nothing does arise anew in Nature, without a seed. In the next place, Every
seed operates by dispositions its Handmaids, which it propagates in the matter
for its intended desires. But the mediating Instruments, whereby seeds do
dispose of their matters, I call Ferments: For even as the sour odor of an
earthen Vessel constraines the milk, the odor of Leaven infects the Meal, and
the hoary odor of a Hogshead, converts the Wine into a loss of it^ strength,
etc. So in the urine there is its own seed for Duelech (for I distinguish the
stone from sand, only in quantity, and signify it by the one only name of
Duelech) also its own dispositive Ferment, which is sometimes situated in a
naked smell or odor. For truly, in an old and strong smelling Urinal or
Chamberpot, the urine does sooner stonifie than otherwise, in a ^eat one. Yet
that fermental odor is not proper to the Urin^, but a foreign stranger, which
sometimes also, so increases it self in the Kidney; that like Gorgon, it
always and uncessantly labors in the framing of Duelech, as if it labored
for its own perfection. For so the Archeus of the parts is unvoluntarily drawn
unto a strange scope or aim, and through the importunities of a strange
Ferment, is led aside whither he would not.

Paracelsus therefore erres, who sets down a certain Tartarous muscilage, being
dispersed Duelech of the Ancients, as in that of Tartar. For it is sufficiently
manifest, that in man's urine (even in that of healthy Folk) there is always an
immediate, invisible matter and seed; For Duelech, whether the while, Duelech
break forth into act, as long as the urine is ripened in our possession, or
after that it has flowed out of us: The urine indeed, contains essential
beginnings for Duelech; but it is unto it by accident, that they are ripened or
not: and although the urine has in it self the seed and matter of the stone,
yet it is not the womb of the stone, but only the matrix of a stone-seed,
which seeks and finds a womb for its self, either within or without. For as
the Being in act, ought to perish, if the Being which is in possibility, and
after some sort seminally fore-existing, ought from thence to arise: it is of
necessity, that the essence and matter of the urine whereof Duelech is made,
should first decay, if Duelech be made from thence: wherein notwithstanding, a
small space of delay does interpose. There is indeed in the urine a fit matter,
and there is in it a seed for Duelech: yet it likewise stands in need of an
actuating and exciting Ferment, which may procure the seed to bud; Because the
transmigration or passing over of a thing, argues a decay of it self, by a
neutral state, through a proper mediating Ferment: Therefore the corruptive
Ferment of the urine is the exciter or stirrer up of the seed. Therefore I have
shown by handicraft Operation, that the urine is longer preserved undefiled,
under the Balsame of our Family Administration, and under an illsmatch'd heat,
than that which else, in a cold Urinal, hearkens to corruption a few hours
after, and therefore also defiles the Urinal with sand. For the Kidneys being
after any manner polluted, have now conceived a corruptive Ferment of the
urine. There is indeed, in the Kidney its own excrementitious Ferment, from
Nature: but that is not yet sufficient for the propagation of the stone. There
is therefore a Duelech in the urine, as a Being in possibility, which breaks
forth into act, while the corruption of the urine, or of the former Being,
hovers over it. In the mean time, it is true, that some Provinces do bring no
sluggish aid unto the frequency of the stone. For Illyricum was once Paracelsus
supposes) because such places are fruitful in Tartars: Because that, since
those of Europe, who are carried in the same ship, and have used the meats of
our Country, are afflicted with foreign and local Diseases. For truly, there
are some seeds of Diseases in places, and they forge fit matters for
themselves, if they do not find them obedient or espoused to themselves. Let
those Trifles depart, which suppose and require a naked allusion of a tartarous
fore-existidg matter, and so, a muckinesse for Duelech, and do found them on a
feigned Allegory of Artificial things: As if there were no other consistency of
the stone, than what might answer to a dried muscilage? As if a snivelly
Spittle cannot be generated of drink that is not slimy. As though the
generation and hardening of every rocky stone, ought to be enrouled in snivel
and heat? For if the heart, as it is hotter than the bones, so also should be
harder, perhaps their Positions might deserve credit: But Nature despises
similitudes that are fetched from Artificial things. Therefore I understand
that a dungy Ferment of the Kidney being too much exalted, does afterward
dispose the Coagulater, the Spirit of urine, and the matter of the volatile
earth, that they may grow together into the seed of Duelech: For there is not a
transchangative principle in Nature, out of the Ferments that are inbred, or
obtained (even as elsewhere of Ferments) except in Artificial things
constituted by the fire.

From whence also, every similitude drawn from the same, is unfitly applied.
For Potters earth is after one manner burnt into a stone without a seed; and
every

I have distilled a Duelech that was cut out of a man, by himself; neither have
I extracted any thing from thence, besides a stinking spirit of urine, and a
yellow Crystal, and also an Oil, such as is drawn out of dried urine: But that
which remained unto me in the bottom, was a black, scorched, brickle, and
un-savoury earth. Therefore the Writers of the first Beginnings of Chemical
Medicine, deceive their Readers, as many as from the distillations of the stone
of man, and its preparations, do boast of the Ludus of Paracelsus, or of the
Prince of stone-breaking Medicines: For they have a desire to write mere, and a
great many lies. Neither am I sufficiently angry at the Impudence and rashness
of these men, in a matter of so easy an Experiment; especially, when as any
one might have fitly known that thing from the shavings of the Urinal. Surely,
there is not so much as the least of those things extracted out of the stone of
man, which those Instructers of Children do rashly write. It is certain in the
mean time, that by the means of putrefaction, not a few things are made
volatile, which before, their Closets being not unloosed, were more straightly
bound up: For so also, Vegetables afford the more unmixt or mere waters to the
Stiller, than themselves yet being not putrified. We perish not therefore by
the stroke of one only Weapon, since all particular ones which are mild, if
they grow but a little exorbitant, do fashion new Calamities in us. For the
substance of the Kidneys, being the hardest of all the Bowels, and destitute of
finewes and Arteries, was the fittest for a dungy Ferment of the urine:
whereunto, if the Ferment even but of a fore-threatned putrefaction in the
urine, shall have access, a speedy inclination into the Disease of the stone,
is imprinted on the trans-sliding urine. For truly, the odor only of the
forenamed putrefaction in the urine, stirs up a heterogeniety or diversity of
kind, which was before hidden therein. For presently, the urine which lighted
into a foul Urinal, becomes of a very stinking smell, and far sooner bewrayes
the sand that was hidden in it, than that which otherwise was received in a
clean Glass. For I have shown by an undoubted experiment, that even the urine
of healthy persons affixeth Duelech on Urinals, in the form of grains, or
scales: And that not presently after making water, that they do forthwith
settle; but they are affixed some hours after: To wit, while the urine now
unfolding the Ferment conceived in the Kidney, enters into the way of
corruption. In those that have the stone of the Reins indeed, the urine
receives a putrefactive Ferment, which otherwise is not communicated to the
urine of healthy Folk, a dungy Ferment being otherwise sufficient for it.

Furthermore, it is not necessary that an actual putrefaction be in the Kidney,
that it may stir up a sand within. Even as neither does the urine in Urinals,
as yet stink, while it now freed it self from the sand: but a sore-threatned or
beginning putrefaction is sufficient, that the spirits may freely enjoy their
right, and mutually (their Bolts being cast off) act on each other. But I
suppose that to be a sore-threatned putrefaction, which is only seminally in
the Archeus of the Reins, although not unfolded: For otherwise, if there were
but the least actual putrefaction in the Kidney, a slow Fever would accompany
that putrefaction: but of how small a quantity soever it shall be, it easily
takes root within the urine, whereinto indeed a uriny-Ferment has already
pierced; the which, as it is in it self a dungy one, so also it is a putrified
one. For there is an easy association of putrefaction, and of an excrement in
a Fermental co-resemblance: Whosoever therefore shall endeavor, that his urine
may not stonifie within: let him seasonably provide, that it do not
unseasonably wax stony within him. For therefore, there are some Medicines,
which tinge the urine and Kidneys with a grateful odor, and for this cause
are kind to their Organs. For as they are Diuretics or provokers of urine,
they obtain a passage unto the Kidneys, and immingle themselves with the urine.
For whatsoever things, through an ocult, or manifest quality, have deserved the
surname of Stonebreak; do indeed cleanse and wipe off, and for this cause do
comfort the Kidneys being threatened with putrefaction: but surely, they do not
melt, or resolve any thing of the sand: Such as are sharpish Fountains,
Diuretical stones and herbs, which by washing off, and wiping away, do banish
the sands and thinner clots: but do not dissolve them, and much less do they
restrain the new Beginnings of the stone; Because they being destitute of a
Balsame, and the seasoning of a grateful Odor, do notwithstanding not appease
the filthinesses of the putrefactive Ferment, however dull they as yet may be.
For even as the re-budding of a plant, is not taken away by the lopping off its
branches, but by rooting of it up: so neither is the stone of the Kidneys
cured, by thrusting out of the stone. There is not any thing done that is
worthy of Reward. If a person that has the Falling Sickness be raised up from
his fall, if he be not also freed from a Relapse for the future. Yet this top
of perfection or healing, the Schools have not any thing touched at: yea they
have rather despaired thereof; because they saw that the contracted blemish of
the affect of the stone, did oft-times Tyrannize on the posterity, as being
translated by an hereditary right.

For when Physicians had seen one that was cut for the stone of the Bladder, to
have Book of Fevers. For we are nourished of the same things whereof we consist.

Neither are the solid parts nourished, but by a spermatick slimy Liquor that
is akinne Galen is the more to be laughed at, which forbad Membranes, Sinews,
Cords or Tendons, and so, parts of the first Constitution, in Food, least a
muscilage or phlegm should thereby grow: as being unmindfull indeed, that the
similar parts in us, are immediately nourished only by that vital muscilage.

Nor in the mean time, do the Schools heed, that one of the Kidneys, and that
Tartar of meats and drinks: but that the Kidneys do through their own defect
stir up a vicious Ferment, and at length bring forth this insolent Monster. For
oft-times, one of the Kidneys has a good while flowed with much sand, and
afterward is wholly stopped up with the stone. It well perceives indeed, a
blunt pain of that side; but no sand afterward throughout the lifetime.

Lastly, the Schools indeed, take notice of that by Anatomy; yet, they do not
as yet therefore cease to condemn the guiltless stomach, as bringing forth a
rocky phlegm for the one, and not for the other of the Kidneys. Therefore it
is beaten for the fault of bringing forth the Disease of the stone, it is
sweeped with Besomes, it suffers the lesser and familiar Evacuations of three
days: but the more rough punishments of solutive Medicines, it undergoes at
the set interchanging seasons of the Year: Yea the stomach endures punishment,
because Cauteries are imprinted under the shoulders and hammes of the legs, for
the preventions, wrestings aside, and revulsions of a distilling phlegm, and
other old Wives fictions of that sort: And the Tormenters do so much the more
cruelly rage on the not-committed fault of the stomach, because this stomach
suffers their Cautery to be over-covered with a Scar, but Physicians do keep it
open. As if a feigned phlegm, rushing down from the plain of the Head, and
remaining unchanged in the stomach, should slide through the Bowels, and should
be again supt up by the Meseraick veins without any discerning of a hurt
received, but should from thence again be carried unto the Liver and Kidneys:
unless, through the skin being opened beneath the shoulder and Knee, it were
revulsed outward from its appointed Journey. Good Jesus! Thou Wisdom of the
Father! Are these thy Schools, which propose such kind of Toys unto silly
credulous poor people? and which circumvent them with mere Trifles? Which
torment Mortals with so many Butcheries? Far be it! far be it from us to
believe this to be a Doctrine of Truth: that is, Thine. But the Enemy of the
first Truth, the Enemy of Men, has brought forth these trifling Discourses,
and does even still defend them.

But moreover, some prescribe Diuretics, and others in the mean time, being
afraid of Abbatesse being oppressed with a descending stone, by the persuasion
of a Circle of Physicians, abstained from a Urine provoking Remedy in the
Dog-dayes, least happily, through the heat of that season, and of the Diuretic
Remedy, sleep, with a cruel howling, until the stone had of its own accord,
arrived into the Bladder. And then the Council of the Physicians was triumphed
in; and that unless she had observed that Rule, surely she had not kept life.

A certain Noble Woman being sorely troubled with the stone, and a Fever; after
bloodletting being four times repeated, after Clysters, the lesser Evacuaters,
Laxatives, Vesicatories, and other Remedies of that sort, survived full ten
days with outcries for a Spectacle of Physicians; because they found not an
hour that was free from the Fever, wherein they might give a purging Medicine
to drink against the stone; neither otherwise would her strength be sufficient
to undergo a new tormenting Cruelty: For what things I have seen committed by
Physicians in time of curing, under the Title or pretense of Heat, I could
scarce with horror and Compassion, describe in a whole Volume.

For I remember that a Jesuit at Antwerp, in the Year 1606. both whose Kidneyes
being beset with the stone, denied the passage of his urine; at length, after
two days Combat of Physicians, breathed out his Soul: For they debated about
the shadow of an Apulean ass; to wit, whether a Suppository Glans, or a
Clyster were to be administered unto him: They all abhorring Diuretic Medicines
or drivers forward of the stone. In the mean time, John Vermierden a certain
Merchant, having suffered a standing pool of urine for eight days space, and
being now near death, took a Urine-provoking Medicine, of the juice of
Palmer-wormes, and of the juice of black shell-fishes, wherein he had boiled
one grain of Cantharides, to be drunk up at one entire draught. I let these
things pass.

But I thus decide the Controversy of Diuretics. Every stone is either bigger
than Vreter or urine-pipe, or less, or equal. If it be less, urine-provokers
shall be seasonable, and not to be feared: But if it be bigger than is meet;
Diuretics shall be plainly unfruitful and vain: But if it shall answer in
equality to the Urine-pipe, it is better that the same be more speedily
expelled, least it be increased by delay.

Notwithstanding, because in the trans-passage of the stone, the Ureter being
contracted Diuretic Remedies, are in the fit, to be given with a fore-Caution:
To wit, those things that are to be given to drink, are to be Restrainers of
pain, and of the Contracture sprung from thence. Through the carelessnesse or
ignorance of which only point; it sometimes happens that stones have stuck in
the middle of their passage, and have killed the Patient with miserable
howlings. And that not so much through the insolency of the Diuretic
Medicines, as through the error of Physicians. For neither must we think, that
the Channel or Pipe of the Vreter is of an unequal straightness, that the
stone, which at the first onset descends through the Vreter, does at length
stick fast, as being pressed with the straightness of its Journey: But the
future Compressions, are diseasie and convulsive frizlings, arising from pain,
even as elsewhere concerning Sense and Sensation. And so, Fomentations or
asswaging Applications, as well those that are external, as internal, which
appease those convulsive motions, I chiefly exhort unto, and judge necessary.
Why shall I Cantharides. 2. Others provoke and leave a tartness in the urine,
and stir up the strangury: such as are new Ales. 3. There are some which render
the urine abstersive or of a cleansing faculty: as sharpish Fountains, the
vitriol of Mars, the stone of Crabs; and likewise Herbs which in many places
rejoice in the Etymology of Diuretics. And they all of them contain a
volatile Alcali or Lixivial salt, or at leastwise attain that Alcali in time of
their digestion. For, for this cause, prouokers of urine, do for the most part
conduce unto a vulnerary drink: Because that in every Wound, a Tartness or
Acidity, the Betokener and Companion of all putrefaction in the flesh, does
arise: the which Alcalies do easily sup up into themselves, and consume.
Wherefore there was a Country man, who healed wounded persons with the
Lixiviuns of Teile-tree. So the stone of Crabs being boiled or steeped in Wine,
does notably represent the savor of a Lixivium or Lie. 4. There are also some
which provoke urine, and stir up the expulsive faculty thereof, as they do
generate a putrefaction of the urine: Of which sort, are the Radish, Asparagus,
etc: For I have seen a Lawyer, who was not afflicted with the Disease of the
stone, but after he had returned home from a more large eating of Asparagus:
and afterward; that he lay along under most cruel pain, not so much from
stones, as from most subtle sands, through the returns thereof, perhaps every
fifteen days, for some years. From whence I learned, that the error of one
evening had brought an ill habit on his Reins, which could scarce be taken
away for the future. I also, from hence, knew the pronenesse of our nature,
which so quickly hearkens unto its own ruin, and that it having once fallen or
slipped aside, does Slowly and difficultly rise again, even by the Favor of
medicines.

Lastly, that such a kind of habit, now for some years persevering, has
nevertheless been Mace, Nutmeg, Terpentine, Mastick, Juniper, etc. As though
the kidneys being comforted with their odor, were made mindful of their
office. 6. And then, there are some also, which from a Lixivial Alcali, do in
time of digestion, pass over into a tartness, cleansing the passages of the
urine like soap, do stir up the expurging faculty, and do cut the filths grown
thereunto: of which sort, are those medicines which are collected from the
shells, and stones, and ashes of appropriated things; and the which alone, seem
to be worthy of the name of stone-breakes, especially if they are drawn up unto
a degree of volatility. 7. In the next place, there is a sort of Diuretics,
which being taken in a small quantity, do power forth plenty of urine out of the
whole body: as Palmer worms, the species's of Brookelime, and likewise the
juice of Sea shell-fishes, black and long: and whatsoever things do contain a
volatile nitre, and which do by property, rowse up the sleepy reins. 8. There
is also another sort, which by way of sticking, comforts the reins, being
profitable for the allaying of their pain,: Such as is in Saffron, Rhubarb,
and Cassia being inverted, that is, being first deprived of their solutive
virtue. 9. The spirit of Sea salt, is not only a provoker of urine, and does
not also, only assuage the strangury in those in whose bladder the stone is
rolled: but besides, it diminishes the stones of the kidneys, if it be
distilled with the utmost heat or fire of a Reverbery. Therefore it is not
sufficient to say, that Diuretics do create urine: but moreover, it must also
be determined whether they act that from an excitement of the attractive
faculty whether by a dissolving of the urine, whether by an exa^perating
thereof, whether by a speedying of putrefaction, or lastly from any other
title: neither is it sufficient for whey of milk to contain some thing of a
nitrous matter in it: but also it has some certain remainder of its former
blood, from whence it is cadaverous or stinking, and so keeps the tenor of
Asparagus. For truly, many things do, by comforting of the reins, provoke
urine, and other things overspread the urine with a grateful odor, and others
are the more troublesome, through a sharpness, as also those things which
hasten a stinking ferment of the urine, the which are hurtful unto the
diseased with the stone, in their whole root: and therefore with the great
error of Physicians, is Asparagus boiled almost Vena Cava or hollow vein, at
least ten fingers in breadth: and because the bladder is of a middle situation
between both kidneys. Therefore I persuaded my self, that the upper kidney
could not unloade it self upwards into the bladder: But afterward I knew this
my fear to be vain, and that nothing was beneath, in respect of the Archeus:
neither was it sufficient to have speculatively searched thereinto. Therefore
there was fitly one made known unto me, who had never layen on his left side
from a boy; Also that he being now an old man, had not yet suffered the disease
of the stone. I observed also another, who had never slept but on his loins
and right side: yet he became stony in his left and declining kidney. I repeat
hear, that the clear and distilled liquour of my own urine, carried its own
earth up with it, through the Alembick, which it conformed and affixed to the
sides of the vessel, into a true Duelech: and that, that hardening was made by
the Spirit of the urine, which coagulates any thing, and many things after a
diverse manner.

For it condensed the spirit of wine into a volatile lump. But if it finds a
fixed object, of the nature of a Salt, it is turned into a Salt, even as it
happens unto spirit of wine, Tartar: or while the spirit of fountain salt
being drunk up by salt its kinseman, is made salt. But if the spirit of urine
find a fixed earth which it may gnaw, seeing it wants a coagulable object, it
is imbibed by the earth, and subdued hereby: and it being otherwise the Author
of coagulation is there coagulated passively. But where the spirit of urine
finds a volatile object that is not coagulated; yet coagulable (because of an
earthly disposition) it uncloathing its own Coagulum or runnet, constraines the
same vapor into an earth; and both their forces being conjoined, a new
creature is made, which is the nativity of Duelech.

But moreover, the Schools insisting on their own principles of heates,
prescribe,

They therefore choose wool or flocks before feathers, by reason (they say) of
the heat of these: As being ignorantt that feathers do less heat, than wool,

In the next place, it being granted, that the feather should more heat the
body laying upon it, and that is wrapped in feathers, than wool; Yet all that
cease, if a sheet

CHAP. VI. The Womb of Duelech.
1. Why the womb of the stone is to be sought into. 2. The bladder also,
generates a stone of another condition, than the kidney. 3. Prognostics or
presages. 4. Heat does not coagulate any thing in urines. 5. Another necessity
of the womb. 6. The situation of this womb. 7. A handicraft operation. 8.
Observations had from thence. 9. The extension of this womb is conjectured of.
10. The reason of wonderful events in those that have the stone in their
reins. 11. From whence there is a relapse in the stone of the reins. 12. The
stone of the reins hearkens unto meteours. 13. The manner in making thereof.
14. The urine, why it is troublous or foul. 15. The pain of the stone of the
reins is from a contracture. 16. They are deceived in the cause, who bring the
straightness of the Ureter, as for the fierceness of pain. 17. The ignorance
of the womb has caused a neglect of the cure. 18. A fabulous persuasion of the
Schools. 19. Another necessity of relapses. 20. The clearing up of a certain
doubt. 21 A history of a mad man. 22. The separation of the urine from the
venall blood. 23. The disorderly generation of a strange stone.

THe seed, matter, and process of making the stone in man being already made
manifest, and the urine being known in its contents, as it is the seminary
vessel Duodenum; why shall not the same thing happen to the urine? Wherefore it
has seemed to me, that neither also could the urine perform the reason or
office of the womb of the stone, and much less the Reins themselves, so great
is the hasty passage of the urine through them, as it were through Syringes:
wherefore it has behoved me, first to give heed unto the womb of this
monstrous offspring: especially, because the Schools have even hitherto, skipt
over this top of knowledge, as being content with the judgment of the vulgar,
nor being wise beyond the country folk, who behold only the reins and bladder:
But surely the mine or womb does every way cause a great diversity of the thing
that is to be born, if it for the most part, conteines the fruitfullnesses and
barrennesses of generation. For if nature be subject to the Soil: certainly
nature cannot but be in a womb, especially, if she stonify in one of the
kidneys, the other remaining safe. And that thing is chiefly to be contemplated
of, from the same, and in the same matter of the stone, and urine of one seed.
From the womb therefore and not from elsewhere, is the cause of the far fetched
infirmity, to be required.

For the bladder also, and the same urine in number, procreates a Duelech of
another condition, than that which is made in the kidney, or at leastwise,
which was never made before. For indeed, I am not wont to subscribe to the
naked pleasures of Predecessors, as neither to their Judgments, because I am
the more assured, that the very power of healing, languisheth under their
unaptness: Therefore I ought to search out the womb of Duelech.

First of all, I have espied, that those that had the Stone in the Reins, were
wont,

A certain one also I beheld, which would dissolve only with heat; (so far is
it that heat should be the author of curdling) yet oft-times that lump being
separated from Archeus.

I knew therefore, that the generation of Duelech, does follow the laws of
other natural generations: and so also, that it is made at an instant; and by
consequence, that

Therefore I have deservedly suspected, that the reins only, are not the womb
of the sands, of the Bolus or lump, and of the Stones; but that these do
prepare their own products by foregoing vessels, wherein the urine is disposed,
and that the full essence of Duelech is there obtained: To wit, that the
fundamentals of those things are stamped, which anon appear to be. But that I
might expel all scruple from me, or that I might not believe, that the urine
does by a momentary passage through the kidneys, being as it were, more swift
than the glance of an eye, act it self into a lump, sand, or greater Stones,
and then afterward be cast headlong through the urine pipes:

I collected the urine of him who was grieved in one only kidney, and which had
voyded both sand and lump; and then I strained the urine from the sand through
a Towel;

On the contrary, I also found, that the urine which had once applied its sand
to the urinal, had laid aside no more sand in a new urinal for thirty hours
after, but only a sediment that the dross being the tincture of the urine,
should then according to its wonted custom, be attracted: as if all the
tincture thereof, being for the framing of the urine, were wasted; or, as
though the sands were made of the mere tincture of the dross; and so that the
mixture of the liquid dung with the urine, was a diseasie one besides nature,
although ordinary: which meditation indeed, at my first entrance therein,
afflicted me: At leastwise from thence I more clearly knew,, that the material
cause of Duelech, assigned by the Schools, was altogether vain and stupid:
seeing that if there were any whitish and phlegmie muckiness cocted from the
heat of the kidneys, into a stone; Now the sand of the reins should not be of
a more citron color than the stone of the bladdet; but both stones should be
alike pale; because the cocting and drying of that mucky snivel, cannot
citrinize the pale color of the same; or in the bladder, under a longer delay,
it should be wholly yellow, unless pethaps, the Schools shall demonstrate, that
the Muscilage of the kidneys is yellow, and that of the bladder white; Else
surely, they teach old wives fictions concerning the muscilaginous matter of
the stone. Furthermore it has seemed to me, that the urine is clear,
plenteous, nor tinged before the fit; and troublous, and sandy, after the
pains; because that while the sand is in making, that happens in the vena cava,
and in the sucking veins themselves; it not being indeed, as yet in the form of
sand, or of a stone, but like a lump, like a more thin clay, and like a
sediment. And so the urine is not then duly concocted in that kitchen;
wherefore it is watery, and the Archeus of those parts is primarily, ill
affected. But I understand the coction or digestion of the urine, to be the
promotion thereof unto a urinous perfection: for there is not yet in that very
place a sand, but the most small atome of a Bolus or lump: Because a corruptive
ferment is there established, besides nature, and the requirance of the place:
but by how much the farther it departs from thence toward the kidney, or unto
the last sink of the urine; it is also more and more burdened with its own
uriny ferment; and Duelech receives an increase almost at every moment, and is
by degrees confirmed into bigger grains; For I did argue, if a vein even after
death, preserves the blood from curdling, contrary to corruption, it should not
be unmeet for a certain preservation from a stony coagulation, likewise to
exist in the wombs or veins of the urine; but that this preservation is very
strongly trampled upon by a vicious ferment of the neighboring-kidney: The
which, when it has once seriously happened, so as that the veins have but a
little departed from their native goodness, it befalls these, as to any kind of
impure vessels, and those molested with a neighboring stinking, or strong
smelling ferment, whereunto something of the residing impure contagion, does
stubbornly adheres for such is the continued succession of relapses in those
that have the stone in the reins, that all the dreggy filth adhering unto them,
is not fully wiped off; and that there is the same neighbor character of the
bad disposition, which forged the former calamities. After the same manner,
whereby a hen carries mature eggs, and those less mature, and others, like
grains, in her loins, which are the pledges of a birth successively to follow
for some months.

This indeed has been the necessity whereby those that have the stone in the
Reins, do for the most part, obey the importunities of a Meteour, do also
presage future tempests,

That cruel pain therefore of the diseased with the stone of the kidney,
arises from the contracture or drawing together of the veins: but not from the
passage of the Bolus, the malady was unaccustomed. For otherwise, if the
Urine-pipe should undergo so great a largeness, they contradict themselves,
while Diuretic Medicines forbid the straightness of the Vessels. And then, I
have further considered, that about the beginning the urine is voyded clear,
watery, and abundantly: For since the urine is tinged by the dross or liquid
dung: but since that dross is not drawn forth, but nigh the end of the Gut
Ileos, and night to the fuel of the Ferment of the dung; From thence it comes
to pass, that that dross is not allured from so far a distance under the
confusion of the fit at hand: for that the Family-administration of that
Kitchen, is confusedly troubled and interrupted: Because the stomach, together
with the whole Abdomen or neather-belly is disturbed, and in a guess or fear,
fore-feeles the storm at hand, no less than it co-suffers with the same, and
undergoes it, being present. For it seems to fore-feel the sand, not yet seen:
but surely, it is then present in its own womb, and while it is fore-felt, from
that very time, the beginning of that contracture is present. The Archeus
therefore being willing to wash off the enemy, and excuse the fit at hand,
calls to him from on every side all the Latex, and sends it down to rince the
Kidneys. Therefore the veins are contracted in the stony Reins, and the
Bowels consent; and therefore by reason of their consent, they dissemble the
pain of the Colic. For which cause, the pain of the stone in the Kidney, is
not yet sufficiently distinguished by the Schools. Neither is it a wonder,
that at the convulsion of the veins, the Bowels themselves are also convulsed
or pulled together: seeing contractures of the Joints (by reason of the near
affinity of consent) do follow as well the cruel pains of the Colic, as those
of the stone in the Kidneys. Far therefore do the Schools wander from the
Truth, as that the dross is drawn or sent, for the framing of the stone: but
rather the tincture thereof comes upon the urine by accident, while the Spirit
the Coagulater uncloathes his power on the volatile earth: Because other things
being agreeable, the stone that is tinged, is always more brickle than pale
ones. And that thing clearly argues, that the tincture of the urine, if it
could, would totally hinder the composition of Duelech. And therefore those
that have the Jaundice, although they are otherwise subject to the stone; yet
in time of the Jaundise, they are scarce seen to be stony; For therefore in
time of the generation of the affect of the stone, the urine, at the first
conception of sands, waxes yellow, and looks pale about the beginning of the
fit: Because then it is as yet, Latex, and not yet meet urine. Therefore, I
have certainly known, that if all the sand which is voyded should be made only
in the bosom of the Kidney, the pain would be greater while it is voyded, than
while the sand does not yet appear: The which notwithstanding, contradicts
experience.

Moreover, because the sand being once bred, the urine is troubled more than it
was wont, and becomes thicker; seeing otherwise, a troubled confusion
persuades, that it contains more of a pouderish matter (for in a more gross
consistence, there is more powder than in that urine which is at first clear
and watery:) That plainly convinces, that the womb of the affect of the stone,
is already filled up; neither that it can entertain

For they persuade, by the Marsh-mallow, Mallow, Oil of Almonds, and the like,
to assuage pains, to moisten, enlarge, and besmear the passages: and so in
this, as also in Schools are either intent only on the effect, or propose
that which is ridiculous: while, as they ought by a cleansing faculty, to brush
off the sands and lump, from the whole Womb, they totally employ themselves in
loosening the passages, and in moistening the membranes, which are always most
moist in themselves.

For truly, although the sand be expelled, yet the womb thereof is not
therefore safe: but at leastwise the sides of the veins, remain defiled with
the Bolus or lump, for a future Schools hitherto have had no regard.

For I sometimes wondered, that he that a good while before had the stone in his
Reins, Nephritical affect or stone in the Reins. For from thence I have
learned, that as pain in a Wound, stirs up a sandy or gleary water, so also,
that it can change the urine it self, which may hinder stoni^ying in the
ancient womb of the Loins. Wherefore also, there is a troubled urine (and that
without sand) seen in persons that have the stone: For the pain is the Trumpet,
which occasionally calls to it, the Latex from on every side, which inflames,
yea and disturbs the urine with a strange Guest being admixed with it. But in
so great a confusion of Offices, nothing is thought of the confusion itself:
For the pain has oftentimes set before mine eyes, the Image of fervent heat.
For water, after the boiling up of heat, is for the most part troubled and
confused: For so, because there is a Bolus made of the volatile earth of the
urine that is not yet sufficiently seasoned with a salt, by reason of the want
of an Urinary Ferment stablish'd in the Reins: therefore also, that Bolus or
lump melts with the fiery heat; neither is it constrained into the more hard
and great sands, as long as it does not experience the force of the Ferment of
the Kidneys: But the Bolus is sufficiently tinged, not indeed from the dross,
the more lately coming thereon, which tingeth the Sands (for that red lump is
beyond the yellowness of the dross) but from the washy venal blood, which is
erroneously translated in the veins (the womb of the Bolus) for uses, being
the ends of Turbulency. And for this cause, in the signification of urine, the
Bolus testifies of the Liver and venal Blood; but the sand nothing of these.

It is manifest therefore, that the urine is by it self salt, although a man be
not fed with

A certain Curate in our City, being beside himself, passed over 17 whole days
without any meat and drink before his death; but he never wholly wanted a daily
urine, although a more sparing one, and by degrees, a more red one departed
from him. From whence I conjecture, that there is in the Kidney an
exchangeative faculty of the blood into urine (and the which faculty, I
elsewhere, in the Treatise of the Dropsy, do studiously prosecute) no otherwise
than as a Wound does of the blood, prepate a speedy and plentiful Sunovie or
gleary water. Therefore the urine, for the last limitation of it self, requires
and borrowes a virtue from the Ferment, which the Kidneys do inspire into the
womb of the urine: No otherwise, than as the Liver inspires the faculty of
blood-making into the veins of the Porta, and knittings of the Mesentery:
Wherefore the whole Chyle of the stomach does in the same place presently
dissemble blood in its color. But the plainly Lord-like power of the Kidneys
over the veins, I elsewhere prosecute concerning the Dropsy. But although the
Ferment of the Kidney, serving for the ministry of the whole entire urine, be
as it were the digestion of a certain Bowel; yet it is not reckoned amongst the
number of digestions, because it concerns the concoction of a superfluity, but
not of a nourishment.

For since every transmutation which proceeds by digestions, has its own
Medium's Port-veine: For else, the blood, while it attained a vital condition
in the Liver, would undecently be defiled with the blast of the Ferment of the
Kidneys: But that the urine is naturally salt, and from whence that saltness
is unto it, thou shall find elsewhere concerning Digestions. But here, let it
be sufficient to have given notice, that as much of an acide salt as is bred in
the Chyle under the first digestion; so much passes over into a salt salt, by
a substantial Transmutation in the second.

I have now pointed out the womb of the Urine and Stone, beginning: I have also
declared the wonderful property of the Spirit of Urine, in coagulating, and
stonifying: Port-veine, and from thence to be expelled, as an unaccustomed
stranger, through the Mesentery into the Bowels: that it shall there also
easily coagulate unwonted stones; and the which Paracelsus calls congeoled; but
not coagulated ones; because they ascend not unto the hardness of the Duelech
of Urines: the which are confirmed from their mother-matter, a muscilage. But
if indeed, the spirit of urine be carried upwards or downwards through the
hollow vein; it by a faculty proper unto it self, estrangeth the spermatick
and muscilaginous nourishment of the similar parts into a more hard compaction:
from whence at length, Scirrhus's, quartane Agues, and also diverse obstructions
do arise: the which surely, they do vainly endeavor to brush away by Jeleps,
or Apozemes. Lastly, the Gaul is nourished by the venal blood its Neighbor;
whereinto, if the spirit of urine shall wander out of its own womb, stones are
presently bred also in the Gaul, For whatsoever enters into another harvest,
becomes foreign and hostile, and so, extraordinary affects do arise from
co-like Causes. For neither have I unfitly taught, that, that wheyish matter
which is carried, as being thoroughly mixed with the blood, and is by sweat or
otherwise, unsensibly dispersed, is not urine, as neither that it has the
properties of the same; nor that it is a whey, the imitater of Milk, and much
less that it is Gaul, or yellow Choler: but a part of the Liquor Latex; of
which, in its own Treatise.

CHAP. VII. Duelech Dissolved.
1. The inconsiderate rashness of the Schools is accused. 2. An account or
reckoning up of Knaves, over whom the Magistrate ought to be intentive. 3. The
Author excuses himself. 4. Every Disease in its own kind, is curable. 5. How
much is to be hoped for from the Shops. 6. Or what may there be found for the
Disease of the Stone. 7. A double Indication or betokening. 8. A somewhat deaf
intention of the Schools. 9. The vanity of this kind of intention. 10. Why the
Marsh-mallow, Mallow, juice of Citron, etc. may profit. 11. A frivolous
objection against Vrine-provoking Remedies. 12. The imposibilities of the
Schools. 13. The Reasons of the Schools for an impossible Remedy. 14. The
Reasons of the Alchymists. 15. The testimony of Cardanus. 16. The writ or
Charter of the Prince of Saltzburge. 17. The delusion of the Schools from a
ridiculous enquiring into Remedies. 18. Ridiculous privy shifts. 19. That the
Stone is not confirmed. 20. The stones of Animals and Vegetables, after what
sort they may be profitable unto us. 21. The manner of preparing them. 22. From
whence Ludus took its Name, and the preparation thereof. 23. Ludus, where it is
to be found. 24. A blockish beasting. 25. An error of Paracelsus. 26. The
rashness of the Schools. 27. Paracelsus prattles no less unsavourily
concerning the matter of the Stone, than the Humourists. 28. A declaratory
confession of things un-soulified: and of the Balsame of Salt. 29. The manner
of administering a Remedy. 30. The Bladder of the Bul-Cal^ being an Embryo. 31.
Observations about the stone of Crabs. 32. An Error of Paracelsus. 33. A
wondrous Antipathy. 34. A new Catheter.

I Have spoken of the Womb of the Affect or Disease of the Stone: But now I
must Schools, who are become a Reproach, because there has not been any thing
hitherto, diligently searched into, concerning the true Causes or Curing
thereof. I have indeed elsewhere rehearsed, that the power of the mind being as
it were barren or feeble, has acted the original of Medicine: and that
Medicine, being also in its ripe Years, even unto this very day brought into a
Circle without any progress: because they have been willing rather to abide in
foreign, Grecian, Barbarous and Heathenish Inventions, and have held it an
Honor to have polished other men's Principles. While as in the mean time, new
Diseases arise: also those: that were once spent or grown stale, do rise again
masked; and therefore do they appear illegitimate, nor any longer answering to
the descriptions of the first. For indeed, Medicine stands without any
progress, while as our health stands in the greatest need of the increase of
healing: As a slow and ungenerous kind of Physicians hinders the same, because
they would be wise only by another commentary, and deny Art to increase above
what they have known: And therefore also, whatsoever they are ignorant of, they
by a certain despair, drive away into the Catalogue of uncurable Diseases. As
if the invention of Ancestors, had stopped up the way of our industry, had shut
up the treasures of wisdom, and as if all the modern force of the mind were
barren, and the power of divine wisdom exhausted, that there were nothing any
longer, which may demonstrate unto us a further truth.

Truly the cup of sloth has even from the very beginning, befooled the world
with a Lethargy; for therefore, every one, had rather to assent, than
diligently to search: For so great is the sweetness of gain; that every one
does with love, admire his own societies or confusions, and Miscellanies of
Medicines (they call them received Magistrals) and those Medicines which being
in times past the more secret ones, have rendered Physicians that were Lovers of
labor, famous: old women, by reason of the drowsiness of Physicians, have at
this day, spread abroad into the hands of Apothecraies.

From whence, every Barber, Bather, Nun, Tormenter, or Bawd that was chased out
of the Stews of harlots, boasts of medicine; the number whereof I will here
describe.

For those first come to hand, who will heal, being indeed not instructed for
this purpose; Galen after the example of his Master Quintius, has confirmed:
For the Schools making experiments by the deaths of men, presently call their
Graduates, most expert Physicians. Others being vulgar ones, had rather heal
only the vulgar; and unto these they give their Counsels: Some also, from
favor alone, and being entreated. Many also, by reason of the ambition of
honor, and that they may seem as wise men, have this kind of vice bred in
them; for such kind of Deceivers will seem to be rich, and therefore they
perform all services for death, or a chanced health, freely.

Of this sort are those first of all, who at Rome, thrust a Triacle on the
Cardinals and Peers, as composed of better Simples than God has created in
nature: For so we have deceived the people in the City, and have seemed to be
holy Apothecaries. There succeed these, such as require rewards indeed, but in
no wise money, lest they should be known to have put off the condition of Noble
persons, and likewise their promised poverty: And therefore they are those, who
say, they earn or merit nothing for themselves, but only for a poor Community.
There are Apostates like to these, who confess indeed, that they are not
Physicians; but that they have their secrets from a Queen, or an Emperor: For
these are wont to interpose as middle persons, which extol the price of their
medicine. And then there follow these, who wear garments and a purse bored full
of holes like a sieve; neither, in the mean time, are they slow to exercise, of
their own imposture: As that they were sometimes very rich, but now
impoverished (in a hogs-head of wine) by the Art of Chemistry, by Wars, and by
the constancy of Religion. There are also those, who at sometime were valiant
in a troop of Soldiers; but in War (for the conflicting for moneys) they
bestowed all their wealth; they show their scars in a bravery, perhaps being
received as a due reward. Some also have left wives and children, houses, and
Altars, and the pleasant fields of their Country, for the worship of Religion.
Many also are poor of their own accord, because no body will give them any
thing: neither are those wanting, who feign their Religions, change their
garment, walk in wodden begging shoes; they by a lurking hypocrisy,
counterseit an Hermit, into whom God has inspired the virtues of Simples.
There are some also, who everywhere intermix Astronomy and Palmestry.

In the next place, there are others who wander about the country, who
received their Art in the Mountain of Venus: from hence they have known to cure
bruit beasts, no less than men, from diseases: Likewise, they know also how to
foretell things to come, and to dig treasures out of the earth: And there are
some, who being destitute of books, write on paper the unharmless words of
Solomon, whereby diseases no otherwise than as Devils are chased away; they
carry crosses before and behind them, lest the Devil should carry away him that
writes those powerful words. There are some who understand diverse Dialects;
they feign among the Dutch, that they can speak the Chaldean, Arabic, and
Dalmatian or Sclavonian tongue, and being laden with many Arts, they at length,
brag of Science Mathematical, or Histories: Many of these have known how to
make, no less then the stone which makes gold, they carry about with them Mines
of Metals, that are propagable by a perpetual ferment. There are also
Saracens; and there are baptized Jews (for the most part, wickeder than those
that are not baptized) who have learned out of the Cabal, diverse ways to
morrifie Mercury; and likewise diversely to prepare poisons: the which, they
deliver, to be prevalent against all diseases, and many other. They boast, that
the Hebrew tongue does contain the foundations of all Sciences, and the great
Secrets of Commonwealths; and that they are great with child of the
foreknowledge of future things. They oftentimes cite their Rabbis, their book
Nebolohu, together, with the little Key of Solomon: from whence they are able
to read as well things past, as things to come. Others also affirm, that the
medicinal Art is to be inherited only in their own progeny or succession of
blood; although they are all foolish, or wicked persons. But if they are not
received by men, at leastwise, among women they boast with a Grace: for they
are covered with the same hide, both Greeks and Jews, although the one does
interchangeably deride the other; for they being prompt by nature, perfectly
learn to Lie, of themselves.

There is also a fugitive sort of the family of Chemists; the which, while they
boast of the more choice remedies, set to sale nothing but poisons to
Apothecaries: for they usurp all liberty of lying among the ignorant; lying
increasing with them through daily use: For they are Idiots, being fugitive
Apostates from Chemical furnaces. But the Schools, do with a greater security,
and by a most free authority of all, deceive Mortals: for when as I do by the
unavoidable decree of truth, demonstrate, that they are altogether ignorant of
the essences, causes, and remedies of Diseases, and do confirm that thing by a
great Volumn, and Reasons drawn from the cause: they in the mean time, promote
their own Scholars; this man, because he is a Latinist, and has his father a
Chyrurgion, or an Apothecary; or another, because he was made Master of Arts,
and has heard some Lectures of Professors; another lastly, because he in
part, brags of Enclide, or or has learned to dispute, from Aristotle.

But I pity mankind, which is subject to so many inward Calamities, and exposed
to so many external assailants: who, when under the unlucky rules of the
Schools, they have slain any one of those in chief Place, do assume the
privilege of calling upon the uncurableness of the disease, and have
everywhere their patrons and accomplices. And so, they alone, do without
punishment, make an assault on the lives of Princes, even as I have showed in
the book of Fevers. But by so much themore miserably, do mortals entrust
themselves in their hands, because they cover their ignorance among the common
people, by promotion, and an oath. For they swear that they will faithfully
cure infirmities, the which, I have shown, that they are altogether ignorant
of. Yea, their Prince, Galen, has not shown them so much as one Medicine,
which was not borrowed from Empericks, however he may triumph in his pastime
Theory of Complexions and Degrees, as well according to their kinds, as places.
For Quintius, the Master of Galen, and wholly an Emperick, is everywhere called
on for help, by his Scholar.

Princes and Magistrates ought to divert this unpunished liberty of killing,
from their Physicians would become the more watchful, and the business would
more rightly succeed with the sick, and the Prince would preserve his Subjects.

But those Statutes are to be seriously kept; for they are equivalent to the
Law of Cornelius, concerning privy murderers. I now return from whence I have
digressed. There are also some, who while they feign themselves to have read my
Book of Fevers, object, that I boast only of Chemical Remedies, and unwonted
Arcanum's or Secrets, that I might call every sick person unto my self, by
despising the most safe doctrine of the Ancients. Far be it! Because I neither
go to visit the sick, not do I heal for hope of gain: The which, all good men
of our whole Country are witnesses of. Surely, I call none, to prostitute or
set my Medicines to sale unto them. I willingly live a retired life, being
sought unto only by the poor. This one thing, I openly and freely profess: to
wit, that the conquests of difficult diseases, do require other Physicians than
Humourists, and far different remedies from those which the Apothecary sels:
Because they do most desirously require the endowed powers of the most perfect
bodies, that their poisons, from their balsames, may be separated in us. Yea
where poisons are not manifest, the confusions of the Archeus are overcome,
impurities are privily expelled, the Dimensions of remedies are turned in and
out, that they may disclose their properties, of whose endeavor, the Archeus
has need.

And moreover, the impressions of remedies may be turned inward, whose Tyranny
our nature cannot bear without destruction. For in this offense, and in this
penury, many ages have already departed, as being unhappily passed over;
because the causes which make diseases, being unknown, the powers of Remedies
being not known, and the more ptofound preparations being despised, whatsoever
disease did not pass under heathenish beginnings, has stood dedicated unto
desperate ones.

Truly, no Disease is, in its kind, uncurable: For God, as he made not death,
so neither

Wherefore, I before God, who is everywhere present, do from my very soul,
exhort a sluggish kind of men, who are ready in subscribing to the ignorant,
that they contemtemplate with me, that by the remedies of the Shops, some
diseases alimentary or pertaing Hippocrates indeed, without envy, left the
enquiries into the more profound remedies, unto posterity: because our
Ancestors lived in more happy ages. But the Schools have not had respect unto
the greater necessities of Mortals, of nature sitting and laying; but being
content with Galen, and his Master Quintius, they have not perceived the
defects of mortal men, seeing they have beheld gain to sway them in any event
whatsoever. For they have not so much as once earnestly considered, how to
hinder the returns of the stone in the kidneys, and much less, how to dissolve
the stone; because they had yielded up their names to deceived Authors, and
false causes. For therefore there has nothing been heard hitherto, of the true
cause of stones, and of a true cure, and therefore also, nothing of true
remedies.

For truly, such a remedy was desired, which might hinder the Offspring of a
growing Duelech to come, by a preparation of the very urine it self: Then also,
which might restore the Gorgonous declining of the stone-breeding womb, the
power of a stonifying ferment; and at length, which might also dissolve
whatsoever the spirit, the Coagulater had committed. Of all which particulars,
there has nothing been hitherto heard: Only the Schools have been intent in
driving the stone foreward, and in loosening of the urine passages.

Therefore, in curing of the disease of the Stone, a twofold industry is
obvious to our Duelech being generated. I will show, that it has not been
dreamed of either intention, in the Schools; but only, that they have attempted
the driving forth of sands and stones; but that they have not consideted of the
pacifying of so cruel a pain, from the root. They praise indeed, and exalt to
the highest pitch, Mallows, the Marsh-Mallow, Oil of Almonds, and whatsoever
things they name moisteners for mollifying: and then, they con-joyn diverse
fomentations, as well those, mostening, as abstersive or cleansing, and
likewise cooling ones, lest the pains should be heightened, or the stones
increase. Yea, they commend also, the Oil of Scorpions; as though, that being
anoinced on the outside, would break the stones! as if I say, they would
loosen the fat, fleshy membrane, and Peritoneum or filme enclosing the bowels;
to wit, at the enlargement whereof, the urine-pipe should presently be
mollified, and extended in breath or wideness. Truly the common people have
found out, and brought forth these succors for themselves, some old woman at
first persuading them.

Afterward, the Schools, at the beginning, admired these succors, and then,
straightway other hope of healing: But for the enlargement of the urine-pipe,
not indeed according to its length; but only, whereby they might hope, to wit,
for its widening: as if nature were obliged to conform her self to the
endeavors of Physicians: And so they have judged the remedies of pains to be
by accident; whereunto they have adjoined Clysters, lest the urine-pipe being
pressed together by the dung lying upon it, should spread a floud-gate for the
sliding stone, and so, should stop up its passage; And so that the capital
remedy of the Schools has been intent about dungs, the effect, and latter
symptoms; but no way on the causes, roots and foundations: From whence that
Satirical verse arose.

Stercus and Vrina, Medicorum fercula prima. Excrementitious Dung and
Vrine-piss,
Are of Physicians, the chief dainty dish.
But how vain and childish these aids of the Schools are, the very afflicted
themselves, and the widows and offspring of these, do testify. First of all,
the Muscilages of the Mallow, do not pass through, from the mouth unto the
Ureter, in the form of an asswaging, loosening and mollifying Medicine but
that, they do first receive some formal transmutations in their passage: For
neither does any thing descend thither, unless it has first assumed the nature
of urine: Yea, and if the urine-pipe being now stopped up by the stone, (for as
long as it is not stopped up, it has not as yet filled up the whole wideness
of the Ureter, and therefore an enlargement of the same should be in vain
required) does sustain the urine lying behind it; after what sort, I pray,
shall this same excrement give place in so straight a passage, that it may rise
up, and make room for the urine prepared of the Mallow, coming unto it?

I, at leastwise, confess, that I do not understand any thing of these
promises. And then, put the case, that old wive's fiction were granted, and
that, that moistening Muscilage could come down safe unto that straight
angiport or narrow lane of the urine: yet it shall not therefore extend the
pipe of the Ureter, which was already before, moist; the which, besides the
already actual mostening of it self, does now require or expect to be enlarged
by a foreign muckiness: as neither, being once ever enlarged, should it
afterward wish for, or admit of a further repeated extension of it self, in
relapses; And so, that supposed, and dissembled remedy of the Schools, would be
profitable but at only turn: Unless they had rather, that the Ureter should be
enlarged by the sliding and coming of the aforesaid Muscilages thereto, and
through their casual absence to be again narrowed into its former state; which
is to grant a power of enlarging according to the desire of the Physician,
besides the accustomedness and nature of a solid passage, and that of the first
constitution: Because they should naturally, afterward again return into their
former and native narrowness. For the Schools, if they speak seriously in these
things, they befool or deride the sick, and do wantonize by applauding of
themselves.

I pray you, if they suppose these things to be true, why do they forbid
Diuretics, if they are of validity for driving forth of the stone, and by
adminstring moisteners, do enlarge the narrow passages? Why do they not couple
moisteners with provokers of urine, that they may satisfy both betokenings at
once? For I have already taught before, that if death shall come upon the
Patient, from the stone sticking in the passage, that does not happen from the
guilt of Diuretic Medicines; as neither because the urine vessel (unless
perhaps, it shall be a monstrous one) is in some other place, straighter than
it self in its beginning: and therefore that the stone once departing out of
the kidney, if it be stayed in the sliding down by reason of the strickness of
the passages; that happens from the cruelty of pain which has convulsively
contracted the urine-pipe: And therefore, that comes not to pass through the
offense of the Diuretics, but of the Physician, who has never scarce heard of
this Convulsion, in the Schools; and therefore, neither has he sought into a
remedy for it. Where surely the incongruity, and faulty arguing of the Schools,
from not the cause, as for the cause, comes to be taken notice of.

Because the aforesaid moysteners, the Marsh-mallow, mallow, and oil of
Almonds, or cutting force of its sharpness (for otherwise, vinegar, and other
sharp things should perform the same) because the juice of Citron, lays aside
its tartness in the first digestion of heat, and therefore, neither is it
admixed with victuals, now waxing hot: but there remains in it a residing
faculty, convenient for asswaging of the Cramp or convulsion: To wit, while it
being converted into urine, does as yet retain a certain kind of mark of its
former middle life.

What if the Schools do fear the use of Diuretics, least happily, many stones
in descending, should light at once within the Ureter, and that he which as
being the more gross Diuretik medicine: Because, besides, a fiction is also
set to sale for a truth; For whatsoever does at the beginning, happen to fall
into the urine-pipe (unless it shall be a certain hook) that does thus
proceed, and is carried downwards: For small stones do not play and wantonize in
so famous a passage: not one stone, or many at once that are bigger than the
passage, do pass out of the kidney: as neither do they once fall down from
thence, which sustain the weight of urine behind them. That thing indeed, were
to be suspected, if the Ureter were not a soft and loose membrane, but a dry
and unflexible reed: For that, a moist membrane, for fear of a Vacuum or
emptiness, does of necessity always fall down on the sides, unless it be
enlarged from behind, by the urine falling: But the urine provoking medicine,
is not yet therefore hurtful. For the falling of many and badly formed little
stones by chance into the Ureter, has not drawn its faults from the diuretic
remedy; but from the fatal urine rushing on it, which without that Diuretic,
had equally fallen: wherefore a Diuretical remedy is neither to be feared, or
turned away from, for fear of an irregular and monstrous chance: to wit, that,
that which is ordinary, by it self profitable, should be forbidden, from the
fear of an unwonted and most seldom accident. But if they say, that many small
stones being glewed together with a slimy matter, do fall out: First of all,
that destroies the material cause of Duelech which is diligently taught by the
Schools. For truly that phlegmy glue ought already to have been stonified: but
those stones neither found, nor took to them, that glue in the urine-pipe:
wherefore if one only stone, or many co-glewed ones, do slide out of the
kidney, it is all one: because in their sliding forth, they were not bigger
than the passage of the kidney.

Therefore if urine-provokers do not dissolve that glue, nor disjoyne those
little stones: it shall atleast be very profitable, so much as may be, to have
driven forth that offensive fardle of the stone, a more plentiful and provoked
urine laying on it, by the urine its own weight. For the urine-pipe is not
naturally moist with any muscilage within; The which, the urines of healthy
persons do testify: Therefore, if any muscilage of medicines should come down
thither, that could not but be unto the Ureter besides nature, and its usual
wont. What if the urine pipe, being beset with a stone cast into it, be said to
beget a muscilage.

First of all, the urines of those that have the stone in the reins, do
contradict that chance: And then also, the Schools shall be heedlesse, which
derive phlegm, or the material cause of the stone, from above, yea, out of the
stomach, for stones: because it is that which should be found at hand, and in
the sick urter. And foolish muscilages of foreign simples are given to drink,
if a muscilage should be the native cause of the malady. And then, the Schools
speak, as if Diuretics did drive foreward the stone, yea and also the urine as
with a hammer, or as if they did thrust them forward behind their back, as by a
staff: for so, by artificial things, after the manner of the vulgar, they
plunge themselves into a labarinth for a spectacle: Not considering, that in
urine-provoking remedies, there is a specifical property left from the middle
life of the simple, or got in the transchanging of digestion; from which
property, Diuretics do emunge or wipe out the urine. But no Diuretics do by
themselves respect the progeny of the stone; As neither does an honest or true
Physician give heed to effects that rush on the sick acidentally by accident,
that therefore, he should neglect effects, perse, or by themselves; the which
notwithstanding is otherwise done, by forbidding of a urine-provoking medicine.
Because that a sanative indication, or healing betokening, commands a most
ready removal of that which is hurtful, and the rather, of that which does
afterward wax more great by delay. Therefore I praise Diuretical remedies in
the stone of the kidneys, so that they do also aswage and lull asleep the
convulsion. A certain Countess, and likewise another Nun, closed their day
with huge pain: For both of them showed as it were, a hook, wlth one sharp top
of its Triangle ending in the kidney; but with its other, into the Vreter: and
both of them dyed with a cruel Convulsion. They dye not indeed by reason of the
suppressing of their urine, when as the other of their Kidneys, yielded a
sufficiency of urine: but they dye only through a cruel Convulsion; which
Cramp is again loosened about the time of Death: Wherefore the Dissection
presented nothing besides a small stone of a Hook-like form, which brought
death upon them.

I said at the beginning, that the curing of Duelech did consist as well in the
abolishment Schools deny to be possible: and so we stand in opposite terms.
Therefore we must come unto Reasons, unto Witnesses or Deeds, and unto Charters
or Letters Patents; and that, my Right being proved, the ignorances of the
Schools also may be made manifest.

First of all, Seeing that of a Non-being, or of that which is impossible to
be, there is not any positive Conception, and so, neither is there any
knowledge thereof; Therefore the Schools confess, that there can be no Science
or knowledge unto them: and that they do deny those things to be possible,
which they confess themselves to be ignorant of.

But the Reasons, which have dashed the Schools unto an impossibility, are
these; but frivolous enough. Our Experience, the Mistress of things, has not
yet made it manifest unto us, that the evil inclination can be taken away;
since that according to Galen, a Distemper being turned into a Nature, cannot
be cured, according to the Proverb.

Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret Though Nature with a Fork thou
do expel,
Yet still she will return into her Cell.
But most especially, in the part that is filled with a continual Excrement, to
take away the confirmed distemper, is altogether impossible. But as to the
Stone being confirmed, however great a noise the specious boasting of
Stone-breaks may make, yet it is nothing but the vain Boasting of Empericks;
The braggings of Idiotisme, and nothing else. For the Physician can only stir
and drive forth the stone by Urine-provokers, and loosen the passages by
moystening Emollients: Yea, since Diuretic Medicines are full of danger,
nothing is more meet for a Physician to do in the Disease of the stone, than to
enlarge the Urine-pipes by moystening them, and to take away the incumbent
filths by Clysters, from the Bowels: but the smoak-selling Chemists, boast that
they will dissolve the stone being confirmed in the Bladder, by a Retrograde
Resolution; and so they procure nothing but disgrace to themselves from their
own mouth: But our Philosophy promises nothing beyond the strength of Nature,
and therefore it remains Reverenced among Learned men, and has taken firm
Root for so many Ages already past. For who sees not, that the stomach it self
ought of necessity to be sooner broken to pieces and dissolved, than the stone
which is an hundred times harder than the stomach, being so far remote from the
mouth? But because the Chemist is for the most part ignorant of Philosophy, he
boldly promises any thing, that he may wipe Moneys from the miserable and
credulous sick; The which, he knows not how to provide by his Gold-making Art.
For if there could be any thing in Nature, which would dissolve a confirmed
Duelech, so many Princes and Peers, and so many various Wits of Physicians, had
not hitherto wanted so happy a Remedy.

These are the lofty Looks, Decrees, and Calumnies of the Schools: The which
notwithstanding

For first of all, if any one by offending, may contract a Disease; Why, by a
well-healing, may he not take away the same radically? and wholly Root out the
Characters that were once imprinted on the part? For I have freed many from the
Disease of the stone, to the which they had for some years been obedient, so
as that they lived for the future, plainly free therefrom. The Remedies of
whom, thou shall by and by find, under the penalty of my infamy or disgrace.
For I easily indulge the Schools, because they speak according to their own
experiences, and ignorances of the Causes, and deny that the Impression
translated on the powers of the Members, is to be taken away: To wit, seeing
they hitherto acknowledge, nothing but raw and sluggish Remedies: But in the
mean time, they are wallowed in an unexcusable Error, who despair that any one
should be wise beyond themselves: When as in the mean time, they cease
diligently to search, and all their life long, addict themselves only to Gain.
The Judgments of the Schools have regard unto the Writings of Ancestors who
were subscribers to Heathenism: but our Judgments have respect unto the first
Being of Bodies they being freed or dispatched from their Wrapperies, whereby
they are hindered from proceeding unto the first Constitutives of us: wherein
they are able to strangle the hurtful Impressions which are introduced into
the middle Life; and for that cause to take away those Impressions which seem
to be converted into a Nature. As to the taking away of the inclination; first
of all the Medicine Aroph of Paracelsus (which sounds, as the Aroma or sweet
Spice of the Philosophers; so called by reason of its Golden Tincture) being
prepared under Dung, with the mixture of Rye-bread, and afterward extracted
with spirit of Wine, cures an ancient inclination unto the stone of the Kidneys.

A certain man called Baio, our Countryman, while as he had for some years in
his Embassage into England, been many times molested with the stone in his
Kidneys, with the greatest pain, and through my persuasion, making use of the
aforesaid Liquor Aroph twice every week, was afterward free from that affect
of the stone for the space of eighteen years: and at length dies in the 83
year of his age; and his dead Carkase being dissected, showed not so much as a
small sand or little stone; who before, while he was stony, whether he were
carried in a Coach, or soberly walking, had always pissed bloody urine: His
Heirs do now as yet survive, who are witnesses hereof.

I remember also the Counselor, of whom I before made mention, concerning his
eating of Asparagus; For he, when he was wont miserably to lay down at every
fifteen days, having afterward used Ale wherein Daucus or wild Carrot-seed
was boiled, has lived now, for some years, free from the Disease of the
stone. The Experiments and Testimonies of whom, do make the Schools to blush:
Since there is Truth in their mouth. Paracelsus also called the Beings of Gemms
and Stone-breaks unto his aid; and at length, by the one only Remedy of Ludus,
promises, and attained both the ends of Curing. The Schools Deny that to be
possible, which they cannot perform: their Testimony is full of arrogance and
blockishnesse: For truly, as often as they admire at the feeble help of
Stone-breaking things, attempted with their crude Remedies, and also their vain
effect thereof, they bend their Brows, lift up their Shoulders as astonished,
being asked, are silent; but being constrained, s^ye back to an impossibility,
and had rather accuse God, as having forgotten Mercy and Goodness, than that
he had afforded Remedies in Nature against the stone; being (as they say)
confirmed, and against most Diseases: Yea, they do more willingly accuse God of
forgetfulness, than they themselves can admit of the mark of any ignorance in
their own Paganish Doctrine. But Princes being circumvented by the Schools,
have subscribed to the juggling deceits of these; and they being seduced by the
Impostures of the Schools, the liberality of their Piety has erected
Hospitals of uncurable sick: which Impostures have reproved that Text of
Wisdom of a Lie; God has made all Nations of the earth curable: neither is
there a Medicine of destruction. For the Schools have made their own and too
gross ignorance, reciprocal and convertible with the impotency of Nature, as if
they knew every thing that is possible, and were ignorant only of that which
were impossible: and that not only Negatively, but altogether privatively: As
though their ignorance did not depend on the de^ect of Universities; but rather
on the scantinesse of Divine Goodness, or Providence. Wherefore since a denial
of possibility in healing, seemed to me to contain a hidden wickedness, I
always hoping well even from my youth, did argue on the contrary, after this
manner. If it be of Faith, that every Disease began from the Fall or departing
out of the Right way; but that every sin may be wholly remitted: we must by all
means hope, that every Disease may in its own kind be taken away, if the
punishment be equalized with the sin, in Remission: Especially, because the
same God who forgiveth sins, does also heal Diseases, has afforded Remedies,
and has created the Physician through the abundance of his Goodness, which
exceeds all his Actions: and is infinitely greater in his Indulgence, than
all the sins of men. For could he not perhaps, create a suitable and victorious
Remedy for every Disease? Or knew he nor how to do it? Or was he unwilling so
to do? Who has afforded the Remedy of Eternal Death. For he rejoices not in
the destruction of the living, who has made all Nations of the Earth curable.
But as to the authorities of Writers: For Cardanus writes, that in his Age,
there wandered a man about among the Lombards, who in a few days, by a certain
Cup, cured in many places safely, certainly, and briefly, as many as had the
stone in their Bladder: and he adds his Judgment, that he doubted not, but
that this man was in Hell; because dying, he envied his Art unto mortals. In so
great a Paradox, one only witness is not sufficient against the Clamours of
the Schools. The Epiaph of Theophrastus Paracelsus, which is seen in a wall in
an Hospital, nigh Saint Sebastians Temple, being erected by the Prelate of
Saltzburge, does represent the same wonder to have many times happened, however
the Guts of the scoffing Momus may crack. His words run thus; Here lays
Entombed, Philippus Aureolus Paracelsus, a famous Doctor of Medicine, who by
his Wonder-working Art, took away those cruel wounds, the Leprosy, Gout,
Dropsy, and other uncurable contagions of the Body, and honored his Goods, so
as to be distributed and disposed of to the Poor. In the Year of our Lord,
1541; on the 24th, day of September, he changed Life for Death.

But that under uncurable Diseases, the Tabes or Consumption of the Lungs,
Asthma, Stone, and all such like Diseases were understood by the Prince of
Salizburge, the Schools themselves do teach. Because they are those who do
always Thunder out, That such Diseases are every where, chiefly uncurable: And
then, the indefinite phrase of the Epitaph has respect unto the Books
published by Paracelsus concerning the Stone; and that with a far more acurate
Quil, than concerning other Diseases. At leastwise therefore, whatsoever is
once and the oftener done in Nature, it is not impossible that this should be
done again: And by Consequence, whosoever affirms that to be impossible,
which by divine Goodness was at sometime done in Nature, according to the
desire of the Physician, he lies before God the Workman of Nature: For in the
Right, which is of the deed done, those very Witnesses do disclose it; and
those are reckoned, unprofitable brawlings, which are brought in against
Witnesses. The Schools therefore, which call us Deceivers, do mock mankind
with an Elenchus or faulty Argument: saying, The stone that is far remote from
the mouth, is far harder than the membrane of the stomach: whatsoever therefore
should corrode or lessen the stone, being at a far distance, had now a good
while before consumed the stomach it self, whereinto it had newly fallen.
Therefore the stone is of necessity, an uncurable evil. But if the holy
Scriptures write otherwise, a way is to be sought, whereby with moderation,
they may be excused of falsehood. But surely, the Keys of Wisdom are by a
certain force, so detained in the Schools, that seeing themselves enter not
in, they also endeavor to drive away others that are willing to enter. For it
is not in the intent of the Chemist, to take away Duelech by Corrosives, but by
proper and specifical Dissolvers. For neither does the stomach of a Pigeon
dissolve Pearls, or that of an Oestrich, Iron, or Flints, by Corrosives, but by
an appropriated Ferment of Digestion: Or if thou shall grant Corrosives unto
the stomach of Animals: at leastwise they are such, which bring not any damage
to the stomach; And moreover, if thou have regard unto the highest Corrosives,
Aqua fortis dissolves indeed Iron, Brass, and Silver; but Wax, it does not so
much as pierce. Through the inconsiderateness of which thing, the Schools have
affrighted their young Beginners, the unlearned vulgar; yea, and great men from
diligent searching into things, their own ignorance, the drowsiness of diligent
searching, and hope of Gain, persuading them hereunto. Therefore for the stone,
and diseases in the Bladder, as if Physicians did intend a Derivation or
drawing them another way, they being ridiculously converted unto the Fundament,
have attempted the matter by Clysters; as if to have unloaded the Fundament,
were to have purged out the stone.

For they saw, that the juice of Citron did diminish a humane Duelech in a
glass, and they hoped, that the same thing ought to be done in us: But if not,
that they could

In the next place, if one only drop of the more tart wine be sent inwardly
unto the bladder, it brings more pain thereunto, than a great stone. They
therefore imagine a ridiculous thing, who boast, that by administering the sharp
juice of Citron at the mouth, they have done some profitable thing for the
diminishment of the stone. They likewise err, who also hand forth liquors that
are distilled with salts, for the dissolving of the stone in the bladder: for a
sharp matter, as such, cannot pass through into the veins, without a notable
hurt or damage. And although, in the juice of Citron, and much more in the
spirit of Sea Salt, there are succors for those that have the stone; yet these
do not happen unto them, unless they have first bid sarewell to their rartness:
Because in very deed, the curing or dissolving of Duelech, is not perfected by
sharp, as neither by corrosive things. Neither do sharp cups ever pierce unto
the bladder, not are suffered to be derived thither.

But while the Schools have been intentive on the summary or content of
stone-breaking Medicines, although as astonished, they were at first, fearful
of the issue of what they promised, and afterward being more assured, they saw
themselves to be frustrated of their hope; yet sporting with man's skin, they
gave him the beaten powders of fruits and stones. They knew, I say, that they
were destitute of a remedy; yet they desisted not to give those things to
drink, which they knew to be vain, wherein they deceived the sick, while they
skipt over the occasion of healing, with vain and pastime remedies, that they
might excuse themselves of their death, among posterity: as though they had
faithfully administered whatsoever was possible in nature, and those things
which are extolled by true Physicians. Of the more hard seeds (as while they
gave credit to Grummel seed, so it is by a ridiculous name, called
[Lithospermen] or stony seed, by the Schools) they straightway made to
themselves a presage from their name. And then, they joined the stones of
Crabs, Snails, Fishes, also the burnt shells of shelfishes, yea, the hardest
gemmes, being beaten in Aurichalcum or Copper. At length, they gave Crystal,
being fired, quenched, and beaten, to drink, from a pastime invention, and with
a deluding event.

Last of all, as soon as they beheld themselves to have come into derision and
despite, or least they might seem to expect a reward, and their repeated
frequencies of visits to be undeservedly paid them, but to have done something,
although they being perfectly instructed by manifold experiences, despaired
within their own breasts: They said, that a succouring remedy, which was
denied in Europe and Asia, was to be fetched out of the Indies; at leastwise,
that the Council of the Physician by the knowledge of so fotreign Simples,
might be drawn into an admiration by those that stand by: As if God were not
the Creator of remedies, the merciful helper of the sick, and had for so many
thousand years, refused remedies to the European and Asian sick?

But in the mean time, the stone does of its own accord, rush headlong out of
the kidney (for of that of the bladder, they have long since despaired) oh, of
what great esteem are their stone-breaks so administered, then, made! and as
somewhat too bold, they feign, that their powders do command the kidneys, no
otherwise then as bondslaves, and break the stones, as it were, under a hammer.

But if the business succeed the less prosperously, they grieve that they were
called late,

Truly, a privy shift of the Schools it is, being a like ridiculous! For truly,
Duelech does not obtain his hardness by degrees; because he is hardened by his
own Coagulum or runnet,

Who is there therefore, who may not admire with me, the everywhere gross
ignorance of the Schools? They have not only deceived themselves by their own
thinking, for that they have said, the stone in the bladder is generated,
dried, and by degrees more hardened and confirmed through heat; but they have
not so much as considered by the way, that urine does apply sands in the glass,
and in the cold of the encompassing air, without the help of heat, dryth, or
cocture; it being as hard to day, as it will be after that it is dried in a
paper.

These indeed are the Studies, Decrees, and Remedies of the Schools; by the
worthy deeds whereof, they deny a help to be possible in nature, for those that
have the stone: And therefore they decree, that the stone in the bladder, which
is bigger than the passage, has not a remedy in nature, from the divine
goodness, besides the knife. For the bladder of women may be enlarged by
operation with the womb-glass, and send forth its stone; but we now treat of
the bladder of a man.

Horatius Augenius a chief Paduan, rejoices, that the cruelty of the knife was
also increased by his own brain; to wit, because he first had dictated that
wickedness to be done by a fired knife: But Paracelsus his junior, although he
had also referred the whole hope of Duelech on the knife; yet afterward having
silenced his error, repaired by his Ludus, his marble and flinty Tartars,
equally, with other shellie or brickie bodies, resolving them by that one only
remedy. Truly I know that divine goodness has created stones in the Vegetal
and Animal Family, which should be unprofitable and vain in their own
particular kinds, almost monstrous, yea otherwise burdensome to their own
individuals, unless they were created for some good unto us.

Therefore since all things were created for the use of ungrateful man, and
many things Duelech, if it be so prepared, that it may come through unto the
kidneys without the hurting of its faculties; yet the stone of the Animal or
Vegetable, in their rocky nature, are for the most part, the more civil ones,
and so being as, it were household Citizens, they are the more easily admitted
into our Commonwealth: for their countenance do cause a hope of their Signate:
that as often as they depart from their stony disposition, they also obtain a
power of executing the natural endowments promised in their Signate, they enter
into Wedlock with us, and communicate their intimately espoused, promised
virtues unto us.

The which cannot happen, but by a full resolving of them into their first
Being: For I have etc. Volatile, without any Caput mortuum or dead head, after
that they had returned into a milkie juice: And that indeed, without a
separative distillation: For I have found, that this kind of remedy does
restore, no otherwise than as Aroph does preserve: Of which two, I make this
difference; that restoration is the cutting off of the received inclination:
but preservation is a prevention of that which is to come through a hinderance
of the disposeable matter: But in a true cure, both are included.

Furthermore, for the true resolution and melting of Duelech being generated,
the Ludus Paracelsus obtains the Chiefdom, not that it is a flint, and that
children do play with it; even as some have interpreted the Etymology thereof:
But because Ludus is always extracted in the form of the ancle, of a die, or
square cube: of the preparation whereof, this is the description according to
the Author.

Ludus being exactly beaten or pounded, calcined, and boiled even into the form
of an oil; the which, he by almost one only word, calls the Gawl of the
earth, and a corrected Altholizoi, which sounds al. tho. oli. gesotten. or
that which is wholly converted into an oil by boiling. Which most eminent
preparation of Ludus, has hitherto been made known but to a few Mortals, under
that brief Tract of words.

And although the world be worthy of Compassion, and that its preparation may
in a more manifest sense be described; yet the manifold Contemners of secret
things are unworthy, that those things should be manifested now, which God for
most weighty reasons, would have to remain among a few, and the little ones of
this world, in the possession of the treasures of his own dispensation, until
that nothing be hidden, which shall not be revealed in its own fullness of
days: in which fullness of time, Woe to the world, and to its confusion!

Yet will I speak a little plainer, that those only, who are skilful in the
Philosophy of the art of the fire, may comprehend me. Let Ludus be beaten into
a powder, in a Mortar, and under a Pestil: And then again under a Whetstone, in
a stony or marble mortar: Then afterward let it be calcined; not indeed with
a roasting fire; but let there be added unto it, the Circulated salt, whereof
Paracelsus speaks in his book of renewing and restoring, and the salt being
distilled from thence, is called Ludns Calcined: Because with the small labor
of two hours, it will be wholly converted into a slat. Let Ludus therefore,
being thus calcined, and reduced into a salt, and being of equal weight with it
self, run down of its own free accord into a moist place.

But let that salt being resolved, be shut up with Hermes Seal, in an Egg with
a long the Ludus, shall in its own equal weight, stand like a more gross Oil
upon the water, which it drew from the air of the Cellar: For then all the
Ludus is a volatile salt, in the form of an oily salt dissolved, and it has a
certain kind of taste of urine; and therefore it goes through the urine with
the drink, in its entire virtues, and dissolves every stone wheresoever it
shall lurk in the Body; because it is a volatile salt, it is resolved in
moisture, neither is separated in the shops of Digestions: But because it does
after some sort represent the taste of urine, and in the mean time, has
properties that are friendly to our nature, it is willingly received, and is
also dismissed to the Kidneys. The dose thereof, is of 14 grains unto 20. with
a small quantity of simple distilled-water: And the stone of an indifferent or
reasonable bigness in the Bladder, is resolved into the bigness of a
Pinekernel, especially in two weeks. The liquor of Ludus being thus prepared,
is called by Paracelsus, the Gaul of the Earth: because, if it be extended in
paper, it is of a dark Citron-colour, not a little declining to green: For it
is a stone, exceeding wonderful, it only answering to the descriptions of
Paracelsus; to wit, being bred of the salt of the urine of the Liquors of the
Earth: In the bottom of the earth, according to the depth of the bladder in the
Body of man. But I have found it at the bank of the River Scalds, nigh Antwerp,
where Bricks are boiled, and it is situated more or less than 40 soot under
the Horizon, according to the depth of the River: For I compare, the bottom of
the River unto the bottom of the Bladder: But it is not in the bottom of the
River; but it is extended in one only and simple roof or story, under the
ground or bottom of the brim, in a neighboring field, nigh to the sides of the
Banks, and that for some miles. And that Vault or story of Ludus, does scarce
exceed the thickness of a foot. Neither also, is it any further extended above
or beneath the aforesaid Vault; nor is it elsewhere round about to be found.

There is also in the aforesaid Field, a frequent Fire-stone, being rich in
sulphur and vitriol. The which, although it be very hard under the earth, yet
it soon becomes brickle under the air; to wit, through its vitriol decaying by
degrees: But Ludas is a palish stone, now and then covered with a clear crust
throughout its seams, being as to a great part of it, volatile in the Potters
Furnace: For this stone is the top of Stone-breaks, and the desire of those
that have the stone. Happy is he who can calcine the same as I have now
admonished: But the labor thereof, requires not only reading and thinking,
but a full knowledge, being also doubly confirmed: Because it is the labor of
Wisdom, the hope of Adeptists: Therefore he is most Rare, whom God, in this
Age that is full of misery, has thoroughly brought unto this Scope. It is not
sufficient to have known the Ludus or Cevilla of Paracelsus, and the native
birth thereof, and that it ought to be reduced into an oily volatile Salt,
without the loss or destruction of its natural Endowments: But since there is
not a more laboursome part in all Chemistry (which Paracelsus does often
declare in the preparation of the Tincture of Sulphur, which graduates or
heightens the native color of Gemms: to wit, the same circulated Salt, is on
both sides silently suppressed:) I will-perswade a few things, so far as
Brother may communicate to Brother. For although out of humane compassion and
Charity, a Remedy against Duelech ought to be divulged before the World, by
Trumpets: Yet it ought, for Reasons known to God, to be kept amongst Secrets,
whereof he himself would remain the Dispenser,

Take of Ludus being poudered: one pound, and as much of the Liquor Alkahest;
distill this Liquor from thence; and at the first turn, all the Ludus will be
changed into a salt, which, in a Glassen-dish in a moist place, runs down or
abroad, without any residing earthlinesse, and this defluxing Liquor, is of a
yellow color, and being closed up with a Hermes seal, in boiling, it swims
wholly atop, as it were a froth, in the form of a green metled grease. And it
is the corrected Altholizoim and gawl of the earth of Paracelsus.

But he that thinks, by the additament of Saltpeter, or of the like Artifices,
to atain this Medicine; let him know, that such kind of salts, however exactly
and repeatingly they are co-mixed with the Ludus, yet that the salts only will
be defluxive, the earth being left, as it were a Lee or dreg in the dish: But
the Ludus ought to be totally transchanged into a volatile tinged salt, without
reserving any thing of the adjoined Alkahest: Because that as well this liquor,
as the Ludus, do keep their former weight: And the Ludus it self, keeps the
Mineral natural endowments which the Almighty goodness has afforded it. But
this work is most exceeding difficult, not indeed in respect of the preparation
of the Ludus, but of the Alkahest it self. I know that I speak the truth, and
the proof thereof in our Adeptists, is that which exceeds all demonstration:
For Aristotle acknowledged no other Science, than that which springs from a
fore-existing knowledge of the Senses: But there is another undemonstrable one,
wherein the Giver himself remains the Interpreter of his own Light, beyond all
the Ambush of a Syllogism; yet so certain is it, that the whole world cannot
stir up the least doubt in the Knower: which thing I have professly confirmed,
and made manifest in the Treatise of the Searching after Sciences. I have made
manifest the while, after what sort a spirit may be drawn out of putrified
urine, which being sent into the bladder by an unpainful Catheter, dissolueth
Duelech.

The Schools in the mean time commend their own Herbarists, and these their own
stone breaks; yet they are in doubt, and being without hope, contend with each
other, That if not for the dissolved stone, at least, for the hope cast into
the miserable diseased, they may desire a reward to be paid them.

There are some in the mean time, who promise composed Magistrals, whereby the
Duelech consists of a matter altogether similar or alike, being fetched from
the one only and constant liquor of the urine. For indeed the stone is
everywhere, and in every part thereof, a stone; neither does the sand differ
from the stone, by way of matter; neither is the Stone a manifold sand,
collected by a glue or Muscilage; so that there is only required a resolution
of the Glue, the sands in the mean time leaping asunder from each other:
Therefore it is a frivolous thing, that the stone does leap asunder into sands
which are the more stubborn to dissolve.

For Paracelsus, although having obtained a remedy, he was succesful in curing
the stone; yet in this, he manifests, with the Humourists, that he was ignorant
of the nater Duelech; because he promises, that his remedy of Ludus being
taken, it should be cast forth in the form of sands; Then again, because he
teaches, that the bigness of Dueleh is to be divined of, and weighed, by the
boiling and drying up of all the urines, being kept together throughout all the
interval of the cure: Both whereof notwithstanding, is a mere dream of
rashness: For truly, whatsoever remedy dissolved Duelech, that should chiefly,
and far more easily be for the dissolving of sands, and very small fragments,
if any should fall down: For whatsoever is coagulated from a similar urine,
that also in it self, must needs be similar or alike: And then, if, when
Duelech is dissolved by Ludus, all the urines being collected, and kept
together in the whole interval of the cure, should be dried up; perhaps they
would forty times exceed the weight of the stone: For who knows not, that even
the urines of healthy folk, being dried, do leave a Caput mortuum behind them.
Therefore I have discerned that Paracelsus indeed had often, by offering of his
Ludus, dissolved the stone of the bladder; but that he kept not the strong
smelling urines, nor likewise that he dried them; Because it had been too
tedious a thing for him to do: For it has pleased the most High to send before
the Elias of Arts, a forerunner, teaching the Crasis or constitutive
temperature and preparation of medicines: unto whom, that the world might give
credit, signs were given, establishing his doctrine: For he has a famous
preparation of great Arcanums, which was not to be confirmed but by an
obtainment of healing: And then there have some followed after, who adding to
the inventions of, or things found out by Paracelsus, were Illustraters of the
Speculative truth being found.

That at length there may one succeed, who has obtained the obtainment of
healing, teaching both by word and work, those things which God has denounced
by the former.

Last of all, the Schools distrusting themselves, have by a new deceit obtained
credit among those that are rash of belief; and have boasted, that by the rules
of diet, they have known so to dispose the body of him that is stony, that all
the foregoing phlegmatic heap of the stone, and that which otherwise, without
those their institutions, would presently and of its own accord, make for the
branches of stone may by a continual successive repetition, be taken away: that
is, they promise, that they can fore-snatch away all phlegm, which does after
any manner whatsoever, form the stone: Yea, that phlegm; which (according to
the heathens) is required for a necessary elementary composition of the venal
blood, should be so sparing and small, that it should scarce suffice for that
its necessity, and much, less for an abundance, to create the stone.

To which end they promise, to wit, certain Magistrals, and repeated small
Purges, and therefore they name them Familiar, and minorative ones or those of
the lesser sort.

They promise moreover, that they will show to the eye, that truly dejected
phlegm, (to wit, their Drawers out of phlegm or Phlegmagogalls being received
to this purpose) hence also, they will ban themselves as for a speedy
prosperous health (at leastwise a cloakative or dissembled one) to the sick, by
reason of the foregoing matter of the stone being cast out: Nevertheless thus
are the weak, by degrees, more weakened; they proceed to live medicinally and
miserably, so long as they subject themselves as obedient unto such helpers

But it has already before been sufficiently answered to such trifles, when as
I removed phlegm and a muscilage from the number of the causes of Duelech.
Paracelsus Tartar, and of the stone, and being unmindful of his own Doctrine
lately delivered, flees over unto the phlegmie muscilage of the Humourists,
whom he first, notwithstanding, so named by a mocking name: But I, that very
name being now everywhere received, do so name them from pity, but not from an
Ironie or Scoff.

But Paracelsus being else where unwary, does again oppose these things,
promising, that within the fifteenth day of the curing of Duelech, it may be
seen of what a bigness it was, if all the urine be daily dried up: which thing
clearly infolds it self with the foregoing matter of Tartar, and such a drying
of urine would be a mere deceit and juggle, if together with the dissolved
Duelech, the foregoing matter of a stony Tartar should be expurged. For truly
he promises, that whatsoever dissolveth Duelech, that very thing does much
more briefly dissolve the foregoing matter of Tartar, which daily increases
for the stone. I surely, have hated sluggishness and blockishness in healing,
stubbornness in a learned man, ignorance in a Professor, a lie in a Writer, as
also a contradiction in one seeking to compass the Chiefdome: For truly, all
those things include a deceit and unskilfulness in the Teacher, if not malice
besides, and an ignorant rashness in such a Prince; and so, they render all
that religion or conscientious profession, suspected of much defilement. I at
leastwise, even from my youth, have even unto tears, grieved at the condition
of the weak or sick, who under uncertain hope, did as credulous, entrust their
life, family, wife and children, yea their fortune and goods, to be governed by
him that is a bold Boaster of any thing.

Therefore at first, I ran through the Monarchy of Vegetables: but I found not
that Duelech in the Bladder; But whatsoever of those would make Duelech to melt
in a Glass, was either hostile, or at leastwise it came not with those
qualities unto the Bladder; but if it might seem to be cast in by a Syringe, it
was not by the Bladder to be endured. Therefore Vegetables being distilled and
decocted; and likewise their ashes, Calx's or Limes, pouders, and all things
being extracted, I learned but vain and slender Remedies against so great an
Enemy. The more sharp ones indeed did diminish Duelech in his entireness; but
being taken in at the mouth, they entered not under that power unto the Bladder;
but being cast in from without, however they seemed mild, like unto Wine, yet
they imitated bright burning Iron in the sense of pain. Therefore I wondered at
Parcelsus and others, that they commended Liquors distilled out of Honey,
Sugar, Dew, etc. Since no mortal man ever endured those, being injected by a
Syringe. Indeed, I have observed by experiment, that a Pigeon did dissolve
Duelech being cut out of man, into a juice, by the sharp Ferment of her
stomach, even as also the fragments of Bricks: Therefore the more inward
membrane of the stomach of Pigeons and Hens was given to drink by Seniour
Physicians, but surely with much deceitful hope: As well, because the
fermental power of the Bowels is extinguished together with the life of the
Bruit; as also it being granted, that that powder did preserve its primitive
and ancient faculty after death which in life it obtained; yet that it should
come unto the Bladder wholly spoiled of those virtues in the Kitchins of our
Digestions: although in very deed, Pouders are scarce turned into a
Uriny-Latex; Although many things of that sort, are with a constant ignorance
on both sides, prescribed to the sick.

Yet this I have learned, that the spirit of Spanish salt, being distilled with
the utmost fire of a R^verbery, together with Potters-earth, and being drunk
every morning with white Wine, which was the day before drawn out of the
Vessel; takes away not only the mortal stranguries of old people, and that it
being wholly Diuretical, has cured some: But moreover, in whom the Stone which
is bigger than is meet, falling down out of the Kidney, had stayed for some
months in the Bladder, that it has been at length diminished, and voyded out
by pissing: the which notwithstanding, in its oftentimes repeated entrance into
the neck of the Bladder, had been needful to be before as often repulsed
backwards by a Catheter. But it is prepared of that salt being first poured
forth or spread abroad, and freed by the fire from its extra^agant filth, and
presently, the salt being bruised, and dissolved between thin plates of Radish;
and at length being again dried, and distilled with a like quantity of Potters
earth, and at length with the sharp fire of on Reverbery, and that after a due
manner, that nothing expire or breath out of it, even as I will teach below
concerning Vitriol. For thou have the Balsame of Salt, which thou shall never
sufficiently esteem. But in my Young Beginning, I had seen the old pieces of
rubbish of ^uious Houses, to pour out Saltpeter: and that the powder of Bricks
being once freed from the Saltpeter; and afterward, being for some years
kept under a Roof or Covering, did put (...) through continuance, and yielded
Saltpeter afresh, and soot that the whole powder, except the sand, might at
length be turned into a salt.

I had seen also, a (...) Brick, enclosed in the middle of a more broad Wall,
to bring forth its own Saltpeter outward, beyond all its neighbor stones, on
both sides; and so that it was the destroyer of its neighbor stones and
Bricks. I therefore being mindful of the name of (Saltpeter) knew, that that
very salt was the Brick or stone it self being resolved: Especially her also it
does voluntarily drop down in the Caves of Rocks: but elsewhere, because it
hangs forth in long drops or Sycles. Wherefore I diverse ways prepared
Saltpeter for the Disease of the stone, but in vain; Because I was then, as
yet ignorant, that Duelech consuled of far other principles, than Mineralstones
did.

I saw likewise Palmer wormed and Infects that were bred in nitrous places, and
which there abode, to be applied for use against the stone of the Bladder; but
in vain: But after that, I knew that so many Ages had dreamed in the knowledge
of the Causes of the Disease of the stone, I confidently believed, that all the
error stood in the possession of our sluggishness.

At length, God taking pity on the anguishes of the Complainer, gave me the
knowledge of the Ludus, together with the preparation of Paracelsus: they who
understand me, do gratify my public studies; because they have known that I
write the Truth. Seek ye, my brethren, and huge joy shall meet your diligent
Soul. For first, learn ye to dissolve Duelech in a Glass, with a lukewarm
Liquor that is not troublesome to the stomach, nor in the next place, unto the
Bladder: so as that Duelech may be by degrees lessened, without Buubles and
disturbance: Rejoice ye, because ye are near. Then learn to turn Ludus into a
salt, without any remainder of the Transchanger.

But let Remedies against Duelech, be drunk on a fasting stomach, without a
yesterday Catheter, yet the urine being first diminished.

But while I examine that dropping of urine, the history of the Daughter of a
Neighbor Embryo, not yet born, to be brought unto me: (for Cowes that are not
begotten with young, are scarce fattened) That little Bladder is for the most
part, filled with the Liquor, of the savor, not indeed of Urine, but of a
strange savor, whereof she drinks every morning, about two ounces, with as
much of white wine. She was afterward married in the 19th. year of her age,
and in this year 1643, she is surviving and in health, being ignorant of the
stone. The same Remedy afterward helped some poor Girls. And when as this had
been now diverse times tried, the some thing was tried of the Embryo of an
Hee-Goat, and it as yet more prosperously succeeded.

I will in this place, subjoyn my own Observations concerning the stones of
Crabs, which I never saw registered by any other. First of all, they are unfitly
called their eyes, Paracelsus has thus commanded it) for truly, by very many,
and uniform dissections of Crabs, have I for certainty found, those things
which follow.

First of all, that the stomach of the Crab, is in his Head, nigh the Crown or
top thereor. June: and then the females; in (the 5th. Month called) July,
before the putting off of their shells: For they are for nine days space, and
more, as it were half without life and unmoved: In which season, their stomach
is outwardly over-covered with a new little Membrane or him: between which, and
their old stomach, there is a certain milky Liquor, which by degrees outwardly,
on the boughty Globe of the stomach, in what part it touches on, and
over-covereth the old stomach, is contracted in both sides into a hollownesse,
and presently becomes stony. In the mean time, neither then, nor a long while
after, does the Crab eat up any thing: And therefore (it is almost incredible)
his true, or more inward stomach is by degrees wasted away into a nourishable
muscilage, and the other more outward and new stomach, succeeds in the room
of the consumed one. For truly, there is presently extended over that milk,
grown unto the bought of the old stomach, a thin skin, after the manner that is
wont to be over luke warm milk, and that milk grows between both the
aforesaid Membranes; To wit, of both the stomachs. All which things, I have
daily observed, by dissecting of perhaps two hundred Crabs, with a pleasant
admiration! At length the remaining part of the milk turns to the Crab for a
nourishment. Last of all, also, both the stones on both sides, are again by
degrees dissolved, and by little and little depart into nourishment: But the
Crab eats nothing, nor is any thing found in his stomach, as long as those
stones are in his stomach, and he lives about 27 days, as well by his old
stomach being wasted by degrees, as from the use of the stones being afterward
resolved.

I add, that a most Rare Diuretical or Vrine-provoking Remedy is collected from
this

Lastly, in the Marquesdome of Brandeburge, there is a most plentiful fishing
of Crabs: But the Carriers are constrained to watch by night; least happily
some Swine do even but lightly run through under the Wagons: For if that shall
happen, in the morning, as many Crabs as were in the Wain, are found dead: so
destructive is the Hog to the Crab.

But that any thing may be cast into the Bladder without pain, I have invented
a new Catheter Cerusse and Lineseed oil: and when it was now almost dry,
forthwith I commanded a pipe to be composed by sowing, whereinto a brazen thread
was driven throughout its length, and its seam was plain, that it might not
any thing stick out: But that at one end of this pipe, (the pipe it self being
large enough) the pipe of a Syringe might be put into it as often as one listed,
and that both might fitly answer, that this way the Liquor might be cast into
the Bladder. Moreover, the whole Leathern pipe is confirmed with washy glue,
that this being afterward dried, it may be painted with a certain color, and
with Oil of Line-seed; And that indeed, as well for the greater firmness of
the pipe, as also, least it should be wet through, and wax flaggy through the
Liquor that is to be injected. The Brazen thread therefore being drawn out, let
another as its vicar, enter into its place, being prepared of Whalebone. Thus
therefore thou have a thin flexible pipe, which does not any thing pain in
sending of it in, although it be forty times thrust forward into the Bladder,
and in one only day. At the first turns indeed, it pains about the muscle of
the Bladder, as being unaccustomed thereunto: but the sore fear of the
Contraction thereof soon cease; but the urine is drawn away as often as one
lists: And the Bladder being emptied, there is at length, cast even into the
Bladder by a Syringe, being equally suited unto the pipe behind, whatsoever one
will. Only let the Liquor that is to be sent in, be unpainfull, nor
unacceptable. But it is a Syringe unto whose pipe, I have said, that utmost end
of the Catheter that hangs out, is to be fitly suited. Let praise Eternal be
unto God in the Highest, and let it please him, to bedew, and make my services
and desires fruitful, which are offered for the help of mortals.

CHAP. VIII. The Author offers a dainty Dish to young Beginners.
1. Questions of most learned men. 2. The Author's Answers. 3. The Author
despises Judgments had, or to be had concerning him. 4. A satisfaction
concerning Horizontal Gold. 5. Things of a different kind concernnig the
Sulphur of Venus or Copper. 6. That the Sulphur of Venus is not the innermost
essence of a perfect metal. 7. A proof of a remaining external Sulphur. 8. The
dignity of the Sulphur of Venus. 9. The Indistinction of thr Authors of the
Young Beginning of Chemistry. 10. The Authors Answers unto their Objections 11.
Some unknown things hitherto concerning Vitriol. 12. The name of Vitriol,
whence it is. 13. The nativity of Vitriol. 14. The difference of the goodness
of Vitriol. 15. The Greeks yield the Victory to the Germans, concerning
Minerals. 16. The error of Paracelsus about the estimation of Vitriol. 17. A
demonstration of the aforesaid error. 18. What kind of Vitriol is the best for
healing. 19. The best and unusual manner of distilling of Vitriol.. 20. The
wonderful properties of this spirit of Vitriol. 21. Some remarkable things
redounding from thence. 22. The distillation of salts. 23. The commendation of
Daucus or wild Carret seed. 24. Our Country wood for the stone of the reins,
and the choice, and preparation thereof. 25. The use of the Birch-tree.

THrough occasion of my Book, concerning Fevers, men of great note, wrote unto
me from diverse coasts of Europe, desiring a clearing Comment about the remedies

First therefore, they enquire, what Horizontal gold may be?

Secondly, They desire the making or composing of the Element of the fire of
Venus or Copper?

Thirdly, Whether or no that may not perhaps be the spirit of Vitriol rectify?
Some also add threatenings, that unless I shall publicly satisfy their wished
desire, my book will be hereafter forbidden, as another Prince of Matchi^vil:
Because that, otherwise, my Book standing, the Universities of Medicine do
consider, that they shall soon be, of necessity, as rubbish; and that Galen
should soon beg his bread from door to door. Good men indeed do consult, that
what things I have brought into public, concerning the unheardof Doctrine of
Fevers, and concerning the detestable abuses of Blood-letting, Purges, and
Remedies, were out of compassion to my neighbors; but the explications are
wanting, and a more manifest speaking; as I being silent, as it were, under a
sealed Charter, all things may be for the future, confirmed by the experiences
of any whatsoever, and the outcries of the miserable sick.

First of all, I have answered, that the secret of the liquour Alkahest of
Paracelsus, Arcanum, to the treasures of the good pleasures of God.

But as to the judgments, in the mean time, to be had concerning me; I little
dwell upon,

For neither am I the first, as neither shall I be the last rebuker of those
men; who never have had regard unto the censures of the world that have been
made of me; nor do I with choice (the which, notwithstanding, many others do)
esteem of my esteemers: Because, in God, I love alike; but no man therefore, at
all, because he flatters me: For I know that I have God for my Protector, who
forsakes none that calls on him. For snares of tribulations have rained down
upon my head: I stood firm, for neither have they in any wise opressed my
soul: They have fallen down on the earth, I have trampled on them with despite;
and presently, as dung, they have putrified of their own accord: But the
authors hereof being confounded, have blushed. I wish that God may pardon
them! I know in the next place, that God will cherish the seeds which he has
planted, and the which he would have to grow, with his dew from above. Neither
has he suffered me to be careful, for the good will of the world, for the
consent of the Schools, or shouting outcry of the vulgar: For he can, and
will do all things whatsoever he will, according to his good pleasure, when the
world shall deserve to be comforted by true medicine, in their sicknesses.

Ah, how swollen a Bubble is Ambition, which always depends as hung up on
other men's wills or judgments? How boldly last of all, do the judgments of
other men, always judge? Especially those which are ruled by a continual
prejudice? But I speak to the questions proposed.

That as Sol or Gold is reckoned to be bred in the Horizon of the Hemisphere:
So Mercury, Mercury, as long as it is metallic Mercury, is like unto the first
Being of metals, and exceeding near unto it: But when it is co-melted with
Gold, all its medic nal virtue is shut up and sealed: yea it is so turned
inward, that it denies the natural endowment which it owes to man's nature, for
its sickness. For the sulphur of Venus, after its separation from its own
body, and rising again, is made as it were a glorious Sulphur, and therefore
tingeth the sulphur of Mercury (the which, in the powder of Johannes De Vigo,
is turned outward by mineral Corrosive Sulphurs) immediately, and they do
mutually embrace each other in an unseparable bride-bed: and therefore the
virtue of faculty of both those sulphurs, does then stand most outwardly. For,
from hence, through a co-planting or conjoyning of their faculties, the
Mercurius Diaphoreticus resulting from thence, does perfect the Unisone of
healing, in all things, which as well a Physician as Chyrurgion can wish for:
whether it be administered in respect of acute or sharp diseases, or next with
relation to Chronical ones or those of long continuance.

The Fire of Venus therefore, is not the spirit of Vitriol, however exactly it
be rectified:

But the residing Copper, remains white, nor ever waxing green through rust,
as neither is it any longer of the number of the seven mettalls: Because it
has become a new and unnamed metal. But the fire of Venus cannot be had but
with a full destruction of the copper, and Volatilizing of the Mercurial body
of the Copper it self. The which, how ever volatile it may be, in the form of
an oil: yet it is afterward, by an easy buisinesse, reduced into a white
unknown metal, and extendible under the hammer. But the fire, or Sulphur of
Copper, is not likewise any longer reduced into a metal by it self: Because,
even as no Sulphur is a metal; so every mettallick Mercury is a true metal.

But Adeptists do teach, that the sulphurous part of a metal, cannot be
separated from Venus, be that green, sweet oil, and that which can never be
again constrained into a metal, as being in it self, an abstract.

Therefore the privy counselors of this Philosophy, do with one accord
testify, that the external Sulphur cannot be separated from its own body, no
not by fire, in imperfect mettalls, but that the Mercurial part thereof does
likewise, together perish thereby.

For I have seen Lead that was thrice sublimed, to have returned into the same
Lead in is added to the Venus, by God: Therefore that Sulphur of Venus must
needs have its own ends, conducing to the necessities of ungrateful man, to
wit, for man's infirmities, beyond every dignity of a metallic perfection: For
the use of whom, to wit, the Stoics themselves have conjectured, that all
created things of the world were directed:

Therefore the Writers of the young Beginning of Chemistry, err, as many as do
feign by diverse fables, a Metamorphosis or transforming of Mercury into salt,
water and oil,

But I in answering, will in the entrance, propose two most exceeding true
sentences of Philosophers, yet for the shaming of these very Argumentaters;
that from hence

The first whereof is, That it is far more easy to make or compose gold, of
that which is not gold, than to destroy natural gold. Let it therefore first of
all shame them, to teach the destruction of gold, who being poor, do testify,
that they know not its construction or how to make it! Therefore, either
Adeptical Philosophers do lie, and are deceived, or the first Writers of
Beginning of Chemistry themselves.

The second is, if I had not seen Quicksilver to delude any endeavor of
Artificers whatsoever; so as that, it either wholly flies away, as yet entire,
or that it does wholly remain in the fire, and after either manner, keeps the
unchangeable and primitive sameliness of it self, and an undissolvable
homogeneity of Identity; I should say, That that Art was not true, which is
true, without a lie, and most exceeding true; so that, that which is above, is
as that which is beneath; and this as that.

They therefore bewray themselves to be ignorant of the matter of Metals, as
many as do teach the aforesaid Metamorphosis of Mercury and Gold: For however
those metals may be some Minerals, being adjoined unto them, be sometimes
driven by a Retort, into the show of an Oil, Salt, or Sulphur, and dissemble
the mask hereof: yet those adjuncts being taken away, they always remain the
same gold, and the same Mercury which they were before, and return into their
ancient bodies: Yea, although gold might suffer it self to be radically
sequestered into different kind of parts, to wit, into Salt, Sulphur and
Mercury, (which is no way possible to nature, unless by one only liquor that is
to be framed or composed) yet that thing, in the simplicity of Mercury its
kind, is impossible for nature and art to do; because it is that which is more
simple than gold, and is composed with a greater and undissolvable identity;
because there is not a diversity to be found in Mercury, such as is otherwise
to be found in the tincture of gold, and in the whiteness hereof: The which I
have already before distinguished in the Sulphur and Mercury of Copper: for
although the Mercury of Copper be wholly made volatile, yet because it is not
for that cause spoiled of its internal Sulphur, therefore it is again reduced
in to a white and malleable metal.

Moreover, as to the question, wherein they ask, whether the fire of Venus be
the spirit of Greeks do name Calcanthum; and the Latins (by an unfit name,
Atramentum Sutorium, or shooemakers ink. But Vitriol, because it is transparent
like vitrum or glass: But that salt is the unripe birth of embryonated or
imperfect Sulphur, the which, while it licks the vein of Copper, it eats into
the vein, and therefore it is called Coperous, or gnawn Copper: But if it shall
gnaw a vein of iron, or of other Metals, it produces sharp fountains, and
those divets, according to the disposition of the vein that is gnawn; which
things I have profesly, and at large prosecuted in a little book concerning the
fountains of the Spaw.

Furthermore, whether that water, which contains in it the salt of Embryonated
Sulphur, exhaled, the residue is at length, afterward, of its own accord,
coagulated in the cold. But the diversity of veins alone varies the price of
Vitriol; for nigh Antwerp, while the Sulphur is melted out of the fire-stone,
the rest is exposed under the open air, and as to the greater part of it, does
by little and little melt: for by the scorching and smoaky fumes of the
Sulphur, it conceives a rust, which is known by the residing salt, and through
rain, flows down into the ditches. So also, the neighboring Eburians do
prepare their Vitriol from a richer vein. Elsewhere indeed, there is a vein of
the very Copper it self, being rich in the coagulated salt of Sulphur, and it
drops, flows abroad, and is coagulated of its own accord, which otherwise is
washed off or dissolved by the moistness of the neighboring fountain.

The difference therefore of the goodness, consists in the purity of the salt:
but not in Azure or sky-colour of Vitriol is for the most part preferred before
the green color; perhaps, because that more pleases the eyes: at leastwise,
by a most easy business, the Be-juglers of Simples do of green Vitriol,
dissemble an Azure color therein.

But moreover, the Chalcitis or red Vitriol, the Mysy, Sorry, and Black of the
Greeks Greeks are only Alphabetaties, and in respect of the Germans, a
sluggish generation, whatsoever the ancient ones have published to posterity
concerning the matter of metals.

But there are some, who with Paracelsus commend and extol that Vitriol in
healing, which is accounted the most rich in the plenty of Copper; and so they
prefer that before etc. But Paracelsus prepares the best Vitriol in healing, by
plates of Copper, being spread abroad, through cementing them with common Salt
and Sulphur.

The more modern ones being from hence seduced, do repeatingly distill the thin
plates of Copper, by the spirit of common Sulphur, or Vitriol, until they are
plainly black and brickle, the which, at length they melt in water, and it
becomes of a sky-colour; the which, in boiling, is thickened, and a Vitriol
grows together in the cold: For so indeed, that is at this day adulterated,
which is set to sale for Cyprus Vitriol.

By the leave of Paracelsus I know, and certainly find, that Vitriol made of
Copper, is far more sluggish in healing, than the common Vitriol, which wants
the suspicion of Miscellanie or Hotch-Potch things: And so, that the spirit
thereof, is nothing but a mere Mineral Vinegar deprived of the vapor of
Coppery Sulphur. For I have certainly found, that the Vitriol made of Copper,
is far more poor, than that which is dig'd out of its Mineral vein: Likewise
that dug Vitriol, wherein there is very much Copper, is slower than the
common sort, in healing and distilling.

For I have distilled Vitriol that was prepared by art, being of an Azure
color, and in no wise to be distinguished by the sight, from Cyprus Vitriol;
and it yielded a little sluggish acide spirit, and all its spirit by and by
ceased within a few hours; and all its remaining body, abode condensed into a
black Feces or dreg, and restored its Copper unto me, according to my wish.

For truly, Copper is a complete metral, not easily to be destroyed, or
returning back unto its own Principles: So that although it be diminished
through the cruelty of sire; yet whatsoever thereof shall fly away, is as yet a
true metal, for the reasons above alleged.

Truly, among Metallic veins, there is none with the like difficulty brought
unto the perfection of a Metal, as is Copper it self (the which, George
Agricola testifies) for truly, it requires to be re-cocted at least nine
times, before Copper issue from thence: whereas the while, the veins of other
Metals pour out their treasure at the first melting. The vein of Copper
therefore attains its perfection by a sequestration of the parts mixed with it
from its nativity: But these parts are those, which are as yet fast bound unto
their own first Being: from whence, it therefore, the Copper being now perfect;
refuses, and as stubbornly as it can, resists a dissolution of its body; and
by consequence, neither can there a perfect Medicinal Vitriol be had from
thence, which may have a virtue from the Sulphur of Venus, because this is not
separable from the Copper, unless by an every way destruction of the Metallic
Body, even as I have before taught.

Those parts therefore of the Copper vein, which are far remote from a
Metallic nature, Calcanthuns or Vitriol artificially made: For the common and
base or cheap Vitriol, does breath forth its exhalation, but in a full eight
days space at least, However it may be urged with the most ardent flames of a
Reverbery. By how much therefore freer the vein is from a foreign Malignity,
and shall be nearer to the first Being of Venus, to wit, the farther off from
the Metallic constitution of Copper; by so much the salt thereof, which is
bred in it of its own free accord, and co-melted with it, does produce the more
unblamable Vitriol, and affords the richer spirits, and those most fit for
healing.

But the unusual manner of distilling it, is this: Take of common Vitriol, that
is not

Then lastly, take the Colcotar or Lee remaining of the distillation, which
thou have reserved from true Cyprus, Hungarian, or at leastwise, Goslarian
Vitriol: Let that residing dreg being co-mixed with Sulphur, be again burnt,
unto the every way confuming of the Sulphur: But afterward, thou shall bedew
and moisten this feces with the aforesaid spirit: For that spirit, as it is
presently imbibed in the glassen dish or gourd: so being fetched again from
thence, it returns nothing but a watery and unprofitable phlegm, the spirit
having remained imbibed in the Colcotar: And repeatingly renew thou that
operation six or seven times, until at length, the spirit that is poured
thereon, wax red, which will swim upon the Colcotar, which is a sign, that we
must cease from the plenteousness of imbibing: And so let this rich Colcotar,
being well dried, be put into a Retort; and let this rich Colcotar be distilled
even unto its utmost spirits now waxing yellow, and casting the smelling odor
of grateful honey.

Yet remember thou to draw away the receiving vessel from the Retort being as
yet of a bright burning heat, and that this spirit must be kept, by the mouth
of a more strong Colcotas, from whence it was struck out by fire. Moreover, the
Lee of Colcotar which is left of the second distillation, is as yet wholly
Coppery, and waxes green after many fashions:

From whence 1. That is manifest, which I taught before: Namely, that the fire
of Venus, is not to be drawn out and had, but by an every way destruction and
separation of the metal.

2. That this therefore must be done by a far more hidden way.

3. That the Vitriol which is rich in Copper, is less fit for distillation than
otherwise, the common Vitriol is.

4. That the Vitriol of Copper, poures forth the spirit of the Vinegar of a
mineral salt, but not the volatile Liquor of Copper.

5. And therefore that the sulphur of Copper, is rightly called the sulphur of
the Philosophers, being fit for long life: Being sweet, I say, in taste, but not
tart or sharp.

6. That the spirit of Vitriol which is above perfectly taught, cures some
Chronical Diseases.

7. And that therefore, the spirits of Vitriol, hitherto sold and in use, are
nothing but a mineral Vinegar, being also adulterated in it self.

8. That the residing Colcotar, is most rich in a Medicinal Virtue.

9. That the preparation of Vitriol prescribed by Isaac Holland, and other
Moderns, has not sent the Arrows unto the true mark.

10. That our spirit above described, and thus rectified, as it is, volatile
and salt, proceeds even into the fourth Digestion, and reolves diseasie
Excrements that are met withal in its journey; And by consequence also, takes
away the occasional cause of many Chronical or lingering Diseases.

I have therefore already delivered the like Form or manner of distilling the
spirit Saltpeter and the like; Yet thou shall remember, that Vitriol has in
it self the earth of Colcotar: wherefore the other salts do desire dried
Potters earth, and that being exactly admixed with them.

But besides, I have already delivered the manner of preserving from the
Disease of Aroph; and likewise, by Ale boiled with the seed of Daucus or the
yellow wild Carrot. I might therefore desist, and repose my Quill, and leave
the matter to others, more successful than my self; by wishing, that every
one may henceforward add what things he shall find out to be far better. For
since Duelech besieges only mankind, and is produced from Excrements
themselves, after an irregular manner, but does not arise after the manner
accustomed to other infirmities: Therefore it seems to be singularly bred, for
a revenge of sin, even before other Diseases, and to be permitted by God, in
Children, being as yet Innocent, for the averting of a greater evil: For
although some Bruits do generate small stones in themselves, yet those stones
are not bred in them from the Causes of Duelech, nor appointed for a
punishment, or tribulations unto them: but rather produced for the profit of
man. But if therefore Duelech does relate to the fault of sin; but since sin
has drawn its rise from a Wood or Tree; it has seemed also to me, that
preservation of health, in the disease of the stone, is not only to be
expected from the seed of Daucus, and some such like Herb, but from some
certain Wood: Wherefore it is indeed true, that a Wood against the stone of the
Kidneys, has been of late brought unto us out of the Indies: but I have not
ever therefore persuaded my self, that divine Goodness had so long denied unto
the Europeans, that it might succor even the poor man that had the stone,
until that, through many expenses, a Remedy should after three thousand
years, at length fly unto us from the Indians: which otherwise had been slow
enough in it self.

The wild Carrot seed indeed preserves, under a continual and strict
obligation; even as Aroph comforts the Kidneys by much cost. I therefore have
seriously enquired, whether there were not a certain Wood familiar to our
Countrymen, which might supply the room of that Nephritical One, at length sent
us by the Barbariaus? For truly, the wood of Sin, and the wood of Life, were
Trees, but not shrubs, and much less Herbs.

Wherefore I heretofore observed, that it was a familiar or natural thing with
Germany, that every Year in [the third month called] May, they would, against
the affect of the stone, drink daily, a draught of the Liquor issuing out of
the Bark of a wounded Birch-tree: which Liquor they preserved from the
corruption of the Air, by pouring on it Oil of Olives. The Tree is wounded:
The Tree is called by the Germans Bircken-Bawm; but by our Countrymen
Bircken-Boom: For the Birk of the Birch-tree is wounded nigh the earth, in the
Trunk of the Tree in [the first month called.] March, about the time wherein
the Vine being wounded, is went to weep out a very young or tender Liquor drawn
out of the earth. But that Liquor of the Birch-tree is wholly watery and almost
without savor: But if any branch of bough of the thickness of three fingers,
be wounded unto its Semi-diameter, and be filled up with Wool put into the
place, there presently weeps out a Liquor, not ungrateful, but somewhat
sharpish: which also in the very Torment of the Disease of the stone, comforts
the afflicted, three or four spoonfulls thereof being taken. That therefore, is
more mere or pure, which flows from above, from the bought, than that which
flows forth from beneath out of the Trunk: But that is plainly watery, which
flows forth nigh the earth. For I presently considered, that that happens, as
in ascending, it might pass through a somewhat reddish Bark, which was as it
were the liver of the Tree: But since that Bark was all the Year without any
notable taste; But the ourmost Bark being white, and as it were membrany, had a
savor and perfume as it were of the best Turpentine; I rent off the more
outward Bark round, from the Trunk, about the space of half a foot; and I
observed, that nevertheless, the Liquor which distilled from the Branches, was
of the same taste as before: Therefore I wondered, from whence that diversity of
Liquors of one and the same Tree, should spring.

In the next place I wondered, that some one small bough, should in one only
day, easily weep out eight or ten pounds of Liquor, which otherwise has not
need of so much nourishment, for a whole Summer, nor room wherein so much
Liquor could be kept: and much less does the Root bestow so much Liquor by
about tenfold, on any of the other Branches: yet neither therefore, was there
sufficient nourishment wanting to the other Branches, although the Root had
otherwise attracted that much quantity of that Liquor, and had poured it forth
through some other Branches. I therefore considered, that that Liquor was like
unto the Sunovia or gleary water, issuing out of a Wound; Yea, I began to
detest it, as if it contained in it the Contagion of Death or putrefaction:
neither that it could give Health, if it did now bear it in a blemish of
integrity: Yet I certainly found, that as well the wood it self of the
Birch-tree, as the red Bark thereof, were spoiled of the faculty of Healing,
but that the white Bark or Rind, outwardly growing to the more young Branches
like Parchment, being easily inflameable, and marked with the ^avour of
Turpentine, did scarce disperse a virtue from it self; into a decoction:
Therefore I considered, that the aforesaid virtue of the Liquor, did not
proceed from the Root, not from the Wood; next not from the somewhat red Bark;
as neither lastly, from the white Rind; because it was that which in many
places was not con-tinual to it self, in the Stem. Therefore I tried to distill
that Bark, both by it self, and also with an addition of the Lixivium of
Tartar: but surely, the Liquor that was dropped out of the Wound of the Bough or
Branch, did far excel the Oil and distillation of the Barks. Therefore I am
reduced to acknowledge, that that Liquor voluntarily flowing out of the wounded
Branches so abundantly, is the mere Balsam of the Disease of the stone; neither
does that hinder it, because through my wantonness, I compared that Liquor
unto water flowing out of a Wound or Ulcer: For truly, the Wound and Ulcer,
which in us, brings or promises death, brings or promises to the Birch-tree,
no such thing. That Liquor therefore of the Birch-tree, is a Medicine promised
from Nature, but procured by the Wounds: and so, it is to urge Nature to bring
forth a Balsam naturally unto her, the which else, she will never bring forth.
Wherefore I commanded the young, tender, and somewhat blackish small Branches
(from whence the Brooms and Rods of our Country Folk are made) which had
swelling, not yet leavie Buds, being dashed with a Hammer upon a stone or
Anvil, to be boiled together in Water, ordained for the making of Ale or Beer:
unto which Ale or Beer, if afterward I adjoined the seed of Daucus, or
Brook-lime, I obtained desirable effects for the prevention of the disease of
the stone, and those as yet more powerful ones, if that Liquor of March, being
collected from the upper Branches or Boughs, had been poured into the Ale,
after the greatest settlement of its boiling or working, which Wines and Ales
do voluntarily undergo in Hogs-heads.

For first of all, I have certainly found, that that drink of the Birch-tree,
did take away the fear of Diuretics or Vrine-provokers; Because it loosens the
pains and Contractures of the disease of the stone, as well in the Loins as
in the Bowels: (for from hence the one only disease of the stone, stirs up
even Colic pains, no less than if the fuel thereof were in the Bowels) and
therefore also it heals Dysuries or difficulties of pissing, and Stranguries or
pissing by drops, even in old Folks. It likewise at first, mitigates the heat
of the Liver, having arisen as it were from a Thorn thrust into it, and
afterward, takes it away.

Lastly, A certain Bridegroom being bound up for five months that he could not
reach to his Bride; in the mean time begat his Chambermaid with Child:
Afterward, chidings having arisen between the betrothed Couple; the Bride
said, that she had dissembled that wickedness with the Chambermaid, that she
might perfectly espy, whether he were cold, ^^ indeed mischiev'd, and by what
title, she might attempt a divorce. At length, the Enchantment of that binding
up, was loosed by the drink of the aforesaid Ale, and he was found to be
mischiev'd, but not to be cold. Last of all, A certain man making water
according to his custom, in the corner of a Floor, presently lay down, as being
afflicted with a bloody and cruel strangury; but any Remedies of Physicians
were in vain; except that, as often as he drank of the aforesaid Ale, he
perceived a notable ease: but as often as he arising out of the Bed-cloathes,
walked up and down, and pissed in his wonted place, he presently suffered
Relapses. At length, there was seen, a pin made of old and black Oaken wood,
fastened or thrust into the place whereat his accustomed urine issued out. That
pin therefore being pulled out and burnt, by the drinking of that Ale, he
remained altogether free from that bloody strangury. And then I remember, that
Karichterus writes, that he had loosed the like sort of Enchantments, only by
pissing through Birch^^ ^^oomes.

CHAP. IX. Sensation or feeling, unsensiblenesse, pain, lack of pain, motion,
and unmooveablenesse, through diseases of their own rank, the Leprosy,
Falling-evil, Apoplexy, Palsy, Convulsion, Coma or Sleeping-evil, etc.
1. Grating or fretting only is reputed the cause of the pain of him that has
the Stone in the Reins. 2. The opposite is prooved. 3. For so the Urine-pipes
should want a feeling. 4. The definition of pain, according to the Schools. 5.
The opinion of the Ancients and Moderns concerning the first or chief organ of
the senses. 6. But it teaches nothing besides vain words. 7. The implicit
Blasphemies of the Schools. 8. That the brain is not the immediate organ of
sense and motion. 9. What has deceived the Schools about these things. 10. A
better attention or heed of some. 11. From whence they have so persuaded
themselves. 12. The Authors meditation about sense and motion. 13. A
speculation about the solution in a wound of that which held together. 14. A
solid part does not feel, of it self. 15. Three organs subordinate to motion.
16. The Schools go back from their former supposition. 17. That the sinew is
not the proper instrument of all sense. 18. A consideration of tho Leprousie.
^9. All sinews dedicated to motion, are also sensible. 20. The errors of the
Schools about the Leprousie. 21. The error of Paracelsus. 22. The unconstancy
of Paracelsus. 23. The unsensiblenesse of the Leprosy, from whence it is. 24.
Manginesse, and the Pox or foul disease, how they differ from the Leprosy.
25. Scabbednesse requires not internal remedies. 26. The Reader is admonished.
27. Wherein the difficulty of curing the Leprousie, is seated 28. Hipocrates
had not as yet known the immediate subject of sense. 29. Life, what it is. 30.
A nearer Doctrine concerning sense. 31. The immediate subject of sense. 32. A
deaf or dull definition concerning the Sensitive soul. 33. How Sensation or the
act of feeling happens. 34. Why for sensation, there is no need of recourse
unto the Brain. 35. The seat of the Mind. 36. What pain is. 37. In what
sense, pain may be action and passion. 38. Pain and a disease, by what
Beginning, they may be made. 39. Of what sort, anger and fury are, in this
place. 40. Pain, what sort of passion it is. 41. Concerning the Apoplexy. 42.
The manner delivered, of making the Apoplexy, is ridiculous. 43. Paracelsus,
about this place, is a like frivolous and unconstant to himself. 44. The
meditation of the Author. 45. Some absurdities accompanying the Schools. 46.
A new distinction of causes. 47. A stopping up of the arteries in the throat,
what it may argue. 48. That a positive Apoplexy is hitherto unknown by the
Schools, and practitioners. 49. That the Apoplexy and Palsy are not made from
the afflux or flowing of phlegm into the bosom of the Brain. 50. Galen is
ridiculous in the ne^like contexture of the brain. 51. An examination of some
remedies. 52. That an Apoplexy is not the primary affect of the brain. 53.
That there is a tasting in the midriffs. 54. A secondary passion is prooved to
be from below. 55. The properties of the head, how far they may ascend in
themselves. 56. A true Apoplexy is positive, not privitive, and that the
Schools are ignorant of. 57. The astonishment or unsensiblenesse of the
Schools, is noted by the astonishment of the fingers. 58. The manifold
impossibility of the Schools, which follows upon a privative Apoplexy. 59.
The Schools are astonished in the astonishment of the touching. 60. A history
of the astonishment of the hands from a Quartane Ague. 61. The rise or original
of a positive Apoplexy. 62. The Palsy is a contracture or convulsion of the
sinewy marrow. 63. The Palsy is oftentimes without the Apoplexy. 64. The
shortness of the neck what it may argue. 65. From whence frictions or rubbings
in an Apoplexy, were instituted. 66. Why they are ridiculous. 67. The anguishes
of the Schools. 68. The rubbing of the skin contradicts the phlegm of the
Cerebellum or little brain of the hinder part of the head. 69. The generation
of the stupefactive or sleepifying matter of an Apoplexy. 70. Why the Apoplexy,
is called by the Germans, a stroke. 71. The place of an Apoplexy, is proved to
be in the Duumvirate. 72. The stumbling of the Schools, about the examination
of the property of simples. 73. Against the position of the Schools,
concerning the phlegm of the fourth bosom of the brain. 74. The perplexities
of the Schools concerning the hurting of the sense, motion remaining safe, and
on the other hand. 75. It is explained by some positions, why sense may be
hurt, motion remaining safe. 76. The Apoplexy, after the manner of hereditary
diseases lurks in the formative faculty of the seed. 77: Against the cause of
the Schools for an Apoplexy. 78. Against the cause of the Schools for a
Palsy. 79. The causes of the Apoplexy. 80. That the Apoplexy does not consist
of a privative cause. 81. The definition of an Apoplexy. 82. What a true Palsy
is. 83. Diverse stupefactive remedies. 84. That sleepifying medicines, as such,
do not cure madnesses. 85. What has deceived the Schools herein. 86. A sweet
Anodine orpain-ceasing medicine is harmless. 87. Why Anodines as such, do not
presuppose cold. 88. What a sleepifying medicine is. 89. An Anodine pertaining
to the Falling Sickness, differs from that of the Apoplexy. 90. A return unto
pain. 91. There is a foreign consent for pain. 92. From whence pains are
con-centrall with the stars. 93. Whether the venal blood be informed by the
soul. 94. Sense and pain, wherein the may subsist. 95. What may cause pain,
and after what sort. 96. Whether sense or seeling be made passively. 97. The
primary cause of pain and sense. 98. The Schools stay behind. 99. The
consideration of life, has regard hitherto. 100. A vainprivy shift of the
Schools. 101. A demonstration of the fire, that pain and sensation may from
thence clearly appear. 102. That these things have layen hid to the Schools.
103. What is to be considered for searching into the proper agent of pain.
104. The rules of the Schools concerning the activity of simples, is reproved
by the way. 105. From whence the Schools have been deluded. 106. A paradox is
prooved against the Schools. 107. Sensible agents act on the sense only
occasionally, whether they are medicines, or not, fire excepted. 108. An
application of virtues, by what means it may be made. 109. Sensation consists
in the vital judgment, and so also, in that of the Soul. 110. Some
consequences for the demonstrations of things before passed. 111. From whence
the faculties of medicines have been estranged in the Schools. 112. How
differently the fire can act. 113. The unconsiderate rashness of the Schools.
114. Some sequels drawn from the foregoing particulars. 115. The differences of
pains. 116. A convulsion is the companion of pain. 117. The pain of the
disease of the stone. 118. The blockish opinion of the Schools, concerning the
convulsion or Cramp. 119. Its falsehood is manifested. 120. Errors meeting us.
121. Some negligencies of Galen. 122. Galen loses the name of a Physician
from the censure of his own mouth. 123. Galen has taught only childish
devises. 124. Arguments on the contrary. 125. The error of the Schools
concerning the Convulsion is concluded. 126. Ridiculous similitudes made use of
by the Schools. 127. Some remarkable things. 128. After what manner the
Convulsion is made. 129. A twofold motion of the muscles, is proved. 130. The
Convulsion is not properly, an affect of the head. 131. Example of parts
convulsed. 132. A sight of a colicall contraction in a child. 133. An Artery,
from whence it waxes hard. 134. Diverse contractures. 135. That the causes of
the Cramp have layen hid. 136. The neglects of the Schools. 137. The degrees
of pains.

THe pain of the Stone in the kidneys, being one of the chief and most
troublesome of pains, is very great and cruel. For the Schools are at rest in
accusing

But I have persuaded my self, that there was nothing at all of satisfaction
from that answer: And therefore I have made a further search: Because some one
very small Stone

For truly in persons grown to ripe years, the spermatick parts of the first
constitution, do no longer daily grow, and so neither is their Ureter enlarged
afterward, by the descending of the stones.

In the next place, the slender sand has been oftentimes very troublesome
through its pain, and has cast down the howling man on his bed, before it
proceeded out of the kidney, and the which therefore, was never as yet
injurious by its rubbing on it or grating, of it: neither also, is it
sufficient, to have spoken of fretting or grating, for the proper and total
cause of so bitter a pain. For the Ureter, throughout its whole passage,

For truly, the Schools define pain to be a sorrowful sensation, made by a
hurtful thing rushing on the part: If therefore the slender and un-savoury
sand, be void of all

For therefore, the Schools teach, that the Brain is the first and principal
organ of all the senses and of all motions, and by consequence also, of pain
and unsensibility:

For indeed, the Schools confess: that the Brain does in it self, feel
nothing, or Aristotle, command that he ought to be unmovable, if he ought to
move all other things (as if the unutterable first mover, cannot move himself,
or that he ought to be unmoved, and wholly unmovable, yea, that he acts and
perfecteth by

Notwithstanding, the Brain is not the primary, or adequate Organ of sense and
motion: Schools beholding, that a turning joint of the back, being displaced;
for that very cause, whatsoever was subjected to the Nerves and Sinews beneath
that turning joint, was also, without sense and motion: therefore they
straightway determined, the Brain it self, and the marrow of the Thorn of the
Back, the Vicaresse hereof, to be the adequate or fuitable Organ or Instrument
of sense and motion.

But other Writers being willing to give a nearer attention, since they
acknowledged and confessed the substance of the Brain to be deprived of
touching, nor to be voluntarily moved, but that the twofold membrane or filme,
endowed with the name of Menynx, was of a most acute touching, although
unmoved; They decreed that every sinew, how slender soever, was over-covered
with such a double membrane, and did borrow it from both the Menynx's of the
Brain; that this very membrane of the sinews was (to wit consequently) formed
under the one only endeavor of Formation, and labor of the seed of
Fabrication: Even so that also, these would have it, That every Nerve should
draw its own feeling from the little filme that covered it, which did not any
way answer from its substance, unto the marrowie substance of the Brain.

Perhaps they took notice, that in the stomach and womb, so great and so
excellent

I have altogether proceeded something otherwise, for the searching out of
sense and pain, and the Organ, objects, and causes of motion and feeling. I
considered first, that while

From whence, I collected, That the solution or loosing of the con-tinual or
that Schools knew that the Brain had none, or atleastwise, scarce an obscure
Sensation: They therefore had rather believe, the sinew to be the primary
subject of sense, motion, and pain: To wit, that the Brain was indeed the
Fountainous Beginning of sense and motion: yet they made the Nerve the
immediate subject of pain and sense. But notwithstanding, they would have
motion, although something a more material thing, to depend on a deeper
arbitration of the Will, and to be subjected thereunto: To wit, so, as that,
the Will is the Commandative principle of motion, but the sinew to be the
derivative Organ of the command of the Will: And Animal, being drawn indeed
from the Arteries, but re-cocted in the

But the stupidity and unsensiblenesse of the Leprosy, do fitly offer
themselves in this those that have the Palsy? Shall therefore the sinews of
touching be stopped up throughout their whole Body, and shall their sinews be
serviceable only for a free motion? Shall, I say, the motive sinews be now
destitute of sense alone? I confess indeed, that

First of all, The Schools hold the Leprosy to be uncurable, and also a
universal Cancer Galen was to this purpose framed, That by the impossibilities
of healing, he might excuse his own Ignorances, and the sloathfulnesses and
dis-clemency of taking pains. For a Cancer in the flesh, is of a most sharp
pain, and of a continual devouting; But a Leprosy in the flesh is without
pain. I see not therefore, after what manner the Leprosy among the Galenists,
shall be a Cancer.

In the next place, Paracelsus errs, who thinks the Leprosy to be deprived of
all salt: Paracelsus, there are as many Species of Ulcers, as there are of
Salts: Therefore according to that his own Doctrine, the Leprosy flows from a
Salt abounding.

Let us grant to Paracelsus (yet without a diligent search of the Truth) that
the Excrement of the paunch in a Leprous person, does abound with small grains
of Salt; and that the urine of the same person does no longer dissolve any
thing of Sea Salt: (both whereof, not withstanding, are dreamed by Paracelsus)
Yet that would not prove, that the flesh and blood of a Leprous person, do fail
of their own salt: And much less also, that their flesh does therefore fail of
the sense of Touching. For first, This his opinion concerning the Leprosy,
utterly overthrowes his own Doctrine concerning the three first principles of
Bodies. And then, even as there are of un-savoury, and unsalt things, manifest
salts daily concocted in us, from the Law of humane Digestion; so, although the
excrements of Digestions were nothing but a mere salt, yet should not the venal
blood therefore be deprived of its own salt: Because it is that, which borrowes
not its salt, and the necessaries of its own Constitution, from excrements:
Yea, it should rather follow, that seeing the Leprosy is such an abundant
productress of salt in the excrements, the venal Blood also shall not want its
own salt: Even as, while there flows a continual Sunovie or gleary water, and
that plainly a salt one out of ulcers; the remaining blood does not therefore
want its salt, or sense is not diminished in the flesh, but rather increases
the pain and sharpness: So also in the Dropsy, a salt water does sometimes
forthwith extend the Abdomen or nether Belly, yet do not dropsical persons
want the sense of Touching.

For Paracelsus elsewhere, defines the venal Blood to be the mere Mercury of
man, sulphur; and likewise, of a Whey-ie, unprofitable, and superfluous salt.
Elsewhere again, as being unmindfull of himself, he defines the Blood to be the
salt of the Rubie: As though salt were the Tincture of the Rubie, or that the
Tincture of the Blood were from a salt: For he makes his three first things,
mutable at pleasure; no otherwise than as the Humourists do accuse their
Humors and Heats, at pleasure: and which more is, do say, that the same are
the causes of Diseases, and Death; and also the Authors of sensation and
motion. Fie! must we thus sport at pleasure with Nature, Diseases, the Blood,
and Death of our Neighbor? For Medicine is plainly a serious thing; and man
shall at sometime render skin for skin. For salt does not appear in the Blood,
flesh, solid parts, etc. except in the last and Artificial separation of those
Beginnings, after Death, and that indeed by the fire: To wit, after that the
sense of Touching has been a good while extinct. Those Dreams of the
principles do not serve for the Speculation of motion and sense. A mark
imprinted by the Devil on Witches, is wont to bewray these, because the place
of the Brand is void of feeling for their whole life: and that mark being once
impressed, has its own natural Causes of unsensiblenesse, after the manner of
the Leprosy; yet enrouled in a certain and slender Center. For the Witch, her
eyes being covered; if a Pin be in that place of the Brand, thrust in even to
the head, that prick is made without feeling. At leastwise, that place should
by a wonderful privilege be preserved all her life time, without salt and
putrefaction, seeing that otherwise, the life according to Paracelsus, is a
Mummy, with a comixture of the Liquor of Salts.

Far more sound therefore is the doctrine of Hippocrates, which decrees the
Spirit, or aerie and animal flatus or blast, to be the immediate instrument of
Sense, Pain, Motion, Pleasures, Agreement, Co-resemblance, Attraction,
Repulsing, Convulsions or Contractures, Releasement also of any successive
alterations whatsoever: so that it appropriates to self, sensible Objects, and
from thence frames unto it self Sensations themselves: For it happens, that if
by chance that Spirit be busied by reason of profound speculations, or madness,
that the body does not perceive Pains, Hunger, Cold, Thirst, etc.

For I remember, that a Robber deluded the torture of torment, by a draught of
Aqua vitae, and a piece of Garlic; the which, he at length wanting, confessed
his crimes.

But the astonishment and unsensibleness of the Leprosy, is in the habit of
the flesh and sinews, subjectively, or as in their Subject; but not in the
compass of imagination; but effectively and occasionally in a certain poison:
But that bloody Anodynous or stupefactive ice, and well nigh mortifying poison,
is communicable and effluxive through a horrid and stinking Contagion; whence
the holy Scriptures command the Leprousie to be severed from the company of
men: But this icie poison begins from without, and therefore they feel inward
pains, and likewise external cold and heat; yet not wounds or a stroke.

The Mange and Scab is manifold, and the Pox or soul Disease infamous through a
etc.

Therefore scabbedness does not require internal remedies, but only local ones,
which

But the Pox does chiefly affect the venal blood, with a biting, mattery, and
putrefying poison.

But the Leprosy does chiefly infect the inflowing spirit, with an Anodinous
icie poison.

Indulge me Reader, that through the scanty furniture of words, I am
constrained to use an illusion unto names: Because, as the essences of things
are unknown to us from a

So, I say, that the Poison of the Falling Evil, is a be-drunkenning,
sleepifying, and also a swooning one, together with an astringency, neither
therefore is it contagious, because intrinsecal, and not fermental: so the
Leprosy has an anodynous or stupefactive Poison; not indeed a sleepifying
one, but an icie or freezing poison, well nigh mortifying, together with an
infection of the sensitive spirit, and therefore mightily contagious,
especially in a hot and sudoriferous or sweaty Region: For even as cold takes
away the sense of touching, by congealing and driving the faculties inward; so
also the Leprosy has chosen to it self, and prepared an anodynous or
benumming poison, not a coolifying and sleepifying, but by another title, a
Freezing one; no otherwise than as Kibes or Chilblanes, are bored with Ulcers,
as if they were scorched with fire: the which notwithstanding, do oftentimes
happen unto those before or after winter, who all the winter in the Chimneys,
felt no cold.

The poison of the Leprosy therefore, does in this respect, co-agree with
cold, effectually, although not in the first Elementary quality thereof:
neither therefore does it also totally mortify after the manner of a Gangreen;
but only the part which it seals with the Ulcer: Yea, neither also does it
straightway extend it self far from thence, because it is from a con^stringent
icie poison, the Author of unsensibleness.

But it is of a difficult curing, by reason of its freezing, and almost
mortifying Contagion, and that an oppressive one of the sensitive: spirit;
because as it is intimately co-fermented may overcome the aforesaid poison, and
also confound or dissolve the ice of the foregoing, winter with a new Spring.

And although that poison be fermental in respect of the poison; and therefore
also from a formal quantity of it self, it endeavors to creep into all places
afterward; yet it is not apt, as to be co-fermented equally with the spirit,
by reason of the force and fighting nobleness of the Subject into which it is
received, and the drowsy sluggishness of its icie disposition.

For such is the difference in contagious things, that the poisons of some
things do voluntarily, or by art, depart, and are separated from, and forsake
the bodies infected by them: But of others, that there is no voluntary division
to be hoped for: for the ice of the Leprousie does the rather besiege the more
outward parts, because it is an icie malady, and is thrust forth abroad by the
inbred heat: for therefore it more defiles the Standers by toward their
outward parts, than their more inward bowels which are co-touching with them in
the root, in the unity of life.

But no Physician ever cured the Leprosy, which obtained not the Liquor
Alkahest.

The which, since it is of a most tedious preparation, none, although skilful
in art, shall come unto the obtainment thereof, whom the most High shall not by
a special gift conduct thither: For he must needs be chosen and endowed by a
particular privilege, if he ought to obtain that Medium or Mean: To wit,
whereby as well sensitive as unsensitive sublunary bodies, are equally pierced
even into the seminal and intrinsecal root of their first Being; therefore also
it subdueth and changes all things under it, without a re-acting of the
Patient and impoverishing of the Agent: For otherwise it is vain, whatsoever
hope the Leprosy shall persuade it self of from elsewhere.

Therefore in times past, the curing of those that had the Leprosy, was
granted for a sign unto the Messiah alone.

My first born daughter being now five years old, became leprous, and that more
and more; and at length, wan Ulcers, and horny white scales grew throughout her
whole body. But then the image of the Virgin Lady newly showed it self by many
Miracles in our City, famous for the Hospital of St. James: The Girl
therefore, being now seven years of age, desired to go to the place, and the
Grandmother with her Nephew, hasten thither, and she returns after an hour,
sound, and forthwith the scales fall off.

Presently after a year, the same Leprosy suddenly returned; And I confessed
my self guilty, that I had concealed the honor of the Lady Virgin: Therefore
my little daughter returns with her Grandmother unto the sacred Image, and she
again returned healed, and so afterward remained.

But I fearing the return of the Leprosy, divulged the Miracle, and by a
public Writing, confessed the favor and clemency of God: unto whom be all
praise and glory, with the sanctifying of his name for ever!

I have already said, that sensation or the act of feeling, (according to the
mind of Hippocrates)

For indeed, I have demonstrated in the Treatise Concerning the Forms of
Things, Peripateticks may crack: Which Paradox, I have demonstrated by
Mathematical demonstration, and Mechanically in the book of the Elements: And
so I here assume it, as being elsewhere sufficiently proved.

I will therefore speak much more nearly than Hipprocrates, concerning
Sensation and Sense; That if Sensation or the act of Feeling were in times
past, said to be made with a passion of the body, wherein the spirit making the
assault, receives the impression of the thing to be felt, and the which
therefore is abusively called the very Sensible Species it self: We now
understand, that this impression is in one only moment, and in the same point
^sinuated into the life existing in it: To wit, under which Insinuation,
Application, and Suiting, Sensation does then first arise, being made in the
life it self, and by the life; Of which life indeed, Sense it self is an
unseparable property.

And seeing Life is not of a body, nor proper to a body, nor lastly, of the
Offspring of corporeal properties; but is a light coming into it by the gift
of the Creator, beyond the condition of the Elements and Heavens; Hence also,
Sensation is not of bodies, nor of matter, nor of a solution of the Con-tinual,
etc. But plainly, a vital property proceeding from the very trunk of life.

As also, it is not sufficient, that there be an Eye, a Mean, a vital Spirit,
that Seeing may be made; but moreover, there is required an application of the
visual spirit unto the Life, and therefore, the effect of seeing, however
altogether ordinary, does exceed the whole Elementary nature; because it
contains the image and co-resemblance of the Life it self: for that, Seeing,
Tasting, Smelling, Touching, etc. are the immediate effects of the Life
sporting it self or playing through its own Organs: For in all sense, it must
needs be, that the allurements of the spirits, and the Species of things
perceived, are fitted immediately to the life, if sensible acts do at any time
happen.

But indeed, in a matter so difficult, and so far separated from the common
Doctrine, grant me Reader, that I may as yet talk more nearly with thee; For
thou have perceived,

Therefore since thou have already perceived that, I will speak further: For
what things I have now spoken concerning the Life, I have shown in my whole
book Of long Life, (whereunto I dismiss thee for speedy recourse) how variously
the Life glistens in nature: to wit, as it is seminally in the very vital
spirits; but as it were fountainously, in the sensitive soul it self.

Therefore in speaking properly of Sense and Sensation, the Sensitive Soul it
self, is the primary, and also the immediate Being, which acts all
Sensations, and in acting, Medium, whereby the Sensitive Soul perceives
external Objects rushing on it: For Sensation is not immediately in the thing
contained, nor in the things containing, nor also in the spirit diffused
through the Sinews into the vital parts; Because that spirit which makes the
assault, differs from the Sensitive Soul, no otherwise than as a fat material
smoke does from the flame by which it is enflamed; But the Soul, the immortal
Mind, is wholly unpassable by humane conceptions, as it is the Image of the
very incomprehensible God himself.

But the Sensitive Soul, although it begins in nature from an occasional seed,
that is, dispositively; yet seeing it is the nearest Image of that Image, it is
also after the manner of men, unknown, and altogether scanty: For therefore
indeed, neither can it be defined by its causes, but only is described by an
absurb or incongruous Circle of reflections own its

This same Soul therefore, through life, perceives in the animal Spirits, and
sees immediately, in the Optic or visual spirit which inhabits in the apple
of the eye, the visible Species conceived: For the Optic Spirit there, is a
transprrent glass, the light whereof is the very Sensitive Soul it self,
present in the same place, being the Seat and Chambermaide of the immortal
mind: Therefore there is no need of a recourse of the received Species, that
are to be perceived through the Sinews, to the Brain; But the Soul being
immediately present, and bestowing all virtue from it self upon the visual
Spirit, she her self sees and discerns.

But the Brain is only the Shop and Cup of those spirits: wherefore the sinews
do not serve for the conveighing of the Specie's drawn unto the Brain in the
act feeling or perceiving; a like reason of the external Senses, with the
imaginative power and its Sisters: For the sensible Specie's, outwardly
perceived by the Soul, are abstracted by sensibility, and then at length, as it
were of the matter [whereof] Specie's or shapes are from thence forged into the
Image of the thing to be perceived.

After another manner, Sensitive Objects entering from without, are conceived
after a Concrete or conjoined manner, in the Organs of the senses, and
therefore they do not only displease, but moreover, do now also pain.

But concerning the seat of the Soul, it is variously disputed for the Heart
and the Brain: But I may suppose, that the Sensitive Soul is conformable to its
own seeds, and

The dispositions whereof, are indeed gradually premised: But notwithstanding
they are in one only instant, enlightened by the divine goodness of the Creator;
Even as in the Book of long life: For that happens no otherwise than as in the
co-rubbing of the flint against the Steel: Therefore an undeclarable light is
kindled by the Creator in the spirit of the more noble Bowels: and first indeed
in the heart, which light, as it attaineth strength by degrees, is more
powerfully enlarged, no otherwise, than as the smoke of a lower Candle does
visibly receive the dismissed flame from the upper Candle: So that although the
Organs are divided in diversity of Offices, yet by a mutual conspiracy, they
readily serve for the necessities and ends prefixed by the Lord the Creator:
Notwithstanding, there is one only Harmony, and continued Homogenial Life, and
Sensitive Soul of all the Bowels and Members, which in every one of them
receives, and presently after cloatheth it self with certain limitations or
properties which it had prepared for it self by the seeds.

For as the flame of a Candle is not extended above or without its own Sphere,
nor perishes as long as it lives within that Sphere, although the smoaky fumes
arising from thence, being void of flame, did fly far away out of that Sphere:
so likewise, the inflowing spirits, although they are illustrated by a
participation of life, are pufft away, do wander far, and therefore are
materially diminished in their Cup or Buttery; yea, and for this cause, the
liveliness of a vital Light grows feeble; yet nothing of the essence of the
Sensitive Soul perishes, because Life is not attained by parts and degrees, as
neither does it subsist like accidents, but is always life; although more or
less liveliness may appear in that light: For no otherwise than as a fire,
where it is never so small, is as well fire, as another that is heightened: In
like manner also, whatsoever exhaleth from the body, which before rejoiced in
the participation of Life, yet loses life, so soon as it departs out of its
own limits: So also Excrements do not indeed keep Life, but a co-participation
of the vital spirits: Wherefore also from thence, the order of the inferior
Harmony slides into disorder, according to that saying, My spirit shall be
diminshed, and (therefore) my days shall be shortened: Therefore a more
immoderate evacuation of corrupt Pus, and the like, brings sudden death: As
indeed they do not contain the Soul, but only the last seminal life of vital
spirits.

For as concerning the immediate existence of the immortal Mind or Divine
Image, the matter is as yet in controversy between the Heart and the Brain:
For I, who know, that even Quickening is made at the very instant, wherein the
Sensitive Soul is present; that is, while that formal, Animal and Sensitive
Light is kindled, (even as elsewhere, concerning the Birth of Forms) believe
also, that the immortal mind is present, and that it does wholly sit
immediately in the Sensitive Soul, as being associated or joined thereunto; Not
indeed, that it sits in a certain corner bowel, prison of the Body, or shop of
the spirits.

But I conceive, that the mind is throughout the whole Sensitive Soul, and that
it pierces this Soul, nor that it does exceed the Sphere thereof, as long as
it lives: and in this respect, that it is subject unto many importunities of
circumstances: But in death the mind is separated; because the Sensitive Soul
it self departs into nothing as it were, the light of a Candle; which things
surely were here to be fore-tasted of, before the explication of Sensation.

Pain therefore, as that which is chiefly to be felt, shall open unto us the
way: For it is a hurtful and sorrowful Sensation or act of feeling conceived in
the vital Spirit, being by life implanted in the sensitive soul.

And in speaking most nearly, Sense or Feeling is a Possion of the sensitive
soul, conceived in the spirit of Life, For nothing can be glad, sorrowful or in
pain, besides the soul it self: And so that Sense, seeing it is the first
conception of Pain, or well-pleasing, it is by all means made primarily in the
Soul: And therefore Sense represents unto me, nothing besides that power of the
Soul of conceiving and judging passively of external Objects rushing on it.

Therefore seeing that these Acts do depend on the Soul, the whole History
whereof is blind unto us; it is no wonder, that it has been hitherto, naught
but carelessly treated by the Schools concerning the Soul and Sensation; Because
they are those who have skipt over the Enquiries of far more manifest things,
as untouched; yea through sloth they have neglected them, by subscribing to
the dreams of Heathens.

In Pain therefore, the irrational Sensitive Soul, is first or chiefly
sorrowful, is mad, is angry, is perplexed, does itch, or fear; and as it is in
the fountainous root of all vital, actions, it naturally moves, and contracts
not only the Muscles, but also any of the parts, unto the tone of its own
passions.

Sense therefore is the action of external Objects that are to be perceived;
the which, while they are conceived in the Soul, it self also suffers, no less
than life its companion, than the animal spirit, and the rest of the guard. But
the immortal mind suffers

But it is as yet a very small matter, that the Sensitive Soul does suffer by
sensible

That even from hence also, the Proverb may be verified, That none is more
hurt, than by himself, (as the Sensitive soul is a mere act:) And so that it
being once spurred up by sensible conceptions, (for it is wholly irrational,
brutal, wrongful, and greedy of desire) it leaps over into furies, and
symptomatically or furiously shakes all things. Therefore sensible Objects are
the occasions of hurts and diseases: But the sensitive Soul well perceiving the
same occasions, nor being willing to suffer them, diversely stirs up its own
Ministers, and by Idea's imprinted on them, estrangeth them from their Scope or
Purpose: From whence afterward proceed various seeds and Offsprings of
Diseases.

The Soul therefore undergoes and suffers the aforesaid affects from the Object
that is to be felt, from whence it being disturbed or tossed by the pricks of
Sensations, does act, and suffer, lastly, as being prodigal, it in a rage,
disperseth its own family-order of Administration: And while it perceives
sweet, plausible, helpful Objects, and those things which are grateful unto it
self, it is not in this its acts of feeling, differing from the Judgment
whereby it feels hurtful, corrosive, pricking, rending, brusing Objects, not
but by accident, which is plainly external to the life it self: From whence, it
is easily discerned, that Sense is made by the Judgment of the sensitive Soul,
being brought upon a conceived sensible object, it altering at first by it
self, according to the Sensation conceived, and then it conveigheth it further
unto another imaginative Judgment, which is separated from the sensitive
Judgment, no otherwise than as Sense, and Fantasy or Imagination do disagree
in their Faculties, but not in their Subject.

Spare me, ye Readers, if I attribute all material perturbations and affections
immediately to the sensitive soul, and to the spirits its guardians; but not
unto the organs of those: For there are some tickling things, which by their
itching, and itch-gumme, do stir up laughter, and a small leaping in some,
which in others do not move the least of these: For oft-times the Soul is
inwardly overclouded with a natural Sensation, and is also sadned, the Subject
thereof being scarce known; yea, it elsewhere, doates: And elsewhere the
sensitive soul becomes unsensitive, as in those that have the Falling
Sickness, for a time: but in the Palsy, oft-times, for Life, at leastwise in
Organs that are hurt, although as yet alive: But in many, without Sense,
Judgment, and Reason, although the animal spirits do issue forth, and being
diffused into the habit of the body, do move, and in the mean time, do
otherwise draw hurtful impressions.

So the life, and that sensitive soul have their own drowsinesse, madness, and
trouble within, although nothing shake and burden them from without: because
seeing that in sleep also, there is its own foolish Lust or Desire, Hunger,
Thirst, Fear, Agony, and a wondrous dissolute liberty of irrational vain dreams.

And moreover, friendly things are presently changed into mixed, neutral or
hostile ones, as the Archeus which never keeps Holiday or is idle, does of
sweet things make bitter, and corroding ones: For the Soul (as I have said)
conceives of sensible things by the means of a Guard and Clients, unto whom
she her self as present, is an an Assistant, and by applying those objects unto
her self, stirs up Sorrow, Love, Fear, etc. To wit, of which Idea's, she
sealingly forms the Characters or Impressions in her own Archeus, whereby she
changes all things acording to the Image seminally proposed unto her self:
Which Character, being through a bedewing of the Sensitive Soul, made partakers
of Life and Sense, do first cloth the seminal body of the Archeus, from whence
at length, most prompt faculties or abilities for action, do spring: And there
is sometimes made in these, so ready and stubborn a perseverance of affection,
that it presents a Spectacle of Admiration to the Beholder, especially, if any
one does examine the attributes of the Life and spiritual Seed: For how most
suddenly are Children, Women, and improvident people, angry, do weep and laugh?
For the sensitive Souls of those, do freshly, as it were immediately even
adhere unto sensible things.

It is therefore a natural thing, that the sensitive Spirit is voluntarily and
easily carried into these kinds of overflowings; because that Soul being easily
received by its own sensual judgment, slides into the voluntary passions of
material Spirits; and, as even from a Child, these same exorbitances have
increased, so afterward, that Soul grows to ripeness, as wrothful, furious,
and wholly symptomatical; the which otherwise would far more safely perform all
things under meekness or mildness, than as by reason of furies to aspire into
Diseases, and now and then unto its own death; which is frequent and most
manifest in Exorbitances of the Womb, and in the Symptoms of some Wounds, and
of other Diseases.

Anger therefore and Fury in this place, are not of the man, but of that
Sensitive Soul brought into the Life, which begets the animosities of a
natural Sensation, and Sphacelus or mortifying Inflammation, like fire. Pain
therefore is an undoubted Passion of the Sense of Touching, wherein the
sensitive Soul expresses a displeasure with the Object, according to the
differences of the conceived Injury brought on the parts.

Furthermore, Whether that Passion be the Office or Performance of a judicial
power, from whence the Soul is by a proper Etymology, named Sensitive, no
otherwise than

For truly, Seeing the Sense of Pain, is the Judgment of the Soul, expressed
by the act of feeling in the Sensible Faculty, whereby the Soul bewails it self
of the sensible, hurtful, and paining Object: Therefore both of them being
connexed together, do almost every way concur; and both also stand related
after each its own manner, unto pain. For indeed, the cause being a sensible
injury, is the motive of pain: But the sensitive Soul it self, gives judgment
of the painful Object with a certain wrothfulnesse and impatiencie of Passion:
The which indeed, in a wound, Contusion or Bruise, Extension or Straining,
Burning and Cold, as being external Causes, is altogether easy to be seen.

But while the motive Causes of Pain are neither applied from the aforesaid
impression of external Objects, or from a proper Exorbitancy within, and the
Sensitive Spirit is from thence made wholly sharp, gnawing, biting, degenerate,
and forms the blood like it self: Then indeed, the Sensitive Soul, in paining,
does not only give a simple judgment concerning Pain; But moreover, she in her
self being wholly disturbed, brings forth from her self a newly painful
product, no otherwise, than if that Product proceeded from an external
occasional Cause.

And although both these do in a greater Passion, and more grievous Sensation,
for the most part concur; yet in speaking properly, Pain does more intimately
respect the Censure brought from the Sensitive Soul, the Patient: Or Pain does
more nearly reflect it self on the property of the Soul, than on the paining
cause; Because many are grievously wounded without manifest pain: even as also
a furious man shows, that he scarce feels Pains from hurtful Causes. Some
things also do oftentimes delude the pains of Torture, and Unctions do also
deceive pains, although the parts are beaten with injury. Wherefore Sense,
does more intimately and properly respect the Censure of the power of the
sensitive Soul, than the injury of the painful Cause. But truly, I am diverted
elsewhere as for the cause of the aforesaid unpainfulnesse in the Leprosy, and
unmoveablenesse in the Apoplexy, etc.

The Schools indeed, contending for the Brain as the chief Organ of Sensation
and

The fourth bosom of the Brain (it being a very small little bosom) beginning
from the Cerebellum, the beginning of the Thorny marrow is stopped up by
phlegm: from whence arises an Apoplexy in an instant. For Nature being
unwilling, or not able to draw back or reduce that phlegm once slidden down
thither, being diligent, is at leastwise Paracelsus also, not being content
with this drowsy Doctrine of three Diseases, is also tumbled in unconstancy.

For sometimes he says, That the Apoplexy and Palsy following thereupon, is
bred, for Microcosme, after the manner of sulphurous Mines, contracted like
Aqua vitae, a flame from the fire of Aetna: Through which inflammation, the
Sinews and Tendons being afterward at it were adust, burnt, and as it were
half dead, are dried up together with the muscles: and therefore they do
thenceforth remain deprived of sense and motion; To wit, he Constitutes these
two Diseases (considering nothing the while, of the Contracture or Convulsion
from the stroke) not indeed in the Case of the Brain, but in the utmost
Branches of the Nerves: as though, they were affects hastening from without to
within. But in another place, he judges not a certain sulphurous or inflamed
matter to be the cause of the Apoplexy: but he accuses Mercury only (to wit,
one of the three things, which he calls His own Beginnings of Nature) as being
too exactly Circulated; and affirms, that through its abounding subtility or
finenesse, it is the containing Cause of every sudden Death. Elsewhere, he
recals the Apoplexy unto the Stars of Heaven: And in another place again, being
unconstant, he teaches, That every Apoplexy is made of gross vapors stopping
up the Arteries and restless beating Pipes of the Throat; and that there is
also an Eclipse of the Lunaries or Moon-lights of the Brain in us, from a
Microcosmicall necessity.

Therefore has he in like manner, whirled about the causes of the Vertigo or
giddiness etc. are indeed the occasional, or effective Instrumentals, but not
the chief efficients of pain.

And then, seeing pain is for the most part bred in an instant, Also that which
is stirred up by external objects: Therefore for pain, there is no need of
recourse to the Brain, that by reflextion it should have need as it were of a
Counselor. Wherefore, the Schools going back a little from the Brain, had
rather receive the sinew for the chief Organ which is to perceive of the
objects of Sense, as they are besprinkled either with a Beam, of Light, or with
a material bedewing of Spirits (for they have not yet resolved themselves in
most things) continually dismissed from the Brain: And so, that the Brain does
deny sense and motion to the inferior parts, unless it does uncessantly
inspire its own favor, by the Spirits its Mediators. But herein also I find
many perplexities.

First of all, I spy out diverse Touchings in man: To wit, almost particular
Touchings Chirurgians wimble, resounds a wonderful sense, even into the Toes.
I have believed therefore, that there could not be so great a latitude of one
Touching, distributed from one only and common Fountain, the Brain, or from
the Nerve of a simple Texture or Composure. Therefore have I supposed that
which I have before already proved; That Sense does chiefly reside in the
sensitive Soul, which is every where present; and for that cause also,
immediately in the implanted Spirit of the parts: And that thing I have the
more boldly asserted, because the Brain itself, which is the shop of the
in-flowing Spirit, does excel in so dull and irregular a Touching, as that it
has been thought to be without feeling. Therefore, either that Maxim falls to
the ground: For the which things sake, every thing is such, that thing it self,
is more such: or the Brain is not the primary seat and fountain of Touching.

In the next place, all pain is made in the place, and is felt as it were out
of hand. Therefore also, Touching is made in the place, and not after an
afore-made signification to the Head. And moreover, in Nature, or at leastwise
in a round figure, there is not right and left: and so that, neither can there
be a side kept for phlegm in the Palsy, by its fliding down, except there are
in the one only Thorny Marrow, especially in its Beginning, two pipes
throughout its length, containing the necessity of a side: which is ridiculous
even to have thought, especially in the slender hollownesse of the fourth
Bosom. For truly, Motion and Sense are in one and the same muscle, which
receives a simple and flender sinew: Yet in fingers that are affected with
benummednesse, the feeling only is oftentimes suspended, Motion being in the
mean time safe and free: Therefore, either it must needs be, that Sense and
Motion do not depend on the same Nerve, on the in-flowing Spirit, and the
common principle of these: or it is of necessity, that from the same one only
small Nerve, Motion only, and not Sense, or Sense only, and not Motion, has
its dependence; or that there are other foreign things hitherto unknown, which
take away or hurt Sense only, and not Motion: but other things which stop
Motion alone, and some things which affect both.

Wherefore, in a more through attention, I have beheld that the astonishment of
Touching, unsensiblenesse, want, or defect in Motion, were passions that
sometimes arose etc. For I have known an honest Citizen, to have been thrice
hung up by Robbers, for the wiping him of his money's sake; and that he told
me, that at that very moment, wherein the three-legged stool was withdrawn from
his feet, he had lost motion, sense, and every operation of his mind. At
leastwise, the fourth little Bosom of his Brain was not then filled up, nor
the Thorny marrow pressed together, which lived safe within the turning joints:
and the Cord being cut, the stopping phlegm was not again taken away out of
that fourth Bosom, that those Functions of his Soul and Body might return into
their ancient state.

A certain Astrologer being willing to try whether the death of hanging was a
painful death, cast a Rope about his Neck, and bad his Son, a Youth, that he
should give heed, when he moved his Thumb, after the stool was withdrawn from
under his feet, so as presently to cut the Cord. The Lad therefore fixing his
eyes on his Fathers fingers, and not beholding motion in them, and looking up
vards, he saw his Father black and blew, and his Tongue thrust forth. Therefore
the Cord being cut, the Astrologer falls on the ground, and scarce recovered
after a month. Almost after the same manner does drowning proceed: Wherein,
as soon as at the first drawing, the water is drawn through the mouth into the
Lungs, the use of the mental faculties is lost; and by a repeated draught of
water, the former effects are confirmed: Yet neither do they so quickly dye,
but that if they lay on their Face, that the water may flow forth, even those
who appear to have been a good while dead, do for the most part, revive or live
again. The pipes of the Lungs therefore being filled up with a foreign Guest,
the vital Beam prepetually shining from the Midriffs into the Head, is
intercepted; From whence consequently, as it were a privative Apoplexy
straightway arises. Surely, it is a wonder, that the Functions of the mind
should on both sides so quickly fail; And so that also, a continued importunity
and dependence of necessity, from the aspiring and vital favor of inferior
parts, not yet acknowledged in the Schools, is conjectured: wherefore I have
promoted a Treatise, concerning the Duum Virate.

I considered therefore, if the Brain be the chief Fountain and Seat of the
Immortal Soul, understanding, and memory: at least, as long as the Soul was in
the Brain, those faculties ought to remain untouched: Seeing that for
Cogitation, there is neither need of the Leg, nor of the Arm, nor of Breathing.
Notwithstanding, hanging does as it were at one stroke, totally take away the
faculties of the mind. For while filled up with water: presently, not only the
faculties do stumble, but also such a stoppage did act by way of an universal
Apoplexy, and suspended motion not in one side only, even as in the Palsy: For
from thence, I confirmed my self, that the influences and communion of the
inferior Bowels were taken away from the Brain, by the interception of a Bond
or Obstacle: From whence also, I consequently supposed, that the first
Conceptions were formed elsewhere than in the Head, according to that saying of
Truth; Out of the heart proceed adulteries, murders, etc.

I found moreover, that the Apoplexy, astonishment or unsensiblenesse, Palsy,
giddiness of the Head, Falling-Evil, Convulsion, etc. were passions arising
from a positive Schools, by subscribing in the aforesaid Diseases, to wit,
unto Heathenish Doatages, stablishing phlegm in the fourth little bosom of
the Brain: When as in the mean time, the like and positive faculties do every
where occur in Opiates, and likewise in sleepy and Epileptical Diseases.

I remember also, that I at sometime in my young Beginnings, distilled some
poisonous things: the which, if at any time the junctures of the Vessels being
not well stopped, there expired an odor from them; or that afterward, in
separating the vessels from each other, they struck me at unawares; I was at
one only instant, ready for a fall, together with a giddiness of the Head,
and a benummednesse of my right side: So that, if the Odor had once only
again smitten me, without doubt I had fallen, as being Apoplectical. Indeed, an
ardent desire of knowledge in times past, constrained me into so great
rashness, that a thousand times, I have not spared my own life. Therefore in
the terms proposed, truly that Odor did not stir up phlegm threatening to
slide down, and a new and fresh blast of air again removed it not out of the
bosom of the Brain. Therefore, if some Simples do bring a drowsy Evil,
giddiness of the Head, a cessation of Motion, and an obscuring of Sense: it is
not unlikely, that the like things to these, do also suddenly spring up within:
Neither is it seemly, always to dedicate all these effects to the depriving
stoppage of one phlegm.

For I remember, that a person being smitten with an Apoplexy, dyed in two
hours: Menynx's or Coats of the Brain; and then the Cerebellum or little Brain
being modestly opened, not any thing of phlegm was found in the fourth Bosom;
as neither was there any thing found to have fallen downwards into the Thorny
Marrow, by those diligently narrow Enquirers. Therefore I shall never be
induced to believe with the Schools, that the Apoplexy is a phlegmy stoppage
of the fourth bosom of the Brain: as neither can I believe, the Palsy to be
an obstruction of either side of the Thorny marrow.

First of all, the unprosperous healing of these Diseases, do bewray the
sluggish Enquiries into Causes. And then, the Apoplexy has so negligently and
ignorantly been handled hitherto, that it is as yet, in the Schools, destitute
of a proper word: For truly, it has Galen, or being delivered to him, being
credulous, from some other; which small Net, Anato^y has not as yet hitherto
seen. But Galen his feigned fine Net has forsaken him, as a rash Asserter of
Trifles, and a ridiculous Dissecter. So that, it is now clearly manifested by
Andrew Vesalius being the Author, That Galen never saw a humane dead Carcass
dissected: and that he described his Doctrine of Anatomy word for word out of
some other, no otherwise than as he did his Herbarisme out of Diascorides.

Therefore I have easily learned, that of necessity, not only the place and
manner Mercurius Diaphoreticus of Paracelsus, elsewhere by me described. For
that Sudoriferous Mercury, as it cures without any Evacuation: so also, it has
brought desired help without the Revulsion of phlegm out of the fourth bosom
of the Brain. For, I having followed the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures (by
their fruits ye shall know them) Have learned, To wit, from the latter, and
from the effect, That the original of the Apoplexy is positive, but not
privative, or by a stopping up of the bosom of the Cerebellum, lum made by
phlegm suddenly falling down thither: Especially, because that from affects of
the Womb, Apoplexies and Palsies do oftentimes arise; They ceasing, Remedies
being administered to the Womb: and those being neglected, they are either
choked, as being truly Apoplectical, or do also languish with a Palsy for
their lifetime.

Finally, I have known, that the entry of an Apoplexy is in the Midriffs; but
in the sudoriferous one, withdraw any thing from the hinder little Bosom, and
much less, from the hollownesse of the Thorny marrow. And that thing, they
have known, as many as have ever been present at the Dissection of those parts.
And likewise, Odoriferous and succouring Essences being drunk, should never be
derived unto the Head, if it were stopped or beset: yet they do presently,
sensibly help; Because there is in the Midriffs their own tastes, and their own
proper smelling: And moreover, their own touching also, is from hence
communicated to the body, by means of the sensitive soul being every where
present: Which thing, although I have elsewhere, sufficiently proved concerning
long Life; yet it shall here be profitable to have confirmed it, at least by
one Example: Therefore, if any one shall drink a Scammoneated poison masked
with sugar and spice, the Tongue and Pallat do indeed commend it for the first
turn: but at a repeated one, the horror of the Midriff, and averseness of
drinking, will discover the error of the masked taste: And that which otherwise
is sweet to the Tongue, is made horrid to the Midriffs. Its no wonder
therefore, that there is a singular Taste and Touching in the same place, and
that it is from thence diffused into the members: and that those Senses of the
Midriffs are presently refreshed by the Essences of the Odor: but slowly and
never, if they are applied unto the Nostrils, Pallat, and seames of the Scull.

For I have taken notice of some things, which cause not only the drowsy
Evil, or Catalepsie, Chyrurgion in cutting: and the Ointments being afterward
withdrawn, the expelled feeling returns.

From hence indeed, I have believed, that the Apoplexy, drowsy Evils,
Falling Sickness, and likewise stranglings of the Womb, and any Swoonings, are
Diseases arising from a secondary passion, and action of Government: but not
from a corporal confluence of humouts and vapors bred in the bottles of the
Brain. Truly, the Womb never ascends above the Diaphragma, but it causes
Apoplectical Affects. There is not therefore, a material Touching of the Womb
and Head: For I have known a Perfume, whereby a Woman suddenly falls down as
Apoplectical, together with the Palsy of her side, and she remains such,
unless she be restored by the Fume of a Horse-fig sent through by a Funnel to
the Womb. For I have seen also, the Circle of the neck in a Woman to have
suddenly ascended above the height of her Chin, the which is subject neither to
humors nor vapors: For truly there is an aspect of the Womb, as it were of
its own Basilisk: whereby the parts, by the afflux of the Latex (but what that
Latex is shall be taught elsewhere) do swell; even as is otherwise, proper to
many poisons: Even so as the waters do ascend and swell, at both stations of
the Moon, from the aspect of that Star alone.

I will decipher my own self in this respect. While I was in the 65 Year of my
age, and was greatly occupied about the consideration of the Apoplexy, I
discerned, To wit, that a positive one which should be made by a freezing
poison, had it self in such a manner, as that it could be known from another
which afflicts by the stopping of a sinew: Even so that he, who sitting with
his Leg Retorted or writhen back, loses feeling in that Leg, by reason of a
pressing together of the sinew: and while as Sense is restored unto it, that
Lancings or prickings are felt from the vital or animal Spirit; (which is Salt,
as I have shown in the Book of long Life) but from an astonishment, which
proceeds from a freezing poison, if the feeling shall return, no pain of
lancing or pricking offers it self. For I contemplated in my study, under the
cold of the Calends of [the 11th. Month called] January: and an earthen Pan
laden with a few live Coals, stood aloof off, whereby the most chilly cold
season of the Winter might at least be a little mitigated. One of my Daughters
seasonably coming to the place, sented the stink of the smoke, and presently
withdrew the Pan; But I forthwith perceived a fainting to be sorely threatened
about the Orifice of my stomach: I arising therefore, and going forth in one
instant, I fell with a straight body, on a stony ground: therefore, as well by
reason of the swooning, as of the stroke of the hinder part of my head, I was
brought away for a dead carcass. I returned indeed after a quarter of an hour,
unto the signs of life, but together with a swelling of the hinder part of my
head, I felt the seames or futures of my scul notably to pain me, and that
more and more: My taste also, and smelling to have been wholly taken away, and
my ears continually to tingle. Moreover, at every of my conceptions, my head
presently whirled round with a giddiness, even my eyes being shut: straightway
after, all my sinews even unto the calfes of my legs ached, so as that one
only sneezing cruelly launced the whole body: indeed an appetite of eating
returned, but a whirling round excercised me for some months.

But I learned first, that in the evening before supper, the giddiness of my
head increased, to wit, about the bound of digestion.

2. That my judgment remaining, the giddiness notwithstanding, was prevalent.

3. That from any kind of pot herbs, and unsalted fishes, the whirling did the
more cruelly assault me.

4. I noted the Gem Turcois, to have remained entire or neutral with me, having
fallen, nor to have preserved me from the peril of falling: And that the
Turcois does not help any but those, whom a sudden fear in falling, surpriseth:
The which happens not in those wherein a swooning precedes, and frames the
fall.

5. That my giddiness was from meats subject to corruption.

6. And I seriously noted, that the Apoplexy, Vertigo, etc. do depend on the
midriffe, although from the shaking of the stroke, my head alone seemed to be
affected, and the vertigo did sensibly whirle about in my head. Yet seeing the
giddiness had respect unto meats, and a plenty of meats, I remarkeably
perceived, that presently after the aforsaid swooning, a guest besides nature
remained about the stomach, being the occasional cause of the aforesaid
giddiness or vertigo, and that thing, I the more strongly confirmed, because
as often as I had in times past, sailed over the sea, I indeed, at the beginning
of storms, grew nauseous; but I never vomited, or desisted from eating: but
after that I wandered about on Land, I always perceived an unconstant
giddiness, night and day resembling the motion of sailing upwards and
downwards: Until that I was always at length freed by a vomit of white
Vitriol. For at least wise, in sailing, there was no offense brought unto my
head: yet, as if I had been drunk, I threatened a fall with a continual
giddiness, the operation of my judgment notwithstanding, remaining constant
and unhurt. But I was always freed from that giddiness, by one only vomit.
But now, in the aforesaid fall, the stroke indeed produced a tumor in the
hinder part of my head, and in the seames of my scull, bewraying its effects in
the organs of the senses and nerves.

But all these did least of all cause a wheeling about of my head, the which I
observed to be chiefly stirred up or exasperated from the choice of meats;
Most especially, because that whirling was restrained according to its custom,
by one only vomit.

From whence I experienced in my self, that the giddiness of my head, although
my head was hurt, was stirred up and nourished by the stomach, and so from the
Duumvirate: But that the swooning it self gave a cause of the stroke, and also
left a sealing mark in a foreign guest there detained.

Again, that that whirling was not from a vapor lifted upwards from beneath:
but from the corporeal occasion of a sealed excrement, as often as something
offered it self which was the less pleasing unto those inferior shops, the
force and impressive Idea of the same, redounded into the brain. From thence
therefore I discerned, that be-drunkening things being derived from the stomach
into the arteries, and co-mixed with vital spirit, did confound the
family-administration of the spirit in the little cells of the Brain, and also
disturb the imaginative power, because they actually proceeded through the
arteries upwards, as foreigners and strangers: to wit, by be-giddyng things,
whereby indeed, whirlines only, how cruel ones soever, were presented, the
understanding remaining fafe: For the occasional causes also of these whirlings
do remain in the places about the short ribs: from whence, they by the power
of government, vitiate the Brain it self: but not the abstracted faculties of
the mind which are immediately sealed in the spirits.

Even so as the Elf's hoof being bound to the finger, restraines the same
rigor of the Duumvirate in those that have the falling sickness. I also well
weighed, as it were by an Optical inspection, after what manner the first
conceptions, might be formed the midriffs, and from thence being sent unto the
head polished. And at length, after what sort these midriffs might be diversely
tossed in dotages, and Hypochondriacal madnesses, without any running round of
the head. And, how in drunken persons, a whirling might accompany their foolish
madness. But elsewhere, after what sort a whirling (...) of the head might
induce no stumbling of the mind: Even as otherwise, how the memory might
stumble, the man remaining safe and sound. Truly as I seriously, and with much
leisure, weighed these things with my self, I found, that qualities do follow
their own Idea's, and by course act their own tragedies in the excrement
themselves: to wit, which diverse properties of qualities I then at first
clearly apprehended, to be as it were seminal endowments, and true formal
Idea's: whereby indeed, the strength of the sensitive soul (for why, they are
companions of the same formal order) was vitiated, and variously subdued, and
yielded to the importunities of active Idea's.

Alas for grief! then the bottom of the soul (so called by Taulerus)
manifested it self unto me, which was nothing else but the immortal mind it
self; to wit, in what great utter darknesses, it might be involved, as it were
in coats of skin, as it was fast tied to, and entertained in the Inn of the
very sensitive soul, while the term of life endures.

And so from hence I clearly knew him, whom I have also therefore (concerning
Long Life) by an unheard word explained, to the honor of God, the contempt

I have also taught concerning Long Life, that the Head is the fountain of the
growth of the parts placed under it, (which thing Crump-backed persons do also
confirm,) and so that from the head, the State and Duration of Growth is
limited: That bounds also are described by the hairs, and therefore that heads
void of care, do scarce wax gray.

I profess therefore with the Schools, That a vital Light is indeed diffused
from the Brain, as from a fountain, and dispersed through the sinews; and that,
that Light being absent, the faculties that are silent in their proper Inns,
are also straightway silent through a pri^ative occasion: For although Sense
and Motion do after some sort, depend as well perceptively as executively on
the implanted spirit of the parts: yet because all particular parts are vitally
nourished by a besprinkled light of the Brain; The Thread also, or Beam of this
Light being intercepted, Sense and Motion likewise are as soon as may be,
intercepted.

But these things do show only a privative Apoplexy, not indeed so truly a
Disease, as an accidental one, even as I have shown above, in the Strayning of
the Turning-Joyuts: But not that therefore, the fountainons cause of the Senses
and Motions in the spirit, dies with that privation, although the functions
thereof be suspended, while that Light from above is suspended: For a Fly does
sometimes frequently fly, when his head is taken off: Also the Head of a man
being cut off, his joints do oftentimes, for a good while, leap a little, and
are contracted, and do as yet afford the signs of an inbred motion.

But of a positive and diseasie Apoplexy, there is a far different cause and
property:

But at leastwise, one only Nerve extended into the Tendon of the Palm,
bestows Sense and Motion on the four fingers alike: Why therefore is the
Feeling alone stupefied in

Again, What Vapor being ever lifted up even from the most tough snivel, was
grosser, or not equal to that which ascends from the water? Let as many as have
been Distillers in the Universe, answer. Why therefore shall a gross Vapor of
Phlegm (the which I have sufficiently demonstrated elsewhere to be a non-being)
be required for an astonishment, and not that of simple water, or of the blood?
But if indeed a Vapor of the latex or blood, shall effect that thing, then
also there shall be a necessary, ordinary, and continual general stupefaction
of all parts without intermission. And then, if some foreign or exerementous
humor or vapor be the ocasional cause of such an astonishment, to wit, the
privative, and stoppifying one of a nerve, surely it is sent, o^ runs down
thither of its own accord: If it be sent, yet at least, not from the Brain, or
the marrow its Vicaress; For so it should not straightway affect, as neither,
at leastwise, strike at one only finger, and the utmost part of the finger,
which was but presently before, healthy: Neither is that Vapor sent from the
spirit, the Family-administrater of Life, because it is that which should more
willingly and readily go forth, as being banished by transpiration: Therefore
that thing manifestly contradicts providence, and a natural care of
diligence, which always dispenses all things for the best end: Because nature
as too injurious to her self, should dash against the sinews, those things
which she according to her wonted manner, had more easily, better, and more
nearly commanded away unto the natural and ordinary emunctory of the skin.

And so that vaporal Fable of the Schools, which is to be scourged, contains a
manifold

But it is like to a dream, that in a sound body, but not in a complaining one,
the sense of a finger does forthwith fail through phlegm, which was no^ before
perceived in

But has that Phlegm, or that Vapor perhaps, crept sideways into the utmost
nerve of the finger? But then the Maxim of of the Schools should perish, which
ascribes the dispensations of any Humors unto the Spirit making the assault:
For those Humors are not in us, or in the nature of things, and if there were
any, an ambulatory or walking power should no^ therefore belong unto them; and
much less, in those being now excrementitious; because all natural motions in
us, hearken unto the faculties of vital things: For if Phlegm, and the gross
Vapor thereof were in nature, at leastwise in this place (as they are
diseasie) they are reputed by the Schools to be Excrements, whereof there is
not a going, no^ voluntary Motion or Progress: Therefore they should of
necessity be driven away by some other: Not indeed, by the Archeus, who seeing
he acts all things, and that well, should not therefore drive that unto the
sinews, which he was otherwise accustomed regularly to drive unto the skin.
Does therefore Phlegm, perhaps being extenuated into a Vapor by heat proceed
upwards; But then, not downwards into the steep finger: At leastwise, according
to the Theoreme of the Schools concerning Catarrhs, That Vapor should
presently again grow together into drops; but it should not wonder about in the
show of a Vapor unto the utmost parts of the Nerves, as neither should it
hasten through the Palm of the Hand, unto one only finger. But why should it
rush on a sudden, like a weight, into a small nerve more flender than a thread?
Into one I say, and not into another?

But if the Vapor does enter sidewayes, why in one only instant is it imbibed,
without a foregoing trouble? Why is it not rather dashed into the flesh, than
into the extreme part of a small nerve, which is encompassed with its own
membrane? Why does the cause which begat one only Atome of Phlegm, or of a
gross vapor, continual produce no other besides that one only Atome? For that
sudden stupefaction does oft-times begin from the little finger, and cease at
length in that, when it has reached to the third or fourth. Now and then also,
all the fingers do suddenly assume the paleness of death, unto the half of
their length, or beyond, even when it is without astonishment, a drowsy
motion, etc.

If therefore that were from a vapourie matter, at least, that matter shall not
be made in the brain or thorny marrow: For truly, then also it should portend
an universal passion; Therefore that Vapor shall be bred in the sinew or
tendon; but then they would be all stupefied at once, but not successively.

Neither am I persuaded, why that Vapor existing without the sinew in the
tranquillity of health, should be pressed inwards unto the sinew or tendon, when
as after another manner, there is in us an uncessant transpiration outward: At
leastwise, why this should not continue, seeing it has the same Workman,
Matter and shop within it? Wherefore does that astonishment presently cease, if
a matter should subsist, such as should be one of the four Humors everywhere
swimming together with the venal blood?

If the cause now defluxeth from the common Nerve of the Palm of the hand, into
one finger already vanquished; Why therefore does it afterward flow down unto
another healthy finger, and not stay in the first? Why if it be ptopagated from
one only little Nerve into all of them, does it not also molest all of them at
once; but subsequently, and a good while after? Wherefore is the feeling hurt,
and not the motion, if they are from one only and a like cause, if it be
brought down through one only small sinew, the Author as well of Motion as
Sense?

The cold of the hands alone causes an astonishment from without, and a pain
within, without any falling of vapors or humors thereinto. At length, the
sinews are not inserted into the fingers, but into the tendons: Why therefore
is the feeling hurt, and not the motion? Why is not the Stupefaction extended
throughout the whole palm of the hand at once, which is covered with one
tendon? If the Tendons suffer this threatened Palsy, now that is to have
departed from the communion of the Nerves unto the thick, not bored, nor pip-i^
trunks of the Tendons: Not passable ones, I say, if therefore not subject to
the Incidencies of Phlegm.

A certain man had retained his Spleen affected from a Quartan Ague, and
likewise a stupefaction of his left hand, together with a mortal paleness
frequently returning

Certainly I have prosecuted the unsensibleness and astonishments of particular
members, that we might the more rightly understand a total Apoplexy.

In the mean time I pity the Schools, that they have not more exactly examined
their own fictions of Humors and Vapors, and the so speedyed and ridiculous
falling down of these; neither that they have once considered, that as the cold
of the encompassing Air is stupefactive; so that they have not distinguished
the nature of the Palsy, and the colike positive passions of the sinews, from
co-like privative ones: That from thence they might have learned, that positive
effects can in no wise consist without a stupefying dead matter and quality:
The which if it be sufficient for crea^ing an astonishment, when it shall have
touched at the Sensitive parts from without; what may it not be for effecting,
if it locally stir the sinew it self. Truly, if that which touches thereat in
manner of a Vapor (according to the Schools) shall presently afford an effect
about to perish the Senses; Why have they not likewise once considered, that
through a more tough matter, it shall be able to stir up a stubborn and durable
Palsy?

Moreover, Wheresoever such an anodynous matter is enclosed in the Duumvirate.
of the body (I understand the Stomach and Spleen) it shall stir up a sudden
swooning,

But the Palsy is for the most part, only of one side, and a defect invades as
it were with the one only stroke of a dart: But the swistness of the unexpected
chance produces a terror in the brain and marrows; that is, in the spirit the
inhabitant of these, and the Author of that act of feeling: Therefore by reason
of its Terror, the weaker side of the marrow is contracted: but surely, the
Palsy is the Product of the Contracture: And in all, one side is always weaker
than the other.

Therefore women, who as they are for the most part of a timorous mind, they by
terror do frequently rush also into a Palsy, without an Apoplexy: For
Terror or Affrightment has that Property, that it straightway closes the
pores, if it shall be sudden;

And indeed the Vulgar are wont to sore-divine an Apoplexy from the shortness
of the neck: For the shortness of the neck does not argue the fewer turning
joints to be, but a or with a sometimes future stoppage of the fourth bosom of
the Brain? To wit, that one ought to be casualy presaged by the other: For the
shortness of the neck contains not a naked sign, or prediction of
Physiognomy: But besides, a certain ocasional cause: For oft-times, after
yesterdayes gluttony or drunkenness, a giddiness of the head, a dizzie dimness
of sight, vomiting, astonishment of the fingers, etc. do happen; the which
threaten and presage an Apoplexy, not indeed through occasion of a fit Organ
(as concerning the shortness of the neck) but because they have their beginning
from an Apopoplexy, differing only in degree and intensness.

If therefore that giddiness and astonishment (after ^urfeiting) be from the
Midriffes, as the occasional matter is as yet nourished by the Archeus in an
inferior degree: Therefore, wheresoever that Anodynous or stupifying poison is
carried up into a degree, it causes an Apoplexy natively arising from the same
seats, where through an error of the sixth digestion, that Anodynous poison is
made of the nourishment, from whence at length, there also is occasionally a
Palsy.

The shortness therefore of the neck affords a brevity and readiness of
passage from the Midriffes into the head, requisite for an Apoplexy, that is, a
more ready aptness of the Organ.

And also the Schools affirm, that in little and threatened Apoplexies,
instituted rubbings of the utmost parts have sometimes profited, and they from
thence conjecturing a revulsion

They being in the mean time forgetful of their own rule, that Sense depends
wholly on the Brain; and that it is in vain to pill the legs, that they may
revulse Phlegm out Cerebellum into the fundament, by Clysters: or indeed,
whether they may by rubbing, require the same out of the bosom of the
Cerebellum through the skin: All being ridiculous, because themselves also are
ridiculous.

In the mean time, let those that stand by me, testify, whether they can
detract rather the skin, than vapors: Yet I certainly know, that though any
one be wholly flead, the Apoplexy, or true Palsy, is notwithstanding, never in
anywise to be removed.

Neither do I see, after what manner they can defend their own Theoreme: To
wit, that Phlegm in the fourth bosom of the brain, is the containing and
adquate cause of Cerebellum? I know therefore, that frictions, as they were
instituted without the discerning and knowledge of causes, and distinguishing
of places; so also that they have been, and will be always in vain: For it is
a ridiculous and cruel thing to have rubbed the skin unto a fleaing thereof,
and to have assigned the cause, to be a stoppage in the middle of the thorny
marrow: Because how much rubbing soever there shall be, if there were any Phlegm
in the world, and that slidden into the aforesaid bosom of the little Brain,
it shall never take that phlegm away in one only grain: But rather those
superstitions being granted, it should continually increase the same: Because
Revulsion (if there be any truth in it) shall draw the matter rather downwards,
and dash it into the pipe of the thorny marrow in what part it is always Nucha
or marrow of the back: Especially, while as in the Palsy, the sensitive
spirits flow down sparingly, or plainly nothing at all, the which might
otherwise be able to drive that Phlegm forth.

Rubbing therefore, as it exhausts it shall rather increase a want of the
sensitive spirits.

But the Anodynous poison of an Apoplexy, is generated after the manner of
other of the matter, But the Archeus perceiving that excrement, and abhorting
it, flees from it, and conceiving the deadly Idea of the Excrement,
impertinently imprints it on himself: From whence an Apoplexy is forthwith
stirred up, as it were with the stroke of a dart: But some previous
dispositions do for the most part go before the nativity of this stupifying
poison.

The which therefore, if it should happen in the Brain, the place should cease
from complaint, [Den Schlag] or a stroke, indeed because it suddenly comes as
at unawares after the manner of a stroke. The place therefore of the nativity
of an Apoplexy is in the Midriffs, and therefore it has also the foreshewing
signs of giddiness of the head, of benummedness, nauseousness, etc. The place
therefore of an Apoplexy is in the Arch^us of the Midriffs: but in every of the
parts, for a particular astonishment: because through the error of Digestion,
the Liquor that is immediately to be affimilated, by reason of the defect of
the Archeus, degenerates into an Anodynous poison, and is made the occasional
matter of so great a malady; an excrement, I say, being sealed by an Idea of
the abhorring Archeus, is sealed on the dreg, who is to show forth an equally
aged memory of his own hostility. But that it does not depart from thence, nor
obey Remedies known by the Apothecary, the very Quartan-ague teaches; the
which, hitherto repeates its Tragedy at pleasure, to the disgrace of
Physicians. If a Quartan-ague be uncurable by the Schools, much more an
Apoplexy. For the stupefactive poison of an Apoplexy, is milder indeed in it
self, than that of the Falling Sickness: but it far more cruelly molesteth with
its invasion. For besides astonishment, it strikes the mind, begets a deep
drowsinesse, and a Catochus or unsensible detainment. But if besides, it also
attaines a sharpness, it produces malignant Ulcers, according to the
mortifying of the Anodynous poison. But because that poison is brackish,
therefore it threatens Atrophia's or Consumptions for lack of nourishment.

For I have observed a Chemist, who had been a good while occupied about Aquae
R^gis's, to have fallen into terrible beatings of the Heart, at length into
pains of his Laudanum only, for thirteen days administered, soon after
recovered the habit of his body, and former strength. For because the harsh
brackishness of the Liquors had defiled the sensitive Spirit, the product
whereof pierced the Archeus, his mouth being pulled together unto one side, and
his fingers being w^ithed side-wayes, resembled a certain Apoplectical Being;
But because it ascended not from the Governor of the Midriffs; but only the
Odours of the waters had immingled themselves with the inflowing sensitive
Spirit, there was not a perfect Apoplexy of that man, although otherwise, one
giddie enough.

But because I call that a brackish Anodynal or stupefactive, which in Opium is
a bitter Henbane, or Mandrake; and a very sweet one in Vitriol and Sulphur:
This first of all discovers the Errors of the Schools, while as from commonly
known Savours, they divine of the faculties of Simples: But indeed I know, that
the interchanges of things, or the maturities of days are not yet digested: nor
likewise, That Truth instead of falsehood, will please every one: therefore I
will subjoyn some Anguishes, which the Apoplectical Rules of the Schools have
brought forth unto me. For while I insisted more than was meet, in the
examination of Minerals, I felt from the Fume of some of them, an Apoplexy to
be at hand, with a defect of my left side, and so that I had fallen headlong
down, if I had as yet but one only turn, breathed in the air of that place.
Wherefore I learned first of all, that the Palsy is not more latter that an
Apoplexy, in duration. Then again, that there is no stoppage in the bosoms of
the Brain: For I was already almost prostrated, and unless I had turned away
my head, from whence the stinking, cruel blast Schools will never answer to
these particulars: if nothing of ph^egme had ever fallen into the fourth bosom
of the Brain, how was the effect in me before its Cause? But if any thing
thereof had fallen down, which had at least, stopped up the half of its Bosom,
which way retired that phlegm so speedily? Or why is not every Apoplexy
likewise, by the same endeavor, voluntarily cured, the phlegm which is the
Effectresse thereof, vanishing? but if they had rather privily to escape, that
my Apoplexy came from the mischievous vapor, and not that to be from phlegm.
At leastwise, why was that cruel Fume brought sooner unto the fourth Bosom,
than unto the former ones, and those nearer and more obedient unto the
Nostrils? unless perhaps the former were Leprous, and sluggish, and without
Sense? Yea, all the sinews which are deputed unto the Senses alone, receive
their sensitive spirits from the former Bosoms: But in the former Ventricles
of the Brain; there was no sign of the hurting of Sense: yet there is no coming
from without, unto the fourth Bosom, but through all the foremost ones. Sense
likewise (except that it was the more dull on one side) and motion remained,
and also a Judgment persuading a departure. Therefore had the phlegm waited
now for some years at the coast of the fourth Bosom: that the Odor of that
Fume being once repeated, it (the sign as it were of a Trumpet being given)
might rush headlong into the pit? Why therefore fell not the phlegm down in me
a leaping Runaway? For in the Falling Sickness, the chief powers of

First of all, Why therefore are the joints contracted, if the Organs of motion
are free? The memory is especially hurt in the Falling Sickness: shall
therefore that also ^e only in the forepart of the Head? But that which is
required being granted: why therefore has every sinew designed for motion,
leaping through the Thorny marrow, from the hinder part of the Brain, lost
Sense, but not Motion? Therefore the Brain in the Falling-Evil is sore smitten,
as well behind as before, by Midriff-Causes. For oft-times some one that is
about to dye, does as yet feel or perceive, speak, and hear, motion in his
lower parts being taken away a good while before, by the displayed sinews of
the Thorny marrow. The Brain being in good health, a sudden swooning oft-times
rusheth on one from the lower parts, and as well Sense as Motion, fails in one
only instant. If that be made by Fumes, Sense ought first to fail, and
afterward motion, by degrees: Because the foremost Bosoms of the Brain are
nearer to the mouth of the stomach, than that last very slender one is: And
that thing should happen altogether most slowly, if the Apoplexy were from a
stoppage.

Again, In most sharp gripings or wringings of the Bowels, the Joints are drawn
together, with an integrity of the Functions of the Mind, yea and without a
pain in the Head; the which presently after, in the Palsy, are for the most
part, at rest. Does therefore the pain of the Belly stop up the Beginning of
the Thorny marrow, without an Apoplexy? To wit, so as that oftentimes, both
the hands and feet are resolved, and deprived of motion. Is now therefore the
fourth bosom of the Brain stopped on both sides? Why are the Joints only
deprived of Motion and Sense, not likewise the intermediating Organs, begging
their own Sense and Motion from the same Journey, mean, and middle space? For
what affinity is there of a Bowel, with that last bosom of the Cerebellum? Or
what agreement of this bosom, with the utmost Joints? To wit, that these
should pay the punishment deserved from elsewhere? For it is not yet
sufficiently manifest, seeing Sense and Motion are made in one only Nerve, yet
how in most, either of the two may be hurt, the other being safe.

Wherefore I as the first, ought to clear up this Question by Positions.

1. The Brain does not feel or perceive by it self, scarce in it self: But it
is covered etc.

2. The Correlative thereof is; the Animal Spirit, as long as it is formed
within the bosoms of the Brain, or wanders, it feels not, neither is the
Brain made a partaker of Sense thereby.

3. That Spirit receives not Sense from the Brain, seeing the Brain it self
wants sense. And by Consequence, neither does the spirit receive the last power
of its perfection and Sensation, in the bosoms of the Brain.

4. The Thorny Marrow in its inward kernel, is the continued substance of the
Brain, and is therefore clothed with a membrane, con-tinual with the Menynx's
or Coats thereof.

5. Every sinew is therefore marrowie within: but without, it is covered with
its own little membrane.

6. The Thorny Marrow is believed to be passable through its middle as long as
we live; whereby the motive Spirit is dispensed, and equally extended
throughout the length of that Marrow and the Nerves. For that its own vital
light beaming forth, brings down the command of the Will, or its beck, unto the
Muscles, the executive Organ of that motion which the Soul voluntarily
proposes to it self.

7. The Command of the Soul is instantous; not indeed, that the Spirits, as
being ennobled with the Characters of a Command, do run down (suppose thou in
one that plays on the Harp) at all particular moments of motions. For although
motions may happen to the administering Spirits, yet the obediences of these
should be too slow. Wherefore the command or beck of the Soul is brought down
in an instant, only by a beam of Light: Even so as the Objects of sight are
even at a far distance, perceived in a moment.

8. Seeing there is no Sense, or at leastwise a dull one, unto the Brain, but a
most acute one unto the Coats thereof: therefore the light of Sense defluxeth
not through the marrow and central substance of a sinew, and its Trunk: but the
sensitive Soul beams forth Sense, and is especially communicated from the
Coats of the Brain through the membranes, the coverings of the sinews, unto
the parts co-touching with, and being the annexed Clients of the Nerve.

9. Therefore the light which beams forth unto the Guardians of Sense and
Motion, is formed in a double substance, and by a double beck, sensitively.
From hence it comes to pass, that Sense is hurt, Motion being safe; or on the
contrary, by reason of a diversity of participated light brought down through
diverse Organs. Wherefore the most High is never sufficiently to be praised, who
has placed so Noble Faculties in the Membranes of the Brain, Stomach, and
Womb, containing the Life, Soul, and the whole Government of man in them! For
if there be a fundamental verity of Palmestry and Physiognomy, there are Lines,
as well in the forehead as in the hand, which do sometimes portend Archeus of
the Seed cannot foreknow those effects; especially those which are to arise
from a contingent Chance (to wit, if anger, an inordinate life, and the too
much use of Tobacco, shall afford the Beginnings of an Apoplexy) Therefore at
least, it must needs be, that the Beginnings of an Apoplexy, are not from a
privative cause, if they are concealed in the Seminal Beginnings themselves,
and are at sometime to break forth at the time of their own maturity: which is
to say, that the Apoplexy does actually lay hid in the Archeus, or Seed, after
the manner of Hereditary Diseases: and so also, that it thus makes an assault
through whole Families. At leastwise, be it known, that an Apoplexy is not a
stopping up of the little Bosom, made by phlegm, as neither a privative
effect: but that it consists of true and Seminal Beginnings: Universities, who
have been hitherto ignorant of the Disease and Remedy thereof.

In the next place, Neither is it to be understood, by what means, or middle
distance, Ambulatory or shaking Palsy. Why at length should that little bosom
expel that phlegm always unto the right or left side, but never forwards or
backwards? Especially, because in Nature, there is not right or left: but all
things, in respect of the whole Body, are round: whence it is manifest, that in
the very Organs, to wit, in the vital Archeus, but not in the feigned phlegm
of that bosom, there is hid an effective reason, why the Archeus being
Apoplectical, does always bend the Palsy its Lackey, unto the side: but it is
a mockery, whatsoever the Schools have dreamed of the fourth little bosom.

The whole reason of Truth therefore depends in these same Diseases, as the
Archeus forms and perfects a Seminal Idea; the which he for the most part,
finds somewhat cadaverous or mortified in meats, and the transmutations of
these. For then he causes giddinesses of the head, and the more tough ones, if
the same thing happens in the excrements, in the passage from Food into
nourishment: and that Apoplexy is most exceeding readily inclined, which forms
it sealing Idea in the very Archeus of the Du^mvirate; Because the whole
Archeus in the Bowels, is straightway as it were mortified.

At length from sundry particulars laid down, I conclude, That an Apoplexy is
in no wise etc. Also that neither of them does arise from an obstruction of the
fourth bosom in the Cerebellum, at the beginning of the Thorny marrow: But the
Apoplexy is generated occasionally from a poisonous stupefactive and mortified
beginning of matter fore-conceived in the Midriffs: Archeus of the place, which
presently, for that very cause vanquisheth, and sore troubles the powers of
the Brain: but not that the Brain does primarily labor, and draw the parts put
under it, into the conspiracy of its own Death. But that the Palsy is a
Contracture of the sensitive parts, caused by Terror alone. But that thing is
manifest in

Furthermore, the Schools have made mention of one only Anodynous poison,
which is sleepisying, stupefactive, and distinguished only in degree, between
Opium, Mandrake, Henbane; not that they therefore deny, although they pass by
many others in Simples. For there are some, which in a small space of duration,
do take away Sense, and the health of the Mind, Motion being left, even as in
affects of the Falling sickness. Some do overshadow or Eclipse the Motion
only, others both, and very many also do befool, Sense and Motion being left:
Neither therefore are they to be named: even as, neither others, which are
bedrunkening ones. But besides, the humor that is to be assimilated unto us,
is easily infected from the Image of a mortal Anodynous poison of the Archeus
conceived in the Midriffs, wherewith a various condition of poison is co-bred
for Company, and is frequently beheld in the Plague: But elsewhere, it strikes
not the head, but is sealed in the habit of the body; where also now and then,
the freezing poison of the Leprosy, is bred by the same privilege of
degenerating; But a stupefactive poison in the Duumvirate, violently dejects
the Brain, and according to its difference, generates giddiness, the
Falling-Evil, Heart-beatings, Swoonings, Catochus's, and the Apoplexy; and as
fears of the parts, so also Palseys accompany this Apoplexy. But out of the
Duumvirate, it mortisies its Seat with an astonishment, and a cold Gangreen,
etc.

They therefore notably err, who are busied in restraining madness by Opiates:
seeing Opiate, is in it self mad, because madness is nothing besides a waking
Dream. For truly scarce a ten-fold Dose of Opium, procures sleep to a mad
person, but in a lesser Dose, nothing is effected: But if indeed through
increasing of the Dose, sleep creepes on the mad person, it shall now increase
the waking sleep, and diverse unlike vanities of vain Dreams. But sleep coming
on a mad man of its own free accord, has deceived Schools: For that, as it
proceeds from a good cause, so also as a fore-running Betokener of health, it
promises that the madness will be solved. Add thou, that in Opium, besides a
sleepifying, there is another poison connexed: whence deadly Poppies for sleep,
are much sung of by Poets.

But in the sulphur of Vitriol, there is a Sugary sleepifying Being, which
brings on sweet sleep, together with a restoring of the principal Faculties.
There is the like in Sulphur, Opiates) is evil: Which poison denotas sore
disturbances and Tempests: Therefore sweet sleep creeping on the party, is to
be dedicated unto favorable Causes. Therefore (I will say it again) the
Apoplexy, Falling Sickness, Coma or sleeping-Evil, giddiness of the Head,
trembling of the Heart, etc. have their own singular, and those anodynous
poisons. The Ve^tigo indeed does sometimes prostrate a man, like the Apoplexy,
but without a Palsy: Because it has not a Cadaverous stupefactive poison, but
a be drunkening one, such as is in Tobacco: But if it shall become the more
hurtful in degree, number, or quantity, it is also made apoplectical.

But moreover, concerning Garlic and Aqua vitae, I have spoken, and of the
unsensibleness thereof: yet it is not apoplectical, because a poison, and
constant Root is absent. At least, by way of impertinency, I will add to this:

That Anodynous things, although they stupifie like cold; yet that they are
erroneously Schools among things that are cold in the highest degree.

And moreover, neither is the sleepifying sulphur in Opium, cold: but it is
exceeding bitter, and the salt thereof is sharp and Sudoriferous: But bitter
things in the Schools, are notably Hot. Therefore the sleepifying matter as
well in Opium, as elsewhere, is a

But the stupefactive poison in the Epilepsie, differs from an Apoplectical
one: because, in the chief part of it, it is a be-drunkening one. Spare me
Reader, for that I denominate

After the Treatises of unsensibility, of Anodinous things, and of some
poisons, pain is to be re-sumed by me. I repeat therefore, That pain and sense
are made immediately in an injured place, or Center, a consent of the Brain
being not required. For it is sufficient that the vital Light of the sensitive
Soul it self is diffused into all parts on every side, according to the
requirance of necessity: For any Ruler of parts, ought also to be a Noter and
Discerner of Objects: Because it has the Soul on every side present with, and
President over it. For after what sort shall the Soul manifest, that it feels
things hurtful, unless it shall stir up a pain or averseness, from thence
conceived in its injured Center? The Spirits therefore, inserted in the Joints,
ought readily to serve the necessities of the Members, without consultation,
and recourse had unto the Brain: seeing not the Brain, but the Soul it self,
being every where present, does immediately feel. For there was need of
excessive swiftness for the averting and preventing of hurtful things:
therefore to send a Messenger unto the Br^in, had been inconvenient. I grant
indeed, that the pain of the Intestine draws other parts into a consent, and
resolves them either with a stubborn Palsy, or contracts the parts serving for
voluntary motion, that the Kidney being pained, the stomach is nauseous, and
begins to vomit, the Bowels are writhed, and the Thigh placed under it, is
astonished: That the Nail of ones Hand paining, stirs up a remote kernel. For
truly, the presence of the Soul confirms, but does not take away a consent of
parts.

Therefore that consent in pains, is foreign unto pain, and by accident:
neither therefore does it touch at, or estrange the essence or cause of pain;
Because that Consent is latter unto pain, and therefore also separable from it.
Therefore all the particular Spirits Astral unto us.

Again, Neither the venal blood, nor the very blood of the Arteries, are strong
in Sense and an animal Touching, although they being even hunted out of the
Vessels, do Divines, whether the venal blood be informed by the Soul? I suppose
therefore, under the Correction of a better Judgment, That nothing is informed
by the Soulof a living Creature, which does not partake of the sensitive Soul;
that is, that nothing is informed by the Soul which does not feel by the Spirit
implanted and quickened in the parts: Because informing argues of necessity,
life in the living Creature: as also Life argues a sense or feeling, at least a
dull one, such as is in the Bones and Brain. But if indeed, meats in the
stomach, an abounding of Seed in the seedy Kernels, Hunger, yea and the Urine,
do produce their own dreams in the Soul, and stir up the Soul under sleep,
according to their pleasure: Yet it follows not from thence, on the other
hand, That therefore the Soul informs the food or the urine: For although the
Soul shall feel urine abounding and pressing it; yet this urine does not feel
its own Objects. For the Soul also, feels a pricking Knife, the which
notwithstanding, it does not inform. That therefore any thing may be informed
by the Soul, it is necessary, that it lives and feels as it were the subject of
the life it self.

Sense therefore, and pain are in the parts or things containing, subjectively:
but in those contained, objectively only. Yea, although things contained are
intimate with

Notwithstanding, it is not sufficient to have said with the vulgar, That a
hurtful cause is painful; yea, nor is it sufficient to know, that the Sensitive
Li^e does primarily feel, and from thence the spirit implanted in the parts,
and at length the stable Organs: and so indeed that the Sense testifies of the
presence of that which is hurtful; seeing these things, the Schools and the
common people have after some sort known: But it ought more manifestly to
appear, what may immediately cause pain, and after what sort Pain may be made
in feeling.

As to the first, a Needle pricks, and from thence is pain. A litte Be stings,
and wounds like a Needle; But both of them do pain after a far different
manner: Therefore the solution or dividing of that which held together, it
self, (otherwise common in both prickings) does not primarily cause pain: For
truly, the dividing or that which held together, effects no other thing, in
respect of it self, than a Non-solution: The which in leprous affects and in
the Palsy, is without Sense and Pain: But if indeed the solution of the
Con-tinual, causes pain, or does not, that is to the knife by accident,
neither does this touch at the Solution primarily, except in the condition of
an occasion, without which it is not: therefore because the stinging of a Be
causes another manner of pain than an equal solution that is made by a Needle,
surely it depends on a more piercing

But Sense in the Schools, is said to be made passively, even as motion,
actively.

But I have already shown, that Sense is made by a power, or by a primary
sensitive Being, through action; Although the Members do suffer subjectively,
through the application of sensible Objects: Therefore Sense or Feeling is made
actively, because the Act of feeling it self, is an active censure of the Soul.

But in as much, in the mean time, as the members do suffer, seeing that is
unto the

The Schools indeed have known with the common people, that violent causes do

Live flesh is most easily scorched, and is excoriated or flead by boiling
water. But

The Schools also have not yet registered that difference, because neither have
they

And perhaps they will say, that it is more easy to make hot, things already
heated, and that therefore, live flesh is the more readily burnt. But let us
suppose dead flesh to be first made lukewarm, and to be in the same degree of
heat, no otherwise than if it did live; yet it is not therefore easily scorched
or burnt, nor after the same manner wherein live-flesh is: Therefore the
aforesaid evasion has no place: Wherefore seeing that from the agent of a
single degree of heat, diverse operations do happen in the same subject of
flesh, being distinct only in life: Therefore it must needs be, that the

For truly, the force of fire being received and introduced into a dead
Carcass, is not to be felt; yea, neither properly is it a Scorching or burning
one, such as is in live bodies, but rather a roasting and parching one: For in
live bodies, the liquor of flesh, is through an indignation of the Sensitive
Soul, most speedily converted into a sharp liquor, and substantially
transchanged: the which in dead bodies is not subject unto a vital
transmutation: And so, by boiling and frying, it parcheth and roasteth fleshes
between the Fibers.

For flesh that is dead suffers by degrees, the which, other bodies not
sensitive, do suffer after a single manner from the fire: But in live bodies,
even boiling water presently produces bladders, and then the solid part is
swiftly cont^acted and burns.

Therefore that action of scorching or burning in live and and sensitive
bodies, is made efficiently by the Life it self, but by the fire, effectively,
by way of an active, occasional, and external mean: To wit, the life it self,
feeling the rigor of the fire, sharpens its own liquor, and transchangeth it
into a bladdering one, and afterward into an Escharrotick liquor. And as much
indeed as is snatched by the fire, so much afterward is by a disposition that
is left, corrupted, because it is dead: But because of sensible things known by
Sense, touching is the chief Judge, therefore a demonstration has scarce
place, and the history and root of pain by its causes, has hitherto remained
neglected:

Wherefore for the searching into the proper agent in pain, I have considered,
that Frogwort, Smallage, Scarwort. etc. do not embladder in a dead Carcass, yet
they

By reason whereof the Schools being astonished, have taught, that Medicines
are wholly sluggish, and as it were dead, unless they are first prepared by our
heat, as it

But (as I have said) it operates after another manner, yea oft-times, a far
other thing in live bodies, than otherwise in dead, or unsensitive ones: And so
the effects of Medicines are not wrought, unless they are first duly applied,
and afterward by a more exact appropriation, they do imprint their power on
us, to wit, that from thence a disposition may arise, which the sensitive soul
stirs up by its own judgment, and afterward also unfolds, and perfects.

For the Schools have erred in Medicinal affairs, because they have beheld
external and occasional causes for principal, and vital ones: Therefore they
have neglected to connex in live bodies, and in cures themselves, things
effected, unto their proper efficients, by etc. ought to borrow their
activities and gifts received for acting, from our heat: As if one only heat
should be the primary cause of so many-form effects: Because in very deed, that
a thing may act on us, it has no need of another foreign thing out of it self
for this purpose; but as primarily, so it without delay presently uncloaths its
faculties by the moments of dispositions, if it be duly applied, (even as I
have demonstrated at large, as well concerning the action of Government, as in
the Treatise, that heat does not digest in sensitive Creatutes.)

But because the sensitive Soul (which the Schools shamefully confound with
heat) applies the received faculties, and from thence frames a certain new
action proper to it self, and wholly vital: Therefore the faculties which the
Sensitive soul receives from the

The which is manifest in the more strong persons, who digest laxative
medicines, even violent ones, without trouble, and drink being in vain, as if
they were foods: And likewise in dying persons, unto whom indeed, there is an
application of Medicines, but not an appropriation, to wit, by reason of a
neglect and defect of the sensitive power: For in the more strong folks, an
exciting heat is not wanting, and yet th^re is no effect: For otherwise, the
virtues of a Medicine are presently received, and do p^oceed: by etc. And it
spreads the seminal Idea's of these Passions on the assaulting spirit, on the
blood, and on the Organs affected by the Medi^ines, and effects remain
agreeable unto the aforesaid Idea's.

The which, in the Treatise of Diseases, and likewise concerning the Plague, I
have evidently demonstrated. And so if a delay interposeth between a Medicine
being applied, activity, issuing, and following from the impression made by the
Medicine: For a poisonous power is not wanting in the stroke of a Serpent,
although it sometimes does not operate, by reason of an impediment: For an
Agent, that it may act on us, stands in need of an application, of an
appropriated impression, and of a sensitive power, as it were the receiver of
another acting power: And that, that it may bring forth a Product, which in
very deed, and immediately, is a new, or vital fruit, as a testimony of the
sensation or feeling act of the soul. For thus many do so accustom themselves
to laxative medicines, that at length they operate nothing at all; not indeed,
that heat failed in the man, or that the laxatives have lost their former
faculties; but the soul has contracted a familiarity from the frequent use of
them, so that it is at length the more mildly wroth with those poisons, than at
their first turns.

For truly, in this respect, it is true and perpetual, that all sensation
consists

At least wise it is mani^est, that medicines do not want a foregoing heat of
ours, that

Whence also it is sufficiently manifest, how disorderly the faculties of
medicines have been hitherto attributed unto the agent, or vital, and principal
efficient, and how Coloquintida, Scarwort, frogwort, etc. Is also to be drawn
promiscuously, unto other agents.

Yea, bright burning iron burns a dead carcass, although not after an equal
manner as it does a live one: For in live bodies it primarily hurts the
sensitive soul, the which

For this prerogative the Schools have not heeded, the which one only
prerogative notwithstanding, is considerable in the Entrance of healing: But
they according to their Calx Vive, as long as it remains dry, it gnawes not a
dead carcass: but it presently gnawes live flesh, and moves an escharre. A dead
carcass is by lime wholly resolved into a liquour, and is combibed, except the
bone and gristle thereof: But it does not consume live slesh into a liquour,
but translates it into an escharre. In general therefore, the sensitive vital
power, is first affected by a sensible object: and from thence it at length
frames an effect, or a new, that is, a proper Being, According to the passion
concieved after the manner of the hurt or injury figured to it self: And this
effect is proper to the sensitive soul, but mediate, in respect of the occasion
exciting.

Consequently also, seeing pain consists subjectively in the injured and
provoked part,

To wit, that pricking, lancing, and walking pains, are bred from mixed
affects, which proceeded from wrath and fear, or from agony. Truly, I took
diligent notice, that

There is also moreover, a stable pain in a part, even as in an ulcer, wound,
impostume, etc. But this rages from an only and mere in ignation: For this
does not so properly

Yea, pain does often denote the passions of the sensitive soul for a proper
destruction of organs: Because that soul lays hold on those parts being badly
affected, rising up as it were from a proper ^ice of themselves, and as if they
murmuring, it endeavors to correct, chastise these parts, and oft-times also,
to destroy them.

Therefore in the terms proposed concerning the disease of the stone, the womb
of Duelech moves at first, great pains only by a convulsion of it self: the
which at length,

Through occasion of pain, the Cramp or convulsion is not to be neglected.
First of all (I will not repeat what I have taught concerning gripings or
w^ingings of the bowels, in the

My age, because it is fruitful in perverse wits, will laugh at this paradox,
with many others: The which notwithstanding following posterity, will willingly
embrace.

The Schools indeed have thought that a convulsion is made by the execu^ive
instruments of voluntary motion, in that respect, because they say, that there
are the healthy, and diseasie functions of the same faculty, although they are
stirred up from diverse occasional causes. A Muscle therefore, seeing it is the
only executive member of voluntary motion, and a sinew the derivative organ of
the command of the will; it follows (as they teach) that a Muscle, although it
be acted in the Cramp, against our will, yet that it is never drawn together,
unless by the very same voluntary motive faculty it self, which moves that
muscle while it is in health; wherein the Schools do erroneoosly contradict
themselves; while as they define a Convulsion to be indeed the symptom of a
voluntary

Yet it is sufficiently known, that fullness and emptiness are natural causes,
but not arbitral or voluntary ones; which natural causes, if they shorten, or
contract a sinew (as they manifestly teach) at leastwise the attraction of the
sinews shall not be made by an arbitrary motion.

I admire also, the hitherto famous stupidities of the Schools in this respect.

For first of all, a sinew differs from a Muscle, no otherwise than as a vein
does: This indeeed, carries blood unto the Muscle, and that motion: And then,
besides the two causes of a Convulsion, perhaps invented by Hyppocrates, Galen
has moreover added a third, which is admitted in the Schools, to wit, a
poisonous quality: For Galen had seen the Convulsion to follow from the stroke
of Serpents; neither yet could he as yet believe, although the stricken member
was swollen, that fullness caused the Convulsion.

He being defectuous, first of all, because he was ignorant, whether a nerve
ought to be smitten, that it may be pulled together, or indeed a Muscle.

Then, because mortal Convulsions are made in gripings or wringings of the
bowels, and Hellebour being taken, without any hurting, emptying, fullness of
the sinews, or a colical poison.

Thirdly, He is also defective, because that seeing in a Convulsion, there is
made a drawing back of the member, and a shortning of the Muscle, he has not
discerned (as it otherwise beseemed the Prince of Medicine to do) why a poison
does contract or shorten the Muscle, thus leaving the former obscurity: For
truly Galen says, That the name of a Physician, is the finder out of the
occasion; which name he has not lost in this place.

Again, In the fourth place, if a Convulsion happens from an empried, and
filled nerve, that is, from a proper Passion of the nerve: Ought therefore a
poisonous qualiry to be imprinted on a sinew, or on a Muscle, that a Convulsion
may from thence happen?

Fifthly, Galen has remained defective, and together with him, the Schools his
followers, why the stroke of a Serpent, the poisonous quality of a Medicine,
etc. are made the proper Passion of a voluntary motion, and of its own Organs:
For if the poison ought to be imprinted on the Muscle, therefore the sinew
shall cease to be the proper subject of the Cramp, and by consequence, the
emptiness, or fullness thereof is vainly supposed and required.

But if the poison dasheth against the nerve it self, after what manner shall
Hellebour wandering through the bowels, primarily affect the sinew? After what
manner shall a Medicine, being as yet detained in the stomach, cause a
Convulsion, and give a freedom therefrom, by the vomiting thereof? At leastwise
it is ridiculous, that the successive alteration of the affected Muscles shall
effect the show of the Malady, if the essence of the malady depends on the
affected sinews.

And it is a foolish thing, That an Emprostotonos or a Convulsive Extension of
the neck forwards, a Tetanos or straight Extension, and an Opistotonos or an
Extension thereof backwards, should differ specifically, by reason of a
changing of the Muscle: For a Muscle draws its tail always after the same
manner, to wit, toward the head.

Truly such childishnesses do of necessity proceed from the ignorance of a
Disease, and the rashness of a childish judgment; wherefore nature has
distinguished of the Specie's of Diseases, according to the Specie's of
occasional causes, but not by reason of the difference of scituations.

And so, seeing emptiness and fullness are terms plainly opposite, they could
not produce one only kind of Convulsion: And it is a hard matter to believe,
that the emptiness breadth, the nerves did suffer an unexcusable Palsy to be
from the error of a convulsive Retraction, and not rather from that of both
the supposed causes? To wit, as well through a stoppage of the netve from
Phlegm filling it, as they say, as by a pressing together of the dried sinew?
and as if so great a sudden drying up thereof, were credible, or possible to be
in a live body? Yea, after what manner does a nerve being now once withered,
(suppose thou by too much insolency, as they say, of laxative Hellebour)
presently again admit of a restoration of its own radical moisture being dried
up? Why has it been necessary to feign, and admit of a filling, or emptying of
a sinew, if a poisonous quality can afford the Convulsion without either of
them?

The received opinion therefore of the Schools concerning the causes of the
Convulsion or Cramp, registered to be from the emptiness, and fullness of the
sinews, is Galen, acknowledge also a third Cause, which is that of a malignant
quality: Nevertheless, they stick as convicted, in the two former Causes: For
they err in the Matter, Object, Efficient, and manner of making; That is, in
the whole. As if a small Nerve being extended unto a Muscle, which oft-times
scarce equalizeth the grossness of a threefold thread, being moistened more
than is meet, and drye^ than is fit to be, should be made by so much shorter
than it self, by how much a muscle draws the members together, perhaps to to
the length of a span? Yea, as though, as well the be dashing of an hostile
Humor, as the emptying of a Nerve, should cause the pains of a Convulsion!

They bring hither the ridiculous Example of dried Clay: when as in live Bodies
Schools have thought, that those feigned Moistnesses and Drynesses of a little
sinew (which could scarce effect the latitude of a straw) do contract the
Muscle, even into the Convulsion of a foot-length. Neither likewise is that
Example of value, That the string of a Lute, being wet with the Rain of Heaven,
leaps assunder as broken, in regard that it is cut short by the imbibed Liquor.

For first of all it might have been extended longer by twofold, than the
feigned extension thereof in its breadth had shortened the same.

The Schools do not take notice, that a moist membrane is brickle, as also a
dry one: and therefore also that Lute-strings are kept fat in oil, lest they
should become wet, or wax dry.

Away with their examples, which have no place in a live body! For in a living
body the sinews cannot be so dried, that their witheredness can cause any
abbreviation.

2. They being once dried, can never afterward receive a moistening any more,
than dry old age it self.

3. They deny a Convulsion arisen from a laxat^ve medicine to be made by a
poison: For if they should acknowledge a poison to be in a solutive medicine,
they should cut off their own purse.

A Convulsion therefore arising from a solutive Medicine, as from only an
emptying, but not from a poisonous Medicine, should be indeed from an
emptiness, or dryness of the sinews: But a Convulsion or Cramp arisen from a
loosening Medicine, is oft-times restored: Therefore it is not bred from a
dryness of the sinews.

4. Every lean old person should be drawn back by a perpetual and universal
Convulsion.

5. Seeing a sinew is not the executive member of motion, therefore the
shortening of at sinew, proves not a Convulsion of the joints as though an arm
or leg ought to follow upon the cutting short of a sinew.

6. Seeing that a nerve being moistened, (so that it were made by so much the
shorter, by how much, through a foreign humor being imbibed, it should be
extended on its breadth) such a humor should be plainly contrary to nature, it
should effect a Palsy rather then a Convulsion: But a Palsy is Diametrically
opposite to a Convulsion it self, as well in Sense as in Motion.

7. How could a stroke of the Scull presently at one moment, dry up the sinews
of one side, but by moistening the other sinews opposite unto them, forthwith
enlarge them on their breadth, that they may cause the Convulsion and Palsy at
once? And seeing as well Emptying as Filling are feigned for the cause of the
Convulsion, the stroke of the Scul ought to produce the Cramp on both sides.

8. It is no wonder therefore, that so unsuccesful remedies have been applied
to the Convulsion, if the Universities are hitherto ignorant of all the
Requisites of Diseases.

For they ought to have known, that every Convulsion is a vital Blas of the
Muscles Archeus; The occasion whereof, is a certain Malignant matter rushing on
the Archeus, as laying in wait for the life of the Muscles.

What if Hippocrates has referred the cause of a Convulsion unto emptiness,
and fullness? he has had respect unto the occasions of the foregoing life: To
wit, that there was a frequent Convulsion to riotous persons, and likewise
through much emptying of the Veins.

And Galen not apprehending the mind of the old man, has waxed lean at the
humoural filling, and emptying of the sinews, by a succeeding, and that his own
device.

Such old wives fictions therefore (which have been persuaded by the Schools
unto credulous youth) being despised; I say, that there is in the Muscles, a
twofold motion, to wit, one as it is the Organ of a voluntary motion; and
another, as being proper to it self; whereby, although it draw back it self
toward its head, yet it nothing hinders, but that the spirit implanted in
those motive parts, does retract or draw back, and move those parts; even as
was already said before concerning the ^od.

For neither is it repugnant to nature, for the parts to leap a little by a
local motion of their own, the soul being absent: to wit, for the parts which
are moveable by another Commander, to be furiously contracted through a
sorrowful sensation, seeing that another conspicuous motion is singularly
wanting to the Muscles, whereby it may denote the hurt brought on them, besides
that whereby it executes the voluntary motion of the Soul. And moreover, it is
altogether natural to all the members, and proper to the common endeavor of
the parts, for those to be drawn together by reason of the sorrowful sense of
an injury brought on them; which place the Schools have left untouched.

Wherefore I have accounted it an erroneous thing, to believe with the
Schools, That the Convulsion is an affection of the Head. For now they depart
herein from their own Positions, whereby they suppose the Cramp to be from
filling, or emptying, or from a poisonous quality of the Nerves, unless they
had rather, the Case being now altered, that the Convulsion should arise from
the filling, or emptying of the Head: But the Cramp is an accident of the
sensitive Spirit; Which thing, first of all, the prickings of the Sinews or
Tendons, and likewise Fevers, Laxative poisons being taken, the strokes or
stings of Serpents, and other things like unto these, do manifest.

Neither in the mean time does it argue on the contrary, that a stroke of the
Head does also bring on a Convulsion: since there is no less Athourity to

Indeed, as well a Convulsion arising from the head, as that which is bred from
the sensitive Soul much abhorring poison, belongs to the muscles its Clients.
In a stroke of the Head, what has presently defiled the contracted side with a
poison? Or what has straightway emptied, or filled all the sinews of that
side? Does not the Brain shake in sneezing? Is not the membrane which
compasses the Lungs, drawn together in a dry Asthma? Is not the Pleura or Skin
girding the Ribs, cowrinkled, and contracted in a Pleurisy; and does it not
for this cause voluntarily pull it self away from the Ribs? And is not the
Mediastinum or membrane of the middle Belly not unfrequently contracted? Also
the Diaphragma or Midriffmuscle through a notable anguish of pressure,
straightned? whereunto a Name is hitherto wanting; although that affect be
frequent in the beating of the Heart. The sometimes dull pains of the Spleen
also, are the Betokeners of that Bowel its being convulsed; The stomach also is
drawn together in the Hicket, vomiting, and stomach pains. Indeed Contractures
are renewed in these membranes, as often as the molesting occasional Cause is
stirred, or returns.

Also in the beginning of a Dropsy, or Jaundice, yea even before water or wind
be bred, the Abdomen is oft-times drawn together, and waxes hard on one side.

Lastly, The Bowels show forth intermitting gripes, not only through an
extension of winds (which brings forth no pains if the Belly be not stopped)
but rather through a Convulsion of themselves. The which, I have elsewhere
written that I have contemplated of beyond the Navil of an Infant.

For I beheld, that as often as wringings or gripings of the Guts were
exceeding urgent, fits of the Falling Sickness were stirred up: but the
Intestines, according diversely rouled together and contracted; otherwise, the
Intestines being appeased, and plainly at rest: For a sharp and brackish
Excrement in Colicks, pricks the sensitive Soul, and this produces pain, and
as it were by intervals, draws the Bowel together, and the wind being then
shut up therein by the chance of Fortune, stretches out the Bowels. Therefore
the Wind-Colick (so called in distinction from Duelech descending) has not its
name from the Cause, but from a latter and accidental Symptom.

So likewise from Laxatives, the pain of gripes or wringings of the Bowels does
oft-times return with a Convulsion, and it is cured by things mitigating the
Convulsion: For Wind-Colicks are scarce discerned from the Stone-Colick:
because the same Symptom of pain, through a crisping and contracting of the
Bowels, appears alike in both: For so the Oil of Almonds being drunk,
asswageth pains, because it pacifieth the contracted Intestines by besmearing
them. Therefore seeing pain produces a Convulsion, and this likewise, a new
pain; we see that pain does oft-times beget pain, and that which is like it
self.

And then, as often as an injury happens to the skin, veins, arteries, or
nerves, they contract themselves into wrinckles through the power of the
sensitive Soul: For how notably hard does an Artery presently become, under any
pain? The hardness whereof does not argue the dryness of an Artery (as the
Schools judge): but a singular extension or convulsion thereof; and the which
therefore, Sweat being at hand, does again produce a re-loosening of the
Contraction, together with a softness: Otherwise, there is as equal a
possibility of re-moistening a dried and hardened Artery, as there is hope of
taking away old age. Has not also a contracted Bladder oft-times deceived
expert Cutters for the Stone; So the Kernels that are the vessels of the Seed,
are draw^ together in the Gonorrhea or Running of the Reins; they being
stirred up by a spur of the Seed.

The privy part also, being drawn together inwards, does now and then so vanish
out of sight, that nothing stands out beside the Nut of the Yard: So also, the
muscles have

I have seen also in Women suffering a strangling of the Womb, the Tendons in
the native place of a Ligament, voluntarily to have burst asunder, and to have
been contracted Schools, in that leaping, and wand^ing digression of the
sinews, acknowledge a sudden emptying, filling, or entertainment of a
poisonous quality? and the sudden banishments of these?) It is also familiar to
the stone of the Kidneys, for the Urine-pipes to be drawn together with most
cruel pain, nothing peradventure being urgent beside; the more ten^e^sand.

I have always judged it the part of bold ignorance, that winds (according to
the Schools) should arise in the Sinews and Tendons, or be conceived in the
sinews from without, as the authors of a Cramp (for, for that cause, a
flatulent one) yea, and to be taken away from thence almost at pleasure: For
the sensitive Spirit abhorring pain, furiously contracteth the Veins,
Arteries, Tendons, and Membranes: And while as under such Furies it finds not
its hoped for succor, it stirs up an increase thereof: For so a Thorn being
thrust into the finger, as it causes pain, it crispeth and hardens the Artery,
and it hardens the pulse thereof which before was not there easily to be
discerned, by reason of an extension only of the contracted Artery. For it is
the property of pain, to pull together and to contract, so indeed, that the
bone above the share, and in the loins, is voluntarily contracted in a
Traveling Woman, although no Muscle, being the Guider or mover: For why, pain
is in its own nature a contractive of the members, and that by a natural
motion, and in no wise an arbitral or voluntary one: the which is especially
seen in the lips of Wounds: Because they are those which are without pain, as
long as they have their lips flaggy, and not contracted.

But the Schools have passed by the contractures of pain in Nature, as also
the sensitive cause thereof, even as I have demonstrated in the Treatise
concerning Diseasifying Causes, as it were in the combating place of exercise.
For in the Urine-pipes (for an Example in the terms of the Disease of the
Stone) there is no necessity, dependency of Dominion, Clients-ship, Usurpation,
Possession, Custom, and no community of the Pipes, and Excrements with the
bowels, or stomach. For if when the left side of the Throat is in pain, not so
much as the right side thereof, in such an angiport or narrow passage, be now
and then, afflicted: why shall we not deservedly suspect the nearness and
dependency of parts which are unlike, and differing in the Ordination of their
Offices, and Situation?

It is therefore sufficient hitherto that all pain, the author of a Convulsion
or Contracture, presupposes a hateful Guest: For there are also unpainfull
Contractures (as before, concerning the Cod) and the which, draw their
original, not so much from pain, as from mere trouble: But painful Convulsions
are made from Hostile Causes:

For so, Those things cause pain which smite the Spirit called (for the Soul)
Alcalies, and corroding things, because they are the nearest to fire; after
that, from austere or harsh, brackish and four things, because they are the
nearest to Contracture; Presently after, from salt things, then next, from
sharp things, and lastly from some bitter things. But from poisons, as such,
cruel pain arises, the which, in the Plague is ordinary, and because so great
pain oft-times arises without sharpness; a Truth is denoted: To wit, That pain
issues from the judgment of the Sensitive Soul.

For Corrosives, since they gnaw the sensitive Soul it self, they wast the
parts themselves like fire. But Alume, Vitriol, Aqua Fortes's, next the juice
of un^ipe Grapes, and also any sharp things, as they do by themselves crisp,
and pull together the Fibers of the Organs, therefore such Excrements are
Convulsory and painful.

There are also Alcalies, which sleepifie pains: To wit, in Cases where they
break the greatest sharpnesses of Putrefactions: For under the Dog Star, while
as Fleshes threaten corruption at hand, the Broaths of fleshes are made sharp
with an ungrateful savor; whence in the Gout, Colic, and gnawing, and
putrefying Ulcers. I conceived pains to proceed at first from a sharpness.
Likewise the sensitive Soul, at first feels pain, the which being at length
accustomed, waxes the less wroth: even so as an accustomed Horse refuses
S^urs; For Nature in her self, is wholly furious and Sumptomatical, and being
by degrees accustomed to pains, waxes mild: Wherefore, Selflove, and Revenge,
are before or more ancient than sense or feeling: because they are intimately
in Seeds, in the bosom of Nature, before Sense. For the Characters or Images
of anger, agony, fear, revenge, and sorrow, do bring forth Convulsions like to
those their own Idea's. For from the knowledge whereby, a Mouse abhors a Cat
not before seen, the Spirit being provoked, is stirred up into anger, fear,
etc. The which, by its own Idea utters its fury on the members, as it were by
a Brand.

1. The hand waxes cold, because the heat there cherished by the Life, is
extinguished by cold: but not that the vital Spirit retires inward, as having
left the arterial blood whch it had married: and much less, that heat as a
naked quality passes, departs, and returns inward, as it were in a Comedy.

2. The heat being now diminished, cold also persisting, the cold waxes
strong, and then Sense in the hand is stupefied: For the sensitive abstracted
Spirits are pressed together, To wit, those which are in the sinews, but not
those which are in the Arteries; because the Spirit has the more firmly
married the arterial Blood, and it is the property of the Veins, even after
death, to preserve the Blood from Con-cretion or Coagulation: For the vital
Spirit is sustained from behind, by the fuel or cherishing warmth of the heart
as much as may be; and therefore in that stupefaction, Life is as yet detained.

3. Motion languisheth in the Hand, because the Spirits being grown together in
the flesh, seeing they are not sufficiently nourished from behind, by the
heart, they by degrees perish, and by degrees are altered.

4. And then, together with the perishing of Motion, Sense also is
extinguished; To wit, while the Blood being chased out of the Veins, threatens
a clotting, Life as yet remaining.

5. And so at length the joints are by cold totally deprived of Life; To wit,
when as the venal blood has now departed into Clots, and dyed: Therefore in
the third and fourth degree aforesaid, pain springs up in the Hand being
heated: For as the Heart inspires a new sensitive Spirit from behind, the
which, while it takes notice of death to be readily at hand, it being as it
were enraged in the same place, presently frames the Idea of its own
indignation, and so puts off its native sweetness, or Complacency: Even as in
the Treatise concerning diseasie Idea's, in the work concerning the Rise or
Original of Medicine, I will more clearly demonstrate. So the sensitive Spirit
which was not trampled on by cold, but repulsed by pressing together, in its
return stirs up another Idea of its own indignation, and another pain as it
were like that of the pricking of a pin.

Let the Reader in the mean time pardon me, in that I ought to borrow the Name
of an Icy or freezing Poison, without the necessity of foregoing Cold: For I
call not that an Icy poison, as if it were made cold, as I have already spoken
concerning the stupefying astonishment of the Hands: but I call it a cooling,
and also a stupefying poison, and that which takes away sense and motion.
Therefore the similitude of the Name draws its Original, not from the Root, but
from the Effect:

And last of all, in this By-work, for a Conclusion of this Work, and
Sensation: Let us meditate at least, of the Remedies of Physicians in the
Apoplexy, in astonishment or be^ummedness, giddiness of the Head, in the
Catalepsie, Catochus, Coma, Convulsions, plucking of the Eyelids, Eyes, Tongue,
and Lips: For thou shall find, that presently cutting of a vein, and a Clyster
are prescribed: They doubting in the mean time, Whether the dung of the
Fundament may pluck the Tongue and Lips in the mouth, may likewise stamp
drowsinesses, and astonishment in the sick; As it has brought forth
blockishnesses and neglect in the Physician: Or indeed, whether these arise
from the venal blood: therefore they are presently intent upon both at once.
And then on the day following, they administer purging things: And thirdly, as
being full of uncertainty, after Rubbings, they provoke Sweats. For their
Succors are universal, because others are wanting, and they are ignorant of
such: And therefore their total, usual Medicines are general ones: Through
defect of the knowledge of efficient Causes, they wander only about the
Products: they not being solicitous of the Radical Framer and Cause, are only
busied about removing of the Effect: Not that they hope for a return of the
Disease, by leaving the Roots, that they may thereby crop Fruit; (for I will
not suspect that of a good or honest man) but they being too earnestly bent
upon Gain, nothing has hitherto been considered by the Schools concerning the
Framer of Diseases: For as much as Medicine (as I have said it from the
Beginning: so I again end therewith) is the Gift of God. But this God has
withdrawn his Gifts from those that are intent upon Gain, nor those once
thinking of his Command; Be ye merciful as your Father which is in the
Heavens, is merciful, from whom every good and lightsome Gift descends. This
therefore is the mournful modern Tragedy of unsensiblenesse and pain, which I
have spoken of, with an event altogether Tragical to the Sick.

AN UNHEARD OF DOCTRINE OF FEVERS.

JOHN BAPTISTA VAN HELMONT Toparch in Royenborgh, Pellines, etc. being the
Author.

Whereunto is added, A TREATISE AGAINST The four Humors OF THE SCHOOLS.

To the Reader, John Baptista van Helmont, Toparch in Royenborgh, Pellines,
etc, P. L. wishes Science, Health, and Joy.
An Index of the Contents of the Preface.
1. This Treatise is rent out of the great Volume, which is inscribed, The new
and unheard of Beginnings of natural Philosophy. 2. The Author's Testimonies
of Dispraise against Physicians that refuse to learn.

I Have seen perhaps two hundred Authors concerning Fevers: therefore it has
shamed me of the Title: but when I more thoroughly considered of the matter it
self, I saw, that one and all of others, sung the Cuckow's Note, and that they
have always subscribed the same thing to themselves from others words. For
from thence I discerned, that since the days of Hippocrates, Medicine has
stood at a stand, if it has not gone back; at leastwise that it has not
profited, because by new Centuries daily, it has gone into a Circle. They have
gone, not whither they ought to go, but whither they have followed blind
Leaders which the most High has not Created, or chosen for Physicians; but who
have entered into Nature through the toren windows of Heathenisme and Atheism.
Surely, it has shamed me, yea and grieved me, that a Fever, the most known or
remarkable of Diseases, is as yet to this day altogether unknown in the whole
course of its Tragedy. Wherefore I seem to be the First who may determine of
any thing of certainty concerning the knowledge and Remedy of a Fever. For I
have written a great Volume, concerning the knowings and curings of Diseases:
surely great and unheard of, from the very first Beginnings of true Philosophy:
indeed, I have demonstrated unwonted Principles to be true, and that by any
kind of Demonstrations.

Out of this work I have rent this Treatise concerning Fevers; and since I
daily saw abuses to increase in curing, and I divined of no small destruction
of mortals from thence: Therefore I have set forth this Treatise without the
Doctrines of Diseases akinne thereunto, because I know that Paradoxall
principles will offend very many, who have studied more in assenting than in
diligently searching: although this kind of study attesteth a certain sloth
and penury of judgment. In the mean time, I hope, that there will not be
Lovers of the Truth wanting, who earnestly breathing after the health of their
Neighbor, will hear even from now the most ancient Physician of the Dutch,
those things which they never heard from any other. For it ought not to be
burdensome to any, to be able to learn by others labors: although it be a
tedious thing to those that are old, to swallow this Testimony of Dispraise:
None has hitherto known Fevers from their essence: none has begun the curing
of them from Art, because all, in passing by the true knowledge of the Causes,
and manner of their making, have neglected to seek out their Remedies. They
have shot forth their Arrows against Heats, and have passed by the true mark
of the thing. But since there is so great a malepartnesse, and a certain
singular insolency of the judgments of this Age, indeed I have feared, that
this Vlcerous Age will not admit of my Work. This small Treatise will show as
it were a cast Lot, what the Lord has determined concerning my Labors. In the
mean time, they who have already grown old in their diminishments of the Veins
and strength, peradventure it will be hard for them to have departed from
things accustomed. I entreat them at least, that they would see in What manner
they shall preserve their own Souls, and the cause of Widows, and Orphans,
which is committed unto all.

Farewell.
A Treatise OF FEVERS.
CHAP. I. The definition of the Fever of the Ancients, is examined.
1. A ^ever has been hitherto, radically unknown. 2. The definition of a Fever
according to the Schools. 3. The chief clause cast forth even from the
requisites of the Ancients. 4. A second defect of the definition. 5. A vain
privy shift of the Schools. 6. Some perplexities following from thence. 7.
Other hiding places. 8. Others contradict things known by sense. 9. A wan
argument of these men. 10. The thirst of feverish persons is examined. 11. An
argument from the remedy of thirst. 12. An argument from a like thing, taken
from the drowsy evil. 13. Another argument from thirst in the vigor of
Fevers. 14. It is the part of deadly ignorance, badly to define a Fever. 15. An
argument against the Schools concerning feverish heat. 16. A second. 17. A
third. 18. A fourth. 19. A fifth. 20. Feverish heat is not from the matter
offending. 21. Another argument. 22. Athird. 23. A fourth. 24. A fifth. 25.
That a feverish heat is not of the peccant matter. 26. The matter of a Fever
heates occasionly only. 27. Who is the workman of feverish heat. 28. The
original of heat besides nature. 29. To make hot, and to be hot, how they
differ. 30. Heat is a latter accident unto the essence of a Fever. 31. From
whence a feverish heat is. 32. A Fever is not heat, essentially.

AFever, goes before, accompanies, or follows most diseases; Therefore I have
owed a peculiar treatise unto a Fever, no less than to the disease of the
Stone. Because although it be that which is most familiar, yet it most
especially fats our burying places, and depopulates

The disease is known indeed, even from its entrance or beginning: but not any
thing has been hitherto known by Psiyfitians, in its causes, manner of making,
seats, as neither in its remedies, even as in reading this little book shall
be clearly made manifest unto any one that is seasoned with the studies of
Philosophy.

For indeed, the Schools define a Fever; that it is a heat besides nature,
being kindled first in the heart, and then derived throughout the whole body: I
will add according to their mind, hurting most actions.

The top of the matter is, that they call the Genus or general kind of the
thing defined, or the essence of a Fever; not any kind of heat whatsoever: but
that which shall be besides

And so, seeing that heat is essential to a Fever, that it ought chiefly to be
so unseperable Fever, that a Fever cannot be mentally conceived, but that, that
heat is an individual companion thereunto. First of all, Camp Fevers have newly
objected themselves, the which happen without thirst, and a manifest heat: That
is, they finish their tragedy without heat, from the beginning even unto the
end of life.

If they say, that these Fevers were unknown to the Ancients, nor therefore to
be comprehended under the definition; I at least conclude from thence, that
neither can these Fevers therefore be Fevers, or that the essence of Fevers are
not of necessity tied up to heat, but only by accident.

And then again, that the definition of Fevers from of old delivered, and even
till Fever. And thirdly, that whosoever shall at the beginnings of Fevers, feel
cold pithily to pierce him for some hours, may notwithstanding, not persuade
himself that a Fever is begun or present with him, but some other affect
hitherto unnamed. For although he be shaken with vehement cold, his teeth do
shake, and his lips look wan by reason of cold, yet that he may persuade
himself by those deformities, that those beginnings of Fevers are not the
beginnings of Fevers: for neither is he extinct by a true Fever, who dies in
such beginnings, the which for the most part, comes to pass in intermitting
Fevers. Let him believe it that will; for I am not wont to call to me any other
judge concerning contingent things known by sense, besides touching: For I am
so stupide, that I stand to naught but the judgment of the senses, concerning
sensible objects.

But Physicians which are the more tough in the opinion of the Ancients,
privily escape into lurking places, that they may defend those things which are
perceived by Galen: for some Fevers, but the beginnings of the fit. But Galen
himself casts down these men; saying, We understand first by the name of a
Paroxismus or fit, the worst part of the whole fit; which sounds, that the
fit and the Fever are Sunonymalls. But come on then, if cold bespeak the
beginning of the fit, and not of the Fever, at leastwise, the fit shows the
Fever approaching: and so, the beginning of a fit shall of necessity be the
beginning of a Fever.

Others therefore had rather, their eyes being opened, not to see, not to
perceive; wherefore they say, that in very deed, no true, but a dissembling
cold, and a deceitful allurement Fever; and while they are externally cold,
they will have it, that they are internally in a raging heat, and are burnt
with true heat, although they perceive otherwise. But such doatages any one
will easily hiss out of the middle of the Country: For a most intense or
heightened cold besigeth their innermost parts for some hours.

For in so manifest, and undoubted an History of cold (which is that of the
deed, and sense) they produce an argument wan enough: there is (they say) a
great heat within,

But they know not that this thirst proceeds not from heat, as neither from
dryness, even as it otherwise happens in natural thirst: For therefore that
neither is it appeased by

For the sharp distillation of Sulphur (which in it self, is most dry and a
corrosive) is wont to mitigate that deceitful thirst, no otherwise than as
water quenches fire: But by a like reason to divine, that cold in the
beginning of Fevers is from an unconquered drowsy affect? Since the Schools
determine that the drowsy evil does no less proceed from unvanquished cold,
than thirst from dryness.

Neither does that hinder, that the drowsy evil is not present with all that
have a Fever: For it is suficient, and brings the greater confusion, that in
some that have Fevers, there

But at length, whither will they escape, if in the vigor of Fevers (which is
the hottest station of Fevers) they grant not so great thirst to be, as in the
beginning Fevers: But they deny that; what therefore will they do, being taken
in their own net? Therefore they largely err, as many as give their judgments
concerning the native roots of things from accidents following by accident.

It is therefore the part of deadly ignorance, badly to have defined a Fever,
if they shall cure a Fever according to its definition. Yea we must treat
against them by the Law of Cornelius, concerning privy Murderers, who
obstinately, badly cure those who have committed their life unto them: because
that through the guilt of whom, so many ten thousands of millions are so
unhappily killed.

And indeed, if a Fever, or Feverish heat (for these two are in the Schools,
Sunonymalls Fevers (which they say does proceed from one of the four humors
being putrified) consists in the bosoms of the heart: therefore the heat, or
F^ver, is not kindled at first, in a Feverish matter; and putrefaction is
vainly enquired into, that they may find out the intimate, and immediate
cause of heat besides nature: And by consequence, the definition of a Fever
from thence, falls to the ground.

Yea it follows from thence, that a Fever does not primarily, intimately, and
immediately exist in its own matter from whence it is caused (as they will have
it) materially,

Again, from the same position, it follows, that, that there may be a Fever,
it is notrequired that the offending and feverish matter be enflamed: but some
other inflameable thing primarily residing in the heart, and from thence
slideable throughout the whole body: For this inflameable body, I (together
with Hippocrates) call the spirit which makes the assault.

But this last matter, I have brought hither, not from the mind of the
Ancients; but it Fevers: At least wise that being now violently begged, it
follows, that the peccant matter of Fevers is not properly enflamed, neither
that it is in it self, primarily, or efficiently hot, nor indeed, that it makes
hot besides nature, if the first inflameable body ought to be kindled in the
heart. Therefore neither is the peccant or offensive matter in a Fever hot
beyond, or besides the degree of nature. But that which is kindled in the
heart, was not kindled before the coming of the Fever: and so it every way
differs from the peccant matter in Fevers.

At length it is also from hence fitly concluded, that in whomsoever they
intend to slay a Fever by cooling things, as such, they do not intend to cure
by a removal Fever: but only they intend to take away, and correct the heat,
which is a certain latter product entertained without the feverish matter: To
wit, they apply their remedies unto the effect, but not unto the cause.

For truly the heat of Fevers is kindled in the Archeus which makes the
assault, and the Fevers is the peccant matter it self. They have regard
therefore, only unto the taking away of the effect following upon, and
resulting from the placing of that root, for the sake whereof, the Archeus is
enflamed not indeed by the root, but by heat drawn from elsewhere, while as
indeed he enflames himself by a proper animosity, and by his own heat being
beyond a requirance extended unto a degree, wherein he is wholly troublesome,
as he is enlarged beyond the amplenesse of his own necessity.

For neither must we think that any heat is so in a hateful feverish matter,
which with me they name the offensive one, that it afterward makes feverishly
hot the whole entire body: For truly, that for which every thing is such, that
very thing, they will have to be more such. And then also, because every
calefactive or heating agent does throughout

Yea, if the peccant matter should be hot of its own free accord, and the Fever
should Fever as such, ought to be continual, nor should it have intermission,
until that all the offensive matter were wholly consumed into ashes. Neither
therefore should there be any reason of a repetition, or relapse, seeing the
peccant matter should even from a general property, always make hot, for the
consuming

The which ought to instruct us, that the heat of a Fever is not proper unto
the peccant matter, or its inmate: and that the heat of the offensive matter
does not efficiently, Whatsoever utters healthy actions in healthy bodies, that
very thing utters vitiated ones

For example: The thorn or splinter of an oak being thrust into the finger,
and actually, and potentially cold, presently stirs up a heat besides nature in
the finger. Not indeed, Hippocrates has seriously admonished, that heat and
etc. But that the spirit is he that makes all assaults. Galen, Juniour unto
Hippocrates by five hundred years, afterward easily stained much paper, and by
his prate allured followers unto himself: But posterity having admired this
prattle, followed the same: it has always had that in the greatest esteem
which was of the least worth: And then the world every where grew aged in
frivolous judgments, always esteeming that to be of great weight, which was
most like unto its own unconstancy.

CHAP. II. The Schools Nodding or Doubting, have introduced Putrefaction.
1. The Schools have been constrained to devise another thing in Fevers beside
heat. 2. Another defect in the definition of a Fever. 3. The Schools contradict
the principles laid down by themselves. 4. That the essence of Fevers is not
from heat. 5. They by degrees are forgetful of their own positions. 6. The
spiciness of Roses is most hot. 7. Whether a Feverish heat be rightly judged by
the Schools, to arise from Putrefaction. 8. A malignant Fever, wherein it
differs from other Fevers. 9. A Crisis of Fevers by sweat, is most wholesome.
10. Why the Schools have fled back unto Putrefaction. 11. A blockish comparison
of heat in horse-dung. 12. Why horse-dung is hot. 13. A degree of the heat of a
putrefying matter is not sufficient for heating the whole man in a Fever. 14.
Putrefaction is no where the cause of heat. 15. Dung waxes not hot from
Putrefaction. 16. Why they have not drawn a feverish heat from hot Baths. 17.
The ignorance of the Roots has wrested the Schools aside unto the
considerations, and remedies of effects 18. Dung loses its heat, while it
begins to putrefie. 19. The great blindness of the Schools. 20. Galen convicted
of error 21. That the blood does never putrefie in the veins, and so whatsoever
they trifle concerning a Sunochus or putrefied Fever, is erroneous. 22. The
foregoing particulars are proved. 23. The natural endowments of the veins. 24.
Either Nature goes to ruin, or the Doctrine of the Schools. 25. An example
from the variety of blood. 26. A ridiculous table of blood let out of the
veins. 27. An argument from the Plague, against the Use of the Schools. 28.
Again, from the Pleurifie. 29. The heats, and turbulencies of the blood do not
testify the vices thereof. 30. A wan deceit of the Schools. 31. To suppose
putrefied humors in Fevers, is ridiculous. 32. Against the definition of
Fevers of the foregoing Chapter, some absurdities are alleged. 33. A frivolous
excuse by a Diary. 34. The foregoing definition of Fevers is again resisted.
35. The unconstancy of the Schools. 36. That the blood does not putrefie in the
veins. 37. Corruption, from whence it is. 38. That the blood of the Hemeroides
is not putrefied. 39. A wonderful remedy against the Hemeroides or Piles, by a
ring: And likewise for other Diseases.

THE Schools meditated, that an heat did oft-times spring up through exercises,
not unlike to the heat of feverish persons; the which notwithstanding, seeing
it was not a

Now they are no longer careful concerning heat, as neither concerning the
degrees, or distemperature thereof; but rather concerning the containing cause
thereof; For neither has a heat graduated besides nature, seemed to be
sufficient for a Fever, unless that heat also spring up from putrefaction;
which particle surely, has been dully omitted in the aforesaid definition of
Fevers.

Therefore the essence of a Fever, is now no longer a naked heat, neither shall
this heat distinguish Fevers from the diversity of heat, (although a Species
does result from

It was finely indeed begun, thus to wander from the terms proposed, that when
as they before respected nothing but heat which should exceed the accustomed
temper of nature, have to be kindled in an offensive putrified matter; but not
any longer, first in the heart. But seeing that of heat, there is not but only
Species in degree, but very many moments, or extensions of the same; and there
are very many particular kinds of Fevers; neither that Species of heat besides
nature: Therefore in the Essence or Being of heat, another thing is beheld
besides the degree of the same.

Heat therefore shall not constitute the Essence of a Fever, but that other
thing, by reason whereof the diversity of Fevers breaks forth. If therefore
putrefying of diverse matters be the efficient cause of the diversity of Fevers,
heat shall be thing as well caused from putrefaction, as the Fever it self; and
so seeing the action of causality of the putrisied matter involveth some other
thing in it besides heat it self, a Fever shall not be heat

Now the Schools do confusedly adjoyn very many things on both sides, that if
one thing do not help, at leastwise, another may help them: So that although
they toughly maintain

For what is now more solemn in healing, than to have given Apozemes of Hop,
Asparagus,

In the next place, to have drawn forth those which they feign to be guilty
humors, by Rhubarb, and Scammoneated Medicines? Therefore before all, we must
profesly examine, whether the heat of a Fever owes its Original to
Putrefaction: Wherefore first Measills, an Erisipelas, etc.) it is for the most
part cured; Because health for the most part accompanies a motion to without.

From hence it is, that Fevers do about their end, provoke voluntary sweats.
And a Crisis or judicial sign which is terminated by sweats, is most exceeding
wholesome, and by

They therefore assume, that Horse-dung which is actually cold, does
voluntarily wax hot by reason of putrefaction: But how blockishly do they on
both sides deceive the credulous world! For Cowes-dung of the same
nourishments, has better putrified, and

They have not known therefore, that heat follows the eaten grain, but not the
nature of Putrefaction: Therefore they foolishly transfer a feverish heat unto
humors putrified in a Fever, from the heat of the dung not yet putrefying.

The Schools thefore have not known, that by how much the nearer Horse-dung is
unto a beginning-putrefaction, by so much the more it is deprived of all heat:
And neither therefore shall the same dung ever putrify, if it be spread broad;
But only while as be ing moist, it is contracted into an heap, no otherwise
than as Hay, or Flowers, if they are pressed together being moist, are inflamed
before putrefaction: They have been ignorant I say, that dung waxes hot by its
own spirits of salt being pressed together.

Again, although dung do wax hot in the making of Putrefaction, yet all heat
cease before the Putrefaction begun is in its [being made:] And so the heat
of the dung squares not with a feverish matter, if the putrefied matter (as
they say) lays hid long before in Receptacles, and indeed, in a Quartane,
always, and very long.

Yea, neither is the degree of the heat of dung suitable, that it may be
dispersed from Fevers, and so much the rather, because they do not teach, that
Cold is before Heat in time.

And moreover in nature, Putrefaction no where causes heat, and much less in
vital Fevers, we complain not of heat, or Cold molests us; when as
notwithstanding, they suppose the humors to be putrefied: Therefore if Heat,
and Cold do causally succeed in that which is putrefied, and Cold be always
before Heat, in the coming of Fevers, Cold is more native to a putrefied
matter than Heat: For therefore we measure the long continuance of the Disease,
by the duration of cold in an Ague or Fever, but not by heat.

At length, I have shown that all feverish heat is wholly from the Archeus, and
therefore that it cease before death; when as notwithstanding, Cold, and
Putrefaction do the more prevail. It implies also, that the heat of a Fever
should be from a putrefied matter, and that it should be first kindled in the
heart it self, from whence the Putrefaction is banished.

In the next place, Heat is not kindled in dung from the Putrefaction it self;
For if it be daily be-sprinkled with the new urine of a horse, it will not so
much as wax hot in a matter to have accused the putrefaction of one horse-dung:
Neither was there any reason why they should horrow the essence of a Fever,
rather from heat than from cold, and other symptoms; Seeing they are the
alike, and fellow accidents of Fevers: Therefore they have always endeavored
to beat down the matter it self, after what manner will they cure, who convert
the whole hinge of healing only unto heats? At leastwise, the similitude of
horse-dung, and of a feverish heat ascribed unto putrefaction, has fallen: For
dung when it begins never so little to putrify, it puts off heat: And as long
as it can be

But the Schools accuse the Putrefaction or Corruption of Humors; and indeed
of one and the same Humor, as well for Cold, as for Heat, and both in a
heightened degree;

If therefore Cold be the Offspring of Putrefaction by it self, it cannot in
any wise essentially include heat, but only by accident.

But if Heat be the son of Putrefaction by it self, verily, neither then should
a Fever begin from Cold.

Nevertheless, it is clear enough from the aforesaid particulars, that the
Schools do suppose Putrefaction to be the essence of Fevers; But Heat, and Cold
to be accidents accompanying the Putrefaction: Wherefore Galen says, When
blood putrifies, Choler is made: which Text if they shall admit of, that Choler
shall be putrified in its own birth, Sunochus or putrified burning Fever.

Let the Schools therefore know, that the blood is never putrified in the
veins, but that the vein it self also putrifies, as in a Gangrene, and in
Mortifications: And so they beg the principle, who let forth the blood, lest it
should putrify in the veins. Like-wise Sunochus to arise from the blood of the
veins being putrified: And also they who say, that the blood while it
purrifies, is turned into Choler: The which particulars I thus prove.

The veins retain their blood fluid, even in a dead carcass, by the consent of
all Anatomy; but the blood being chased out of the veins, straightway grows
together into a clot:

Foreign excrements indeed putrify in the veins; to wit, they being the
Retents as well of their own, as of another digestion, (as concerning
digestions elsewhere) but the blood never; Because it is that which according
to the Scriptures, is the seat and treasure of life.

If therefore the life it self cannot preserve its own seat, and treasure from
corruption, as long as it is in the veins, when shall it preserve it? and how
shall it ever be free from corruption? And likewise, if the life does not
preserve the blood from corruption wherein it glistens, after what manner shall
the bones be preserved? The veins therefore matter? And lastly, Is it not from
a consistence not threddy or fibrous, scarce cleaving together, etc.

But I declare under the penalty of a convicted lie, if any one will make
trial, that I have examined the bloods of two hundred wanton country and
healthy people in one

I suppose also thirty men to be oppressed with an equal Pleurisy; but ten of
them to pour forth blood out of a vein apparently vitiated, (for the blood of
those that have the Pleurisy, is like red wine, whereunto clots of Milk have a
Conflux) but the remaining twenty, I will cure without shedding of their blood.
It is certain in the mean time, that those twenty have their blood no otherwise
affected, than the ten whose vein was cut.

And again, That if in those twenty that were cured, a vein be opened, their
blood shall be found rectified, restored into its former state, and far
estranged from a pleuritical error: Therefore the blood of him that has a
Pleurisy, is not corrupted, although it may seem to be such: The which I
prove, Because from that which is corrupted, or deprived of life, there is not
granted a return unto life, health, or an habit: Therefore black, blew, or wan,
green, etc. blood, do not testify of its corruption, but they afford signs of
its fermental angry heat, or turbulency alone.

For first of all, if the more waterish, and yellow blood should betoken a
vice, the arterial blood should be far worse than the blood of the veins; which
thing is erroneous: For the blood of the veins is no otherwise distinguished by
the aforesaid signs, than as wine is troubled while the Vine floureth; for it
is not therefore corrupted, because the tempest being withdrawn, it voluntarily
cleers up again: So likewise a Fever does variformly disturb the blood, and
discolor it with strange faces: But these masks cease,

Truly I am wont to compare the Lookers into the blood, unto those who give
their judgment concerning Spanish Wine, and who give their thoughts in
beholding of the urine.

But they will say, If putrefaction be not in the blood, why then does purely
red blood leap out of a vein at the third, and not at the first turn; or at the
first, and not at the third turn? But that argument at least convinces, that
one part of the blood is more, and sooner disturbed than another; not the
whole, or all at once: For it is certain, that nature tends by degrees in a
lineal path, unto the perfection appointed for her: Therefore that the blood
nigh the heart is more pure than that which is about the first shop thereof:
Therefore they say, (and err therein) That a Tertian, as well as that which is
Continual, as that which is renewed by Intervals, consists of yellow Choler,
a Quartan of black Choler, as also a Quotidian of phlegm, but putrified ones.

For why was it of necessity to suppose these Humors (the which I have
elsewhere demonstrated to be feigned ones) to be putrefied, seeing they confess
a non-putrefied Sunochus to be continual, and more cruel than the three
aforesaid Fevers: Which particulars surely, if they are compared with the
definition of Fevers proposed, now of necessity the blood in every Sunochus or
continual Fever, and the vital spirit in a diary Fever shall putrify, the life
remaining; to wit, they shall attain the bound of putrefaction:

And then, seeing the Schools confess that such putrified humors do not
consist in the sheath of the heart, and that therefore they are not primarily
inflamed in a Fever,

If therefore putrefied Humors do inflame the spirit in the heart from far,
that thing shall by every law of nature be made nigh, before afar off, and they
shall the rather, or more fully inflame all the blood that lies between the
heart, and themselves, with the heat of Putrefaction, and so all Fevers shall
of necessity afford a putrefied continual Fever; Wherefore neither shall a
Quartan Ague stop its course, and repeat its return, if the same putrefied
matter thereof waits safe in the Spleen for a years space.

Gangrens certainly teach me, that nothing of a putrefied matter (for every
putrefied matter is dead) can long persist without a further Conragion of it
self: Neither do I apprehend how the Archeus of life it self shall putrefie,
that it may give satisfaction to Galen for a diary Fever? But if they
understand a diary Fever to be the daughter of that Putrefaction, which at
length is implanted in the spirit of life; But thus all Fevers in the Schools,
should be Diaries.

Again, If a diary or one days Fever be the daughter of Putrefaction;
therefore Putrefaction is presupposed to be fermented to the spirit of life:
From whence there is a relapse unto the same straights.

But if they understand Putrefaction beginning only, or a Disposition unto
Putrefaction, and that the Heat is an Effect of Putrefaction, therefore it
follows,

But the Schools require a formal, and absolute putrefaction, that they may
find out the cause of a feverish Heat; Having forgotten, that then heat shall
Putrefaction, and not of the Fever; and so they shall constrainedly distinguish
Heat from a Fever: For why; seeing a non-putrefied continual Fever, is a true
Fever, without putrefaction, and by consequence ought to be without Heat.

In the mean time, they by little and little lay aside the fear of heat;
neither must we in healing employ our selves thereabout, while as a greater
damage is to be feared from the contagion of putrefaction in those things
which have a co-resemblance: And therefore it would be better to divert the
putrefaction, than vainly to have smeared over a Fever with cooling things.

But surely, whatsoever things resist putrefaction, are hot: For Myrrh
preserves the dead Carcases of Egypt for now two thousand years; The which
otherwise, with Succory, Plantain, and their Coolers had putrified long since:
Therefore the putrefactions of putrefied Humors, likewise of the blood, and
spirit, are so like unto Fables, that I should scarce believe that the Schools
spoke in earnest, unless they did fatally even unto this day, confirm those
Positions by the practical part.

For a Conclusion, I will as yet add one thing: Whatsoever has been once
corrupted in the body, never returns again into favor; but the blood of the
veins, however corrupted it may seem to be, returns again into favor:
Therefore it was not once corrupted.

The Major proposition is proved, because Corruption in us is an effect of the
sequestration of vital dispositions, and so it presupposes a privation, and
death of the corrupted body, or matter it self.

The Minor proposition is proved, by those who are cured of the Plague,
Pleurifie, and a Fever, without the drawing out of blood. And likewise, if the
blood be ever to be reckoned putrefied or corrupted while existing in the
veins, that blood shall especially

Whole Chyrurgery proves the Major proposition concerning Ulcers bred from an
accidental happenning of the Hemeroides or Piles: But I prove the Minor,
because I

That Ring also prevails in the strangling, and motions of the womb, and very
many Diseases: The Description, and manner of composing whereof, I deliver in
the Treatise upon those words; In Words, Herbs, and Stones, there is great
virtue, where I speak of the great virtue of things.

CHAP. III. The Doctrine of the Ancients concerning Circuits, is examined.
1. The causes of Feverish Circuites in the Schools. 2. The first error. 3.
Galen is accused of error. 4. A quaternary of humors, why suspected. 5. The
great and stubborn blindness of the Schools. 6. Galen is hissed out of the
place of intermitting Fevers, by many perplexities issuing from thence. 7. An
account of Choler necessary for the Fit or coming of a Tertian Ague according
to the Schools. 8. He is refuted. 9. From their Suppositions it is concluded,
that there cannot be a Plethora in a Fever or Ague on every other day. 10. A
begging of the principle in the Galenists. 11. Galen being ignorant of Anatomy,
has copied out many books concerning Anatomy. 12. Unhappy Speculations of
healing invented by the Devil to the destruction of Mortals. 13. An argument on
the contrary drawn from Cases or Receptacles. 14. That yellow, and black Choler
are not entertained in the Spleen, and little bag of the Gawl. 15. Against
Astrologers who derive the Circle of a Fever on the Stars. 16. The similitudes
aforeread in the Schools, do not suqare: 17. Some arguments against the
Doctrine of the Schools. 18. The desert of Fernelius. 19. The rashness and
unconstancy of Paracelsus. 10. That man is not a Microcosm or little world, if
the holy Scriptures are to be obeyed. 21. Paracelsus deceived.

THE Shools say, the causes of set Circuits are, to wit, because as much Phlegm
is [daily] generated, as there is of Choler every other day, and as there is of
black

I gratulate the language of our Country, which would willingly want these
same names drawn from a Grecisme: But the Schools do not thus teach the
effective cause, but only the remote cause, which they call that of [Sine qua
non] or the Fever Epialos, and for Semite-tians. Likewise, that they have
neglected a doubled yellow Choler for a double Tertian, nor that they have made
mention of a doubled black Choler for a double Quartan: That they have not
invented a wandering, and uncertain humor for a wandering Fever; or Humors
continuing, and uncessantly substituted for continual Fevers, exasperating
themselves every day, every other day, or every third day: And lastly, a slow
humor for a slow Fever. At leastwise, they ought to have explained, if
putrefying blood be changed into yellow Choler, why it is wholly converted into
Pus: Why does not purulent, thick, or mattery blood cause a burning Fever in a
Consumption of the Lungs; and why do not yellow expectorations or spittings out
of the breast, produce a Tertian, but an Hectic Fever; and that presently
after meat: Wherefore a Quaternary of Humors for so great a Catalogue of
Fevers,

But as to what belongs unto the seat of the putrified humors of Fevers, Galen
is so alike stupid herein, that it had shamed me to lay open his error, if the
Schools did not as yet to this day stiffly defend the same unto the destruction
of Mortals: they craving respect rather from Antiquity than from the Truth: as
if the fountain of Wisdom Galen, who that he might find the causes of a set
trembling in Fevers,, has writ nothing but old wives Fables; the which as often
as I call to mind, I ingeniously admire that so many wits could subscribe
thereunto ever since the days of Galen: wherein surely I am amazed at the
great sluggishness of wits as to a diligent search, they assenting unto false
principles lest the right of disputing against denyers should be forestalled
from them.

I will therefore no longer speak to Galen, but unto the Schools: I wish
therefore Fever continue for Life? What Schoolmaster admonishes this
Separater of his Error, that he may seasonably repent? At leastwise, if the
utmost parts of the veins do not corrupt that putrified humor, the veins
themselves shall be more putrified, and so they shall labor with an
unexcusable Gangreen. But if the Cause which calls the guiltless humor unto
it self, subsisteth in the very extremities of the veins, that it may putrify
the same in its own possession: Yet by a greater breviary, it should execute
that in the Blood nigh to it self, over which it has a stronger Right, and
from whence it has as well a liberty to separate Choler, or phlegm, as the
same thing is otherwise proper unto a solutive Medicine.

Again, If it lists it to have prepared a putrified humor out of the nigh
blood, it shall in vain expect an agreeable quantity of Choler for full two
days space: But if that humor shall putrify before it could reach to the
utmost parts of the veins, then the Schools contradict themselves, and the
seat of intermitting Fevers shall not be in the habit of the Body, but in the
first shops of the Humors.

In the next place, If at one only turn of a fit, the whole putrified humor
be dispersed out of the veins into the habit of the Body, even for the
consumption of it self, why at least, shall that Separater or Driver (seeing
nothing is moved by it self which is not vital) be less generous in the Bowels,
than he that is placed in the utmost parts of the veins? At length, for what
end of Doatage, shall there be this passage of the putrified Humor from the
Mesentery, through the Liver, and Heart, even unto the extremities of the
veins? It is a matter full of danger; and it is to be feared, but that by its
frequent passage it may soon defile the whole blood with its corruptions, and
deadly gore: For let it either be a great lie of Galen; or humane nature
voluntarily meditates of its own ruin. And by this means, the necessity of
Revulsion boasted of, by cutting of a vein, falls to the ground. For truly,
the putrified humor is by the voluntary force of intermitting Fevers, at set
hours Revulsed, or pulled back from the Nest of its Generation; Yea it issues
of its own accord unto the utmost parts of the veins: unless perhaps, that
Revulsion be accounted dangerous, which wholly ought to be made by the Heart
through the hollow vein, as well in intermitting Fevers, as by the cutting of a
vein. And then, either the feverish matter is at every fit wholly drawn out of
the Nest of its nativity, or not wholly; if totally, there shall be no cause of
return; if not totally, it is exhausted. Why shall a new humor which putrifies
at every future fit, no more move an Aguish fit by its putrefaction, than by
its expulsion? For truly, there is greater labor and pain while corrupt pus is
in making, that when the pus is made. Why in that case, shall not the seat of
Fevers be rather in the place of putrefaction, than in places through which it
passes while it is expelled? Why, I say, the appetite returning, Thirst and
Watchings being absent (To wit, in the resting days of intermitting Fevers)
shall Choler, or phlegm putrify in the Bowels? And why does not the
putrefaction thereof disturb the Family administration of the shops of the
Humors? Why shall black Choler, which should be made on the second day of the
week, putrify in two days space into a ripe putrefaction; and that which
should be made on the followng day, putrify as much in one only day, as the
former putrified in two days? If that which was joined of them both, causes
the fit of a Quartane on the fourth day of the week? Why does not that which is
made on the second day, stir up its own fit on the fourth day; and that which
is made on the third day, not likewise stir up its own Tumult on the fifth day?
And consequently, if any be made on the fourth day of the week; why does it not
frame a fit on the sixth day? The shoulders of Physicians are lifted up, their
Brows are bent, and hidden properties are accused, while as they are
constrained to answer unto things known by Sense, by believed, and supposed
madnesses.

Why at length in the rigours or shaking fits of a Tertian, will they have that
which is vomited up about their Beginnings, to be Gaul: and say, that Nature
bends that same way, if on the contrary, the guidance of Nature does in the
same interval of time, proceed from the Center unto the utmost parts of the
Veins? because Nature does not at one only instant, stir up two opposite
motions within, and without, especially from the cause of one Excrement, which
is accounted the Gawl: Why does not that vomiting take away as much from the
sharpness of the fit, as there is a plentiful expulsion of that excrement
which they suppose to be the very matter of a Tertian? But if in a Tertian, a
residing Choler remains in its own shops after the fit, why does it rather
putrify new Choler, than the humors radically annexed to it self? After what
manner do bitter Vomiting, Thirst, and so great Tokens of hurts molest the
stomach, while as most of the Balast of the malady shall pass over unto the
extreme parts of the veins that it may provoke Rigours. But those who carry
the marks of a Cautery, do see, that two days after Fevers, a spare quantity
of, or no excrements are wiped off: the which surely, should be many, if so
many feverish filths should at every fit slide unto the utmost parts of the
veins and habit of the Body.

The Schools triumph in the Causes of Rigor, they being as prettily feigned,
as blockishly believed. But why does Galen give more heed unto the quantity of
an humor, than to the ready obedience of the same? Should not Choler, although
less in quantity, by reason of its heat, and flowing, be more inclinably
obedient unto the Clientship of a putrefactive humor, than phlegm otherwise
was? But why does not Choler move a fit daily, if a less moiety thereof be
sufficient for a Tertian? To wit, while as the greater moiety thereof is
rejected by Vomit?

Lastly, They ought to have told, how many ounces of a putrified humor should
be required for every fit: whether six, or seven? Truly, oft-times a double
quantity thereof is rejected by vomit about the beginning of a Tertian, and the
fit is nothing Tertian: Whereof, if thou shall take the half: To wit, 8 ounces
of yellow Choler every day; and by consequence, a double quantity of phlegm,
there shall be Musician make an Harmony of these pipes, that can.

I at least conclude, from the supposed dreams of the Schools, That there
ought in no Fever, if so much of humors be bred in him; seeing as much is
consumed in an abstinent Feverish person; because his appetite, digestion, and
Food failing; Yet it is of necessity, that this weight be recompensed out of
the Mass of the Blood. Therefore an emptying is not to be instituted in a
Feverish or Aguish person, who abstaineth for the space of two days. But I
pray, from whence has Galen known, That as much of yellow Choler is made every
other day, as there is of phlegm daily, and of black Choler every third day:
Especially, who is proved by Andrew Vesalius of Bruxels, and the Prince of
Anatomists, in 106 places, never to have pryed into a humane dead Carcass? For
if Galen writes this without proof, at leastwise, the Schools were not bound
to subscribe to his Doatage. But if he learned this, as being perfectly
instructed by Fevers themselves: Verily, he could not refer this same thing
into the effect, and also into the cause of one thing. For it must needs
contein an absurd and blockish begging of the Principle, to produce the same
thing to be for a cause, and effect for it self: Namely, That a Tertian happens
from yellow Choler putrified every other day, and a Quartane from black Choler
putrified every third day, because as much of yellow Choler is made every other
day, as there is of black Choler in full three days space.

And again, Let him prove the truth of this matter, That a Tertian assaults us
every Quartane in the space of three days, because as much yellow Choler is
made every other day, as there is of black Choler in three days space. Surely,
miserable are the Speculations of Healing, which are handed forth in the spring
of Schools: To wit, From whence unprosperous curings of Diseases daily
succeed, to the destruction of the Christian World, and salvation of Souls.

But at leastwise, if yellow Choler should exceed Melancholy or black Choler
in one Schools do teach with Galen, That as much of Gaul or yellow Choler is
made every other day, as there is of black Choler every three days; and the
Spleen be the Case or Receptacle of black Choler, and the little bag of the
Gaul be the sheath of yellow Choler; the Creator has either erred in his
Ends, in framing the very Receptacles of those otherwise than Galen has
determined: or the Gaul, and Spleen were not the Butteries of the Fables of the
School of Medicine.

Therefore others whom the devices of Galen concerning the Circuit of Fevers
did not satisfy, have begged Astrology for their aid: because a Fever does
sometimes return Fevers begin Fever, with the Stars: They are Rubbish and vain
Tincklings poured over credulous ears.

Others also, at length suppose, that they have given themselves satisfaction
to the Question by Similitudes, if they shall say, that Fevers have themselves
after the manner Water-cresse, but that of Parsley far more slow; But the
example availes not, because it resolves one doubt by another: For Seeds which
are the more slowly resolved in moisture by reason of their Gummy oyliness, do
also more slowly bud, as also others more readily, which obtain a muscilage
nearer to the juice of the earth: wherefore such a Similitude has no way
regard unto Fevers, wherein, they will not have fits to be made by reason of an
easy or difficult resolving, but by reason of a scanty, or plentiful afflux
of putrified humors.

Otherwise surely, phllegm being the most estranged from putrefaction, should
scarce Schools concerning the cold fit and circuit of Fevers, standing, it
must needs be, That a Tertian is cured by exhausting of the matter in the fit,
and by a defect of new Choler requisite for a future fit, if the Patient shall
abstain from meat and drink for full two days space; But the Consequence is
false, therefore also the position of Galen. But if the Schools do teach and
say, that then new Choler is dissolved out of the venal blood; Yet this is to
feign Nature to be more solicitous, that she may preserve the Fever, than
otherwise the Life, and Blood the Treasure of Life.

Again, That Choler being separated or made out of the Blood if it be
putrified, why is it not banished by the veins, together with the Choler of
the foregoing fit, the which was already before detained in the veins with the
Blood? or has perhaps that remaining and putrified Choler, fore-known that
there would happen an abstinence of two days: To wit, that it might reserve it
self for this defect, for a continuance of the Fever or Ague, which otherwise
should perish through want of Choler? Or has Nature well pleased her self in
the preserving of putrified Choler? But if indeed that Choler issuing out of
the veins be not putrified; truly, now Nature is mad and outrageous, because
she rather dissolves the Blood, that she may have that which may putrify for
the continuation of a future Fever. But the Schools of Galen confess that
Choler to be putrified, and that a putrified humor is poured out through the
veins at every fit, and brought into the slender extremities of the veins,
and that is the cause of the trembling of the fit, and great cold; To wit, the
putrefaction of which humor, when it is the more intense or heightened in the
same place, that it straightway after causes so great a heat.

I have accounted these Doctrines to be dry stubbles, unworthy Fables,
miserable old Fernelius first discovered this Ignorance of the Schools:
Wherefore, Rondeletius and the followers of Galen, inveigh against Fernelius as
a forsaker of, and an Apostate from the School of Medicine.

Fernelius therefore first smelt out the Nest of intermitting Fevers to be
about the stomach, Duodenum, and Crow, and indeed he fixed the seat of
continual Fevers about the heart: but he durst not to decline from the ancient
Rule of curing Fevers: For he had begun openly to dispute against the foregoing
Schools, for the Nest of Fevers; but afterward he hid himself among retired
places: for he not being able to rid himself of the strawy Bonds of putrified
Humors, suffered the essence and knowledge of Fevers to be snatched away from
him.

But Paracelsus being affrighted with the Rigor of Fevers, persuading himself
that Fever by the ears, and pleasing himself with his own Allegorical
invention of a Microcosme, defines a Fever to be a Disease of Sulphur and
Niter: and elsewhere again, to be the Earthquake of the Microcosme: As if
Sulphur and Nitre were made far more cold than themselves, while they are
separated from the mud (or Limbus as he says) of the Microcosme; and moreover,
after some hours, were of their own accord inflamed with the fire of Aetna. For
as Galen every where stumbled in the searching into Causes, and so therein
bewrayed himself not to be a Physician; (the Name of whom he says, is the
Finder out of the occasion) So Paracelsus by a wonderful Liberty, slid into
the Similitudes or Allusions of a Microcosme or little World, unworthy a
Physician: Because that was a hard Law, which had violently thrust man into the
miserable necessities of all Diseases, nakedly, that he might resemble the
Microcosme

I certainly gratify my Soul, that I show forth the Figure of the living God,
but nor Sulphur and Saltpeter is wanting in us, a connection of them both is
wanting, an actual fire is wanting: And lastly, a Body is wanting which may
undergo that kindling at one only moment. Therefore, let the Causes and
originals of Fevers in the Schools, be Trifles and Fables.

CHAP. IV. Phlebotomy or Bloodletting in Fevers, is examined.
1. One only reason against humors, others elsewhere. 2. A universal
proposition for Bloodletting, Galen being the Author. 3. A Syllogism against
the same Galen. 4. A Logistical or rational proof. 5. That a Plethora or
abounding fullness of good blood, is impossible. 6. That corrupted blood does
never subsist in the veins. 7. That there cannot be said to be a Plethora, in
a neutral state of the blood. 8. That cutting of a vein is never betokened by
the Positions of the Schools. 9. What a Cachochymia or state of bad juice in
the veins may properly be. 10. That co-indications instead of a proper
indication, and those opposite to a contrary indication or betokening, do
square amiss. 11. A proposition of the Author against cutting of a vein in a
Fever. 12. The Schools disgrace their own laxative Medicines, by their trials
of the cutting of a vein. 13. The ends of co-betokenings. 14. A fore-warning
of the Author. 15. After what manner, the letting out of blood cools. 16. A
miserable History of a Cardinal Infanto. 17. We must take special notice
against Physicians that are greedy of blood. 18. A guilty mind, is a thousand
witnesses. 19. An argument drawn from thence. 20. The essential state of
Fevers. 21. An explaining of the foregoing argument, concerning cooling, and
the privy shifts of the Schools. 22. That there is not a proceeding from one
extreme unto another, is badly drawn from Science Mathematical into Medicine.
23. It is a faulty argument in healing. 24. The argument from the position of
the Schools is opposed. 25. The false paint of the Schools, from stubborn
ignorance. 26. The faculties obtain the chiefdom of betokening. 27.
Hippocrates, concerning great Wrestlers or Champions, is opposed: but being
badly understood. 28. The differences of emptyings. 29. A Fever hurts less
than the cutting of a vein. 30. The obligement of Physicians. 31. A general
intention in Fevers, and the cutting of a vein opposite thereunto. 32. Science
Mathematical proves, that cutting of a vein, does always hurt. 33. The
uncertainty of Physicians proves a defect of Principles. 34. Cutting of a vein
cannot diminish the cause of Fevers. 35. An argument from a sufficient
enumeration: 36. Another from the quality of the blood. 37. Whither the
Schools are driven. 38. Vain hope in the changes of blood let out. 39. That
the co-indication of Phlebotomy for Revulsion, is vain, as well in a Fever, as
in the menstrues. 40. Derivation in local Diseases is sometimes profitable: but
in Fevers impertinent. 41. Cutting of a vein is hurtful in a Pleurisy. 42.
The Schools may learn from the Country Folk, that their Maxims are false. 43.
Revulsion a Rule in Fevers. 44. What Physicians ought to learn by this Chapter.

BEfore I proceed unto further Scopes, I ought to repeat what things I have
elsewhere demonstrated in a large Treatise: To wit, That there are not two
Cholers, and phlegm in Nature, as the constitutive parts of the venal blood;
but that the Treatise of Fevers required me to be more brief: especially,
because those very things do of themselves go to ruin in this place; where
there is no mention made of Humors, except putrified ones, since an Animal or
living Creature that is putrified, is no longer an Animal.

I will therefore examine only the two universal Succors: To wit,
Bloodletting and Purging, as the two pillars of Medicine; and the which being
dashed in pieces, the whole Edifice falls down of its own accord, as it were
into Rubbish: and these Succors being taken away, Physicians may forsake the
sick, they not having Remedies, besides the Diminishers of the body and
strength; all which I will peculiarly touch at.

For indeed according to the consent of Galen, in every Fever (a Hectic one
excepted) Schools, and custom of this destructive Age, I state this
Syllogism.

Phlebotomy or Bloodletting, is unprofitable wherefoever it is not shown to be
necessary: or where a proper Indication is wanting unto it; But in Fevers it is
not signified Fevers is unprofitable. The Major proposition is proved, because
the end is the chief Directress of Causes, and the Disposer of the means unto
it. Wheresoever therefore the end shows not a necessity of the means, things
not requisite are in vain provided for that end, especially where from a
contrary betokening, it is manifest that the blood is not let out without a
loss of the strength: such means therefore are rashly instituted, which the
end shows to be vain, unprofitable, and to be done with a diminishment of the
strength.

But the Minor proposition, Horatius Augenius de monte Sancto, profesly proves
in three Books; Teaching with the consent of the Universities, That a Plethora
or a too much fulness of the veins alone, that is, the too much abounding of
Blood is the betokener of Phlebotomy; nor that indeed directly for the curing
of Fevers, but for the Evacuation of a fulness: But a Plethora never
subsisteth in Fevers, therefore Bloodletting is never betokened in Fevers; and
by consequence this is altogether unprofitable. The Conclusion is indeed new
and Paradoxal, yet true, Which thing therefore for that cause shall be
therefore to be proved by many Arguments.

Galen himself proves the Subsumption: Teaching, That at every fit of Fevers,
more Choler is pufft away than is generated in two days. In the mean time, the
other members do not cease to be nourished with accustomed blood: That is,
besides the consuming Caused by the Fever, they also consume their own allotted
quantity of wonted Blood:

The which, in the foregoing Chapter, from the humor cast up by vomit, I have
reduced into a Computation. But now that very thing is to be pressed with a
greater connivance: Fever shall consume no less. Therefore, seeing there is
none, or but a little appetite and digestion of meats, and sanguification, of
necessity also, too much abundance of blood, if there were any at the
beginning, shall fail presently after two days, and the betokening thereof
shall cease for the letting forth of blood in him that has a Fever. But that
presently in Fevers, there is no longer a Plethora; as many do see this, as do
undergo ulcers by a Cautery: To wit, the which presently after Fevers are dried
up, nor do they afford their wonted pus.

But first of all we must take notice, that the Strength or Faculties can never
offend through abundance, not so much as in Mathuselah: so neither does good
blood offend Soul or vital Spirit is in the blood.

By Consequence therefore, there can never be a Plethora in good blood.

But on the other extreme, I have demonstrated in a foregoing Chapter, That
corrupt blood is never contained in the veins: therefore if there be ever any
possible plethora of the veins, that ought to consist in a middle state of the
blood, between a corrupted and very healthy one: whether we consider the same
state of decay, and neutrality, or next, as it is mixed of both: at leastwise
the Galenists may remember, that good proceeds from an entire cause, but evil
from every defect. And so that this state of the blood is not called a
Plethorical or abounding one, but a Cacochymical one or state of a bad juice:
Nor that it desires the cutting of a vein, but rather a Purgation, which may
selectively draw forth the bad, but leave the good.

And so, that by their Positions it is not yet proved, That the cutting of a
vein is in

Furthermore, since it is now manifest, that a Plethora is wanting in Fevers,
which may a require a letting out of blood, and that thing the Schools have
after some sort smelt out; they have instead of an indication or betokening
sign, substituted some coindications or mutual betokenings, as if they were of
an equal weight with a suitable indication in nature, and out-weighing a
contrary indication; the which, after another manner, surely, seeing it is
drawn from a conserving of the strength, ought wholly to obtain the Chief-dome
altogether by that Title, that every Fever is quickly, safely, and perfectly
curable without cutting of a vein; For indeed, for all so diverse putrefactions
of retaining Humors, and Fevers issuing from thence, they presently make use
of the one

They are good words (says the Sow) while she eats up the penitential Psalms,
but they do not profit a hunger-starved swine.

Such indeed are co-indications, whereby they persuade the destruction of
Mortals to be continued, and whereunto I will give satisfaction in order.

But before all, I will have it to be fore-admonished, that although in a more
strong and full body, there is not a notable hurt by letting out the blood, yea
although the sick Fevers shall oft-times slacken: Surely that does no otherwise
happen, than because the Archeus much abhors a sudden emptying of the
strength, and an undue cooling, and so neglects to expel the Feverish matter,
and to perform his office: But they who seem to be cured by blood-letting,
surely they suffer a relapse, at least they obtain a more lingering, and less
firm health: which Assertion the Turks do prove, and a great part of the world,
who with me are ignotant of the opening of a vein, because it is that which God
is no where read to have instituted, or approved of, yea not so much as to have
made mention thereof.

But as to what belongs unto the first scope of a co-betokeming sign, which is
called, Cooling;

Truly the letting out of the blood, cools by no other title, than as it
filcheth from the vital heat: But not that it obtains a coolifying, and
positive power: In which respect Fever? But blood is wanting in Hecttick
Fevers; wherefore through defect of blood, and strength, there is an easy
Judgment of hurt brought by Phlebotomy, which otherwise the more

In the year 1641. November. 8. the body of Prince Ferdinand, brother to the King
of Spain, and Cardinal of ^oledo, was dissected, who being molested with a
Tertian ague for 89 days, dyed at 32. years of age: For his heart, liver, and
lungs being lifted up, and so the veins, and arteries being dissected, scarce a
spoonful of blood flowed into the hollow of his breast: Indeed he showed a
liver plainly bloodless, but a heart flaggy like a purse: For but two days
before his death, he had eaten more if it had been granted unto him. He was
indeed, by the cuttings of a vein, purges, and leeches so exhausted, as I have
said, yet the Tertian ceased not to observe the order of its intention, and
remission. What therefore Fevers.

Is that the method of healing which makes a Physician, whom the Almighty has
Cortracum, was saluted by the Senate of Bruxells, recovering from the agony of
death, by reason of the diminishments of his blood, and strength, then walked
in good health about his Chamber.

Physicians therefore abhor to expose their feverish persons to the encountering
of cold things, to wit, whereby they might presently, and abundantly experience
the virtue of cooling things by a manifest token, because they put not much
trust in their own rules of Heats and Coolers: For since it is already
manifest, that the whole heat in a Fever is that of the very vital spirit it
self; it follows also, that the cooling which is made by cutting of a vein, is
merely that of the vital spirit, and together also an exhausting of the blood,
and an impoverishment thereof: For if a Fever be to be cured as a distemper, by
cutting of a vein as a cooling remedy: Alas, the contrary is manifest! by the
exhausting of all the blood out of the Prince the Infanto of Spain: In whom as
yet, but the day before his death, the Tertian Ague kept its fits: (^o great
cooling not hindering it) and if others intens a curing even in a Quotidian,
only by cold (which they writ to be kindled matter is present; for the
expelling whereof, the Archeus being as it were wroth, does by accident inflame
himself:

But unto the argument of curing by sudden cold, the Schools will answer, that
there is a perilous departure from one extreme unto another: By which excuse of
their ignorance

For truly, it is not be doubted but that it is lawful presently to cut the
halter of him that is hanged, that he who was deprived of air, may enjoy it as
soon as may be: Likewise

In Science Mathematical indeed, it is determined as impossible to proceed from
extreme to extreme without a mean, and that Medium wholly denies all
interruption: the which, if we shall grant in natural things with a certain
latitude, we shall as yet be accounted to have done it out of hand, and that in
the best manner: And so that neither is it lawful to wrest that of Science
Mathematical unto curings.

I confess indeed, that it is not lawful to draw out a dropfie abundantly by an
incision of the Navil, at one only turn; as neither to allure forth all the
corrupt pus out of a great Aposteme, nor to bring one that is frozen by reason
of cold immediately to the Chimney, nor abundantly to nourish him that is
almost dead with hunger: Yet surely a slow and necessary progress of
Mediocrity, as such, or a proceeding from one extreme unto another,

The Schools therefore by a faulty argument, of the cause, as not of the cause,
drive the sick from a sudden aid which they have not, that they may vail their
ignorance among the vulgar, with a certain Maxim being badly directed: For as
often as a Cure can be had without the loss of strength (for the faculties do
always obtain a chiefdome in indications) by how much the more speedily that is
done, it is also snatched with the greater Jubily or joy of nature: Even as
also in Fevers, I have with a profitable admiration observed it to be done with
much delight: Therefore (in the terms proposed) if a Fever be a mere heat
besides nature, and all curing ought to be perfected by contrary subduers;

But I do always greatly esteem of an indication which concerns a preserving
of the strength, and which is opposite unto any emptying of the veins
whatsoever, because the strength or powers being diminished, and prostrated,
the Disease cannot neither be put to Hippocrates decrees, That Natures
themselves are the Physitianesses of Diseases; because the indication or
betokening sign which is drawn from a preserving of the faculties, governs the
whole scope of curing: As therefore Reason persuades, that the strength is to
be preserved;

Hippocrates indeed in a Plethora of great Wrestlers or Champions, has
commanded blood to be presently, and heapingly let out; and that saying the
Schools do every were thunder out in the behalf of the cutting of a vein: But
that is ridiculously alleged for

That the exhausting of the strength or faculties which is made by carnal lust,
is unrepairable, because it takes away from the inbred spirit of the heart:
But the exhausting which is made by the cuttings of a vein, is nigh to this,
because it readily filcheth away the inflowing Archeus, and that abundantly.
But a Disease, although it also directly oppose the strength, yet because it
does not effect that thing abundantly, but by degrees, therefore it rather
shakes, and wears out the strength, than that it truly exhausteth it: Therefore
the restoring of the faculties which are worn or battered by a Disease, is more
easy than that of those which are exhausted by cutting of a vein.

For they who in Diseases are weakened by the cutting of a vein, are for the
most part little and little, and being subject to be sick with many anguishes,
in a long course of days, and not without the fear of Relapses. But they who
lay by it with a Disease, without cutting of a vein, are easily restored, and
recovering, they soon attain unto their former state: But if they being
destitute of remedies, shall also sometimes come unto an extremity; yet Nature
attempts a Crisis, and refreshes them, because their strength, although it was
sore shaken by the Disease, yet it perished not, as not being abundantly
exhausted by the lettings out of blood.

Wherefore a Physician is out of conscience, and in charity bound to heal, not
by a sudden lavishment of the faculties, as neither by dangers following from
thence, nor also by a necessary abbreviation of life; according to the Psalm,
My spirit shall be lessened, therefore my days shall be shortened.

And seeing that according to the Holy Scriptures, the life glistens in the
blood; however plentifully thou shall dismiss this, thou shall not let it forth
but with the prejudice of life: For the perpetual intent of nature in curing of
Fevers, is by sweats; And therefore the fits are for the most part ended by
sweats: But the cutting of a vein is Diametrically opposed unto this intention.

For truly, this pulls the blood inwards, for to replenish the vessels that
were emptied of blood; hut the motion of nature that is requisite for the
curing of Fevers, cutting of a vein does of necessity weaken, although the more
strong and plethorick persons may seem to experience, and witness that thing to
be otherwise. If the sacred Text, which admonishes us, That the life
inhabiteth in the blood; has not sufficient weight in it; at leastwise that
shall be made manifest, if thou shall offend in a more liberal emission of
blood: For the strength and sick person do presently faint ot go to ruin:
Therefore in Science Mathematical, if six do notably hurt, three cannot but
hurt, although not so sensibly.

But it is not permitted him to hurt nature, who ought to heal and restore the
same, if nature her self ought to be the Physitianesse to her self, and by so
much the more prosperous,

It is a deceitful succor which the cutting of a vein brings, and the remedy
thereof is so uncertain, that no Physician has hitherto dared to promise a
future cure from thence. Every Artificer does what he promises: For a Statuary
undoubtedly prepares an Image, and a Shoemaker shoes: But the Physician alone
dares to promise nothing from his Art, because he is supported with uncertain
foundations, being only by accident matter, that is full of ignorance which
would cure by procured weakness: For by a sudden emptying out of the blood made
by heaps, nature for the most part neglects the expulsion of her enemy; which
expulsion notwithstanding, I have demonstrated to contain the whole Tragedy of
Fevers, and Nature: Besides it is confessed, That the matter. that neither does
the cutting of a vein any way exhaust the occasional matter, or effectively
cure by a direct intention of healing.

Again, If blood be to be let forth for a more easy transpiration of the
Arteries, That al leastwise shall be in vain in the beginnings, and increases
of Fevers, whenas the heat

And seeing that blood is not to be let out in the state, as neither in the
declining thereof; Therefore never: But that, not in their state or height it
is proved, because a Crisis or judicial sign is hindered; seeing Nature (as
they write) being very greatly let or cumbred, strives with the disease, and
being for the most part the Conqueresse, does then least of all endure the loss
of strength, and a calling away from the Duel: But if nature be conquered in
the state of the Fever, what other thing shall the cutting of a vein then be
besides mere Murder? If therefore it is not convenient to open a vein in the
height of Fevers, while as there is the greatest heat, perplexity, and a most
especial breathing of the arteries is required: Surely much less shall it be
convenient in their beginnings, and increases; especially, because presently
after the first days, the fear of a Plethora or too much fullness departs, and
so there is a sufficiently easy Transpiration of the Arteries: But that
diseases in their declining, do neither require, nor endure the cutting of a
vein, it is so clear, and testified by the voice of all; That none ever attemps
the cutting of a vein at the declining of a Disease.

Let us consider further, That in Fevers the blood in the veins is either good,
or evil, or neutral: If it be good, it shall be good to have the good detained,
because it

For as I have shown elsewhere, the fear of a Plethora, if there were any, has
ceased, even presently after the beginning: But for that they will have good
blood to be let out for cooling, and discussing of putrefaction; Truly both of
them has already been sufficiently taken away, and the imaginary good which
they suppose, brings a real and necessary loss of the strength or faculties.

But moreover, the Schools teach, That the cutting of a vein is not commanded
in a Fever, by reason of the goodness of the blood, the which indeed, they
suppose to be evil, and putrefaction.

But I have sufficiently taught, That corrupted blood is not afforded in the
veins as long as we live; and by consequence, that this scope of the Schools in
cutting of a vein, falls to the ground: It behooves thererefore that they
demonstrate unto me a naughtiness of the blood, which may be without the
corruption of the same: And then, that that blood is detained in a vein from
the heart unto the hand, if they will have the cutting of a vein to be
confirmed in as much as it is such, or as to revulsion: Let them teach I say,
That bad blood is not in the first shops, and that blood being drawn out
through the vein of the elbow, worse blood is not drawn to the heart, where the
vena cava or hollow vein makes the right bosom of the heart.

Let them likewise instruct me, that the upper veins being emptyed, there is
not a greater liberty, and impunity, whereby the hurtful, and feverish matter
may reach unto the heart, than before: So that instead of a discussing of the
putrefaction (which in the truth of the matter, I have proved to be none) a
free passage of putrified air unto the heart, is not rather occasioned: whither
indeed the vacuity of the emptied veins attracteth the blood from beneath. Let
them show I say, by what reason an afflux of blood, and diminishment of the
strength through the Elbow, may hinder putrefaction, or may import a
Correction, and renewing of that which is putrified. Let them also explain
themselves what they will have meant, that cutting of a vein should be made,
whereby the Arteries may the more freely breath; since putrefaction (if there
were any possible to be in the veins) does not affect the arterial blood, the
Buttery of whole Nature.

And moreover, Let them prove, that the good blood being diminished, and the
strength proportionally, that there is a greater power in the impure blood that
is left, and which is defiled by corruption (as they suppose) of preserving it
self from putrefaction hanging over its head.

Let them likewise teach, contrary to the sacred Text: That the Life and Soul
are rather, and more willingly in the remaining defiled blood, than in the more
pure blood which was taken away by the cutting of a vein. Otherwise regularly
the drawing out of good blood includes an increased proportion, and unbridled
liberty of the bad blood remaining.

What if at length in a Fever, and in the veins there be bad blood, and they
say it is good (as a sign, or effect) which in the letting out of blood flows
forth as evil; and they think that so much bad blood at least, is taken away:
First let them prove the blood which they account hurtful to be truly
hurtful, even as I have already before proved it to be harmless.

And then, let them teach, that by such an hasty and full emission of bad
blood, nothing that is of prejudice is taken from the strength, and that the
remaining blood being defiled, and the Faculties being now diminished, the
emptying out of blood that is made, shall be for a cause; why a putrefying of
the remaining blood is the less able to proceed; and whether they hope that
blood being at sometime, after what manner soever once putrified in the veins,
there is aforded in Nature, a going back or return: To wit, from such a
privation? For let them show that it is not a contradiction, that it is proper
to a Fever to defile the blood it self, and for this property to be taken away
by the effect, to wit,

First of all, I have proved, that as well those things offend in begging of
the principle, which are supposed concerning a putrified continual, and burning
Fever, as those which are supposed concerning the emissions of putrified blood.
Wherefore, in speaking according to Numbers, I have always found Succors that
are made for the snatching away of the strength, to be full of deceit, as that
for a very little ease, the Faculties the Porters of Diseases, are weakened:
For even so as drink at the beginning of Fevers seems to comfort Thirst for a
little space: but who is so mad that he would then drink, if he knew that the
drink would filch away his necessary powers? Therefore the aid of cooling by
cutting of a vein, is unfaithful, deceitful, and momentany.

At length, concerning neutral blood, which in respect of cutting of a vein, is
neither good, nor evil, it is not worth ones labor to speak any thing: seeing
that which is denied under a disjoyning, may also be denied copulatively. For
whether that be neutral blood which consists of a co-mixture of the good with
that which is depraved (by supposing that to be depraved which is not) or that
wherein a neutral alteration is introduced, for both events, the particulars
aforesaid do satisfy.

Lastly, That I may cut off the hope that is in Revulsion, and so equally take
away all co-indications, as the wretched privy shifts of obstinacy. It is a mad
swims not in the blood, or floats in the veins as a Fish does in the water: but
it adheres or sticks fast within, to the vessel, even as in its own place,
concerning the occasional matter, I will declare: But for the Menstrues in
like manner, because a separation thereof is made from the whole, and that, not
but by a separating hand of the Archeus. But Bloodletting separates nothing of
the separable things: because it acts without a foreknowledge of the end, and
so without choice: But presently after the vessel is opened, the more nigh and
harmless blood always flows forth: the which, because other afterward follows
by a continual thread for fear of a vacuum: therefore the Menstrues otherwise by
the endeavor of Nature collected about the Womb, are by cutting of a vein
drawn away from thence; and go back into the whole Body. But if Phlebotomy
shall sometimes well succeed in a Woman that is plethorick, and full of juice;
yet surely in many others it has given a miserable overthrow. For if the
Menstrues should offend only in its quantity (while as it is now collected,
and separated in the veins about the Womb) I shall willingly admit of an
individual betokening of Phlebotomy, and only in the Case supposed. But the
Menstrues, if it shall flow in a well-constituted Womb, it abundantly satisfies
its own ends, and in this respect Revulsion is in vain, although the
Supposition supposes it to be even an impossible thing. For Bloodletting is
nothing but a mere, and undistinct emptying out of the blood: But the veins
being emptyed, they out of hand recall unto themselves any kind of blood
whatsoever from on every side: Because as they are the greedy sheaths of blood,
so also are they impatient of Vacuity or emptiness: And therefore the veins
that are emptyed do allure the Menstrues designed for utterance; That is, being
in this respect once enrouled by Nature in the Catalogue of Excrements,

But Derivation, because it is a sparing effusion of blood, so it be made out
of veins convenient, it has often profited in many local Diseases, and so in
Fevers it is impertinent.

But they urge, that the cutting of a vein is so necessary in a Pleurisy, that
it is enjoined that unless the blood flowing together unto the Ribs, be pulle^
back by the effusion of much blood, there is danger least the Pleurisy do soon
kill the man by choking of him. Surely, I let out the blood of no person that
has a Pleurisy, and such a cure is safe, certain, profitable, and sound: None
of them perishes: whereas in the mean time, under Phlebotomy many do at length
perish with a long or lingering Consumption, and experience a Relapse every
Year: For according to Galen: Whosoever they be that are not perfectly cured on
the fortieth day, become Consumptious: But I perfectly cure them within few
days: neither do they feel a Relapse. Neither indeed have I alone my secrets
for this purpose:

But moreover, I have seen a Country man curing all Pleuritical persons at the
third Physicians, and so great the obstinacy of the Schools; That God gives
knowledge to Rusticks, and Little ones, which he denies to those that are blown
up with Heathenish Learning.

We must now see, if there be any use of Revulsion in Fevers. For indeed, since
the Meseraick veins: but the more refined blood is that which has the more
nearly approached unto the Court of the Heart. For otherwise, Nature as
undiscreet, had placed the chief Weapons of Parricide nigh the Fountain of
Life. Seeing therefore the matter of a Fever, floats not in the veins, nor sits
nigh the Heart: Fat be it to believe, that that is fetched out, or moved from
its place by the cuttings of a vein; however, diverse colored blood be
sometimes wiped out by the repeated emissions of blood, It is therefore a cruel
Remedy, if unto the place of the blood let forth, other blood shall come from
remote parts: For so the contagion of one place should be dispersed into the
whole body, and unto the more noble parts; and otherwise there is an easy
co-defilement in things or parts that have a co-resemblance.

Lastly, if the Errors of the Heathens being once renounced, Modern Physicians
would of Revulsion are vain, that it is a pernicious wasting of the Treasure of
blood and strength; that no hurt does insult from the blood within the veins,
but only from hostile, and foreign excrements: that God also has made
sufficient Emunctories or avoiding places of any filths whatsoever, neither
that there is need of a renting of the veins for a victory over Fevers.

CHAP. V. Purging is Examined.
1. The first confession of the Schools concerning their purging Medicines. 2.
The deceits of Corrections. 3. Another confession. 4. A third. 5. Shameful
excuses. 6. A fourth confession. 7. A frequent History. 8. Deceit in the name.
9. It is explained, what it is for a laxative medicine to be given, while the
humors do swell or are disturbed, and how full of deceit it is. 10. A History
of the repentance of the Author. 11. A conclusion drawn from thence. 12. Nine
remarkable things for the destruction of the Schools. 13. A History of a
certain chief man. 14. A fifth confession. 15. An examination of the aforesaid
particulars. 16. A sixth confession. 17. Vain and foul privy shifts. 18.
Weapons retorted from a seventh confession. 19. An argument of poison from
stink. 20. A mechanical proof. 21. The same out of Galen. 22. A proof from the
effect. 23. The Schools oppose their own Theoremes. 24. The suppositions of
the Schools being granted, none could dye of a Fever, and it should be false,
that purging things are not to be given in the beginning of Fevers. 25. That
this Aphorism includes a deceit, and an unadvisednesse of Hippocrates. 26.
Coction in Diseases is the abuse of a Name.

THE Schools acknowledge that their Purgers, even unto Agarick, have need of
Correction, because they enforce Nature. And I wish those Corrections were not
sluggish, Etymology; To wit, They vail Scammony with the name of Diagridium;
as also they mask Coloquintida with the name of Alhandal.

In the next place, Laxative Compounds in Dispensatories, war under the
dissembled Title of a Captain or Leader.

In the mean time, They cannot deny, but that in every solutive, Scammony and
Coloquintida are the two pillars, whereby the whole Edifice of Purging is
supported: and the which being dashed in pieces, all of whatsoever was
superstructed thereon falls to the ground.

Next, The more mild Solutives: as Manna, Cassia, Senna, Rhubarb, etc. have
given up their names unto those two Standard-defending Leaders.

The Schools confess, I say, That a laxative Medicine being administered, it is
no longer in the power of the Physician: and so, they hereby defame their
Laxatives, and therefore put Phlebotomy. For if a laxative Medicine shall
commit any the more cruel thing, They accuse either the Dose, or the
Correction, or the fluid nature of the sick, or the Apothecary, or his Wife,
least otherwise the name should perish from a Solutive Medicine.

Yet in the mean time, will they, nill they, they confess, that all Solutives
do enclose in them a consuming poison: and they in the Proverb, call Aloes
alone, harmless. But the others are to be administered with an additament,
Correction, and Circumspection, as neither rashly, nor force-timely.

For of late, a judicious man of the privy Council of Brabant, that he might
preserve Aloes (To wit, gelded or Corrected) whereof, while he found not the
effect: he declares it to a Physician passing by, who blames the sluggishnesse
of the Aloes, and so turns [picron] or bitter, into [pigrum] or slow. I will
prescribe, says he, corrected pills of greater virtue: The which being taken,
he miserably perished; because it was in vain endeavored by him for a whole
week, that he might restrain the unbridled effect of the Laxative Remedy: For
he, that he might free himself from a future Disease, perished by the deceit of
the Physician, and left eleven Children, From whence it is first manifest, That
it is as well free for a loosening Medicine to Tyrannize on him that is in good
health, as otherwise on a sick person: To wit, it is lawful under the name of
a Physician, and deceit of a purging Medicine, to prey even upon the life of
Princes without punishment; Because the earth covers the cruel ignorance of
Physicians..

A Purgation or purifying is indeed a Specious Title, but full of deceit. And I
wish Physician were able to expiace Diseases! I wish in as much as this is not
done, that the sick would not expect a purgatory Medicine from the Hand of
Physicians!

Surely it is a thing most worthy of lamentation, what they say, That a
Laxative Medicine being administered before the Coction of a Disease, the same
humors indeed are

For by an History of the Fact, I will declare the Beginnings of my own
Repentance pus, and wheals. The Seniour Physicians of our City being called
unto me: They first commanded the cutting of a vein for the cooling of the
Liver: And then, they prepared an Apozeme of three days continuance, for the
bringing of yellow torride Choler, and salt phlegm out of the Body. And at
length they began the purging of the aforesaid Humors by the Pills of Fumitory,
and provoked many stools abundantly. I was glad, because I had voyded an heap
of stinking Liquor: They therefore admonished, that the same Medicine was to be
taken next day after the morrow; and likewise again, after three days, with
the like success: and in my judgment, if the putrified, and stinking matter
had all been joined together, it had easily filled two buckets; which I thought
to be Humors: For I who before was healthy, cheerful, of entire strength,
light in leaping, and running, was now reduced into leanness, my Knees
trembled, my Cheeks were slid together, and my voice was hoarse. I said
therefore, and too late, in what place were those Humors entertained in me?
For neither did I find Room for so great a Hotch-potch mixture in my Head,
Breast, or in my Belly: For although I had been deprived of all my Bowels, yet
the whole hollowness could scarce have contained the half part thereof:
Therefore I concluded with my self, that those Humors had not foreexisted in
me, but were made in me. And I clearly knew, that that putrified Liquor was

Whence 1. I knew, That scabbedness is a contagion of the skin, but not a
distemper

2. That the vice of those Humors in the Scab, was feigned: The which was
gotten only by a co-touching of the Glove.

3. That purging Medicines did not purge or cleanse, but putrify.

4. That they had melted the lively substance of my Body, and had resolved it
into putrefaction.

5. That they did indifferently defile whatsoever they did any way touch at,
whether it were blood, or next, the lively flesh it self: but that they did not
selectively draw out, and separate one thing instead of another.

6. That the matter defiled did denote its Defiler to be a mere liquefactive or
melting, and putrefying poison of the Body.

7. That the defiled matter flowed forth, Nature expelling it, until that the
force of the purging Medicine was spent.

8. That this was done no otherwise in an healthy, than as in a sick person.

9. And that therefore a Solutive Medicine was dangerous, before that Nature
was the Conqueresse in Diseases: but afterward, that the hurt thereof did not
so manifestly appear.

Which things I having long, and seriously weighed with my self, I desisted
from Galen, who was wholly so encumbered about those Humors, that he affirms
all Diseases to consist thereof. But seeing better things were as yet wanting
unto me, which I might substitute in the room of Humors, and Laxatives; I was
willing with an admiration, and compassion of mankind, at length to suspend the
study of Healing, until the most High of his own good pleasure, after much
expense of Monyes, and Years, vouchsafed to grant understanding unto me that
sought it; The which, I wish the World might by my works apply unto it self for
profit. Boldness increased in me in proceeding, and I was daily the more
confirmed by the daily observations of the Errors of Physicians.

Among other things, I remember, that chief Physicians had administered to a
Scammony, whence in one only day, forty and one stools had succeeded: The
which, being by my Command weighed together with the urine of that day, weighed
eighteen pounds, and seven ounces of yellow and putrified Liquor, I therefore
said unto him, and to his Physicians: Truly, if that Liquor be yellow Choler,
and one of the four Humors, now the phlegm remaining from thence in the Body
(it according to Galen exceeding Choler, in one third part) shall weigh twenty
and seven pound, and ten ounces, and by the same account nine pound and three
ounces of mere black Choler remained: That is, thirty six pound, and thirteen
ounces of phlegm, and melancholy, unmixt with yellow Choler.

Therefore they ought to confess, That a Purgation is not a purifying of the
Body, but rather a distempering of the Humors left behind, if there were any
such.

And then, that the aforesaid loosening was not an Elective cleansing out of
yellow Choler, or a freeing of the Body from superfluous Choler; but a mere
putrefactive melting of the Blood. For truly the Blood did not stink before,
while it was in the veins, it presently stinketh in the Bowel at the same
instant wherein it falls out of the veins.

But I pray, In what vessel shall thirty seven pounds or pints of remaining
phlegm,

The Physicians answered, That the ready nature of the Prince had too much
hearkened to the purging Medicine, and for eschewing of the aforesaid filth of
the humors that were left, and also for the disproportion of the same: which
Choler that that Scammony, not only by its property draws forth: but that of
the blood it self, or of a composition of the four Humors, it made one only
Liquor, being rejected by stool.

Whence I again concluded, that it was an Imposture, and Deceit, which
supposes Choler, or phlegm to be drawn out, and the which avoucheth one Humor
to be selectively avoided before another, while as now they confess, that all
of them are melted together.

And according to Galen, when the Blood putrifies, yellow Choler is made: and
that it is false, that a Cholagogal or Extracter of Choler (for examples sake)
cures Choleric Diseases, and that it is a deceit in those who say, Choler is
drawn out, if the other three also being first corrupted, are ejected together
with it.

Certainly there is none studious of the Truth, who may not from hence
presently understand, That the Foundation of Healing of the Ancients goes to
ruin, as well in respect of Humors, as of the Selection of solutive
Medicines. Truly I admire even to amazement, That the World has not yet taken
notice of the destructive danger of Laxative things: The which otherwise, so
suddenly well perceives any wiles or subtle crafts extended over their purse.
For truly, it is not to be doubted, but that Laxative Medicines do carry a
hidden poison in them, which has made so many thousands of Widows, and
Orphans. For neither do they draw forth a singular Humor after them: The which
I have demonstrated in a singular Treatise, never to have been in Nature,
except in the Books of Physicians. For increase thou the Dose of a Laxative
Remedy, and a deady poison will bewray it self.

Come on then, Why does that your Choler following with so swift an efflux,
stink so horribly, which but for one quarter of an hour before did not stink?
For

If any one shall drink a dram of white Vitriol dissolved in Wine, it presently
provokes Vomit: But if presently after drinking it, he shall drink thereupon a
etc. he indeed shall suffer many stools, yet wholly without stink. Scammony
therefore, and Vitriol do alike dissolve the blood of the Meseraick veins:
This indeed by its violent brackishnesse; But that by the putrefactive, and
strong smelling poison of Laxatives. From the consideration whereof alone,
purging ought to be suspected by every one as a cruel, and stupide Invention.

For if according to Galen; the blood when it putrifies, is made yellow Choler:
therefore the stinking and yellow Liquor that is cast out by Laxative
Medicines, and Galen, against the will of the Schools. For he chiefly commends
Triacle, because it most especially resists poisons.

He also affirms also a discernable sign of the best Triacle to be, that if
together with Laxative Medicines, Triacle be taken, undoubtedly stools shall
not follow.

Do not these words of Galen convince, that Laxatives are mere poisons? To wit,
all the operation whereof is evaded by Triacle, the Tamer of poisons? unto
which suspicion the effects do agree: Because a Purging Medicine being taken,
the sick, and healthy do equally cast forth Liquors of the same color, odor,
and condition:

Moreover, the Schools also oppose the selective Liberty which they attribute
unto solutive Medicines: For if any humor of the four be putrified in Fevers,
and naturally betokens a removal of it self: But if Laxatives do selectively
draw out Loadstone attracteth Iron, it shall not therefore draw rust unto it:
And therefore if a purging Medicine resolves the flesh, and blood, that it may
thereby extract Choler which it draws bound unto it self by a specifical
property; it does not therefore likewise draw stinking, and putrified
excrements included in the veins, which should be the cause of Fevers. Surely
none should ever dye by Fevers, if the two Maxims of the Schools were
supported with Truth; To wit, if putrified humors are the cause of Fevers. And
likewise, if they depart selectively, through purging things. Besides, it
should be a mad Caution, That purging Medicines be not given in the beginning
of Fevers, before the matter be troubled or rise high; To wit, before the
maturity, and Coction of the peccant matter: From whence it is sufficiently
manifest, that loosening things should otherwise be hurtful. But if they are
given after that the matter of the Disease be now well subdued, the aforesaid
Caution conteines a Deceit: Because

From which surely, an honest Physician does then also more justly abstain;
Because it then disturbs the Crisis, induces the danger of confusion, and of a
Relapse. For a loosening Medicine does always, and by it self draw out things
not cocted, no otherwise than those which are afterward called cocted ones:
because it is on both sides alike cruel, and poy sonsome. But after that Nature
has overcome the Disease it brings on less damage, neither is the deceit of
a Laxative Medicine then so apparently manifest: And so, if then a loosening
Medicine be given, the Physician shall seem to have conquered the Disease by
his own Art. But besides, if all particular Laxatives should extract their own
Humors by a Choice, they should of necessity also, be of concernment at every
station of the Disease, because they are those which always draw out the same
Liquor, and that alike stinking: but they disturb as much as may be, as long as
Nature shall not become the Superior: Which victory of that Disease, the
Schools have called Concoction: Not indeed that Nature attempts to digest or
Coct any thing which is vicious, orwhich falls not out

Let these Admonitions suffice concerning both the Universal Succors in
Fevers. I concluding with Hippocrates unto Democritus; That every Solutive
Medicine, robs us of the strength, and substance of our Body.

CHAP. VI. The Consideration of a Quartane Ague.
1. A Quartane has deluded the Rules of the Schools. 2. Why they know not how
to cure a Quartane. 3. That the wonted excuses in other events of Diseases do
fail. 4. A presage from a Quartane, in other Fevers. 5. The examination of a
Quartane according to the account of the Schools. 6. The weaknesses of Galen
himself. 7. Failings noted in Physicians. 8. Constrained words in the
confession of Physicians. 9. An argument against black Choler in the Spleen,
and the privy shifts of Physicians. 10. The true reason whence the Spleen
waxes hard about the end of a Quartane Ague, and the error of the Schools is
discovered. 11. Some remarkable things in a Quartane. 12. The manner of
be-drunkenning, and the Organs thereof. 13. A notable thing concerning a
Vegetable Spirit of Wine out of Juniper Berries 14. Why VVines are ordinarily
grateful to Mortals. 15. After what manner the Arteries draw their Remedles.
16. An impediment in abstracted Oils, which is not in the Salts of the same.
17. The manner of making of the Cardiack or Heart-passion, which they also call
the Royal Passion. 18. Diverse Chronical Diseases are from the Stomach. 19. The
ignorance, and sincerity of the age of Hippocrates. 20. There is no Seat for a
Quartane left in the Schools. 21. A few remarkable things concerning
Madnesses, are declared. 22. The Seat of foolish Madnesses.

SUrely I have demonstrated in an entire Treatise, that there never were
Humors in Nature, which the Schools of Medicine presuppose for the Foundation
of their Art; and that Treatise should profesly have respect hitherto, unless
it had been erelong to be repeated in a work of other Diseases: Because they
have every where named all Diseases by those Humors.

But it shall be sufficient in this place, to have demonstrated by the way,
That Fevers

Now I will speak something concerning a Quartane Ague: but not that it differs
from its Cousin-German Fevers in its matter, and efficient cause, or is cured
otherwise than after one and the same manner, and by the same means, whereby
other Fevers are overcome: but because a Quartane has never been vanquished by
the broken forces of the Schools: and so it has made mocks at the
Commentaries of Physicians and their vain Speeches concerning black Choler,
concerning the Spleen as the sink of black, and burnt Choler, and of loosening
Medicines bringing forth black Choler by a Choice.

A Quartane Ague therefore, has long since exposed the Doctrine of the
Universities, and the promises of these unto Laughter, as being vain Trifles
and wan Fables without strength: For truly a desperate curing by Arts, has
made manifest the feeble help of Medicines, the vain promises of
Dispensatories, and the undoubted ignorance of the causes of Fevers. Good God!
it is now manifest, that Physicians cannot only not cure the Leprosy, Gout,
Palsy, Asthma, Stone, Falling Sickness, and other Diseases contained under
the large Catalogue of uncurable ones, which are never cured of their own
accord: but they have not known how to take away so much as a Quartane Ague,
which patiently expects, and deludes every endeavor of Physicians: The which
notwithstanding Nature cures by her own power, to the disgrace of the Schools!
For they who attempt their Cures only by the cuttings of a vein, Sarrifyings,
Leeches, Vesicatories, and purgings of the Belly; and so by diminishments of
the Body, and Strength, and stick wholly in Heathenish Doctrines, are even
excluded by Nature from the true knowledge of Causes, and Remedies.

Because first of all, None of their Medicines reaches unto the Seat of a
Quartane, Physicians have been hitherto unprosperous: For they purge and cut a
vein, and then they leave the rest to be boren by Nature; And in the mean time,
they certainly know that they shall profit nothing by Remedies of that sort,
nor that they ever have profited thereby: I wish at least, that they had not
done hurt. They ought therefore to confess, that Remedies, and also all the
suppositions of Art fails them in this Disease; Yea, neither that the wonted
privy evasion of uncurableness in other Diseases is of value unto them: For all
the powers of the Universities being conjoined, cannot perform so much as
Nature can, and does do without them of her own free

But moreover, The same shamefulnesse of ignorance, and every way impotency
which a Quartane has discovered in the Schools, They should be compelled to
confess Fevers also; if those did not hasten to an end of their own accord.
Wherefore I now conjecture, That the outlaw a Quartane, in the Age that is
forthwith to come, shall distinguish false Physicians from true ones, whom the
Almighty has Chosen, Created, and Commanded to be Honored.

The Schools therefore define a Quartane according to the account of other
Fevers, by a heat kindled besides nature, first in the heart from the humor of
black Choler being

I importunately crave at your hands, I beseech you let the profession of
Medicine tell me, what harmony they can ever utter from so great dumness? And
whether it be not to have blinded the minds as well of the sick, as of young
beginners with prattle? Let them explain, why that heat is not first kindled in
the Spleen, where the cause, or humor sits, matter, has it not long since
putrified the Spleen? The which (especially) is accounted by the Schools to be
nothing but a sink of the worst excrement? After what manner does a Quartane
after so many months retire as better, of its own accord, to the disgrace of
Physicians, while as notwithstanding, it shall of necessity be more dry, gross,
and shall more putrify than at its first fits?

Again, What humor which from its rise is evil and putrified, can be at length
digested? Does nature become foolish, that she at length, after a divorce, and
a year an a halfs time begins to digest the humor which in the beginning she
had refused to digest, it being already before of necessity plainly putrified?
What reason is there of the change of her will? Has it then first repented
Nature of her deed? How shall she not weary her self, which has almost worn
her self out in striving so many months with a putrified, and the worst of
Humors, That she might exclude that which has now hardened in her possession,
and which was offensive in so many respects? For if in three days space, as
much of black choler be kept as is sufficient for a fit, what is this to the
Spleen? or what shall it make to the digestion of the primitive, and putrified
black Choler? If black choler be daily of necessity made a new, be laid up into
the spleen, and from thence be brought into the stomach its emunctory? How
shall nature so many months be forgetful of the passages, expulsions, and rites
of that Emunctory? and shall not be mindful of these, but nigh the end, which
is so tiresome? What if Senna, Epithymam, and the Arsenick which is entertained
in the stones of Armenia, and Lazulus, do fetch out black Choler on every side
(especially out of its natural Iun) and this be the total, undoubted cause of a
Quartane, and accused by so many Rules, Authors, and consent of ages: Why
therefore do they not take away, diminish, or any way shorten a Quartane?

But Physicians after so many torments, forsake their sick, being weakened
under the custody of despair, and commended to the government of the Kitchen.
At length, what will that much and stinking balast of liquor avail them, which
these Medicines being drunk, the credulous sick person casts forth without
profit, and perceives his strength to be diminished hereby?

Is not that saying of Hippocrates true? If those things which are convenient
are drawn out, the sick feel themselves the better, and easily bear such
purgings of the belly. For why although such solutive medicines are
immoderately taken even unto the last breath of life, yet does the Quartane
Ague slacken nothing of its power?

Learn ye therefore ye younger Physicians, of me an old man, That your Humors,
and laxative Medicines are nothing but mere delusive doatages, whereby in
subscribing to each other, ye have been deluded by Heathens, unto whom the gift
of healing was not given: Because Galen never saw so much as Anatomy, however
magnificently he Argent-vive or Quicksilver, and all Simples he borrowed word
for word out of Diascorides, the name of this man being suppressed: He never I
say, knew even Rose Water.

Is it not a shame that ye should wipe away some moneys, that ye hand forth the
cuttings mutter many things among your selves even to a loathing, concerning
the digestion of black Choler, concerning the little cloud or that which
swimmeth in the urine, when as notwithstanding, ye being full of distrust, must
confess That these words lay hid in your breast from the beginning: Against a
Quartane Ague we have nothing, we let out blood, and purge, and afterward

In the mean time, the Spleen swells harder, and oft-times the Ancles also
together total cause thereof remaining in the Spleen? After what manner it
being now hardened in the Spleen, shall it be better evacuated, than while
nature attempted the banishment thereof by the Fever. At length, after what
sort shall it better depart, being hardened, than being fluide in the
beginning? Has it, the Ague ceasing, lost its putrefaction? To wit, while it
threatens a Dropsy, and the Spleen being harder, swells? The which
notwithstaning are tokens of its former naughtiness. But whether black Choler
alone among natural things shall return from the putrefaction of it self into
its former state? But if the Ague cease, because the black Choler was
consumed by so many Circuites, Why now does it more obey the Physician than
while there was no extension of the bowel? Why now at length do you hope for
aids from Capers, Tamarisk, and Ammoniacum, the which while the Ague remained
were sluggish? If the same black Choler surviveth, why does that cease, the
Fever being safe? But if the black Choler has departed with the Fever, why do
ye prescribe remedies for the more fluide black Choler? But if ye feign black
Choler to be brought unto the Splee by an Imposthume, what is that bowel more
noble than the Spleen, which without sense or feeling, Complaint, and contagion
has so long endured black Choler besides nature? And which had suffered so
many fits of Fevers? Why was not that imposthume made while the faculties were
as yet entire, they being the more fit for expelling of the enemy? Why not,
while the matter was the more fluide?

How will ye salve this, That the Spleen is the Emunctory of black Choler, if it
has behooved this Choler to be at length brought to the Spleen from elsewhere,
after so many labors and anguishes? Why therefore have the hardness, and
swelling of the Spleen at length increased unto a proportion, with labors?
Surely it is a wonder that it has hitherto been unknown, that the Spleen under
the tortures of a Quartane has suffered many things; from all the particular
digestions whereof, that ballast is left for the swelling of the Spleen,
without the error of local humors: And that therefore the hardness of the
occasional matter of the Quartane and much less, any black Choler, because it
is that which was never in nature; Wherefore also it happens, that such a
hardness vanishes from the Spleen of its own accord, that the strength being
retaken, nature perfects her own digestions; Wherefore the cure of a hard
Spleen is not seated so much in the moystening, softening, and purging of black
Choler, as in refreshing of the faculties of Digestion.

For the Confirmation whereof, we must know, That the Spleen is bespangled with
Seat of a Quartane is not only in the very body of the Spleen, but in the very
Arteries thereof themselves; if not in them all, at least in some of them:
Which one only point, has made the cure of a Quartane difficult.

Thirdly, at length we must know, That an Artery draws no juice to it self out
of the stomach, intestines, or from elsewhere: For to what end should it draw
that juice unto it self, since it shall not produce any good to it self
thereby? For that Chyle or juice being attracted, does as yet want foregoing
means whereby it can ever be brought unto the perfection of arterial blood:
Otherwise, the Arteries had drawn unto themselves more vexation but by a little
sucking of a foreign liquor, than they are able to wear out by long pains for
the future.

I grant indeed, that the Arteries do ordinarily, and immediately attract a
be-drunkening

For example, If the berries of Juniper are boiled in water under an Alembick,
an Aquavitae is extracted; yet less, than if from the same berries an oil were
not first withdrawn. Thirdly, at last, if the remaining berries being strained
through a searse, are boiled into an Electuary, thou have now obtained solutive
Medicine excelling all the compositions of the shops. An Artery therefore
willingly snatcheth to it self the burning spirit of life, a guest of the
vegetable nature, out of the stomach (which the Grecism of the Schools never
saw, or knew) the which otherwise nature by her first instruction prepares out
of the digested Chyle: surely she rejoices, that she has found a liquor with
much brevity, from whence she may make vital spirit for her self.

For in this respect Wines are regularly pleasing to Mortals, they exhilarate
the heart, Archeus the Executer of our functions may from thence be framed:
Wherefore since neither the Mesentery, nor Liver are ordained for the framing
of vital spirit, the heart rejoices immediately and readily to suck to it that
spirit (being already before prepared) through the arteries, out of the stomach.

Whence it follows, If the arteries attract unto themselves the Spirit of Wine
like attracted inwards, it ought to be that which yields a good smell, and to
be unseparably married to the spirit of wine.

Wherefore Wines that are odoriferous, do more readily bedrunken than others,
because the odours which are married to the spirit of wine are most easily
admitted unto the heart, head, womb, etc.

But oily odours being abstracted from their Concrete bodies, do rather affect
by defiling, than materially enter into the Arteries: For therefore through the
immoderateness

Whence at length difficult heart-beatings grow up in the gluttons of Wine, and
the mere or pure spirit of Wine by an importunate daily continuance, strikes
the reed of

For it happens in the Artery of the stomach, that the spirit of wine joining
it self by its own importunity to the spermatick nourishment of the artery, in
the course of days Vertigo's or giddinesses of the head, continual headaches,
the Falling Sickness, I say Swoonings, Drowsy Evils, Apoplexies, etc. For in
the family-administration of this member, as it were that of the heart, it
obtains its own animosities durable for life, which are not to be extirpated
but by the greater Secrets.

The same way also sudden or unexpected death has oft-times made an entrance
for it self; because such a vitiated matter is never of its own free accord
drawn out from thence: For although the Archeus be apt at length to consume his
own nourishment; yet he does not obtain this authority over excrements
degenerated by a foreign coagulation, and so for that cause not hearkening to
the vital power or virtue: For therefore that part has assumed the title of
the heart, stirs up swoonings from an easy occasion, Falling-sicknesses also
after the twenty fourth year; and likewise such affects as are attributed to
the heart, are accounted uncurable by those who have not much labored in
extracting the more potent faculties of medicine.

Hippocrates (by leave of so great a man, and of such an age, I speak it) was
ignorant of this seat of the falling evil; because he was he who being
constituted in the entrance For he said, If Melancholy passes into the body,
it breeds the Falling Sickness; But foolish madness, if it pierce the soul.

If therefore black Choler passing over into the body, and soul, causes the
Falling Sickness

The Schools especially rejoice in so great an Author for their humor of black
Choler; But they are forgetful of a Quartane, which far departs from the
Falling Sickness, and Madness: For after whatsoever manner they shall regard
it, a Quartane shall either not be made from black Choler, or this shall not be
in the body, nor in the soul while it makes a Quartane.

But as to what pertains to Madness, and the Falling Sickness, as if they were
separated

For first of all, The Falling Evil does much more strictly bedrowsie, and
alienate the powers of the soul, although Madnesses do that far more stubbornly
or constantly: Wherefore the aforesaid diseases are far otherwise distinguished
(let the Genius's of Hippocrates spare me) than in the changing of their ways,
and bounds: And which more is, the general kind of foolish Madness, shall
differ by its species in its proper matter, and proper efficient: as is to be
seen in madness from the biting of a mad dog, or stroke, or sting of the
Tarantula: For the cause of things had not as yet been made known in the age of
Hippocrates; the knowledge whereof, the Prattle of the Greeks has hitherto
suppressed: Neither also are wrothful doatages made from yellow Choler,
brutish ones from black Choler, and jesting or merry ones from blood: Surely
otherwise we should all of us be daily jocound doaters, or deprived of blood:
For feverish doarages are especially fetched out of a feverish matter, creeping
into the shops of dreams, and not from elsewhere; But not that it forsakes the
body, that it may enter into the mind. And likewise a doting delusion should
never happen in a burning Fever, in a Synochus, or continual Fevers: but
always in Quartanes, and black Cholery Diseases. Truly, a Doatage is already
from the very Beginning of Fevers: To wit, where the Fever and the Cause of the
Doatage are jointy in the Root. For the malice being increased, and the Organs
weakened by little and little, the Doatage or Delusion ascends unto the
maturity of its own perfection.

So in Wine, and also in some Simples, yea and likewise in feverish Excrements,
a hidden Doatage is covered: neither does it bewray it self, unless the power
thereof shall ascend into a Constitutive mixture. At leastwise, all things do
by the same Royal wax, according to the Genius of their own malice, Rage on the
Organs of the Fantasy, even as elsewhere concerning Madnesses. The Seed
therefore of the doting Delusion lurked from the Beginning in the feverish
matter, which at length is promoted unto its due malignity.

If therefore Madnesses differ in their matter, and efficient cause, That is,
in their whole Species, and Being: Surely the Falling Sickness, and Madness,
do much farther differ from each other, and do more differ in a foreign Seed,
than that one only black Choler being exorbitant in its Seats, should bring
forth both. Even as elsewhere concerning the Dunmvirate.

Madnesses (I will say in one word) are all nourished by the arteries, and in
the Inn In whom a vein beats strongly in the Midriffs, those are estranged in
their mind: Therefore also they ofttimes want an exciting disturbance before
they relapse into a Mania or brutish madness; Because this is bred by a
perturbation very like unto that.

CHAP. VII. The Succors of Physicians are weighed.
1. Of what sort the Succors of Physicians are. 2. The vanity of the same. 3.
The hurt of local Medicines, and their feigned derivation. 4. The water in
Vesicatories was mere venal blood. 5. An Objection solved. 6. A Vesicatory or
embladdering Medicine is more cruel than the letting forth of blood. 7. To what
end Vesicatories were devised. 8. A Clyster, why hostile to the bowels. 9. A
Clyster never reaches unto the gut Ileon. 10. Laxatives in a Clyster are the
more sharp, being hurtful, as purging things are, but less hurtful. 11. A
poison hurts to have taken it inwards, by whatsoever title, and entrance 12.
That Fevers are never drawn out by Clysters. 13. They therefore hinder long
life 14. A Clyster, how it names Physicians. 15. A foreknowledge from the use
of Clysters. 16. It is a blockish thing to nourish by Clysters. 17. A
conjecture. 18. The common sort of Physicians are taken notice of.

I have determined to examine the common Succors, before I determine of the
nature of Fevers: But those are Scarifications, openings of the
Fundament-Veins,

They are indeed foolish aids about the superficies of the body, when as the
Central parts labor, and are besieged, and the which not being freed from the
enemy, it is vain, and

Surely it is a vain rudiment of hope, to be willing by consequence to remove
the root out of its place, by taking away the guiltless blood from the skin;
which thing Prince Infanto the Cardinal, by his exhausted veins (the Circuit
of his Tertian Ague nevertheless remaining) has confirmed to Anatomists with a
mournful spectacle.

And likewise a Paracenthesis or opening of the belly nigh the navil in the
dropsy, Moloch: For the water dropping continually from thence, is nothing but
venal blood transchanged.

For while any one scorcheth his hand, or leg, the fire calls not the whey of
the blood without. What if a water swims on the blood, which they call Choler;
surely that floats not as being separated from the blood, except after its
Coagulation or Corruption.

By so much therefore are Vesicatories fuller of danger than the cutting of a
vein; Because this is stopped at pleasure, but that not: the which after the
cuttings of a vein, Coma, and so for the adulterating of a latter effect: For
they rejoice to awaken the sleepy or deep drowsy sick, by reason of the pain
of so many Ulcers: And however thou considerest of the matter, it is a cruel
torture of Butchers: For neither is the drowsy sick ill at ease because he
sleeps; But he sleeps because he is ill at ease:

They therefore who suspend the sleep only by pains, do cruelly drive the sick
headlong into death: For they flatter the people in being cruel toward the sick
party: In the mean time, they persevere in the office of a cruel, and
unfaithful Mercenary Helper: For if the drowsy feverish person sleep, or being
pulled, be daily awakened, such stupid allurements perform not the least thing
in Fevers: Wherefore I am wont to give my remedies in at the mouth, and food at
set hours, nor to regard whether he shall sleep, or not.

I say that ancient saying with the Apostles; If Laxarus sleep, therefore he
shall be healed: For the tortures brought on him that has a Fever, have never
profited any one.

But as to what pertains to Clysters, it is a frequent, and shameful aid of
Physicians: I at leastwise in times past, never persuaded, and described
Clysters but with shame:

The tear of the eye, although it be salt, yet it is without pain, because
familiar, and nearly allied to the eye: But simple water is painful in the eye,
and any other thing. The urine also, although it be salt, bites not the
Bladder; But any kind of decoction whatsoever being sent in by a Catheter,
although most sweet, causes pain within: But if the urine shall draw but even
the least sharpness from new Ales, or from elsewhere, presently there is a
great strangury, and distilling of the urine by drops.

The dung therefore since it is a nearly allied, and houshould-content of the
bowels, bites not, nor is not felt until it has come down unto the fleshy
parts of the strait gut, which do as it were perform the office of a Porter,
and therefore do feel, and urge it: Whence I conclude, that every Clyster since
it is a forreigner to the intestine, it cannot but be troublesome, and
ungrateful thereunto.

Again, A Clyster never ascends unto the gut Ileon: For if thou castest in
eighteen ounces, now a great part thereof remains in the pipe, or slides
forth in its injecting, Colon.

In the next place, if loosenig Medicines are in a Clyster (for the sick party
that very much abhors laxative things, is for the most part thus deceived)
as I have already

But at least wise, none can deny but that it is a hateful thing to have
admitted poisons within, by whatsoever title, and entrance: Because purgative
clysters resolve the

And at least wise, in speaking in the terms of Fevers: Non ever drew forth
Fevers by clysters; because they have never come unto the places beset with a
feverish matter, nor

For that thing I have learned from old men, that whosoever loves a long, and
healthy life, let him abstain from purging things taken into the body under
what deceitful pretense soever: A clyster at this day, is so familiar unto the
more wanton people, that it is called a cleansing, and succor: As if they
would cleanse the natural excrement.

Surely, however thou may look upon those wiles of Physicians; they are not
but from

The malady is to be cured; but not by cloaking by a clyster is the paunch to
be daily Campanians, Arduennians, and likewise the Asturians, etc. Unto whom,
as a clyster is unwonted, and also unheard of; so there is a strong, and most
frequent old age.

But besides, the last scope of a clyster is, that they cast in the broaths of
dissolved fleshes Fluxes, wringings or gripings of the guts, and also burntish
or stinking belchings, and breeds the little worms Ascarides. But those things
which are injected from beneath, because they have not any thing of the benefit
of the first digestion, are of necessity mortified: Because they experience
indeed, the heat of the place; but are deprived of the true ferment Physicians,
that they have wrested clysters aside unto such abuses, nor that they have once
had regard unto the aforesaid reasons; and I fear, lest they who so greatly
flatter great men, after that they bid any one to take food, and three hours
after do constrain him to vomit; that what he vomited up they should cast in
through the fundament, into those who were pined with much leanness, and
consumption for lack of nourishment.

Surely the ignorant flatterer, is a slavish kind of cattle, acting the part of
a Physician, Senca says, many have not attained unto wisdom; because they
thought that they had attained it.

They esteem it to be a thing full of disgrace, that himself being once a
Doctor or Teacher, ought as yet to learn of others. A nourishing clyster
therefore, is an old wives invention: For I have seen broaths in the more
strong persons to have been rejected as horride, through the stink of a dead
carcass; but in the more tender persons, to have provoked swoonings: when as in
the mean time clysters of Mallow, and Brans, cherished a less discomodity.
Vain therefore are the common helps taught by Physicians, for the intentions,
or betokenings of Fevers; Because they take not away, subdue, or reach to any
thing of the root of Fevers.

CHAP. VIII. The usual Remedies are weighed.
1. A censure of distilled waters. 2. Of what condition essential waters may
be. 3. A censure of decoctions. 4. The comforting remedies of Gold, and
precious stones are examined. 5. A mechanical demonstration of abuses. 6. Gems
are not any thing dissolved in us, hewever they are pawdred. 7. Pearls that
are beaten, and dissolved in a sharp spirit, are examined by the way. 8. The
Author testifies his own bashfullnesse. 9. The Pearls which are dissolved in
the shops, are not Pearls. 10. Pearls, or Coralls being disssolved in some
sharp liquour, remain what they were before. 11. Five remarkable things taken
from thence. 12. The help of an old Cock, an old wives invention. 13. Alkermes
is examined. 14. Comforting remedies are in vain, when as the enemy within
tramples even on the strongest sick.

THe internal remedies used by Physicians in Fevers, if they are looked into,
will be found to be of the same leaven with the other of their succors: For
except that they are brought into one heat, as it were the scope, and hinge of
the matter, they are as yet of no worth in themselves, neither do they any way
answer unto a putrified matter.

For first of all, distilled waters, as well those which are called cooling
ones, such as are those of Succhory, Lettice, Purslane, and Plantaine, as those
which are of the order Grass, Dodder, Maidenhair, Carduus-Benedictus,
Scorcionera, etc. Or those also which are fetched from cordial plants, are in
very deed, nothing but the sweates of herbs, but not their blood; and I wish
they were not adulterated for the persuasion of gain.

For they are the rain waters of green and fresh herbs, but not the essential
liquors of

Moreover, the decoctions of plants, since they contain the gums, and
muscilages of simples, they provide pain or cumbrance for a feverish stomach,
loathings, overthrows,

Physicians also, are wont to brag of their exhilarating Cordials; and
restoring remedies

For they are first made into a light powder in a brassen mortar, and the gems
shave of a part of the brass with them, because they are harder than any file.
And that thing I aqua fortis: For a green color presently bewrayed it self,
and the Apothecary confessed that his fortyfying remedies acted most
especially, by communicating verdigrease or the rust of brass unto the sick.

And then, if gems are afterward the more curiously beaten in a grindstone or
marble, which is far more soft than themselves, they increase in weight, and
become comforting marbles, and stones, beyond the original gems.

For at length, gems that are made into a light powder, do no more profit than
if Physicians, and the unhappy clientships of the sick.

Yea they administer Pearls, and Corrals being beaten to dust or dissolved in
distilled

For first of all it is to be noted, that I before my repentance, had learned
by some Physicians promise concerning them: And then, that a true Pearl has
not within it a mealy powder, and that of a different likeness from its own
bark: but that the whole body of the Pearl even unto its center, is mere
little skins, laying on each other as it were the rhines of onyons spread under
each other; which thing, they know with me, as many as have known how to reduce
Pearls of an egg-like figure unto a circular Pearl: But the aforesaid barks
of Pearls are in no wise dissolved by the aforesaid sharp things; therefore
they shall dissolve only the meal of false Pearls.

Yea although the aforesaid barks were dissolved, (which they are not) the
Pearls

Which powder, however it may be reckoned to be dissolved by the judgment of
the eyes, Chrysulca or aqua fortis, it been plainly unchanged in all its former
qualities: For otherwise, the same silver could not be fetched again from
thence, seeing there is not granted a return from a privation to an habit.

They therefore that drink Pearls thus solved, so far is it that they enjoy
the milky substance of Pearls, that they drink unto themselves nothing but the
dssolved salt of the vinegar: The which I thus prove by handicraft operation:
If thou shall pour some drops of the salt of Tartar on dissolved Pearls, or
Corrals, the hidden powder of the Pearls presently falls to the bottom; which
is a demonstration of the deed.

First therefore, the pearls of the shops are not true ones, but a certain
abortion of

Secondly, the powder of Pearls, or Corrals dissolved, although it may delude
the eyes: yet it is not truly solved, it remaining the powder which it was
before.

Thirdly instead of comforting remedies, they substitute nothing but the acide
salt of the things dissolving.

Fourthly, that powder being thus solved, cannot be made blood, and therefore
neither can it enter into the veins.

Fifthly, what if it had entered unto the Liver, hollow vein, and so by the
power of digestion, that sharp salt adhering thereunto had at length been
wasted into a transmutation: What other thing should such Comfortatives
perform, besides to besmeare the veins within, with a foreign powder? And at
length to load an un-obliterable malady with a^ foreign guest? This is the
harvest that is to be exspected from Gems.

It is an alike doting monstrous thing, which they promise concerning the
broth of an old Cock being joined with herbs: For first of all; there is more
of life, and strength in the more young birds, than in decrepite ones: Let the
judgment be brought unto Hens.

And also medicinal broaths are ungrateful, and troublesome to the stomach,
and so they are easily dismissed unto excrements: Therefore after this manner,
under a changed mask, they again dissemble their Apozemes under the broth of
an old Cock.

Last of all, there is the Antidote Alkermes, which although, as it consists
of the Syrup of the grain that dies Scarlet (I wish it were not adulterated
by roses) it be laudable;

For the invention of some covetous old man brought up that thing, as thinking
that nature is exhilarated or rejoiced with things that delight the eyes.

Far be it, for neither Gold, gems, not precious stones as such, shall refresh
the vital spirits, and much less crude silk roasted, and that if it were
tinged with a Purple Color; unless the vital spirits shall well perceive
restaurations to themselves by the additions of strength.

But moreover, vain are comforting, and cordial things which are wished for;
the fuel of Fevers remaining, and the blood, and strength being diminished.

For if a Fever prostrateth a strong person, and one that is in good health,
how shall it suffer him to be strengthened being now dejected? Especially by
things which

How shall a Citizen fortify himself, who has received an household enemy
stronger than himself, into his possession? The wan therefore, and vain
promises of Physicians concerning fortifiers and strengtheners, are full of
deceit.

For he that exhausteth the strength or faculties together with the blood, and
withdrawes them by evacuating medicines, but forbids wine, and things that do
immediately restore the strength; also who continually prosecures after cooling
things as enemies to the vital heat; how shall he procure strength by such
electuaries.

CHAP. IX. The true cause of Rigor or the shaking fit, in Fevers.
1. Rigor or extreme cold; and trembling, is from the spirit making the
assault, but not efficiently from the diseasifying cause. 2. Why he intends
Rigours. 3. Why he stirs up cold and heat. 4. Why he begins with cold. 5. The
Author runs not back unto the laws of the microcosme. 6. There are
intermittences almost in all agents. 7. The manner of making cold. 8. The
manner, and cause of rigor. 9. A mark of ignorance in Galen concerning the
tossing of a member. 10. The burning cause of a Fever. 11. That every motion,
as well an healthy, as a sick one, is made efficiently by the Archeus. 12. How
the Author learned that thing. 13. The turbulency of the Archeus disturbs the
urine. 14. The ordinary office of the Gaul is troubled, and makes the Chyle
bitter. 15. Wherefore also the bitter vomitings thereof diminishes nothing of
a Fever. 16. Whence is burning heat, and sweat in a Fever. 17. What sweat may
betoken. 18. Sharpness increases cold, the which an Erisipelas proves. 19. A
Gangrene, how it may undoubtedly be stopped. 20. Why the beginning of a
continval Fever is from horror. 21. Paracelsus is noted. 22. The errors of
Galen, especially concerning the putrefaction of the blood, and spirit. 23. The
true seat of a diary, and hectic Fever. 24. The fabulous similitude of Galen
for the parching heat of an hectic Fever. 25. Why lime is enflamed by water.
26. A mechanical proof. 27. The blockish cause of gaping. 28. The true cause,
and the organ of the same. 29. Sleep, the drowsy evil, giddiness of the head,
Apoplexy, etc. are from the mouth of the stomach. 30. Gaping is not in the
muscles of the cheeks, or jaw.

HIppocrates first put a name on the Spirit of life, to wit, that it is that
which makes the assault, and the guider of all things which happen in us:
which prerogative

For the Archeus intends by trembling rigours, to shake of the excrement
adhering to the similar part: Even so as a spider also, shakes her cobwebs, and
joggs

But the Aroheus taking notice, that he can little profit by rigours or shaking
extremityes, stirs up an alterative Blas: All which I have elsewhere taught, to
consist naturally,

From Winter therefore, in the very universe it self, the beginning of the year
proceeds, through a spring, and Summer, into Autumn, wherein the fruits are
at increase, state, and declining: So the Archeus himself (as all seeds, and
vital things do imitate the nature of general ones) stirs up feverish rigours,
colds, and heats: But not the offensive matter of the Fever, even as has
already been sufficiently, and overproved at the beginning: For so also, in
disjoynting of the bones, the teeth presently shake, and rigours spring up: And
likewise while a woman with child untimely expels the not vital abortive young.

For neither do I speak these things, as if I fled unto the devise of the
Microcosme of Paracelsus, although I give notice that the nature of the
Universe does observe a single manner

For he who in wrestling being short winded, has failed, is for some time at
quiet,

Wherein surely the part wherein the feverish matter sits or sticks fast, does
first contract

It is therefore a natural thing to the veins, and parts that are chiefly
affected, to have contracted themselves into wrinckles: since therefore that
the arteries are for the most

But that trembling, seeing it is in the Muscles themselves, it is to be noted
that the Muscles have two motions: One indeed as they are the Clients of the
Will, that they may utter a voluntary motion: But another, inasmuch as they are
carried with a motion of their own against the consent of the Will: And this
again is two fold, to wit, the former which is contracted by one only violent
drawing, even as in the Convulsion, Cramp, etc. But the other which suffers
intervals, such as is an aguish, or feverish trembling, the tossing, and
trembling of some one member (to wit, of the head, or hands, etc.) being
familiar unto old age, and Drinkers.

Truly Galen passes it not by without observation, but he is received with
laughter: For he teaches, That such a trembling of old age is made from the
striving of weight

Since therefore, not only the skin (as in the Cod) but also all the particular
membranes are by a motion proper, and natural unto themselves, crisped,
wrinkled, and contracted, it is no absurdity to give also unto a Muscle its own
motion: For so also after death in a Tetanus or straight extension of the neck,
the Muscles on both sides are extended a good while after the death of all
will: For so the poisonous quality of purging things does oft-times pull the
Musclely parts together; and in Fevers that are mortal, there are unvoluntary
Convulsions, with an interposing slackness: Of which motions, seeing I have
largely treated in the Treatise concerning the Convulsion, It shall be
sufficient to have admonished in this place, that those two motive faculties do
naturally belong to a Muscle: One whereof is idle, and at rest, as long as the
Muscles are in a good state; but it is moved as it were an auxilliary or
assisting one in the encountering of things troublesome unto them.

At length therefore when the Archeus has observed, that he profited nothing
by an oblique convulsion of the veins, and arteries, and by the trembling of
the Muscles; as Wroth, he frequently moves any thing, that he may shake off
from himself the foreign enemy.

Wherefore I repeat that which I have diverse times spoken; to wit, that all
motion Archeus which makes the assault; but occasionally from occasional
causes.

The which I at first mechanically discerned by some remedies of Fevers;
Because if

But in the Plague, Malignant, and other continual Fevers, if it be reached
forth to a fasting stomach, nor the action thereof be disturbed between while
by drink, it for the most part supplies the whole office of curing at one only
turn; else surely while the veins are strained, and grieved, or otherwise,
nature is called away from her work begun, or is made to awake in the middle of
her rest, the indignations of the Archeus are the more provoked: Neither has
it been sufficient here nakedly to have said, That the Archeus in Fevers first
stirs up a Blas of cold, and afterward of heat, as seeds do imitate, and bear
in themselves a figure of the world: For truly nothing is naturally moved by it
self, except the Archeus, who is the first mover of the living Creature.

For I know that a vigor is granted unto every seed, that this vigor being
once stirred up, it is afterward fit for moving of it self by its own virtue,
and all other things thence-forth, besides it self, which are contained under
the sphere of its own activity: Therefore troublesome, and confused urines are
voided forth, sharp, and undigested vapors,

But the Gaul which regularly changes the sharp Chyle of the stomach into a
juycie salt, Duodenum into a bitter juice.

The Archeus in the mean time, being then wholly intent upon expulsion, does
ofttimes under the aguish cold, shake out this bitter superfluity, otherwise
painfully thirsty:

At length therefore the Archeus being as it were angry, enflames himself by
his own animosity, (but not by heat drawn from putrefaction) and assaults his
enemy, is in a raging matter is naturally to be driven away, and shows to the
Physician that nature it Diaphoreticks or transpiratives alone are the
appropriated, and specifical remedies of Fevers: For in the beginning of an
Erisipelas there is an unwonted small cold, yet not rigor, because the vapoury
sharpness is as yet little: The which when it shall reach unto the superficies
of the body, it proceeds out of its own proper Inn, there to wax sharp, and
putrify: Erisipelas: as also a strong Lixivium or lie, mightily stops
Gangrenes that are deeply scarrified; Because in Lixivials all sharpness dies
together.

Continual Fevers do likewise from a sharpness detained within, at first cause
rigor or a shaking extremity, and afterward even unto their end or
consumption, burn with Artists who are long, and much busied about aquae
fortes's; Because a vaporeal sharpness does everywhere pass through our
innermost parts, yet without a Fever: For matter is wanting.

For Paracelsus from the one only fire of Aetna, of Sulphur, and Nitre, divines
of above sixty particular kinds of Fevers: Neither as being on either side void
of a method, discovered he any seat for Fevers.

But Galen as he disposed of the seat of intermitting Fevers in the little
mouths, or extremities of the veins: so he appointed the nest of continual
Fevers beneath or beyond the liver.

But a Suno chus or a Fever of daily continuation, as well that which is
putrified, as that which is not, he places through the hollow vein about the
heart. A diary Fever also,

For seeing that it is the only Balsame which vindicates us from corruption,
what at length shall be left, which may balsamize the Balsame it self, if this
shall putrify? Or what shall season salt, if it be corrupted? For if it should
be putrified but in some small portion of it self, the whole shall of necessity
presently be defiled; seeing there is a most potent constitutive mixture of
spirits into spirits, and a proper or natural co-resemblance betwixt them. For
the life is scarce protracted for a quarter of an hour in the Plague, while as
the contagion invades the spirit: In like manner, if Putrefaction lays hold on
the blood, presently, as if a Gangrene were continued in the blood, a
necessitated death arises.

I will therefore show both the seat, and matter of a Fever in such a manner,
as experience, and a long diligent search of things have made manifest unto me.
My speech is of Fevers which are by themselves alone; but not from those that
are bred from a strange passion.

First of all therefore, a Diary, and that which is called an Ephemeral Fever
from the duration of one day, sits in the hollow of the stomach, and is for the
most part from vitiated

And it is a shameful Fable of the Schools in this place, which they devise
unto themselves for this slow Fever; For whereas it might especially accuse
Putrefaction for heat,

First of all, That withstands these things, because the concoction of the
Chyle is not yet finished in an healthy stomach within two hours, and much less
is sangufication completed; and least of all is there a transchanging of the
blood into a secondary, and spermatick nourishment; because it is that which
they say is dispersed into the innermost places of the solid parts in manner of
a dew; and most longly, and slowly does the Lungs borrow this new nourishment
from the liver: Therefore the solid parts cannot be be-sprinckled like lime,
and from thence be enflamed, as long as there is buisiness with the Chyle in
the stomach. And then that similitude of lime is of mere ignorance:

Because it is that which is not enflamed by reason of the be-sprinckling, by
it self, but by accident; In regard that no salts do season, or act as long as
they are dry, that is, Calx vive there is a twofold Alcalized salt: One indeed
Lixivial, and the other sharp, and both of them distinguished by the sense of
tasting; which two salts being dissolved by water, while they act on each other
they are inflamed; which same thing happens in hot baths, in the sharp salt of
fountains acting on the lixivial first matter of fire-stones: That very thing
by handicraft operation, and from the effect, not indeed by reason of what; but
because it is so, I thus prove.

For if thou shall pour the sharp liquor of Vitriol upon the salt of Tartar,
straightway both of them being actually cold, do burn with heat: And therefore
if out of Lead being Alcali thereof shall drink in a moisture out of the air,
it really conceives fire even in the Scrip.

Wherefore the Schools have not known, that if Lime were not enflamed by a
mutual agitation of the spirits of its salts, it could never become a stone.

Again, What is there in live bodies which may resemble the dryness of Lime?
What I say, which is actually dry? Is limie? and not thoroughly wet with a
daily, and continual dew? Is not the digestion of the solid parts continual,
and un-interrupted? Surely however I consider it, they hand forth trifles for
the Elements of nature, and the similitude of Lime with an Hectic Fever is
full of blockish ignorance.

And as gaping accompanies many Fevers; so surely they have gapingly, and
feverishly delivered all things.

For the sake whereof we must note also, that there is a foolish cause rendered
by Galen That smoaky vapors being heaped together, do stir up the Muscles of
the Jaw that they may be expelled:

First of all, very many smoakinesses should blow up those Muscles, in whom
there is much necessity, and frequency of Gaping.

And then seeing those smoaks should be the unsensible superfluities of the
last digestion; Why should such a kind of superfluities rather stir up an
expulsion of themselves, than those of other parts? Why should they not daily
be diligent in that? and why do we not sometimes gape for forty days together?
why are those smoaky vapors more obvious in Fevers, than in the Gout, and
Apoplexy? Certainly there is no function of our body, which is more moved by
example than gaping is: For we easily follow even unwillingly,

Gaping therefore is not from a smoaky vapor, but from that faculty, and part
which obeys the imagination: For the Schools admit with me, that the mouth of
the stomach is most readily moved from a beholding; Because very many do most
aptly loath, and vomit, filths being beheld, or imagined: And the eating of a
sour Apple being seen, the mouth in many waxes liquid with spittle: The mouth
of the stomach therefore is especially moved at imagination.

Indeed sleep, likewise a deep drowsiness, the Coma, the Catochus, Catalepsie,
Vertigo Giddiness, and accidents of that sort, do issue from the mouth of the
stomach (even as elsewhere concerning the Duumvirate:) But Gaping is a
fore-shewer of, and Chambermaid of sleep, therefore I attribute Gaping unto
the same part. For the Fantasy the inhabitant of the first sudden invasions
or violent affections dwells in the same place, and therefore it has received
the surname of the heart: So also from a sorrowful message, frequent sighs are
drawn, that they may lighten the mouth of the stomach being sensibly burdened.

Thus therefore from a dull or sloathful stomach requiring slumbring, a desire
of gaping strikes, and extends the Muscles that are restless, about the time of
sleep, wherein it calls the Muscles of the cheeks, and rough Artery into its
protection, no otherwise than as the straining bone about the organ of
smelling, calls the Muscles of the breast unto its aid for sneezing; For even
as the cause of sneezing is not to be sought for in the Muscles wherein it is
made; surely much less does gaping belong to the Muscles of the jaw.

Since otherwise, one may also gape, the teeth being pressed together, that is,
by a contrary motion of the jaw.

For the Schools should more rightly have had respect in gaping, unto the rough
Artery, which is drawn for two fingers downwards by a heteroclital or irregular
motion. In the mean time they never dreamed any thing of a smoaky vapor of
that Artery, because it is that which always sufficiently lays open, and is
passable fot air, otherwise it ought not to gape: For such is the compacture of
the body, that even in things not necessary, the members do set to their mutual
hands, and as if strange Organs did strive for their own right.

CHAP. X. The Seat of Fevers.
1. The one only Seat of Continual, and Intermitting Fevers. 2. Fevers do vary
from their occasional matter only. 3. The nest of Fevers, in what bounds it may
be enclosed. 4. A burning Fever, and the Fevers Sunochi are nigh the mouth of
the Stomach. 5. It is proved from the action that is hurt. 6. A Quartane is an
Outlaw in its seat. 7. The matter, and seat of malignant Fevers. 8. The
Plague, how it is separated from other Fevers.

THe seat of continual Fevers differs not from that of intermitting ones: For
this cause therefore continual Fevers offer themselves, which end into
intermitting ones,

Those Fevers therefore vary not in the flitting of places, or from the nature
of their Inn; but for the sake of their occasional matter alone.

In this regard also I am repugnant not only to Galen, but also to Fernelius,
concerning the Essential difference of the places of Fevers.

The nest therefore of Fevers is in the first shops; to wit, it is extended
from the Pylorus or lower mouth of the stomach through the Duodenum, and the
manifold vessels

But those that are the nearer unto the upper mouth or orifice of the stomach,
are by so much the more troublesome, and the more formidable in their
perplexities.

A loathing, especially a great abhorrency of fleshes, fishes, and those things
which Duumvirate its being hurt in the action of Government: hitherto have a
supervening sharp or sour belchings, the little cloud of the urine access, and
those things which prove the coction of the stomach to have returned, even as
in the Treatise concerning The signification of the Urine elsewhere.

But a Quartane Ague alone has chosen its Inn in the Spleen it self, and in
the veins co-touching with it: But a malignant Fever alone, peculiarly
challenges something

But they are by so much the worse Fevers which shall not sit in the hollowness
thereof, but in its boughtiness; because nothing but an extraordinary Arcanum
can reach unto those places: For therefore Camp, and all Endemical Fevers are
more stubborn than others, Fevers desile only from without, and affect the last
nourishment of the stomach; Because in very deed, the whole body as long as we
live is transpirable, and exspirable, according to Hippocrates.

For I have elsewhere demonstrated, that the Lungs, and Diaphragma or
Middriffe, are on every side passable with pores in live bodies; The which,
while Endemicks pass through, and smite the Bought of the stomach, they
oft-times infect the last nourishment of the stomach.

I have said that a Diary Fever, together with a Hectic Fever, do sit in the
stomach: But

CHAP. XI. The Occasional Causes of Fevers.
1. The occasional cause of Fevers, is not the true containing cause thereof,
2. Why an occasional cause is diverse in its self. 3. A twofold occasional
cause. 4. The venal blood is a composed and simple natural thing; and therefore
not made up of unlike parts. 5. The first occasional and material cause of
Fevers. 6. A second matter. 7. The ignorance of the Schools concerning the
tincture of the urine. 8. Why the urine is the more slowly tinged. 9. The false
Judgments of the Schools concerning Vrines. 10. A Fable of the Schools
concerning the gauly tincture of the Urine. 11. An Argument of the Schools from
the ignorance of Galen. 12. What should more rightly be collected from thence.
13. The Archer of a doting delusion, where he inhabites. 14. Why in a doatage
a remedy is not to be applied to the head. 15. From whence all Apostemes are
bred. 16. The injury of the Schools. 17. Whence the cloud that swimmeth in the
Urine is. 18. A good Physician why he neglects a Crisis. 19. What coction in
Fevers may be.

THE Schools show forth a foul and miserable, yea and mournful spectacle
everywhere easy to be seen: That since a Fever openly talks with us, yet they
have known it nothing the more for so many Ages, as neither do they know
radically to expel it: Because Fevers are now not any thing more successfully
cured after two thousand years experiments, and dissections, than in times past
from the first.

For indeed, whatsoever is the cause of the cause, that very thing also is the
cause of the thing caused; Wherefore the occasional cause being uncessantly
present, and entertained

For if the occasional cause were the true containing cause, and matter of the
Fever it self; truly there would never be any intermitting Fever: For the
essential causes being supposed which are requisite to a Fever, the Fever also
is of necessity present; But the occasional cause is present from the beginning
even to the end; the which, if it were the containing cause, and did
effectively contain the essence of a Fever in its own bosom, the Fever also
should be present as long as that containing cause is: But the Consequence is
false, therefore also is the Antecedent; That is, that cause is not the
containing one, and of the intimate Essence of Fevers, but external unto it,
and therefore occasional.

And seeing in the variety of the occasional cause, a reason consists,
whereby it is either setched from their constituting and essential causes (even
as elsewhere concerning logical matters) I have therefore appointed a two fold
matter of the occasional cause: both indeed new, and hitherto unheard of.

Unheard of I say, because I am he who do not acknowledge both the Cholers,
phlegm,

As neither if it were constituted from thence, that it could ever immediately
return back into its own constitutive parts, neither that it could show those
in the blood let out

For truly, I have judged, that no aid is to be fetched from those humors, in
this place: But in the last digestion of the nourishment, while the solid
parts endeavor to

And those first and supposed humors prepared out of the Chyle, and Chyme or
cream, do far differ from the true nourishment of the solid parts degenerating
through the transchanging of the blood: Therefore Fevers arise, not from both
the cholers, phlegm, venal blood, and spirit being putrified, but from
secondary juices, not indeed putrefying, but degenerated in time of
assimilation. But they degenerate through the admixture of a foreign matter,
or from a foreign impression, or next, through the error of the Archeus,
being wrothfull, or called aside.

Moreover, another occasional cause of Fevers, I derive from elsewhere: To wit,
that because we undoutedly believe by Anatomy, that the Meseraick veins being

Whatsoever therefore has hitherto tinged or died the urine, is the dross,
but not the gaul; even as otherwise, the Galenists being deluded, have seduced
their young beginners

In the last place therefore, the tincture passes through unto the urine;
because the coming of the Chyle that is changed into dross, unto the gut
Colon, is the slower,

Therefore the judgment of the Schools concerning the Colors, and content of
urines have been hitherto false, and the divinations drawn from thence.

It is therefore a fine fable of ignorance in Galen, who says: In the morning
I see my urine to be watery, wherefore I repose my self to rest, and after some
space, I see it to be tinged, because Choler comes in the last place, and so my
urine receives the last maturity of its digestion. As if the urine in the
bladder, if it be not let out, should be cocted by its own maturity, or by an
additament of the tinging Gawle? Surely Choler (if there were any) should arise
conjoyntly with the other humors, and with the urine the whey of blood: to
wit, by the same labor of the sanguifying Liver, the choler powered on it
should tinge that urine, and not some hours after, unless thy can show that
it would be profitable for that excremental Choler to be kept for some time,
and that separated without the urine. But they thus argue on the opposite part,
from an eventual conjecture, and from causes being badly understood.

For they say that it is of experience, that in continual Fevers, if after
yellow urines, watery ones do suddenly appear, doting delusions are signified,
by reason of Choler Galen) crept up into the head: But it had behoved this man
to have shown, who the sender of that choler should be, who its conducter
through the veins, and what the receptacle of that Choler: Whether the bosom
of the brain (for there is no other hollownesse in the head) could bear that
Choler without present death? and for what end nature should do these things,
that from the sinks of the humors being nigh to an emunctory, she should bring
feverish Choler, and that totally excrementitious, directly on the opposite
part, unto a most noble bowel?

But I in my signification of Urines, have gathered from the same signs of the
Urine, that the liquid dung is not brought through the veins after a due
manner, unto the Urine:

But that the Archer of doting delusions and of madnesses dwells in the
Midriffs, is as well manifest from Hippocrates: In whom a vein strongly beats
in the place about the short-ribs, he is by and by estranged in his mind: as
from the property of the name received in the Schools, whereby they denominate
the hypocondriacal passion from its seat: But because the mark of the Archer is
the Brain, that he may stir up doatages and drowsy evils; that ought not to
move the Physician, that therefore he should apply a remedy to the head: For
truly, that thing is always to have applied a medicine unto the effect, unto
the shaken weapons, but not unto the Archer.

Wherefore as long as the dross or liquid dung is carried in a straight line
unto the Urine,

But if that nourishment degenerates beyond the liver, it stirs up diverse
Apostemes, but not Primary Fevers. For because also in a Phlegmone or inflamed
Aposteme, the blood, Pus, it brings with it also a Fever, of necessity: And
when it shall come unto the utmost, there is the less labor and pain; even as
also by continual Fevers there is then a Crisis even like unto an Aposteme.

For why do not the Schools rather conclude of phlegm from the little cloud of
the Urine, That sour belchings suddenly coming upon burntish ones, is a good
sign: and so denotes a declining of Fevers to be present, or a Crisis: But a
good Physician ought to neglect Crises's, because he ought to prevent them: For
nature causes not a Crisis or time of judgment, unless when she alone carries
the whole burden on set days. A true Physician therefore, ought to overcome
the

But the Coction which is expected in Fevers, is a cutting, and cleansing away
of the nature, nor cocteth any thing, except she pretend always to assimilate
it to her self, by a similar or alike and simple digestion: For oft-times
therefore, a little cloud appearing in a Quartane, vanishes away; because
Coction, which the small Cloud signifies, is not a true subduing of the matter
from a Primary intention, but only of the digestive ferment of the stomach:
otherwise, the Feverish matter being once made the more fluide, a new Crudity
happens not thereupon.

CHAP. XII. The Diet of Fevers.
1. What is the most slender food of acute or sharp Fevers. 2. Herbie medicines
are not to be mixed with meats. 3. Feverish persons may drink. 4. They must
abstain from fleshy foodes. 5. The madness of Physicians. 6. What sort of
meat and drink is fit for those that have a Fever. 7. A debate concerning the
use of wine in Fevers. 8. That a Fever, and heat are radically distinguished.
9. It is of little concernment, whether a remedy for a Fever be hot, or
temperate. 10. An objection is refuted. 11. How great the inflammation of the
Archeus is.

FRom that one only precept of Hippocrates; that in acute or sharp diseases (he
has commanded) we must presently use a most slender food: But I do not
interpret a

Truly those medicines are not to be mixed with meats; but all things are to
be introduced by their own Stages.

First of all I detest in Fevers, an abstinence from drink: For if the Fever be
hot and thirsty, but is deprived of moistening drink, it robs of blood, and of
the nourishments Physician to this end: likewise also we must drink as often as
necessity admonishes, seeing the one is not more agreeable to nature, than the
other: Otherwise, the strict law of thirst, and obedience of its command being
broken, has already, a thousand times brought disgrace on the Physician.

I also abhor the broaths of fleshes in a Fever; for nature forthwith
detesteth the same, and by how much the more mere or unmixt they are, by so
much the more to be condemned Hippocrates: Impure bodies (so he calls those of
feverish persons, whose stomach is burntishly stinking) by how much the more
thou nourishest them, by so much the more thou hurtest them: For they hurt
feverish persons; because Flesh, Eggs, Fishes, and fleshy broaths, are then
easily mortified or corrupted, and do least of all nourish.

For it is like unto madness, to empty the veins, and again to be willing to
nourish those whose digestive faculty is prostrated: To be willing to comfort I
say

For then thin ales being joined with wine, wherewith bread, being first boiled
in water apart, even unto a glue or mucilage, it admixed, do most especially
satisfy; And Physician, who restores not the person that has a Fever before
the space of four days.

But moreover all the Galenists inveigh against the use of wine (although wines
being secretly drunk, have a thousand times brought Reproach on the Galenical
Art) because a Fever is nothing but a mere heat, being called by Hippocrates a
Fire,, and wine shall be to him that has a Fever, such as oil is for the
extinguishing of fire.

But this Argument has already before perished as an old Wives Fable, under
the definition of a Fever: And by so much the rather, because it is contrary to
daily experience: For as many as use Wine moderately in Fevers, do the more
easily recover, preserve their strength, and are the sooner restored unto their
former state: But they who after the diminishments of the body, and abstinence
from Wine, do peradventure escape through the benefit of nature alone, they
remain sickly for a long course of weeks.

For truly, none doubts, but that the Plague is the most cruel, sharp, and
swift Fever; but that it is loosed without the cutting of a vein, and purging,
and only by sweats, and the drinking of the more pure wine.

None also doubts but that Triacle, and other sudoriserous Medicines are hot,
may be given to drink in Wine, yea and in Aqua vitae.

And since these things as such, do not hurt, but profit in the sharpest of
Fevers; much less shall Wine be taken away in the more mild ones; Especially,
Because it is manifest, that heat is not the Constituter of Fevers, but a
consequent thereof by accident. Neither is there place for arguing the
difference of the Plague from other Fevers: For in very deed, the Plague floats
in the Archeus as a poison: But Fevers have a stubborn occasional matter, and
that adhering to the veins: Therefore transpirative Medicines are required on
both sides: in the Plague indeed Medicines that cause sweat, together with an
Antidote against the Contagion of the poison: But in other Fevers,
Diaphoreticks which cut, dissolve, and cleanse: And truly on both sides, this
buisiness is perfected by hot things.

But Wine has a peculiar betokening, not only because it adds strength,
whereby nature subdueth the hateful matter; but moreover, because it is a
convenient Chariot of Medicines: For indeed it is a Messenger that has known
the ways, being fitted for the journey, being near to the inner most parts,
and admitted into the inner Chambers of the body: For in a young, and strong
man with a small Fever, there is great heat; when as in the mean time, in old
men there is a mortal, and difficult Fever: yet it has an heat scarce
troublesome.

If therefore heat be increased after wine is administered, the feverish
malignity is not therefore increased; Because a Fever, and Heat are radically
distinct; The which I have Fevers of young, and old people.

It makes no matter, Although the trouble of heat shall a little increase
through the drinking of Wine; For that is recompensed with usury; Because the
faculties (the only Physitianesses of diseases) are increased by moderate Wine.
This very thing, if it be more fully, and radically sifted, thou shall find
that heat does not properly accompany a Fever, but the valor or strength of
the faculties.

Therefore that which the Schools do so greatly abhor in Wine, is the mark of a
good sign: For deadly, and the worst of Fevers are scarce hot; and every Fever
about the time of death is without heat.

If therefore the motion of heat be that of the Archeus himself, for the
expelling of the enemy, and wine add heat; therefore he who proceeds by Wine,
heals according to the conformity of nature: Notwithstanding let us grant, that
Heat, Wine being administered, is the greater, yea also that the Fever is the
sharper: For what other thing follows from thence, than that the Wine shall
increase the vital constitution? And that that state is nearer to the
constitution of young folks, than that which proceeds by cooling things, or
without the administration of Wine? for cooling means are more like to death,
to cessation from motion, and to defect; But heat from moderate Wine, is a mean
like unto life, and a means which the Archeus himself uses: For the
Constitution of heat increased by Wine, is nearer to the Vigor, State, and
Crisis, than if the strength being weak, there shall be the more feeble heat by
abstaining therefrom: These things concerning the drinking of Wine.

But concerning the drinking of water; Let the decision be, that feverish
persons desire not hot water, nor do they thirst after that which is lukewarm;
but cold water is to be admitted in a slack degree, in the highest heat of the
state of the Fever; Neither must we be afraid as I have said, of a co-mixture
of the extremes; Because experience has long since successfully shook off
this fear.

But in other stations of Fevers, neither is cold water, as neither is
abundance to be drunk; yet thirst is never to be endured, not indeed under
sweat; But then let the drink be hot: If thirst be urgent, and the Fever has
not the fodder of drink, the inbred moisture is wasted.

But moreover, That which they accuse concerning the crudity of water, take
thou thus: Water springing out of sand is simple, and the best, and it is to be
taken from the fountain it self; But that which runs through Pipes, or issues
out of a clayie spring, is now partaker of a mixed malignity: But this water I
call not so much crude, as infected: For water by it self, deserves neither to
be called crude, nor cocted, as neither is it ripened by heat, nor does it
attain any thing thereby; for it is sufficient, so that its highest cold be
blunted: but none may use infected waters, as neither any cold drink in the
Plague, and malignant Fevers.

But there is a larger reason for an hot remedy: But neither do I ever persuade
a remedy Fevers only by heat; but as Wine profits by comforting, and by more
thoroughly introducing succors coupled unto it; So do remedies by cutting,
resolving, and cleansing, and in that respect the more prosperousty, because
they have the Archeus in operating, agreeable to themselves; For thus far he
co-mingles his own powers with the powers of remedies, that the occasional
cause may be put to flight, and that the more firm health may not presently
receive its strength prostrated.

At length perhaps they will object against these things: That since heat in a
Fever is the effect of the spirit that makes the aassult his being wroth; It
also follows, that from the Archeus is to be measured, and by consequence,
that whatsoever increases a feverish heat, does also increase a Fever.

I have answered before, that there are many branches, effects, or various
Symptoms of one root: And that oft-times, doting delusions, Coma's or
sleeping Evils, intermittencies of pulses, to wit, things denoting an increased
Fever, do happen under the more mild heat; Even as from a tender branch of an
Acorn there is a greater leaf than from an old Oak.

There is therefore an Elenchus or fault in the argument, to say [the Fever is
the greater in the man] for I abhor that increased Fever, the which mortal
increased symptoms do follow:

But I in no wise fear the Fever to have increased, because the Archeus does
the more strongly rise up for the expulsion of the root of the Fever: And if
they in conclusion call that thing an increased Fever, I little dwell upon it.

For so also the Schools persuade, that we are not greatly to be afraid of
accidents unexpectedly happening besides reason. It is therefore to be noted,
That the Archeus is never Archeus being dissolved or wasted, should be the
cause of fainting.

The Archeus therefore is enflamed in much, or a little portion of himself: And
therefore the Archeus being increased by Wine, if more thereof be enflamed, yet
more of him is not lost (and yet he more strongly strained the occasional
cause) than if the Archeus be not strengthened, and increased, and a less part
of him be enflamed.

CHAP. XIII. The Essence of a Fever.
1. Of what sort an Essential, and Natural Definition is. 2. Diseases are
Beings subsisting by themselves, and not accidents. 3. Why Diseases inhabit in
a strange Inn. 4. A Disease is not only a Travel, nor a Motion, nor a
Distemper, nor a Disposition. 5. The Essence of a Fever, which the Schools are
hitherto ignorant of. 6. There is therefore another Scope of healing than what
has hitherto been* 7. That the occasional Cause alone distinguishes Fevers.
8. The cure of a Physician is made easy.

THE definition of a thing is not to be framed from the general kind of the
thing defined, and from the constitutive difference of the Species's or
particular kinds, even as I have elsewhere demonstrated in Logicks: Because
besides rational and irrational, (if so be they are as yet the constitutive
differences of living Creatures) no differences of like sort

Truly Fevers have a matter, and an internal efficient cause after the manner
of other Beings subsisting in them; although all diseases inhabit in a living
body; because they are not Beings of the first Creation, but begun from the
curse of the departure out of the right way; And therefore neither have they
properly their own seminal Being which

As often therefore as that which is not vital is inserted into a vital soil, the
Archeus is angry and becomes wroth, that he may exclude that foreign thing out
of his Anatomy:

The which I have perfectly taught in the entrance of this Treatise, by a thorn
thrust into the finger: Therefore a Fever is not only an expulsive endeavor,
or alterative motion, (and much less the alteration and disposition it self, as
the Schools have otherwise Archeus defiled through indignation: For a part of
the Archeus is defiled through anger, and receives an image or Idea of
indignation, (the which is clearly expressed in a woman great with Child,
fearing, or desiring any thing, while she conveighs the seal of the thing
desired on her young) and whatsoever of the Archeus is defiled by that foreign
Idea, this ought to have been rooted

For the Archeus, if he has an image brought into him, is unfit for governing
of the body: For therefore persons void of care, the more healthy, more strong
ones, and those of a longer life, do slowly wax gray: The endeavor therefore
of a Physician is not to direct unto the effect, or unto the alterations
naturally received in the Archeus: For (as I have said) in Diseases, all things
depend on the occasional cause implanted into the field of Life; because
Diseases have not in them an essential root of permanency and stability, as
other Beings have which consist and subsist by their own seeds; Because in very
deed, all do immediately consist in the life; (therefore in a dead Carcass there
is no disease) and therefore all the destruction, and cessation of these,
depends on the removal of the occasional cause.

The Scope therefore of healing cannot turn it self unto the cooling of heat,
or to the' stupefying of alterative motions, as neither unto the expectation of
Concomitant accidents, Archeus, whence also they agree in the Essence, and name
of a Fever, being distinguished only by their occasional cause.

Indeed the Matter, and Inn distinguishes Fevers: yea it is of no great
moment with a good Physician, to have curiously searched into the diversities
of Fevers according Go thou unto such a vein, or unto that place; For it is
sufficient to have known what things I have already before in general
concluded: And let the whole study of a Physician be, to have found out
remedies, with whom all Fevers are of the same value and weight, as I shall
presently declare.

CHAP. XIV. A perfect Curing of all Fevers.
1. The property of the occasional cause. 2. Why it becomes not putrified. 3.
Vomitory and laxative Medicines cure only by accident. 4. The Schools why they
have not had meet remedies. 5. None cured of Fevers by the Physicians. 6. The
Authors excuse. 7. Of what sort the Remedy of a Fever is. 8. The
successfulness, and unadvisedness of Paracelsus are noted. 9. The Description
of an Universal Remedy. 10. A Remedy purging Fevers, and the sick, but not the
healthy, is described. 11. The most rare property of the Liquor Alkahest. 12.
Particular Remedies of Fevers.

THerefore it is now manifest, and be it sufficient, that the occasional matter
of a Fever is to be vanquished, and that that matter if it be not food
corrupted (as in a Diary) Archeus.

For if it were putrified, it should not be tough, neither should it adhere as
stubborn, (for by putrefaction the steadfast Fibers decay) and so neither should
it afford daily Fevers,

The occasional matter of Fevers therefore, is detained besides the desires of
nature, in undue places, wherein there is not any sink of the body: therefore
vomitory, and laxative

First of all, the Schools could not seek meet remedies for Fevers, they being
seasoned with

First of all, the Schools could not seek meet remedies for Fevers, they being
seasoned with bad and false Principles: But they not seeking after remedies,
neither also could they find them: Therefore Physicians being hitherto
destitute of a true remedy, have endeavored to cure Fevers, going into a
Circle: But if any have been cured under them, that has been by accident.

Let them give God thanks who has bestowed strength on the sick, whereby they
have Fever, and their succors.

Physicians therefore instead of curing Fevers, have neglected them by
exhaustings of the strength, and blood.

Far be envy from what is spoken: for not boasting, or the vain desire of a
little glory, I call

I have bestowed my Talent, let him believe me, and follow me that will: It
shall no longer lay upon me, if Mortals being rash of belief, perish by Fevers.

Indeed the occasional cause of Fevers is cut off by one only hook: That remedy
is sudoriferous or a causer of sweat, which cuts, extenuates, dissolves, melts,
shaves off,

For indeed Paracelsus, although he had Arcanum's or Secret Medicines, whereby
at one only draught he alike successively cured the Quartane Ague, and all
Fevers; yet the Species, Numbers, and Properties of all Simples, and Stars unto
the Medicinal Art; and that not indeed by similitudes, but he would have them
to be so precisely known by a simple identity under the penalty of convicted
Idiotism: Therefore I distinguish not a Fever, if there be the greatest
goodness of a remedy: For that remedy is the Diaphoretick Precipitate of
Paracelsus, which cures every Fever at one only potion:

But an Hectic Fever within the course of the Moon or in a months space: For
it being taken in at the mouth, cures the Cancer, Wolf, and any eating
malignant Ulcer,

The description thereof is as well in his book of the Death of things, as in
his great Chyrurgery, and I will somewhat more manifestly declare it:

Take of the powder of Johannes de Vigo being prepared with thy own hand: for
otherwise it is adulterated by Minium being admixed with it, even as also any
sort of Chemical Medicine whatsoever which is set to sale, is full of deceit.

This Powder, the Element of fire extracted from the Vitriol of Venus or Copper
being poured on it, is to be five times cohobated with Aqua Regis, by
increasing the fire about the end; for it is plainly fixed; And it is a powder
exceeding Corrosive: The which afterward let it be ten times cohobated with
Aqua vitae most exactly refined, and renewed at every turn, until it has
brought away with it all the Corrosion: And then that powder is sweet like
Sugar: And therefore the spirit of Wine is there called Saltaberi, or Tabarzet,
which sounds, Sugar: Not because it is sweet in it self, but it takes away the
cortosive spirits with it self; so that the remaining powder shines in its own
sweetness, and not borrowed from elsewhere.

For besides that the fire of Vitriol is sweet, the very Sulphur of the Mercury
being then turned inside out, is of the greatest sweetness. That powder is
fixed, and it is called Horizontal gold: For I have delivered a Secret unto a
few, which ennobles a Physician: But to have prepared that Secret, is for the
first turn of great labor, and the direction thereof depends on the hand of
him unto whom all honor is due; because he reveals such Secrets unto his
little ones, which the world knows not, and therefore has a low esteem of them.

There is also the Purging Remedy Diuceltatesson, which radically cures the
Gout, no Corralline Secret, which is prepared of the Essence of Horizontal gold
after this manner.

From the common Mercury sold in Shops, abstract thou the Liquor Alkahest,
whereof he makes mention in his second Book of the strength or faculties of the
Members, in the Chap. Concerning the Liver: The which is done in a quarter of
an hour: For says Raymund, my friends standing about me, and the King being
present, I coagulated Quicksilver, and none besides the King knew the manner
how. In which Coagulation that is singular, that the liquor Alkahest being the
same in number, weight, and activity, prevails as much in the thousandth
action, as it did at the first; because it acts without a re-acting of the
Patient. The Mercury therefore being thus coagulated without any remainder of
the Coagulater, make thereof a fine powder, and distill thou Corinth, neither
is it lawful to profane the Secrets of God, who would remain the Dispenser
hereof; it has been sufficient for me to have manifested the Theorie of
Medicine: That by praying, seeking, and knocking, they may attain knowledge,
from whence every good gift descends.

Notwithstanding there are some particular Remedies of Fevers, which although
they ascend not unto the universal ampleness of general kinds; yet they for the
most part Marioram, Rosemary, Sage, Rue, and the like: not thinking that these
salts are the Alcalies or Lixivial ones of their ashes; but volatile salts, and
those which contain the whole Crasis or constitutive temperature of the
Simples: For they are famous Diaphoreticks, and somewhat temperate ones: The
which if they are drunk in Wine, or Vinegar at a due station, to wit, upon a
fasting stomach: and before the fit of intermitting Fevers, or at any time of
continual Fevers, and sweat be procured, they shall never expose a faithful
Physician to a mock.

Cease thou also to wonder, that I propose Fevers to be cured without all
evacuation, if I persuade transpiration, and sweats: For I have also seen
Fevers to be frequently cured by Simples bound on the body, with the great
disgrace of Physicians.

Lastly, I will also say this, that I have safely cured an hundred Quartanes by
an Emplaster, without a Relapse, although Aurumnal ones.

Therefore in the Family of feverish Species's, such particular remedies do
oft-times reach to the top of an universal remedy. Seek and ye shall find, so
that Medicine be not for gain: For if your intention be Mercy, from Charity;
Truth, and Light descending from the Father of Lights shall meet you in the
journey: To whom be a rendering of Honor for ever.

CHAP. XV. An Answer unto Reproaches.
1. An Argument against the Contemners of Sciences. 2. Answers unto the
Reproaches of the Galenists. 3. The Chemical Medicines of the shops are
adalterated. 4. Corrosives wax mild by the fire. 5. An Objection concerning the
smaleness of the Dose. 6. The dignity of Mercury, and Stibium or Antimony. 7. A
most rare Arcanum of Volatile Salt. 8. All things cry for revenge against the
Galenist, the Despiser of Chemistry. 9. The Original of the Apothecaries shop.
10. An Objection concerning the solving of Pearls and Coralls. 11. After what
manner things dissolving are separated from things dissolved in the stomach.
12. What to [Precipitate] may signify in Chemical preparations. 13. A censure
of some Writers of Chemistry. 14. A repeated Objection, privy escapes unto the
more soft Tophus's or small stones of living Creatures. 15. Of what sort the
action of Gemms on us may be. 16. What there may be in a more tender stone
which operates, its powder remaining safe. 17. Mechanical proofs. 18. Proofs
from their own weapons. 19. A certain wonderful, and almost infinite re-acting
of the Patient without a transchangeative passion of its Essence. 20. An
explaining it by handicraft operation. 21. What Bodies being apparently
dissolved, may suffer in us. 22. A danger unknown to the Schools. 23. A Secret
involved first by ungrateful dissolved bodies, and afterward a superlative one
by grateful Dissolvents. 24. A general kind of Medicine. 25. A conclusion unto
Physicians. 26. The praise of the volatile salt of Tartar.

This ulcerous or corrupt age of most perverse Wits, will not suffer those that
are admonished to repent: For so far are they as yet from that, that most
Practitioners refuse to enquire into these greater Secrets, because they every
where inveigh against Sciences which they are ignorant of.

But because they are altogether ignorant of the same, they both almost
triumph, and also gratify each other concerning their ignorance; neither is it
manifest, that they have spent their time in those things unprofitably, because
it shameth them not; to have a vile esteem of Chemical Science, by Writings and
Taunts, as a smoak-selling, and delusive or false Art: But they know not, that
since of a Non-being there is no knowledge, and no conception in the mind
answering thereunto:

Therefore also, in that whereby they deny the truth of science, they manifest
that they

1. Those things belong not to our judgment or employment, they no way touch at
medicinal affairs: for we follow things approved from of old.

2. Chemical medicines cast a smell of corruption, being hot, violent, and not
common.

3. We have Servants who faithfully prepare those medicines which are for use:
And it is unseemly for a learned man to exercise the composition or
preparation of medicine.

4. The smoak-selling Experimentators institute all horrid evacuations, being
full of terror, because they are supported only by Mercury, and Antimony, they
being manifest poisons: And so, they are to be reputed among Mountebanks or
Juglers.

These are those things which they by reason of their ignorance, thrust upon
the unwary vulgar: whereunto I in order thus give satisfaction. We treat of
medicines, but not of things, which concern a corriar, or potter: They
therefore suppose a shameful evasion, that they are ignorant of what it had
behoved them to learn: Neither also is there a trusty foundation from
antiquity, it being always ruinous; they going where it has been gone, not
where they were to go, they always following the flock of predecessors, and
mutually subscribing to each other through the blind judgments of their mind:
our fugitive servants also will answer, I being silent, from whom they borrow
the corrosive powder of Precipitate, and of another more sweet, or less
poysonsome, and likewise the vitrum or glass of Antimony, and the flowers
thereof, Cinabrium, and in sum; nothing but poisons, for the transplantings,
and cloaking of great diseases: But all things notably adulterated for the
desire of gain.

For it is easy to deceive the ignorant in things which they profess
themselves to be Aqua vitae, and whatsoever shall swim atop; let it be the
essential oil; but the rest, oil of Almonds: And that thing thou shall the
more certainly know, if thou shall make trial in a Bath: The oil of Sulphur is
for one half of it rain water, but the distillation of Vitriol is brought
wholly into deceit, and is more frivolous daily: The which will presently be
manifest through a simple examination by a Bath: That scarce a sixth part
thereof is the pure distillation, and that as yet loaded with the tincture of
oaken bark.

In the next place, unto the second particular I will by and by answer: Now it
is sufficient to have said, that the more choice Physicians at this day, do not
despise Chimical remedies, the which, their books do lately testify: And so
the Fox dispraiseth Grapes, and Hens, that are sequestered from him in the Tree:
But how much they can perform, the experienced sick do speak though we be
silent.

Unto the third: It is no disgrace or uncomelinesse, to have prepared some the
more choice remedies with ones own hand, and to have bequeathed and delivered
those medicines unto his posterity, by his hands: For neither was it an
unbeseeming thing for the High Priest of the Hebrews to have struck down Oxen,
and to have played the butcher for the salvation of the people: Is it happily a
more glorious thing for the Galenical rout to have viewed stinking dung, and to
have stirred it with a stick, than for us to have handled Furnaces, vessels,
and coals? surely if they had the weight of truth, they would knowthat the
works of charity do not defame any one: But they who have not charity, account
all things disgraceful besides gain and Lucre. Depart ye from this pride, and
be ye merciful, as your Father which is in heaven is merciful: For else he
will say, I know you not that live for gain and deceit: But indeed disgrace
hinders not these somewhat ambitious ones, but ignorance, and the covetous
desire of Lucre: For they make more account of the number of visits, than of
the glory of curing, which wholly buries it self in having done well.

For as soon as they are dismissed from the Schools with the title of Doctor,
they enquire through the Streets and Inns, with the eyes of a Lamprey, whether
there are not sick folks which may entrust them with their life: But stop your
proceedings, Medicine is not to be excercised after the manner of Mechanic
arts.

And because Physicians err in this point, the Father of Lights withdrawes his
gifts, after that Medicine is managed as a Plow. Possess ye Charity, and gain
Will voluntarily, follow you with Honor and Glory, the which take hold of a
Physician that shuns them, whom the most High has commanded to be honored.

Unto the fourth I grant, that all kind of Knaves have most licentiously thrust
themselves into Chemistry, no less than into Medicinal Affairs, and that a
various destruction does

First of all, it is suitable in this place, That Science or Knowledge has no
enemy but the ignorant person; Not any such one, but him that is proud, and
refuses to learn: The which is manifest by the already mentioned Corrosives,
and indeed manifest poisons, that they become sweeter than Sugar: The same
thing is also more easily manifest, and to our hand; For truly Scarwort,
Frogwort, Apium risus, etc. do forthwith in distilling lay aside their
embladderring power, even as the juice of Citron does its sharpness,
Water-Pepper its Acrimony, etc. Neither is that of concernment, that Chemical
Medicines are to be administered in a small Dose: For that accuses them not of
Scammony, Spurge, and Coloquintida: Therefore an undiscreet Physician is like a
Tormenter.

The virtues of a Chemical remedy are narrowed in a small quantity, under which
they are pleasing while as all things have regard in their own proportions,
unto the strength and necessities of the sick.

Hitherto perhaps that saying of Jeremy 15. does not unfitly square: If thou
shall separate the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: But that
which they upbraid us with concerning Quicksilver, and Antimony, it conteins a
mere ignorance of things, and a blockish reproach: For Antimony, as long as it
provokes vomit and stools, and Mercury may be revived, they are poisons, nor
the remedies of a good man: But when they have have come unto the top of
perfection for which they are ordained of God, no mortal man can search out
their virtues, or illustrate them with due praises, however the guts of the
scoffing Momus may crack.

For neither do we boast, that we have known the purgative force of Mercury and
Stibium, and to have given them to the sick to drink, who detest purging
things, especially those which alike equally dissolve an healthy, as a sick
person, by causing putrefiction. Lay aside Choler, and remember that in your
shops, dispensatories Echo forth nothing besides Scammony, Coloquintida,
Elaterium, Esula or spurge, that is, mere poisons: And then, although the
essences of vegetables and spices are hot; yet their volatile salts (which thou
have never seen) are temperate.

So that, if thou shall know how to transchange the oil of Cinnamon, Cloves,
Lavender, etc. into a volatile salt, thou have obtained a temperate medicine
effecting as much as can be hoped for from those simples, in an old Vertigo,
Bearing of the heart, Apoplexy, and the like diseases: Therefore they who at
this day keep the keys of medicine, seeing themselves do not enter the
passages, they drive mortals from the useful fruit of those gifts which the
most high has dispersed in nature.

Therefore the powers of the most exellent things cry to heaven, that they have
come

For the Apothecaries shop began at first, from Merchants, the collectours of
simples and herbs: but afterward when Physicians saw that it was not meet for
every one to

In the mean time, Physicians kept the more choice and secret remedies to
themselves, whereby they might procure honor with their posterity: But at
length the sluggishness of Physicians increasing, they were contented to run
through the streets from house to house, to have made gain by the frequency of
visits; at length Dispensatories succeeded thereupon, for the compiling of
forms of medicines here and there selected according to the pleasure of
ignorance, that they might be kept in the shops, and in a bravery set to sale,
rather for expedition than for their property. Whence at length, Physicians
joining compositions to compositions, give sometimes the hotch-potch of a
thousand simples to the sick, to drink, that if one thing help not, at least
wise another may help; or at least, that they may excuse themselves that they
have managed the cure of the sick according to the common rule. This is the
preparation of medicine at this day, from which, how far the Philosophy of
Chemistry differs, they indeed have known, who even but from the entrance, have
saluted the same; but unskilful haters only, are ignorant thereof.

The Galenists surely will take it haynously, that I have answered unto their
ignorninies and reproaches by mere light, and that I have rent the
Household Stuff of their chiefest remedies, wherefore they will pursue (I know
well enough) after this manner: Thou urgest that Pearls, Corrals, etc. Are not
disolved in sharpish liquors; but that they are only calcined, and powdered by
the salts of the dissolvers, also that they are hidden, and made invisible
only to the sight: And that thing thou provest by Silver being dissolved in
Aqua fortis, that it is from thence reduced safe, therefore that it has not
lost its former essence, and thou wrestest that aside unto the aforesaid
Stones, and provest it, because by the Alcali salt of Tartar, the same stone is
again precipitated to the bottom, which before was an invisible powder, as the
Alcali salt drinks up the sharp or soul salt which contained the powder of the
stones in it self: But thou see not, that first of all your young Beginnings
do teach, and greatly esteem of these sort of dissolutions: Then also, that the
stomach wants the salt of Tartar, that it may precipitate the dissolved
powders, and separate them from their dissolvent, and therefore thou proposest
a mockery; and by consequence, the matter of Pearls, Corals; etc. being once
after this manner dissolved, remains dissolved, and is admitted inwardly unto
the veins, with the liquors of the Cream, and so is transchanged into urine, or
blood, and performs as much as we promise.

I answer, That Nature has no need of the salt of Tartar, to separate that
powder from its dissolver: Because she is well instructed, as well in respect
of the meats, as of a proper etc. wherein there is for the most part, a
volatile lixivial salt: And also wines with the white of eggs, do not only
separate such coagulated dissoluents from the powders dissolved, but they do
also revive precipitated Mercury.

Again, the very digestion of the stomach it self does ordinarily,
substantially transchange the sharp spirits of vegetables, into the salt and
volatile salt of urine; the which when it has no longer the former faculties
of dissolving, which it at first had in its sharpness, it presently utterly
leaves (that is precipitates) a powder, which before it hid as dissolved in
Galenists know,

But again, the Galenists will urge, saying, that the stones of Bezoar, Crabs,
Snails, etc. etc. whereto I answer; That gems, small or flinty stones, and
rockie stones, have much latitude, and that they differ very much among
themselves.

For first of all, Gems, Flints, Marbles, and whatsoever things have a
Christalline hardness, etc. being as yet less hard then Pearls, are not of a
rocky nature, but they are made rather of a milky juice, half cheesed, and half
stonified, and they have the nature of a Tophus or sandy stone, being neutral
between a gristle and a stone; even as the shells of stones in medlars,
peaches, etc. do keep a neutral and middle kind between woods, and a sandy
stone.

These things being for the truth of the matter, and the better understanding
thereof, thus supposed, I say, That although the stone of Bezoar, of Crabs,
etc. as to the solid matter of their powder, are in no wise digested by man's
stomach; yet there is in them a certain milkie and muscilaginous juice of great
virtue, yet of small quantity: Such as also happens to be extracted out of the
shaving of Hartshorn, by seething.

If therefore thou do a good while boil the powder of the aforesaid stones in
rain, or distilled water, if thou separatest the decoction from the powder by
straining it not changed; which is manifest, if thou shall drink the stone of
crabs, being not beaten into powder, but into pieces, and after voiding them
forth, shall wash them clean, thou shall find the same weight thereof which
there was before, and so nothing thereof to be subdued by the stomach, nor any
thing of those stones to be participated of by the digestion.

Come on then, I will also press the Galenists with their own weapon: for if
the aforesaid Stones, or Pearls being taken by way of a powder, should melt in
us, ye attempt The dissolvent is by the same endeavor coagulated, whereby the
body dissolved is dissolved: And therefore if the body dissolving be taken away
from the body dissolved, nothing is ordinarily recovered from thence, besides a
water without savor, being without actimony and sharpness: the which surely as
they are the Clients of Salts, they are coagulated in the thing dissolved, and
stand by it as Companions. Thou shall know the same

The salts of vinegar, wine, juice of Lemons, or of the Oak, and likewise of
the sharp chyle of the stomach, as they are vegetables, and alterable by our
digestion, by digesting indeed

For first, since they are not digested in the stomach (even as I have already
proved) neither in the next place, shall they be able to be cocted in the
second digestion; because there is no passage unto the second, but through the
first.

Secondly, therefore they shall never be converted into blood, but into some
other superfluity of the veins.

Thirdly, powders shall be bred in the veins, and kidneys, and they shall be
stopped up with the powder being a foreign guest, never to be drawn out by any
remedy for the future.

These things are spoken concerning thigs dissolved by a dissolving vegetable,
and

In which journey, whatsoever of filths those famous Secrets do touch at, they
dissolve diseases. Whosoever therefore ye be, who in healing, have cordial
charity toward

But if ye cannot reach unto that Secret of the Fire, learn ye at leastwise to
render the Salt of Tartar volatile, that by means hereof ye may perfect your
dissolutions: The which although as being digested in us, it forsakes its
dissolved bodies that are safely or

Because the Universities in their eighth Potion forbid, to wit the Cutting of
a vein, except in the fullness of blood, but they admit of it only in this,
because then the vice of Bloodletting cannot be sufficiently manifest; and
because in their tenth Position, they now implicitly grant a Fever not to be a
mere heat, but that it is to be cured by heating, and corroborating remedies,
they being all hot things: Surely one of the two must of necessity be true; To
wit, either that a Fever is not heat in its root; or that they must not heal by
contraries any longer.

Out of the Positions of Lovaine, disputed at Lovaine, under the most discreet
Sir D. Vopiscus Fortunatus Plempius, on the 26. of November, in the year 1641.

CHAP. XVI. The Essence of Fevers is discovered.
1. The life of Mortals is the efficient cause of Diseases. 2. Herein is the
raging Error of the life. 3. A proof of the foregoing particulars. 4. The
Author, wherein he disagreeth from the Ancients. 5. The internal efficient,
and its matter are proved. 6. In what sort the Thingliness or Essence of Fevers
may be formed 7. A Proposition. 8. That Immortality once consisted from a
natural cause. 9. The Original of diseasie Idea's. 10. What has deceived the
Ancients. 11. That the Archeus in his own Idea's of perturbations, imitates the
Imagination. 12. The aforesaid Proposition is proved. 13. A twofold fountain
of the Beginning of Idea's. 14. A necessity of Idea's in a Fever is proved. 15.
The same thing by a numbering up of parts. 16. An examination of the occasional
cause.

HItherto I have disputed against the Schools, as if I dared not to teach the
Essence of Fevers: Therefore since the fruit discovers its tree, I am compelled
for the sake of the Lovers of Medicine, to add a supply, whereby the Essence of
Fevers being hitherto unknown, may be the more illustrated, and a manner of
distinguishing between Judgment and Judgment, and Remedy from Remedy, may be
granted to the young Beginner.

First of all, I have shown ably enough, that the definition of Fevers have
been hitherto unknown, and therefore that the Essence, and essential causes of
those are as yet unknown: And seeing the knowledge of things is not granted
unto us from a former cause; at leastwise it is strongly to be admired at, that
nothing has been devised for the Essence of a Fever, besides heat; while as
notwithstanding, the History it self of Fevers might have been able
sufficiently to have opened the Necessities, Agreement, and Constancy of
Causes: and at leastwise to have reduced Mortals from the ridiculous error of
heat, unless a sluggishness it self of Mortals had been allured through the
tediousness of a diligent search, and the easiness of subscribing.

First of all, I speak of the nature of man being corrupted, such as it
continues since transgression successively.

For a Disease was as yet an Exile, as long as death was absent; So indeed that
a disease had not yet any hope for it self in possibility: But after that death
entered into the life, every disease stood in a powerful army directed against
the life it self: so as that a disease intended to establish its nest in the
vital Beginning; not indeed by fighting as a certain

For indeed every Disease perishes presently together with the life: For
neither do Duel of nature, also the lot of an Elementary complexion with
solitary qualities, or with the very offensive matter of supposed humors among
each other: All that I affirm to proceed

But the excrementous matter, and that which they have thought to be, and
called the offending or diseasie matter, I call that which is produced,
detained, or introduced besides nature from an erring, or foreign occasional
cause: And so I call all such matter only the occasional matter: indeed the
inciting one, and plainly external to a Disease; because None is hurt, but from
himself.

Hippocrates in times past after a rustical manner perceived that thing, the
first called The maker of the Assault, as well for life as for death: For God
made not death for man, the which began from sin.

But I do not deny that the life is provoked into its own injury by occasional
causes: yet at leastwise I could wish, that the Ancients had divided, as is
meet to be, the internal cause essentially from the external occasional ones:
But I take not the internal, and external matter for a respect of the body; but
that which is radically, and essentially proper to the disease, that I call the
Internal, and unseparable matter: But otherwise, if if it be only accidentally
adjacent thereunto.

Therefore before all, it is seriously, and only to be noted, in what manner
the very essential thingliness of Fevers may be formed by the Essence of the
efficient life: That not only the very local thingliness of principiating a
Disease may be hereby conceived; but that moreover an essential limitation
thereof essentially issuing from the life it self, may be known: Which things
therefore are more deeply to be peirced.

Wherefore let it be instead of a Proposition; that Mortality, Death, and a
Disease,

But in the state of Purity there was Immortality, no Death, no Disease,
because

The Sensitive soul therefore afterward stirred up the Vital air, which after
that, began to be called by Hippocrates (...), or the Maker of the Assault, and
the chief Workman of Diseases: But the power of the same was badly understood
by his followers; and that Maker of the Assault remained neglected by
Successors, it being also unknown that the differences of diseases did issue
immediately from the life; And therefore the whole buisiness of Diseases was
falsely committed unto occasional, and never existing Humors; For I have
concerning the Original and Principles of Healing, delivered the manner whereby
that Maker of the Assault produces an Ideal Being: from whence Fevers, and all
Diseases borrow their Original: The which generation of Idea's or shapie
likenesses being there professly handled, I will only touch at by the way.

First therefore it is confessed, that the madness of a dog is stirred up by or
in his conception

The same thing ptoffers it self in the Tarantula, in Serpents, and things sore
moved with fury: So in the Plague-grave I have demonstrated, that this Idea is
made not only by the fear of the man, but also of the vital air: Wherefore also
it is very equally necessary, that for a Fever (which is stirred up from the
assaulting spirit, and vital Beginning, not which arises, is moved, or
increases of its own accord, or of nothing) a motive Idea, or effective cause
springs up in the same vital Beginning, being indeed poysonsome in it self, and
varying according to the signatures or impressions which this tree of a
feverish Idea utters for its fruits: For since of nothing, nothing is made; but
of something, always something: As well the Ancients as the Moderns have
supposed,

But since the Elements are but three in number, neither do these flow together
unto the constitution of bodies (because I shall elsewhere show the connection
of these to be impossible) they cannot produce any strange Beginning from
themselves: But Humors since they never have hitherto any where been, and
since Fevers are of a more aerie, and abstracted body than that which a liquid
excrement is thought to be: I have discerned that from nothing, nothing is
indeed materially made, but that most things are efficiently effectively, and
formally made from a conceived Idea, which do forthwith after cloth themselves
with bodies.

Indeed by the conception active Ideas are made, and the formal Beginnings of
seeds, which presently cloth themselves with the coat of the vital spirit,
wherewith they then in the next place come upon the stage, and are made that
Maker of the Assault, which is known by the Schools only by its name alone, and
therefore neglected by practical Physicians: For that Fevers do now and then
arise from the disturbances of the mind, that is very well known to persons of
no reputation, and Barbers.

But that the Archeus or the spirit which violently assaileth, does suffer its
own perturbations, and conceive the Offsprings of these, the Idea's stirred up
in it self, has indeed

Truly there is a master-work man-like image of evil, or good, the Effecters of
effects, as well in diseases, as in other seminal Beings: But that image takes
its Original beginning from the cogitation of man, or from the conception of
the Archeal spirit surrogated in its absence: (I now speak of Diseases) For the
Sensitive Soul is in the spirit or Archeal air, after the manner of the
Receiver: And although the Archeus be not vexed after the usual, and humane
manner of the soul; yet the Inn of the sensitive soul (which is the Archeus
himself) arising, enjoyes the Idea's as well from his own conceptions, as from
the exorbitances of his conceptions, after the manner proper to his receiving.

For neither does the Archeus always fish those passions out of his own
conception, but also from things undigested, badly digested, and transchanged:
Even so also from excrements not being rightly subdued, or separated: And so
also, not only from our faculties being estranged, or erting, but besides, from
the inbred endowment of things; Even

In the next place, the occasional matter of Fevers, if it were of the essence
of Fevers, or if it should not precede; at leastwise it should always
accompany the proper effect to it self.

Wherefore since a quaternary of Humors, and the existence of these are
feigned, things; it must needs be that the feigned humoural cause does neither
fore-exist, nor follow the Essence of a Fever, neither that there is any
respect of Humors unto a Fever, nor likewise of a Fever unto feigned Humors.

Again, neither can the blood (the treasure of life) after any manner be the
constitutive cause of Fevers; yea nor indeed the occasional cause thereof,
except it be hunted out of the veins; and first corrupted; that is, unless it
first cease to be blood: For truly there is no other reflection of the
out-chased blood, than that it is a dead Carcass in a living sheath, and that
in the mean time, it undergoes diverse transmutations according to the variety
of the Idea of the Archeus, governor of the stern of the family-administration
in the nearest kitchins: For this vitiated blood is now a cadaverous excrement,
and an occasional cause, whereby the Archeus being excited, frames

Lastly, any other excrement whatsoever being defiled by a succeeding
digestion, transfers the right of an occasional cause it self, and occasionally
brings forth a Fever, no otherwise than as I have already said concerning the
blood: And such an excrement is heaped up by a vice, digestively, and
distributively, or by degrees, or at length is produced by a Fever, or by
foreign things breathed into the body: However it shall be, at leastwise in
respect of Fevers, it always remains external; neither does it ever enter into
the Essence hereof: They are indeed only accidental considerations which do
most nearly respect the degree of Fevers: for if the action of diseases
proceeds immediately into the life, and takes its beginning from the life;
verily it is necessary that the essence of diseases do also wholly pierce the
very essential marrow of life; But other external things of what sort, and how
great soever, do only regard whether the occasional matter be greater or less
in quantity; Whether the efficient cause in a young man be stronger than in an
old man, in the beginning of the disease than in the end thereof, in a
malignant Fever than in a more mild one, etc. But such degrees of powers are
only the Correlatives of the efficient, being compared unto the strength.

And they teach indeed, how much it is to be feared from an accident
occasionally rushing on the sick: But I here have regard unto the formal
essence of a Fever: Therefore the essential power of the internal efficient, or
of the life it self, is always present, and remains; and the denomination
thereof drawn from a term of Relation, although it may change the hope of the
Physician, may vary the superiority of life, and the proportion of the Agent;
yet the life it self is always the intimate, principal, formal, and essential
efficient of Fevers, and the occasional matter every where remains without the
true, and internal material cause: For a Fever is oft-times taken away, or
cease, a remnant of its occasional matter, and efficient as yet remaining:
For a Quartane oftentimes cease of its own accord, and perhaps returns again
a month after: and so it keeps its occasional matter in the mean time
untouched, and without action, as it were sleeping: And the same occasional
Being is elsewhere of its own accord wholly consumed the storm of the Archeus
being first appeased: Oft-times also, Fevers leave weaknesses, and local
diminishments of the faculties behind them, being durable for life: as the life
of the implanted Archeus was curtailed, and suffered his own too many
tribulations.

CHAP. XVII. A narrow search into the Essential thinglinesse of a Fever.
1. An erroneous speculation of the Schools. 2. The Author differs from the
Schools. 3. The manner of making a Fever is enlarged for betokenings. 4. The
center of a Fever. 5. An examination of thirst, and cold. 6. The Doctrine of
its center is confirmed. 7. Why a Fever is sometimes terminated by the appetite
of unwonted things. 8. The family government of a Fever in the Pylorus. 9. The
Quartane ague is an outlaw; and the unheard of seat of strange Fevers. 10. Why
vomiting loses not these strange Fevers. 11. The definition of a Fever is
rent. 12. An examination of remedies. 13. The vanity of hope, from whence it is
introduced.

HItherto as well the modern, as more ancient Physicians have considered the
nature and essential thinglinesse of Fevers, from the speculation of heat, as
well internal,

I have therefore taught above, from what active and vital beginning a Fever
arises seminally, and materially in us; that is, entirely: For the essential
thinglinesse of Fevers being perfectly taught by their manner of making, makes
manifest the thinglinesse of the efficient whereby it is formed: Because it
begs all its determination from the life.

For therefore the true Ental and essential thinglinesse differs in the whole
circumference

For truly Physicians hitherto, place every disease among naked qualities: But
I have demonstrated, that heat is not the essence, or of the essence of Fevers;
but a mere accident, seperable from a Fever, and that which is accidentally,
and by intervals adjacent to a Fever.

Now it remains for the knowledge of a Fever, and its remedies, to contemplate
of the Therefore almost every Fever, presently after its beginning, abhorrs and
is averse to fleshes, fishes, meat-broths, eggs, and whatsoever things may soon
be corrupted within the stomach: For fleshes and fishes only by a lukewarmth do
voluntarily depart into corruptions proper unto them, and would hasten stinks
as it were to the bound of a dead carcass.

And these, when they slide down into a stomach that is deprived of its
accustomed due and digesting ferment, do through the lukewarmth of that place
alone, hasten into the corruption of themselves. For feverish belchings do from
hence become of a strong savor, and therefore for sour belchings to happen
upon burntish or stinking ones, Hippocrates will have it to portend a good Omen
or presage; because that the digestive ferment of the stomach (which
constraines all things to wax sour) testifies by sour belching, that it has
returned: The which otherwise, being absent, sleeping being hindered, or
suppressed, fleshes, and those things which are ready easily to putrify are
presently corrupted: Whence afterward yeellow, leeky, and bitter vomiting is
stirred up, from the pottage of the Steward being corrupted: This is the cause
why whatsoever things do easily putrify, are presently made hateful in Fevers.

But at least wise, from hence it is manifest, that the stomach is the stage of
a Feverish combat: And then thirst presently gives its voice for this
conception, accompanying

Yea and in the great, and daily cold of intermitting Fevers, thirst is more
cruel, and the vomiting of that yellow dreg more abundant, than otherwise, in
the sharpest

But Feverish rigours are appeased as soon as the fury of the internal cold
has become milder: But that thirst is decietfull; Because it is that which not
only drink does not quench, and which does miserably delude the drinker; but
also it teaches that it was not caused by a defect of moisture: But if a
fervent heat within (otherwise worthy to be laughed at) be supposed to be, as
long as it stirs up a cruel cold out of its inner chamber: At least wise, does
not that heat, the household guest of Fevers, (although it be not yet
complaining, or hitherto felt) while it is dispersed, and the cold is driven
away,

Is it not manifest from hence, that thirst does not spring from heat; but from
a far different root? Especially, when as oft-times the sharp distillation of
Sulphur, either quenches the thirst, or at leastwise, mightily allayes it.
Therefore the sudden averseness of appetite, and abhorrency of meats, and a
disdainful choice of drinks in Fevers, a thirst almost unsatiable, vomiting,
loathing, anguish, together with sighs, sometimes continual watching, lastly
frequent drowsinesse, or doting delusions, discover and accuse the stomach,
and the neighboring places thereof to be the place or sink of a Fever.

For therefore a slow and more stubborn Fever is frequently loosed by the
appetite of unwonted things (to wit, of a herring and smoaked things) it hoping
by such an unthought

And therefore, by how much the farther it deviates from thence, by so much the
more, the vigor of meats, and quality of their former life is prostrated:
Wherefore, if a Fever, otherwise of long continuance, be vanquished by the
appetite, and enjoyment of that unaccustomed food; it denotes, that a Fever is
not far remote from the member desiring it.

Indeed, elsewhere sour belching also, returns with an appetite: But at least
wise it

Therefore the Pylorus (the lower porter of the stomach) as long as the Fever
bears command, does not rightly perform his office; and the thirst which
arises in that two days space, does diverse times return, vex, and again wax
mild: And the Pylorus knows not for what end he so stubornly shuts himself, and
so greatly deteineth that drink within the stomach, the sink of Fevers: Wherein
then especially the goodness of digestion is not hoped for: but rather a long
delay, and consequent corruption of that which was cast in: He knows not I
say, to what end he utters so mad effects, while as from such deteinments, he
procreates yellow and bitter excrements, which hitherto have deluded the unwary
with an image of the Gaul, and that he dasheth forth those excrements
abundantly, in vain, and without easement. For from thence I conjecture, that
the appetitive faculty of meats and drinks implanted in the orifice or upper
mouth of the stomach, has declined into the Pylorus, all things being confused
above and beneath, and therefore that a mad thirst does equally molest; because
the Chaos of the feverish confusion is tossed immediately in the foreign fold
of the Pylorus.

For neither is that thirst allayed by drink, which is not in its own place, to
wit, in the orifice of the stomach, whose office alone it is to denounce the
defects of nourishment.

A Fever therefore has a poison, and it is a manifold serpent, which is
entertained about the Pylorus, and a little beneath it, or which sits in the
hollow bought of the stomach: For there are oft-times ridiculous doatages,
elsewhere also furious ones, according to the condition of that poison: But
that serpent oftentimes stirs up thirst, oft-times also anguishes, faintings,
and soundings or frequent bitter vomitings, or also those that are impatient
and unsufferable of nourishment alone; or continual watchings, and at another
time drowsy evils supply the room of these.

At leastwise at its first entrance, the ferment of the stomach, together with
a desire of eating do presently fail: Neither therefore does Anatomy vainly
complain, that the difficulties of dissections next under the Pylorus, do
exceed any other of the whole body, by reason of a multitude of vessels
in-writhed with glandules.

For hence the exorbitances of the nourishment that is badly digested, and
badly distributed, and liekwise of the dross or liquid dung, being alienated
out of its circle, or the degeneration of the nourishable and spermatick
humor, do concur or run together, whence the family-administration of the
stomach is overthrown: For truly all of them concur in the manifold texture or
weaving of those vessels, and also a comixture of excrements: For which causes
poison arises, and the nourishments are estranged from their scope; they
undergoing also, various alterations through delay.

The which while the Archeus of the same place, well percieveth to be in his
jurisdiction, be being vexed, troubled, and as it were mad, does as yet
diversely more alter those excrements, and according to the persuasion of their
poisons, forms together diverse Idea's of his own preturbations, that he may
express the Protheus of the Poets, and represent a various tragedy of Fevers:
Yet the Metamorphyzings, and ends of this poisonous contagion, are not
therefore the objects of Physicians: For neither is the variety of the poisons,
or sumptomes to be so much regarded, as the dignity of the place, and
disturbance of the Archeus, and afterward, by what means the poison may be
restrained, and the averseness, and stird up confusion of the Archeus may be
reduced: For these being appeased, the Fever straightway cease, and those
things which do there materially offend, are easily tamed by nature, and retire
it self as rightly subdued: This way indeed, Fevers do presently depart at the
arrival of some one Arcanum, but the remainder of expulsion is committed to the
shoulders of nature, that Hippocrates his dignity may be preserved; That
natures themselves are the Physitiannesses of diseases: These things, of
continual, like as also of intermitting Fevers, and the birthplace thereof.

But the Quartane Ague alone being an Outlaw, has seemed to have more
inwardly, or piercingly entered, or to have extended it self to the Spleen,
without the Cottages of the stomach: Nevertheless it keeps its equal progress,
and unfolding, upon the Archeus of the place; while as it committing the
errors of digestion within its own Cottages, stirs up its furies at set
periods.

Again, there is altogether a strange, and very unwonted Seat, Propagation, and
unaccustomed perplexity of healing of malignant, camp, and purple or spotted
Fevers, etc. to wit, while as stinks, etc. are drawn into the body by the
inbreathed Endemicks of places, Fens,, Minerals, Fumes, Hospitals, sick Folks,
and stinking odours: The which while they pierce through the lungs into the
breast through the Midriff, do strike the connexed superficies of the stomach,
and decypher the idea of their own poysonsomness in the nourishment that is
immediatedly to be assimilated: The which being therefore degenerate, stays it
self there, and invites the Archeus of the place into its own furies: whence
the unwonted Tragedies of Fevers do issue, to wit, very cruel, stubborn, and
deceitful ones: Because they stir up the more dangerous drowsy evils,
watchings, and madnesses, and anguishes, according to the spur of every poison
there bred, diversely stirring up the perturbations of the Archeus of life: So
of late, Fevers have arose without thirst, heat, and tempest, for the
confoundings of Physicians; because indeed they stir up Fevers in nothing more
secure than the other: for some do swiftly, or slowly kill with some small
beginning of cold, and that quickly ending; yet no less cruelly than those
which molest with a great fierceness of Sympromes.

At leastwise now it is manifest, why vomitory Medicines do not any thing help
that Fever of the stomach, and there uttering the signs of its Mansion: For
although vomitory remedies may seem to tame the product of a Fever, yet they
take not away the occasional producer planted in the Bought, and external part
of the stomach. We may therefore be led by the hand from the Fever it self, and
presently the indications fetched from thence, will teach, that all those
anguishes do begin, and are stirred about the stomach.

A wonder it is surely, that the Schools do nevertheless as yet accuse the
Liver, and Choler, or Phlegm, to wit, putrified ones: since they observed that
dejections or purgings

But surely although that thing does regularly offer it self in healthy
persons, yet not in Fevers, whereunto therefore any exorbitancy is singular,
and proper: For so the liquid dung passes from the womb of the urine, and
seats of the stone, through an undirect departure, unto the Pleura, unto the
veins of the stomach, and vessels of the gut Duodenum: Of which deviation there
is no reason, but the very liberty of the confusion of the Archeus.

In the nex place (I will rehearse it) neither does a Fever it self always
flow from, and is directed by a former occasional cause: For truly the Archeus
himself, although he be not solicited by an external error; yet from the
offense of his own incontinency, he now and then of his own accord takes to
him furies, and is luxurious through a proper insolency of liberty: For he
tumulteth, and from a light error frames the Idea's of his own indignation no
otherwise then he is oft-times stirred up from a ridiculous cause: And the
which is less wonder in the universal Archeus, if he stumble; seeing he only is
chief for the governing of so diverse functions of faculties.

For because the Center of the malady has placed the place of its exercise
about the and drives the life it self headlong into all disorder, and
confusion of dissolution: For the Enemy who was able to prostrate the health
being entire, and strength being strong, will despise whatsoever shall be
objected for comfort, while himself is present.

In vain therefore do they intend the helping of Symptoms, if a conquering
Medicine be not present, and the which may restrain the confusion of the vital
Archeus: The which indeed is the essential, and principal Effectresse of cures.
And it is matter of grief to intend the corroborating of the faculties with one
hand, which the other hand dejecteth by solutive Medicines, and blood-letting.

A plausible remedy therefore is measured from the effect, if it appeaseth the
tumult of the Archeus, and extinguisheth the Idea of the Fever: For the place
of the Fever being pacified, or the prison opened, the Archeus who before beat
down all things, because confused, being now quiet, expels the enemy, and the
occasional matters, the prison being opened, do suddenly flow forth: And that
thing we contemplate of in a most difficult, and desperate case: For truly the
contagion of the Pox or fowl disease being taken away, the bonie, and hard
bunches vanish away of their own accord: Elsewhere also desperate Imposthumes
happen oft-times from the guidance of nature alone: so unwonted declinings,
dissolvings, resolvings, and departures are acknowledged even by the
Humourists: And therefore I hope they will be the more readily inclining about
the voluntary expulsion of the occasional matter of a Fever: At leastwise that
help is not to be sought from solutive medicines, as neither from the theevish
remedies of the vital faculties.

Surely the fury of the Archeus being first appeased, which forms feverish
Ideas, what, and what sort of things ought to be, are easily afterward
sequestered: And that thing the sick do easily bear, and they find themselves
the better thereby, as they are eased of a loading weight, and the confusion of
perturbations sprung up in them: Therefore the knowledge of the essential
thingliness of a Fever banisheth the hope which Physicians move from the
cutting of a vein, solutive medicines, Scarrification, and Cantharides, to wit
by reason of one fault, lest they should seem to have made their Visits in
vain, and to ask a reward from deceit.

But seeing that the Fever being well nigh overcome, the Archeus composeth
himself to tranquillity or rest, as by Crises's, Sweats, or by bleeding at the
nose, or also by the Fevers, and the which being moderately prepared, do mow
down a Fever like a Sith.

Surely I should rejoice to make these manifest, but events experienced by my
hurt, have affrighted me from it: For about the end of the last past age, I had
begun to cure by the distillation of Sulphur, and Vitriol: I also told what
those unaccustomed, and unknown Remedies were:

But at first Physicians showed their Glove corroded, and resolved by the
aforesaid Remedies, that they might affright the sick, that his stomach could
not endure the same.

But when as afterward, the false paint of the Physicians their dispraising
nothing hindering, they saw those that were cured by me to be in good health,
they bad some things to be distilled by my fugitive servants, which they had
seen, and learned: Hence indeed Chemical Medicines passed over into the hands
of Merchants and Apothecaries.

Neither indeed should I envy it, but that all things would be set to sale, as
adulterated, as long as Gain, and Covetousness shall prevail: Surely it is to
be grieved at, that nothing of these remedies is handed forth to Mortals, which
is not most miserably adulterated.

At leastwise I will declare for those that are ingenious, That the spirit of
the salt of Tartar, if it shall dissolve Unicorns-horn, Silver, Quicksilver,
the stones of Crabs, or some one of those Simples, it cures not only a Fever,
but also many diseases sufficiently. But not that I hope that Silver,
Quicksilver, or others of like sort are to pass through into the veins:

It is sufficient for me, that that spirit of the Alcali salt being by these
bodies reduced into a volatile, and coagulable salt, and reduced in the shop of
the stomach unto the rule of the meats, passes through it into the Meseraick
veins, at least being carried that way by the Urine, and by passing through
them, licketh, and resolves the filths there grown, through a foreign power
assumed to themselves. Surely I could willingly communicate many, and more
easy remedies of like sort, if the drowsiness and sluggishness of Physicians
had not affrighted my pen, who gape only after gain, and expose the life of
mortal men under the trustiness, and desire of lucre of the Apothecary, and his
wife.

But as to a Quartane Ague, I am wont to drive that away by an Emplaster
composed of a few resolving, and cleansing Simples; neither has it ever
deceived me, except that in fat or gross persons, the obediences thereof are
the slower.

An Impertinency.
The Author desires to see that Humourist, who had equalized Air unto Water in
weighing, that he might connex the Galenists their equal temperature [ad
pondus] or according to weight: to wit, how much air is to be taken for a pound
of water, that they may be equalized in weight?

Another.
The Air is neither light, nor heavy, because it is without weight; and
therefore neither can it be weighed, nor equalized: Therefore the Doctrine of
Galen is destitute of the greatest, and chiefest hope of complexions, because
it has a liberty of lying boastings.

A PASSIVE DECEIVING AND IGNORANCE OF THE SCHOOLS THE HUMOURISTS. The which if
they shall henceforth defend, shall cover with a stubborn malice, God also
being wroth, will discover the same in the now imminent age, for the profit of
the Christian World, and the Confusion of the obstinat.
The PREFACE to the READER.
I Had written in an unwonted Style, concerning Fevers, and when the little
Book returned unto me, I scarce understood the same by reason of its gross, and
innumerable faults: yet presently afterward, however plainly vicious it was
for that Cause, within a few weeks it began to be desired: Whence I judged, if
a faulty Book had been worthy the Press, and much desired, that by a stronger
right it earnestly required another Edition; not only that it might come forth
amended, which would bewray the blemishes, and ignorances committed against me,
and so by a singular Doctrine would as nearly, and intimately as might be,
weigh the life of Mortals, whereunto none as yet hitherto had attempted to
answer: but more peculiarly, that the Unheard Of Doctrine thereof, chiefly
true, although unexpected, might the more strongly be confirmed: Therefore I
was constrained to overadd the Commission of my own Coin, whereby it might on
every side be firmly defended from the Humourists, the Pages of the Schools of
Galen, and my Haters, and might not suffer the truth delivered, to be trodden
under foot: wherefore I have added Reasons, whereby I have shown the vanity and
falsehood of the device of Humors, whereby Physicians from a destructive
foundation have circumvented the whole world, have fatted the places of burial,
have destroyed Families, have made Widows and Orphans by many ten thousands,
and so have brought themselves into the merriments of Kitchins, and Comedies.
Paracelsus indeed attempted to hiss out the Fallacies of Humors, and he has
at this day, his Followers almost every where, amongst the most learned men;
yet never any before me (that I know of) has professly attempted to untie this
Knot: Therefore if any one has heretofore threatened to bend his Quill against
my Book of Fevers, because he took it injurionsly, that I have not only
overthrown the two Universal Bulwarks of Medicine; but especially that I have
demonstrated, That no laxative Medicine has ever hitherto drawn out
electively, this Humor before that; yea that all and every of Purging
Medicines were an hostile poison to the Life: Perhaps he will now lay aside his
Pen, when he shall see the same Opinion to be more strongly confirmed: To wit,
That the existence of both Cholers, and of Phlegm is impossible in nature; that
the trifling Complexions, and Diseases diligently taught, and believed to arise
from thence, are supported by false Principles: And by consequence, that the
method of Healing instituted according to the distemperatures of Humors, is
deceitful, mere dreams, old wives Fables, and trifling toys. For I ought to
treat roundly, sincerely, and heartily, as often as I have determined to write of
God, Truth, the Life, and public Good of Mortals. I implore him for my
witness, as also my Judge herein, Who is the Way, the Truth, and veriest Life
it self of mortal men.

I have therefore willingly exposed this diligent search of Truth, and attained
victory under his Protection, and Bedewing.

Fare ye well my mortal Companions: I wish ill to all your prosperous affairs,
Because I persectly teach the Truth.

A PASSIVE DECEIVING AND IGNORANCE OF THE SCHOOLS THE HUMOURISTS.
CHAP. I. That the four Humors of the Galenists, are feigned.
1. IT is answered by going to meet those who shall be willing to begin to
write against the book of Fevers. 2. The received opinion of the Schools is
supposed. 3. That it is false, whatsoever has been hitherto diligently taught
concerning the Elements, degrees, mixtures, discords, and diseases hitherto. 4.
That heat it no where but from light, motion, life, and an altering Blas. 5.
The limitations of moisturds and drynesses. 6. The relation of a disease unto
health, of what sort it is. 7. The remedies of diseases, from whence. 8. The
unconstancy of Paracelsus, even as also of Galen. 9. That a return from a
privation is not granted according to the Schools: the which notwithstanding do
every where dash against this rule. 10. They fail in proving a quaternary of
humors. 11. The two pillars of humors are broken. 12. Many things among
simples have only two diversities. 13. A miserable reasoning from a similitude,
for the number of humors. 14. The Schools stumble in the light. 15. The mask
of a sophistical argument is discovered. 16. The similitude from herbs, is
opposed to the similitude from milk. 17. In like manner, the urine ought to be
put for a fifth humor. 18. The perplexity of the Schools. 19. A conuincing
argument against humors. 20. An argument from a position supposed. 21. From a
sufficient enumeration of shops. 22. From an imposibility. 23. From an
absurdity. 24. Reasons, sixteen in number. 25. Against the positition
concerning phlegm. 26. From in^plicite blasphemy. 27. From its shop. 28. From
the impertinencie of the supposed position. 29. From a convenient or agreeing
thing. 30. From the Gowt, and wringings of the bowels. 31. From an Erisepelas.
32. From Causticks. 33. From an Evangelical word. 34. From a defect of the
seperater. 35. From the nourishing of the similar parts. 36. From an
impertinency. 37. The deformity of a formed argument of the Schools. 38. From a
like thing. 39. From the nature of an Element. 40. From the simplicity of its
end. 41. A denial of a position. 42. From a Phylosophical maxim 43. From taste,
and properties. 44. Who was the inventer of humors. 45. What a diversity of
Soiles may argue. 46. From the blood of an Ethiopian. 47. Whence the venal
blood is the more red in its superficies. 48. From a like thing. 49. Whence
there is a change of colors in things. 50. From a show of the deed, in many
things. 51. The childish in inspection of the Schools of out-issuing blood. 52.
Miserable impostures. 53. A ridiculous omission of the Schools. 54. The
judgment of Physicians fights against it self. 55. Privy shifts sliding from
unvoluntary cheeks. 56. A cruel or hurtful little book concerning the nature
of man. 57. From effects, and fear. 58. From the confession of Physicians. 59.
Dunghill Physicians distinguish not men but by dungs, 60. A ridiculous argument
of the Schools. 61. An argument on the contrary, from a maxim of natural
Philosophy. 62. A convincing argument. 63. Galen ridiculous about the cause of
the variety of humors. 64. The perplexities of Galen. 65. Refutations by the
Beginnings of natural Philosophy. 66. An error of Paracelsus. 67. The Schools
are ignorant of the venal blood. 68. An argument against the position. 69. A
false and ridiculous supposition of the Schools concerning the supplying office
of the Spleen. 70. Absurdities. 71. A handicraft demonstration. 72. Against the
position concerning black Choler. 73. Many absurdities follow. 74. The Schools
do most miserably prove their position for black choler. 75. Some defects
following thereupon. 76. A convincing argument. 77. An Idiotisme of Paracelsus.
78. Sharpness does not ferment Earth. 79. From an impertinency. 80. A
convincing argument. 81. From an impossibility. 82. A ridiculous supposition of
the Schools, and four absurdities thereof. 83. Some absurdities accompanying
the opinion concerning the honey of Galen. 84. From things implying. 85. By a
convincing argument from the supposition of a falsehood concerning the Elements.
86. From a number of the Elements. 87 A brutish objection. 88. If we must not
proceed by humors how therefore must we cure? 89. The praise of the valatile
salt of, Tartar.

I Have sent forth an unheard of Doctrine of Fevers, that I might hear what the
more

For truly they could not be ignorant, that if I could sufficiently
demonstrate, that the humors accustomed in the Schools (besides blood) were
never, or never to be in nature: they also were to have no contention with me,
concerning Fevers: And that thing I now promise ingeniously to perform: not
indeed as that I may be glorious by the name of a Paradox, but altogether from
compassion toward young beginners that are badly instructed, and toward the
sick that are badly handled under the device of humors.

Therefore I will state the form of the matter: For indeed, the Chyle or juice
of the stomach being supt up into the veins of the mesentery, they affirm the
same chyle to

And that this choler is afterward separated, partly into the spleen, and
partly into the little bag of the gawl: To wit, that they may be the keepers of
both their own superfluous choler; but that the two natural Cholers, as the
entire and constitutive parts of the blood are co-mingled together with the
blood, for the necessities of the parts to be nourished: in the due proportion
of the quaternary of which humors, that as health does consist; So on the
other hand, that in an undue proportion thereof, all diseases are entertained:
But that an undue proportion thereof proceeds, as well from the perpetual
strife, and hostile, and unwearied contrariety of the four repugnant Elements,
as from the voluntary distemperature, and inbred fight stirred up, of things
received into the body.

Truly I have already, in the Beginnings of natural Philosophy, and rise of
medicine, sufficiently removed the foregoing cause of so great a fiction: To
wit, where I have sufficiently etc. For I have taught clearly enough, that the
fruits which antiquity has believed to be mixed bodies, and those composed
from a concurrence of four Elements, are materially of one only Element.

In the next place also, that those three Elements are naturally cold, nor that
native heat is any where in things, except from light, life, motion, and an
altering Blas:

In like manner also, that all actual moisture is of water; but all virtual
moisture from the property of the seeds; Likewise that dryness is by it self,
in the air, and earth:

I have also profesly demonstrated, that there are not contraries in nature:
That health is opposed to a disease with relation of that which is entire, unto
that which is defectuous.

To wit, that remedies do take away a disease, not by the force of contrariety,
as neither by reason of a naked similtude or likeness; but by reason of a mere
gift of goodness,

For Paracelsus as the first, so laughed at humors after an Helvetian manner,
that he mocked the Galenical, also the Arabian Physicians with the surname of
Humourists:

Being first of all, unmindfull of their own discipline that there is not
granted; an immediate return from the privation of a Form, unto an habit; yet
have they through a

But the Quaternion of Elements being already elsewhere cast out, with the
combating concourse of the same, that fourfoldnesse of Humors has indeed been
supposed and subscribed

The first whereof, is fetched from four Elements, that they may constrain the
blood against its will, under a quaternary or fourfold number of Humors, unto
the obedience

As if every one of them which they believe to arise from the wedlock of the
Elements, ought therefore of necessity, to have four Heterogeneal or different
kind of parts agreeable

But the second and chief argument of the Schools for a Quaternary of Humors,
is not a certain formal reasoning; but a naked and miserable inference,
established by a similitude

But the sediment thereof about the bottom, being sometimes the more weighty,
and black, they call black choler; but in the middle space they note red blood,
wherein while they observe white fibers or threads, the Mothers of a gellyie
coagulation, they have called those Phlegm: For the vein of the ham of maids
being cut, those fibers appear in lukewarm water, like unto spiders webs, which
they have called Phlegm.

But first it had behoved them to have discerned, that the unfit similitude of
Milk and blood, does teach, or urge nothing: Because the water swimming one the
blood, is not

For the careless Schools do not take notice, that a diversity of kind is bred
in the blood, after that it has disposed it self unto corruption that is soon
to come thereunto: Therefore

I indeed have hitherto seen in herbs, on only clarified juice; as likewise I
acknowledge

For neither, although part of the chyle be turned into urine is an unlikenesse
of the

The water therefore, swimming above (which they confess to be sweat, Whey,
and a remainder

Therefore four Humors shall equally be made of any meat under one act, and
the

Who in the next place is that so exact Seperater, which was able to separate
the watery Choler from the urine, but could not materially separate all the
urine from the blood?

Let us therefore consider how choler being made by the Liver, in the Liver,
shall come down unto the little bag of the gaul: In what place sanguification
is wrought? Whether

For it ought to proceed from the Liver unto the Gaul, by a retrograde motion,

But phlegm, and the blood want excrments? For if both of them are made
beneath

This matter I have elsewhere profesly explained in a full treatise, concerning
a sixfold

And in the 16. brief head in particular: That Choler is not made of meats.

And in the 17. That the Gawl is a bowel in form of a liquour, and the
necessary balsame of life; but in no wise an excrement.

In the 25. The curious opinion of the Schools concerning the Gaul, is
unfolded.

In the 26. That nature had been more careful for the Gaul, than for phlegm.

In the 27. That the separation of the urine, and of the wheyinesse of blood,
differs in the whole essence from the separation of the wheyinesse out of Mil^.

In the 30. How much Gaul imports, beyond every disposition of an excrement.

In the 31. Why birds might want urine and a kidney, but not a Gaul.

In the 35. That the excrements of the kidneys, and belly, have indeed the
color of Gaul, but not that they are therefore tinged with the Gaul, and much
less with choler.

In the 36. After what manner the dung excludes a comixture of the Gaul.

In the 37. That excrements may seem Gauly, which are no way Gauly, and
therefore that these things have been rashly passed by, by the Schools: Also
that a leeky liquour is not of the Gaul, the history of a Cock proves, and
some following experiments, in the Chap. of the Pylorus, Sec. 24.

The which, that I may not here with a tediousness repeat, the curious Reader
shall enquire, and he shall find them in the places cited: For if the Liver
generateth both Cholers, and Phlegm, together with the blood, why does it
despise, and lay aside a great part of them for an excrement? but reserve the
rest in the blood? when as otherwise, of simple and homogeneal blood, there
either ought to be no duality of any of its particular parts, or there should
be the same necessary duality no less of Phlegm, and Blood, than of both the
cholers. Neither does reason otherwise suffer, that the same singular Cream of
the meats should be daily, and always, and equally divided into six parts; to
wit into blood, both Cholers retained in the blood, and again into both the
excrementitious Cholers, and (those shut up within their own entertaining
places) and at length into phlegm; especially when as the gaul differs from the
liquor swimming on the blood let out of the veins, in its whole property. Unto
which six humors if thou shall add the Urine; now seven humors shall
ordinarily be framed of one only Cream, and the supposed device of a quaternary
of Elements, and the necessity of that fiction perishes.

Therefore if these are made by one only act of one liver, in a direct, and
ordinary course of Ordination at once, why does it generate those things as
necessary out of the homogeneal

Surely that thing contains a Mockery, that a Humor failing of its
appointment, should be ordinarily changed into another Humor: As if the Water
had not its own Perfection, Ordination, Order, and Constitution, but were
naturally brought into air, from the scope proposed by the Creator.

But I have elsewhere shown in our Physics, that Water can never by Art, or
Nature be changed into Air, nor likewise this into Water. If therefore Phlegm
resemble Water because it contains it, and Blood, Air; the adopting of any
Phlegm into blood shall never be able to subsist: And by consequence, it is a
feigned thing, whatsoever has hitherto been diligently caught concerning the
union of Humors, and Elements, their Likeness, Commixture, Complexion, and
Necessity: yea, if phlegm be not as yet mature, and through an overhasty
swiftness of time, it be only in the way unto blood, and therefore left in the
veins, and mixed with the blood that it may be perfected, and at length may
nourish; now not only the Liver shall be the shop of the blood, but any Pipe of
the veins shall have the nature of a bowel; and because it contains its
properties, and offices, it should be preferred before the Liver in
sanguifying, and in the perfecting of the blood. Yea neither should Phlegm be
essentially a separated Humor from the blood, no otherwise than as a sour
grape differs not essentially from a ripe one: Therefore by the same title, the
whole Chyle of the stomach shall be Phlegm.

Again, since Phlegm is attributed unto old age, defect, and imperfection;
therefore

In the next place, since that being granted, Sanguification should not be the
proper office of the Liver; and the Liver shall be able to operate more
perfectly, and more at a

Finally, if Phlegm differs not but only in maturity, it is not an Humor
essentially distinct from the blood: and by consequence, the Quaternary of
Humors passes into a Ternary.

And then, as Galen witnesses, more of phlegm by twofold, is daily made
(which he proves by a Tertian Ague) than of Choler: How much Phlegm therefore
shall not be made in healthy persons, and those perfectly digesting? And how
much of phlegm

that every digestion is always of necessity, and naturally defectuous, and
vicious: Because nature shall never attain the end, and purpose of nature, If
phlegm be naturally generated as a fourth Humor of the blood. After another
manner, phlegm ought to fail in temperate bodies, together with both the
Cholers.

Why I pray, is blood abounding turned into Fat, since it is far more easily
(as they say

But why does he that lives soberly in a temperate complexion (as they call it)
daily lay up both the Cholers into their own Receptacles? Does it not rather
from thence plainly appear that the Gaul, and Spleen are nourished by some
other thing, and by a vital liquour, than that which being banished from the
blood, has attained the conditions of an excrement?

But go to yet, what is that Humor in the Gout which is troublesome with so
cruel That it is a sharpness; Wherefore also according to the institutions of
the Schools, it is cold, and therefore different from Choler, and Fire: Yet in
the Gout which they call the Hot one, (for by how much the sharper it is, by so
much also the more cruel) they complain of most sharp pain, and heat: Therefore
Choler either shall be sharp, nor any longer bitter, or the Schools have
forgotten a fifth Humor.

Let the same equal Judgment be in the Colic, and wringing of the bowels. In
Erisipelas also or Anthonies fire, the Humor is sharp; because it is that
which waxes mild by soapie Remedies: Therefore Choler or Gaul is not bitter.
And then in Caustical, and Escarrhotical affects, (namely in the burning Coal,
Persian fire, etc.) Alcalies, but not a bitter one: Even as neither in the
Cancer, Wolf, all running cancrous Ulcers, and those causing the greatest
pains. For the salt which gnawes, is no way bitter: Wherefore effects that are
most fiery in us, deride the vain device of Choler; Especially seeing they who
imitate the nature of Fire, are not the Clients of a Choleric Humor.

Therefore if according to the admonishment of the Word of Truth, The Tree be
to be judged of by his fruits, but every thing by its Works, and Properties; I
see not from what Use, End, Necessity, or Rashness, they have feigned yellow
Choler to be fiery: For there was no necessity, like a Fable, to feign three
daily, and domestic constitutive Humors of us, that is, without which we
cannot live; which never were in the nature of a thing, or do suggest any
necessity of themselves.

But what, or what sort of bowel shall separate both the superfluous Cholers
from the

Why therefore was nature less careful that she might make a bowel for the
expurging of Choler, than she was for the ejecting of Urine? Shall therefore
the Chest of the Gaul, and Spleen, perhaps strongly attract both the Cholers
unto themselves without the aid of a Separater?

Yea seeing Sanguification is a Simple, single action, and of a natural scope,
surely one only Liver could not produce four Humors at once, out of an
Homogeneal liquor, diverse from each other in their whole Element, and separate
two only as hurtful far off from each other: Otherwise if the Liver should be
sufficient for the separating of its own Liquors, it had separated the Urine by
a stronger right, and had made the necessity of the Kidneys altogether vain.

In the next place, if it does not sequester all the Choler out of the blood,
not so much as in the most temperate strength, nature shall always of
necessity offend even in the abounding of both Cholers, in the excess of heat
for the forming of Choler, and of Cold also for Phlegm; and likewise shall
contiaually offend in separating.

And so, seeing both Cholers accuse of a necessary access in a just temperament
(as they call it) these could never be made fit for nourishment.

Since moreover, we are daily nourished by the same things whereof we consist:
to wit of a temperate, and lively seed refusing both Cholers: And there shall
be the like reason for into blood out of a natural, proper, and requisite shop,
much more shall yellow Choler be fit, that in the heart it may degenerate into
the more yellow blood of the Artery and into the spirit of life, and the heart
shall be the restorative shop of a gawly excrement.

But alas, how miserable an Argument is it! while as the blood let out of the
veins disposes it self to corruption, sometimes two, three, or more liquors
are seen; therefore

For blood is wholly changed into milk, and then after its corruption, it has
only three subordinate parts, to wit Whey, Cheese, and Butter; nor ever more:
For sometimes etc. corrupt Pus: Sometimes into a pricking, gnawing, watery
liquor, as in the Disease called Choler, Ulcers, etc. Elsewhere also it totally
departs into a salt Wheyish liquor, as in the Dropsy, and many Hydragogal or
water-extracting Medicines: Oft-times also it waxes wholly black like pitch,
as in blood that is chased out of the veins in a Gangreen, etc. but frequently
into an ashie and stinking clay, of slime, as in Fluxes: At another time also
it wholly passing over into a yellow poison, shows or spreads forth the
Jaundise, in which manner also it boasts it self in those that are bitten with
a Serpent: Elsewhere also the blood is without the separation of an
Heterogeneal matter, wholly changed into sores issuing forth matter like honey
called Melicerides, into swellings of the Neck, or Arm-holes, containing a
matter in them like Pulse, etc.

And in the P^ssing-Evil, the blood is totally changed into a milky liquor;
Even as under a Tabes or Consumption of the Lungs, it wholly passes into a
yellowish spittle.

Are therefore perhaps as many Humors to be constituted in the blood, as there
are beheld degenerations thereof? And shall there be as many Liquors in
Rainwater, as there are things growing out of the Earth? For the blood is in
us like unto water; neither had it need of diverse seeds in the Liver, that it
may be one only equally nourishable Humor:

Wherefore I steadfastly deny, That the blood as long as it lives, or is
detained in the veins, (although after the death of a man) is coagulated; and
by consequence, that it bath integral, unlike parts, with any Heterogeniety of
it self; But that all diversity in the blood, is made only by the death or
destruction of the same: Therefore the diversity of Humors is the daughter
only of death, but not of life.

Neither is that of concernment, that Excrements do now and then occur in the
body, which dissemble the countenance of blood; To wit, from whence they are
made by Pus, or Snivel; or spittles, as yet parts of the blood; Because
Excrements are no longer that which they were before their corruption; Because
every thing assumes its Essence, and name from the bound of transmutation.

For what does it prove, if blood by Phlebotomy separates water, or other soils
in time of its corruption, if the same water be thereupon, neither Gaul, nor
Choler, nor bitter, and wants the properties of Gaul? Or what a rash belief is
that; Water swims on dead blood; Therefore it it is gauly Choler, which under a
false taste, dissembles the bitterness of Choler? For that Water swimming on
the blood, is not an entire part thereof, nor of its Essence, or Contents, or
more near akin to the Blood, than a Chariot

It is therefore to be grieved at, that for so many ages, none has ever tasted
down that water; but that they all have engraven their names on the trifles of
their Ancestors; that I say, under a show of healing, the Schools have
delivered the destructions of the sick under false Principles.

For truly Humors are destructive Ignorances, sluggishnesses, and
shamefulnesses introduced by the Father of lies, and celebrated by the loose
credulity of his followers. For the variety of soils in liquid bodies, depends
on a preheminency of weights; Because they have a latitude in weight, which
after death, become Heterogeneal or of a different hind,

For will a man that is of a sound judgment believe, that Wine, Ale, and the
juyces of herbs do lay aside their own black Choler at the bottom, together
with their sediment: For what has black Choler common with the heterogeneal
substance of a sediment?

But as to the Color; every Ethiopian has his Blood almost black, but for
the most part without whey; yet none of them is Melancholy, but all wrathful:
For the blood

Therefore neither is it a wonder, that the part of the lower ground thereof
becomes more intensly black: But that black blood is not a separation of weight
in the Blood, and much less black Choler. I have separated nine ounces of fresh
Blood, and that as yet liquide, into Por^ingers: One whereof I exposed to swim
in cold water; but the other part being equal to the former, I longer detained
in a gentle lukewarmth: And this showed very much of black blood, but the other
not any thing. A diversity of kind therefore in a dead liquour presently
putrefying, and putrifiable, is a suitable sign of corruption: And the which
therefore neither has a vital or seminal Beginning, a sign, as neither an
Argument of its primitive composition: For we are Originally composed of a
vital seed; and are resolved into a putrified and cadaverous watery Liquor: The
which also oft-times happens in part, in living bodies.

What if the Blood, of pale, becomes red, shall that therefore be ascribed to
Phlegm?

Thus is it; Colors, and Thicknesses in the matter, are works of the seminal
Archeus;

Have thou recourse unto the Book of the Unheard Of Doctrine of Fevers: That I
have looked into the Bloods of two-hundred Country healthy persons in one only
morning, which were remarkable in the aspect of colors and diversities of
grounds: For some of

I take pity on the deceiveable inspection of Blood issuing out of the body,
and the accustomed Judgments from blood let out of the veins, the fictions of
Humors, and the

But whichsoever of the Humors shall offend in the Table of the inspection of
Blood flowing forth, that is presently banished with a diminishment of the
head; and unless it shall forthwith after obey, it is to be put to flight by an
an infamous stool; Coloquintida; (for all the compositions of the shops are
supported with Scammony, or Coloquintida, or both, as it were with two
Pillars:) Oft-times also, whom this man judges to be Cholery, another calls
Sanguine; but if they shall see one whom they esteem to be Phlegmatic, to be
once angry, others also will presently contend that he is in a raging heat
through Choler. And Scammony being drunk, one derides another, if they be
called apart, because he has drawn Choler so plentifully from a sanguine man,
and he secretly insinuates by that very thing, that the greater reward is due
unto him, as being skilful in his art; For in the truth of the matter, fraud,
and fruit connexed with deceit do flourish, as often as vain complexions, and
Humors being neglected, and the betokening, and aspect of the blood let out
being disregarded, it is fore-known from the poisonous property of the solutive
Medicine received, what kind of dreg every one is to cast forth.

Indeed a solutive Medicine with them, is an asistant to the function of the
Liver: Because it frames the Humors which they will have it to do, and shows
them in a bravery brought forth at pleasure, and that according to the
foreknowledge of an Imposture: And they boast as it were from a three-legged
stool, that they have foretold to the sick the colors, and properties of the
offending Humors to be brought forth, and that those sick having gone to
stool, have answered in the divination, unto their foreknown Sooth-saings.

Surely a wretched Doctrine it is, and ignorance to be expiated by punishment:
because that person is most miserable, who having taken a consumptive medicine,
has suffered his blood to be exhausted under the mask of putrefaction. But at
leastwise it is a wonder, that the Schools have passed by the excrementitious
filths of the Ears: For they are those which being yellow, and bitter, might
afford a fresher remembrance, and

These things are described at large, concerning the Doctrine of Fevers, in the
Chapter of Solutives. Sufficient for me is the testimony from the mouth of the
Schools, that among all loosening medicines, Aloes is only unhurtful. They are
not innocent therefore who profess

What do we, and shall we do, will some say, for unless we now and then open a
vein, and provoke the Belly, we stay at home, and are made the scorn of the
vulgar, and the

For a little Book is fore-read in the Schools, concerning the nature of man,
being reproachfully ascribed to Hippocrates: Teaching, that one solutive
Medicine being administered, Medicines perform under the cunning craft of
Physicians, involved in the false position of Humors. At length the guilty,
and accused guiltless Humor being drawn out, yet the disease for the most part
is not any thing the mildet thereby. Are not therefore Mockeries to be
conjectured from thence? and whatsoever has been pratled concerning Humors,
their excess, choice, and separation? For it is daily seen, that the events do
frustrate the hope of the sick, and promises of Physicians: And therefore
neither dare they certainly to promise health by a withdrawing of Humors by
their laxatives; the which alone, they notwithstanding, seriously accuse for
the containing cause of diseases; Because indeed they are badly instructed, and
too much at the persuasions of false Maxims: Yet Hippocrates says, If those
things are extracted which ought to be extracted, the sick feel themselves the
better, and do easily bear it. And moreover neither dare they to trouble bodies
with Purgers in good earnest, before the Disease has caused an hope of its
digestion, but nature an hope of her victory, (and that without the endeavor
of Physicians) to wit, of a future Crisis.

But this is done, lest the Schools their solutive Medicines, and also their
own Maxims should be defamed amongst the vulgar, if laxative potions being
fore-timely drunk before the bodies are in a chafe, that is, before a
prostrating of the disease, a cure should not succeed: Therefore seeing little
of a remedy remains among Physicians, besides cutting of a vein, and purges:
yet least Physicians should be made of no esteem, they now and then hand forth
the lesser laxatives, that they may seem to have done something.

They confess indeed, and openly declare, that those lesser purgatives will not
cut off a disease at the root (as if otherwise the greater laxatives would mow
down diseases like a sith) but that they are diminishers of the peccant
Humor, and for this cause to aid and assist: Suppose thou, if not unto the
health, at least, unto the death of the sick, or the kitchen of the Physician.

For Physicians do privily confess, that little aid is drawn from the pulse,
beholding of the Urine, and the Blood; but that they have viewed the Urine, and
Blood under Gordonius's Rules or deceitful Juggles, to wit, least they should
seem to be less wise than their Predecessors; The which surely contein deceit,
and pride covered with deceit: At leastwise, impure Physicians have taken up an
invention for a man to be called, and distinguished by the name of Dungs.

To wit, a chole-rick, melancholy, phelgmatick person, which things they
believe to be mere excrements: For it is certain, that by loosening Medicines
the venal Blood

And it is a dull argument to infer from thence, If the blood, and flesh depart
dissolved through the fundament, and they are made a yellow liquor, or muckie
excrement; therefore the flesh, and blood do consist, and are composed of the
same matters; which are true Choler, and Phlegm: For truly except that the
blood were not a true natural composed body, but essentially made up of many
unlike parts, it could not also return again into Choler; species from Choler:
And by consequence, if the whole blood and flesh are sometimes transchanged
into that putrefaction, (which they name Choler) and are ejected, and so the
whole flesh melts as well by art, as through a disease: One of the two must
needs be true;

It must needs be I say, either that those four Humors do always persist in
their own proper forms, yet under the shape, and covering as well of flesh, as
blood: or next, that those four Humors have put off their own Essence, and
forms under their entrance of the form of blood, and flesh. If thou shall say
the first; Now the blood is not a natural composition, but made up of many
things: But if thou will say the latter; an immediate return of blood, and
flesh into Choler, or other their constitutive humors is impossible. Whence
again it follows; That those things which are cast forth of the body by a
laxative draught, are not Choler; but a stinking cadaverous or mortified
liquor, being thus defiled by the force of the Medicine. For Galen seems to
reject both the Cholers, and Phlegm for the natural complexions of man, even so
also to refer them into a mere distemper: For truly he says, that one only
honey in sanguine persons, is wholly turned into blood, the which in choleric
persons is totally changed into Choler: wherefore he banisheth the nativities
of these kind of Humors, as without difference, not so much into an
inclination of the matter, as into a vicious distemper of the Liver.

Whence it follows, that three distempers at least do always; and at once
flow together; every one of which do bring forth their own particular humors:
Yea it is to be Galen be dashed against the rocks, and being drowned, that he
perishes, while he teaches, that blood being putrified, is wholly turned into
Choler: For from thence he will be constrained to grant, that part of the blood
is daily putrified in its constitution; Yea and that Honey in Choleric persons,
wholly putrifies within few hours; but not in sanguine ones: And that as well a
Choleric complexion, as the Choler thereof, are mere corruptions: At
leastwise, as much of Choler as is daily made in sanguification; So much
according to that precept of Galen, putrifies; And by consequence, Choler is
not a constitutive Humor of sound and healthy blood; but a vicious adjacent
thereof.

For while the blood being putrified (as Galen witnesses) is turned into
Choler, that Choler is understood to be true Choler, but not a putrified Being;
seeing otherwise, putrified Choler is no more to be accounted Choler, than a
putrified man, a man.

But after that I seeingly knew, that no Being existing in its perfection,
testifies to the unlike parts of its own seminal root, if any should remain;
but that the seed disposes of May dew, it shall suffer a full moon in the
grass by night, is changed into Eeles; but with Rye bread, if it passes over
into Ants: But a woman's Shift, being shut up with wheat, departs into Mice,
within few days: Yet honey does not therefore draw its matter from Eeles or
Ants, a calf, his from Bees, or Mice their matter from flax and menstruous
blood: And the Eele, Ant, etc. shall be so composed of honey, as again the Eele
being dead, does the second time exclude honey out of his body.

Therefore Paracelsus errs, who says that a roasted Stork departs into a
Serpent, and

Therefore it is clearly manifest, that the Schools have not understood the
blood, as a natural, single, and composed Being of nature; but for an
artificial Being patcht together ordinarily produce four Humors at once, and
the variety of these (from the example of honey mentioned by Galen) depends on a
fourefold variety of one efficient.

Therefore it must needs, be that in one only Liver, a fourfold express
complexional

In the next place, how inconsiderate is this device of the Schools, that they
will have the Spleen to be the sink of black, and the worst of Choler, yet the
Spleen to yield Good and most Holy Jesus, will thou as yet long admit of
confusions of so great moment in healing? Have respect unto thy people groaning
under so gross falsities, and remember thy natural bounty.

For the Schools see in artificial things, a chest that was compacted of
diverse pieces, to

But another has seen salt to be resolved into water, nor to be then any
longer seen, and presently by the boiling up of the water, that the salt does
again appear; They have therefore supposed the same thing, to happen in their
own feigned Humors: As if Choler being essentially unchanged, should be
changed sometimes into blood, and at length into flesh, and at the pleasure of
the Physician, should by his solutive medicines, return safe from thence.

But let us come to the hand: Let the supposed yellow Choler be taken, that
swims

The which, if it be made in the Spleen; therefore it is not a part of
sanguification, or of the blood: But if it be made in the Liver, with the other
three, of the same similar

But both the Cholers ought with an opposite confusion to be carried downwards
unto their own Colleges apart, in so slender veins of the shop of
sanguification: The Black length shall it drive this superfluous, pernicious
superfluity? Shall now the sink of the last excrement be through the stomach,
and the orifice thereof, which is so noble and sensible?

Shall this malignant liquour thus suggest an appetite to the stomach? For to
what end shall a dross be re-cocted, having been already rejected in its whole
kind by banishment, and its properties? The stomach is granted to imitate the
office of the heart; was it therefore convenient, that the stomach, and the
enclosed food thereof, and thereby the whole family-administration of the whole
body, should be daily defiled with the contagion of a malignant excrement? For
were not that to have accused nature, and the Creator, of unexcusable
rashness from the beginning of the Creation? Had not some little bag been
fitter for seperating of those dregs, if there were any Black Choler, than that
the Noble Bowel of the Spleen bearing so many arteries, and the Noble Bowel of
the stomach, should be made the refuges of the worst excrement?

But with what weapon do the Schools defend so great doatages? Truly they say;
That sometimes a black sharp juice is seen to be cast forth by vomit, the
which falling on the earth, would lift up the same in manner of a ferment or
leaven: Whence they have consequently gathered many absurdities.

1. That that sharp or four excrement ought from its Color, to be called
Melancholy or Black Choler.

2. That it is sometimes made from its own proper matter; yet oftentimes from
Yellow Choler being re-cocted.

3. But it is not as yet known of whether matter, as neither the cook-rome of
that dish; Since otherwise, Yellow Choler could not without confusion, be
derived unto the strange Inn of the spleen.

4. That Choler which they will have to be the hottest of humors, and fiery,
they say, is by cocture reduced into an earthy, cold, and dry Humor.

5. From a Watery and Yellow Humor, into a black one.

6. From most bitter Gaul, into a sharp and fermenting one.

7. Why therefore is Yellow Choler (Gaul I say) never recocted into black
Choler, in its own little bag? Why does it beg another port for this coction?
Was there daily need of the re-cocting of Yellow Choler, if by re-cocting it
hastens into a worse state? Why does not nature, which always of possible
things makes that which is best, expel that Choler with the excrementitious
filths of the Belly, which it changes into worse by recoction?

But if the Spleen be the shop of Black Choler; it has not daily so great
heat, which may be sufficient for the roasting of Choler: or if it be hot how,
of Yellow Choler which is hot; shall a cold humor be made? Especially since
Galen will have honey, hearkening unto diverse distempers, to be changed into
diverse Humors agreeable to those distempers? As though a liquid decoction
should loose the virtues of sugar, and should put on opposite ones, because it
is thickened into a syrup or Lohoch. Wherefore has Gaul hitherto, by what
artifice soever it has been recocted, never assumed a sharpness? For by wat
way, or by what conducter, or enforcer, shall Yellow Choler, being exactly mixed
with the blood, and Homogeneally co-arisen with it in the shop of the Liver, be
brought unto the foreign vessel of the Spleen, that by roasting it may be made
Black Choler in the same place, if it be proper to the Spleen to lay up a
Black, and thick, cold, Earthy liquour?

For is the spleen for this end rich in so many Arteries, that it has not a
Bowel like unto itself, in so great a liveliness of pulses; to wit that it may
coct Yellow Choler into Black, by defiling in? How shall Black Choler differ
from Yellow, if be made [this something] by one point of heat? Is not that to
commit the whole buisinesse of nature unto cocting heat, the formal properties
being excluded? Shall there be room in the Spleen for foreign Choler sliding
to it, if it has elsewhere supplied its own necessities from the veins, and
arteries? Where therefore shall the Choler coming unto it, be waited for in
the entry and doors of the Spleen, if a grateful guest has already beset the
house? Shall the Spleen bid farewell to the inbred blood of the veins, and
arteries, that it may receive Choler coming unto it, into it self, to excoct
it into a Black filth? What if Choler be said to be roasted in the veins
themselves; seeing the heat of all the veins is only a moderate lukewarmth,
shall there not of the fiery liquour of Choler, another cold one be made?

Neither is there any reason why the veins shall theeve away the services of
fanguification from the Liver; Nor also, why it being first decocted Black in
the veins, it should afterward be brought unto the Spleen, as seeking for it
self a new place of entertainment.

Neither at length, can the veins for this cause be concluded to be the
Cocters of Yellow Choler into black. Lastly what is that fuel, which without a
necessity may roast Yellow Choler, into another and worse excrement? For while
I speak of the shops of nature, I know that nothing is moved by it self, nor
that there are foolish heates, intended for no good end, as neither digestions
proposed by nature her self, for ridiculous objects: For if there be a small
vein, whereby the spleen inspireth a digestive ferment, and vital vigor into
the stomach, I see not why therefore so many fictions of Black Choler are
convenient, from whence so many troops of calamaties have followed in a chain.

For how silly a thing is it, to have feigned the worst dross of nature (as
they confess

If of the same species; Now the same [this something] shall be sharp, cold,
and earthy, and shall be fiery bitter, and shall be made immediately out of
diverse matters disposed unto their own diverse ends: And that by one only
Elementary, simple, and not seminal agent: And Galen with his honey, shall be in
a straight: And likewise, Yellow Choler from its own disposition, shall be
subordinate unto Black Choler, as to a more perfect Being, by Elabouration; and
so Yellow Choler shall not be one of the four, but a Semi or half-Humour.

But at least wise, I perceive not why a superfluous dross should be daily
made, and ought to be of the constitutives of us; Or what dullness it is,
which has constrained them to feign so many fables? Truly however that page of
healing be considered of, it is wholly without necessity rolled among dungs.
There is indeed a sharp, vital, and spiritual Ferment in the Spleen, whereby
the stomach cocteth: the which to wit, failing, the appetite also goes to
ruin: And therefore the old man says; That in Fevers, sour belchings coming
suddenly upon burntish or stinking ones, is a good sign: For it is the Ferment
inspired by the Spleen, being the subject of a great title, and of a general
use; in no wise to be dedicated unto a black balast, and melancholy excrement.

Paracelsus writes, that man could have more commodiously wanted kidneys and a
For whatsoever God has made, was and shall be always the best by far or most
exceoding good.

1. But if the Schools had ever poured forth Aqua fortis, they had easily found
that

2. That the action of Ferments is one things having a co-resemblance.

3. That the earth is not Fermentable, because an Element is not to be
Fermented by the Ferments of fruits, by reason of the constancy, and
simplicity of it self: For if the leaven of bread-making does not Ferment
woods, or stones, what Ferment for the earth shall therefore be found?

For truly such is the condition of Ferments (not considered by the Schools)
that a Ferment from the time that it is once recieved, it continually
fermenteth further, neither does it cease as long a it finds an Object
co-like unto it self: Wherefore the Elements indeed, do conceive the strange
Ferments of fruits; but are in no wise therefore, fermented by the same;
Because all Ferments are unsuitable to the Elements; Because they want
transmutation, and seeds suited to themselves.

Otherwise, if the Earth were fermentable, dead carcases could not be in-humed,
but that presently the Globe of the Earth would be made destructive unto us
with a deadly Gore.

4. Therefore Galen never knew those things, he never knew Aqua fortis, yea not
so much as Rose water, he never smelt out formal Ferments.

5. Neither does Black Choler any way Ferment Earth, if it no where, and never
were: Although dungs may boil up through a dissolution made by sharp things.

Furthermore of one only Bread and Water, Chyle is made.

If therefore in Bread and Water, a fourefold Humor in nature should lay hid;
by

First of all, these Humors are not made seminally, and dispositively, of
simple Elementary Water; therefore the Chyle shall be made of the bread being
resolved, and of this only; and this Chyle shall be afterward changed into
four Humors, by the privilege of the acting Liver.

And therefore now an exorbitant and irregular Liver: For truly of every
natural agent, there is only a single and simple action: It must needs be
therefore, that either

For if four Humors are not made out of the simplicity of the aforesaid Chyle,
of natures own accord, neither from the power of a fourfold agent co-labouring
in the Liver; or if the supposed Quadruplicity of feigned Humors, be not made
by a power or faculty of the agent, or patient; Truly whatsoever is denied
under a disjunction may be denied copulatively, by reason of the largeness of
a negative.

Therefore I conclude; if from the connection of a simple agent, and single
matter,

But if we feign varieties of Humors to be in the blood, by reason of a
diversity of Meats; Now an hundred Humors at least, shall be to be granted in
the blood, from as many Meats being taken at once.

But the Schools will have it, that under the degree of one only digesting
heat, many meats are changed into Chyle, and that through the government of
the same heat,

At length, they confess sanguification to be the proper workmanship of the
Liver: But of the Spleen, only through inordinacy, and aid; although in the
mean time, the Spleen be let, and involved in dungs, about the coction of
Yellow, Choler into Black.

1. First of all, Galen goes to ruin with his Honey, the which he writes to be
wholly turned either into Blood or into Choler.

2. The generation of Humors proceeds not from an Elementary power.

3. We must not run back unto a vain Quaternary of Humors.

4. Otherwise Bilification or making of Choler should be as natural to the
Liver, as its Sanguification or making of blood is.

5. The blood shall be nothing but a confused connection of Humors, an
irregular generation; but not a natural composure, but deprived of the
necessities of agents, and ends: Truly on both sides, great trifles do involve
great cares, and great absurdities: The which, if they put on obstinacy, they
now nourish madness, if not also malice: The trifles of Humors therefore
being invented by the evil spirit, were derived into Pagans, and hitherto
subscribed by the Schools.

For they were fit for the Devil, because they contein confusions in healing,
fallacies and lies; and therefore they produce daily deaths, they obscure the
light of nature, they presuppose plausible fictions, and are destitute of all
examples from their like; and by so much the more dry, stupid, dangerous, and
rash, those fables are, by how much they are the more toughly believed for the
destruction of Mortals.

Galen therefore is wholly giddy, who affirms Honey to be totally turned,
sometimes into blood, and sometimes into Choler.

1. First a messenger has been wanting unto this rash asserter, which might
the more surely certify him, what and how much was made from the totalnesse of
Honey: And so he is wholly suspected of rashness and a fiction.

2. Truth is wanting to the affirmer: For truly in nature, Choler fails, and
therefore also a Choleric complexion.

3. For he who throughout his great volumes, attributes the properties of the
members unto Elementary qualities alone, constantly writes that a quaternary or
fourfold number of Humors are framed only by the actual heat of one Liver, in
one only action of Sanguification; When as notwithstanding actual heat cannot
but be simple in one only member, at one and the same time.

Let Galen therefore learn to dream more truly concerning Honey, and
Sanguification:

Take notice my Companions, that we are in no wise constrained unto the fiction
of four Humors: For those things which are voided forth in the Flux, the
disease called Choler, and dreggishnesses of vomits, are not Humors boasted of
by the Schools; but they are excrements which the revenging disease frames,
and expels; even as those which laxative medicines do eject, are the
corruptions of sound or entire blood: And that which the revenging disease
there acts; That the Laxative medicine here executes, indeed with much
brevity: For neither is the gate of diseases shut by the feigned persuasions of
Humors; Since that, according to Phlosophy, Those things are never drawn out
of a transchanged Being, from whence it is naturally constituted in its making.

Moreover, although I have sufficiently proved elsewhere, that there are not
four Elements,

For truly, if the Elements do not with their Forms, remain in the mixed body;
neither also could their properties remain therein; seeing the forms themselves
are the immediate subject of inherency of their own properties: But if they had
rather have the Elements to remain with their forms, in the mixed body; Now
even the forms of those Elements shall not be substantial acts, but only the
bonds of the Elements: For they shall always return entire, from every sore
shaking of the supposed mixed bodies: To wit, the forms of the Elements shall
soundly sleep so long as they shall have rule over the form of the mixed body:
Since therefore the Form of a mixed body is of necessity, a pure and simple
ultimate act; it cannot be fourfold (yea although the material and remote
principler of that matter should be the very actual Elements) and by
consequence there is no reason of feigning a Quaternary of Humors, in respect
of the agent: Because the action of sanguification is in no wise Elementary;
but vital, and of the Ferment of the Liver; The every way simplicity whereof,
could not finally respect a quaternion of Humors to arise out of an uniform,
and most exactly united Chyle: So that although there were in a mixed body,
twenty Elements, there should not therefore be as many necessary productions of
Humors.

It is therefore a blockish speculation, and of a divelish persuasion, which
says, that

To wit, that from thence, the necessities of curing and of diseases, are
dictated. etc. Therefore I may say truly with the Prophet: Do not ye become as
the horse and mule, which have no understanding: Do not ye learn of such
Masters: For the half part of the Continent will subscribe to my desire:
Because under the Ottoman, Abyssine or Ethiopian Empires, and the chief part
of the Indies, the cutting of a vein is unusual: Yet the strengths,
nimblenesses, readiness, v^g^ancy of these nations, and constancy of their
labors as well to do as to suffer, learn ye out of Histories: And ye will
deservedly lament with me, that the Nations which in times past, were
formidable in war, have at this day by degrees, under Physicians, become ready
to dye, at every turning of the wind.

For the North, and West, which were wont to disperse their warriors into the
whole world; do henceforth, by reason of these follies of the Schools, dye, as
soon as the army is marched far from home.

Lastly they will object: If thou take away universal succors, neither
directest thy self unto the withdrawing of Humors; by what means therefore
will thou that Nature is the Physitianesse of diseases, therefore that she is
to be comforted, and not dejected: That there is need of a promotion of ends.

For if excrementitious filths shall adhere unto the first dens or privy places
of the Body; we must insist on resolving and cleansing medicines, nature being
safely buisied about the rest: But if something shall the more stubbornly and
hiddenly remain in a more inward place of retirance; volatile Alcali salts are
to be recieved, which cleanse away all things like Soap.

Surely it is a wonder, how much the Salt even of Tartar alone being made
volatile, will not perform: For it scours all dregginesse, and stubbornness
of obstructing Paracelsus is true, that whithersoever it shall not reach,
scarce any other spirit of salt shall more powerfully come.

But external affects are cured as well by local applications, as by the
internal aids of the vital powers: So that ye apply your selves unto a
clarifying of the blood, and the tinctures and renewings of a new balsam by
transpiration.

But the greater Arcanum's do after some sort, ascend unto the top of an
universal Remedy.

Learn ye; For God sells Arts to Sweats.

CHAP. II. A second Supplementary Conception against the fallacy of Humors.
1. The carelessnesse of Physicians is to be bewailed. 2. The mixture of
Elements is rejected by the way. 3. Paganish ignorances are not to be winked at
in Christians. 4. The doting delusions of a Catarrhe or rheum have sprung
from Humors. 5. The wandering Keepers being unknown, Catarrhs were at length
consirmed. 6. A quaternary of Humors is infringed by the contusion of a
member. 7. Yellow Choler is battered mith an Engine. 8. An unknown use of the
Gaul is proved. 9. That Choler is not Gaul. 10. An absurdity of the Schools.
11. A Galenical error. 12. Pastime consequences of the argument of the
Schools. 13. That the Schools through the sluggishnesse of a dililigent search
have been ignorant of the contents of the urine, and have neglected the
signification of the urine. 14. The manifold errors of the Ancients. 15. An
argument from the rule of falsehood. 16. A defect of the Schools. 17. The Choler
shown by the Schools is unto the blood by accident, but not of its essence. 18.
Again by the supposition of falsehood. 19. The Schools ought will they, nill
they, to swallow down two Maxims of the Author. 20. An error of the Schools
is again connivingly supposed. 21. It is again supposed. 22. Some absurd and
shameful particulars are proposed. 23. The covered blasphemy of the Schools.
24. The Gaul, a vital bowel. 25. That the Pagans were not enlightened with the
gift of healing. 26. That snivel is neither phlegm, as neither an excrement of
the Brain.

BUt indeed the number of Humors is so deeply rooted, that it is not
suficient, once to have refuted the same: And so, seeing that is not
sufficiently taught which is not suficiently learned, I am constrained to
repeat by way of a second conception, what things I have already above
attempted to demonstrate at large: For truly, the whole square of healing is
conversant in this thing.

For I have very often wondered, that the fight of the Elements, the fictions of
mixtures and complexions, have befooled the Christian world for so may ages
hitherto, and that

In the next place, unto these aforsaid and blind rashnesses of Physicians,
they have feigned as many Humors; to wit, according to a Quaternary number of
Elements: Indeed that in a disproportion of these, perhaps all diseases did
consist; as also, consequently, their cure, from the abundance of those
supposed Humors being sequestered: at length, that the renewing and preserving
of health (however shortness of life, the aforesaid sequestration of Humors
and blood should cause) was recovered. A cruel received opinion, and ungracious
wickedness of the Schools of Physicians! Therefore I have not always seriously
enough detested the passive deceits of the credulous, and pernicious inventions
of the Schools, and next the continued sluggishnesses in subscribing, even unto
amazement, and frequent sighs, and complained to my Lord Jesus, that mankind
has under the fraudulent wiles of the Devil, with so great rashness of
belief, prostrated it self unto so stubborn and barbarous cruelty, and that it
does alike constantly subject it self even unto this day: Especially, when as
in the more external things, these kind of trifles could find no fuel: I
therefore begged of the clementious Parent of nature, that he would vouchsafe
to raise up some one, whose gift might be, to refell so great dullness of
mortals and of the Schools: For first of all it was certainly manifested unto
me, from so great and so constant blindness, that we mortals are plainly not
wise as to any thing of worth, nor that we do savor any thing, not so much as
in natural things, unless the hand of the Almighty does enlighten us from
above, by his pillar of fire, in so great a night of darkness.

For truly, first of all, the existence of Elementary fire nigh the Globe of
the Moon, exceeding

But because the mad toy of a Catarrhe, has likewise wondrously afflicted the
world, and I having often searched with my self into the occasions, to wit,
from what fountain so

For truly, any one being oft-times by the more cold air, suddenly stricken in
his throat, neck, teeth, or shoulders, he also as credulous supposes,
according to the same place, but not defluxing thither from elsewhere: Although
in the mean time, those strange products have nothing common with the four
supposed Humors: and much less do they convince of a future flowing down of
these: The falsehood whereof notwithstanding, is of so great moment, that the
position of: the asserted Humors cannot but include a dullness and
unconsiderateness of the Schools in their own principles of healing, with a
most destructive abuse unto mortals, of necessity: Because that from thence,
the art of healing, adisease, health, the necessity of life, and at length of
death, do follow: The which therefore, I in this place, for the benefit of my
decieved neighbors, will the second time more cleely explain: But at first, I
will retake the position of the Schools, wherein they feign the blood to be
composed of four diverse, and con-nexed Humors.

For we see, after the contusion or bruising of a member, first a swelling
follows, Galen, who never knew black Choler to be returned into yellow.

But rather (he writes) that all the blood does by its alienations,
immediately and naturally contend into yellow Choler: Hitherto has the unheard
of doctrine of Fevers, in the Chap. of solutive medicines, regard: To wit,
where I have shown, that the blood of the veins is through its corruption,
diversely transchanged according to the poison of the solutive medicines: For
truly that thing happens in bruises; and blood being chased out of the veins,
and by degrees made destitute of the fellowship of life, does by little and
little also hearken as well to the affects of the parts, as to the various
corruptions of the blood: But not that the variety of dead excrements, or
unlikenesse of corruption, can, or ought to testify a composition of the blood.

Yea truly, the Schools suppose for the institutions of medicine, that yellow
Choler is one of the four constitutive Humors of the blood, to wit, a gawly
and bitter one: and

From hence indeed they prove, that that very original Choler which swims on
the blood that is let out of the veins, ought (will they, nill they) to be
naturally bitter, and Gauly; and again on the other hand, with a scantinesse of
truth, that the constitutive Choler of the blood ought of necessity to be
bitter: And moreover, although that bitter excrement, and which is rejected by
vomit, does altogether differ from the Choler left in the blood after its
separation from thence, by reason (as they say) of its abundance, excess, and
meernesse, attained in seperating; yet in the essential and actual truth of the
thing, they will have it to be the same; to wit, as well that which is rejected
by vomit, and that which is as yet left for the composition, and requisite
integrity of the blood, as that third, which redounding from the daily food, is
brought unto the little bag of the Gaul, and from thence (they say) to be
carried forth, for the tinging of the excrements, as well of the belly as
bladder: The which to wit, they seriously affirm to be one and the same Choler,
and mere single yellow Choler; and Choler I say, to be one only Humor in its
root, of the four constitutive Humors of us: In which recieved opinion of the
Schools, that a destructive decieving of mortals is contained, I thus prove.

For first, it is manifest, that that which is contained in the chest of the
Gaul, is not an excrement of man, bred from the error of the Liver, and
ordained instead of a spur, the full satisfaction of opposers, demonstrated;
whither let the Reader have recourse.

In the next place, that that which the stomach re-gorgeth by vomit, is not
Gaul, shall be elsewhere profesly demonstrated: Be it sufficient here that the
stomach is an Inn unaccustomed

And then, there is not a passage, whereby the Gaul may by a retrograde motion,
be drawn from the Liver into the stomach: If it being made by the Liver, be
naturally brought

The Schools will have the Gaul to be ordinarily, as it were an unprofitable
excrement, and because it is not co-mixed with the blood as an entire part,
that it is by the Liver, Galen, I behold the body of my urine late in the
morning, to be plainly watery and not tinged; wherefore I sleep upon it, and I
see my urine to be then tinged: Therefore either the urine is of its own accord
tinged only by a continued luke-warmth; or (even as the Schools reach) the
tinging Gaul is at length co-mixed with it after some hours: Therefore from
hence it is manifest; that they will have the Gaul to be presently again laid
aside by its own little bag, through the Bowels, about the end of digestions,
and that coming down about the utmost part of Ileon, it is attracted into the
veins of the Mesentery, is sucked through the port-vein of the Liver, is sent
inwards within the Liver, and hollow vein, and that it slides through the
sucking veins into the kidneys with the urine; which circle of the Gaul, from
the Liver into the Liver, is so full of infamous ignorance, that nothing is
alike infamous.

For truly, 1. It is manifest; That the yellowness of the urine is not from
the Gaul,

2. That if Gaul should be made in the Liver, and not in the very Bowel of its
own little bag, it might more readily depart from the Liver into the kidneys,
than that, contrary to all comeliness of nature, that should be fetched back
from dungs which had been once rejected and banished: For there was never Gaul,
or Choler in the nature of things, or in the Inn of the kidneys: And that
which is made by an erring stomach, and rejected bitter, was never Gaul, or
Choler; but the mere superfluity or excrement thereof: And therefore the
bitterness of Choler is in no wise rightly inferred from the bitterness of
foreign filths.

3. The bitterness of Choler in the urine is not sufficiently proved, not the
least thing whereof was ever true: None of the Physicians of so many ages, has
hitherto naturally bitter: but neither is that super-swimming liquour, as
neither the urine, bitter: Therefore they are not Gauly Humors: Therefore from
the carelesseness of trial, they have been rather willing to subscribe to
fables, and to believe falsehoods for truths, and stiffly to defend them, than to
forsake that accustomed opinion: But all posterity lamenteth the effects
proceeding from thence, and the whole Christian world with me, bewayleth them
even to this day: Therefore let one at least make trial of what things I have
spoken, and the which he shall presently be able to experience without
discommodity or danger, and every good or honest man will grieve at the so
great ignorance, and sluggishnesse of so many ages, and the cruel passive
decieving of the people of Christ.

That therefore, which the Schools call yellow Choler, as well in the urine, as
in the composition of the blood, is neither Choler, nor bitter, nor Gaul, nor
therefore one of etc, although the mouth might sometimes be bitter; yet the
liquour issuing from an Erisipelas, is not bitter, but plainly of sharp, is
become salt: That Humor I say, of whose burning heat, the Schools complain in
an Erisipelas, is called a most sharp one; when as in the mean time, it bears
neither any sharpness, nor bitterness before it: And they are unconstant in
this; when as notwithstanding, the sharpness of Humors, ought to differ as
much from their bitterness, as Pepper does from Coloquintida, or from wild
Cucumber.

And so the Schools have treated thus carelessely and unconstantly, concerning
the properties of their own Choler; Because in Law, a varying witness is
unworthy of any credit, he is accounted for an unsavory or foolish, or false
witness, and he is constrained to restitution, by how much hurt he has
brought unto another by his testimony.

But come on then, let us suppose (but not believe) that the liquour swimming
on the blood, is Gauly Choler, and of the natural composition thereof; At
leastwise, that

The Schools indeed suppose a permanency, and co-knitting of four Humors for
the constitution of the blood: Yea besides this simple and vain supposition,
nothing has been

Therefore Choler has not place in the constitution of the blood, although a
uriny wheyishnesse swim upon blood let out of the veins: For that whyishnesse
is unto the

I will therefore re-sume by supposing; That yellow Choler is naturally a
watery liquor swimming on the blood: Let the Schools therefore, at least
reach, if Choler be an are driven to believe these trifles, by reason of a
Quaternary of Elements, and a necessity of mixed bodies: Both which, after they
have been oppressed by demonstrations [propter quid] or for what cause, the
world will Sue for my writings: The very Schools themselves and all posterity
will laugh at the blockishnesses of Ancestors, which have hitherto been so
stubornly defended, they being so pernicious in healing, and false in
instructing.

Because, will they, nill they, they ought to swallow two Maxims of mine,
elsewhere That there is no Element of fire, and that kitchen or artificial
fire, is not a substance: And consequently, that if more things than one should
concur unto the composition of the blood: at least wise that four Elements
could not flow together thereunto: And therefore, that the fiction of four
Humors does badly square for our blood, for mixture, tempering, strife, and
likewise for the truth, existence, actuality, diversity, and healing of
diseases and cures: But the other of my Maxims is elsewhere sufficiently
proved: That every sublunary visible Body, is not materially composed of four,
as neither of three co-mixed Elements. They must therefore seriously repent:
Because the fire, is neither an Element, as neither a substance, neither is a
salt watery liquour to be called into the composition of us, for the feigned
comparison of a Microcosme or little world, that it may represent the form of
fire.

Again, I by way of connivance suppose: That nature scarce makes enough blood
of

Why also does she daily bring forth more of malignant humors (and those to be
expelled) out of good and much juicy meats moderately taken, than out of the
best blood? Since, as Galen is witness, in hot natures, honey (which otherwise,
in temperate, and therefore in Sanguine persons is totally turned into blood)
is wholly turned into yellow Choler? To wit, its other three companional
Humors being excluded? Whence it follows: That the framing of Humors
proceeds not from the complexion of the food, but altogether from the condition
of the Liver.

From whence consequently, if more of both Cholers than is meet, be daily made,

I therefore supposed further, that the Schools teach black Choler to be
sharp: But they prove that, because it being rejected by vomit, and falling on
the earth, if it be

For first of all, the Schools contradict themselves in this, that they
determine four Humors, and also those to be bred or made by the same motion of
digestion; to wit, if the composition of the blood does happen from four
Humors being conjoined. Secondly, they struggle with themselves, while they
teach, that yellow Choler in cocting, is terminated into a Leeky and Cankery
Choler: That is, to put on a green Color, and in the mean time, to increase in
bitterness.

Therefore black Choler is not sharp from an overcocting of yellow Choler,
neither does that arise from this: else, either the coction of nature is not
single in the same body, and promoted by the same ruler of digestion; or
surely, that which is rejected, being sometimes sharp and black, is not black
Choler: Unless that perhaps both may be alike deservedly denied: And then,
where, and after what manner, shall yellow Choler be overcocted? For not in the
Liver, where the slender little veins do not undergo the delay of cocting; to
wit, they being filled with continual blood, and urine passing through them.

Neither in the next place, shall black Choler be made of yellow Choler
re-cocted in the veins of the mesentry; seeing these are continually extended
with sucking of the meats, and with the passing of drinks through them; and the
recoction of yellow Choler should not only be for an impediment, but moreover,
for a contagion to the fresh Chyle tending unto the shop of Sanguification: But
if indeed yellow Choler be recocted neither beneath, nor above the Liver, nor
at length in the little branches themselves of the Liver, that from thence it
may be made black Choler; but yellow Choler be brought to the Spleen, that in
that Bowel, a transmutation of yellow Choler into black, and of bitter into
sharp, may happen; then at leastwise, they ought to have remembered, that that
being granted, now black Choler, or a fourth Humor should fail for the
Composition the blood, and that the blood should be only composed of the other
three: Which thing utterly overthrows the position of the sanguification of the
Schools.

At length, to what end shall the recocting of yellow Choler into black serve?
If an hostile, Element and earthy, sailing in the blood, should a while after
arise from thence? Is nature so greatly buisied in preparing of Humors that
are forthwith to be banished? And the which a little after, I shall show to be
Non-beings? Mere fictions designed to no end? Next, by what means shall yellow
Choler draw that sharpness to it self, from bitterness, they being hostile
qualities unto all bowels, out of stomach? If it directly passes over into an
ordinary and natural Humor? How shall a fiery Humor, through a delay of
coction, assume the heat of cankered rust, especially under the same slow and
vital lukewarmth? And shall be made a black, sharp, and Earthy dreg? Is
therefore perhaps. Earth materially bred of a fiery Water being re-cocted? In
what part of the world also does a sharp thing proceed from a bitter thing
being thickened? And from whence have the Schools learned this feigned
Metamorphosis? Is happily that sharp, black, and earthy Humor, a certain
singular Humor, one of the four Elementary humors of the three Elements? But
therefore it is false, that they have affirmed the same to be made of
re-cocted, and burnt Choler.

Yea moreover, it is to be feared, least it be to be called a fifth Humor;
which as yet has not had another like unto it self, and that this shall be no
less necessary than the other four, if they as yet dare to devise four other
Humors: For truly this is a sharp one, unworthy of the family of Choler; The
which is wholly spoiled of every property hereof, to wit, which is a sharp,
gross, black, thickened, re-cocted, cold, Earthy, and leaden Humor: But where
have the Schools learned, to call Earth a black, sharp, cold, and dry fire,
that they may begin a fourth and Elementary Humor requisite for the integrity
and consistence of the blood? Consider Reader with pity whither the enfolded
absurdity of a fiction has driven the Schools, that through the penury or
scantiness of names, and truth, they have made two Elements, and feigned
Humors from thence, a cold Earth, and also, a bitter, sharp, sour, and fiery
liquour? And that they have called it yellow Choler, and also, the same,
presently, black, sharp, bitter and four Choler? Alas! they may fear a deadly
chance will befall them, since they have now proceeded in stumbling for so many
ages, and in running away, so miserable lied: But at leastwise, I conjecture,
that this new branch of black Choler, has not a sure assertion in the constant
dullness of the Schools (the which I at first demonstrated to have been the
nourishable blood of the Spleen, sometimes becoming degenerate through a
sinister event) nor to be requisite from the beginning, and for the
constitution of the blood: but that it is said to be produced from degenerate
Choler, by re-coction, in stead of a privy shift; to wit, that they may after
some sort, free themselves from so many perplexities of absurdities: At least
wise, they are compelled rather to grant, that that black sour liquour; being
now and then rejected through the vice of the Spleen, is an excrementious,
unprofitable dreg, and not an Humor made from the intent of nature.

However otherwise it is, if they say it issues forth from the intent of
nature, (although that be the more rarely beheld) and not likewise from yellow
Cholet being first re-cocted; at least wise, it has attained the underserved
name, and property (for neither do the Schools sufficiently explain
themselves, they wandering in an unconstancy of their own recieved opinion) of
Choler, which is of a fiery and Gawly property: Now earth shall sometimes be
nothing besides fire being thickened, if the feigned Humors do fitly square
with the Elements attributed unto them: Also yellow, and black Choler shall be
made at once, and by the same agent of lukewarmth, that both Cholers may answer
to one earth: Especially, seeing now it is manifest, that fire can no more be,
than it is of the number of Elements.

But if indeed, three Humors are sufficient for three only Elements, why have
they invented four? For that is to have been willing to compel nature according
to the imagined errors of dreams; and through rashness already accustomed, to
have confirmed heathenish follies, without the gift of the light of healing:
But how will four square to three? The which if they do not square, let not,
likewise, the Schools proceed henceforward, stubbornly to defend the paganism
of the Ancients: For truly, to be willing to cure by such lies of pagans, is to
have introduced a destructive and erroneous practice, unto ones own damnation,
and the calamities of ones neighbor. If therefore black Choler appears not
in the Liver to be remarkable by its properties; nor in the spleen, from yellow
Choler being recocted, or from roasted Gaul; yea nor from a proper intention of
nature, nor likewise, is a secondary nourishable Humor; certainly, there is no
yellow, as neither any black Choler: Yea, if both Cholers be a daily Humor,
and the constitutive parts of the blood; and likewise, if both Cholers are a
daily superfluity designed unto their own sinkes: Therefore also, the dung
shall by a like privilege, be an excrement, not indeed of the meats, but of
the blood, because it is tinged by yellow Choler.

But truly the offices of either Choler appointed by the Schools are too
stupid: To wit, that nature shall of necessity, be always diligently careful
for the generating of yellow Choler, for the tincture and bitterness of the
dung and urine (although this taste be wanting to them both) as also, for a spur
of the avoiding or expulsive faculty. Again, to what end ought the stomach to
have been spurred up by yesterdays black Choler, being first defiled with
sharpness? For truly, the stomach is endowed nolesse with a proper expulsive
faculty, than with an attractive, or retentive one: Why likewise does black
Choler (which from its own, buttery is not only feigned to be bitter and sharp;
but to be also perniciously sour) degenerate into sour, that it may inject a
spur into the stomach? Since that which is sour, according to the Schools,
rather binds or restraines. Let it therefore shame judicious men to tell of
yellow Choler and Gauly, and that it is required to be bitter for the tincture
of the urine; seeing that in urine, there is never any bitterness found.

And let it shame them, in a matter of so great moment, as is the Temple of the
Holy spirit, to maintain these Cholers for the composing parts of the blood;
And so, to have directed the government, and doctrine of non-beings, unto ends
impossible to be true: For if as well the Gaul as the Spleen, are receptacles
defigned only for excrementitious filths; let them blush, while as they behold
the Spleen alone, to have more arteries than all the Bowels together: And let
them consider why there was need of so many Arteries for the sink of a most
disgraceful superfluity.

And whether that be not to have accused the most glorious Author of life, of
error, who had given more of internal life unto one sink of filths, than to
all the palaces of life Galen concerning honey, these or those Humors do become
few, or many, not from the complexion, and goodness of the meats, but from the
endeavor of the Liver alone) and had endowed pernicious filths with a far more
ample passage, and that far remote from a Noble bowel (For the Creator seems
to be accused by the Schools, as forgetful of his ends) That as the Bowels do
together, and at once, empty out their whole yesterdays fardle; so also that
the Spleen might at one only turn, empty out its stuff, and preserve our body
free from so great an enemy.

For if black Choler be an excrement; truly by how much the sooner and cleaner
it is evacuated, by so much also, the better: Even as the bladder is not
delighted with retained urine, as neither is the long gut delighted with
excrementitious filths retained in it for a treasure: But they rejoice to be
freed from their fardle, at one only turn, and that with speed: Therefore the
Schools by consequence, do wickedly accuse the Creator to be guilty, as that
he was either ignorant of the aforesaid ends, or as passing them by that he was
unmindfull of them: Because he was he, who would have an hurtful excrement
daily to increase in abundance, to be plentifully brought from far, through the
slender veins, by a retrograde motion, unto the opposite Spleen, and by a
strict channel to be unloaded into the stomach; and least happily, the sink
thereof should be hurt by its guest, he had appointed so many Arteries as chief
over it, that the whole Spleen might show forth nothing besides a folding
together of Arteries.

Fie! let so great rashness of men depart. And indeed they alike equally doat
concerning Tobiah, as having long since perfectly taught it: For Raphael (which
name of a spirit, sounds, the medicine of God) commanded the Gaul to be
transported, but not the fish, which otherwise had readily putrified; But not
the balsamical Gaul: The Gaul therefore, supplied the room of a balsam beyond
the condition of the blood, flesh, carcass, bones of an ordinary bowel; Because
it holds the stern of life in us: Even as elsewhere concerning digestions, and
the use of the Gaul. Lastly they affirm a childish thing: That since a
sufficient quantity, yea too much of Gaul for its own uses, is generated,
nevertheless they bid that the very little bag of the Gaul do remain the
treasural buttery of that excrement, to be always filled with that banished
dreg: Whereas otherwise, if that should have the appearance of truth, the Gaul
ought daily and speedily to be unloaded after the manner of the bladder,
because it should rejoice in its expulsion, but not always to swel by deteining
it, unless it were a bowel.

Which due hastening of expulsion, and unburdening, since otherwise, it is not
seen in the Gaul, as neither in the Spleen; it is for an undoubted sign, that
the Gentiles have

I have said little of Phlegm, for if I shall speak what they write of that,
that it is daily

First, it is sufficient, that I have demonstrated the same to be the fibers of
the blood, or the blood it self speedily hastening unto the bound of the
digestion of the solid parts, and so that it has now somewhat entered the
threshold of a secondary nourishable Humor: Then next, that I have shown, that
trifles do voluntarily rush down with their own weight, while as now for that
very cause, they take away their own quaternary of Humors, if Phlegm be blood
beginning, or not yet sufficiently digested: But because the Schools for the
most part, prove Phlegm by snivel, I will here speak something of this
excrement; To wit, I will show, that the Schools are altogether ignorant of
what the muck or Snivel is, while they define the same to be a Phlegmatic
excrement of the brain, and a superfluous excrement of nature, and as if a
superfluity, perhaps of somany ounces in one only day, were a necessary
remainder from the blood received into the digestion of the brain: which
particulars I have elsewhere profesly touched at, in the treatise concerning
the Latex, and also of the erring keeper: So here I will only demonstrate them
by the way.

For truly I have stood by, when as Hellebor, Turbith, Tobacco, etc. Were
beaten, and presently I have sneezed diverse times, and my nostrils did not
only drop down plenty of waterish snivel, but also, of snotty snivel. Any old
woman might presently think, that that snivel had not bewrayed it self, if I
had not drawn up the flying dust of those things: Therefore it was not in the
head before, but was made there; To wit, If the pipe were open, and yet it did
not flow forth: If therefore; that salt snivel be the proper excrement of the
Brain, it is the remainder of its secondary nourishment, being there left after
the finished digestion of that part: But not that; For it had flown forth of
its own accord, and without the odor of things, which it did not: Therefore it
was made, not from the superfluity of the nourishment, but from the nourishment
degenerating, or degenerated: After another manner, the brain has an excrement
after the manner of other solid parts, to wit, the which is dispersed into the
encompassing air, by an unperceivable transpiration: But the snivel allured
forth by Tobacco, or other sneezing things, is plainly like to ordinary snivel;
but that snivel which is violently stirred up, is not the excrement of the
digestion of the brain; therefore neither is it the ordinary snivel: But it is
speedily made, and that in very much quantity; yea and without a presently
manifest hurting of the brain: otherwise, if it should degenerate through a
defect of the digestive faculty, the head should of necessity also be ill at
ease: But the consequence is false; therefore also the supposed antecedent.
Therefore, there is another certain faculty, besides the ordinary and principal
nourishing one of the Brain, which produces such snivel at the meeting of the
foreign and troublesome odor, powder, air, or obstruction internal unto it:
The which surely differs very much, according to the varieties of that foreign
thing meeting with the faculty: For a sign, that that faculty (which I name the
keeper, being prefixed as well before the windpipe as the nostrills) being
diversely affected by things encountering, it does presently bring forth diverse
snivels in its own Cabinets, out of the Mass of the Latex. But I admire, that
none has hitherto taken notice of these faculties, extended as well in the
windepipe, as in the passage even unto the organ of smelling: but that by
rudely passing over the whole, it is referred unto the phlegm of the Brain.

The Schools therefore bravely show an hurtful excrement of the Brain,
begotten indeed by they know not what Parents: but they have not yet made
manifest the essence, existence, or appearing thinglinesse of phlegm, and of a
fourth Humor, which they together with the rest, have erected for a pillar of
medicinal affairs. I wish there may be another Sampson, who may desh the two
pillars of Choler, and the one of phlegm, in pieces, and overthrow the
appearing Palace, which the Evil spirit has even hitherto prolonged, to the
deciet of mortals.

CHAP. III. The dissembled or feigned vomiting of Choler.
1. The neat invention of four Humors. 2. They show afalse phlegm. 3. Choler
has remained undistinct. 4. An absurdity in black choler. 5. How they prove
yellow choler. 6. What that bitter and yellow matter may be, which is cast
forth by vomit. 7. From the handicraft operation of a calf. 8. That it is not
Gaul which is cast out. 9. This bitter supersluity is bred from a fore-fold
error. 10. A faulty argument of the Schools. 11. An objection, with a begging
of the principle. 12. It is proved by a manifold argument, that it is not Gaul
which a Tertian Ague casts up about its beginning. 13. That an hungry stomach
draws not choler from the Gaul. 14. The chest of the Gaul wants an upper
entrance. 15. The Gaul should not suffice all the fictions of the Schools. 16.
That the reason of choler is not to be fecht from fire. 17. The absurd fiction
whereunto they are compelled. 18. That fire cannot subsist without an actual
burning. 19. A privileged Humor for the air, is fegned. 20. Some absurdities
accompanying both the cholers. 21. Some absurdities accompanying phlegm. 22.
What that may be, which they imagine to be phlegm in the blood. 23. After what
sort the Author departs from the Schools herein.

THe doctrine of Humors is too Ancient, and firmly rooted, than that it can
fall to the ground by Engines lightly assaulting it: Because men depart with
difficulty from what they have been accustomed unto: The wart, the root of the
evil, which has been once plucked off, it is to be feared least it spring
again; especially that which has already every where obtained a sprout:
Because there will be those who knowing no better, shall see themselves as it
were excluded from medicine, and through indignation, will shut the doors
against truth knocking: Others, who have grown old in sluggishnesse, being
unapt to learn better things, will despise others before themselves.

I will go against them: For indeed, when Physicians had seen the blood ofthe
veins to

As soon therefore, as the ham of a virgin being let down into water, they let
blood from

For milk has not this phlegm, because in the separation of its heterogeneal
parts, it has Cheese and clots wherewith it is constrained: For I speak of
milk, and blood, even as they are Beings existing entire in act, they being not
separated through corruption: But the Schools behold the blood while it is now
a dead carcass, being coagulated, neither properly while it is that any longer,
the Etymology whereof, it has as long as it flows; No more then a dead man,
is a man with an estranging particular.

They also presently added a third Humor to the blood, which should be the
Gaul, nor that as yet, different from the Wheyie urine and sweat, and the Water
accidentally

For the law of founding the Gaul was in the pleasure of the Prince of
Physicians; but not any longer of nature: He fell into the meditation of four
Elements, yet a fourth Humor was wanting; wherefore, that their number might
answer to the Elements, which were thought to be four, and to flow together,
well nigh, unto every constitution of a body, a fourth Humor was seasonably
devised, being therefore like unto earth, and black, the which while they long,
in vain enquired into, they at length, by a proper and rash boldness,
commanded it to proceed from a re-cocted fiery and Gauly liquour, so as that
Choler, the name being retained, was commanded to degenerate from yellow into
black, and from an invented fiery liquour, an earthy one proceeded.

And its bitterness (for in live bodies they have commanded it to be presently
scorched,

For so, they introduced yellow Choler by the jaundise and bitter vomitings,

Neither was it any longer to be disputed concerning it, as neither against him
that denied such principles (but of the Choler of the Urine, I will by and by
speak under the inspection of urine) and afterward they boldly also affirmed,
that Choler to be in the urine, in any dungs whatsoever, and also in the filths
of the ears, and eyes: But the jaundise has more fully confirmed this
doctrine, because it is that, which overspreads the mouth and spittle with
bitterness, and stirs up the itching of a Citron-coloured skin.

Therefore it has easily been believed, that all these same effects are
borrowed from the Gaul: Yea, they have affirmed that all such diseases of the
skin are from adust Gaul, and offending as well in quantity as in quality, and
from the vice of the Liver, in bringing forth more Gaul than is meet; To wit,
by which circumstances, they have supposed, that they have sufficiently and
over proved the existence, and necessary association of Choler: From hence
afterward, arose a dream which conjoined those four Humors together, they
remaining in their essence, and that from a co-heaping thereof, one only blood
did from thence proceed, and that every humor did again rebound from the
connection and composure of the blood as often as it should please an Elementary
strife, to wit, a distemper, or at the pleasures of Laxative medicines.

I will now willingly declare, openly mine own, and those, daily observations:
For first of all, if the more plentiful, hard, and scarce sufficiently chewed
meat be taken at supper; on the morning following, yellow vomiting, and bitter,
in the show of yolk of eggs, or otherwise, like Oil pressed out of the seed of
Rape roots, frequently succeeds: From thence therefore, first, I conjectured,
that that was through an error of the digestion of the Stomach; but not from a
vice of the Liver, from a defect of Sanguification, or the making of an
abundance of Choler: For truly oftimes, meats badly digested and chewed, being
partly turned into an yellow balast, are beheld to be cast up together with the
same vomit.

And then, I conjectured, that the rules of Sanguification standing, those
yellow and bitter excrements, were neither Choler, nor Gaul, and much less a
constitutive part of the blood: Because they were neither as yet slidden of the
Stomach, nor therefore experienced in the Sanguification of the Liver, but
through a long delay, and the small veins of those of the mesentery.

Wherefore likewise, that neither was there a passage from the Liver unto the
Stomach, but by the same passages, being very remote, and impossible to be
believed: Especially, while as the badly withdrawn meats are seen to come forth
whole, togethe with the yellow and bitter vomiting. Furthermore, I learned by
the example of a Calf, and ocular inspection, that this yellow rubbish was
generated in a Stomach being Duodenum, in temperate bruit beasts: Seeing also,
that the suckings of Milk recieved, do wax yellow in the gut Ileon: For a Calf
drinking only his mothers Milk, shows, presently after death, that the Milk
presently clots into a sharpish curd, and watery acide liquor; both of them
being much desired for the making of Cheeses: This curdy runnet I say,
presently after, lays aside the whiteness of Milk in the Stomach, becomes
brown, and in the Duodenum, and beginning of the Ileon, waxes yellowish;
afterward in its progress it is more fully yellow, but further, it is plainly
made of a Citron color; but about the blind gut it waxes greenish: Last of
all it becomes dungy. Let the Schools therefore show, whether those colors
are made from a yellow and Leeky Choler? While as in the mean time, they are so
changed before their coming into the Liver? Or whether indeed, these colors
are made from the property of the Bowels?

In like manner, infants having sucked Milk, do presently cackya Citron
colored excrement, and thou would call it mere Gaul, and the Schools are
constrained to confess,

Whence it is made manifest, that the Milk, as well in us as in braits, is made
of a Citron or deep yellow color, by a digestion of its own; to wit, that all
Cream, in sliding by the voluntary thread of nature, and corruption, unto an
excrement, and by its own motion, waxes yellow, through the proper endeavor
of the Stomach and intestine^. And that it is most easily estranged, looks
yellow, green, and obtains diverse savours or tastes, under the digestive
faculty going astray: But not that therefore it is, or is made Gaul.

For these excrements are made in the Bowels, out of the shop of the Liver, and
by strange faculties, nor in a Fold committed unto the making of blood: For
truly, if the Gaul be a constitutive part of the blood, for that very cause, it
is made also, in the place, and matter wherein, and whereof the blood is
generated, but not in the intestine: For the first change of the milk should be
into yellow, or green Gaul, and that naturally, and from thence into blood.
That yellow Cream therefore, does presently, of its own accord, profit in the
Duodenum. and puts on those colors, not of feigned Humors, but of a natural
excrement: Wherefore, neither is it a wonder, that the same thing happens in
the Stomach, being hard-bound or distressed under any guilt of offense
whatsoever; To wit, that the whole Cream contained therein, is presently
translated into a vicious bitter, and yellow Chyle, the which in the Jaundise
presently happens.

In the mean time, in the running of the Chyle downwards through the gut Ileon,
it is sucked into the veins, whatsoever the Archeus has judged to be not only
most nearly allied to nature, and meet for the preparing of blood; but moreover
also, the whole Whey ascends toward the Liver, together with it.

But if therefore, the Chyle does fore-timely assume the countenance of an
excrement about the hedges of the Stomach, as being prevented by the error of
the digestive faculty;

And the which, although it be cadaverous or stinking, and being newly produced
from the blood; yet by reason of its bitterness, and the poison of the
solutive medicine, it is not tasted down by dogs, as neither by a swine; they
otherwise, less abhorring the eating of dungs: For they percieve a bitter
poison of the purging medicine to subsist, being far different from the
goodness of Meats, blood, and flesh. Be it therefore a faulty argument;

The poisonous medicine has caused a bitter juice from the Meats, drink, and
blood; therefore it is Gaul and Choler: And likewise, the Stomach being ill at
ease, has caused etc. is commonly bred by proper causes: As if the offspring,
effects, fruits, and products of errors, were a constitutive part of our blood.

Therefore, that which the Schools name a native part of the blood, a compeer
with putrefying Chyle, and Choler or Gaul; That is wholly a mere excrement,
alienated and degenerate, from a natural agent being badly disposed: So also,
the filths of the ears shall be Gaul, if yellowness and bitterness be
sufficient for it to be called Gaul: which being granted, now that yellow
excrement which is rejected by vomit, as dung, shall be near skin to, and of
the family of the blood.

But at leastwise, the Schools will have the yellow and bitter excrement which
is rejected

And likewise, there is oft-times sixfold more of this yellow and bitter Balast
rejected at one only vomiting, than the largeness of the little bag of the gaul
can receive: The self; or certainly there is no Choler of the essential
composute of the blood. Is peradventure therefore, this choler and this gaul,
which is rejected by vomit, made in an irregular place, and by an erring
workman? Therefore also, of necessity, it shall be neither choler, nor gaul.

But there is nothing as yet manifested concerning another choler, that of the
blood: It is therefore an injurious thing to the blood, and to the inbred
choler of this, if there were any, to be founded and proved by an excrement
which is never prepared by the princiciples, or in the shops of choler. Yea,
from thence there is an equal right and liberty for whatsoever is supposed to
be cholery, to be compared in essence, color, savor, and in its efficient
cause, unto this poisonous excrement voided by vomit in a Tertian Ague, and
other nauseous effects; and likewise, for that which in the disease called
choler, is expelled as well upwards, as downwards, and in solutive medicines,
through a continual framing thereof.

And so now, from hence it clearly appears, that the Standard-defending
inventers of choler, have by a rash and undiscreet boldness, introduced choler
for an elementary apposition or making up of the blood (which they call its
composition) and have falsely affirmed, that yellow and bitter vomited-up
excrement to be gaul and choler, from the efficiency of the liver, and of the
constitution of the blood. For how uncertain and stupid is the begetter,
separater, sender, conducter, way and channel, by which that choler should be
designed from the liver unto the stomach, by a retrograde motion? unless they
had rather that the obediences and necessities of these should be foolish. But
the Schools have never examined these things, but with a swift foot they have
skipped over the bridge and clay, from whence they feared perplexities from
absurdities, as if they gaped only after gain; the which, notwithstanding, they
might have diligently searched into, to their greater profit, than to have
daily over-added their own centuries unto the writings of Galen. For neither
does an excrement less differ from the blood, than the dead carcass of a swine
from a man: For that carcass was at sometime alive, but that excrement never
lived. But it has been already proved, that no choler is formed in the liver.
But if choler also, be made elsewhere than in the liver, from this supposition
of the Schools also, it was not true choler; and much less from the essence of
that (to wit, of an excrement) shall the essence of Choler be capable of proof:
but if indeed Choler shall with any foot, originally enter into the family of
an excrement; now, for that very cause, it shall be an Humor different from
Choler; the which notwithstanding, the Schools do with a serious intention,
will to be intended, caused, and desired by our nature, as if they were
advertized by an Elementary necessity.

At leastwise, none of a sound mind is able to understand, why the veins of the
stomach (which I have demonstrated elsewhere, never to be able to sup any chyle
at all) shall allure unto themselves as a friend, that which the Liver, and
which the veins, and the whole family-administration of the body have been once
seriously averse unto, as worthy of banishment: which indeed so naughty a
Fardle being begotten in some other place, being a Bastard and Forreigner,
should be brought unto the stomach, which possesses the Sense, Nobilities,
passions, and tenderness of the heart. Surely in an inverted and confused order
of things, should filths be thrust down unto a bowel expressing the harmonies
of the heart, if they should be adopted, being as foreigners coming from
elsewhere. Who is that mad and straying guide, which may thrust down such
excrements to the stomach. For no^ the term of Choler cease, while as the
relics of yesterdays supper are supposed to be badly digested, and to be cast
back again as yet whole, with an unchewing tooth, yet yellow, and bitter: For
neither are they correlative things, that much Choler should flow forth into
the stomach, as often as any notable vice hereof is present: For after a liberal
and troublesome supper, even as also, after the fit of a Fever, loss of
appetite, sufferance of hunger, bitter, burntish belchings, loathings, weight,
giddiness of the head, etc. are alike present: wherefore it is easily to be
believed, that those sumptoms have also sprung from a like mother: So that
(which I promised in the title) it is nothing but a dissembled vomiting of
Choler, whereby the first inventers of Humors have credulously persuaded
Choler.

They also say, that therefore Choler is also drawn out of the little bladder
of the Gaul, unto an hungry stomach: But by how sluggish a judgment that is
confirmed, and that filths are by a retrograde driving motion fetched back unto
the stomach, let Philosophers speak: For hunger desires not iron, or ice; but
is only carried forth unto objects that are to be eaten, from whence nature
hopes for nourishment to her self: But it is not carried promiscuously toward
any objects: So neither does nature desire, that which she had once cast out as
reprobate; As knowing, that any thing cannot be made out of every thing:
neither therefore does she hope for or look for nourishment from an excrement;
The which, she therefore neither desires nor allures to her self: And I wish
the Schools had considered that thing, before their rash doctrine of Choler. I
grant indeed, that through inordinacies, inordinate and confused obediences do
now and then follow: But I shall not therefore admit, that a sixfold quantity
is drawn out of the little bag of the Gaul, for vomit, as neither that any
thing is rashly drawn to the stomach; Seeing the very Gaul it self is a Nobie
and vital Bowel, even as elsewhere.

Wherefore, I now and then, in the more curiously searching, have looked into
the chest

At leastwise, if there were any unpercievable pore, (which there is not) that
might inspire Choler from the Liver unto the chest of the Gaul; why therefore
does the mouth at the utterance of the Gaul, lay open fifty times more at
least, for the ejecting, than for the entering of Gaul? For truly, no entrance
could as yet be discerningly viewed by the eye, for so many ages. Is there not
also, from hence an easy confirmation, that the orifice of the Gaul tends into
the empty gut, only for an in-breathing of its own vital and necessary ferment?

For the Gaul in a Tertian, should never be sufficient for tinging of the
urine, the drosses of the paunch, also for tinging of the daily nourishment,
and the which they require

It is therefore wholly an excrement, and badly squares with another Choler
feigned to

For they say, that the Elements do repeatingly destroy and devour each other;
But they have hitherto failed in the proof: But they allege only artificial
fire, which they think, does convert water, and air into each other, as often as
those are no longer beheld: But they fail in their own position; For they teach
that fire converteth water into it self, and not into air: And it should be a
foolish action of the fire, which should labor not for it self, but for the
air: Yea although water quenches fire, yet it was never seen, that on the
other hand fire was made water: For they have thought it sufficient to have
stated, and not to have proved their own positions. But among Humors, that
which they will have to be made like unto fire, they show a water, not sharp,
biting, as neither salt-bitter, but modestly salt; and the which, they
elsewhere call the Whey of the blood, its Etymology being drawn from the
watery part of Milk: They call I say, Choler an Humor answering to fire: For
they command that, that the Elements ought to obey their dreams: For the
Schools being seriously asked, say that Choler is an Humor merely fiery and
Gauly, because it is actually composed of fire predominating: But I being
silent, as to these trifles, am amazed, while as I behold a waterish whey
swimming on the blood.

They add also, that true fire is suppressed in Choler, as being masked, and
bridled by the form of the mixed body: But let them believe that will, that the
form of Choler Element in us, should so restrain its own product, wherein it
should actually lay hid, that it should be altogether Cold in act, and be a
wheyie and merely a watery Being.

I therefore suppose and know, that if but a very small quantity of actual fire
were in a mixed body, that it would presently perish, as being suppressed by
adjuncts a Yea, if etc. by the fire, can in any place, or at any time couple
fire unto earth, water, and air, that he may from thence constitute any mixed
body, and much less that he can allure fire to flow down from Heaven, and
shall connex it with air, water, and earth. Its a wonder therefore that the
whole faculty of medicine does hitherto establish its Basis in an
impossibility: And so much the more wonderful, that the whole world has as it
were snorted in a deep sleep, at these deaf dreams, and has befooled all with
a credulity; And so much the more to be admired, that they have believed the
fire to be suppressed under other Elements in mixtures, and nevertheless, as
yet to remain safe; when as notwithstanding, they have sufficiently known and
taken notice, that all fire presently as soon as it cease from burning, or is
joined to water, perishes and is reduced into nothing; For if the Schools had
brought the vital spirit, or sky-le air instead of fire, they might have seemed
worthy of pardon: But they had rather become foolish in the dream of
Epimenides, than not to have found an Humor like unto fire, that according to
lying conceptions, a quaternary of Humors might arise.

For, for air, they have feigned a privileged Humor, which should not be
excrementitious, after the manner of its two companions: And therefore they now
and then call these, neither do they begin to be, or to be seen, before the
death of the blood: For as long as the blood is profitable for nourishing of
the parts, the more solid part thereof was undistinct from the rest of its
body; Because it was a true and entire composure: For that thing is one every
side obvious in the frame of nature: For since nature acts for ends known
unto her Author; one-part always more readily receives the impressions of the
Archeus, than another: For the end of the venal blood was a nourishing of the
solid members; And therefore it by little and little, breaths after, and
attaines the degrees of solidity: The blood therefore, as soon as it is
perfected in the Liver, it assumeth in its more mature, and more spermatick
part, white fibers or threads, and the beginnings of a desired homogeneal curd,
which at first, it had not in the veins of the mesentery, as is manifest in
those have the bloody flux.

Indeed it is therefore, the best and most-perfect part of the blood which the
Schools call phlegm, and the which I know to be akin to a more solid and
spermatick constitution: etc. Because they think them to be the mothers of
phlegm: Neither do they heed, that the similar parts, and those of the first
constitution, are of a spermatick or seedy nature, and those altogether by an
undistinct confusion, they call phlegmatic ones: As being ignorant, or at
leastwise unmindfull, that we are most nearly or immediately nourished by the
same things whereof we consist: And so, if the homogeneral, similar parts, and
those of the first constitution, are condemned by the Humourists as phlegmy;
Surely one of these two must needs be true: Either that the Schools know not
now to distinguish phlegm from a secondary and spermatick Humor: or plainly
that there is no phlegm at all in the blood: And that that which they have
supposed to be phlegm in the blood, is the beginning and foundation of the
secondary and immediate nourishment of the solid members. Now I must speak of
yellow Choler which is supposed to be in urines, with the admiration and gross
ignorance of fore-past ages.

CHAP. IV. The signification of the urine according to the Ancients.
1. The division of Urines. 2. No unfit observation of Paracelsus. 3. The
Authors aim. 4. It has been erred hitherto in judgment, concerning the
circle of the urine. 5. From whence the circle in the urine is. 6. A childish
opinion of Galen. 7. It is proved that Gaul is not in the urine. 8. The
unconsiderateness of the Schools. 9. What the yellowness of the urine may
betoken. 10. That nothing of Choler or Gaul is in the urine. 11. A threefold
error in this thing. 12. A begging of the principle. 13. That Choler is not
snatched out of the urine unto the brain. 14. Some accompanying absurdities.
15. From Anatomy. 16. From the Jaundise. 17. What watery urines suddenly after
tinged ones in Fevers, may fundamentally denote. 18. That the prognostications
of the urine have been mere dreams hitherto. 19. A channel is wanting. 20.
Under the division of motions. 21. The little cloud of the urine, whether it
denotes phlegm. 22. All things are cocted in us for one only end; to wit, that
they may nourish. 23. Why the spleen has a double ferment. 24. What that may
be, which the spleen does sometimes belch forth into the stomach. 25. That any
effect is not taken away, the cause being removed. 26. What a confused or
troubled urine may be speak. 27. Whence erudity in the urine is. 28. Why the
strangury is scarce cured in old folks. 29. Whence the lumpy sediment or ground
is. 30. Errors about contents, as well those proper as foreign, elsewhere
concerning Duelech. 31. As yet a new method of judging of the urine by the
weight thereof.

ANd moreover, the Schools for the divination of urine, presuppose a washy of
watery matter; on the opposite part to this, a thick one, and then a moderate
one:

Lastly, some urines being made clear, are presently again disturbed; but
others with difficulty.

Secondly, they consider almost all color, from the watery, white, milky, and
dull; and also from the clear watery, even unto the blackish color.

Thirdly, its proper, and foreign contents are viewed: Foreign ones indeed, I
call, slimy, bloody shavings, sands, and stones: And those either soon affixed
to the urinals, or freely settling: But proper contents are those, which are
almost ordinarily thrust down out of confused urines, or which swim in clear
ones, in their superficies, a little under it, in the middle about the bottom,
or laying on the bottom it self; and those either cleaving together, or rent
asunder.

Fourthly, they consider the froath, and bubbles.

Fifthly, they at length consider of the circle. But Paracelsus moreover,
distinguishes the body of the urine, into the urine of the drink, and mixed of
both: He calls it that of the written by Ancestors, and much less to chastize
them, nor to handle the precepts of the judgments of urine, nor to explain the
inventions of others, as neither to make an Apology for them: But I only desire
to discover the Ancient errors of the Schools that have arisen from feigned
humors, that juniours may not hereafter be led aside according to rash beliefs
of dreams.

First therefore I will reckon up the errors concerning the circle of the
urine; and then Gordon have been set to sale unto ignorant poor people, under
the false title of a Diviner.

First of all therefore, they have stumbled in the circle of the urine, since
it has hitherto been unknown, why the circle is oftentimes, of another color
than the rest of

Yet have they not diligently enquired, from whence there should be that
variety of the

For neither otherwise, could a somewhat yellow urine, yield a more red, and
heightened color by a naked reflection of it self; but should rather paint out a
more pale color, than a yellowish one, if the color of the circle were only
appearing from a reflection: Therefore the reason of the altered color in the
circle of the urine, depends in very deed, on the very body of the urine it
self; And so, the circle alone, shows the whole consistence, color, and
transparency of the urine, because it contains them: which thing the wood
Nephritical or for the stone of the kidneys, teaches by a notable example: For
this wood being steeped in rain water, if thou shall afterward behold its
infusion sideways, it is wholly red in its body; but that decocted, or infused
steepage has an Azure or Sky-colored circle, however disturbingly thou shall
shake it at thy pleasure: For so the color of the blood being beheld through a
vein, appears of an Azure color: So also, the sky-colour in the circle of the
decoction of the Nephritical wood, is indeed Azury; but being multiplied, it
looks more black, and of an obscure color, tends more to white, than a red
one, being diametrically seen through a glass, or vein: After the same manner,
in the body of the urine a red color appears simply such, as it does in the
circle; which being re-bounded or weakened from a cross the urine, is not of so
citron a color in the circle. The circle therefore, is a true token of color
in transparent urines; but in dark or thick and troubled ones, a circle does
not apear. But as to what pertains unto the color of urine; the Schools say,
that a watery, thin, pale urine, is a sign of digestion being deficient, even
as that which is tinged with a manifest yellowness is a token of good
digestion.

It is a saying of Galen; I make water after midnight, the which while I see it
not yet to be tinged with a due yellowness, I return to sleep: And awaking two
or three hours after, I again make water, and I find my urine filled with a due
color: Whence I conjecture that a perfect digestion, and yellow Choler of the
Gaul, is now poured on my urine: This is also the modern doctrine of the
Schools: Yet I, as yet doubt, whether the yellowness of the urine may be
always attributed to one cause; Since they unconstantly attribute it, sometimes
unto digestion being finished, but sometimes, unto yellow Choler being mixed
therewith: But least they should err, they have joined both. I therefore,
since I found none who has distinguished himself herein, am constrained to
explain both: For the urine

And then, if but one only drop of Gaul, shall be in two points of urine, the
whole becomes bitter: but the urine although of a Citron, and Saffron Color,
is never bitter: Therefore it receives not Gaul admixed with it, nor is the
tincture thereof, of Gaul.

Truly, if the Schools do judge of things by savors or tastes, why are they so
little careful,

The which, if it be so, why at leastwise, have they not from thence
acknowledged the yellowness of the urine to happen not from Choler or Gaul,
but from elsewhere? Because if Choler were made in sanguification, together
with the blood and urine, and being co-bred together with, and sprinkled on
the urine from the beginning, should ting the urine; Choler should neither be
the last thing constituted in the Liver, if it were a constitutive part of the
blood, and its superfluity should be straightway wiped forth with the urine,
neither should it make a separated Inn for it self, for a time: Or if that be
supposed, at least that Inn ought to be named, and by Anatomy to offer it self
and to be found.

But seeing yellowness in the urine of Galen, is more late than the body of
the urine, a place of the utmost part of the gut Ileon is denoted, where, when
as now the cream begins

Now it is sufficient, that the Gaul of a bird, or fish, being even but
slenderly burst, however most exactly they may be washed, yet a bitterness
remains: Therefore if there

The Schools therefore, have trebbly erred in this matter.

First, while as they being ignorant, that yellow and liquid dung is mixed with
the urine,

Secondly, Because from yellowness alone, and a custom of subscribing, they
have conjectured of Choler: As if nothing were of a saffron Color in us, which
ought not also to be Gauly.

They indeed prove the same thing by it self: To wit, that Choler is in nature,
because it is manifest in the urine: And again, that what is yellow in the
urine, that ought

Thirdly at length: For the judgment erring concerning the ordinary color, and
so concerning the very content of the urine, it must needs be, that
prognostications of the urine do fall to the ground, as many as have hitherto
been supported by Colors, and contents: But at least wise, since it is now
manifest, that the yellowness of urine is not Choler, but a dungy excrement;
it is no wonder, that another yellow excrement is bred in the stomach, which
also is bitter, by a far different, and proper error of its own ferment, which
therefore ought not to be of the family of the Gaul.

Furthermore, seeing that in Fevers, yellow urines do suddenly wax pale, and a
future doatage is signified, and since that thing is interpreted by the
Schools, to come to

For it is sufficient, that it has been already demonstrated, that that
doting delusion is not bred from Choler snatched up into the brain; but
because the liquid dung which was wont to go with the urine, is now detained in
the Hypochondrial or place about the short ribs; neither is it mixed with the
urine, as it was wont to be: That doatage therefore, draws its original from
that seat from whence all madnesses derive theirs, as I teach in its own
treatise: For by this title also alone, some madnesses are therefore named
Hypochondriacal ones.

For otherwise, who should that snatcher of Choler be, which should bring this
unmixt, into the brain, and being separated from the blood of the veins through
which it should

But to what end should a Fever (which they account a mere accident) stir up
Choler to the head? Shall it be judged best in nature, to have now at length
banished the matter of the disease which a good while lurked in the midriffs,
into the head? Or what if it wandringly floateth in the veins, as being
separated from the blood, and of its own accord shall climb upwards, why is it
not rather banished out of doors through an accustomed passage? Shall man's
nature, now procure its own death, contrary to the universal endeavor of
things? Shall such a fury at length, be fit for the sequestring of Choler,
which was not seperable but by an appeased vigor? Does happily, the Gaul being
defirous of a wandering state, of its own accord and voluntarily separate it
self, and ascend to the head? At length, in what bottle does Gaul lurk in the
head, that it may stir up a Feverish madness? Is it in the bosoms of the
brain? Is it in the feigned arterial weaving of Galen? But on both sides it
should presently be mortal; and Gaul would drop down through the doting
nostrils.

Again, if watery urins in Fevers, after yellow ones, do afford safe doatages,
with laughter; Yet surely, according to Hippocrates, then these kind of doting
delusions

At length in the Jaundise, the brain it self is yellow: But if the Jaundise be
from Choler, why is it without doatage? Without an Erisipelas, or great
inflammation of all

A waterish urine therefore, after yellow ones, in Fevers, denotes, that the
tincture of the urine or liquid dung (it is the liquour of meats in the bowels,
immediately before they Hippocrates: As the Liquid dung being not rightly
purged, tumulteth in the Hypochondrials.

Therefore they are mere dreams, which the Schools do hitherto, as it were from
a three-legged stool, foretell concerning the color of the urine. They have
indeed learned

But if they will have Gaul to be brought through the hollow vein, how should
not Gaul mix it self with the blood? Should not the whole blood of those
feverish persons be bitter?

A dreaming old woman said so long ago, and the Schools have followed her: For
if

Vain therefore is the fiction of the Schools, concerning yellow Choler in the
urine, and

But be it a sign of digestion, because the ferments of the stomach, Gaul, and
Liver have returned, which before were hindered, shut up, etc. Whence there is
hope, that the to this end; the which, unless it be inspired into the stomach,
in a due dose, lack of appetites, crudities, yea and an inordinate hunger or
appetite it self, do arise.

Therefore if this comely ferment of the defense of the stomach be exorbitant
in the spleen, there are made, bloody and black spittings out into the stomach,
which the Schools

By reason whereof, we must note, that the cause being removed, the effect is
taken

But if the ferment of that bowel be supplanted, there is a gross and white
sediment of the urine, nor ever without the strangury or pissing by drops, the
which therefore in old

But a red sediment in a yellow urine, and that which easily melts through
the heat of

CHAP. V. That the Jaundise is not from yellow Choler.
1. The supposition of the Schools in this case. 2. A fit answer. 3. An
ordinary, and ridiculous privy shift. 4. Another evasion. 5. The cause of the
Jaundise is taught by Anatomy. 6. The Schools entangle themselves. 7. From an
impertinency. 8. A double vice in the jaundise. 9. The forgetfulness of the
Schools. 10. Absurdities upon the causes of the Jaundise of the Humourists. 11.
Four absurdities. 12. That the bitterness of the mouth does not argue Choler.
13. That the Jaundise is not from the Gaul being stopped. 14. There is always
some poison in the Jaundise. 15. That colors, if they are inordinate in an
excrement, are not made from causes ordained in nature. 16. It is proved by
proper remedies. 17. That curative betokenings are not drawn from things
helpful and hurtful. 18. The adequate or suitable cause of the Jaundise. 19.
That the Jaundise is not bred but from single causes. 20. That the Jaundise is
not cured by yellow remedies, as such. 21. A History in the strangury of an old
man. 22. The Ox scoffs at the causes of the Jaundise delivered by the
Humourists, and at the use of grasse-roots. 23. That Choler is not dismissed
for tinging of the excrements of the belly. 24. The pale dung of the bowels
does not so much accuse of the absence of the Gaul, as of the error of its
transchanging. 25. Against the possibility of the Gaul being obstructed in the
Iaundise, by reason of the essential thinglinesse of the disease being unknown.
26. Another argument. 27. A third. 28. From an impertinency. 29. From the
impossibility of tincture. 30. From bitterness. 31. From the disproportion of
the thing tinging, and of the thing tinged. 32. The generating of an unnamed
poison in the Iaundise. 33. Some absurdities are proposed, to be seriously
considered by the Humourists. 34. A conclusion from the premises. 35. The nest
of the Iaundise. 36. An error of Physicians about the passing of Choler into a
fish.

THe standard-defending argument, whereby the Humourists believe that from a
full necessity, they have confirmed the existence, and generation of yellow
Choler,

First, They have not yet proved any upper entrance of the Gaul unto the little
bag, as neither has it hitherto, by exact Anatomy, been found: Therefore the
excrementous bowel upward; neither thus, should the gauly tincture of the
dungs, ever fail although the lower passage were shut up: The Humourists
therefore stick in the entrance, in proving of the question, whether the thing
be: And then, they fail in the passage and separation of Gaul from the Liver.
Thirdly, At leastwise from the disproportion, they might easily collect, that
they were decieved: For if one that has the jaundise, shall drink eight pints
in one day, he is to make well nigh, as much of most yellow urine, whereof four
pints at least should be of mere Gaul, and by how much the weaker the sick
shall be, and nearer to death, by so much the deeper, their urin shall be also
in yellowness, yet not any thing bitter.

It was therefore to be measured, how much of yellow Choler may be daily
expelled by urine, and through the skin, in those that have the jaundise; to
wit, whether there be daily as much of Gaul, expelled through the paunch in
healthy persons, especially, in whom there is a seldom going to stool: But if
not; therefore, it is not Gaul, not Choler, or of the natural Humors, which is
made in the jaundise; but plainly an excrementitious poison: And by
consequence, the jaundise does not prove it self to arise from Gaul. At length,
the argument of the Humourists being granted by way of supposition, at
leastwise, for that very cause, they confess, that no Choler in nature, not so
much as that which is believed to float together with the blood in the veins,
is made from the intent of nature, or for nourishment: but that always,
however it may be taken, it is excrementitious, and a certain product, which as
well in its quantity, as quality, is besides nature, and the scope of
sanguification: By consequence also, that Choler is neither of the composition
of the blood, as neither of the intention of nature, which it has in
generating of the blood: That is, that Choler is not a constitutive Humor of
us, or an entire part of the blood.

But if they shall answer; that Choler in the jaundise, is indeed a diseasy
Humor, and therefore also excrementitious; but not therefore also ordinary
Choler: But that I might

Again, if the cause of the jaundise be a diseasy excrement, and a far
different thing from the constitutive Choler of the blood; and not otherwise,
ordinary and natural Choler; Therefore at least, it is an impertinent argument
of the Schools, to be willing, by a feigned and excrementous Humor, to intrude
the necessity of a natural Humor, and to confirm a necessary Choler: Even as a
gleary or gravelly water also, does not prove the nourishment of a bone, or the
making of a bone in the callous matter growing in fractures; As neither does
corrupt pus prove a generating of flesh.

What if they say, that the Gaul is not troublesome in quality, in the jaundise,
but only in quantity; I pray, let them look back: Because, even on the first
day, and before

Truly I remember, that two jaundous dead carcases were dissected, I being
present: Yet neither orifice of their Gaul was stopped (for I curiously,
thoroughly viewed the whole); but the veins of the Mesentery (to wit, beneath
the Liver, and far remote from the Gaul) abounded with a yellow and dungy blood.

For Gaul was thought to be present, before it could be made by the Liver: And
the excrements and liquid dung; Since that, neither does the urine which is
from thence yellow, acknowledge bittternesse.

Sorrow has oftentimes given a beginning to the jaundise: But the Humourists
dedicate sorrow to the Spleen: Sorrow therefore shall not be the foregoing
immediate, and containing cause of the stoppage of the Gaul: The liquid dung
also multiplies the jaundise, not only through the error of the digestive
faculty: but also, through the vice of the dispensative faculty, it is snatched
into the veins by a retrograde motion; and that which ought to be purged
downwards, is called or sent up wards. Moreover on the the other hand, the very
efficient of the jaundise produces a poison, by a homebred vice, no otherwise,
than as I have demonstrated, that through the digestion of the stomach being
decayed, a poison is bred, which is expelled by vomit.

For in the jaundise, the excrements of the fundament do frequently look pale,
and are almost white, and then on the morrow, they again look yellow; and
again, soon after

Two things therefore concur together in the jaundise: One is an estranging of
the second etc. For the stomach, and intestine have their proper yellowness,
which sometimes also waxes bitter from the digestive faculty erring.

But when as, with the error of the digestive faculty, a vice of the
distributive is present, now the jaundise concurs: because that which is bred
besides nature, is besides nature dispersed into the veins and body; which
otherwise ought, neither to be bred, nor carried that way, but to be forced
through its own emunctory places: which distributive faculty has been hitherto
neglected by the Schools:

Through the error whereof notwithstanding, diverse diseases are made; to wit,
etc. especially the jaundise, in the limits of the body: For the liquid dung,
which otherwise is naturally generated after a separation of the more pure
chyle, about the end of the Ileon, last of all, also before the mere dung, in
the gut Colon, does now fore-timely begin, from the empty gut, and is besides
nature, turned into that yellow excrement (yet not bitter, such as is bred in
the stomach) whence a right is engendered in it, of climbing into the veins of
the mesentety: Therefore the excrements of the belly are of an ashy color,
they being deprived of the liquid dung, and tinging yellowness natural unto
them.

1. For the Schools understand the Gaul and Choler to be Sunonymass.

2. That the chest of the Gaul is shut in the jaundise, where it inclines unto
the gut Duodenum.

3. Therefore, that the filths of the belly being deprived of a due portion of
Gaul, do wax pale.

4. Therefore that the Gaul, which ought to depart through the fundament, is
over-proportionably and immoderately co-mixed with the urine, through the
error of its passage alone: which blockishnesses of credulity, have caused the
fundamentals of healing to be turned aside, and have brought great destruction
on mortal men, no less than they have manifested inconsiderate rashnesses.

For first of all, it is manifest (the which I have elsewhere proved concerning
digestions) that the dung of man, although it be little, or much yellow, yet it
is not therefore bitter,

The generation whereof, notwithstanding, is not intended by nature, but is
diseasy beside the instincts of a vital nature, and by accident. What if the
mouth of him that has the jaundise tastes bitter, does it therefore, argue
Choler? In the jaundise, a most yellow urine tastes not bitter; therefore it
is deprived of Gaul and Choler. The mouth, in fear, waxes presently bitter,
with a saltness; But fear has not obtained any command over the Gaul, that a
dread being concieved, it can be powered forth into the mouth: For if in the
jaundise, the Chest of the Gaul be so shut beneath, that no Choler can flow
unto the Duodenum: therefore, neither is the mouth bitter in the jaundise, from
Gaul being drawn upwards from the Duodenum, or empty gut, seeing there is not
another passage any other way, whereby Gaul could ascend into the mouth.

Oftentimes also in the jaundise, after ash-colored excrements of the belly,
they void yellow ones: why therefore does not the jaundise cease, if the cause
thereof now desisteth?

If (I say) also, from the stinging or biting of some Serpent, any one suddenly
falls under the jaundise; shall therefore the little bag of the Gaul be
forthwith shut? Who

And therefore, that the excrements do wax pale, yellow, red, and black, no
otherwise than from a vice, as well of the digestive, as of the distributive
faculty? For the

What if therefore, the jaundise be not from a stoppage of the Gaul; shall not
consesequently, medicines for the unstopping of the Gaul, be in vain? For so,
as some Serpents,

Let them therefore remember, that curative betokenings are not fitly drawn
from things helpful, and hurtful; but more fitly, diagnostical or discerning
ones: And the

The efficient cause therefore of the jaundise, is a poisonous ferment besides
nature, which so badly affects the Pylorus, that the digestive and also the
distributive faculty

Therefore the jaundise is cured, by the flowers of Marigold, Dandelyon, and of
many other the like things being applied: oft-times also, by some Antidotes
agreeable to

For neither does Rhubarb, Saffron, Gourd, the sharp leaved Dock, etc. Cure the
jaundise as they are yellow: but their yellowness rather shows their
ordination to be

A certain man of eighty years old, and father in law to a Physician of
Bruxels, for two from his father in law, by offering him stone-breaking things:
But he had not freed him from the dropping strangury: But his gaul was filled
with some clots, without the jaundise: but a defect of the Spleen causes the
strangury of old men, As I have elsewhere proved concerning digestions.

For the Jews complain very much of black Choler, and grief: But they make use
of

1. Before therefore, I shall grant the gaul to be daily sent down for tinging
of the

2. And then, that the excrements of man are endued with a notable bitterness:
The which notwithstanding, is elsewhere proved false, concerning digestions.

3. It ought to be manifest, that the same paint which tingeth the urine and
filths of the belly, is not naturally generated in the very passage of the
membranees, which is called the intestine; even as I have made manifest above
concerning a Calf.

4. If therefore the urine, and dungs are ordinarily, and naturally yellow, and
yet are not bitter; therefore not from gaul, or Choler: Therefore it is no
wonder, if such an Efficient of nature erring, such a tincture becomes the more
plentiful, and so that in the more heightened jaundise, the urine waxes also,
more intensly yellow daily in a jaundous person: neither is it a wonder also,
if from the efficient and distributing cause erring, such yellow excrements are
derived throughout the whole body, and that the jaundise, and at length also,
death do arise: For if in a gluttonous stomach there be made a bitter
yellowness, from its digestion erring: and that, as well without as with-in
the the jaundise, as well in an healthy as feverish person, and as well in an
obstructed, as open gaul; In the next place, if in stopped up gaul, stones
clots, etc. do appear without the jaundise; If in the jaundise, the urine be
most intensly yellow, and tinging, without bitterness and gaul, and all these
things under the error of the digestive faculty alone, and the distributive
offending; It is no wonder, that the excrements of the belly look pale through
a vice of both faculties: Because, it is the part of same faculty, being in
good health, to beget [this something] and of the same being ill at ease, to
make [this something vitiated].

At length, a pale excrement of the belly, and urine of a yellow ruddy color,
in the

Again, if there were any upper mouth in the chest (which there is none: for a
passage is not found to be but beneath) surely that should be least of all fit
for drawing of

Then again, from hence it follows; if there were any Choler, and that Choler

Then at length it is manifest from elsewhere, that the liquour of the gaul is
a mere vital bowel, but not the Choler, or daily excrements of the Liver:
Therefore, if there thorugh the chest: why therefore, the passage of the little
bag beneath, bein stopped up, should the whole body presently re-gorge it self
with gaul: for truly, this presupposes as much gaul to have been first
prepared by the Liver.

Furthermore, if yellow Choler, which they imagine to swim on the blood let out
of the veins, does as well tinge the excrements of the belly, as of the
bladder, and that Choler

Neither in the mean time, does the urine of a jaundous person, therefore,
ascend scarce in its fiftieth part, unto the tincture of mere Choler: Therefore
if the urine (which in its own body every where, and always materially
represents drink) does as yet borrow its color from gaul and Choler: the
tincture of a jaundous urine it self, ought' in its body to exceed the tincture
of gaul, yea and of saffron, at leasts by thirty fold, and the gaul should be
thick like the yolk of eggs; The which, seeing it is not of the nature of
Choler, or gaul, therefore neither shall the tincture of a jaundous urine be
able ever to be from gaul: And this argumentation, is from number, extension,
measure, and thickness.

The Schools therefore ought to have regard unto their own positions concerning
the obstructions of the gaul; and they should easily find, that there is not
about the hundredth proportion of gaul or Choler daily bred, (although it be
granted, that the little bag of the gaul be stopped, and that gaul is not
thrust down unto the excements of the fundament) unto that which is voyded by
the urine alone: And then, that there is not a reason why the jaundise growing
great, the urine, and color of the habit of the body should wax great and be
increased, when as otherwise, sanguification, and the generating of gaul
happens to be less, daily, death being urgent. And which is

But in conflraining the Schools to measure; A yellow heart, whereby in one
only day atleast, the urine is tinged in the jaundise, might infect as much
dung with a full color,

Yea, when the other troop of absurdities might be excused, yet by the jaundise
more of yellow Choler (so I now by a liberty, call that dreg) is daily
dispersed throughout the

Therefore, it had at leastwise behoved the Schools to teach, why a detainment,
and obstruction of the gaul does multiply the generation of gaul, if they will
not at once grant, that that generation of such gaul and of all feigned Choler,
is otherwise, excrementous.

And so, that Choler, and a'quaternary of Humors is feigned; But whatsoever of
these excrements is generated, that it is partly of an unnamed poison, which

Therefore they have accounted a narrow search into the poison of the jaundise,
to be in vain, seeing they thought that Choler to be that which did abound only
in quantity, and otherwise, to be a natural co-partner of the venal blood. Ah,
I wish they had first examined, that yellow Choler (such as they show to swim
on the blood let out o^ the veins) cannot more deeply tinge the urine (which
otherwise, is watery, from the nature of its own Whey) than Choler it self is
tinged, and as yet far less: And that an ordinary urine, of a mean and
temperate yellowness, is notwithstanding more deeply tinged, than the
aforesaid supper-swimming Choler it self is: That in the jaundise, its color
is fourtytimes more full, and ringed, than that it can be hoped to be dyed by
the aforesaid Choler: And that by how much the more diseasie and nearer to
death the jaundise is, by so much the urine also is more filled with a deep or
yellow yellowness.

Neither yet, is there a reason why more of Choler should be daily generated,
while as there is a less necessity thereof, and the natural heat in the Liver
less: Why there should I say, be more of Elementary fire, by how much death is
nearer, and why that fire, if there should be any, should be nearer to its own
choking; And that while they rashly say, honey to be wholly turned into Choler
or gaul, in a Choleric, strong, fiery, manly and valiant constitution, which
otherwise, in a sanguine person, is made totally blood.

And so also, that they being constrained by their own and unvoluntary
confession, do not see that the generation of their feigned Choler proceeds
on both sides, from

Since, as in the mean time, there is no necessity of such Choler, but very
much necessity of blood in the jaundise; May they not seem from thence, to
conclude.

1. That nature in its greatest health, always erred in its own ends.

2. And so also, that the Creator thereof had erred.

3. And that she should not cease, to make a most plentiful quantity of gaul,
while as she most greatly abhors that, and should have the least need
thereof: That the making of Choler in the Schools, is from a diseasifying
cause; but not from the integrity of nature: That whatsoever they call Choler,
is neither Choler nor gaul, nor one of the four feigned constitutive Humors of
us; but, the gaul being excepted, that Choler is always a mere dungy
excrement, if not also, together therewith, defectuous and poysonsom. Therefore
Choler never existed in nature: But the gaul is a prevalent bowel, in the
nature of an original or firstborn liquor, greatly vital, and most exceeding
necessary. Choler therefore, is wanting in whole nature, therefore also for the
jaundise: But the disease called Choler, whatsoever it touches with its
poisonous ferment, it de^^es it, and transchangeth it into a poison, without
ceasing. The whole invention therefore, of Choler, is frivolous, false, and
pernicious.

But the nest or shop of the jaundise, is from the Pylorus even unto the end of
the Duodenum. For I remember, that a Pike-fish, being at sometime opened alive
in the

The common sort of Physicians supposed, that he had drawn Choler from the
jaundous person: But I suppose, that the live fish had putrified with the heat
of him that had the jaundise, and that he had borrowed his yellowness from
corruption: That the excrement tinged on the skin, in the jaundous person, was
a mortified poison, no other wise than as the flesh of the fish was: For the
fish was so stinking, that it was despised by a Cat: I therefore healed the man
by some calcined Alcali salts. Let it be sufficient to have spoken these
things, concerning the falsehood of Humors, and the miserable snare of the
Humourists: But other things which concerning the falling down of Humor,
having regard hither, might offer themselves, I will elsewhere perfectly
explain in a particular treatise, concerning the toys of a Catarrhe.

But last of all, that for black Choler they are wont to accuse the Hemerhoides
or piles; in the next place, the Menstrues, and Cancer of the Dugs; Surely that
I despise under silence, as unworthy of an answer, and as unprofitable trifles,
in a great compassion of the rash belief of my neighbors, and also of the
blindness of the Schools: For truly, herein they retire from the terms
proposed by themselves, as well in making of blood, and sliding down to the
spleen, as in passing from yellow Choler into black: Because the fundament
veins, and veins of the womb, not always, daily, or in any place, but only
about the utmost passages of those veins, blood, being otherwise good, is made
malignant, and defiled in those places, and not before: but not that it was
already before degenerated in the Spleen, and sent into the utmost end of the
Fundament.

Even so as also, whatsoever the Schools devise for the establishment of
phlegm, concerning the Pose, Cough, Asthma, Shortness of Breath, Pleurisy,
Toothach, etc. All that, I will demonstrate in its own place in the treatise of
the toys of a catarrhe, for ridiculous dreams of Paganism: But now it has
seemed sufficient unme to have shown, that no phlegm is contained in the
fellowship of four humors: and that which is dashed forth from diseasie
causes, which is snivelly, and the which they have hitherto persuaded
themselves to be ejected like phlegm, it is sufficient now to have shown, that
that very thing has undergone the title of an excrement, nor that it is in any
wise to be ascribed unto the family of a vital Humor.

Let the Lord Jesus be between me, and the interpreters of these things.
FOR AN ARGUMENT Of the book, a Poet has thus sung against the Humourists,
thirsting after Christian blood.
MOst famous Captain, why in many Doctors does thou trust,
It Is much thou can confide in one; the other rout [unjust]
Do hurt, do thou not see the veins throughout the body empted,
This cut's, that burn's, and so by Art, the maladie's incensed:
Who ere of daubing Galen does in ought the counsel take,
They all against one body fight, and B' Art a slaughter make.
A rout of Medicine professors slew an Emperor,
Do thou believe that Physic Doctors have a healing power?
He was a Belgian Prince by blood, but Phisick't by that rabble
After the Spanish mode: to the Dutch that mode's unprofitable.
I Will add a little to his Tomb: here lays a Captain best,
Over whom Mars could not ought prevail while blood was in his breast:
What bloody war could not perform, Physicians could by lance,
Thus less than Hippocrat's himself, Mavors is made [by chance.]
TUMULUS PESTIS.

OR THE PLAGUE-GRAVE.

JOHN BAPTISTA VAN HELMONT Tobarch in ROYENBORCH, Pellines, etc. being the
Author.

THE PEST Reader, the Title which thou Read, is a mournful Terror, affixed
to the doors, within it shows death, the kind of death, and scourge of men:
stand still and enquire what this may betoken? What the Epigraph of the
Plague-Grave will have it self to be.

I have departed under the Anatomy, not dyed, as long as the ill-Counselling
envy of the scoffer, and ignorant lust of men shall cherish me.

THEREFORE HERE IS No Funeral, no dead Carkase, no Death, no Sceleton, no
Mourning, no Contagion.

GIVE GLORY TO THE ETERNAL, That the Pest has now failed under the proper
punishment of an Anatomy.

JOHN BAPTIST A VAN HELMONT Of BRUXELS A Philosopher by the fire, Toparch in
Royenborgh, Pellines, etc. Wishes health and joy to CHRISTIANS.
Dear Reader.
I Have always, even from a Child, sought after the truth, above every
delightful thing; because I every where found every man a Liar; and so that
from the impiety of the world, all false, ignorant, devised, deceitful things,
and things full of impostures have been invented: And when I had fitly searched
into all States, Religions, and Conditions by their individuals, I saw indeed
the certain and unchangeable truth, in numbers, and measures: In the next
place, in created things, I found indeed the essence and properties of things
to be true and good; but the truth it self, however I in quired amongst men, I
no where found: I greatly grieved that truth had hid it self from my capacity,
as not knowing, that that was my own vice, but not the fault of things.

At length, when I had considered that God himself was the naked truth, I took
the Gospel-book in my hand; wherein although I every where noted singular
verity, yet I found the interpretations thereof to be according to the will of
the flesh; Yea, at this day, I have noted some to be diligently studious to
excuses excuses in sins, especially in those of gre^^men: And so, the truth of
the Gospel is reckoned to be professed; but not consented unto as it ought to
be: For there is none who having two Coats, puts of one, that out of mere love,
he may cloth the poor man as if Christ were present, therewith: None turns the
other cheek to him that strikes him: And so, Evangelical truth, through the
endeavor of some, is at this day grown out of use, among Christians. In which
consideration, when I once had tarried out almost all night, after the studies
of some years, and very many anguishes, I resolved with my self, that I would
every where assault the Plague freely, which had then invaded our Countrymen,
and the which all fled from: And although I had on every side contracted the
most choiseremedies out of books, into a breviary and also had remedies
described by others, at hand; yet I experienced them all to be void, feeble,
and vain: For the forsaken sick, and poor, did oft-times utter their vomitings
and belchings upon me, and breathed out their soul between my arms, to my
grief: but God preserved this ignorant and unprositable servant. And at length,
I comprehended the nature, progress, and properties of the Pest, to be far
different from what the Schools had hitherto understood them to be: Because
Doctors and writers themselves, do first run away: and what things they have
here and there compiled out of diverse Authors, they do equally extol and
commend to the ignorant, as most exceeding good, and the which, from their own
ignorance, they so judge to be: And so, all their doctrine is supported by the
foundation of supposition. In the mean time notwithstanding the knowledge of a
Pestilent poison, hitherto scanty, is desired; and remedies are required, which
their gift being unchanged in the first shops, can overcome the contagion of
the poison; whereof nothing has hitherto been dreamed by the Schools.

Tumulus PESTIS. OR THE PLAGUE-GRAVE.
CHAP. I. Of what kind the Pest or Plague is.
AFTER a pensive lodging out all night, a dream befell me: and since night unto
night shows knowledge, I have thought that a dream does contein knowledge:
Therefore I willingly submit my dreams unto the judgment of the Reader.

For I beheld my self to be in the vaults without the city (they call them
Grotts) I saw Daedalian Labarinths; in some place, Arches threatening a cleft
and ruin. I had called them the porches or galleries of Pluto, wherein
inveterate or long accustomed darkness, and a thick air, wearied with long
rest, suffers not the light of a candle to shine a-far of: For the thickness
of the air did so meet with the Gas of the earth, that the flame of a
wax-candle would scarce shine but a few paces from thence: For the voice
becomes so dumb with a duskish sound, that not far of from thence, an outcry
cannot be heard, and the more dull sound seems to resemble, not a voic, but
the shadow of a voice. For nothing is there which is vital, except a company of
Bats, their nests being adjoined or knit fast in the Arches of the co-heaped
rubbishes.

Alas! a sad spectacle, the Image of eternal death, where the seat of
night-thieves is: Wherein, if thou shall chance to hurt one of its cruel
inhabitants, thou art deprived of candles, and presently of life, unless, thy
light being extinguished, thou prostratest thy self as humble, and feign thy
self as dead. For those lurkers, being the natives of obscurities, do not
endure to be obtained, or corrected by any; and much less, to be driven away
from their seat: They call it an injury, to have the light brought against
them; because with them, they neither have light, neither do they love it:
under doctrine and correction, not issuing out of their nests, they cry out for
revenge, and they gape for it with conjoined votes.

For how strong are they because and when they are very many? How bold are they
in the Age and Kingdom of darkness? and how unmild, where all things favor
their own wishes and flyings? For our breath there smells of so great an hoary
putrefaction, that delay presently tingeth us with paleness. And indeed, it is
familiar to the Mines of Metals, that except the soil be frequently pounced,
and new air do breath on it from the Sky, mountainous Inhabitants do certainly
perish with a blind Gas: but if they shall not lodge out of their house all
night, they at least, do contract a disease deplorable even for their life
time: For therefore, they are wont, that they may preserve the life of
mountainous Inhabitants, to blow in new air, and to blow out the hurtful by
Engines. But in the Roman Vaults they seek not for Minerals; therefore also,
they want an Arsenical Gas: For there, frequent Sepulchers are found, which are
thought to be those of Martyrs who gloriously died: Therefore, I dreaming,
began to doubt, whether fled Truth, and not to be found at this day, had made
its grave with the Martyrs in the same place? the question smiled on me
sleeping; for the most High created the Physician, as also, medicine out of the
earth. I have therefore deemed the truth of medicine, and knowledge of a
Physician, to have hid it self in the stable Foundation of Nature, and the more
hidden Sepulcher, from the unworthy and defiled beholding of Mortals, and to
have forsaken our commerces, and to have overwhelmed it self in many labyrinths
and perplexities; so that, by reason of the smallness of light which is social
unto us by nature, truth remains covered over with darkness, and hedged about
with difficulties. And the worst thing which here at length offers it self, is,
that this Grave of Truth is kept not by a good Genius, or Spirit, but by the
unhappy Birds of the Night: therefore the spirits of darkness are to be
supplanted: But whosoever he be, who strives the less to applaud those keepers,
he presently experienceth the violent power or tyrannical rule of those, who
under the show of piety and quietness, keep these Kingdoms of Pluto as their
own. But seeing they themselves come not into the light of truth, they also
suffer not others to enter, unless they prostrate themselves as humble unto
them. For any other person is straightway encompassed by the powers of
darkness, the Enemies of the first Truth, who under the pretense of godliness;
challenge the Legacies of their own Sepulchers to themselves; because they
boast, that the Kingdom of Truth is in their possession: And therefore, that
the command of Learning, Sciences, and the powers of great men, are assigned to
them. For these, being neither Birds, nor Mice, have obtained a middle and
hermaphroditical kind, and they go, as it is in the 20th of Luke, They pierce
the houses and possessions of Widows; they lead away after them, poor silly
women laden with sins, etc. Surely, every such business walks in darkness,
and all their endeavor is with a Noonday Devil.

Truly, I saw not a means of opening the Sepulcher of Truth, but with long
leisure: but this thing, hateful spirits, even since the days of Arias
Montanus, have not permitted to good men: Wherefore, that I might seasonably,
and with the profit of my Neighbor, put that in frequent practice, I decreed
to withdraw my self from the vulgar sort, and under the light, thoroughly to
knock the Vaults of Nature full of holes: And least I should labor in vain, I
disposed of my glassen basins under the light, that by a dumb sound, I might
discern the Vault of Nature underneath. I endeavored by the unwearied pains
and charges of forty years, to break the rocky stones asunder with the Axe,
Crook, Fire, and sharp liquor, that light may flow in from heaven, and that the
Nightbirds which presume to keep the Keys of Sciences, and the narrow passage
of Truth, may vanish away, or betake themselves unto a corner, out of a
Court-like conversation, and the pursuances of courtesies: or at least, that
they may no longer hereafter hinder mortals who are diligent searchers after
truth. For this mixed kind of Monster noyseth abroad, that it is more excellent
than all Birds; because they begin not from an Egg, after the custom of other
Birds; but do nurse up their Young with a longer sucking at the Breast; and do
cast those out of the Nest which they think are not sufficiently profitable
unto them.

They boast, I say, that they are therefore the most quick-sighted of Birds; in
this respect, because they also see most clearly under darkness. Alas, thus is
our Age deceived by darkness! But they feign, and persuade the vulgar, that
Truth is in the shade, within their own vaults; who in the mean time, being
always learning, do never come unto the knowledge of Charity; because they
endure not the light that is perfectly learned by alone and naked Charity; and
therefore, they always weave to themselves the Wiles and webs of darkness.
Truly, it was necessary for me to rent the bowels of the Earth, and to break
its Crown: For truly, Galen has seemed to me, to have entered into the Vaults
with a slender Lamp; who being presently affrighted, stumbled in the entry, and
at first almost fell over the Threshold: Therefore, his Oil being lavishly
spent, he returned to his own, and told many things confusedly, concerning the
Sepulchers, which he had not perceived, nor known, nor believed, although he
had seen them. All from thenceforth, boast rashly among their own people, that
they know many things, who saluted not so much as the Threshold of Nature,
except at a far distance, from the relation of Galen. In the next place, Avicen
with his company, although he became more cautious by the viewing of Galen; yet
he entered not much deeper, but looking behind, about, and above him, and being
taken with giddiness, his foot being dashed against a stone, fell headlong
down: but returning, he boasts in a Foreign Dialect, that he had seen far more
than his Predecessors: The which, when his followers understood, and stuck to,
they chose a certain one of them for a Standard-Defender; they all of them had
rather fight for the glory of their sworn Prince, than that they would
themselves enter the passages: as if the mind of man, that is free, being
readily inclined like unto Clients, had forsworn liberty: Therefore none having
afterward endeavored to enter, and being content with the first Boasters,
they prefixed on their Centuries, that themselves were to fight for the glory
and Trophy of a matter not yet known; but as many as came unto the entry, being
as it were factiously addicted unto the first Patron, and insisting in the
steps of Predecessors, presently fell down together.

They dreamed that they were entered; at leastwise, they were deprived of light
and help for removing the darkness of so great an heap. Others also, afterward
hastened toward the Vaults, but they brought not the light with them, they
perceived their Oil to be extinguished, and snatched away by the Enemies of the
first Truth, and humane health, and Inhabitants of darkness. At length,
Paracelsus having entered with a great Torch, fastened a small cord to the wall,
about his first paces, which he might follow as a Companion, and Reducer of the
ways; he aspiring to pierce whither the footsteps of mortals had not yet taken
their journey. The rout of Birds is presently amazed at so great a sight, it
thinks that Prometheus had entered; it dares not, nor was able to extinguish the
Torch, yet it secretly attempts to do it. This man sees very many Monuments,
he is long and freely enlarged, he fills the entries with smoke, and while he
is intentive, as a greedy devourer of truth, his strength fails, his Torch
falls, his light is extinguished in the middle of his course, and he is as it
were choked with fumes. I a poor miserable man, have at length entered with the
least light of a Lanthorn; and that nothing might hinder, and that nothing
might detain my hand from the work, I indeed refused a Rope, and hung my
Lanthorn at my girdle, but a Crook followed at my back, making a path the rule
of my return: Therefore I insisting only in my own footsteps, I there saw far
other things than the foregoing company of Ancestors had described.

But because I was alone, strength was wanting for so difficult weights, and I
having endeavored many things, the rout of Bats being against me; at length,
after the manner of the former, I departed without fruit; yea, far worse;
because through long delay, the light was darkened unto me, and my eyes
afterward refused to bear any further light; for why, because they had now too
much accustomed themselves to darkness: Even so, that unless I had wholly
abstained from my stubborn intent, the heavenly light of the day had profited
me nothing: at leastwise, this one only and most true thing I had learned; that
we all having trusted only unto humane aids, did walk in thick darkness,
through unknown ways, most difficult windings, and paths of the night,
imitating the industry of a few, and those badly to be trusted in: neither that
at length we did bring any fruits from thence, except the light badly consumed,
be-darkned eyes cheeks looking pale with greyness, confusions of mind,
presumptions of vanity, and the image of the night at hand, full of terror and
despair.

Moreover, I discerned, that all sorts of Knaves and Harlots, Deceivers, Jews,
and Tormenters, when as they had once intruded themselves by their own
rashness, they were soon, by boldness, raised to a degree: For I have not found
in any a greater liberty, more ample rashness, more cruel credulities, more
thick darknesses, and more frequent confusions, than in the most noble of
gifts; wherein, it is free for any one to kill, if the murder be involved in
the Cloak of a succor, and the party slain be covered with earth. Therefore I
begged of God, that he would vouchsafe to set a bound in so wicked
naughtinesses, which they committed against the Divine Image of his Majesty:
But soon after, I discerned the vanity of my desire: For truly, as long as men's
own profit holds the superiority, and medicine is exercised as a Plow, they
contend in vain, who endeavor to compose my Christ the Father of the poor,
with Mammon.

I praised those Cities in times past, wherein it was not lawful for an
undiscreet College of Physicians, to rage in a drunken manner, on the health
of their Neighbor: But afterward, I laughed at my own blockishness, because
they were excepted who cured freely: Whence I learned, that the gain of
Physicians had provided that Law for themselves, and that man's own gain would
every where vitiate the Laws of Charity, that none would from a certain hope,
be found for the future, unto whom that exception might square.

I saw therefore, that in the custom of Laws, defects grew over, and that Laws
were rendered barren of juice or virtue: and surely my stupidity was by so much
the greater in this, because more gross errors in curing are no where
committed; than those which even Chair-Physitians do through a punishable
ignorance commit; even as in my whole work I have endeavored, and been ready
to show mechannically by the fire, practically, and by all kind of
demonstrations. And indeed, but a few ages ago, arrogance, sloth, and the
extinguishment of Charity sequestered a Chyrurgion from a Physician: wherefore
afterward, servants handled manual instruments and operations; as if it
unbeseemed a Christian to help his Neighbor with his hands. In the mean time,
some Noble Matrons healed many defects with their own hands, that were
despaired of by Physicians.

Truly, after that the Studies of ambition and gain were practiced, Charity
grew cold, Mercy was extinguished, Art perished, and the Giver of lights
withdrew his gifts, the number of our calamities increased, and Physicians were
made the Fable of the vulgar; Truth remained buried in the grave of Science,
and instead thereof, a confused kind of brawlings arose, being discursive,
which was accounted for doctrine. For Physicians described, and drew to
themselves the whole Army of Diseases, almost grieving, that the Catalogue of
them was as yet so small: For they being allured with the facility of the Art
of Galen, promised to measure all diseases by the Geometrical demonstrations of
degrees of heat, and cold, and to heal them all thereby. Chyrurgions also, as
well the Modern as Ancient, from an imitation and emulation of these, largely
and widely treated promiscuously of all diseases, snatching the cures of them
all under themselves, in the sight and despite of their former Masters:
Because, at first, and from the root of Medicinal Ordination, all things
belonged to be cured only and alone by Physicians; but unto Chyrurgions
afterward, only by permission, and from favor. Both of them have remained
under a confused strife, the which I cannot, nor do I intend to put an end
unto, as being assured, The signs of a true Physician.
That a Physician chosen by God, his own signs shall follow, and wonders for
the Schools: For he shall prepare, to the honor of God, his free gifts, to the
comfort of his Neighbor; and therefore compassion shall be his Leader: For he
shall possess truth in his heart, and knowledge in his understanding; Charity
shall be his Sister, and the mercy of the Lord shall enlighten his ways: For he
shall employ or bestow the grace or favor of the Lord, and the hope of gain
shall not be in his thoughts: for the Lord is rich and liberal, and will give
him an hundredfold, in an heaped up measure. He will fructify his works, and
anoint his hands with blessing: He will fill his mouth with consolations, and
with the Trumpet his word, from which diseases shall flee: He will fill his
life with length of days, his house with riches, and his Children with the
fear of the Lord: His footsteps shall bring felicity, and diseases shall be in
his sight, as Snow in the Noon day of Summer, in an open Valley: Curse and
punishment shall flee away, and health shall follow him behind. These are the
promises of the Lord, unto Physicians whom he has chosen: These are the
blessings of those, who walk in the path of mercy: Because the Lord loves
those that work mercy; and therefore will he enlighten them by his Spirit, the
Comforter. For who is liberal as the Lord, who gives many things freely, and
for some small matter, bestows all things. Blessed is the Lord, who saves
only the merciful man, and who saves him that is to be saved, freely. But
consolation shall meet the merciful man, in the way of hope; because he has
chosen a faithful Master. But indeed the Greeks, and soon after, the Arabians,
instituted the cures of infirmities, without the distinction of the person of a
Chyrurgion from a Physician: And those Heathens rising again from the dead,
shall at some time, confound Christian Physicians, for their sloth,
covetousness, and pride: For God reserveth the choice of a Physician to
himself. But the Schools being willing to ease God of this work, have taken on
themselves to instruct Scholars, any, and without difference, and have
proposed unto them an Art placed in the daily reading of books, and in
disputations: wherefore they have read the books of Galen, Avicen, and their
Interprerers; and then they have rolled over Herbarists, the images of Herbs
being deciphered to the life: And the which, if they have not yet therefore
known from thence, the studious are dismissed to the shops, and to the
gatherers of Simples, with a command, that when they have well known the
Effigies of Simples, they return unto their Lectures, which they by much and
long study have collected out of diverse Authors, that they may learn the powers
or virtues of Simples and Compositions, and also their applications. In the
mean time, perhaps ye shall see the dissections of dead carcasses, and ye shall
hear (as they say) Galen's method of Healing, his use of the parts, and
differences of the Pulses: Likewise out Commentaries on the ninth Book of
Almanzor, according to the common rule of Practitioners.

In the mean time, learn ye problematically to dispute subtly upon any
proposition; and so, within three years space, ye shall be transchanged into
learned men. The Schools, in the mean time, being as it were ashamed, laying
aside the name of Physician, promise some higher thing unto their young
beginners, when the three years are finished; which is that of a Doctor.

Therefore, after that Art was raised up into a Faculty, Religion, and
Profession; pride crept in, covetousness intruded gain; whence also there was a
mutual hatred betwixt Physicians; which things brought with them all inclemency
on the sick. Moreover, at length, pride, for the most part, super-excelled
covetousness in those that were blown up with the letter, and lucre: wherefore
a Physician, promoted his household servant, who had known how to comb and shave
a Beard, into a Chyrurgion; accounting it a shameful thing for him who had
rolled over so many books, to bind up an Ulcer, or repose a broken bone: For
all vices have that, that they associate themselves with shame and fear, and
cover the fault with the shadow of decency: And therefore also, pride has by
degrees chosen sloth for its companion, the coupling whereof has soon bred
ignorance: So that indeed, a Doctor being called unto the outward deformities
of an Erisipelas, has been ignorant of the kind and name of that affect; the
which, when he had warily understood by the Chyrurgion, he late at night rowls
over some books, that on the morning following, he may declame many things
concerning the affect: therefore, he bids a vein to be opened; he commands
Whey, with Rose-Vinegar, or Soap, to be applied, for mitigating of the burning
heats, and describes a potion against the day following, for the drawing out
of Choler. The Chyrurgion smiles as often as the event answers not his
promises; and the Doctor, by degrees, shifting of external diseases (because he
is ignorant thereof) as being content with his Super-eminent Title, that he had
read most things in Chyrurgical writings, and could declame most exceeding
ample things among the common people, the Chyrurgion conniving thereat. He in
the mean time, who without the advice of the Physician, takes to him his own
Disciples, who can sometimes pull out a Tooth, who have known how to open a
Vein, to spread Basilicon and Diapalma, and have learned in three years time to
bind up a wound, they are reckoned the Free-masters of Chyrurgery, against the
will of the Schools. But the Doctors have too late learned the Fable of him who
had endowed a Serpent, frozen with cold, with his own hosom, and being pierced
through by the same, miserably perished: And that thing at this day is so far
extended, that Chyrurgions henceforward, have their own Doctors or Teachers,
Professors, and Writers, in their Mother Tongue, amongst themselves. Then I say
the Schools, and that too late re-considered; so that they, who at first
blushed to repose a broken or displaced bone, and afterward knew not how to do
it, are now glad to pour back the Urine, and to stir stinking dung with a
stick, that they may divine their humors to have been chased thither: And that
unless they shall do that, verily they know, that as idle at home, they ought
to grow moldy beside their books: For in the mean time, the ignorance of
Chyrurgery is increased among Physicians. Truly, God has every where punished
pride, by ignorance, or madness.

Galen indeed wrote books of the Therapeutick or practical part of healing,
which they interpret to be a method of healing: But who is he that knows not
that Therapeuta sounds as an household servant? and so, that they should serve
Nature and the sick, with the humble Title of Family-service: and we will glory
in the Lord, who taking on him the nature of a servant, would that his own
Physicians, should in this humble vocation, be made partakers of the most Noble
Science of the whole Universe. And indeed I at sometime asked a Canonical man,
why he would not sing together with the rest at the hours of singing, who from
their Institution were the Singers of Divine Praises, the imitators of Angels,
but not the Heads or Directors of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy? He answered, that
would be an unbeseeming thing for great Canonists to sing; that they had their
lesser Beneficiated ones, and Chaplains: For the one, through a possession of a
larger alms, denies unto God his praises, as a thing disgraceful unto him; but
the other accounts, that it would be uncomely for him to handle, cleanse, and
bind up the torn Members of Christ. But I am assured, that within a few
transitory days, the Lord will say; Unless ye become as one of these little
ones, I know not you Lamp-bearers without Oil. Wherefore, I exhort you my
Brethren, take away gain, and in the room thereof drink in charity; and ye
shall feel, that every good work, which now seems to be base unto you, is not
only laudable, honest, and Noble; but also, that it sanctifies and ennobles its
Operater. Was not the great High Priest of the Jews a Prince, a Butcher of
Herds, a Killer of a Flock of Cattle, having bloody hands? But it is far more
decent to bind up the Ulcers of the poor, than it was in times past to offer
Sacrifices: For no good work in charity, shall ever be able to detract any
thing from the Reputation. Gain therefore and Pride, were introduced by Satan.

But thou will say, the Labourer is worthy of his reward: If thou art a
Labourer, let it not therefore shame thee of thy work: The wise man says, a
Physician shall receive a gift (not a stipend or reward) from a King, not from
a poor man: Therefore, if the intention of the Operater be pure, God shall
provide according to his promise, who deceives none, promising an hundredfold
in this time, and the life of another. Wherefore I will describe by the way, an
history of my own life, and the magnificences or sumptuous provisions of the
Lord: imitate ye the same, if happily any good thing shall therein offer it
self.

Truly, I was a Glutton of Books; I had collected all remarkable things into
common places, so as that few exceeded me in diligence, but most in judgment.
In the seventeenth year of my youth, I read Lectures of Chyrurgery before the
Students, in the College of the Physicians of Lovain, being appointed
thereunto by the Professors, Thomas Fienus, Gerardus de Villeers, and Stornius:
Alas, I presumed to teach those things which I my self was ignorant of: I
fitted together Holerius, Tagautius, Guido, Vigo, Aegineta, and the whole Troop
of Arabians; the which surely all together, understood not the perfection of
Chyrurgery. Afterward I desisted, having admired at my own rashnesses and
inconsideratenesses, that I should presume, only by the reading of books, to
teach those things which are not well learned but by sight, and the handling of
the hands, by long use, and a sharp judgment: For an unconsiderate presumption
blew me up, because I had been voluntarily by them chosen hereunto, and had my
Professors, both my Auditors, and the Censurers of my readings: For I trusted
to writings, as it happens to children reading from Baiardus and Malegigius. At
length, being amazed with my self, I certainly found, that the event answered
not the Doctrine, and that Professors gave me not more light in practicing,
than the writings of the Ancients. In the mean time, it often came into my
mind, what the Schools thunder forth out of Avicen; to wit, that confidence on
the Physician is of greater weight to the sick, than the Physician is with all
his instruments: I therefore suspected, that it was a feeble succor of the
Physician, before which, an imaginary aid of confidence should be preferred:
For if any one being glad or joyful, be cured by laughter; at leastwise, let
the medicine be ridiculous, where the Physician shall cure the sick party by
laughing and confiding; for that is not the medicine which the Almighty has
created from the earth. Then also, that Maxim of the Schools appeared
ridiculous, affirming, that the capital betokening of curing, is drawn from
things helpful and hurtful; because that Maxim ordinarily presupposes, that
uncertain, and hurtful medicines are wont for the most part to be sent before:
Helpful ones also, if any shall be given, that they are administered by chance,
and without knowledge: which things surely do define medicine, against the will
of the Schools, to be a conjectural Art, and that the knowledges and cures of
diseases, do begin a posteriori or from the effect, from errors, from the
trial and conjecture of that which is uncertain: yea, that that which should
afterward be searched out, should be alike uncertain. The Poet has deservedly
cursed that medicinal Maxim.

-- Careat successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu, facta notanda putat.
I wish that he, who e're he be, may want successes rare,
Who from the event, does straightway think, deeds to be noted are.
I therefore grieved that I had learned that Art; and being angry with my self,
grieved, who was Noble, that against the will of my Mother, and my Kindred on
the Fathers side being ignorant thereof, I as the first in our Family, had
dedicated my self to medicine: I long bewailed the sin of disobedience, and it
grieved me of the years and pains bestowed in a choice profession: And I
ost-times humbly entreated the Lord with a sorrowful hear that he would
vouchsafe to lead me unto a calling, not whither I was carried of my own free
accord; but wherein I might well please him most: And I made a vow, that I
would follow and obey him to the utmost of my power, whithersoever he should
call me.

Then first, as having been fed with the forbidden fruit, I acknowledged my own
nakedness: Because I found neither truth, nor knowledge in my suppositional
docttrine, supposing it especially, to be a cruel thing to heap up moneys by
others miseries: Also, that it was an unseemely thing, to translate an art
founded in charity, and bestowed under the condition of exercising mercy, into
gain; since the Nobleness of charry is estranged by a stipend, which wants a
price out of it self, because it is greater than all price: Wherefore, I
presently entitled my inheritance on my sister a widow, and transferred it by a
gift among the living; because she could scarce conveniently want it.

I therefore being a young man, altogether unprofitable in all things, an
unthrifty man, and who had rashly applied my self to studies, commended my self
to God, with an intention of going far from home, of forsaking medicine, and of
never returning into my Country: Because I clearly then beheld my own innermost
parts; I discovered, and divorced the vanities of my former presumption, and
literal Learning; I therefore proceed on as uncertain, unto strangers, under
hope, that the Lord would clementiously direct my course unto the end of his
own good pleasure: But by how much the more I detested medicine, and cast it
far from me as a juggling deciet, indeed, by so much the greater occasion of
healing invaded me.

For an Idiot associated himself with me, who had known at least, the manual
instruments of the art of the fire: I presently as soon as I beheld the inward
part of some bodies, by the fire, percieved the seperations of many bodies,
then not yet delivered in books, and at this day, some being unknown:
Afterward, an earnest desire of knowing and operating, daily increased in me:
For not much above two years after, I had gotten such houshould-stuffe to my
self, whereby I was, though absent, in great esteem among the sick; also with
Ernestus Bavarus the Electour of Collen, and he called me unto himself for
help: But then it as yet more shamed me of my late, and learned ignorance:
Wherefore I presently resigned up all books, and I percieved my self more to
profit by the fire, in conceptions attained by praying, than in any kind of
books, which sing always the same Cuckows note: And then I clearly knew that I
had vitiated the passage of true Philosophy: Obstacles and dificulties of
obscurities on every side appeared; the which, not labor, not time, not
watching, lastly, nor the lavishments of moneys could from any worthiness
disperse: but the one only and mere goodness of God alone. For neither did
carnal lust, nor drinking bouts withdraw even one only hour from me; but
continual pains, and watching were the thieves of my time: For I willingly
cured the poor, and those of a mean fortune, being more stirred up by humane
compassion, and a moral affection of bestowing, than from a pure and universal
charity or dear love reflexed on the Fountain of Life.

For it happened, that a Consul or Senator being at sometime willingly about to
make use of my endeavor, I denied to give it him presentially, as being
unwilling to forsake many that were poorer, least I should be accounted to have
neglected many for one: Notwithstanding, God from the free grace of his own
good pleasure, turned this pride into good: For it shamed me to receive moneys,
but of the richer sort: So that a Confessor constrained me to admit of the
money of a certain man that offered it, least by doing otherwise, I should bar
up the doors against those, who being fore-stalled with shame, would not dare
to ask further succors from my hands: For he said, The gifts which thou
refusest, give to him that is in need: and the which, if thou shall not
receive, thou by thy pride, withdrawest from the poor that which was to be his
own. I also gave willingly, the medicines prepared by me: but because I felt
the greater joy while I was called by a Primate or rich man, I being angry with
my self, and confounded, refisted long, and bestowed very much pains, that I
might pluck up the growing branch of covetousness bred in me: Therefore I
every where searched out more of arrogance and haughtiness in my self, than of
a Godly affection.

Finally, God cut of the means from me, as well in the Church as among civil
Potentates; and so also, ample fortunes seemed to be promised me by Radolph the
Emperor but I had incurred the danger of my foul: In exchange whereof, he gave
me a godly and Noble wife, with whom I withdrew my self to Vilvord; for seven
years space, I offered up my self to the art of the fire, and succored the
calamities of the poor. I found, and indeed I sound for certainty, that none
should be forsaken of God, who with a pious affection, and fitme faith,
performs the office of Physician: For although I was the silliest of all, I
seeingly discerned, that God is Charity it self toward the miserable, and
therefore that from his own effluxing goodness of charity, he always bore a
care over me: For the inheritances of my wise were increased, and ample
partimonies of my family befell me: for although I was subdued in suites of law,
by the malice of men; yet I became a conqueror by some revisals; so as that the
mercies of God openly appeared toward an unworthy person.

And moreover, he pressed down those that excelled in might, who persecuted me
unto disgrace, and hidden death, under the cloak of piety: And the darts were
reflected on their own strikers; so that now it more shameth, than repents
them of their manifested crimes.

In the mean time, I desist not to cure some ten thousands of sick persons
every year, by my remedies, neither are my medicines therefore diminished. I
have learned therefore, that the treasure of wisdom is not to be exhausted,
and I daily experience my yesterdays ignorance to be to day illustrated. But in
returning from whence I have digressed: I find that they have not yet been able
to discern what defects respect a Physician, and what a Chyrurgion: Which
things if I may determine of, I declare, that only things suscepted or
undergone do touch at Chyrurgery: The which in a section concerning a new rise
of healing, I have sufficiently explained: But things suscepted, are a wound
made by piercing, a cut or incision made by a fall, biting, bruise, burning or
scorching, or congealing: Likewise, every swelling proceeding from a fall,
stroke, etc. Also a rent, pulling asunder, burstnesse, breaking of a bone, and
displacing thereof: As also, contagions externally drawn, being those of
scabbednesse, the kind of Anthonies fire called Herpes, etc. and no more: But
unto Physicians, besides the internal defects of things retained, it belongs to
cure any Ulcers, Apostemes, and whatsoever external affects do proceed from an
internal Beginning; such as are the Cancer, Wolf, Leprousy, Gout, the disease
Paneritium, the Sciatica; etc. But at this day, there is the more mild brawling
between both Professions, because most Physicians are ignorant of a method,
medicine, and succors, no otherwise than as Chyrurgions are: And therefore
although they join hands, and so exhaust the purses of the sick party; yet at
length they hasten to the bound of despair.

And in the proposed question concerning the Plague, they are unanimous enough:
For the Physician refuses the Plague to be of the diseases placed under him,
because it bears before it a Carbuncle, Kernelly Glandules, Sores about the
groyne called Bubo's, an Escharre, bubbly Tumors, and Tokens: And at
leastwise, he condescendeth with the Chyrurgion, because he promises that he
will scrape together out of renowned and standard-defending Authors, any the
best Antidotes, if not the curative medicines of external affects; at least,
preservatives against the cruel poison: Yea if the Triacle of Galen does not
suffice, which according to Andromachus, contains only 66. Simples, (that is
the last part of the name of Antichrist) he promises to his herbarists, that
he will super-add very many more, which are sufficient for the putting of the
Plague to flight: and that if they are not prevalent in a sufficient power of
faculty, they may at leastwise, be able to strive with the Plague, in
multitude, by their number: But if the Doctor shall be hired from the City,
with a stipend, least he should hurt or be wanting to his other sick patients,
by causing a fear (thus he over-covers his own fear with another dread) he
ingeniously promises, that he will show by his pen, that the affairs of the
sick are cordial unto him: So that, he will also frame a book out of the most
Famous Authors on every side, which he promises to dedicate to community,
indeed under the hope of repaying a reward of his vain-spent labor, unto the
writer: For in that treatise, he promises, that he will so distinguish of
diet, exercises to be performed, avoided, and of means to be curiously
examined, besides remedies and preservatives, out of all Authors, that the
very Plague it self, shall upon the sight of that book, of necessity become
diseasy.

In the next place, the Chyrurgion says, that the Plague, as it is joined with
a Fever, stands not to be ruled by his will or judgment: But however
successfully the matter shall sometimes prove unto him; at least wise, that for
six weeks after, he should be profitable to none, with his sissers, file,
knife, or rasour or launcet. What therefore shall he that is suddenly taken
with the Plague, do, being left destitute by both forsakers? Or what will the
Magistrate do, being deluded by his own stipendiaties? Because they are they
which respect nothing but gain, the one only scope of their whole life.

The Physician therefore will dismiss the sick unto the non-feared
Pest-houses, wherein there is as unlawful a pleasure for a Physician to kill,
as for a tormentor, and soldier. The Chyrurgion answers, That there is a Mate
known unto him, who is without fear, after that he has notably drunk; who
although he has not known how to open a vein, (for this is esteemed the top
among them) neither is worthy of his family-service; yet he has oftentimes
brought Simples out of a wood, or mountains, and therefore that he is
skillfull in some Simple, which whether it be an Herb, Shrub, or tree, or
living Creature, he has hitherto refused to declare; Yet he undoubtedly
affirms, that it privailes against the Plague, and he willingly persuades
him to commit the buisinesse of the infected unto him.

Master Doctor skipping for joy consents, and praises the subtle invention
of the Barber, and his care for the Commonwealth: And so that companion being
called unto them, a Lixivial medicine for an Eschare, Basilicon ointment, and
Diachyson gummed is given unto him, and also a magistral preservative
confection described by the Physician: Wherewith he being now furnished,
becomes a stipendiary of the City, and the life of the common people in misery,
and the fail-yard of the Common-weath is committed unto him: yet under this
condition, that if he suffer himself to be governed by Tenders, and
under-Sisters, as super-intendents, who by a long possession, rage on the sick,
he is to receive a yearly reward. Surely miserable are the sick, more miserable
the Magistrate, and most exceeding miserable the Doctor, unto whom the
Magistrate has committed his sheep, which they deliver to wolves: Because in
this respect, man is truly a wolf to the poor, and infected man. But the strict
judge, will at sometime, require at their hands, the lives, souls, and forsaken
orphans.

For what would a King do, if a cowardly Captain shall wipe away much money
from himself and the people, and muster a great band of countrymen in his
enrowling book, but shall betake himself, with his Ensign-bearer, into a most
fenced Tower or Castle: but shall write unto the Drummer, and some
women-sellers of provision, that they cheerfully assault the Enemy with those
fresh water Soldiers? For will not the King require of his Captains, the
Soldier that was rashly slain? And the town destroyed by the Enemy? Have
regard therefore, ye Senators, and Physicians, what cruel thing does not hang
over your heads? Because nothing is more certain than death and judgment. For I
have written these things from a compassion on you, and the sick: I divine of
you, let God be favorable unto me! At leastwise the Magistrate has not
hitherto known, of what kind the Plague should be.

CHAP. 2. The Pest or Plague, an Infant.
A Rtaxerxes, by an Epistle, commanded Petus, that he should come unto him, to
cure a disease (as yet without a name) which killed his Citizens and Soldiers;
for that, by gifts recieved, he was obliged hereunto. Petus answered him after
the manner of Physicians at this day: That natural succors do not free from a
popular slaughter: For those diseases, which are made by nature, those nature
judging of, heals. But Hippocrates cures a malady from a popular
destruction: Because this man is endowed with a divine nature, and has carried
up medicine from a low estate, unto great achievements.

Hippocrates therefore is a divine man, the ninth indeed from King Chrysamides,
but the eighteenth from Aesculapius; but the twentieth from Jupiter: Being
indeed of his mother Praxithia, of the family of the Heraclides: Wherefore,
from both seeds, he has his original from the Gods: He was initiated or
entered as a young beginner in medicinal affairs by his great grandfathers, so
far as it is to be believed, that these knew: But himself has taught himself,
having made use of a divine nature, the whole art: And in the industry of his
mind, he has as far exceeded his progenitors, as he has also exceeded them
in the excellency of art: But he takes away, not only the kind of bestial, but
also of brutishly fierce and wild diseases, through a great part of the land,
and sea, dispersing the succors of Aesculapius (even as Triptolemus, the seeds
of Ceres): Therefore has he most justly obtained divine honors, in many
places of the earth, and is made worthy by the Athenians, of the same gifts or
presents with Hercules and Aesculapius: Send thou for this man, and command, as
much Gold as he shall he willing to receive, to be given unto him: For this man
has not known one only manner of curing this disease: This man is the Father,
the preserver of health, and the curer of griefs: In sum; this man is the
Prince of divine knowledge.

Artaxerxes therefore, writes unto Hystanes the Lieutenant of Hellespont. Let
Hippocrates the Glory of Cods, who drew his original from Aesculapius, come
unto me: and give him as much Gold as he will have, and other things in
abundance, sparing no riches: For he shall be made equal to the Peers of
Persia: For it is not an easy thing to find men that excel in counsel.

Moreover, Hystanes writes thus unto Hippocrrtes: The great King Artaxerxes
has need of thee: Commanding Gold, Silver, and whatsoever thou will have to be
given unto thee; that thou should be made equal unto the Nobles of Persia:
Thou therefore, come quick^.

Hippocrates the Physician, unto Hystanes the Lieutenant of Hellespont, joy.
SEnd thou back to the King, what I say; That we enjoy food, raiment, house,
and all sufficient wealth for life: But that it is not lawful for me to make
use of the riches of the Persians; neither to free Barbarians from diseases,
that are enemies to the Greeks-Farewel.


Hipocrates unto Demetrius, health.
THe King of the Persians has sent for me; as not knowing that with me, there
is a greater respect of wisdom, than of Gold. Farewell.

To the King of Kings, my great Lord Artaxerxes: Hystanes Leivtenant, joy. The
Epistle which thou sents't unto Hippocrates of Coos, who sprang from
Aeculapius, I sent a way: but I recieved an answer from him, which I transmit
unto thee, with the bearer thereof Gymnasbes, Dieutyches. Farewell. Great
Artaxerxes, King of Kings, says these words unto the Co-ans: Render ye
Hippocrates to my messengers, who is endued with evil manners, wantonizing over
me and the Persians: But if not, ye shall know that ye shall pay the punishment
of the offense: For I will convert your City, being laid wast and drawn into
diverse parts of the Island, into the sea: that for the future none can know,
whether there were an Island, or the City Cos in this place.


The Answer of the men of Coos.
IT has seemed good unto the people, to answer the messengers of Artaxerxes:
The Co-ans will do nothing unworthy of Merops, nor of Hercules, nor of
Aesculapius: All the Cities will not yield up Hippocrates, although they were
to dye the worst of deaths: The Earth, and Water which Darius and Xerxes
required of our Fathers, the people gave not, since they saw those very Kings
themselves, to be impotent mortals, as other men. They now answer the same
thing: Depart ye from the Co-ans and return this message, that the Gods
themselves will not be negligent of us; Because they deliver not Hippocrates
into your hands.


I have thus described these things at large, whereby the truth of the fame of
Hippocrates may be manifest, and that he had cured the Plague among the people
throughout Greece: For indeed, that disease being as yet an Embryo, scarce
known, scarce named, was now perfectly cured: but now, it being sufficiently
and too well known, is left unto decievers of the lowest condition: Charity
has grown cold; therefore the light of knowledge, and understanding has been
snatched away from us, and the certainty of curing has been buried with
Hippocrates. Although a great volume be born about in his name: yet he
suppressed this safety or assurance of curing (God so permitting it) for fear
of the Barbarians, or from a zeal of vanity to be observed, because he arose
from the stock of Deasters or Starry Gods: or because through the successive
interchange of days, his own monuments perished, suppositional ones being left:
However it is, by the permission of God, the aforesaid amplenesse of knowledge,
and safety of curing the Plague has hitherto vanished.

I have read perhaps, an hundred Authors concerning the Pest or Plague, indeed
all of them transcribers, writing a far of, and being unexperienced and
conjectural ones, through a fear of death: That at leastwise is known, that in
the days of Hippocrates the best remedies of diseases were not as yet made
known: For then cures were instituted only by Simples, and those crude ones,
the preparations of them being not yet devsed.

But Galen his Juniour by more than five ages, endeavored to write
commentaries on Hippocrates, and he with drew from him at pleasure: For why, he
had never seen Argent vive, never Rose water, or Aquavitae. And although the
age of Hippocrates was homely; yet healings were obedient unto him, which do no
wise obey Galen, not his followers at this day.

Hippocrates had less of prattle, but more of candor, science, and heavenly
light: so that with homeliness, ages have seemed to put of purity, and the
gift of God: Wherefore out ages have been fruitful in most perverse manners,
and wits: It has therefore pleased God, that a true and exact curing, and
prevention of the Plague, has soundly slept together with Hippocrates: At
leastwise, nothing is read among the Jews concerning a popular or general
Plague among the ^^ople, from the age of Noah unto the offense of David: But
among the Persians, and Greeks, besides the consumption mentioned to have been
in the age of Hippocrates, the enemy of mankind, and Prince of this world, has
caused some Plagues to rage, by the permission of God, which Satan commanded to
be expiated by sacrifices done unto himself: Perhaps, because that thing was
not granted unto him, as to the Prince of darkness, so much, as because he had
the foreknowledge of a future Plague, and together also, of the term of its
appeasment: Whence he violently, fabulously and deceitfully challenged the
rise, decay, and power of appeasing thereof unto himself. A Plague is read to
have seldom been among the Romans: And but a few ages ago, the memory of the
Plague was almost worn out: At length, it returned for ages, and raged for
seventy years; and soon after it destroyed for fifty years; so that the year of
Jubilee was made cloudy, and terrible. Now, there is a third years Plague at
Constantinople: The Turks are not wont to provide for themselves against the
pestilent contagion: And therefore they scoff at the Christians, as resisters
of the ordination of God, and as those that decline the Plague, for the most
part with a vain endeavor: That the manner of divine revenge, is to be born,
which happens of necessity, unto every one appointed thereunto. In Egypt, the
Plague varies every seven year: It for the most part, endures unto a third
year, after this manner, as Prince Radzvil the Polonian witnesses. On the
first year it lightly begins, when the Sun enters into Libra, and it rages
chiefly in December, even unto the month called March: At which time, the heats
are milder: but when they have grown strong, when as in the year following, the
Sun enters into Leo, the Plague presently cease; and indeed so, that if any
one shall have a Pestilential Apostem within, and shall survive unto the
aforesaid hour of the aforesaid celestial sign, he escape all danger: Even as
colds with us, so here, heats chase away the Plague, and for two months time
they live securely: But after that the Sun has entered into Libra, the Plague
again begins by degrees, and continues until the entrance of the Sun into Leo:
on the third year, it keeps the same fashion, but that it slakens somewhat more
from its bitterness: Afterward, if a contagion shall not be brought on the
people from elsewhere, the four following years are free from the Plague:
sometimes also, a longer truce is made: But the malady for the most part
returns in the space of seven years Their harvest begins about the end of [the
first month called] March: Before the last days of [the second month called]
April, it is finished: For the southern winds blow throughout [the third month
called] May, which by burning, would reduced their fruits unto nothing. That
Prince having been there thus perfectly instructed, wrote these things, and
believing all: whereunto, I shall give satisfaction in its own place: At
leastwise, the holy Scripture makes no mention, that these things happened unto
Egypt in times past; although the Sun and Heaven are now rolled about in the
same circle, as in times past: For my speech is the memory of my Parents,
concerning the Plague, as of a most rare monster: It has of late flourished
among us for fifteen years: Now it cease: Houses were then built up at
Bruxels, for the infected poor, and the walls themselves were broken at the
North-ditch; of which houses, our Country could long be without: But I lay the
fault upon us; it was a command of Charity; draw thy Neighbors Ox or Ass out
of the mire, bring him to his Master, neither shall thou pass by the way, doing
otherwise. But now the Cattle of our Neighbor, is not only not freed, but we
our selves press them down; yea, we forsake and flee from our Brother (the
Temple of God) in his greatest necessities, and mortal diseases, and stop our
ears at his lamentations: every one, like the Priest and Levite, passing by,
excuses himself from the work of charity, as though that to do a good work,
were not belonging to his profession, and as if the Text were a liar;
Whatsoever thou shall do unto the least of these, I will account it as done
unto my self. Its no wonder therefore, that in these ulcerous rubbishes of our
days, God sorely threatens the destruction of a most perverse people; and that
their Cities shall be ploughed as a field: For I have oft-times been affrighted
within my self, at that eminent foregoing sign of the destruction of the
Universe to come; There shall be Plagues: For I from thence despaired, as that
none was to come after Hippocrates, who should any longer cure a popular
Plague: But from elsewhere I hoped, that as what we wish for, we easily hope
for, and in hoping, do also believe; so also, that we might despair of what we
are very much afraid. I therefore believed and hoped, that this safety of
curing the Plague should hereafter be discovered, and that every succor before
the last Tragedy of the world, would again be hidden: at leastwise, I suppose,
that there will be other far more horrible Plagues than ever heretofore, and
against which, all Antidotes will be vain: For truly, our Plague at this day,
does not affect bruit beasts: But in the last dreggishness (...), they shall
destroy wild beasts also; yea, fishes, and trees; and there shall be Plagues,
but not an ordinary Plague; otherwise, this should be an uncertain sign of the
future destruction: For there shall be Plagues from the hand of God, from the
pouring out of the Vials, as the Revelation has it: But against, those Plagues
there is not to be a Buckler in Nature. I promised therefore unto my self,
before I attempted to write these things, that the Plague that was curable,
even unto that face of times, and a true remedy thereof, was to be fetched out
of the Grave of Hippocrates, or rather from above, from the Father of Lights. I
will declare what I have learned, for the profit of Posterity.

CHAP. III. The Heaven is free from, as also innocent of our Contagion or
Infection:
NOt the least comfort has appeared unto the Soul that is earnestly desirous
of knowledge, or unto the miserable and forsaken sick, from the writings of the
Ancients. First of all, it is of Faith, that the Stars are for signs, times or
seasons, days and years; nor that man can any way alienate the offices of the
Stars, or decline them unto other scopes: That the Heavens are the works of the
Lords hands; that God created not Death: and therefore, that neither does the
Heaven contain Death, a disease, poison, discords, corruptions, or the
effective cause of these: For truly, they are ordained, not for the cause, but
for the signs of future things; and only for the changing of seasons, or
Meteors, and for the succession of days and years; The office therefore of the
Heavens, is not to generate evils, to cause poisons, to disperse, or influx
them, to sow wars, and to stir up deaths: Because the heaven cannot exceed the
bounds of its own appointment: the heavens declare the glory of God, for whose
honor, and the uses of ungrateful humanity, it was created: And therefore, it
rather contains in it, life, light, joy, peace, and health, with an orderly and
continued motion: no curse is read to have been communicated to the heaven
after the transgression of Adam, nor execration to be infused into it, as
neither a spot to have been sprinkled thereon. The earth indeed brings forth
thistles and thorns; because under the Moon is the Copyhold of the Devil and
Death (because of sinners) the Empire of discords, and interchanges: The earth
has become a Stepmother unto us, she is therefore the vale of miseries, being
great withchild of the corruption and fardle of sinners; because it has
pleased God, that there should be no other way unto rest, but by tribulations:
yea, it behoved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into glory; not indeed
another, but his own, because he was willing to take on him the form of a
servant. I belive the Word of God, but in no wise the vanities of the
Soothsayers of Heaven; and I judge, that they who write, that the Plague does
arise from the heaven, do stumble, as being hitherto deceived with the errors
of the Gentiles.

The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows the
handy-works of the Lord: The Heavens therefore, show a sweet, or bitter thing
to come, but they do not cause that sweet, or bitter: yea, neither is it lawful
for us to call bitter things evils; for God has directed all things to a good
end: Therefore the heaven declares future things unto us, but does not cause
them; and the stars are only unto us for the signs of things to come; and
therefore there shall be signs in the Sun, Moon, and Stars. The Stars also
cause the successive alterations of seasons in the air, waters, and earth, only
by a native Blas: From whence the changes and ripenesses, as well in fruits, as
in the body of man, especially in a sick one, do consequently depend.

I understand also, that the stars are in this respect for times or seasons
unto us, by their motive and alterative Blas: For neither therefore are the
Heavens Sorcerers, or the Cocters of poisons, the incensers of wars, etc. I
knowingly consider them to be altogether as the alterers of successive
interchanges in Elementary qualities, as to the interchangeable courses of
Stations: Wherefore it happens, that the sick a^e diversely altered in the
promotion and maturity of seeds conceived in them; because our vital faculties
do stir up every their own Blas, according to the rule or square of the most
general motion of the stars; not indeed, as of violent leaders; but of
foregoing, or accompanying ones. For the Book of the Revelation does not
attribute even any the least punishing power unto the Heavens; but the same to
be distributed by God among the Angels: and the which therefore, are called
smiting, and ministering spirits, performing the commands of the Judge;
Therefore, I shall not easily believe, that the Plague owes its original unto
the importunate or unseasonable changes of times; the which also, Eudoxus,
according to Fernelius, perceived.

And I cannot be induced by any reason to believe, that the Heavens do give
growth, form, figure, virtues, or any thing else, which proceeds from the
Being of seeds: For the Herb was potent in a flourishing seed, even before the
stars were born; so that although there should be no stars, yet every seed, by
the power of the Word, is of it self naturally for producing of its own
constituted body, and against the will of the stars, and stations of the year,
yea, and of climates: many seeds and foreign fruits are produced by Art:
Wherefore, the Epidemicks of Hippocrates, illustrated with the Commentary of
Galen, do also contain very many things, unworthy the name of the Author; not
only, because it attributes diseases to the stations or seasons of the year,
and not every one to their own seeds, and diverse infirmities to one root (that
is, unto the first qualities of the air) and so coupleth diverse effects with
unjust causes; but because they contain very many absurdities of trifles.

For I am wont in this thing, to compare Judiciary Astrologers unto Empericks,
who having gotten an ointment, powder, or any other medicine, extol the same
to be prevalent, well nigh for all diseases; and also, for many other: So, many
of those being not content with the showing or betokening message of the Stars,
constrain them to be the workmen, Deasters, and absolute Patrons of all fortune
and misfortune, to be conscious or witness-bearers, and the workers of life and
death to come: Lastly, to be the Counselors and Judges of thoughts, and
questions asked. If therefore, they do not contain death, wars, poisons, nor
the Plague; verily, neither shall they be able to rain down such scourges upon
us, seeing they cannot give those things which they have not, do not contain,
do not cause, nor generate: For a messenger, the Preacher of Wars, is not the
General, or cause of these. For if Trigantius the Jesuit tell truth, the
Plague is unaccustomed unto the most wide, and whole Empire of the Chinois, and
never there seen; over which, notwithstanding, the same Saturn, and the same
Mars, bears rule, and that alike powerfully as over us.

Again, if in some Lands the Plague rages at a certain term of time, and
returns at fore known stations, wherein notwithstanding, the Plague in times
past was a very great stranger; surely it should follow, either that those
Provinces do not lay under the influences of the Stars, or not under the same
influences as in times past; or that those Plagues are adulterous ones, or at
leastwise (as I deem) that they do not proceed from the heaven; to wit, since
there are no consultations of Stars in the same place, which do yearly observe
set days of their assemblies: For what if the plague in one City, destroy the
greatest part of mortals; truly all providence of the Magistrate shall be in
vain, if the Neighboring places that are situated under the same Meridian or
corner of the heaven, cannot be preserved untouched.

And seeing the influx, and in-beaming of the stars, is most universal; how mad
soever others may be, yet it is not to be believed, that plagues can have an
influence from the stars of heaven, unto designed places, Cities, and Villages:
For if the Plague it self should be a pestilent influx of the stars, or a Gas
sent down from above unto us, or a mere naked quality descending through the
air, which comes unto us without that body; it shall also be either conceived
in the stars, or generated in the air Neighboring on us.

If the first of these, it should of necessity be, that all the corners of the
world should be infected at once, unless we suppose a Pipe or Trunk to be
directed in the air, and through the air, from the heaven even unto us, and that
an unmoved one; by which also, and not otherwise, the pestiferous air bringing
down the smoakinesses and defilements of the stars, is conveyed unto us: For
since the distance of the stars from the earth, is of many thousands of
Diameters of the earth; it is not to be thought, that any smoakiness of a star
can reach safe unto this Center (and less unto some Province thereof) but that
it can infect the whole compass of the Earth and Sea, with a universal gore at
once, it supplying the space and room of one the least Center or Point.
Therefore, if the Earth be like unto the least point, hitherto have those
things respect, which I have elsewhere spoken concerning the Region of the air,
through which, neither winds, nor dew, or rain, do ever run down, nor Meteors
do play their Tragedies: And much less does any thing flow down perpendicularly
out of the depth of the heaven: or if it should rain down; some Decades or
ten-fold numbers of the age of Nestor, would not be sufficient before that it
could come as a stranger unto us. But if the stars do at least dismiss from
them a meet and naked quality, that quality shall even by so great an interval
of place and entertainments, degenerate and fail diverse times, and through the
journeying of some years, and so, before it can come unto us, it shall have
nothing of its former likeness; neither could such a quality coming unto us
from far, infect a certain place, unless it be brought by an Angel, as it were
in a box: but if by an Angel, now the natural question cease; and we vainly
make the heavens to be the bringers of the Plague, and Sorcerers, if an Angel
himself be the Plague-carrier; who otherwise can bring far more readily the
pestilent poison nigh the earth, or into us, than that he should bring that
with him, from the pure and guiltless heavens.

In the next place, a pestiferous quality sliding down from heaven, if it shall
not descend at once in the enclosed air, it shall either pass from subject into
subject (which the Peripateticks and modern Schools refuse) or through a
thousand shapes of it self, and those so often degenerated, shall come down
from its original unto us, as wholly a stranger; and so the poison of the
heavens shall be frustrated. But if it be supposed to be generated in the
Clouds nigh the earth; therefore the heaven being free and guiltless, is falsely
accused: For truly, I have shown elsewhere, that the heavens do operate only by
a motive, local Blas, and an alterative one, of heat and cold, but in no wise
by poisons: because they are those thigns which are only formal properties of
sublunary bodies, and the fermental ones of some seed, I grant indeed
willingly, that a fiery weapon is now and then seen, a fiery weapon to have
fallen out of the air, being darted unto some certain place; and that the
plague has sometimes followed thereupon: But that prodigy, in the first place,
slideth not out of the deep bosom of the heaven, but out of a more nigh Cloud:
Perhaps Satan the companion of Thunder, lets fly such a weapon, where he knows
the plague to be sorely threatened (from whence, he of old, snatched the honors
of God unto himself) but that weapon is not therefore the cause of the plague:
otherwise surely, at every plague a weapon should from a like necessity, be
darted forth; especially because it is the property of fire, to consume the
plague, and poisons, but not to generate them: Therefore fire does never
naturally, signify the plague, whose destruction it contains: and therefore,
such a fiery weapon is a most rare monstrous sign; sent down by spirits for
terror unto him, who shall rest back that weapon for the amendment of his
life: and truly, it is impertinent to our purpose, and an exceeding frivolous
thing, if from thence we note the heaven to be the bringer of the plague: For
any monstrous signs are uncertain, and unfit for the foundation of medicine.
But if an age or length of time, should thrust this pestilent ware into our
bosom (for so it has been believed hitherto, and they have badly deceived our
Gentile Schools with an Epidemical name) to what end are there so many writers?
or what means have been hitherto devised against those importunate influences
of the stars? For who has hitherto hindered the marrow from increasing in the
bones, after the manner of the Menstrues? therefore they have falsely accused
the heaven: Let it seem sufficient for the Schools, to have made the heaven the
Author of the plague, and to have buried their own knowledge under the silence
of despair, only from the persuasion of ignorance, and terror of fear:
Therefore the accusing of the heaven does every where involve a manifest and
necessary ignorance. But at length, after that they have contracted all the
strength of their Studies, they persuade, that places are to be avoided,
wherein the Plague-stroaks are vigorous; that meats full of good juice, must be
used; that a good fire must be made, and that any kind of filths must be
avoided; and that Triacle must often be used, whereinto, when enough simples
have not yet been cast, every one may heapingly add new Genturies or Hundreds
at pleasure, thereunto, and so, that is reckoned the most excellent Antidote,
which contains the collected heap of a thousand simples: and they hope, that
one of a thousand may perhaps help, at leastwise, that it will not hurt: For
those are Magistral Antidotes or medicines against the poison; so that if in
the mean time, the matter shall the less luckily succeed according to desire,
at leastwise, he who has compiled so many the most select simples together,
and those commended by Renowned Authors, is free from blame: they being badly
mindful of their own lies, prescribe also grateful suffumigations of vinegar,
and Odours of Spices; as if such feeble remedies could prevail against their
own principles; that is, against poisons diffused from the heaven, throughout
the whole air: For if by reason of those odours, either the beard, or nail of
the hand; or lastly, the marrow cease to grow, it might infuse some
confidence of hope, that the pestilent seed might be overcome by the wan
remedy. Therefore, if there were any causative reason of the plague in the
heavens, that by a stronger right, should belong unto man over the heavens, if
a wise man shall have dominion over the stars, but not the stars over a wise
man: For a wise man is able in some respect, to change the significations of
the stars, although not the motion of the stars. But that thing is as greatly
impertinent in this place, as is the false accusation of the heavens: For
truly, if the stars should causatively work their own effect on us; verily, a
wise man, might be able to mitigate it, and Physicians do, by their accusing of
the heaven, falsely endeavor to excuse themselves for an impossibility: There
is not I say, any action of the stars on us, besides that of a Meteor: for
Astrologers feign many things which they have known to be false; yea, and
impossible: the which, in the speculations of the Planets, are on either side
easy to be seen: notwithstanding, neither Nature, nor therefore medicine, to
admit of the rule of falsehood, as neither of the suppositions of Science
Mathematical. Therefore lastly, if a popular plague should slide out of the
heaven, it should of necessity be, that the heaven should resist and hinder,
also, according to the same root, and not as to the latter product; and so the
whole Art of Healing should prescribe nothing but altogether vain remedies for
the prevention of the plague.

But the Schools commit not themselves unto so great wickedness, and they more
willingly rush unto impossibilities, that they may make a Buckler for their own
ignorance, and may send any ignorant drinkers, and Cup-shot tormentors of
mortals against the plague. At leastwise it is manifest from hence, that they
do not hitherto assault the causes of the plague before, but behind, and that
they have had respect only unto the effects thereof: and so, that whatsoever
has been spoken concerning its prevention, has in it the mere deceivings of
their Neighbors: For they imitate the Countryman, endeavoring to exhaust a
Brook where it hastens into the Sea, nigh the shore, but not by stopping up the
Fountain: Therefore, either they do not believe the plague to arise from the
heaven, or their remedies are full of despair and deceit.

Furthermore, if the heaven, as it were an angry Parent (as it pleased
Paracelsus to dream) takes notice of our crimes, and is defiled with our
impieties, and therefore as a Revenger wounds us with its darts, and so
miserably kills us; Certainly, it shall either be some Deaster, or sensitive
living creature, which arrogating the office of God unto it self, and envying
the office of the smiting Angels, teaches us, that envy is a Celestial thing,
as also the revenge of the creature on man. But why does it note our crimes, if
in taking notice thereof, it be defiled? and how shall it be defiled, if sin be
a mere nonbeing? how shall that Archer perceive a mere non-being? how shall it
judge of the departure of man's will from God? for if it be angry with us, and
inflamed for revenge, by reason of [that nothing] how shall it not rather be
angry with us, when it shall perceive that we imitate its own actions, and do
stop or prevent them? to wit, while the heaven being appeased, we form the
plague in us by our own terrors: and it should far more harshly bear it, that
man, against the will of the heaven, should heal the plague, that he overcomes
his own wounds, and prevents or hinders its offices, in despite of the heaven.

Again, if the Plague could by an orderly motion of the stars be declaratively,
and as it were, yearly foretold (even as I have already before declared the
informations of others concerning Egypt) but our offenses want a set orderly
day, number, and measure: For sins depend on the heart of man, and a free will;
therefore that cause is not beseeming for its effect, and a sign thereof. But
Divines deny the future effects of free will to be fore-known by the stars, and
so, neither that knowledge, nor understanding dwells in the heavens, and
inanimate bodies: Therefore neither indeed, do they denounce the plague, wars,
etc. to come from sins fore-known unto them. Be it sufficient, that the plague
is denounced, not as for an inciting cause, but because it has so pleased the
Eternal: That every guilty person may examine himself, and amend: neither is
there need of feigning belyed naughtinesses, and ill wills, to be in Saturn, or
Mars, if our sins are the effectual cause of contagion: and so Astrologers and
medicinal Diviners contradict themselves: For neither otherwise, should it be
of necessity, to feign an Executioner to be angry with the guilty person,
although he kills the same. I pray, why shall our iniquities rather provoke
Saturn, and Mars, than the Moon which is nearer by some thousand miles? Why
should Saturn who is most remote, be a more potent Revenger of our crimes, than
the Moon? For if any star were pestilential, certainly it should chiefly be
that which bears rule over the night, rest, and reducement into the first
matter.

In the next place, if the plague does invade us as a punishment, or be sent by
Angels his messengers, the movers of the Orbs; Surely, none shall be natural,
and the prescriptions and rules of the Schools, as well for prevention, as for
curing, shall voluntarily acquiesce. The heaven therefore, is a presager of
fore-shewing a thing to come, and it affords signs of the plague, which God
reveals to his own: But the heaven is not the effective principle of a present
plague, as neither the fore-knower thereof: For truly, otherwise, as well the
heaven, as the directive Angelical intelligency should err, as often as it
should punish a guiltless child with the plague, for a sinner; neither should
the habitations of the godly be ever subject to the plague; and God should
appoint an unjust Deputy, which should cruelly kill the good with the plague,
which should not lay hold on the wicked: He should kill the good, I say, for
sins that entered not into their thoughts: or at leastwise from hence it is
manifest, that the plague has its own cause in nature. At length, if the
plague were the offspring of Celestial light; surely, that should always
rise up in an instant, seeing the aspects of the stars are by the minutes of a
moment: Wherefore the plague, before that (its poison being bred from
elsewhere) it could come down unto us, it should first be dispersed with the
wind, should be well washed with the first be-sprinkling of rain, and be
appeasingly allayed with the colds of the night and Clouds, before it should
descend unto us: and also, those Cities should be punished, which had least
offended: and then that also in Paracelsus is ridiculous, that the Arching
plague, and noter of our crimes, should inhabit in the Sun (wherein God has
placed his own Tabernacle) as it were, an angry and revenging parent, by reason
of the contagion of impurity received; Yet that Saturn, and Mars (he being
unconstant, so says in another place) were the revengers of crimes. Therefore
after what manner soever it be taken, providence suffers the injury of the
punishing heaven; and God, blasphemy: and so a deceit of Paganism is included,
whether they shall say, that the pestilent poison is stamped by the stars, or
sent from them for the revenge of crimes: or also, that it is framed by the
natural course of the stars, through yearly elementary qualities, or
extraordinary, or indirect and monstrous ones, directed by Satan. They on both
sides dash themselves on the Atheism of Pagans: For neither has the evil
Spirit that power on us, which the Gentiles suppose; neither is there any other
Guardian read to be in a plague sent from God, beside Angels of light; and so
it is to have departed from the truth of the holy Scriptures, to have
attributed a power of generating the plague, unto the stars, or the devil:
especially where the dispute concerning a natural plague, and not that sent
from the hand of God, comes in place, and where it is to be enquired concerning
remedies, causes, and obstacles or preventions.

For first of all, oft-times the plague begins from one only individual, to
wit, from a guitless child; and so, the heavens had for a purging satisfaction
of this child, smitten the whole Family, Town, and at length the Province; to
wit, the innocent for the wicked, after the manner of an Apothecary, that
Substitutes [quid pro quo] that is, any thing instead of any thing.

Again, while the plague creeps by its contagion, from one unto another; at
leastwise, the poison shall be no longer handed forth by the heaven, or a wound
inflicted by the heaven, in the second, third, and tenth person; as if the
whole anger or revenge of the heaven were stirred up through the fault of the
first guiltless person. Again, the plague that is conceived only from the
terror of one that is fearful, since in the most special kind (for no other
actually existeth in individuals) it differs not from any other which should be
sent from heaven through the poison of the stars: Therefore neither shall there
be any natural plague at all, from the heaven, if it be conceived from
elsewhere, by the naked image of terror, nor that its original stands in need
of the heaven: For after another manner, one individual is not constituted by
parents differing in the whole predicament: For if the most High created the
Physician and medicine from the earth, and the plague be formed by the stars; I
at least fear, least all future medicine should be unfit for so great a poison:
But at leastwise, the Lord could not err, in that he sent medicine from the
earth, and not from the heaven. And moreover, the Books of the Kings, and
Revelation, attribute the plague to holy Angels, which is the mark-pledge of
Divine Revenge: neither is it lawful to go back unto the evil spirits, and
stars, as the beginnings of pestilent poisons.

In the next place, Paracelsus writes, that the plague is beamed forth from
the heaven, as it were from an Archer, only into three places; to wit, behind
the ears, under the armpits, and into the groyns: Wherefore the plague arisen
in other members, shall either not be the plague, or of another kind, and of
unlike causes, than that which should be the wound of the heaven, is: or next,
the heaven has erred in its darting; or at leastwise, Paracelsus has rashly
erred through boldness. Therefore, if other Foreign causes do frame the
plague, without the help of the heavens, it must needs be, that these are
deprived of their possession and estimation, and that the heaven ought
hereafter, to attempt the controversy by way of Petition.

If in the next place, the plague be a wound, therefore it is from external
things suscepted or undergone; not a Fever, or disease consisting of an
appointed seed, and by consequence, whatsoever of Diaphoretick or transpirative
medicines they have decreed for a succor of the plague, let it be false and
deceitful; and Incarnative and Vulnerary medicines shall be more fit; and a
Diaphoretick for prevention, is most exceeding vain, that any one may not be
wounded by the Celestial Archer: For there should be but a sluggish Buckler of
a sudoriferous medicine, against an arrow so poysonsom, being darted so
powerfully, from so far, in a straight line, and with so great leisure; and
being most securely led, the weapon proceeding through so many thousand miles
of Stages. For it became Paracelsus to have known, that the Carbuncle,
Glandules or Kernels, Buboes, and bladdery swellings behind the ears, are not
indeed, the Pest it self; yea, neither that they are any way wounds, but signs,
the product, and effects of the Pest. For because that also, some signates of
the Plague are frequently not seen, but after death: Wherefore, that heavenly
Slinger should, as often as he wounded, send in, not the plague, but the effect
of the plague: and he had come too late, as to inflict the plague, or wound on
those parts in him who had already before died by the plague.

For a certain one being continually provoked to vomit, with headache, dies
under continual faintings, within seven hours from the invasion of the
sickness: But presently; about the time of death, he is tinged above the Navil,
even unto the throat-bones, with a frequent mark, or black print of the stroke.
For curiosity sake, since an Anatomist was wanting, I dissected him, and found
the mouth of his stomach, now cauterized with a black Escharre. Lastly, the
black marks or tokens, are not wounds, even as neither are the Glandules,
little bladders, Buboes, etc. Therefore at least, the heaven does not wound in
the plague; the which, if they are opened, thou Paracelsus, call Ulcers, and
distinguishest against wound, and thy own self. Too fabulously therefore, is
the heaven defiled with out corruption, and is a revenger of these injuries,
even as also, a Notary, and wounder of our crimes: That was an invention of
Heathenism in times past, that it might blasphemously extol the heavens and
starry Gods into a worship. Four Elements also, are blasphemously and foolishly
brought in by Paracelsus, who was wont to laugh at the Relolleous quality of
them; especially because, in the original of our medicine, a Quaternary or
fourfold number of Elements is taken away, as well in the nature of the
Universe, as in the constitution of mixed bodies: For how ignorantly is a
Quaternary of Elements suited with the aforesaid Ternary of emunctory places?
For Paracelsus having obtained Arcanums plainly heroical for the supplanting of
diseases, and being destitute of medicinal Science descending from the Father
of Lights, and of his own accord, assuming to himself the Title of the Monarch
of secrets, and from this boldness, invading the principality of healing,
treated of the Plague as it were of an enemy unknown unto him: Therefore he
ascribes the Plague, sometimes to the heaven, at another time to the Sun, and
sometimes to the elements alone, and often times to Pythonisses or women of a
prophesying spirit, witches, and to spirits, as well those infernal, as
elementary Deasters; being for the most part forgetful of the doctrine of his
own Paramire; where he proposes plagues of the being of nature, of the being
of poison (as if any Plague could exist void of poison, or as if some poison
were not natural) of the being of the Stars (as though the Stars were above
nature, or without it) of the being of witches (these he attributes unto Incubi
or devils in men's shapes, hobgoblins, sylphs, etc.) he distinguishes them also
against the being of the Stars, least peradventure witches may be the wise men
which are said to bear rule over the Stars, and of a God-like being, and he
there forgot his own and an imaginative being, the remembrance whereof
notwithstanding, he ought to have had before the rest: unless he had rather
that an imaginative being cannot cause disease, or that it is no where
vigorous, but in the possession of Witches.

And moreover, as I judge a plague sent from the hand of God, to despise the
remedies of nature; so also, if there were any proper unto devils, or witches
(which is not a thing to be believed) yet at least it should in no wise owe its
original unto the heaven: For otherwise, if there were a witch Plague, it would
be far more cruel than accustomed ones are, by reason of an external poison
being adjoined, and a readiness of its acting, speedied and enlarged through
the wrath of the evil spirit. P. Boucher a Minorite Friar, in his oriental or
Eastern pilgrimages, tells as an eyewitness. That although Egypt be otherwise
exceeding subject to the Plague; yet that every year, before the inundation of
Nile, a singular dew falls down, which they call Elthalim, at the coming
whereof, as many as lay sick of the Plague are readily and universally cured,
and are preserved as healthy there from, by the same dew: For if this be true,
neither has it been sufficiently searched into by Prince Radzvil; yet not any
thing can be drawn from thence, whereby we may know that the Plague is
naturally caused by the heaven; since from thence at least it follows, that
some meteors are healthy, but others hurtful to some, which none has hitherto
denied.

For although the Sun, the day before the inundation of Nile, returns every
year, almost unto the same place; yet the same stars do not return as
companions together with him: And then, that dew is not the offspring of the
heavens or stars, nor of a meteorical Blas of the heaven: but the day before
the inundation of Nile, the more high land of Aethiopia, being more hot and
southern, was long since overflown, which sends forth a great vapor from it,
filled with Nitre (for the whole water of Nilus is nitrous) which vapor is not
only resolved into a dew (the dew elsewhere weeps Honies, Tereniabin or the
fatness oftwood honey, found in good quantity in the summer months, with a
manna-ie Being, and Laudanum, being as it were gummy things; and among us the
May dew daily abounds with a sugary salt) and accompanies Nile running: but it
well washes the whole air of Egypt, even by moistening it, and refreshes
the bodies of the sick, not much otherwise than as a shower does the earth
after long driths.

At leastwise, I being admonished by the holy scriptures, despise the
soothsayers of heaven. Therefore if the heaven be the cause of a destroying or
devouring Plague, it ought likewise to be the cause of every other Plague:
Because the same Being, in the Species, obtaines the same constitutive causes,
from which the Species it self recieveth its identity or samelinesse. Therefore
I constantly deny, that a pestilent poison is bred by the heaven, or dismissed
from the stars: but all Plagues which are not singularly sent from God, for a
scourge, are either endemical ones or proper to a Country, or framed by a
certain terror.

But those which are borrowed, as being drawn in from contagion, do follow
their own seed and ferment: But an endemical Plague, although it be drawn in
from without, occasionally, yet it is not to be reckoned for the plague,
unless the terror of our Archeus do first frame a poisonous Idea of sore fear
conceived from the endemical Being, even as shall by and by be manifested. I
deny moreover, that any Plague is endemical: For although the air may myire
the bodies of many unto diverse confusions of putrefaction; yet it is in no
wise the original cause of a Postilential poison: For as all putrefaction
differs from the Plague; so in like manner also, the poison of the Plague
differs from any corruption that is the daughter of a thereor: The which,
unless it be rightly and perfectly known, the nature of the Plague also, shall
not be able to be any way understood: and much less a radical healing of the
same promoted.

For a conclusion of this Chapter, I will add an argument which is drawn from
the bank of rivers: For I have seen those, who, that they might avoid houses
infected with the Plague, departed from Antwerp; others who fled from the
Smalpocks, through which, two years before, they as yet carried about with
them, a face he potted with the scats thereof, which were smitten in the river
Scalds it self, with the diseases which they presumed they had avoided, and had
withdrawn themselves as healthy. I remember also, that a certain girl was
cured by me of the Leprousy at Vilvord, who when show is now accounted to have
been whole for the space of seven weeks, and returned to Antwerp, she presently
felt in the River it self, the Leprousie to bud again upon her throughout her
whole body: Who at ^^^gth, returning to me, and being cured, staid with me at
Vilvord for the space of half an year; nevertheless on the same day (wherein
she returned home, the hidden Leprousie in Scalds, again re-budded. I have also
known women who were readily inclined to a miscarriage, although they traveled
the Country in a Coach, and the journey had prosperously succeeded; yet in the
river they felt a commotion in their womb, and being carried from the bank by a
Coach, that thy slide into an excessive flux of menstruous blood.

And so the river strivingly imitating the heaven, steals away the believed
honor from the Planets: I speak of Summer; and so neither is cold in the
tive^, then somewhat suspected to be accused: Also the cold of Autumn, in
traveling the country; withstood or hurt not so much, as in the month called
August; the river; nor the shaking of the Coach; brought not so much hurt as a
quiet saying: At length, not a watery vapor wandering about in the river:

For truly in journying the Countryon rainy days, the declared calamities
happened not: As neither by living about fenny places: but in rivers fit for
flowing and ebbing, a few hours has brought on them these troubles of the
Plague, Wheals, Leprousy, and small Pox, which on lane did not arise: For the
water twice every day, for sakes the ships and banks, and the bottom is of a
strong smelling stink, through an hoary putrefaction: wherefore the river
speaks in silence, and proves the hurts of its odor putrified by continuance,
which I shall by and by show: For that thing also, is therefore proper, not so
much unto the sea shoat, as to the bank of rivers: For there is no hoary
putrefaction at the falt Sea, and sand of its bottom, such as is in half-sweet
or breachy rivers: wherefore their waters are scarce ever altogether clean, and
they want an odor proper to themselves.

The Heaven therefore is free from our contagion, as also being innocent of the
accusations of the ignorant, it wants the fault of revenge. They are the
Relics of Paganism, the which, unless the School of medicine shall shun, let
it know, that the giver of lights will not reach forth his benefits unto them.

CHAP. IV. A foreign new Plague or contagion.
ALL diseases have not come at once into the place of exercise: surely the ages
of our Ancestors were happy, wherein, but few infirmities had bent their sword
against man weakness: And the product following upon Adams transgression, has
by degrees adjoined the principles of nature with us. For Astrologers do as yet
to this day flee together unto the limited positions of the stars, unto the
wraths and un-co-sufferablenesses of their oppositions, and the conjoyning
combats of malignant lights: whereby the first Fever, first Apoplexy, or first
was bred. For although I am not wont, diligently to search into things past,
which may not profit, but hurt; and much less have I accustomed my self to
enquire into those things, the demonstrations whereof I could not obtain, give,
make, or hope for; yet I could not but deride the folly of Paganism referred
on the stars.

For I could the more easily assent unto Astrologers, if a Fever being once
bred, and an Apoplexy having arisen, they had ceased when that constellation
ceased: Also if they could demonstrate in what Inn, the while, they should
inhabit, the displacing of severish stars being once divded or drawn into
diverse parts. Wherefore in the book of long life, I first was constrained to
describe the entrance of all diseases and death into humane nature, from their
original: And so I clearly understand, and seeingly behold, that they were the
relics of paganism, whosoever has dared to extend the offices and
ordinations of the Stars beyond the text of the Holy Scriptures, which says,
that the stars are to us only for signs, seasons, days, and years: For if I
should assent unto judiciary Astrologers, I should suppose a feverish, or
Pestilent seed being once bred, to have afterward entered into nature; not
indeed, that its generation did continue thence-forward, as the offspring of a
certain curse, but of creation: But since most diseases do at length end into
health, if at leastwise they do not die with the sick themselves, and for the
most part without the raising up of a new offspring; it should of necessity
be, that if they had at sometime begun by reason of unlucky lights (a
ridiculous, or blasphemous word for a Christian) neither could then begin
without them at this day, if those lights having thus con-joyntly encountered,
are to be judged the efficient causes of diseases.

Therefore I believed, after that I had more fully unfolded the re-solutions of
hidden bodies by the fire, that there were from the beginning, the same
principles and roots of diseases, which there are also at this day: The which,
I have clearly enough demonstrated in the section of the original of medicine,
in the treatise concerning diseases in general. I have also believed, that some
diseases in the beginning, were as it were in their infancy, more gentle, and
that they had more swift progresses, and also more easy extinguishments, by
reason of the former strength of humane nature; yet that some diseases were in
their beginning more fierce, the which indeed, do not so adhere to the root of
humane frailty; but are attained as companions with a Plague or contagion, as
being foreign: For as natures were in times past, more strong, the which as
they are the recievers, so also the Physitianesses of diseases; so now, I
experience the seeds of diseases daily to profit, to make a more strong
impression, and to wax very fierce; and that our nature, by how much the longer
it goes on, and the more unseasonably proceeds; by so much the more
negligently also, it hearkens unto remedies: For indeed in the days of our
Fathers, the Lues venerea or foul disease, till that time hitherto unknown,
arose, together with its chambermaids and lackeys: But the 1424. year, and the
siege of Parthenopolis or Magdeburg, and the age of that Lues, and the first
nativity thereof, is taken notice of. At length, whatsoever has once grown
tough in our possession, although it may perish in those individuals, yet it
afterward keeps its particular kind, and scarce knows how to dye, as long as
the command of him remains, who sends a spot into the flesh: As the Scurvy,
Plague of Hungany, etc. unknown to our Ancestors: but our stripes increase
daily, because impieties also are multiplied.

Truly diseases are changed, are masked, are increased, and do degenerate
through their coupling: therefore henceforward we must deliberate with a more
earnest thought, concerning more profound remedies: but from the growing worse
of a disease, I have conjectured, that a more secure art of healing ought to
arise, than that which hitherto by frequent blood-letting, and the poisonous
resolving of laxative medicines, their bonds being conjoined, fore-timely draws
mortals into the place of burial; For I guess at it, because I see the Lues
Venerea to change other griefs into its own obedience; and that the plague also
will in this respect be degenerate; and indeed I have at sometime read in the
revelations of St. Bridget, also in the lives of St. Dominicus, of Vincentius
Farrerius, of Coletia, etc. that in an unanimous apparition, they saw the
Savior of the world to be angry at the impieties of mortals, and to threaten
the destruction of mankind with three darts: by reason of which appa^ition, it
was, that B. Vincent, as soon as in a superintellectual rapture at Valentid of
Spain, he had seen Coletta the reformatresse of the Order of St. Clara,
prostrate on her knees, before the holy-sacred Trinity, he earnestly entreated
the aid of the God-hearing Virgin, that Christ the Lord might divert that
purging satisfaction which was threatened for a deserved punishment; and his
country of Valentia being forsaken, he came to Gaunt to see Coletta, whom he
presently knew to be the same woman which he had seen in the aforesaid tapture,
and sought for. ^or covetousness there was a dart of Wars, whereby goods badly
gotten, and badly reserved are taken away: for pride, there was in the hand of
the Almighty, a dart of want and famine: But Ecclesiastical or Churchmen, whom
these kind of sins do for the most part touch, he threatens to chase with both
lances from their possessions, they being heaped up, and badly used, contrary
to their vows: and at length against luxury, he bare a a dart of contagion or
infection in his hand. Truly David, chose the plague instead of war, and
famine, not by chance, but from a higher guidance; because the whole people,
after the Kings example, were fornicators: At leastwise, that is singular in
the aforesaid vision, that it appeared unto diverse Saints, and in diverse years,
and indeed before the coming of the Lues or Pox; because there is not a word
which the Lord has not revealed unto his Prophets.

Last of all, under the fullness of days, under the maturity and completed
number of sinners, the long-suffering God sent one of the three darts into the
middle of the flesh, and forthwith the Lues Venerea appeared, being plainly
cruel, poisonous, and killing with a poisonous putrefaction. But afterward,
other sicknesses; yea, and the plague it self, contracteth a blethish thereof:
neither do ancient diseases any longer answer unto the descriptions of our
ancestors, neither do they show forth the accustomed obedience of a league with
remedies ^t for in times past great armies were led up and down, and beyond
Europe, into Asia and Africa, without any notable contagion, and on both sides
almost, the same numbering account of soldiers was found; but now presently
after a ^iege is begun, they within the Garrisons die, and also the besieging
camps, and straightway a popular plague succe^ds a speedied vanquishment: for
scarce one only band of the soldiers of a garrison goes forth abroad, the
which wagons laden with sick men do not follow, although it laded the
hospitals behind it. The chief Chirurgions do bewail with admiration, that but
so lately, any the lesser wounds do scarce any longer obey the wonted
medicines. Moreover that Lues or Pox, is read to have been first seen in the
siege of Naples, in the year 1494. Physicians also attempt the rise or original
thereof by conjectures: for it has pleased some to attribute the nativity of
the Lues unto the West Indies, and that there it was natural and accustomed:
but others have been pleased to accuse the Eastern climate; notwithstanding,
that the West Indies were free, Ferdinandus Cortesius himself witnesses, who
was the vanquisher of the same; and that after his coming, he had not yet taken
notice of it there to be; but that the Pox was brought thither with an
Ethiopian, a bondslave of Pamph^lus of Narvaez; for perhaps he had newly
brought it thither, and brought it with him from the siege of Naples: for
seeing the Lues began there at first to be seen, it has been disputed among
Nations, whether it ought to be ascribed for a triumph, to the French,
Spaniard, or indeed to the Neapolitan. In the mean time, none ever accused the
Portugal, and by consequence the East Indies were free: for the Portugal was
not in the siege of Naples, who from an ancient hatred, willingly promoted the
wars of Castile: yet the Portugal alone, with an excluding of the Spaniards,
had viewed the East, and subdued it to himself. Neither does it hinder these
things, that the Lues or Pox was for a long time since accustomed to the
Chinoys: for none came from thence unto the War of Naples: therefore, if it be
true, that the Lues excels in antiquity in China; it might there have begun
from the same Beginnings, even as they had Guns, and Printing before us: At
leastwise, the venereal plague or Pox is no where from Endemicks, nor from an
infection of the air; from hence also, it is not every where popular: but that
the Lues was not brought from the Chinoys unto us, is manifest from Guaiacum,
the use whereof among the Europeans, is eighty years elder then that of the
root of China: And then, because the entrance into China, is forbidden unto all
forraigners, upon pain of their head: the Pox was then never seen in the coasts
without China, whither notwithstanding, the Chinoys yearly ran out of their own
borders for commerces sake: But Guaiacum came from the Western lands. Others
perhaps, therefore contend, that this plague of luxury began, because the
dearness of victual had persuaded, the fleshes of dead carcasses that were
slain, to be filthed away, and being privily boiled, to be sold; but since with
the men eating Indians, this Lues, before the coming of Pamphilus had been
unknown, the alledgement of these is not received. Astrologers also with whom
the causes of all accidents al^ referred unto the aspects and revolutions of
the Stars, that they might not grant any thing to come to pass without a
cooperation of the Stars, say that a strange situation of the Stars had then
an influence only upon Naples; the which they seeking with much perplexity,
have not yet found: as if the same situation of the Stars had never been
before; for the holy Scriptu^as gainsay this opinion of the Astrologers, as I
have already proved above.

At length, Paracelsus unconstantly searching with earnestness, in many books
and additaments, accuses and detesteth the copulation of a leprous Harlot with
a scabbed French soldier: As if indeed no leprous whore had been before
co-mixed with a fordid Frenchman? But it is sufficient for a refuting of this;
that Paracelsus herein also is unconstant to himself, who denies in many
books, that the Lues Venerea is by it self a disease, but he permits it to be
only a page unto other diseases; notwithstanding every contagion, whether it
be contracted from the Leprousie, or from the Pest, or elsewhere, is truly and
actually a disease in it self: neither is it a wonder also, that the cause of
the Pox is hitherto unknown by those who have had respect only unto the
contingencies of nature: I rather believe that so many apparitions to Saints
were not in vain, and shown unto them without their scope or purpose. I
therefore believe, that the beginnings of the venereal plague was drawn and
planted into nature from a dart of divine anger, violently cast, and no
otherwise than as at the pouring out of the phials, the third person of mortals
shall at some time perish: Not indeed that I will have the plague of lust to be
accounted altogether miraculous in its beginning, because it began from a
heinous offense: For I know, as in nature, it now has, so also that in its
beginning, it found a ferment and root therein. And moreover, a certain Layick
and holy man, being wont at some hard questions, to receive dreaming visions,
and oft-times also, through the abstraction of his mind, intellectual notions
or knowledges, perhaps from too much curiosity, narrowly searched into these
questions. 1. Why that venereal plague had broke out in the fore-past age, and
not before; since that in the fore-past days of Pagans, any wicked impudent
wantonness was never wanting? 2. From whence, if not from the Indians, it came
into Europe? 3. What may be the cause of its continuation, and mitigation, and
changing, if it were come from God? For Miracles do seldom pass over by way of
contagion, and unless a command be delivered, obtain their cause in nature:
But neither is God wont to punish the guiltless, even as the Lues veneris
oft-times infecteth the innocent. The Layick said, that he saw in an
intellectual vision, an horse, which flowed almost all abroad with a stinking
ulcer; which disease being proper to the horse kind, our contrymen call,
Den-worm; but the French Le Farein; whence horses do by degrees perish with a
corrupt mattery rottenness: but he saw this horse as it were designed for meat
to dogs, having his whole back vitiated, also about the vessel of nature:
neither had he any other answer, besides that vision; wherefore he said, that
he supposed, that at the siege of Naples (where this cursed contagion at first
arose) some one through an horrible sin, had carnal copulation with such a
horse-beast. At leastwise, from thence I conjecture the rarity of a disease not
before seen; because I cannot easily believe that ever such a sin was in the
like terms committed from the beginning of the world: and it is a disease like
unto the Lues Venerea, and akin and familiar unto the nature of the horse: And
therefore it might (God the avenger so permitting it) have naturally
transplanted its own ferment into the family of man, although it was before
divinely threatened: That the Mares contagion, I say, might have mixed in the
act of lust not to be spoken of, it then propagating the Gonorrhea or running
of the Reins, the Cancer, and venereous Baboes, etc. even so as at this day,
the Pox it self is attracted from a filthy whore, even into the testicles of a
man: But I cease to be the more curious, as often as a thing being known, is of
no use; unless happily thou had rather meditate from hence, that horses thus
ulcerous, are cured by the remedy of the Pox; and on the other hand, this by
Quicksilver most exactly prepared: At least wise the consideration of the Lues
serves for a degenerate, and at this day multitiplyed plague, and many of
which are threatened in the holy Scriptures under the coming of Antichrist.

I add, That it is infamous, and has infected every corner of the world; it
h^^h also manifestly shown by the effect, that it is a common satisfactory
punishment of the flesh, and creeping unto a further, and as yet a commonly
unknown mark: For indeed at its first beginning, it not only stood a good while
unknown, but also its healing was unsuccessefully att^mpted, and at this day is
commonly unknown: whence it follows that the life of mortals being enraged by
uncertain and cruel medicines, ^^ now humbled, even before the youth of every
one; which weakness promises a cert^^^ lasting continuance of perpetuity, and
in abstinent persons, unto the fourth period of generation at least; yea,
although a large company of men have never contracted the Pox: Nevertheless,
since the Lues is scarce ever well cured, and the relics thereof have
remained; surely there do those survive, who having experienced the rashness
o^ Physicians, are made far more weak then themselves were: For there is a
radical part o^ poison, which has remained in their possession, besides the
horrid tortures of ointments, perfumes, and salivations; and it must needs be,
that in that respect their successors are diminished with a notable weakness;
For the Lues is not indeed a disease, consisting of a matter [whereof]; but
only a poisonous ferment is affixed to the solid, or liquid parts of our body,
like an odor; And so (the which is singular to the Pox) it incorporates it
self, not only with the constitutive parts, but also with the excrements, or
with the matters of other diseases, which it touches at; because it affects
them, and is co-mixed with them: and since it is easier to defile a matter with
poison, which is newly appointed for an excrement, then a part as yet alive,
and so also for this cause resisting:

Hence it comes to pass, that whosoever have the manifest, or hidden
beginnings of any diseases whatsoever, they do easily contract the Foul
disease, and therefore also it transplants it self into various masks of
diseases by an association: for in many it produces ulcers, and wheals; in
others, it gnaws rottenesses in the bones, it stirs up hard swellings, also it
causes Buboes about the groyn, phlegmones or inflamed apostemes, and corrupt
mattery apostemes, as also wounds stubborn in curing: elsewhere also it has
brought forth palsies, gowty fits, the jaundise, or dropsy, etc. For that
thing deceived Paracelsus, he thinking that the Pox was not a disease in it
self, because it adhered to other diseases; For a curse now coming upon nature,
impure from its original, does not proceed by an accustomed generation, but it
finds its own body pre-disposed in the body of other diseases; so that the
likeness of conception, nativity, subsistence, and effects in a strange body
(to wit, that of man) do produce a likeness of the rise of the Pox, as of
other diseases, because they in a like manner issue from the fall. Diseases
therefore, that from the rise of the Pox are become degenerate for the future,
those do for the most part imitate the right or customary manner of some
poison: neither has any one sufficiently searched into the causes of these,
wherefore indeed, most diseases have become contagious, more cruel, more
frequent, and more slow and difficult of flight, than in times past. For the
Pest is undoubtedly more frequent then it was wont to be, it catches hold on
us upon the least occasion, it cruelly infects us, and is the more readily
dispersed, because it is joined unto a new poison: For many, as it were
dispairing, have thought that the strength of our nature does thus run down
unto its end in a short space: But the Word of God has a stable Government:
there is not any defect of these incorporated with the humane species; but
adhering only unto individuals by accident; and seeing every foreign adhering
matter is subject to a separation, and no strange thing is fit to be conjoined
pithily to the image of God, in constitutive principles: Therefore every
foreign matter does of necessity receive its birth, increase, ascent, state,
declining, and death, and at length also, of its own accord, expects a
restoration by further propagations: For the seeds and species of the word are
durable for ever. Hence it follows, that a foreign guest ought at length to
depart from the fold, whereinto it has theevishly crept, through a privy
error: Because the power of the Word-suffers a prescription by no seasons,
length of motions, or days, as neither by the wiles of the enemy. The flood
indeed over-covered the earth, because man had corrupted his way: And therefore
at this day also, by reason of sins, an infirmity has made it self room
amongst us, it grows new daily, and besides, another is about to threaten us.
In the year 1540. under Paul 3. about Autumn, a Tarantula first appeared in
Apulid, nigh Tarentum, being a monster, so called by the City, like unto a
spider, but twice bigger: The which afterward remained in the species, and
from the land of Tarentum was now also transplanted into the Roman land: For
according to Daniel, every monster growing up on the Commonwealth, comes from
the sea: new flatterers are confirmed by this monster, who befool or make men
mad that are bitten by them, and they trippingly dance with exceeding
gladness, as if they had done well in believing flatterers.

In the year 1550. in the sixth month called August, the French first saw
wheat, which they call bedewed or honyed wheat, it representing in its ear,
being as yet green, a smoaked or red-herring in its smell; but in its ripe ear,
nothing but a stinking black powder: I wish, not the cause of any popular
diseases. It is a stroke or punishment which steals from us a great part of
victual; for cockle or tares is sown against the more mighty Prelates: the
which I wish they knew, and did foresee.

In the year 1556. The Scurvy first appeared in our seacoasts, being unknown
to the ancients; the which infects the gums, and breath, and legs; because it
^l^o besieges the most inward parts. In the same year there are men remarkably
noted, being admitted of in the Low countries, subverting within and without,
those that rashly believe on them, with a sweet contagion. Not so long ago a
camp-^ever assaulted our contrymen, with a deep contagion, killing without
thirst and heat; and they are denoted, who under a show of Piety, spread new
and suspected opinions among people in families. But at leastwise, nothing
which is once hostile, does afterward kill in its own kind; because it is sent
into us for a scourge, and we being blind, do not diligently search into the
occasional cause, deadly mean, end, and remedy: For they at this day accuse the
impuri^ies of Camps, Fens, houses, together with the poverty of soldiers, as
the causes of unwonted sicknesses, and among Physicians, the whole preservative
is conversant about this occasion: As if indeed Camps were in times past purer,
whilst Plagues, and unwonted Fevers not as yet were: For I know, that as often as
a Fever falls on the body, from the pedigree of ancient ones, which actually
suffers the Lues venerea, or which at sometime had it, and being badly taken
away, that that Fever forthwith associates it self with the poisonous sweepings
or relics of the Lues, from whence it borrows poisons, which began to be
called a malignant and Camp-Fever: and that it propagates it self by its
contagion, even on those that are free from the Pox:

And it is indeed, of the Fever its father, and the Lues its mother, being a
third monster diverse from both parents, as being from diseases distinct in
kind: From hence surely, as well a Fever, as the Plague, have become masked and
unknown: For so the Lues proceeds to be dispersed in a feverish Chaos, and is
made to be of a common right: For the unluckie monster of the Lues, being
unlike unto both parents, is a treacherous poison, and becomes a striving
imitater of the plague: And by a new ferment of putrefaction, it produces the
Plague it self to be more cruel then it was wont to be. It is not therefore an
absurdity, that Camps at this day do stir up many sick soldiers, more frequent
deaths, and those Fevers more malignant in contagion: Neither do more ready
infections undeservedly follow Camps, than otherwise, the more populous Cities;
because the soldier is a nigher object of the Pox, than Citizens. The Plague
therefore finding a fuel for its spark, does easily return.

CHAP. 5. The Opinions of the Ancients.
THe Pest is in every age reputed for a punishment sent from the angry Gods.
Therefore Hippocrates names every blemish of contagion, wholly, in diseases,
Divine. The Heathen do as yet to this day flee over to their Idols: The gods of
the Nations are devils. But we Christians have recourse unto the one only
eternal Power, and do implore the aid of Saints, because God is glorious and
wonderful in his Saints, who by request obtain those things which our
unworthinesses do deny us. For there are Cities in the Neatherlands, wherein
the fellowship of Saints, Patrons in the Plague, has for a long time hitherto,
kept the Citizens free, as many of them as were sent for the succor and
service of those that were defiled with the Plague: For none that was sent by a
head-fellow-Citizen, and companion, although he readily served him that was
infected by the Plague, was ever laid hold of by the Plague. So it is: The
hairs of every ones head are numbered: A leaf falls not from the tree, without
the permission of God: much less does any thing happen unto us, besides the
permission and foreknowledge of God. So it is true; a certain Plague comes
from the hands of the Lord, the which to avoid, is impossible: because it comes
from him who cannot err in arching. Therefore I have decreed not to write any
thing at all concerning this Plague, as neither of the curing of a miraculous
one: For if a natural Plague be healed by a miracle, that belongs not to a
Physician: very many of us also are of opinion, that the Plague is nor sent but
from God, without the concurrence of a second cause. The Mahometans also, with
the Calvinists, believe the Plague to be the lot of an unavoidable
Predestination: Neither therefore do they avoid infected places, or bodies, as
neither any hurtful things: being badly constant to themselves: for truly a
wild beast cannot hurt without the consent of the Lord; and so in this respect
he is not more hurtful then the Plague; yet they beware of and defend
themselves from wild beasts. England also has hitherto wanted the proper name
of the [P^st] and the which, from times past, it names [Plaga] the Plague or
stroke. As to what pertains to the causes thereof, the Greeks first, and
afterward the Arabians, and whosoever have dedicated themselves to either of
these two, do collect the Pest or Plague into two causes.

The first whereof, they name Catarctical or foregoing causes; but the latter,
connexed, conjoined, containing, and immediately accompanying ones: and indeed,
when they saw the body of man, by its individuals, and places of its
habitations, to differ in great variety, they devised a universal cause for the
plague; to wit, they being seduced by Astrologers, blamed the heaven, that by
its hurtful light and motion, it be sprinkles the air with a cruel gore; the
poison whereof, they have therefore named an Epidemical or universal one: and
al^^hugh they saw diseases infamous in contagion, to arise through occasion of
Pools or Lakes, Caves, poisonous soils, Minerals, Filths, Mountains, the
natural moistnesses of the earth, of a valley, or sink, or privy, from whence
diverse pu^refactions sprang; yet they never esteemed the disposition of these
diseases ^^ be the Pestilence; but by a separated name, they called them
Endemical ones: which distinction, presently laid every doubt asleep, and they
themselv^ have snorted in this deep sleep, being glad that they had banished
their own ignorance unto the heavens, for a universal ^ault: and they thought
themselves secure, not any thing distrusting, that the heaven could vindicate
it self from blame, but them of ignorance. They likewise separated the dead,
and those that were about to die, in detesting their obediences, that it might
not be heard of, neither that they might accuse the carelessness and ignorance
of Physicians: Especially, when as the chief Physician always runs away,
forsaking his own sick Patient i^ his despairing of life. Wherefore they call
the Diviners of the stars together for their aid, that seeing the world defends
the errors of these men, they may defame the heaven with a conjoined
accusation of a fault, that it defiles the air and water with the consumptive
poison of an abstracted light.

But Paracelsus being much more bold than his Predecessors, would have the
heaven to be really infected with our contagion; to note our sins with a pen of
iron, and unwillingly to receive them; therefore, to be a revenger, and to stir
up deaths: But that the Plague is a mere wound, that it is darted from heaven;
that the stars, by wounding, and in running, do us hurt; and that these wounds
are made only in three places, and not in more (as not knowing, that these are
our emunctory places) to wit, behind the ears, under the armpits, and in the
groyn.

In another place also, he appoints, not three, bu^ four plagues, according to
the number of the Elements, that every one of them are to be vanquished by a
fourfold and much different remedy: But elsewhere, he also devises a fifth
plague, being sent into us by Gnomes, Sylphs, Nymphs, Satyrs, Hobgoblins,
Giants, or Faunes, because perhaps, he supposed these to be a fifth Element.
Moreover, he being entreated by the City of Stertzing, for a choice Antidote
against the poison of the Pest, forsaking his former sta^ry and Elementated
remedies, in the end, wholly trusted to a drink of Triacle, Myrrh, Butter but
root, Terra Sigillata, Sperma ceti, the herb Asclepias, Pimpernell, Valerian,
and Camphor, with the best Aqua vitae; to wit, through inconsiderateness, he as
unmindful, being snatched away into a hundred confusions of simples, by him many
times and seriously detested but a little before.

In the next place, neither do those things agree together, that he elsewhere,
has often, not any thing distinguished the Element of fire from the heaven:
and nevertheless, that he has delivered four plagues, distinct in their
original, cause, and remedies, the which he had dedicated unto one heaven,
which in another place, he would have to be the only Author of the Pestilence.
He wills also, that Crystal, A^^es, and likewise Gemms, are bred in the air,
and do fall down from heaven, the which he, as unmindful of himself, names the
f^^its of the water, as willing Crystal to be nothing but mere ice constrained
by cold. At length, the Pest, seeing it is a malady of the heaven, and of the
fourth degree; yet he says, that the tincture of Gemms is the best solidative
medicine of that wound; and so also, that a remedy of the second degree, should
cure the plague of the fourth degree.

I also pity the vain ^iresomeness about remedies, which among a thousand
Alchymists, scarce one prepares: For it is a frivolous thing to compose so many
books, and at length to have run back unto remedies which are scarce to be
gotten, in a popular disease, and every where obvious: For it is a frivolous
thing in a wandering plague, to nourish a whole Country with the fleshes of the
Stork, which flies away about Autumn; or with a Lions Tongue, hung on the body:
For all such things discover ignorant boasting, but not a common charity, in so
miserable a grief: For neither has Hippocrates chased away the plague out of
Greece, by such remedies: For otherwise, the poor man (if the plague should be
put to flight by precious remedies and victuals) should with the despairing of
his life, the unequality of Fortune, much bewailing, and just grief, ponder,
God to be a respecter of persons, and remedies to be denied unto him. I
therefore shall never believe, that God, in Nature, was less careful in curing
the poor man, than the rich: For the history of Lazarus, and the rich Glutton,
does wonderfully comfort the poor. Lastly, Paracelsus has set forth books of a
plague generated by Pythonesses, and Hobgoblins: By Hobgoblins, I say, Satyrs,
etc. which he denies to b^ evil spirits, which he makes coequal unto Witches
in generating of the plague: Yet has he neglected to add remedies for such a
pestilence; as though the title of the Monarch of Secrets, being presumptuous
on himself, it had been sufficient for him, not to have ^rod in the footsteps
of those that went before him, and to have stirred up very much smoke, and
little fire, and to have exposed the memory of himself unto laughter. For his
books of the Plague, of Tartars, of Minerals, etc. do contain much of prattle,
but little of trusty aid.

CHAP. VI. The Pest divided.
THe Paramire of Paracelsus is totally employed in persuading, that every
disease without exception, and by name, the Pestilence, is in its whole species
five-fold; to wit, being distinct in its causes, original, properties, and
remedies. But the first kind, he calls a Natural Being, originally proceeding
from elementated fruits; and this plague, he has described in his books of the
plague and pestilentialness, wherein he is there his own Interpreter. But since
it is manifest that the fruits which the Schools have believed to be of mixed
Elements, are of water alone (even as I have elsewhere clearly demonstrated
concerning the rise of medicine) of necessity also, the doctrine of the
Elements, at least for the Pest, now falls to the ground: and then, another
predicament of diseases, he calls an Astral or Starry Being, as it were raining
down from the starry heaven; and in many books of the Pest, he prosecutes only
this kind of Being, others being omitted: and so, seeing he elsewhere confounds
the heaven, and the fruits of the heavens, with the Element of fire, an Astral
plague shall also again be co-incident with a Natural and Elemental fiery one:
and then, a third most general kind of diseases, he calls the Being of poison;
as if there should elsewhere be a certain plague void of a poison; and as
though a plague could have its poison, without, above, or besides a Natural
Being. Thus therefore he distinguishes, as being fore-stalled by an Idiotism,
the stars, against the Being of Nature: But at least, as if a natural, and
Astral plague, were not of a poysonsom nature? At length, the fourth kind of
diseases, he calls a Spirital Being; to wit, the evil spirit cooperating,
together with his bondslaves.

Hitherto also, he refers the execrations, and desperations of men: But first
of all, he omits his Faunes, Hobgoblins, Nymphs, Satyrs, etc. unless happily,
he will have these to be the companions of Cacodemons: at leastwise, he
neglects the chief hinge, to wit, his own fantasy, when as terror or
affrighting fear alone, generates no seldom plague.

And moreover, he supposes a spirital external Being to be the essential cause
of the Pest; to wit, whereby the species are only to be divided: and so, he
distinguishes of two effects diverse in kind, only by external occasional, and
accidental causes: For it is certain, whether the Witch as a Sorceress, should
connex a pestiferous contagion unto any one, or that be done by any other
means, and by a proper vice of nature; at leastwise, the plague issuing from
thence, is on both sides one and the same. Last of all, he calls the fifth kind
of diseases, a God-like Being, or that of the faithful, stupidly enough, in not
distinguishing God from diseases themselves; even as otherwise, it is a free
thing, in no wise to have separated Nature from her own effect. But he has no
where made mention, even in his largest writings, of a Deal or God-like plague.
But as to what belongs to my self, I do nor adnit of an Astral Being, although
Paracelsus has made that common, not only to one of the five; but being
unconstant to himself, unto all pestilences universally.

I likewise, in the next place, confound the Being of poison with the Being of
Nature: For if it does not contain a poison; neither also, for that cause, the
plague. But since the Pest has a separated birth, and progress distinct from
other diseases, being not a little tied up unto imaginations and terrors: In
this respect, I make every plague to be spiritual: not indeed, therefore to be
of a Witch, but to be tributary, and merely natural to the disturbances of the
Arche^s: But if indeed, the Cacodemon or evil spirit co-laboureth for the
destruction of man; it shall indeed, be the more fiercely transplanted, and wax
cruel; yet there is not (although his Paramire thinks otherwise) need of
superstition for this thing, nor is that plague devious from that of nature,
because a spirital Being, does evidently, whether he will or no, always war
under Nature. Therefore, I acknowledge two only plagues different in kind; to
wit, one which is sent immediately from the hand of the Almighty, by the
smiting Angel, for the execution of the hidden judgment of his own Deity: For
this, although I acknowledge it to be a pestilence; yet I wholly commit the
same unto my Lord, and say with a resigned mind, Let thy will be done, O Lord:
For truly, neither do I wish for a remedy, but according to thy own good
pleasure. Finally therefore, I will every where touch only at the pestilence of
Nature, as a Philosopher; and I call that, the other plague.

CHAP. VII. The conjoined cause of the Ancients.
IN diseases universally and without exception, I at sometime, in discoursing
of a disease in general, have acknowledged no efficient and external cause,
besides an occasional one only. Now moreover, I have shown, that I have justly
denied to give the heaven passage unto the plague; although in the mean time,
the Blas of a Meteor may be able to dispose the suffering subject unto a more
ready impression of receiving. Therefore I will first apply my self unto the
connexed causes of the Pest, which we read to be referred by the Ancients, into
the corruption of humors, and inflammation of heat; and therefore their
preservatives written down, are supposed to be adjudged only by way of
resisting the putrefaction of humors. But the Schools have not yet ex^lained,
what that vitiated humor enflamed with heat may be, or with what name to be
endowed, which may be the firebrand of the plague, in the veins, bowels, or
habit of the body: and they have not yet known, that in Egypt a destructive
plague is rather extinguished than incensed by great heats: Even as among us,
that the ^e^tilence is for the most part, rather in Autumn, than in Summer: For
sometimes the Schools run back unto E^demicks, as well those domestical, as
foreign, the which are believed to incite and heap up putrefaction after any
manner whatsoever.

In the next place, for preservatives, they scrape together any simples,
although hot ones, so they are but commended by the faith of He^barists: But
the doub^ing of the Schools, as also the unprosperous uncertainty of remedies,
is every where covered with the ridiculous event of diverse complexions; the
which surely has been hitherto a common and threadbare aptness or fitness for
excusing their excuses in death: and at length, through the great fear of
Doctors, of the plague, the distrust of the Schools is discovered to be beyond
the Laws, and promises of books: at leastwise, they assuage the unlucky
obediences of the sick, by one only saying, It so stood in the Destini^^:
Therefore, that they must patiently bear it, because that, or the other
miserable man, was referred into the Catalogue of those that were to die.

In the mean time, the work of the plague is cruel, but more cruel is he who
brags of help, and brings it not: The progress of the plague is swift, by
reason of so great sluggishness of Physicians: The venom in the plague, at
leastwise, is not quieted at one only moment; neither does that admit of peace,
which despises Tr^ce. If therefore there were any humors corrupted in the
Pest, in th^^r being made, through putrefaction, seeing they cannot return, and
be reduced into their ancient b^i^htness of integrity, and the first, and
chiefest natural betokening of diseases in the Schools, is most speedily to
pluck up the hurtful humor, and that all succors are vain, but those which do
readily and fully sequester the offending filth; It should follow, that their
universal succors (to wi^, purgings, and cuttings of a vein) are the most
potent helps of the plague: The which notwithstanding, are already many times
found to hasten on death. That supposition also of necessity falls down
together, which introduces corrupt humors for the immediate cause of the
plague: For in very deed, the Pest, does rather infect the nourishable humors,
than that these are the cause of the Pest: Otherwise, I have elsewhere made it
sufficiently manifest, that nature does not acknowledge, nor ever had humors
in the constitution of the blood: Wherefore, neither are these able to cause
any thing, because they are non-beings.

Again, if humors in the making of their putrefaction, should be the connexed
cause of the Pest: at leastwise, the Schools ought to have set forth the name
of that humor, and likewise to have expounded the manner and process, whereby
those humors are corrupted, and how, they being now corrupted, are the
conjoined cause of the plague: and also, after what sort they may be speedily
sequestered, together with the hinderance of their impression on the vital
parts. It had behoved them in the next place, to point out the place wherein
the assembly of the foregoing pestilent corruption, as it were in a Nest, was
held. For if this center be the veins, or bowels (to wit, where the first
sequestration of excrements happens) all sweat should be altogether hurtful;
because it is that which should bring the poison from the stomach, or liver,
through the vital bowels, and not pour it forth nearer, through the accustomed
sinks: For so the Lues Venerea, only by a Gonorrhea, choosing its mansion in the
Testicles, if by solutive medicines, it be drawn back from the shops of the
urine, that it may go back through the veins into the paunch, It spreads a
necessary Lues, only by that passage, into the whole body. Much more therefore
should the Pest, if it had defiled the humors in their own shops, and should
be b^ought sorth, in passing through by sweats, infallibly defile all of
whatsoever is vital within. But if indeed, the habit of the body be the place
of the putrefaction of pestilential humors; now the Diet of Physicians shall
be ridiculous, which is believed to hinder the generating of putrifiable
humors.

In the next place, from what, and from whence, putrefaction in good juicy
blood, should arise in the habit, or also in the center of the body, before the
plague, not any thing has been determined by the Schools concerning all these
things; as thinking it sufficient to have said by the way, that the corruption
of humors is the conjoined cause of the plague, because run away Doctors have
never beheld this, but asquint: For when they observed, that a laxative
medicine being drunk up, the flesh and blood being consumed by that venom, and
a yellow humor, or pale snivel, or the more dark blood, not yet fully
transchanged, did flow forth; they affirmed that, not only the venal blood, but
the whole body, did consist of four humors differing in kind, and that they
were again resolved into them: Even so, that they have supposed this
putrefaction for the Pest, to be begun in yellow Choler, being compared to
fire, or in black Choler, and therefore called melancholy, as being nearer to
earth, Saturn, and malignity.

Truly, although I have elsewhere abundantly demonstrated four humors as a
frivolous and hurtful invention; yet let us now grant, by way of supposition of
a falsehood, that the blood did consist of a commixture of those four humors;
yet when the blood has now ceased to be, and is by a formal transmutation,
changed into a nourishable and vital liquor, which immediately nourishes,
increases, and cherishes every member; it at leastwise fights with the truth
of Phylo^ophy, that that nourishable liquor being degenerated from blood, by a
formal transchanging, had not yet forgotten its former condition, and
compacture. Suppose thou, if Wine, Ale, the liquor of flesh, with the juice of
po^herbs, be drunk at one meal, and changed into blood; certainly that
constitution of the blood is not one, as long as it consists of those four
diverse things being as yet co-mixed: but those four are made only one, while as
by a formal transmutation, they are made a new product, which is blood. In like
manner therefore, although the blood should consist of a connection of four
humors; yet seeing they are now one, and no longer four; that one thing
constituted shall be no longer that thing connexed of the four original liquors
granted: Neither can the diseases resulting from thence, either insist or be
accounted as humorous in healing; they not b^ing any more able to return back
into those four feigned humors (although they are granted to have been real
ones) than the blood that is once made, can return into the former Wine, Ale,
Broth of fleshes, and juice of potherbs. It is manifest therefore, that the
Schools, contrary to all Philosophy, are ignorant, that there is a formal
transmutation, while blood is made of meats; and while of blood a nourishable
liquor is made.

And it is manifest from the aforesaid blindnesses, that the greatest part of
diseases has been committed upon trust, unto the ignorance of principles in
the Schools. But I ingeniously protest, that I have never found even the least
tittle of assisting aid in any books of Ancestors: For although many being as
it were helped, did recover; nevertheless, I have seen ten-fold more, who from
the beginning of the invasion of the plague, had made use of the fame remedies,
to have unhappily perished: For Triacle for a long time ago, has always
promised help, and the water thereof is now accounted every where more
excellent, although they know, who have known the properties of the Pest, that
they contain a vain help: For Antidotes which restrain poison, have nothing of
certainty against the plague: and therefore University-Physitians da^e not
expose themselves to the contagion of the plague, under the unfaithful safegu^^
of Triacle; because the poison of the Pest is a far secret one from any other.
But some Religious persons in a City, leaving nothing unattempted, whereby they
might obtain moneys, or esteem, profess to sell the most choice Triacle at a
great price: But since none going to warfare in Christ, infolds himself in
secular affairs; I exhort every one chiefly to be^are of such pompous Boasters:
For why, they enter not in by the door, but above, by the roof; being not
called, they intrude themselves into medicine: For these will almost say with
Tully, We have deceived the people, and have seemed most famous Apothecaries:
For Triacle was as yet unknown unto Hippocrates, the subduer of the plague: It
receives a threefold quantity of honey, according to the plenty of all
simples: Also sixty simples being at discord, being dry, hard, shut up, crude,
excrementous, and for the most part inveterate from the age of two years: These
Simples I say, are rendered much barren from the mixture of ^oiled honey: They
require also a mixture and digestion from the feeble Feverish person,
^especially from the stomach being vitiated by poison, and from the Archeus
being inwardly prostrated, and confusedly tumulting: Wherefore they perform
little of help, and the least of comfort: For the cocted Trochies of the Viper,
since by the admonition of Galen, they are the Capital Simple of Triacle, do
easily teach, that the water of Triacle is plainly ridiculous: For if the Viper
stated the Triacle water with virtue, in distilling; why have the Trochies of
the Viper, in its first and Galenical cocture, put off all that prerogative of
healing? What therefore shall I do with those who are always learning, and
never coming unto the knowledge which they profess to teach? For most men (as
Seneca witnesses) have not attained unto that Science; because they thought
that they had attained it. At length, neither has it been sufficient to have
concealed the names of those humors, which they have imagined to putrify
before the plague, and to be the accompanying cause hereof: But moreover, in
skipping over that, they pass over the very thingliness of the corruption,
which now and then, finisheth its Tragedy in a few hours.

For Physicians seem to have rested on a soft pillow, while their Neighbors
house is on fire; and their head being once elevated on their elbow, to have
declared the Arrest:

The plague is a contagious disease, from putrified humors, being connexed to
a Fever, most sharp, and exceeding dangerous: which being said, they having
very well fed, to have bent down their head again for their afternoon sleep;
which sleep, under so great light, has again closed their eyes. The world in
the mean time, bewails its condition, seeing the effects, not the causes, as
neither in the next place, the remedies to be noted by this judgment:
Wherefore the Country people with both hands, scratching their hair on their
Temples, pronounce another Arrest. There is no need (say they) of much study,
nor of so many books, that any may say, the Plague is mortal and contagious,
the which, every one has learned by his own malady: Therefore it shall be
better to ask counsel of faithful helpers, no longer of drowsy ones, who are
Fugitives from the Plague, and ignorant of remedies.

CHAP. VIII. The Seat prepared.
IT is not sufficient to have demonstrated, that the causes of the Pest are
unknown to the Schools, unless I shall declare my own experiences, the cause of
the plague, its diverse progresses in the making, its strange properties in its
being made, its preservations, and cure. At first therefore, I will repeat what
I have demonstrated elsewhere; to wit, that in Nature, there are at least two
causes, and no more: Indeed the matter, and efficients which efficient in the
plague, I call the Archeus, Vulcan, or Seed: at leastwise, for the matter,
there is not a certain undistinct hyle or matter, which never existed, nor will
be in nature: and it serves for Science Mathematical, and not to a contemplater
of Nature: Therefore, I behold the matter of the pestilence, with relation unto
its internal efficient. The matter therefore of the plague, is a wild spirit
tinged with a poison: But that matter tends unto the end proposed to it self,
after a threefold manner; because it either comes to us from without, and
being totally and perfectly pestiferous, exhaling from a pestilent sick person,
or dead carcass, or place, or Utensile being defiled; or it is drawn inwards,
being as yet crude, from a Gas of the earth putrified by continuance, which
afterward receives an appropriative ferment within; and at length, by degrees,
attains a pestilent poison in us: Or also a total destruction of us, is now and
then materially, and formally finished within, without an external assistance.
But that there are not more manners, whereby the plague is made, is manifest
from the division: For either it is wholly generated within, without a foreign
aid; or it happens on us from without; and that is either perfect in the
matter, and form of a poison, wanting only appropriation, and application; or
it is as yet crude, imperfect, and as it were an Embryo. Whence at leastwise,
first of all, it becomes easy to be seen, that the Pest does not always first
invade the heart: For I have seen him, who in touching pestilent papers, at
that very moment felt a pain, as it were of a pricking Needle, and straightway
he showed a pestilent Carbuncle in his forefinger, and after two days died.

Furthermore, the aforesaid threefold matter, however plainly venomous the
first is; yet on both sides, it holds it self within the number of an
antecedent cause: For no otherwise than as poison taken in at the mouth, is not
the disease it self, or death, but only the occasional cause thereof: For not
any thing that is corporeal, acts immediately on the li^e o^ vital powers
(because they are those which are of the nature of Coelessial lights) but first
it is received, and made as it were domestical: and when some poison is now
made a Citizen of our Inn, to wit, it being swallowed or attracted;
notwithstanding also, it cannot as yet enter, or be admitted unto the hidden
Seminaries of the vital powers (because it is in its whole essence external)
but first, the poisonous quality, by acting on the life, stirs up the Archeus
(otherwise the Author and workman of all other things to be done under his own
government) into its own defense: For otherwise, a pestilen^ poison acts not
like a sword, which equally wounds all it touches at, in the same moment of it
self; but the pestilent poison is not able to strike any. The Archeus
therefore, since from his own disposition, he has animal perturbations,
passions, confusions, and interchangeable courses, he suddenly brings forth the
image of his own alteration conceived, and decyphers that Idea in the particle
or small portion of his own proper substance wherein it is conceived; which
Image of Death being thus furnished, is the Pest or Plague it self. For truly,
I do not judge the plague to be a certain naked quality, although it existeth
not elsewhere than in a body, as it were accidents in a subject of inherency:
but the plague is a Being, a poison of Nature, subsisting by it self in us, and
consisting of its own matter, form, and properties; the which I have elsewhere
most fully demonstrated in the Treatise of Diseases.

But here it is sufficient to have admonished, that the life operates nothing
by conquering, or destroying, unless by the vital motions of the sensitive
Soul, which is not wont but to operate by Idea's on the Archeus the Executer of
any motions whatsoever; even as, neither does the Archeus operate after any
other manner on the body. Wherefore, it is to be noted by the way, in this
place, that the inward material and immediate cause of a disease, is the
disease it self, (...) wise, than as the material cause in a man, is his very
body, persevering from the (...) unto old age; but not that there is any
conjoined material cause of a man, besides his body it self, which is the very
product of generation; to wit, from a material cause, and seminal internal
efficient: which things have hitherto been veiled from the Schools, and so they
have reputed the internal occasional causes of diseases, to be the immediate
and conjoined ones, being as yet plainly distinct from the disease produced:
Wherefore that is also, next to be repeated in this place, which I have taught
in my discourses of Natural Philosophy; to wit, that there are six digestions
in us: For in the three former, that there are their own Retents, and their own
excrements; the which, seeing every one of them are in themselves; and in their
own Regions, troublesome; yea, by a co-in^olding, and extravagancy, they have
become hateful, they degenerate into things transmitted, and transchanged, and
do from thence induce diverse diseases occasionally.

But in the fourth and fifth digestion, I have shown, that not any perceiveable
excrement is admitted: But in the sixth digession, which is that of things
transchanged, that very many voluntary dungs do through the error of the
vegetative faculty, offer themselves. Moreover, that some are transmitted from
some other place, as also that not a few do degenerate through a violent
command of things suscepted or undergone: which things have been hitherto
unknown by the Schools; and therefore also, have been neglected: and the which
therefore, have wanted a proper name, and the diseasie effects of these have
been ridiculously translated, and adjudged unto the four feigned humors of the
Liver. Wherefore, although I as the first, have expelled the diseasifying
causes of Tartar; yet least I should seem to make new all things from
animosity, I will here call these filths, the Tartar of the blood; although by
an improper Etymology; because for want of a true name. Such excrements
therefore, whether they are brought into the habit of the body from elsewhere:
or next, made under transchanging, by a proper error of the faculties; or
lastly, through a violent command of external things being there degenerated; I
name them the Tartar of the blood (...) that in very deed they are Tartars, in
the matter and manner of the Tartar of Wine; but because of good nourishment
being now defiled, that which before was fruitful and vital, has afterward
become hostile.

And these things I have therefore fore-admonished of, that ye may know, that
the Tartar of the blood is the product of the plague, and that that is easily
made from efficient pestilential causes. And moreover, it is not yet sufficient
to have said, that the Tartar of the blood, is the product of the Pest; but
besides, I ought to prefix the place thereof: For I will by and by teach, that
the Plague is a poison of terror; and therefore I have noted, that the Seat or
primitive Nest thereof, is in the Hypochondrial or Midriffs; to wit, where the
first conception of humane terror is, whether it happen from external
disturbances, or next, of its own accord, from the motions of things conceived:
Wherefore there are present in the plague, vomiting, doatage, headache, etc. the
which in its own place, I have decyphered in the Commonwealth of the Spleen.
Therefore if the Schools had put this Tartar of the blood for a conjoined
cause, we had as yet notwithstanding, been differing from each other, as that
which with them had been a connexed cause, is with me a product of the plague:
for the Pestinvades us after an irregular manner; neither is its conjoined
matter a certain solid body, or visible liquor, as neither therefore any
putrefaction plainly to be seen; but only a Gas, separated and degenerated from
the substance of the Archeus. But whatsoever visible thing offers it self as
vitiated in the Plague, is not of the matter of the plague it self, nor of the
matter [whereof] but it is either the occasional matter, of which before, or it
is the product or offspring wherein the plague sits, as it were in a nest.
Wherefore the Carbunole, Bubo, or Escharre, are not the original matter of the
Pest, but the effect and product which the Pest ^ath prepared to it self: For
the plague is for the most part so cruel and swift, that as soon as it is
introduced into the Archeus, it cannot omit, but that it subjecteth some part
of the nourishable humor unto its tyranny, and dwells therein: Wherefore, if
the putrified humor should be the immediate cause of the plague, truly it had
been putrified before it had putrified; To wit, seeing the Pest it self,
prepares that vicious product for it self, which the Schools call humors, they
being as yet undefined. For Fernelius would be a little more quick-sighted than
the Schools; and therefore he knew that the plague was not bred, or did con^ist
of the putrefaction of four seigned humors; as neither of the heat of the air,
or of the cold thereof; but of a certain poison, the Fosterchild of hidden
causes.

Again, we must take notice, that when the (...) of the blood, or dross of the
last digestion being vitiated, has received a pestile^^ ^^ment, it has a
privilege of exhaling through the pores, no less than other transchanged
excrements, without any residence left behind it, or remaining dead-head (So
the Chemists call the dreg which remains after distillation) to wit, if the
humors shall be alimentary; but not, if the substance it self of the solid
parts be scorched into an Escharre, or Carbuncle: for so the much more hard
dungs of the Lues Venerea, being as it were equal to bones, the counsel of
resolving being snatched to them, do wholly vanish.

But although the Tartar of the blood, does also rejoice in the aforesaid
prerogative, as often as it is banished as infamous, out of the
family-administration of life; yet while it is transchanged into a corrupt
mattery, or thin sanious poison, it gnaws the skin into the shape of an
Escharre, before that it can sweat through the pores in manner of a vapor: And
that indeed, by reason of the imprinted blemish of a strange ferment, whereby
it degenerated into a formal transmutation: But if indeed, the Tartar of the
blood shall draw the odor of the ferment, but is not yet transchanged,
Glandules, Buboes, etc. are made, which are oftentimes ended by a plentiful
Flux of sweat, without opening of the skin: whereas the other aforesaid
products cannot obtain that: and almost all these, are by the Schools banished
into Catarrhs. The whole Tartar of the blood therefore, is indeed bred at home;
but it is a Bastard, which is intruded by force, destruction, and error.

But since the remedies of Nature are subject unto so many Courts of
digestions, and bodies of so eminent an excellency, do possess a violence and
strength of acting, and likewise have filths admixed with them, or difficult
bolts; truly, the art of the fire is never sufficiently esteemed, which now and
then graduates one Simple to that height, that it persecutes with revenge all
the excrementitious filths of the digestions, even into the uttermost coasts of
the body: otherwise, in the last digestion, very many griefs do offer
themselves, they being referred by the Schools, among incurable ones, by reason
of one only fault of a remedy alone, which accompanies, and accuses the
defect; no otherwise than as they are destitute of curing, in the work of
witches, because remedies are neglected, which may go into the root of the
malady: For truly, those devilish discommodities do not lay hold so much on the
body, or the filths thereof, as on the Archeus himself; the which, since he is
as it were the clear image of the man, it follows, that while that Spirit is
wrested, aside in any Organ of its body, the same member suffers the sumptoms
of the Archeus: And so, whatsoever the Spirit suffers, which is the Ruler of
life and sense, it must needs be, that the body suffers; but not on the
contrary: For neither does he that is maimed in one leg, therefore generate a
maimed offspring, because the spirit is not defectuous: For whatsoever the
body suffers, although the Spirit feels this same thing; yet this is not drawn
together, unless the passion incline unto extremity; that is, that it is
co-fermented within the root of life, or implanted spirit; even as I have
elsewhere shown concerning the convulsion in the Colic. Its no wonder
therefore, if a Tartar of the blood be stirred up by the state, or insisting
urgency of the Archeus: For who is he that knows not, that indignation,
confusion, a sorrowful message, affrightful fear, etc. do presently take away
an appetite of eating, do stir-up sighs, or tears, and extend an unwonted
fardle under the Midriffs; to wit, as the nourishment of the sixth digestion
degenerates in the stomach, namely, where such passions are immediately framed.
This Tartar of the blood therefore, being once become degenerate, does
presently molest in manner of an Enemy. And even as a dog being once mad, pays
the punishment of his madness with his own death; So that Tartar being once
banished, and referred into the number of excrementitious filths, does never
afterward return into favor; because, whatsoever the Archeus once forsakes,
straightway dies, and that which is dead does no more revive, nor strike a
peace with the Enemy: Therefore an earnest desire of revenge, and indignation
of self-love, are radically co-bred in the first Fountain of Nature: They do
also more manifestly rise up in the more perfect subject, and so in sensitive
creatures, do challenge to themselves the animosity and glory of a wrathful
power. Wherefore that Tartar of the blood, being subdued by the plague, does no
longer obey the Laws of Life, but repenting of its former obedience, arrogates
to it self an unbridled liberty of fury, and by so much the more cruelly
molesteth us, by how much the more confidently it has once received the hidden
counsels of the Archeus within; which thing, the Schools name, to symbolize or
co-resemble: For then it is an houshold-Thief, unto which the ways to the
treasure, and privy storehouses are known: For how speedily do a few drops of
corrupt matter under the scull, kill? and what cruelty does not the blood
chased out of the veins, threaten? how cruel, is even but one only thorn in an
Aposteme? Its no wonder therefore, that the Pest, the most fierce of diseases,
does presently bring forth its own product, and if it shall not find ^ sea^,
that it presently makes one for it self: notwithstanding, a hope of curing the
plagu^ remains, because that Tartar, and the Pest its own Inn, may be puf^
away or dis^^ssed by a due banishment of swea^: The which understand thou, as
long as it shall remain in the shape of dissolvable Tartar: For otherwise, if
it shall catch hold of a solid part, the hope of life fails, unless the part it
self which is caught hold of can forthwith be sequestered: But Wheals, black
strakes, or black and blew spo^s or tokens, denote the Archeus to be affected;
for they are the superficial tinctures of the skin, the which, if they shall
the more deeply lay hold of, they do also cauterixe it: and since they do
immediately pierce the Archeus before others, they stand in need of a most
speedy remedy.

It is also worthy to be noted, that an unsensible transpiration in the plague,
differs from sweat; because Diaphaeresis or unsensible transpiration is the
matter of the nourishment, and so also of the Tartar of the blood, being
defiled; but sweat is of the substance of the Latex: But transpiration, seeing
it is continual, it is also without sweat. Hence it comes to pass, that sweat
does most especially wash off, and for that cause, a dry transpiration is
seldom sufficient for curing of the plague: and therefore a plentiful rincing
sweat is to be provoked; that while the Pestilent Tartar breaths the
naughtiness of its poison through the pores, it may be partly washed off by the
sweat, and the delay of its departure be partly speedied. Here a difficulty is
manifest to be noted, and not decided by the Schools; to wit, why some defects
of the stomach are cured not by vomiting, or stool, but only by sweat; because
they consist in the Retents of the stomach being transchanged in the sixth
digestion, but not in the remainders of the Cream. The Plague therefore, for
the most part begins in the stomach, and there begets and infects the Tartar,
whereon, as soon as the perturbations of the Archeus have made their assaults:
For every imagination of the desirable faculty has its seat in the same place,
and there frames its Idea; and chiefly, about the orifice of the stomach, the
vital powers are concealed, as I have elsewhere many times profe^ly
demonstrated. But because the Tartar of the blood is in the form of a mucky
sliminess; Hence the Idea of the Pest willingly buds forth into Glandules: for
the stomach, and the Archeus thereof, because it sends a continual society of
imagining into the brain; hence are Parotides or tumors behind the ears: But it
pierces through the Diaphragma into the lungs, and armpits, and a perplexity
of breathing does arise. But pestiferous odours being prepared in the stomach,
frequent vomitings do accompany them, together with a pain in the head, the
which, we having often experienced from the odours of burning coals, to have
vomited with headache, and a dejected appetite: But if they proceed unto the
Liver; Now there is a Bubo in the groyn.

CHAP. IX. Minerals and herbs do imagine after their ownirregular manner.
Whatsoever subsisteth by a real essence, does after some sort love it self:
Wherefore also, it has the sense of a friend, or enemies; that is, of its own
commodities, and troubles: wherefore, a self-love rests in the bosom of
Nature: But things do scarce ever remain in the same state, without
interchange: Therefore they undergo somewhat: but if they suffer, and walk in
the way of destruction, verily it must needs be, that they have a cause from
whence they are grieved: Wherefore, sympathy and antipathy are observed to be
even in stones; but in the Lodestone, most manifestly; the which
notwithstanding cannot consist without a sense or feeling: But wheresoever that
sense is, although it be dull, it happens also, that some show of imagination
agreeable to its subject, does accompany it: For otherwise, it is altogether
impossible for any thing to love; desire, attract, and apply that which is
consonant to it self, or to shun any thing adverse to it self, unless a certain
sense, knowledge, desire of, and aver^eness from the object are reciprocally
present.

All which things do enclose in them an obscure act of feeling, imagination,
and certain image of choice: For else, by what means shall a thing be moved, or
altered at the presence of its object, unless it feel or percieve that very
object to be present with it self: If it perceive, how shall it be altered,
except under a conception of the passion felt by it self? And unless that felt
conception does include some certain imagination in it self? Take notice
Reader, that in this corner, all the abstruse knowledge of occult or hidden
properties lays, which the Schools have banished from their diligent search:
they desisting from whence they were to begin, according to that Maxim; A
Philosopher must begin where nature ends: I have therefore deliberated more
exactly to demonstrate, that in inanimate things ^here inhabiteth a kind of
sense, fantasy, yea, and of choice, yet in a proportionable respect,
according to the capacity and degree of every one.

I do not in the mean time make mention of Zoophytes or Plant-Animals, which
remote absence of proving, might unto many seem to be ridiculous: But our
paradox will offend none who moderatly understands it.

First of all, it is not to be doubted, but that some flowers do accompany the
Sun, as well in clear days, in those wherein the Sun does not shine, as in
nights themselves; they attesting that they have a motion, sense, and love of
the Sun: because, without which it is impossible for them to accompany the
hidden Sun. For even as late in the evening they loose the Sun in the West (the
which, while he hastens toward the East, does not operate amongst us who abide
in the shadow of the earth) yet in the mean time, whether the night be hot, be
cold, be clear, or rainy., the flowers notwithstanding do not cease equally to
bend themselves toward the east: Which thing first of all, points out that
there is in them a knowledge of the rising, and circuit of the Sun, in what
part he is to set, and in what to rise; call thou it the instinct of nature, or
as it lists thee: For names will not change the matter: the matter it self is
of a deed done, but the deed has its cause in the flower: But that these
things do thus happen in plants vegetatively enlivened, it is the less wonder:
But that they have place also in Minerals, I thus prove: There is almost
nothing made in nature, without a proper motion: and nothing is moved
voluntarily or by it self, but by reason of the property put into it by the
Creator, which property, the Ancients name a proper love, and for this cause
they will have self-love to be the first born daughter of nature, given unto
it, and bred in it for its own preservation: And when this is present, there is
of necessity, also a Sympathy, and Antipathy, in respect of the diversity of
objects: For so the feathers of other birds are said to undergo rottenness by
the feathers or wings of an Eagle: and cloth made of the wools of sheep that
died of their own accord, is soon of its own accord, in the holes which are
beaten through it, resolved as it were with rottenness, in what places the
threads of the dead wool run down: So a drum made of a sheep and asses skin, is
dumb, if a neighboring drum made of the hide of a wolf, be beaten.

The skin of a Gulo (it is a most devouring creature in Swethland) stirs up in
a man, however sober he be, and not a hunter, the ordinary sleeps from hunting
and eating: if the party sleeping be covered with the same. But what are these
things to minerals? Truly I proceed from the vegetable kingdom, through dead
things, by degrees, unto stones, whereunto the holy Scriptures attribute great
virtue: For indeed, stones could neither move, nor alter, if they had not an
act of feeling of their own object: For neither could red Coral wax pale, if
being born about, it shall touch the flesh of a menstruous woman, unless it
self felt the defects thereof: For the Lodestone bewrays it self, as the most
manifest of stones, which by a proper local motion inclines it self to the
North, as if it were vital: But not that it is drawn by the north: Because if a
Lodestone be placed toward the north in a wooden box, in the averse part of
it, upon the face of a standing pool of water, the box, with the other and
opposite corner of the stone, speedily as may be, rowls it self to the North:
Therefore, if that should be done, by a drawing of the north, and not by a
voluntary impulsive motion of the Lodestone it self; the box should in like
manner, presently also, by the same attraction, yield it self unto the north
bank: The which notwithstanding, comes not to pass: but the box, together with
its stone, remains unmoved, after that the stone together with the box, has
retorted it self on the requisite side, and by a requisite motion. It is clear
therefore, that the Lodestone does of its own free accord, roll it self to the
North: From whence afterward it follows, that there is in it a sense,
knowledge, and desire unto the north, and also the beginning of a conformable
motion.

Furthermore, if any one does hold a polished piece of steel nigh^ the
aforesaid box, toward the South Side, the Lodestone then forthwith neglects
the north, and turns it self to the steel; so that the box not only turns it
self to the steel, but that it wholly also, swims toward the north: whence also
it is plain to be seen, that the Lodestone is carried with a stronger appetite
to the iron, than to the North; and that the steel has less of a successive
alteration in it, than the North: Consequently also it is manifest, that it is
strong in a manifest choice of objects. Some have moved a frivolous doubt about
this matter; To wit, whether the Load stone draws the iron, or indeed the iron
draws the Lodestone it self? As not knowing that there is a mutual attraction
on both sides, which comes not by little and little, by reason of much
familiarity, neither does it keep respects, not observe the ends of its own
gain, fruition, circumstances, or consequence:

Neither is that drawing subject to a flatterer, o^ defamer: out it is a gift
originally inbred by nature, in the Archeusses on either part, and marked with
a proprietary character by him who made all things; so that indeed, if the
steel be lighter than the Lodestone, it is drawn to the Loadstone; but
otherwise, if the stone be lighter than the steel: Because the drawing is not
in the one, and the obedience of the drawing in the other; but there is one
only mutual inclinative drawing, and not of the drawer with a skirmishing of
the resister: And so, from hence it is manifest, that a desire is in nature
before the drawing, and that the drawing follows the desire as some latter
thing, as the effect does its cause. If therefore, according to the testimony
of truth, all things are to be discerned by their works, and the fruits do
bewray their own tree; truly such attractive inclinations cannot subsist
without the testimony of a certain co-participated life, sensation, knowledge,
and election.

Moreover, neither is the life of minerals less than the life of vegetables,
distinguished from the animal life, by their own life, and their generations
among themselves: Because that which is vegetable, and that which is mineral,
do not operate but one, or a few proper things; and the same things as yet,
with a preciseness, interchangeable course, property, inclination, and
necessity, as often as a proper object is present with them: but a living
creature operates many things, and those neither constrainedly, as neither by
accident of the object; but altogether by desire, well pleasing, appetite,
will, and choice of some certain deliberation; Seeing the first operation of
the same is life; but the second, a proper appetite, desire or love, or
delight. At length, thirdly, there is a deliberative and distinctive choice of
objects: So I have seen a Bull that was filled with lust, to have d^spised an
old Cow; but an heifer being offered him, to have again presently after,
want^nized.

But the first operation of things obscurely living, is a power unto a seminal
essentialnesse.

Next, the second, is an exercise of powers, and properties.

At length, the third operation, is a greater, and less inclination, motion,
and knowledge: The which indeed, flow not from a deliberative election or
choice; but from a potestative interchangeable course, strangeness, likeness,
appropriation, purity, or unaptnesse of objects: wherefore it was a right
opinion of the Ancients, that all things are in all after the manner of the
receiver: But those powers by reason of their undiscerned obscurity, and the
sloth of diligent searchers, have been scarce believed; but by predecessors,
and moderns, were not considered: and by reason of the difficulties of access,
they have circumvented the world with a wandering despair, and with the name of
occult properties have hood-winkt themselves by their own sluggishnesse: But my
scope in this place has been; that if in Herbs and Minerals, there are such
kind of notions, the Authoresses and moderatresses of hidden properties; the
same, by a far more potent reason, and after a more plentiful manner do
inhabit in flesh and blood; To wit, excellently, with a particular and
affected notion, motion, inclination, appetite, love, interchangeable course,
hostility and resistance; as with that which occurs in us through the service
of the five senses: Even so that in flesh and blood, there is a certain seminal
notion, distinction, imagination, of love, convenience, likeness, and also of
fear, terror, sorrow, resistance, etc. with a beholding of gain, and loss,
offense, and complacency, of superiority I say, and inferiority, and so of the
agent, and the patient.

Because those necessary dependances of a consequent necessity, do flow from,
and accompany the aforesaid sensations or acts of feeling: The which surely in
the vital blood are characterized in a higher degree, by reason of the inbred
Archeus the Author and workman of any of these passions whatsoever, than
otherwise, in the whole kind that is not soulified or quickened: For a tooth
from a dead carcass, that dyed by the extinguishment of its powers,
constrains any tooth of a living man to wither and fall out, only by its
touching, because it compels it to be despised by the life: The which, a tooth
from a dead carcass slain by a violent death, or presently extinguished by a
sharp disease, does not likewise perform. In like manner, the hair of a dead
carcass whose life was taken away by degrees, by a voluntary death, makes
persons bauld only by its touching: Watts, and brands brought on the Young by
the perturbation of a woman great with child, through the touching of a dead
carcass that died of its own accord, and by degrees, until part of the branded
mark shall wax more inwardly cold; the mark also does by degrees, voluntarily
vanish away. Observe well with me, whether these are not the testimonies of
another act of feeling than that of cold.

Moreover, whether in that same sensation, there be not a natural knowledge,
and fear of death connexed, which things are as yet also in the dead carcass:
For truly a Tetanus or straight extension of a dead carcass, or stiffnesse
thereof, is not a certain congelation of cold; But a mear convulsion of the
muscles, abhorring death, and living even after the departure of the soul: For
from hence the dead carcases of those who die by a violent death, because they
die, the faculties of their flesh being not altogether extinguished, they feel
not the aforesaid Tetanus but a good while after.

CHAP. X. A living creature imaginative.
I Have said that Herbs and Minerals do imagine by a certain instinct of
nature, that is, after their own manner: so in the next place, that the blood
and mummie have certain native conceptions, in order, and likeness unto man:
which things, that they may be directed unto our purpose concerning the Plague;
thou may remember, after what sort the perturbations of a woman great with
child, her hand being applied unto some certain member, although unadvisedly,
rashly, and without a concurrence of the will, do decipher the member in the
Young co-agreeing in co-touching, with the image of the object of that
perturbation: with the image I say, but not with an idle signature. But suppose
thou that her desire was to a cherry; verily a cherry is deciphered in the
young, and in a co-like member, such as the childbearing woman shall touch
with her hand, which cherry waxes green, yellow, and red every year, at the
same stations wherein the cherries of a tree do attain those interchanges of
colors: And which is far more wonderful, it has happened that the Young so
marked, has suffered these signatures of colors in the Low Countries, in [the
months called] May and June; which afterward expressed the same in Spain, in
[those called] March and April. And at length the Young returning into his
country, showed them again in a bravery, in [those called] May and June: Also
under a strong impression of a woman great with child, not only a new
generation of a cherry is brought in thereupon; but it also happens that the
old one is to be changed, and it constrains a seminal generation to give place;
yea, and the image of God being now lively or in the readiness its coming, not
to come, and that a strange-born creature and monster is substituted in its
place: Of the contingencies whereof, daily, and unvoluntary experiences are
full: which power is granted to be given to a woman great with child: yet not
that therefore in other women, the images of conceits are not likewise brought
unto the womb wherein an embryo does not inhabit: For I have taught in a
particular treatise, that the disturbances of men are framed in the midriffs,
about the mouth of the stomach, to wit, that in men, they from thence ascend
unto the heart; but in a woman that they are more readily sent unto the womb:
because a woman does naturally appoint vital inspirations for her Young: And
so, every commotion of the midriffs in a woman, has continually respect unto
the womb, whether a Young be present or not. Whosoever therefore much disturbs
a woman with grief, etc. from a deliberate mind: he willingly sends into her,
a disease: And he that molests a woman great with young, let him know that he
hurts the mother, and offspring: Hence maids, about the years of maturity, if
they are vexed with the conceits of difficulties, they are wont continually to
decypher the sides of their womb with the vain Idea's of conceptions, and for
the most part they are made unto themselves the A^^horesses of various
sumptoms, for inordinate lusting: Because the womb does not suffer its
tranquillity to be taken away by foreign images, without punishment. But a man
forms his images in his mid^iffs, as well those of the desirable, as of the
wrothful faculty, so that madness is therefore not undeservedly called,
hypochondrial; and that thing happens no otherwise than as in a woman: but he
transmitts the Idea's of conceits, more freely unto the heart, and brain: For
a certain man exspecting that on the morrow morning, a Major would be sent for
his household goods, sitting sorrowful all the night with his head leaned on the
palm of his hand, in the morning had that side of his head gray, in what part
his temples had touched his hand: And so the hand of a woman with child
translates her own exorbitances unto her womb, and the hand of a man his
fears, even into the skin of his head.

At leastwise, from hence it is manifest that there is a true growth and
nourishment of the hairs, and not a vain signature of colors; but that they
are not inbred by an application expelling from behind: and then, that the
perturbation in men, is much ak^^ to that of a woman, although far more
infirm. I have taught also elsewhere, that the efficacy of disturbances
consists in the spleen: Wherefore antiquity has accounted Saturn the
principle and parent of the starry gods, also the highest of the wandering
stars, to wit, the which should cast his influence downwards on the rest, but
that the rest should in no wise reflect upwards, because the stars are believed
to conspire for the commodities of sublunary things, but not upwards: Therefore
they called Saturn the origina of life, and the beginning of conceptions, or
generations; yea and they named him the devourer of a young child; poynting out
hereby, that the images framed by the desirable faculty, do make seeds
fruitful, and also the Inns of digestions in us; even as when they are
exorbitant they consume the new or tender blood, and enforce very many diseases
on us.

Therefore the imagination of the spleen has the first violent assaults, which
are g^a^tted not to be in our power: Saturn therefore was feigned to be as it
were without a beginning: but Jupiter the chief offspring thereof, casting
down his father from his seat, signified the brightness of reason subduing the
first assault of imagination: But an image formed by imagination, is presently
in the spleen, clothed with the vital spirit, and assumeth it, whence an Idea
is fortified for the execution of works: for what person is he who has not
sometimes felt disturbances, anguishes, and the occasions of sighing about the
orifice of his stomach, in which part the spleen is most sensitive, even as
also the touching in the fingers ends? Is not the appetite taken away from an
hungry man, by a sorrowful message? Be it observeable in this place, that
although the essential disposition of things aprehended in time of the
perturbation, be plainly unknown unto the woman with child, yet she wholly
forms and figureth the same in her young, while as without the trunk of the
trees, she frames a cherry in the flesh, in an instant, containing the
internal essence, and the knowledges of a seminal cherry. Its no wonder
therefore, if that a terror from the plague, frames an Idea of the plague,
from whence the plague it self does presently bud, although the sensitive soul
of man be ignorant of the essence of the plague.

Here an open field is made manifest, to prove that the knowledges or Idea's of
all things, are formed in us by the power of the sensitive soul; yet that they
lay obscured in the immortal mind, which we believe to have been present with
Adam, while as he put right names on the bruit beasts: For if the conceit of a
woman being allured by the overflowing of some certain perturbation, can
decypher the inward dispositions of plants, or animals (yea sometimes, with a
total transmutation of her young) it must needs be, that in the mind it self,
as in the essential engravement of the divine image, an essential notion at
least of sublunary things does inhabit, only being depressed and deformed in
the impurity of nature, and spot of original sin: otherwise, the sensitive soul
cannot do strange things which it knows not, and has not; and so there is need
for the immortal mind to have a conflux hereunto, it being stirred up by
perturbations: It is a very obscure and difficult way, whereby Adeptists, by no
help of books, do strive by seeking to obtain some former light of sciences:
And therefore also, they call it the labor of wisdom: and Paracelsus esteems
it to be ten-fold easier than to have learned Grammar:

Yet Picus is of opinion, that unless the operater makes use of a mean, he
will soon die of a Binsica, or dryness of the brain: That the spirit of life
will be diminished by reason of a daily continuance of speculations. Whatsoever
that may be, at leastwise, the ignorance of causes has neglected most things,
and the helpings of the sick have been exspected in vain. But I have discussed
in this place of images or likenesses bred in the imagination, whereby it may
be manifest, after what manner every corporeal body proceeds from an invisible
and incorporeal Beginning (the which, they of old affirmed to be fetched from
the intelligible world) by the imagination of the foregoing parent, in
imitating after a certain similitude, the creation of the world, being from the
command of the incomprehensible word, [Fiat] once made of the infiniteness of
a nothing: The which afterward, obtained its continuation from the gift of the
word; Let seeds be brought forth; To wit, by a fore deduced imagination as well
of plants, as of animals: Nature therefore, in following the power infused into
her, brings forth every seed by the image of a certain conception. There is
indeed, as well in living creatures, as in plants, yea and in minerals
themselves, every one their own imagination, after their own improper manner;
yet on both sides the productresse of the fruitfullnesse of seeds, as well for
a natural Being, as for that of super-incidents and monstrous ones:

Because the imagination frames an image of the thing conceived, which by its
gifts given it of God, it converts into a Mean, which is called a seed; To wit,
without which image, every seed is only an empty husk: No otherwise, than as
the blossom of a pippin, not having a promised pippin behind it, is a vain
braggery: That image, and seminal one, even as it bears in it self a perfect
similitude of its own image to be conceived; so also, a free and uncorrupted
knowledge of things to be done by it self under the race of generation: Yet this
is remarkable in generations; that as a woman with Child does not operate the
wonders proposed, unless she be sore smitten with perturbations, and the flint
be struck against the steel; so the seeds of living creatures cease to be
fruitful, unless a disturbance of ^ust be conjoined, making the soul to
descend into the seed, that it may enlighten that seed: Wherefore herbs
languish presently after their product, the scope of their imagination or
property being completed: But minerals, because they are not ordained to stir
up a race out of their own bodies, by so much also they have the ends of their
own imagination far more obscure.

Since therefore, all generation presupposes an image, according to which it
executes its own dispositions: Hence it cannot come to pass, that an
imagination of terror should generate an Idea of love, nor that a phantasy of
fear from an enemy, should produce a phant^sie of terror from the plague. Also
places infected with the Pest, are not undeservedly to be avoided; and not only
by reason of the air being already vi^iated and defiled; but also, that objects
may be avoided, which conduce unto the imagination of terror. Now the shore
whither we f^^l appears afar of, and after what sort terror may be the Father
of the plague. It al^o happens that children do most speedily imagine, and are
disturbed; yet their perturbations do not carry seeds in their images, or cause
the plague unto themselves by terror: For it is with these even so as with a
young musician, who in his first lessons, does not transmit his cogitation
conceived unto his fingers, but with difficulty: But after that he is skilful
in his art, and fingers are now accustomed unto the images of tunes, and
motions; they undoubtfully perform the command of the fantasy, and perfectly
sound out the whole hymn, although now and then, through an attentive
discourse, he shall divert his mind from the music: For neither do his
fingers cease to proceed unto the end of the well apprehended song.

CHAP. XI. Things requisite for the Idea of an imagined Plague.
EXperience has oft-times caused a belief, that some one has prepared the
absent Plague in himself and his, through terror alone: which truth shows,
that the image of the fantasy, does from the incorporeal essence of its own
nakedness and simplicity of cogitation, cloth it self by little and little,
and put on the Spirit of Life, and leaves therein its own seminal product: a
Being surely, most ready for great and terrible enterprises. But moreover, that
it is not yet sufficient for the execution of its appointment (for it is found,
that the Image arriving at the Bowels, does nevertheless oft-times wax feeble)
Therefore, I have declared, that in a Woman great with Child, the hand is
moreover required, it being the Instrument of Instruments, as an external
Instrument and sign of the determined member whereon the Image is to be
engraven: For the Soul always uses means, upon which the Image is carried,
for Being and Operation. But I therefore ought to delinea^e after what manner
the Soul after the example of a Musician dismisseth the operative Images of its
own conceptions unto the hand, but in no wise unto the foot: and after what
sort, through custom, that presently transmitteth its Images, which otherwise,
besides custom, would most troublesomly reach thither. Wherefore it is to be
noted, that if the Woman with Child shall be right-handed, and yet shall, under
the onset of disturbance, touch some one of her members with her left hand,
nothing will be marked upon her Young thereby: Whence it appears, that that
hand, which is the common ordinary and daily executress of cogitations, is also
the Directtress of Images unto places, and operations. Therefore a man does not
operate alike strongly by imagination, as does a Woman: nor any other Woman
alike strongly, as does a Woman with Child: neither also does every terror
generate the Plague: For the affrightment by a Wolf, Snake, or mad Dog, does
not produce in us the operative Images of a Wolf, or Snake: yea, nor indeed,
where the Wolf is visibly present: even as notwithstanding, the Plague is bred
in us by an Image of terror. A doubt therefore subsisteth, whether an
affrightful imagination of the Soul from the Plague, or the Image thereof, be a
sufficient and suitable cause of the Plague? First of all, it is seriously to
be heeded, that the imagination is sufficient of it self for to operate,
unless other things beside do concur. For first of all, wholly in ordinary and
accustomed works proceeding from a deliberation of the elective Soul, the will
must needs be present: For a Baker shall vainly, and that intentively imagine
many things about making of Bread, unless his will shall move his hand, not
indeed to some member, but unto the Dough. I in like manner, writing of the
Plague without terour, in a full will, and conceit of the thinking Soul, do
meditate many things concerning the Plague; Yet I do not therefore contract
this Plague to my self. No man also, unless happily he be foolishly des^era^e,
intends a generating of the Pestilence in the consent of his will. An unfolded
will therefore, is required, in a daily and natural course of operative
actions, wherein the will draws forth conceived Images in deliberating, for the
execution of the work: But there is in no wise required a consent of the will,
for the generation of a Being, or the transmutation of one Being into another:
For truly, every transmutation, although it be monstrous, yet it attempts the
privileges of a true Generation; Since there is a re-ideaing in the Archeus,
from the Victory of the new Image, translated upon the seminal one, which was
first conceived in the Archeus. Therefore the consideration of transmutation
does not consider a consent of the will. Again, neither a naked imagination, or
production of an Image, nor a touch of the hands, do suffice together for
transchanging: But (mark well) every work of imagination, which of necessity
produces in us a new generation, or transmutation of one thing into another,
requires the concurrence of a certain faith, co-bound in the same point of the
Subject, the fantasy it self: For truly, an affrightment from a hurtful
Animal, does not produce in us that hurtful Animal, nor even the poison
thereof; Even so also, as my attentive imagination, meditating of the wonderful
poison of the Plague, does not therefore generate the Plague in me. The reason
therefore, why a terror from the Plague, does rather cause the Plague, than a
terror from living Creatures, causes the poison of the same; consists in
this; that the poison of the Pest is made not only from an apprehension, and
conceit of terrible effects; but because there concurreth together with those,
a certain unseperable belief whereby any one being affrighted, and fore
afraid, in fearing, does imagine, and slenderly believe that he has now
contracted something of the pestilential poison: From whence (but not before)
the Image of the Plague being conceived by this kind of terror, becomes
operative and fruitful. For that terror, with a credulous suspicion, applies
the Soul thus affrighted, unto the Archeus, that it may cloth this Archeus
with the Image of the conceived Terror: Through want also of which Belief,
although Animals should conceive great terror, yet they never snatch to them
the humane Pestilence, although they sometimes draw in their own consumption,
as also natural poison, from whence also they dye. For it is a fermental
poison, the which, how speedily soever it may dispatch them; yet it is not the
true Psague. But whosoever shall see a mad Dog leaping on him, and how much
soever affrighted he shall be from thence; yea, though he conceive a Fever and
dye; yet no man does ever even slenderly believe that he drew the poison of the
mad Dog, without biting: Wherefore also, all his sore fear is only least he
should be bitten; which rather includes a prevention of a poison to come, than
a belief of a poison bred. The terror therefore, the occasion of the plague,
carries a certain belief and fear in the Imagination, that he has actually
drawn something of contagion vnder-such an uncertainty and Agony: Because the
poison of the Plague is only visible, but not the biting of a mad Dog: which
particle of faith, together with the disturbance of Terror, perfecteth an
actual Image in the Archeus, the seed of the Plague that is to be generated:
Because that which is imagined, apprehended with perturbation, and believed,
does stand actually in the same point of the fantasy, which brings forth an
Image on the Archeus, as it were a seminal Being. Otherwise also, neither is
any faith sufficient for this thing; because, there is none who does not firmly
believe the Plague can-kill, infect, happen unto one, etc. But such a belief as
that, is feeble, and as it were dead; neither therefore is it operative, that
is, not hurtful; unless that in the same point of Identity, it be essentially
connexed unto terror apprehended with disturbance, from a drawing in of the
actual poison. Eor Camps and Castles do very often snatch to them a panick fear
and deadly terror, as soon as with the fear of perturbations, they believe that
the Enemy has treacherously, or privily crept in, or obtained an unexpected
aid, etc. All which things do rather prevail under a dark night, wherein all
things are made invisible, and more horrid and fearful. Pollutions in Dreams,
although they have a strong Imagination without the motion or enticements of
fornications, which is sufficient for expulsion; yet for want of that belief,
they cast forth only barren seed: For although the Imagination operates in
sleeping; yet a Faith or Belief does not operate in Dreaming; because it is
that which is not the Daughter of the Imagination, but of the will alone: For
indeed, sleep peculiarly conduces to this, that the liquor of nourishment
being transchanged by the application and information of the mind, may be
altogether assimilated: wherefore, in youthful years, people sleep more, and
more soundly than in those succeeding. And since vital matters have their own
natural Imaginations, even those which are not intellectual Imaginations;
Surely, the Imagination of the blood it self, shall most powerfully operate
under sleep. But Faith or Belief, seeing it is a separated power fast tied to
the Soul and Will, it is of necessity also stupifyed in time of sleep. There is
therefore, well nigh, an unshaken and uncessant act of the Imagination of the
Spleen: But the Soul once believing some one thing, afterward cease and is
at rest from the consideration of believing o^ confiding, until that an Object
be again rubbed on it anew. Neither do I speak in this place concerning
Christian faith, and a supernatural Gift of God; but I behold a confidence, to
wit, as well aa delusion in believing, as the supposing of a true thing. For a
certain young Bitch, and not yet lascivious, having gotten a whelp of fifteen
days old, licks it, loves it, and puts it to her dugs; and then being
befooled, believed that it was her own Young; who was a yet uncorrupted, her
dugs presently swell, and I saw them to have po^red forth plenty of milk. Also,
if thou desire Chicken in the midst of Winter, make the Eggs lukewarm with a
hot Towel, and in the mean time unfeather the breast of a Capon, put him upon
the Eggs that he may cherish them, and there shut him up: who in rising up,
feeling the lukewarmth of the Eggs, and the unwonted coldness of his breast,
begins to cherish the Eggs: But in sitting on them, he conceives a false
belief, and believes that he is the mother of the Eggs, he brings forth all the
Chickens, even unto the last, and calls them together by Clucking like a
cherishing Hen, and fighting for the Chickens; chaseth the Cock; and at length
being forsaken by the Chicken, is very sorrowful. If therefore a false belief
operates so much; what shall not any the more grounded one do, that is
conjoined with the terror of the Plague. There is therefore, a certain native
Imagination in the blood, in the parts of an Animal; yea and in the diseasie
excrements; so that, magnetical or attractive Remedies have already begun with
benefit to be applied unto the blood let out of the veins. Let us consider
also, the excrementitious muscilage of the sixth digestion to stick fast within
the Reeds or Pipes (I thus by one only Etymology, call the Veins, Atteries,
Bowels, and any kind of Channels) to be at first in its own quality,
guiltless, but violating the right of its ^nne, as it is undirectly a
stranger; And therefore by it self, laying in wait for the part. Presently
after, a desire of expelling that excrementitious muscilage, is conceived by
the Archeus implanted in the part: the Idea of which conception, is imprinted
on the hated muscilage; The which, seeing it is seminal, it obtains a form,
being a certain life; and likewise for hence also, a power of acting, and
afterward it governs its own matter for the Ends proposed and obtained by it
self. But the member not being able to subdue the guest, connexed unto it
against its will, burns with a greater endeavor and appetite of expelling;
For, neither is that desire any longer a Being of Reason, or imagined Being;
but it has arisen into a certain seminal Being, by reason of the Idea
conceived by the Archeus being imprinted on himself, and it transforms the
foreign matter into every perfection of a diseasie Seed: no otherwise than as
in the spittle of a mad Dog, there is a seminal madness it self: and the
conceit of a Woman great with child, in the deciphered cherry of her young.
For so the matter being enriched with a power of acting, according to the Image
of the passion put on, begins to act on the entertaining member. There is
indeed now in it, a disease it self, having obtained an efficient Seed; the
which, at length, being more stubbornly connexed, and oftentimes the Conqueror,
subdues the vital faculty of that member, into its own jurisdiction. To wit, it
mortifies, and renders the part wherein it sits, conformable unto its own
contagion. But the part; seeing it is subject unto weariness, and the bound
hereof: but on the contrary, the Character or Seminal Idea now conceived, is
unwearied; it must needs be, that the forces of the Archeus, being as it were
collected, that disease is banished by a Crisis, or the strength of the disease
being voluntarily worn out, that it be deprived of the power of acting, and
that stoppages and Schirrhus's are made: or that being overcome, it be driven
from the place, and an Imposthume be made: or that it be expelled by the strong
prevailing force of a Medicine. For otherwise, Nature forsaking the Raines,
delivers its hands bound to the disease, To wit, as the part containing, being
conquered by the Enemy contained, makes all the rest like unto its self, no
otherwise, than as small Gangrene soon mortifies the whole Body: So also, the
matter of a disease sticking fast and infecting the part whereto it adheres,
presently infects the whole entire Body. For, neither are the Seeds of a
diseasie matter always inbred from the beginning: the which therefore, in the
mean time, is only the occasional matter. And moreover, for the most part, a
foolish and unhurtful race of qualities do dissemble the innocence of a
diseasie Thorn. Otherwise, hurtful things should never be admitted within,
because they are wont before their admission, to be intimately and finely
examined by the Archeus. For, whatsoever things are incapable of the necessity
of life, are presently prostrated in their entrance. If therefore
excrementitious filths being inwardly admitted through a treacherous error, or
having arisen through degeneration, do receive enmities within, and exercise
them on us, while as they shall by an Idea received, be qualified with a
strength of acting: it is no wonder also, if they do now and then attain the
ferment of a poison, and that Ferment being obtained, that they lay ready hands
upon us. This is the brief original, progress, and History of the Tatrar of
the blood, and of diseasie Images. Furthermore, the Images of poison, are on
this wise: for in poisonous Beasts, that a poison is made from the Image of
Anger, we are taught by the Proverb; Morta La bestia, morto il veleno. The
deadly Beast has his deadly poison. The which has place only in the proper
poisons of a Species, but not in the dead Carcasses of those that dyed of the
Plague; which thing we daily experience, as well in men as in the Falcon:
Because the Plague is not bred from anger after the manner of poisonous
Serpents: For a sporting Dog, if he shall smite with his Tooth, he inflicts a
wound that is quickly healable: but if he shall bite with an angry Tooth,
although not more deeply than the foregoing Dog, now he has made a wound
partaking of the poison of anger. But if he shall be mad, he now communicates a
poison, not exceeding that of anger, but such a one as is a Compeere of his
deadly and senseless madness. For a will of hurting, being through wrath or
anger kindled, the Beast otherwise harmless, produces a poisonous Image, and
by his Tooth transmits or communicates the same. That thing is much more
apparent in hurtful wild Beasts. Therefore Sorcerers are careful, that they
may borrow a deadly poison from Serpents, being first enraged and provoked. A
wantonizing young Bitch, if she lick the hand of a Child, she embladders the
same; But a wantonizing Mare, seasons the horns of her feet or hoofes with a
poison: to wit, so that they are for a present poison to those that have the
bloody flux: the which otherwise, of one that is not wanton or lustful, if they
being powdered, are fried with Butter, they forthwith cure the bloody flux: But
things proper to the poison of plants, are not from anger or dread: but a
corruptive ferment is by the Creator of the World, put into a Seminal native
Imagination, for the continuing of their Seeds. For neither is there an enmity
in plants, or a will of hurting of us. And so, neither does the poison dye away
together with plants, being dried: For there is a poisonous ferment,
co-fermented with plants, from the beginning of the World, for a seminal
propagation, for ends known to the thrice glorious Creator alone. But a mad
Dog, communicates a poison by his spittle, and so by his Tooth. For the Tooth
serves to a mad Dog, as much as the hand to a Woman great with Child. Lastly,
The Imagination of plants; although it be the Formatresse of their own seeds:
yet it self is not free, or arbitrary, but rather a seminal Endowment; for
propagating its like: and that with the total property of it self, wherein it
rests, not being alterable by foreign disturbances or enticements.
Wherefore, in it self it conceives not a monster, nor does ever make it of its
own accord, unless it be provoked from without. Such therefore is the
difference, original, progress, product, and manner of the hurting, of
poisons. And these things I have drawn out for that end: to wit, that it may be
understood, that if a mortal poison be forthwith made from the anger of
poysonsome wild Beasts, the terrifying poison of the Plague, may also be made
through terror in the Archeus of man. For, if sorrow begets a foolish
madness, the Dropsy, or Falling Sickness; but anger the Colic, Apoplexy,
Convulsion: and a plenteous anguish, or a less intense cogitation, a Furious
or Lunatic person: Neither is it derogatory from Reason, that the Image of the
Pest is framed within from a perturbation of that Vulcan, wherein the first
assaults are made. The fits whereof, as those of mad persons, are oft-times
taken away by succors for the Spleen. There is a small living Creature like
unto a Spider, and is called by Solin^^, Solifuga, because he shuns the day
being frequent in the Silver-Mines of Sardinia; and it creeps in secret, and
through imprudency, causes the Plague to those that sit upon it; which poison
indeed is not the true Pestilence, but a poisonous pustule or wheal: for he
subjoyneth, that there are hot Fountains near, which presently abolish the
poison implanted by the Solifuga; So indeed, the deadly vapors of Mines, are
oftentimes called Pestilent ones, because they kill the Diggers that ^arry the
longer therein. But they are wont to make trial of this danger: if a burning
Candle being let down into the burrowes of the Mines, it be forthwith
extinguished; neither is it a wonder, if besides their poison they also choke
the light of Life, if they do extinguish the fiery light of a Candle.

CHAP. XI. The Ferment of the Pestilence.
COnsider thou how sorrowful a Dog walks, how he refuses meat, and abhors
drink; how many spurs of hatred, and conceptions of envy he nourishes before
madness. Again, how that a full force of his conceit being translated not
only into his spittle, but into his tooth, which is cleanly wiped through the
garments, as it were by its odor alone, and by the simple suffumigation of one
smell or odor, is sufficient to stir up a late and serious madness in him
that is bitten, for the least touch of the tooth, in what part the skin lays
open, and gapeth only in the Epidermis or upper skin, however clean the blood
leaping forth, be washed off: nevertheless, it so deriveth the Image of its
own madness, that as the hand of a Woman with Child paints the member of her
young; so a Dog by the touch of his tooth, within the fortieth day will bring
madness. But neither does it proceed for death only, however the wound be
only in the Epidermis: but before death, the chief faculties of the mind
perish, and as Lackeys, do presently follow whither they are led aside by the
imaginative poison. For that odor of the tooth, is as it were a m^er nothing,
an incorporeal Being: no otherwise than as the smell of an hoary putrifyed
Hogshead, or the smell of a foot put into a new shoe, that makes a foots-step.
For a Dog has known his master a good while by his imprinted footstep, and
distinguishes that he passed that way. So the odor of a garment, or paper,
being infamous through a pestilential corrupt matter, defiles us with a most
subtle, unperceiv^able, and most thin poison: And it not only seasons and
kills us with a deadly poison; but it also casts down the mind from its seat, no
otherwise than as the touching of the tooth of a mad Dog under the skin,
thrusts down the Reason from its majesty, and constrains it to follow according
to the determined Rule of its own madness. For the party bitten, at a set
period of time, is sore afraid at the beholding of all liquid things,: he
conceives a dog-like envy, and wishes that he could destroy all living, and
multiply his own madness. Writers declare, that worms do grow in a Wound in
the hea^ of a Dog. At leastwise, I deny no^, but that a Ferment is to be
supposed to be in this poison, respecting and affecting the spirits of
Imaginations: into which, the least co-participation of an odor, introduces
the Idea of its own Image, whereunto our fantasy is constrained to yield,
yea, rather is fully transchanged into that horrid apparition. For it is a
wonder, that a hunting Dog, which is the firstborn of all the whelps of his
D^m, does alone assault and overcome a mad Dog. There is in him the natural
endowment of an unconquered Imagination; even so, that if he be bitten by a mad
Dog, yet he does not become mad: whereas, in the mean time, all the rest, do by
biting contract madness, do fle^ from a mad Dog, neither dare they to defend
themselves against this Dog. That poison therefore, is the Inn of the
madness, also, the foreign guest of Imagination, which is overcome by the
Imagination of an opposing Soul. Therefore, from hence we have known that all
poisons are in themselves, fermental; for, some destroy the matter only, and
together with it the Imaginative Spirit, from whence are diseases that have a
foolish madness connexed unto them; but others affect the Spirit only; Such
as are those, which bring a dog-like madness, and which bring on foolish
madnesses and Catalepses 's or sudden st^pefactive congelations: to wit, The
which do not notably melt, or alter the body: but they draw only the sensitive
Spirit into destruction: for indeed the Taran^^ta is scarce ever at rest, and
therefore also he disturbs the man whom he has stung, with a restless
trouble. dFor behold, with what an horrid effigies he transpl^nteth his
Imaginations into the man whose skin he has pierced, but even with a slender
sting. For, the vile, small, and weak creeping Animal, by an unperceivable
quantity of his poison, infects the whole ^an, and presently snatcheth the
powers of his mind under his own protection. Also, surely the odor of a
footstep does fitly square with the Plague, being likened unto it: For although
the Houses are opened in a high place, and that well-fa^ned with the Wind, and
the infected Air of the House does yield to the Winds: yet the Plague does not
therefore cease the third day after, but that it is sufficient for taking away
the wholecommon people; for neither does the odor of a footstep in the way
being exposed to the Winds cease (though nothing in quantity) unless it be
washed with Rain, or covered with earth: for it always represents unto the Dog
his own master. I remember also, that in the Plague at Ostend, the very
pestilent hoary putrefaction it self, is ^wont a little to smell of the soales
of shoes burnt, and I was wont by that odor, to bewray one to be infected
with the Plague. Furthermore: before the Fall, every living Creature was
subject to man, as to its master, and its middle life melted, and perished in
eating, before the sight of our Archeus. But now, even a Whelp has a
predominacy over our life, and constrains the free powers of the Soul of
mortals, under his own infirmities of madness. For, it is a miserable thing,
for the Image of God thenceforth to be subject to the biting of Insects, and
that it ought to follow the various Images of the poisonous Ferment of every
one: And it is a degenerate thing, for servile Bruits to season their biting
with the Image of Anger, with a mad and deadly poison. Alas, how piercingly and
strongly is the Image of anger sealed? And with what a snatching speediness
does it pass over unto the spittle? Unto how great infirmities is a Woman
subject, from the hidden Odor of her Womb? For, with what Exorbitances not to
be spoken of, is her understanding vexed? For truly, oftentimes a hoary
putrified Odor being communicated from the soales of the feet, casts down
our lofty Stature, and deprives those that have the Falling Sickness, of
sense, memory and understanding. For, how readily does the contagion of an
Hypochondriacal excrement under the Midriff, alienate the mind, and seduce it
with sorrow, horror, fury, madness, feverish dotages, and the differences of
a Lethargye, while as they estrange us according to the Image bred in their
own Fe^ment? For, how terrible a poison of terror, is at one only moment,
imprinted by a stroke of Thunder, on a Beast which it has smitten, so that
with the eating of his flesh the Plague is swallowed? Which thing at least, is
for a sign, that a Thunderbolt is darted from a monstrous sign full of terror;
to wit, from whence the Archeus being extinguished in a moment, in discovering
the Image of his Terror, perishes almost in a moment. For sleep, yea, a deep
dr^wsie evil is oftentimes in a man, where there is a great disturbance of the
Pest in his Archeus. Oft-times: on the other hand, the Archeus lives free and
safe from perturbations: when as the man is in a mi^erable conflict with his
own disturbances. In Wars, and out of Wars, there are now more cruel Plagues
than in Ages past: Because Wars are more cruel in dreadful fear, and have more
of great dread, and less of angers: when man being moved against man with the
violence of Wrath, studied Revenge: Neither is it a Wonder therefore, that the
drinking of ones own Urine should restrain the Plague before the access
thereof; not as an An tidote: but because it contained a hope and persuasion,
before it was taken. For I remember, that in the Year 1635. while the French
men besieged our Neighbor City Lovain, a very great Plague, from thence, soon
after invaded the fearful Bruxellians, and the poor Women who were terrified
with fear; and the which, being dispersed into all the Villages, brought every
where a great destruction. For a co-participation of life in meats also,
causes, that they are soon made vital: and they presently snatch hold of our
Archeus, being otherwise liable to indignation, fury, and a manifold misery or
damage of Symptoms: so, in Magnum oportet, a necessity and transplantation of
much contagion is enclosed in us. But if the properties of the middle life of
things eaten, ought after some sort to remain in the blood: and for that cause
also, the fleshes of the Eaters do vary their savor according to the diversity
of the meats: it must needs be, that we are affected by those things which
leave their mark of resemblance in us. Indeed savours, the witnesses of
properties, have stricken a covenant, as well with the external, as internal
fellowships of putrefactions, which therefore, are easily made the partakers of
injuries in us. For the middle life of mears remains in our fleshes: hence it
is, that Fish-devouring Nations, and Carthusians are not troubled with flies of
worms. For fleshes that are not well preserved, from the co-resemblance of the
middle life residing in us, do easily stamp any putrefaction on us. From whence
also, formal corruptions do arise in us, from an unthought of Beginning. And
then, fleshes and fishes, although they are seasonably killed, yet they
contained in them the purulent matters of diseases, wherewith, when we are ^ed
(especially if they have before contracted a burntish odor) we readily yield
unto the fellowships of their symbolizing mark, and they presently stir up in
us, adustodours, and mumial putrefactions by continuance, in us. For, neither
do Oxen or Sheep eat men, nor contract our Plague into themselves: but we ^at
Oxen, and draw a brutal Pest, like as also our own; Because the pestilences of
many bruit Beasts do play their part in man alone. Wherefore, neither are
meats, no^ being rightly concocted, guiltless, while they scorn at the Ferment
of the stomach, because they easily pass over into the foreign colonies and
various corruptions of their own con^agion. Truly, this successive alteration
of new calamities in the Plague, shall at sometime, be a future betokening
cause of the last times: At leastwise, the Ferments of poy^ons and venomes,
have never been thoroughly weighed in the Schools. But the action of these has
therefore been supposed to be equivocal or of doubtful interpretation, and
prepared by an impression of the Heaven. For always, when as they slide into
Ignorance, they implore the too far distant aid of the deaf Heavens, and blame
guiltless Saturn. For they call that an equivocal action, while the Agent does
not generate its like. As happens in Celestial Impressions and Meteours. But
how improperly they have recourse unto the Heavens and their equivocal actions,
for poisons, every one shall easily know, who has beheld poisons as Agents
merely natural and domestical, they being not only alterative after the manner
of Meteours; but transchanging, and spermatical or seedy ones. For, what can be
more like to a seminal generation, than if the slender poison of a Scorpion
kills the whole man, and propagates the property of its own seed into the whole
body? For neither do Ferments any where operate Equivocally or doubly, but
plainly Univocally or singly: Because, if the Pest should bud forth by an
equivocal action: verily it should not be contagious, seeing it should not
produce its like. Therefore it is manifest, that the diligent search of
Ferments being neglected (in the commerce whereof notwithstanding, every
transmutation of things to be generated, is enrowled) Poisons have been
hitherto unknown, as well in their making as in their Being and operation:
Especially, because the property of a poison, is, by the destruct on of the
Archeus of man, to imprint its own seminal Image in the room of the other:
Wherefore also, the Organ of this poison is the Ferment it self. But u^derstand
thou this thing concerning poisons which attempt a transmutation by way of a
seminal Image, but not of mere Corrosives: because they are those which do not
fermentally corrupt the Archeus, or his Image; but they stir up the same
Archeus into fury, who afterward destroys his own matter, or Inn: under the
alteration or destruction whereof, the Archeus himself also gives place,
together with the integrity and retainment of his Image: For the greatness,
vehemence, strength, and swiftness o^ poisons have deceived the Schools, who,
the consideration of ferments being neglected, have passed by the one only
dispositive instrument of generations, which goes before the introducement of a
seminal Image: For the Schools are wont to measure the works of nature
according to the square of artificial things; and so, if at any time there ^ere
any thing which would not seem to them, to square with this measure, they by a
verbal excuse, have had recourse unto the heavens, and hidden causes, that they
might cover their sluggishnesse and ignorances with an impossibility of sifting
it out.

CHAP. XIII. The form, and matter of the Pest.
SInce a disease ought to perfect its own title, and misfortune in us, as it
were in its own mansion, and its own proper essential causes do remain in its
product; it must needs be, as long as any thing wanders in the air, water, or
earth, that that can neither be a disease in it self, nor the containing cause
thereof: Yea, whatsoever is marked with the name of antecedent causes, is
nothing but the occasional cause, causing nothing by it self, but by accident,
nor any thing without an appropriation received in us. Wherefore they neither
betoken nor desire, nor prescribe a cure, but only a caution or flight. The
occasions therefore of the Plague, are to be considered, as the occasions of
diseases being sometime entertained, do pass into the order of causes. First
of all therefore, I have already sufficiently taught that the Pest is not sent
down from the Heavens: And seeing every effect is the fruit or product of its
own, and not of another tree; therefore every cause produces its own, and not
another effect: therefore the Pest has a specifical, proper, and not a
foreign cause: For neither may we distinguish of Plagues by their accidents,
concomitants, or signates; because they are those which flow immediately from
the diversity of subjects, because they diversely vary after the manner and
nature of the receiver, according to the custom of the Beings of nature.

Wherefore also the Pest consisting of matter, form, essence, a seed, and
properties, requires also to have its own, and one only species; seeing the
very essence it self of things or defects is most near to individuals: But if
it either happen from without, or be generated within, that is all one, seeing
from thence the Plague is now constituted. Again, if it do the more swiftly, or
slowly defile, its issue be the more violent and speedy, do invade diverse
parts, or diversely disquiet the body; yet that does not therefore change the
species of the poison.

For they are only the signs of quantiry, co-mixture of a ferment,
appropriation, and incidency on the parts receiving. Otherwise, the internal
and formal poison of the Pest, and that which conteins the thingliness thereof,
is (...) ^ys singular in every individual: Because the essence or Being of
things consists in the simplicity of their own species; as there is the same
essence of fire on both sides, whether it be great, or little, whether quiet,
or driven with the bellows; or lastly, whether the flame shall be red, yellow,
green, or sky-colored. Therefore the remote, crude, and first occasional
matter of the pestilence, is an air putrified through continuance, or rather a
hoary putrified Gas; which putrefaction of the air, according to the experience
of the fire which Adeptists promise, has not as yet the 8200. part of its own
seminal body: The which thou shall the more easily comprehend, if thou
considerest a hoary putrified vessel and hogs-head of wine now exhausted,
without any weight of it self, to corrupt new, and old wines infused in the
hogs-head: For I have treated in my discourses of natural Philosophy,
concerning the nature of a ferment putrefying by contmuance, and after what
sort vegetables do arise from an incorporeal and putrified seed, that from
hence the progeny of the Pest may be the more distinctly made manifest.

Moreover, I have shown that the earth is the mother of putrefaction through
continuance; that we may know, that popular Plagues do draw their first
occasional matter from an earthquake, and from the consequences of camps and
siedges: For therefore, as much as the earth differs from the heaven, so much
also is the occasional matter of the P^st, remote from the Heaven. But I call
this first matter, that incorporeal hoary pu^rified poison existing in the Gas
of the earth: And so I substitute this poison as theremo^e matter, under
another more near poison, which disposes the matter of the Archeus, whereby he
may the more easily assent, and conceive in himself a pestilent terror, that
at length a formal pestilential essence may suddenly come upon the previous
dispositions hereof.

But besides, if I must duly Phylosophize concerning the infections of the
Air; I ought of necessity, to repeat the Anatomy thereof, from the fore
assayed doctrine of the elements, in my treatise of natural of Philosophy. The
air therefore in it self is one of the firstborn elements, being transparent,
and void as well of lightness, as weight, unchangeable, and perpetual, being
endowed with natural cold, unless it be hindered by the strength of
scituations, and things co mixed with it: but being every where filled with
pores; and for this cause suffering an extension, or pressing together of it
self: The porosities whereof, are either filled with vapors, and foreign
exhalations; or remaining in their integrity, they plainly gape, being void of
a body (the which I have elsewhere demonstrated in the treatise of a necessary
Vacuum): For in very deed, if the air were without pores that are empty of
every body, vapors could not be lifted up without a penetration of bodies: But
since a most manifest enlargement and com-pression of the air is granted (as I
have elsewhere fully demonstrated) an emptiness also, is of necessity granted:
For such porosities in the air, are as it were wombs wherein the vapors the
fruits of the water, are again resolved into the last simplicity of waters from
whence they proceeded, and are spoiled of any signatures of their former seeds
whatsoever: But those effluxes in the air are foreign, ^y accident, and
various, according to the disposition of the concrete body from whence they
exhaled.

First of all, they are the vapors of pure and simple water; and then of the
waters of the salt sea, which season the rain with their vaporous brine, and
for that cause preser^e it from corruption: For otherwise, by reason of the
societies of diverse exhalations being admixed with it, rain waters would of
necessity putrify and stink, no less than clouds in mountains, and most mi^^s.

The poisons therefore, of the air being drawn in, are partly entertained in
manner of a vapor, in its porosities, and do partly defile the very body of
the air, without a corporeal mixture, even as glass conceives odours: which
defilement has of right, the name of an impression. I have an house in a plain
field, being rich on its South Side; in a wood of oaks: but on the north it
respects pleasant meadows: moreover, toward both the mansions of the Sun, it
has hills that are fruitful in corn: But linen clothes being there washed and
^^nced in the fountain, being hung up in the loft, look most neatly white while
the North wind blows, and here and there also, from east to west, or on the
other hand from west to east: But the south-winde only blowing, and the
southerly windows being opened, they are notably yellow with a clayie color:
For from the numerous oaks, a tinging vapor is belched forth into the air,
and I have learned that this vapor is breathed in by us, as also drunk up by
the linen: And also, thus from Groves of oaks, after the Summer solstice, an
hidden vapor does exhale, which in^ecteth an unwonted countenance and neck,
with a frequent itching pustule or wheale, and afterward they beco^^ plainly
visible in the legs and elsewhere: For there are somethings in the air which
are perceived by the smelling of the nostrils: in the next place, there are
other things, which are distinguished by dogs only: And lastly there are also
other things, which are void of all odor, although not void of contagion.

For truly the serment of a poison, as such, may be free from smell: Therefore
every country produces and suffers its own sicknesses: For why, nature is
subject to the soil, neither does every Land bring-forth all things; Because
diverse vapors are brought forth in the air, according to the variety of the
soil: Which things I more fully sifting with my self, have often admired, that
our life is extended unto so many years: since we are environed on every side,
with so manifold a guard of most potent enemies, since we admit the same so
deeply within us, and are constrained to attract them against our will: And
that not only by breathing; but also by a magnet or attraction, which sports
aftes its own manner through the habit of the flesh. For I who have been often
and long present without-fear, among the fumes of live coals, and the odours of
other things, have rea^ly felt those odours and fumes not only to be derived in
a straight line into my breast: but also from thence into my stomach, and
therefore that our belchings do express those smoaky fumes conceived: For so
the breath blown out of the lungs, resembles the smells of Garlic and Onyons
that are eaten, although collected through the Nostrils; but the plague is drawn
in on both sides: But a voluntary Pest, which is begotten not from without, but
within, bewrays it self in the armpits, and groyn, but seldom behind the ears:
For this Pest for the most part, issues forth from drawn-in odours: But that
which is infamous in spots, proceeds from an internal poison, being first
smothered within, and therefore the worst of all, as it is for the most part
intended or increased with the fermental putrefaction of suffocation: But that
which shows forth Carbuncles, is either a strong expulsion which casts
farther than into the next ^munctory, or which arises from the touch of a
contagious matter, or from an in-breathed poison of the plague.

For that Pest which has invaded from a co-touching, although it be more slow
than that which otherwise insulteth from an universal cause; yet for the most
part it is more deadly: Because the Archeus implanted in the member, is slain
by this plague; and from thence the part draws a pestilential Gangren; for
succouring whereof, the whole Archeus is the more negligent; he meditating of
defending the bowels, as fleeing, betakes himself inwards, and that mortal
Gangren proceeds to creep. Also, remedies and their intention are for the most
part idle for escharring of the outward parts, and that afterward the Escharre
may quickly fall off: For in this respect, all Emplaisters, and attracting
things are administered; but they are seldom administered, as that they overcome
the poison it self: But a plague from without, as it is chiefly to be feared in
the joints; so on the other hand, that which is darted from within to without,
involveth the less danger.

And indeed, that which is bred within, does primarily terrify the Archeus;
and therefore it is sudden, and very powerful: But the poison of a plague that
is caught by touching, after it has insinuated it self into the Archeus
(because he is that which is the first living, and the last dying) and the only
Ruler of things inwardly to be done) being at length confirmed, after the
manner of poison, it easily infecteth the rest: For truly, the Archeus himself
being once infected, presently conceives a pestiferous image of terror, and
the raines of governing the body being forsaken, he communicates it to his
Associates.

In the next place, although sweat be profitable in every plague; yet less in
that which has privily entered by an external co-touching; at least, it is in
no wise therefore to be neglected. Moreover, in the plague of a particular
individual person (by whom the whole people in common are now and then
afflicted) there a fermental putrefaction does for the most part begin within,
which being once suddenly laid hold of, the poisonous image of an Archeal
terror is from thence the more easily committed. That Pest is the more swift,
which is drawn inwards from the external putrefaction of an odor; because it
presently associates unto it two degrees, to wit, a putrefaction through
continuance, and a mumial and co-marriageable ferment: But there is no need,
that that hoary putrefaction should be perceiveable by the nostrils, with an
aversness: For if dogs, which exceed us in smelling, do sent an hoary
putrefaction, or the foot-step of their Master in the way; our Archeus himself
does as yet far more easily smell out-those things which are within, and
therefore, a putrified odor cannot hurt, unless it shall find a mumial serment
within, whereunto it may couple it self: Then indeed there is now forthwith a
foreign matter, nevertheless, as yet wanting a contagion: Therefore it
behooves, that the matter be furnished with full conditions, and with a
formality of acting: For these two are as yet, as it were the occasional and
provoking causes. Again, as concerning the Tartar of the blood, there has been
enough spoken, that it is a product of the Pest, and that it waits for this, or
is made out of hand at the coming of the plague. The first term therefore of
making the Pest, is an hoary putrified Gas, the which, seeing it cannot infect
without a co-resemblance of appropriation, it requires another correlative
term, which is a mumial ferment (without which there is not an appropriation)
to wit, the Archeus the receiver of the Pest: For truly the poisonous matter of
the plague being by contagion derived into us, defiles not any one, unless the
Archeus shall lay hold of it, and appropriate it to himself; wherein surely,
the Archeus labors improvidently: For from thenceforth, the Pest conceives a
terror, by his own fantasy, but not from the sore fear of the man; to wit,
in which fantasy of Archeal terror, the Archeus brings forth a pestilential
poison, which is the very Idea of the conceived terror, being clothed with
the proper coat of the Archeus: Alas, then the Pest is present within, and does
soon easily disturb the whole man. The image of the Pestilence therefore,
consists of an Archeal air, as of the matter containing, whereon the poison
of the terror of the Archeus is imprinted, as the immediate efficient cause:
For neither therefore does the poison of the plague, always defile any one
whatsoever, although it shall presently find an odor in us agreeable to it
self; because the mumial ferment, although it be internal, yet nevertheless, it
is only an occasional mean, in respect of the contagious application, or of the
infection applied; which appropriation immediately consists in a real and
actual congress of the image bred by terror, which the Archeus conceives from
the aforesaid application, as thinking in this respect, that now there is a
potent Enemy entertained within the Cottages of his own house; which panick
fear of the Archeus, is the immediate cause of the image bred by imagination:
(therefore I have proved, that there is an imagination in the Archeus, besides
that which is decyphered by the conceptions of the mind, as well in the
Midriffs, as in the Heart, and Brain) which image is the suitable cause of the
Pest; I say, the veriest Pest it self, no otherwise than as a Chick is nothing
besides the Egg it self ripened by a cherishing warmth: For Purple or spotted
Fevers have therefore indeed, a poison and contagion, besides putrefaction, and
a fermenr of appropriation (to wit, from whence they defile men alone, not
likewise beasts) yet they want an Idea of terror, whereby the Archeus being
full of confusion and desperation, neglects his government, and frames the
deadly and seminal image of a pestilent poison.

In the next place, he easily insinuates this his confusion into his own
transchanged nourishable liquours, over which before he carefully watched, and
now degenerates them into the hostile Tartar of the blood: For the Archeus
forsaking the Stern of Government, like a man that is sore afraid, rashly turns
all things upside down, and himself being a runaway, proclaims that an Enemy
is received within, darknesses are made, the the appetite is prostrated, and
every digestion of the shops begun, cease, and that which is almost, or half
digested, is corrupted, because it abhors the sorrowful image of a mortal
poison. There is therefore a sedition and noise within throughout the members,
because the implanted spirits of these, do well perceive the confusion of the
inflowing spirit, but are not able to restrain it: For if the nourishment being
half dig^sted, were fresh and mild in the stomach, a drowsy evil arises, and
likewise vomiting and loathing; but if it be now dry or stiff through
digesting, the headache possesses the man: But if it be well nigh digested, it
putrifies with a stinking burntish savor, from whence there are continual
vomitings: For all things go astray, and do putrify under the image of the
poison, and the nourishment of the stomach it self, degenerates into a filthy
muckiness, the which also, does oft-times put on a caustical or burning
sharpness, and there is for the most part, a murmuring noise about the stomach:
For why, where the first and inordinate conceits and violent assaults of men
are, in the same place also of necessity, the first confusion of the terror of
the Archeus arises, and there is made a most filthy image of the plague. For I
have noted, that the Pest has for the most part, placed its first seats about
the stomach. For a certain man being dejected with a continual vomiting, felt a
great pain of his head, and by and by a doting delusion; and then he also
having suffered a deep drowsiness by intervals, died in sixteen hours space,
many fainting fits having gone before.

But I desired to know, from whence he had so speedily died, and with so great
a fury of sumptoms; neither did a Chyrurgion desire to be present: at length, I
began the disfection with a knife, and I found his Stomach now pierced with a
threefold perfect Escharre, in such a manner as I had once seen the stomach of
a Servant-Maid to be pierced, who had willingly drunk Arsenick. In the mean
time, in every Plague, a Fever arises from the beginning, because also a sore
threatened corruption has begun in the Archeus: Surely all vital things are
affrighted in the natural directions of images scattered through a dreadful
discord, confusion, and desperation. The Tartar of the blood also, being now
freed from its Laws, in so great a confusion of the whole body, snatcheth to it
a fury, it struggles in the conceived borders of its own part whereunto it
adhereth, and through the confusion of terror, increases all the tumult.

This is the Tragedy of the Pest, which I at sometime through divine clemency
saw in an intellectual dream: But the great fear, flight, desperation, etc. of
the Archeus, is not the poison it self; even as neither is the wrath of a
living creature the poison thereof: But the poison of the plague, is a Being
produced from the image of dread, and clothed with the substance of the
Archeus; as the anger of a Serpent, lays aside the image of his anger in a part
of the Archeus, and lays up that image in his Spittle, etc. at the executive
Organs of anger.

But the poison of the Pest is in it self horrid, and far more cruel than the
mortal contagion of Serpents; to wit, that which is produced in beasts by a
vital perturbation, such as is the anger of Serpents: For the contagion of the
Pest creeps into the standers by; neither does it perish with the life of the
Animal, as otherwise, the poisons of beasts are wont to do: For that the poison
of the Pest does not inhere in the life, but there is an image in the air
effuming from thence, and that indeed clothed with the infected Archeus; as
thin sanies, blood, corrupt pus, vitriol being sprinkled on them, have as yet
retained a life and vital actions on the whole body from whence they issued,
the which, the magnetic curing of wounds, ulcers, and broken bones at this day
has taught us.

But moreover, the Pest rather drives from it the fugitive life, the fearful
and fleeing Archeus; and as the madness of a Dog assumes his product in his
spittle, so the poison of terror is sealed in the Tartar of the blood, even as
also it is dispersed into the air, and an odor departing afar off: For
therefore beasts are the free beholders of our calamity, because they want the
defect of an univocal or self-same Archeus, and therefore also an
appropriation: Yet any subject whatsoever, whether it shall be air, a garment,
or any other more solid body (although ignorant of dread) which may be seasoned
with an odor, may in like manner be the subject on which the product of a
dreadful imagination may be imprinted, no otherwise than as the earth resembles
the odor of a swift footstep.

Furthermore, although the Pest or Plague be only one in the species, yet it
invades after diverse manners: For at one time, a popular plague assaults, which
arises from a divulged hoary putrefaction, after an Earthquake, out of Caves,
Clefts, Pools, Mines, and dead carcasses, as well those of beasts as of men,
which belch forth a poison putrified through continuance: The which
notwithstanding, is not as yet pestilential, until that it being received
within, shall then at length be app^opriated to a ferment: From whence indeed,
the Archeus being affrighted, creates that cruel image of his own confusion and
terror. It invades also, only by a pestilent odor drawn in from a sick
person, or from a dead carcass, or from a place, or from an infected matter;
the which odor, by how much the more subtle subject of its inherency it shall
have, by so much also the more speedily it infecteth, and the more speedily
approaches to the Archeus, by reason of a mark of resemblance: For neither
therefore does the exhalation of sweat so speedily infect, as a pestilential
Gas that is not perceiveable in its odor: For just even as the Gas of coals
disturbs the stomach, provokes vomit, headachs, yea and also, swooning; so I
have noted plagues, which by a subtle exhalation, do infect the immediate
nourishment of the stomach, that they brought on continual vomitings,
hicketings, frequent swoonings, and doting delusions, and most speedy death:
and that vomiting refuses remedies to be swallowed down, the Swooning-fits do
cast down the strength, as also the doatage is averse to food, and remedies.
But the matter that is now infected, if it be to be taken away by sweat, in
passing through, it defiles the whole house even to the skin, unless the
malignity thereof be restrained by remedies: For although a remedy may readily
touch at that infected matter, yet it does not easily bring forth that matter
which does not willingly follow: For truly, any Antidote, does never restore
the party that is once infected, into his former state; and therefore all the
care of an Antidote is only about the preservation of those that are not yet
infected, and the mitigation and speedy expulsion of these. Also the occasion
of a popular plague is difficult, because infected places and bodies cannot be
avoided; which thing, in Camps, and besieged Cities, clearly appears: For we
read, that in the East, a plague began from three Soldiers who violated a
Sepulcher, that it defiled the Roman Camps, and killed a third part of mortal
men, throughout the known Coasts of the world: For such a plague is most swift,
and most cruel; the which indeed brings into the body along with it, almost all
concomitants needful for it self: For since the poisonous matter has already
obtained a ferment, it ought not to parley with out Archeus concerning its
reception, the which it easily obtains by request, from the disturbed Host: for
truly, it brings with it an Idea already in it self, from a former cause, and
attains from the Archeus a new Idea within, co-like to it, for its companion.

But the Pest which begins, and perfects the whole generation of it self in us,
without an external help, is made from a fore-existing fermentally putrified
Tartar of the blood, which does soon of its own accord, most readily put on the
odor of a dead carcass: From whence, the Archeus being sore terrified, stirs
up an Idea of the conceived terror, and so a pestilent poison is stirred up,
and the seminal, and hurtful image hereof is incorporated in that excrement,
the which therefore proceeds in raging and infecting: For the Plague is
communicated unto us by an unsensible air, which Flies, Pies, Ravens, Crows,
Eagles, Dogs, Wolves, etc. do for the most part distinguish: For it is very
well known, that the household Animal a dog, discerns every one by his odor,
or that he does even a good while after distinguish the footsteps of any one
thereby, however lightly imprinted; and a pestilential Gas is alike subtle, and
odourable: Therefore there are different manners of attaining the plague; to
which end, it is meet to repeat, that a pestilent poison is only of one
particular kind, nor that there be many parents of the same thing, distinct in
their species and seed; that is, that its seeds cannot be diverse: So that a
Scorpion bred from the herb Bazil, and from a Parent, differs not in kind; as
neither does a Louse which proceeds from Nits, and which sprang immediately
from a man, lay aside aspecifical identity: for Nits, or the Eggs of Lice, are
in the sameliness of the Archeus, with the matter from whence a man does
immediately generate Lice: Because if two ^eeds divided in species, should
constitute one and the same thing in the species, specifical dispositions in
the matter for the generation of things, should be in vain, but all things from
all, and every thing from every thing, should promiscuously proceed: Agents
therefore that are diverse in kind, although they may constitute something under
a specifical sameliness; yet the same seed, and that of the same Archeus, must
be understood to be formed from them both: So a man makes a vital excrement,
from whence proceeds a Louse, a Worm, etc. and he so disposes that matter by
his cherishing warmth, that it attaineth a co-like Archeus, which the Louse
generating, originally implanted in his Eggs: and so the Louse that generateth,
is the univocal agent, which extends from himself sufficient matter for
Generation: But the man is the equivocal agent, which afforded from himself an
excrementitious matter, which matter sliding on, does at length, in the
cherishing warmth, attain a co-like Archeus: So a dead carcass generates into
worms, and these do again sexually generate: and so Mice are generated of
excrementitious filths, and again by parents; and that wholly in Insects, whose
seeds are issued from bodies purifying as it were of their own accord: at
leastwise, the immediate matter of these, and agent of these Generations, is on
both sides simple, uniform, and of a specifical ident^ty or sameliness:
Therefore also, both constituted bodies are of the same species, generating
afterward their own like, without choice: So that Lice which proceed from our
exhalations, do admit of copulations with those which through a cherishing
warmth, came forth out of Nits.

The immediate matter therefore, and immediate agent in the Pest, are on both
sides of the same seminal Archeus, and specifical identity: For whether the
matter be made within by degrees, or on a sudden, or being drawn in from
without, be actuated in us; at leastwise the poison of the plague is never
made, but a terror of the Archeus has brought forth that poisonous image. But
I call terror, as well that of a man fore smitten by the first assault, as
that of the Archeus of man it self, and of the blood, received from an
antipathy.

After this sort, a bold and stout man is oft-times before or in presence of
the plague, fearful; yea, he who scarce fears the plague, has his Archeus
within, subject to aff^ightments. For so, an Infant that is incapable of fear,
and ignorant of apprehension, is not more slowly laid hold of by the plague,
than a poor timorous woman: For although a sturdiness of mind may prevail as to
prevention, yet it does not kill the poison already conceived. And there are
diverse boldnesses of Magnanimity: for some one man is undaunted in a single
combat, who in the conflicts of war, is fearful: another is not affrighted in
fighting, who is notably afraid of Hobgoblin Furies: Lastly, a third fears
not Enemies, but he is afraid of armed Countrymen, etc. Galen thinks that a
good complexion ad pondus or according to an equal weight of the Elements,
would give strength to resist the plague: He I say, who would have all
particular parts and bowels in man, to differ only in the unequality of the
temperament of the Elements, now grants an equality of the Elements flowing
together according to an equal weight, in the one humane kind: when as
otherwise, if the heart were the most temperate part, now the whole man ought,
according to any of his parts, of necessity, to have the consistence and
hardness of the heart. But I as the first, have rejected the opinion of
Elements, co-mixtures, and temperaments, as foolish and totally false, by firm
demonstrations, in the Volume set forth concerning the original of medicine.
This co-mixture of Elements therefore, I willingly yield to the Galenists, and
am willingly ignorant, after what manner air, or fire can be weighed, that
being weighed together according to the weight of water, and earth, they may
compose from themselves, flesh, sinews, bones, brain, heart, marrows, etc. Ah,
vain fiction, cruel wickedness, hissing it self forth against our neighbors.
Moreover, the animosity or stoutnesse of mind which I praise, is not affrighted
by death, or the plague, it adorns the Archeus, that he may resist the poison,
and expel that poison received by accident (but otherwise, he cannot overcome
or kill it) no otherwise then as terror shuts the pores by the motion of
nature being obedient unto it: Wherefore they who have recovered from the
plague, are scarce alike easily infected with the plague the same year: The
contrary is seen in other diseases and poisons: For truly these do not only
leave behind them weaknesses from whence there is a more easy relapse; but
also other poisons do operate, by changing the parts wherein they are
entertained. But a pestilent terrifying poison primarily invades the Archeus
alone, and sorely affrights him: The which, when he has once known, and
overcome his enemy, he afterward presumes and is made more confidently bold,
that he shall not so easily fail under him: neither is he thenceforth so easily
affrighted through occasion of the poison brought unto him: neither does the
weakness which the Pest leaves on him, hinder; because it is sufficient that
he is not alike easily terrified, and that he does not decypher the pestilent
image of terror in his own proper substance: And therefore other poisons of
diseases are far more gross than the image of a drawn-in terror: For some
hurt not, but under on open skin; but others require to be eaten, or drunk.

But the most rare poison of the Basilisk or beholding Cockatrice, is sent
forth by imagination directing the sight: But a pestilential poison is framed
within, by the proper conception of the Archeus. Other poisons are bewrayed by
some sensible sign: But the Pest alone is communicated by an unsensible
contagion, even so as the foot-step of a man keeps its odor. Behold how the
image of sudden sorrow prostrates the appetite, how the image of a nauseous
matter c^eates vomiting, the image of condolency produces tears, the image of
slow sorrow or lingting grief stirs up sighs, the image of fear generates the
Falling Sickness, and now and then the Palsy: Therefore I elsewhere writing
of Diseases, have not in vain demonstrated that joy, fear, anger, hatred, and
other passions and perturbations, do generate in us, their own proper and
singular actual image, no otherwise than as terror does the Plague: But the
generations of these are the domestical and more ordinary offsprings in us.
But the image of a pestilent terror, brings forth a poison immediately
existing in the Archeus, and draws its own matter from the same: And therefore
the Senses cannot conceive that image. The Archeus therefore, having beheld a
mortal enemy nigh at hand, being bred within, or brought to him from far,
admits this enemy through his own terror, and an image decyphered anew, and
confirms him with his own character and substance: For our hand being moved to
a Carcass that died of its own accord, soon waxes so cold through the flight
of the Archeus, that it at length scarce waxes hot again at a long fire: Yet
Dogs perceive not that cold, while they devour such a dead Carcass, even as the
dead Carcass of a Beast does not much cool us: Therefore the cold of an humane
dead Carcass is fraudulent and accidental, and does more cool, than it has of
cold: And the Carcass that died by little and little does more cool us than the
Carcass of a person that died of the Gowt, or of a sharp Fever. Yet since we
discern by an engine whereby we measure the degrees of the encompassing air,
that the cold of both these Carcasses are equal; To wit, the Archeus being
sorely afraid of death (which the hand applied to the dead Carcass extinct by
a long infirmity, perceives) flies, forsakes the hand, neither (because
mindful thereof) does he easily return: Therefore it is manifest, that the
Archeus does perceive and shun death, even that which is before and out of
himself. And as yet more, the ferments of putrefaction (as in the cold fit of
an Ague) being conceived or bred within; And most especially those, which being
received within his family-administration in manner of an image, do tend unto a
formal transmutation of his own essence: Because the poison bred through an
Idea of terror, is of the highest actual power: And the image of fear and also
of dread, differs from the image of terror, by reason of the formal activity
of faith concurring, even as before I have noted. And moreover, although the
Archeus does well perceive death, and poisons, yet he does not well perceive
the poisonous terror, because he thinks it to be his own terror, and a vain
passion, until that by the fore-gone ferment of appropriation, he has
certainly known that that poison was a forreigner unto him, which he had lain
up in a part of himself, while he formed that foreign Idea; and so, with a
certain destruction of himself, he presently expels the poison from him: And I
wish, that the power now inbred in him, were not communicated throughout the
whole body, by what way it proceeds. For so the poison of a mad dog is in no
wise thoroughly perceived by a man, as neither by his Archeus, except after that
it has established a ferment for it self in the Archeus: In the which then
image of doglike madness, sin^ there is presently an estrangement of the mind
connexed; Hence the Archeus conceives no terror to himself in fury: For the
stumbling in imagination, rather shakes off terror, is rashly mad, and by the
poison of the mad dog is directed into an Hydrophohia for the disease causing a
fear of water.

Lastly therefore, the one only poison of the Pest has also the one only
beholding of terror, and one way unto the grave, or unto recovery, by good, or
unfit remedies. But whatsoever things I have hitherto spoken concerning the
pestilent Idea of terror, I will not have to be interpreted at liberty: For a
fear from enemies, from a thief, from a disease, from an hurtful Animal, from a
Sword, do indeed generate an image of dread, but not a pestilent one: which
image I have therefore denoted with the name of terror, as distinct from an
image of conceived fear, whereby a living creature is afraid. A pestilent
terror therefore, does not here denote any terror, or the dread of any
calamity; but only a pestilent horrid poison conceived in terror, as well by
the man, as by the Archeus of the same. In this Idea therefore, is situated
the essence of the Pest, and the thinglinesse of this whole Book. I confess
indeed that the images of any fear are easily changed into the Idea of a
pestilent terror, even so as a woman great with child, deriveth the image of a
mouse on the undefiled flesh of her Young, yea has sometimes transplanted the
whole Embryo into an horrid animal or monster: Because, as I have elsewhere
taught concerning forms, formal images do mutually pierce each other, and the
latter does readily draw the former into the obedience of it self, which
Hipocrates calls a leading of seeds whither they would not. Truly to convocate
a diversity of elements, and a combating assembly thereof for a mixed body, and
likewise of complexions, humors, and conditions, inclinations, and studies
sprung from thence: Lastly, the divisions of climates, angles or quarters,
ages, proportions, strengths, bigness, and interchangeable courses, for a
succor of ignorance, that hereby we may make the more, greater, and more
difficult calamities, may increase uncertainties, may rule ignorances, may
beget doubts, may patronize impostures, and promote despairs of life, is
nothing else but to have labored in vain. For the perfect light of Sciences,
is like fire, which burns up every combustible matter without exception. Such a
Science Hipocrates had in times past obtained.

CHAP. XIV. The property of the Pest.
I Have demonstrated that the passions of the mind do destroy the appe^i^e, as
also prostrate digestion: In the next place, that the first motions of
cogitations do obtain their own assemblies in the midriffs: Therefore also I
have dedicated the mouth of the stomach unto Mercury, whereunto the Heathens
have attributed the sharpness of wit, as also the sleepifying white wand of
truce: I have also said that the plague is originally conceived from the
terror of man, and that the air which being brought out of a pestiferous body,
is carried into us, does at its first assault rush into the spleen, which
presently shakes out the same, and delivers it as it were by hand, unto the
O^ifice of the Stomach: From hence are dejection of appetite, vomiting,
headache, dotages, faintings, thirst, the drowsy evil, etc. But the Plague
which is made in us, even as that which is drawn in from without, have their
own Inns wherein every one begins to rage: But as long as the Idea of sorrow
and fear do besiedge the Tartar of the blood in the Stomach, and as long as the
image of the terror of the Archeus is absent, the Plague is not yet present.
In the mean time indeed, it comes to pass, if they shall keep themselves the
less exactly, that the Tartar of the blood being more and more malicious, does
at length terrify the Archeus; and he stamps a pestilent poison on himself.

For Plagues which are bred only through terror, are more swift, and much
more terrible than those which proceed from an infected air: for this perhaps
strikes many to the heart; because the stomach, seeing at least it is a
membrane; yet I have placed the perturbations and first assaults, even in the
Orifice thereof, or in the spleen, at least wise, in that extreme or utmost
part of it self which lays on the orifice or upper mouth of the stomach; and
from hence a ferment is bestowed that is requisite for the necessities of
digestion: But the Schools themselves call the mouth of the stomach by the
Ftymology of the heart; For a wound of that place, and a wound o^ the heart, do
kill with the same sumptom, and alike speedily: For I have seen many, whose
head a strong Apoplexy had made plainly unsensible and dead; yet that were hot
in the midriffs many hours after: For a Bride in a Coach nigh Scalds, is
saluted by Country Musketeers, and the bullet or a Musket smites through the
temples of her head, not a little of her brain is dashed out, and her head
presently dies: But she being being brought to Vilvord four leagues distant
from thence, her pulse as yet afforded testimonies of li^e. Is not also the
vital spirit, being a certain ruler of the whole body, in the womb? and the
which is only a membrane, after the manner of the stomach? and the seat of far
greater disturbances than the liver, lungs, and kidneys. Truly the members in
themselves are nothing but dead Carcasses, but the spirit is the Governor
which quickens those members; which spirit, and after what sort, God has
planted where he would. Indeed I remember that I have often seen, that those
who had the Tartar of their blood corrupted by some kind of fear of the Plague,
but without belief, or presumption of a contracted infection, di^ undergo an
uncessant anguish and combating day and night, yea although they were wise, and
laughed at their own perplexities; yet they were not able, but that as
restless, they would present the image of fear conceived, before their eyes:
For they were like unto those who were bitten by a mad dog, who will they, nill
they, have their imagination readily p^yable at the pleasure of the poison. At
length, in the very Tartar of the blood sticking about the midriffs, I have
found a proper natural fantasy, which the image of fear conceived in the
spleen, had feigned to it self: So, lascivious dreams do not always follow from
the imagination of the fore-past day; but for the most part also, from the
matter it self predominating in the Testicles; no otherwise also, than as one
that has a desire ^o make water, dreameth that he does continually make water:
Therefore the terror of the man is the occasion of the Pest, and the terror
of the Archeus is the efficient cause of the pestiferous image and poison: For
it is as it were the Father of the Plague, the which, the poisonous image being
once bred, although it may cease, at least wise, the Plague conceived is in its
own image: For if the terror of the man were a sufficient cause of the Plague,
of necessity also the Plague should always follow a pestilential terror, which
is false: even as also, in an in^ant, who is void of all terror, the Plague is
received at pleasure: From whence it is sufficiently manifest, that the Archeus
himself being affrighted, is the primitive efficient cause of the image of the
pestilence. The plague therefore consists of a defilement, to wit, of a
contagion, in the swiftness of its course, in the singula^ity of its poison,
in the terribleness of its concomitants, lastly, in a difficulty of
preservation, and curing.

But indeed, I leave behind me the inquisition of that plague which is sent for
a punishment by reason of the hidden judgments of God: The which although it be
plainly above nature, yet in the mean time, the matter thereof is not a
creature lately made of nothing: because it after some sort, enters the borders
of nature: For the smiting Angel stood not on a mountain, which the continual
water of the air flowing over it, well washes by licking thereof: Neither
stood he also on an high Tower, and where notwithstanding, the sin of David in
the lust of concupiscence, had took its beginning: but he stood on the hoary
putrified threshing floor of Araunah. So the Angels in the Revelation, pour out
their Vials, from whence the third part of men shall at sometime perish. The
word, yea the beck of the Lord can do all things, without a floor, a scabbard,
a sword, Vials, the effusion of Poison, etc. But such is the bounty of his
piety, that he inflicts not such punishments nakedly by his word; perhaps by
reason of the perpetual constancy and irrevocable firmness of his word, nor
also by evil spirits does he send a supernatural plague, lest he should deliver
the living into the hands of their enemies. At length, the plague produced by
enchantments (if there be any) follows nature: For truly, the Devil is not able
of himself even to make one gnat, unless he assume the seminal Beginnings
thereof; even as his magicians could not make gnats, the offsprings of the
waters, of dust: wherefore also, they confessing the impotency of the Devil,
then cried out, truly here is the singer of God! If therefore it shall at
sometime be granted to the Devil to form the plague, surely he drew that from
the principles of nature:

And the diabolical plague should differ from the natural ordinary one, in its
application and appropriation: For he should more toughly apply the actuation
and impression of the poison, no otherwise, than as the bellows does at
leastwise promote and heighten the fire which it made not: but he should
appropriate it with a foregoing preparation, by the image of terror drawn in
and borrowed from his ^ond-slaves: And although such plagues should be more
cruel, yet they should yield unto the same natural remedies. But I call them
more cruel ones, by reason of their swiftness, to wit, the image of cruel envy
had from witches, being over added: notwithstanding, such permissions should as
yet be limited unto persons and number; yea should be more easily expiated by
prayer and alms-deeds, than ordinary plagues: To wit, whereby God taking pity
on mankind, may the rather hate diabolical arts, and make the Devil grieve at
div^ne mercy soon shown. But that good spirits are the framers of the Pest,
surely that is from great compassion, that we may not be beaten but under the
command of obedience, by the rod of the Lord, and not of Angels: For God every
where keeps a Decorum: He takes Sergeants and Guardians, who have a native
goodness, who keep friendship, nor can aslume a divellish disposition, for
which they know there is no place in Heaven. But before he would deliver Sodom
to the Devil, he first deprived it of a few innocent persons.

But the plague which arises from a curse, by reason of the extreme anguish of
mad poverty, by reason of a teeming woman that is forsaken, by reason of a
wounded person, etc. is a plague of divine punishment, which surely is scarce
supported by the Beginnings of nature, and is easily discerned; because it
invadeth only such places and persons cursed: And likewise the rich who sit in
Ivory Seats, who drink out of gilded plate, who eat the Calf from the Herd,
and the fat Sheep from the Flock, and do not remember their imprisoned brother
Jos^ph: Because the Lord adjures or earnestly swears the destruction of these,
that others may as it were in a looking-glass behold, what it is to have
pleased, and displeased God.

But Plagues which follow Camps, and rage for the most part some months after
a siedge, are not to be ascribed to the slovenliness of the Soldiers;
especially if they shall begin a good while after the City is taken, as for the
most part it comes to pass: For Camps had also in times past their own, and the
same impurities of Soldiers; but the occasion is that of the smell of dead
Carcasses putrified through continuance, which is infected with a mumial
ferment: because that at this day, the slain are not buried as in times past,
nor deep enough in the earth: In the next place, because they are hurt by an
invisible bullet from far, which moves a greater terror in the Archeus than
while spear to spear, and sword to sword were stoutly opposed: For neither was
it in vain commanded in the Law: That whosoever should touch a dead Carcass,
should be impure, and that he was to be clean washed, together with his
garment: And that the Sun was not to go down upon the bodies of hanged persons:
Which things surely in a literal sense, are thus prescribed by God for the good
of a Commonwealth, least the mumial ferment should putrify by continuance.
Therefore it is the part of blindness and rashness to be bewailed, for the
bodies of those that are hanged to be shown in a bravery for a spectacle, until
they fall off of their own accord (indeed a small profit accrues from thence
for so great evils) and it is all one as if the Judge should say; God indeed
has so appointed it; but the Magistrate has corrected for the better: As if
it had been unknown to God that the Spectacle of an hanged person would be more
affrightful to evil persons or offenders: Therefore if God has known this, and
nevertheless has given an express command for burial, it it no wonder that
punishment follows transgression as a Companion:

But God follows the guilty eternally as a revenger behind, and I wish the
punishment were turned only upon the transgressors: for to bury is a work of
mercy; but to show the guilty hanged in a bravery is not that work; according
to which it shall at sometime be pronounced, Go ye Cursed, or Come ye Blessed.
For truly, to bury the dead Carcass of a condemned person, is a work of no less
mercy, than to bury a Prince: And this mercy is not so much exercised toward
the dead party, as toward our neighbors, least the following stink should
infect them: For neither to be buried, does profit him that is buried, but the
living: Therefore the Scope of Divine Goodness consists not only in burying,
but in inhuming deep enough: which particulars will be made more clear by an
example: For a dead Falcon being cast behind the hedges, and half putrified, is
devoured by a live one; but presently he is taken with a most contagious plague
of his own kind; Because the poison of terror being received within, smites on
his Archeus, by reason of a mumial co-resemblance infected with a putrified
fermental hoariness. And the Pest of the Falcon is so great, that the pestilent
Falcon being brought through a Street, insecteth all other Falcons which are
brought that way for three days after: Whence thou shall conjecture, what the
dead Carcasses of men, as well of those that are hanged, as of those that are
carelessely buried, may do by their odor? For a Dog eats not a Dog, unless he
be dried in the smoke, to wit, while the mummy has lost the horror of death,
through the estrangement of its taste, in preserving from corruption: but a Wolf
eats a Wolf newly killed, but not a putrified Wolf: Whence there is a
suspicion, that there is something in a Wolf which is superior to a mumial
appropriation: Perhaps Paracelsus supposed, that that was it, wherein the first
act of feeling of an applied object sits: Peradventure also, for that cause,
they have thought the Tongue of a Wolf hung up, to be adverse to the plague.

And moreover, the dead carcasses of soldiers, are at this day to be buried
deeper than in times past; because the Bullet of a great Gun, or Musket makes
a contusion, and then, it takes away some part with it; wherefore, it produces
an open hole, and at length also, it begets a poisonous impression of smoke;
from whence, the flesh round about, presently looks black with a certain
Gangren, and it readily receives a poison into it, if not in life, as leastwise
soon after death; to wit, while as through a speedy putrefaction of the flesh
being combibed into the earth, a cadaverous, hoary or fermental putrefaction
does arise; unto all which is joined in the Archeus of the dying-souldier, an
Idea of revenge, which is prone to putrefaction:

From thence into the air, a monstrous Gas, I say, is pouted out into the air,
which smires the Archeusses of the living with terror: For it is with a dead
carcass, just even as with horse-dung, which does not putrify so long as it is
hot: But when it grows dry, and the Saltpeter thereof has departed from
thence, the dung also inclines to be transchanged into the liquor of the earth:
For otherwise, if the dung be restrained from putrefaction, through the
be-sprinkling and stirring of horse-piss on it, and into it, it produces much
Saltpeter. For behold thou how powerful a nourishment the mushrome of one
night is (for indeed a Mushrome is the fruit of the juice Leffas or of plants
being coagulated, and near to its first Being; the which I have elsewhere
shown) but after it has assumed the putrefaction of the earth through
continuance, how cruel a poison for choking does it bring forth: We must
therefore have a diligent care, that a fermental putrefaction does not arise in
the relics of the last digestion: For indeed, the plague privily entered my
own house, through a Chambermaid; she forthwith recovered: Both my Eldest Sons
being sore troubled in their mind, show an undaunted courage, and concealed,
that they were vexed with a continual combat of sighing at the mouth of their
stomach: and when as through the wiles and framed deceits of my prevalent
Enemies, I was detained at my own house under prevention of an Arrest; both my
Sons also, would not by forsaking me, go into the Country: and since they had
observed at other times, that they were refreshed by swimming, in the midst of
Summer, they swam thrice without my knowledge; whence transpiration through the
po^es being stopped up, both of them being forthwith devolved into a Fever,
together with a dejected appetite, pain of the head, and a Catochus or
unsensible detainment of the Soul, with a pricking of the whole body, they died
among the Nuns, swearing that they would admit of my remedies: but after that
they had received my Sons, they refused foreign remedies: The Eldest indeed,
perished without any mark or signal token, even after death; because his skin
being cooled by swimming, nothing outwardly appeared: But the other showed only
a small black and blew Pustule in his loins: and the loss of these my Sons, I
frequently behold, as if it were present; and thou may suppose that it gave
a beginning unto this Treatise. I leave vengeance unto my Lord, whom I humbly
beseech, that he would spare my Enemies, and bestow upon them the light of
Repentance.

CHAP. XV. The Signs.
I Have hitherto written unwonted Paradoxes: my understanding being without the
Moon, was drowned in tribulations: there was a matter most full of terror,
horror, and of difficulties present; a great Reader incapable of the best
things, a darksom brevity of beginning, and a hateful novelty, although a very
necessary one. But that which chiefly blinds us in the Pest, is the want of an
exquisite and unseparable sign; to wit, through the admonition whereof, we may
be able timely enough to prevent or withstand it by remedies. Nevertheless,
whatsoever created thing is in any place, it has its own discernable signs, by
which it may be fitly distinguished from other things: and these, those which
do precede the plague, do accompany it, or soon follow after it. But those
signs which go before it, do make for its prevention: but whatsoever signs do
afterward follow, serve more for others, than for the miserable sick: But the
accompanying signs alone, do discern of the cure.

And moreover, the signs of a plague to come, are decyphered in the heavens, if
the Firmament shows the handy-works of the Lord in the earth. That the signs
thereof are badly referred by Astrologers, unto twelve divisions of causes, I
have already before sufficiently manifested: But Gaffarel has lately described
an Hebrew Alphabet, from the situation of the stars, and authority of the
Rabbis, by an argument ridiculous enough, whereby the Hebrews devise such wan
signs: as if God had now, the Rabbis only as his servants, unto whom he may
communicate his secret counsels: For Christians do not consider the
shamefulness of those positions, who suffer such kind of books to be printed:
For neither do the fixed stars change their places, that they may sometime
describe these, and sometime other things to come; the which, in the first
place, is contrary to all Astrology. Comets also, the Meteors Trabes, Dragons,
Darts, and other monstrous signs of that sort, being oft-times popular, have
foreshewn popular plagues; but not by a rational discourse, or Theories of the
Planets, and much less by the Alphabet of the Hebrews: for irregular lights do
not obey set rules: For the Astrologers of Jerusalem, although most skilful in
their art, yet they were altogether ignorant of the signification, as also of
the apparition of the star of Bethlehem. For the Lord will not do a word, which
he will not reveal to his Servants and Prophets. Amos 3. But of these things
Artificers have no knowledge; because new lights have been oftentimes mortal,
and oft-times have directly signified prosperous things: For monstrous signs do
in the hand of the Lord, make manifest his secret judgments, neither does he
manifest those but to whom he will: For truly, the Conjunctions, Oppositions,
and Quadrants of the Stars; likewise their Eclipses, Retrogradations,
Banishments, Combustions, Receptions, and other impediments, are supposed to be
so regular, that they are sometimes described in Ephemeres's for an age: But
the Pest is of things extraordinarily increasing, and those not necessary: But
a regular mean is not a meetly suitable sign for an effect from a contingency
by chance: Neither therefore could the Ephemeres's or Planetary daies-books of
Brabu, foretell the plague in Lumbardy, of the year 1632. which was conceived
from an unjust war, and the fear of horror: Wherefore, I attribute
extraordinary contingencies or accidents, unto extraordinary contingent causes.
I believe indeed, that the fore-shewing signs of the same are decyphered in the
Firmament, but not in the directions of the courses of the Planets: Wherefore I
account those signs to be irregular, nor to be subject to Astrology; because
the significations of those signs are granted by an extraordinary privilege:
Therefore the signs of such a plague, are for the most part declared only to
the servants of God; as is read concerning Jonas: But the signs that went
before the destruction of Jerusalem, were messages of the Word long before
prophesied of; and so neither could the foretold destruction be hindered, and
they were directed only to the mere glory of God, the admonishment of the
godly, and the flight of these. And moreover, Israel ought to die, and to be
renewed by Generation in the Wilderness, except Joshuah and Cal^b: neither
could that thing be any way prevented: for the Word of the Lord stands
unchangeable, with whom there is no changeableness, because he is not like unto
man herein. Monstrous signs therefore, if they do not prescribe a condition in
declaring (unless Niniveh be converted) they by nature promise an unavoidable
effect. It has also pleased others, to draw the births of Monsters into the
fore-shewing signs of the plague; even as Cornelius Gemma, concerning his
Cosmocriticks or Divine Characters, does by trifling, patch them together
without a foundation. But who is he, who shall either know, or interpret the
denoted fore-tokens of Monsters? For the plague being present, then indeed, and
too late, every one draws significations at his own pleasure. And there are
some who therefore abhor the coming of unwonted Birds: but that sign either
cease to be natural, or that of the Quails foregoing the plague of Israel in
the Wilderness, shall cease to be a Miracle: And let this be impious and
blasphemous; but the other impertinent to my purpose. Others interpret this
sign for flesh-devouring Birds, for a future plague; as if they were sent to
devour the dead carcasses that were to be inhumed; according to that saying,
Where the carcasses are, thither are the Eagles gathered together.

But the Text is not read to be for future dead carcasses, neither to have
swallowed them down, seeing they are wont to be most carefully buried before
others: For the River Rhoan at sometime carried away the dead carcasses of the
plague at Lions; but it infected the Citizens beneath them: at leastwise, the
Clergy of Lions declared hereby, that the burial of the dead was to be
observed, not so much for the health of the soul, as for the purse.

The coming of Birds therefore, living by prey, denotes rather a future defect
of their prey in their own Native Provinces, and they should rather denounce by
a monstrous sign, a destruction of war, than an imminent plague. But others
divine the plague to be from the meeting with unwonted fishes; to wit, they
suppose the waters to be infected with a corrupt defilement, and for this
cause, that Sea Monsters do ascend into the waves: surely a ridiculous thing:
For if the Sea putrifieth through continuance in its saltness; what water at
length, shall wash away the defilement of the Sea? or why shall one only Whale
wandering out of his road, feel the hurtful poison of the Sea? not all in a
Shoal, or many together? Truly, I know that the Sea is not subject to a natural
contagion of the Pest, and that the monstrous signs of the Heaven, and Sea, are
directed by the same finger, of whose unsearchable judgment they are the
Preachers, being declared unto his servants only: For the same Lord is present,
as well in the center of the earth, and in the bottom of the Sea, as in the
highest top of heaven. Indeed all things do alike equally obey him, except the
most ungrateful sinner. But surely, I do rather fear the unwonted raines of
blood, of spots, or sparks, and likewise Funerals brought down through the
Clouds, mournful sounds heard in the air, as also noises in burying places,
etc. which things, seeing they are the admonitions of Divine goodness;
therefore they are to be referred out of Nature, that every one may seasonably
look to the Oil in their own Lamps: For neither therefore do I esteem those
monstrous signs to be the works of the Evil Spirit, but against his will. Truly
they are freely given, and above Nature; neither therefore do they belong to my
purpose.

But Paracelsus, as he had known a singular remedy of the Plague to be in the
Toad, and Frogs; so also he writes, that this is presaged as often as a great
heap of Frogs arises into a heap, which is to choke some weak or infirm one;
which being killed, it afterward assaulteth another, until the number being
thus diminished by degrees, every one at length particularly runs away: which
things, if they thus naturally happen; as they prepare a remedy for the plague
to come, so also they denote it: For out of a Gaul, even as also from an apple
drawn out of Oaken leaves, they write, that for the most part, three small
living creatures are drawn; to wit, if it contain a Spider, th^^ will have it
portend the Pest; if a Fly, War: but if a creeping Animal, that it fore-sheweth
Famine. But seeing one of the three at least, is found every year enclosed
therein, if not two, or all of them and yet, one of those punishments does not
continually follow; therefore I refer such predictions among old Wives Fables.
I therefore judge, that these kind of Insects do denounce the difference of the
Leffas in the Oak (Leffas is the nourishable juice of plants) so as that a worm
denotes the aforesaid nourishment to be putrified through continuance; but a
Spider, a poison to be moreover adjoined to that putrefaction: and therefore,
as it were a connexed and co-touching Spider is every where almost in the whole
compass of the earth; the which being in the Oak, portends not any thing out of
the tree; especially because in the neighboring and co-planted trees, nor also
seldom in the fruits of the same Oak, those diverse Insects are beheld at once,
in the same Summer: Yet I do not remember that I have found a Spider and also a
Fly, at once, in the same Oak: although a Fly indeed, and a Worm, also a Worm
and a Spider: But far be it from a Christian to prophecy from Oak, and
Terpentine, for that is read to be forbidden by the Lo^d, with cruel
threatenings. But as often as a new and rare stink of Caves accompanies an
Earthquake, or an unaccustomed stink happens in L^kes, then endemi^al signs
have occasional powers. These things of a future plague. But as to what
concerns a plague being present, truly I could never by the pulse or urine,
even although it were distilled, know the plague to be present. Paracelsus
indeed, ridiculously enough, numbers it among the diseases of the Liver, and
among Tartarous ones, even as elsewhere in a Treatise, and in overthrowing the
fiction of Tartars, I have profesly prosecuted. This man attributes an unnamed
pulse to the Pest, which he calls a fourth: But I, although I have seriously
and often heeded; yet I acknowledge my own unaptness, that I never found such a
pulse: But I have well noted about the end of life, an unequally inordinate
creeping, and at length, an intermitting pulse: But I have never found a
fourth, or a sixth pulse diverse from the rest, from a peculiar bewraying of
the plague, but a pestilent pulse different from continual malignant Fevers,
has never offered it self unto me.

The urine therefore, and the pulse, have never, according to my unskilfulness,
discovered the plague: yea, while I more narrowly rolled over the writings of
Paracelsus, I knew that he was never present with one infected with, or about
to die of the plague. In the mean time, the judgment of the plague, loads the
conscience, as well in respect of the party afflicted, as of the family of the
same; because the Pest does by a certain similitude, resemble a Praetor or chief
Officer in a crime, who requires a loss both of life and go^ds: and so, a rash
judgment of the Pest contains a crime: For to have known the plague by the
shape of an unwonted Fever, may be easy to another; surely unto me, it has
been very difficult. Thou will say, the Pest is with a Fever and headache; but
that is f^miliar unto other Fevers: Vomiting, and the drowsy evil does
oft-times accompany the plague; but that is not altogether unwonted elsewhere:
There are in the Pest, Buboes in the groyn, Parotides or little Bladders behind
the ears; those signs are not unfrequently proper to Fevers that are free from
the plague: There are also black spots in the plague, the which I have seen in
women that have been strangled by their womb: There is also a Purple Fever, and
likewise leaden Pustules or Wheals, without the Pest: as also a Carbuncle does
oftentimes happen without the plague: But as often as many of those signs do
concur, there is no difficult judgment concerning the Pest: for a Bubo in the
groyn, little bladders, or spots, from the beginning, before much cruelty of
the plague, do denounce the plague: So also a Carbuncle, or Bubo, and a very
small tumor, is far more painful in the pest, than any where else, and they
are present almost before the increase of the Fever, and they prevent the
suspicion that they sprang from the Fever; so that those miseries of the skin,
do go before in the Pest, which in other Fevers happen more late, as it were,
the products thereof: a pestilent Bubo, being as yet small, persently and out
of hand, existeth as cruel, without pain of the member, and lessening of the
Fever, and paineth greatly.

But if a Bubo issue forth after a foregoing pain of the member, it carries
the judgment of an unfit remedy: Therefore, they are the ordinary signs of the
Pest, being already entertained, if before, or presently after the beginning of
the Fever, a Glandule, Parotis behind the ear, Carbuncle, Bladder, Pustule, or
spot, shall suddenly invade, and that with the greatest pain: For in other
Fevers they do not so notably pain: the place indeed is red, and swells before
the malady be bred, which has not it self in such a manner in the plague: And
the Pest is confirmed by vomiting, by an excelling pain of the head, by a deep
drowsiness, by a doting delusion, and by a dejected appetite, if they shall
suddenly invade.

For the Pest that comes unto one from far, being drawn in through a
contracting of the poison, enters as it were the pain of a pricking Bodkin, and
presently, with the greatest pain, marks the part which it strikes, with a
swelling, with a wheal, with a little bladder, or with a spot: Even as also,
that which enters in by an odor, strikes the stomach and head with a sudden
pain, or sleepi^ying anguish; or stirs up the stomach it self, as it were a
spur, unto vomiting: But if it springs from an internal poison, it has a
foregoing Fever, upon which some of the aforesaid signs do straightway
succeed: But that Pest which invades from a snatched terror, is speedy, and is
discerned by the testimony of the sick: But that which has arisen from some
k^nd of terror of the Archeus, but not of the man, and which lurks in the
Tartar of the blood, is indeed, in a deg^ee unto the plague, and breaks forth
more slowly than is wont, and is easily overcome unless the negligence of the
sick shall hinder; yet its delay is the longer in the journey: for, for the
most part, the accompanying signs of the Pest are known timely enough, that the
remedy which shall be prompt, and which shall be peremptory, may rightly
perform its office. Nevertheless it should be my wish, to know the Pest in its
making: For that which produces its signates only after death, takes away a
great number from amongst us, and destroys many families; because it has
already become mortal, before it makes it self manifest, or be known; because
it has first finished its task, with the hicket, fainting, and an Escharre in
some Noble place: For they call this, the Tragedy of one day; therefore a Diary
or Ephemeral Fever: Not that the Pest has the Spirit of Life for its proper
seat, although there was never any plague which has not also infected the
Archeus; and so also, by that title, every plague ought always to be a Diary
Fever: But whatsoever of the Archeus is conquered by the Pest, that
consequently is by and by separated by that vital Archeus.

At length, that also brings most speedy death, which besieged the Archeus of
some bowel; because the birds of death do continually fly from thence, which
trample the rest of the Archeus under their feet: For I wish, and wish again,
that we may not know the Pest too late, nor from the event: For a speedy death,
although it may produce its own signs, yet it rather profits for the future,
but nothing, those that are gone and past. For some, to this end, anoint the
soals of the feet with fresh Lard, they apply a Puppy, which if he lick, they
persuade themselves, that the chance is free from the plague: But others heat a
piece of Lard at the feet of the sick party, and cherish it for sometime under
his armpits, or in his groyn, and they say, that this will not be devoured by
a dog, if the plague be present, which thing deserves no credit: for the plague
of man shakes not dogs, nor makes them nauseous: For truly as well dogs, as
Wolves, do without punishment, devour the dead carcasses that are not well
enough buried; as also Pies, and likewise Ravens. Perhaps indeed, an hungry dog
will not eat that La^d which was rubbed on the feet of his Master, because it
smells of his Master, whom he dares not bite. But the Germans call the root of
the herb Butterburre, or the g^eater Coltsfoot, the Pestilential root; because
as the Pest displays it self before a fore-shewing sign; so the Butterburre
sends forth its flowers before its leaves. The Pest also propagates it self,
not so much by a seed, as by an Archeal root. They also relate, that a Sapphire
of a deep Sky-colour, or Citron-coloured Jacinth, if it abide upon the painful
member for a quarter of an hours space, so as that the light from the opposite
part of the Gem, strikes the infected place, and there collects its beams, that
the place touched on, will wax black and blew within a quarter of an hour, and
that it is an infallible token of the plague: But if the place shall in no wise
assume a more wan color, that the sick person is free from the plague.

But I have always in doubtful cases, made use of a powdered Toad, and that
boiled in a very small quantity of simple water, in the form of a Poultess;
whereby, if presently after, the pain in the Escharre, Carbuncle, or Bubo in
the groyn, waxed mild, I safely conjectured that the plague was present. For I
sometimes beholding a [Mass] of Prelates and Abbots, and their fingers to be
adorned with precious stones, I conjectured, that they were in times past,
obliged to visit those that were infected with the plague: But that now also,
the Gems of Gems are born about, their use being neglected and unknown, the
which I do conjecture.

CHAP. XVI. The Preservation.
PReservatives according to the Ancients, are twofold: For some ought to
hinder the plague to come; others also the plague being present, that it
proceed not to cut down: But for the former, they have devised as well Amulets
or Pomanders without, as Antidotes within. But since the Schools have been
ignorant of the very essential thinglinesse of the poison; and indeed, that
every Pest whether it shall be brought to us from without, or next, shall be
bred within, presupposes the image of a poysonsom terror; therefore proper
preservatives have never been known from a foundation. Therefore among
preservatives, I consider,

1. Least the spirit of the Archeus do conceive a terror in us, or that from a
terror he do not produce a terrifying poison on himself, or one brought on him
within from elsewhere.

2. That a fermental and co-resembling mummie being brought to us from without,
does not infect the Archeus the internal ruler of our mummie.

3. That whatsoever has already in contagion become a partaker of the mummie,
be killed, and departs: Therefore the least co-resemblance which it has
common with us, is to be taken away: Wherefore some light poison is always
wont to admix it self with every Antidote; to wit, that hereby the application
and approximation may be taken away, that the Archeus may be preserved free
from contagion, or that he fall not down into the mumial nourishment, and from
thence frame a Tartar of the blood to himself. In this last patronage of
safeguard, antiquity has been wholly vigilant, but it has not been incumbent
about others, because they were unknown:

Although this last preservation has therefore become uncertain and without
fruit; because it has rather respected the latter product, or seat, than the
root or chief cause: when as in the mean time, a preservation from the effect,
foregoing conditions being supposed, is fore-stalled as being in vain.
Therefore if we must treat of preservatives and antidotes to expel the poison,
as is meet, what things I have already explained concerning the causes,
process, and manner of making the plague, ought to be firmly fixed in our mind.

The Pest therefore either enters from without, and marks the place of its
entrance from without, because it primarily affects it, or is attracted with
the breath, and there passes through the Diaphragma or midriff, and causes a
pressure and perplexities upon the very bought of the stomach; and in the same
place clothes the matter, which soon exhales from thence, and becomes infamous
in contagion: And seeing that in nature every agent has its beginning,
increase, state, declining, and at length death, it must needs be likewise,
that by how much the longer of continuance, and powerful, the corruption shall
be, by so much also the more dangerous or destructive it be rendered: For the
Pest beginning, is increased with the diminishment and death of the man.

For I a good while believed that every curative remedy of the plague was also
of necessity the preservative of the same, because it is accounted a more easy
thing to be preserved, than to be cured; Or whatsoever it performs in the
same kind, which is the more difficult, that it should also willingly do that
which is more easy: Wherefore I was greatly occupied in times past, with the
care of diligently searching into medicines for expelling of the poison, to
wit, whereon the whole satisfaction of my desire then depended. But afterward
I diverted my mind to another belief, and considered that healing remedies had
rather regard unto the extraction, or expulsion of the malady; and that such
remedies had not place in preservatives for the future; To wit, seeing that
which as yet is not, cannot also as yet be expelled, or extracted, yea not so
much as extinguished: For truly, first of all, a remedy against the terror of
the man imagining, or of the Archeus, is not in it self so much positive as
negative; and so the drinking of pure wine, even unto mirth, preserves for the
future; because it so rules the imagination not only of the man, but of the
Archeus, that the power of forming images perishes: For so no man is poor or
defectuous, as long as he is cheerful from a drinking of wine: And therefore
the holy Scriptures declare, that wine was made for cheerfulness, but not for
drunkenness; because it is a powerful preservative: So that although the
sturdinesse of a man excludes the terrors from the imaginaion of the man; yet
a manly animosity cannot take away the terror of the imagining Archeus: for
the aforesaid animosity or sturdinesse of mind, admits of a combat from a
contrary opinion of the Archeus: but mirth or cheerfulness introduced by such
drink, neither admits of, nor acknowledges an enemy, as neither does it
undergo a strife, but excludes them: But an exhilerating draught is more fit
for the Pest to come, than for it being present: Therefore I grant also, that
the preservative, and curative remedies for the plague as being present, are of
the same company and intention, but not for a future one; yet so, that
preservatives of the plague as being present, do not serve, but in the making
of its increase, but not in its product being made; because of that which is
corrupted, there are no longer preservatives, but only healing remedies by
extirpation.

We must not therefore believe that bad Antidotes, although they were the most
potent poisons, could drive away the terror, as neither the pestilent effect
of the terror; For truly the poison of the pestilence is irregular and
different from other poisons in this, that it issues from the terror of the
Archeus, as it were fire out of a flint: For if the Archeus being terrified,
yield up the field, verily the body (which being considered in it self, is a
mere dead Carcass) cannot receive comfort. Furthermore, if the Archeus be so
considered to retire, that a poison enters in his place, and in this respect
shall supplant the Archeus himself; how shall sweet odours and incenses prevent
the poison, especially if the very excellentest of sweet smells, are also
capable of receiving a pestilent contagion? Therefore let it be a part of
Christian piety and compassion, studiously to contemplate with me, how
blockishly and unexactly so many Simples have been heaped up together for
preserving, and curing; and how much their unfaithful succors have deluded ten
thousands of men, and their expectations; because they have every where mocked
mankind in a true remedy, by reason of the gross ignorance of causes: For
indeed a curative remedy of the plague being present, presupposes that which a
preservative remedy prevents for the future: Therefore a proper curative remedy
is convenient only, as by slaying of the product (which is the pestilent
poison it self) it annihilates it in the matter wherein it resides: In the next
place also, another curative remedy being conjoined with it, is employed in
expelling the subject of the poison it self, which is to be attempted by-sweat:
Moreover, a third is that which takes away and lessens the co-suiting of causes
unto their products, the which also has in it the nature of a preservative.
The Pest therefore which is drawn in from without, from an infected body,
garment, or place, has indeed in it, an absolute and formal pestilent poison,
which presupposes not a fore-existing fermental putrefaction, and therefore it
suddenly invadeth with no foregoing complaints, and it utters future signs,
but only it has need of an appropriation; which kind of preserving in making
of the Pest, a rectifying of the air, familiar to Hipocrates, contains (of
which in its own place) no otherwise than as in a popular plague; To wit, that
the poison it self in the air may be killed, and the air also, originally so
disposed, that it suffers not the nourishable humor to be mumially corrupted,
or to snatch unto it a fermental putrefaction.

These things of a remedy for the future. Otherwise, when as the pestilent
poison is now received within, it lurketh, and is unknown, and also is fitted
and sealed in the Archeus; and that by reason of the singular swiftness of its
poison: But then, defensive remedies alone do come too late, unless they are
also healing ones. First therefore every cure of preserving, is busied, that
the body may be always actually hot, and kept in transpiration, and that the
mind may be disposed unto a cheerfulness opposite to terror; even as I have
already before cited concerning wine out of the holy Scriptures: But what thou
read concerning the rectifying of the infected air, it has respect not so
much unto the air, as to the points thereof, to wit, in whose vacuities or
hollow empty spaces, the vapor of contagion sits or floats. Furthermore, those
remedies which take away a putrefaction through continuance, and poison out of
the air, but terror out of the mind, and lastly, mumial co-fittings or
suitable conjunctions out of the body, these are preservatives: For the
perfumes or suffumigations of Hipocrates, freeth not only the encompassing
air, but also the air that is attracted inwards, yea, and the co-agulated
vapor from the poison, and together also from a fermental putrefaction, no
less then as it hinders the mumi^l ferment from being applied; to which ends
also, Antidotes, Zenextons or external preservative Pomanders do conduce, which
are able to kill the image of terror, and pestilent poison, in the proper
subject of the vapor, or Tartar of the blood; and in this respect also, to
divert and hinder the terror of the Archeus.

But if indeed the Pest be conceived by a proper error within, other
preservatives are required, than when as we must live about infected places, or
persons: But the plague being formed, moves the same to go with a speedy course
in a retrograde order, from a poison formed, unto a corruptive vapor:
Therefore also neither are amulets or preservative pomanders occupied about an
inferior and remote preparation of the pestilent matter that is to be averted;
but for the overcoming of the formal and ultimate poison, and suiting of the
Archeus with the Tartar of the blood, in the one extreme, and in the other,
with the poison drawn in: And so an amulet keeps a curative betokening in
preserving; yet it is excedeed by a curative remedy in this, that healing
remedies ought not only to kill the poison; but also to thrust it out by
sweat: Indeed both betokenings ought to concut in curative remedies: For
othe^wise, in vain does the body flow down with much moisture of sweat, if the
Tartar of the blood be not resolved, but is rather continued by the continued
terror of the Archeus. Truly the causes, as well the constitutive, as the
occasional one, being known, afterward the indication o^ betokening of things
to be done, coariseth only by the conduct of reason: For if a fermental
putrefaction has given a beginning unto, and caused the first disposition of
the matter, places putrified through continuance, as also nourishments easily
putrefying, are to be avoided.

An open air is healthful to healthy persons, because it has the power of an
elementary consuming; but the air as it is such, does no less obey contagion,
than other bodies, and it contains in its own Magnal of the air, as it has
hollow po^es, the whole conta^ion; the which at length by pining away in the
same place, does for the most part die, not but of its own accord, in the space
of 40 days; and by an elementary power is spoiled of the poisonous seed of a
ferment: For the seeds of things conceived, do by little and little decay in
the air, as they being shut up in the hollow places of the air, as it were in
wombs, do return to the last disposition of corruption, and the first
generation of watery matters. All sorrowful things also, are to be removed, not
only because they are near unto fear and terror, but especially because they
do forthwith produce a sensible fermental putrefaction (the mother of sighs)
about the mouth of the stomach. The places therefore, and objects of a
sorrowful remembrance, as also such fellowships, are to be avoided, no less
than sorrowful messages, and discourses of History: Exhilerating Wines are to
be drunk, as also the more strong Ales or Beers; because that by causing
carelessenesses and animosities, they shake off grief, and terrors: But the
cold air and winds hurt those that are infected, yea that are fearful and
sorrowful after any manner, or whatsoever is opposite to exhalation and sweat:
A washed house does now and then indeed take away the fermental put^efaction
and contagion; and the wa^ery vapor hurts those that are infected; therefore
it were first to be dried. Forty days shutting up, although they may increase
the fermental putrefaction; yet they take away the pestilent poison, as it
perishes of its own accord in that space of time: Perhaps therefore custom
has brought over those Quarentanies or forty days enclosures, for any
renovation whatsoever: For although swimming, or cutting of a vein, may seem to
diminish the fermental putrefaction; yet seeing nature has laid up the blood
for her treasure; it follows, that as often as she shall perceive the blood of
the veins to be taken away, the Archeus as it were fearing treachery, is
disposed unto terror, and draws the rest of the blood inward to himself, and
by consequence also, it calls the pestilent poison together with it, into the
inner chamber; which motion is diamentral with, or directly opposite to sweat:
And therefore, let as well the cutting of a vein, as swimming, be destructive;
also all loose solving of the belly is to be avoided; because so, the more
crude blood of the meseraick veins is made to putrify through the ferment of
the solutive m^dicine (even as elsewhere in the book of Fevers) to wit, at the
evacuation whereof, the meseraick veins do ^etch back blood out of the hollow
vein, and this out of the small branching veins of the body; which motion is
diametrically opposite to the curing of the plague.

Those things which I have ^i^herto spoken, are of the number of negative
preservations, or they are admonitory rules of things to be avoided, which
rules do not, yet, contain health. But among positive preservatiues, Amulets
challenge the first place to themselves, which obtain a proper faculty, whether
it be for killing of the poison, or else for preventing of the mumial
appropriation of the Archeus: Both of them indeed are curative in the making of
the Pest. Next a sudoriferous one follows, which is a rooter out of the plague,
and of its seat, by washing off. Again, the Archeus being grieved and
affrighted, straightway betakes himself inwards, flees as it were to his
Castle, begets sorrow and sighings, and the enemy being received within,
increases venomous perplexities: Therefore he is to be called forth unto
delights, and by sudotiferous medicines: For sudoriferous or sweat-provoking
remedies, are all of the same intention, and almost of the same weight, but at
leastwise they differ in the degree of goodness. In the next place, in an
Antidote being adjoined, I praise the potion of Hyppocrates, whereunto I add
Ginger, and the black berries of Ivy; because they are Diaphoreticks which are
acceptable to the stomach. Also antidotes are to be given in generous or rich
wine, and that presently after food, not indeed so much that the sick party may
sweat, as that his body may be kept in transpiration: But let the food be
light, and little; for in every fever, and rather in the plague, digesti on
fails; therefore let the more pure drink supply the room of the more large
food: For pure or unmixt wine excludes fear, cares, sorrow, and terror; And
therefore also the chief preservative is establ^shed in confidence.

Indeed I do not here speak of Christian faith or confidence (although in
Spirituals, there is every where matter of great moment) for they also who lay
down their life for the sheep, do now and then die of the plague, other
careless persons remaining safe: For their confidence has either a defective
rottenness within, or some other obstacle; The Lord not working miracles, but
for his hidden Judgments. The faith or confidence therefore, of which I speak
in this place, is the natural mean of animosiry or stoutnesse of mind, fighting
against, and strongly resi^ting terror; neither is that faith positive I
believe, but altogether negative, not abhorring, not fearing, yea neither
therefore believing that he shall be infected: For as a pestiferous terror
has a suspicious and fearful faith annexed unto it, that they have lately
conceived something of contagion, or do feel a murmuring about the mouth of
their stomach; so the preservation thereof is a a belief that they have
conceived nothing: neither therefore is it sufficient that the confidence be
not terrifying (which is a mean between terror and animosity) but it is
required that it be operative, by not believing that they shall be insected:
And that not by an inducement of reason, but altogether by a free power of
animosity, and the mere mother of confidence: otherwise, children and
mad-folks, although they have conceived no terror, yet they oftentimes perish
by the plague, for want of an operating confidence, which frames a preservative
ot it self: For not to believe that one shall be infected, works far more
strongly than the presumption of fear, not only because a negative destroys
more strongly than an affirmative builds up; but because it together therewith,
contains a privation, which is stronger than every positive: For we are those
who proceed from an infinite nothing, and therefore our nature does more
strongly apprehend nothing, than something itself, from whence also it
obtains rest to it self; even as is to be seen in negative Syllogisms,
wherein the conclusion follows the negative, and forsakes also a particular
affirmative connexed with it, that it may bring it self into quietness by a
denial.

For truly, the understanding being now degenerate, and naturally distrusting
it self, in understanding [this something] of things, had always rather lay
down in not knowing, or not being able to know: And that is the cause of
fluggishness in Sciences: Therefore the belief requisite in terror, for
preserving, is positive, and therefore it ought effectively, actually, and
^fficiently to stand; although with hope it concludes negatively from the
weaker part. A good man, in readily serving those that are infected with
contagion, if by reason of the piety of his work, he hops and trusts more
in the goodness of the work, or of desert, than in a free valiant confidence
on God, he has a faith con-joyned with hope, and it includes an agony of fear
and terror: Therefore he naturally undergoes an infection, unless he be
preserved from elsewhere. But the confidence of this place is drawn, not so
much from Saff^on, or the exhilarating things of boasters, as from the cheerful
drink of the more pure wine. Women with child, also women in childbed, or
menstruous women, because they are then more restrained under the command of
their womb, than under the conduct of the universal Archeus, therefore they are
the more dangerously oppressed with the Pest: For truly, the Archeus of the
womb does no way obey reason, or confidence, which is wholly vexed with
confusion, and a sorrowful troop of disturbances: Therefore the womb is to be
comforted with the oil of Amber, and with Amber dissolved in the best spirit of
wine, and with the suffumigation of the warts of the shanks of a horse, being
beaten to powder in a mortar.

CHAP. XVII. Zenexton, that is a preservative pomander against the Pest.
Which confidence, as it were the principal pledge of animosity, and mean of
preservation, that the Schools might stir up, the succors of idols, purging
sacrifices, and exceeding mad Idolatries have been Anciently devised: Things
also were hung on the body, and carried about from without, which afterward,
in every religion were accounted for holy things, and the which, were even
falsely believed by an hidden (because an unknown) goodness, to repel terror,
and sorrow. A Zenexton therefore, seeing it has for the most part, been
devised for prevention of the plague, and does also complete a part of the
cure; therefore it deserves a singular consideration.

For Physicians have described diverse such preservatives, according to the
desire of every one, that they might readily serve for a comfort to the sick,
while themselves were fugitive helpers: They decree also, that Amulets are to
be hung on the body, the which, although for the most part, they could have
nothing of virtues, at leastwise that they may from a ruinous foundation,
persuade others unto animosity; to wit, unto a be lief, hope, or some kind of
confidence: For the Pagans at first commanded the Images and Statues of their
Deasters or starry Gods, to be carried about the sick: and then they came unto
characters, words. seals or tokens, and to the Talismanicks of Gamah^u.

Afterward the first Monks of the Christians, offered labels, and things to be
hung about the neck, against the plague: and from that foundation, they
persuaded the vulgar, to believe that the Pest was a stroke immediately sent
from God. I meditate therefore, that every natural work ought in nature, to
follow its own means, as often as all things requisite for operation are present:
Therefore I enquire in this place, into the fixed, firm roots, into the
necessary and ordinary causes, for the obtaining of the effects correlative to
such causes. Others therefore interpreting the Plague to be a punishment, have
proposed unto people, unutterable names, writings, signates guarded with mere
vanities, also polluted with unsignificant words, in bearing them about;
whereunto perhaps, they have joined a verse of David, of Solomon, or of some
Prophet. But Paracelsus laughing at these vanities, devised other greater ones,
especially those adorned with two characterisms; yea and with lying seals; and
he again consents to those, which elsewhere, he derided with much Taunting: But
I have at sometime frequently noted, a sometimes ready sliding into
hypochondrial madness, from these superstitions: Besides these, there are some
who forsaking divine names, do commend figures, lines, characters, words, the
figures of numbers, and according to the pleasure of Astronomers, the feigned
seals of the planets (to wit, the errors of the wandering stars) under the name
of Pythagoras, of Solomon the Jew, or some other, they hitherto attributing
more to the toys of the heathen than to any sacred imprecations: For if
happily any one who had saluted him that had the Pestilence afar of, and had
remained free from contagion, he now being the Author of trifles, had made it
his privilege of deceiving two thousand people afterward by his toys: For
truly, I have taught there is no Astral thing that in the Pest, as well in the
manner of its making, as of its curing: For I always reject unfaithful,
triflous means, and especially those which are unlawful; because none that
leans upon a Staff half broken, is preserved from falling, unless it be by
chance: For although the terror of the man be put off by vain remedies) which
otherwise infants want) yet they are not therefore deprived of the terror of
the Archeus: Indeed they exclude only the effect of faith privatively, when
very much, and that only for a little space, and they oft-times forsake their
own confiders: for why, since they are known to be of no power. For Paracelsus
always made an heightened imagination, and strong confidence of great account;
the which when as he floating as loose and frivolous, I found to be founded on
the sand, I could dot approve of, and that follies do contain a succor of
preserving from the plague. Paracelsus scarce trusting in mental trifles,
converts himself unto a Zenexton, which would undoubtedly preserve him that
carried it about him, from the Pest:

But since he describes not that preservative Pomander for the City of
Stertzing that had been bountiful unto him, right would make us to conjecture,
whether as ungrateful, he deceived that City, or whether indeed, he were
ignorant of that Zenexton. Surely a remedy is in no wise to be hidden from
mortals, in so great a destruction; especially, from whence he might hope to
deserve honor to himself among those that are present, and all posterity. Men
have been diversely mad about this thing; for every one has pers^aded himself
that he has catched the boasted of Zenexton of Paracelsus, by the ears; and
that thing has so greatly pleased mortal men, that thenceforth they have
exchanged names, the Amulet of the Greeks, with the barbarous name of Zenexton:
for very many have carried Arsenick, Orpiment, Quicksilver, yea and Mercury
sublimate, and such like poisons of the veins about their neck, or the pulses
of their veins; no otherwise than as if the Plague, and Lice were chased away
by one and the same remedy, But these kind of inventions being brought unto us
out of Italy, which is fruitful in presumption, juggling deceits, and
subtilties, we strangers do adore and follow: For as p^sterity willingly
boasts, that it has drawn the first rudiments of discursive Sciences from
the Greeks; So also, it has hoped to learn the properties of poisons more
readily from none, for the varieties, enlargements, and maskings of death, than
from a Nation frequently imploring the help of poisons; for it has believed,
and falsely persuaded it self, that to hand forth poisons, and to cure the Pest,
had a near affini^y: Therefore our Physicians returning from Padua, with
worship and reverence toward their Professors there, some opinionating these
men for their great learning, have hung Quicksilver enclosed in the shell of a
Filberd Nut, about their neck, and they supposed that they were safe, whom,
when others saw to die, they married the former Quicksilver unto Arsenick, a
Spider or Scorpion being added thereunto; some whereof, inscribed sacred words
on Tro^hies prepared thereof; that if one should the less successfully profit,
the other at least might help.

But I have seen in the Camps of Ostend, nigh the shore, many thousands of men
with such a Zenexton, the plague being removed; yea, and those who for every
fifteen days, embladdered their ribs by Trochies of Arsenick enclosed in fine
^^nnen bags; and those are the medicinal Tragedies, the final periods of an
Italian Imposture. Moreover, the Jews and Heathens, to wit, these from
ignorance, but the other from a sworn enmity against us, do sell roots at a
dear rate, to be born about by us that are rash of belief, as being deluded by
a hope; and they feign that first Moses, and afterward Solomon, successively
delivered those secrets by the Cabal, delivered unto their Fathers the Rabbi^s:
As wicked Josephus himself, in his eighth book of the Jewish Antiquities, Chap.
2. notably feigneth, concerning so many thousand books of Enchantments
described by Solomon, no otherwise than as he malignantly concealeth the death
of the little innocent Babes under Herod.

Lastly, our Physicians, after that they beholding the disproportion of events,
and promises, described sweet perfumes, and grateful odours, in apples,
powders, and bolsters, and sponges continually smelling before their nostrils,
they hoped that they should strain the air of the Pest as it were through a
Sieve, from the exhalation of the Spices, and so should kill or correct the
poison with the odor that was plausible unto them: as if the poison should
cease to be filled with the Spic^ness, and should not enter the more fully,
with the grateful odor its companion, and as if sweet smelling things
themselves were not subject to contagion; as though Arserick, or Wolfs-bane,
being married to Ambergrease, should cease to hurt! as if the most odoriferous
wines should not be presently defiled with a hoary putrified Hogshead! at
leastwise I gratulate my own soul, that it has never been ensnared with such
childish delusions. Wherefore, an Amulet is founded not indeed in an excited
imagination, or belief (because they are those, which are the expert soldiers
of another Monatchy) but altogether in an actual endowment conferred on things
by the Creator.

First of all therefore, it is manifest from the premises, that sweet smelling
things, gold, gems, Crystal, and whatsoever things are able to draw an odor,
are able also, by the same Law, to be defiled with the Pest: Not indeed, that I
do altogether despise the medicines of the same not being infected; far be it:
For it is one thing to dispute, whether any thing be capable of receiving
contagion; and a far different thing, whether any thing can help those that are
infected: for I have taught, that wine does preserve from a future contagion,
which otherwise, is in it self so defileable, that it brings the plague only by
its touching, and drinking: But in a Zenexton, there is altogether another
method, condition, and property required: for a preservative Amulet requires,
that in it self it be wholly undefileable, if it ought to preserve for the
future: and it is distinguished from other preservatives by that condition,
from whence indeed it is known, what sort of Zenexton is to be chosen, and what
kind thereof is unfaithful; the which I desire that thou thus understand: The
Pest of Oxen is not that of dogs, or of falcons, and none of these is that of
men; Yet the skins, or fleshes of bruits may be defiled with our Plague, as
that they may be pestiferous contagions unto us, although not unto them;
Because the pest infecteth in an appropriation, or mumial co-resemblance:
Although the plagues of the last times shall take away from amongst us, not
only men, four-footed beasts, birds, and fishes, but also trees; and therefore
they shall be of another and more cruel disposition than modern plagues, which
issue out of the bosom of nature: and likewise we are instructed by the
aforesaid particulars, that the Archeus of man, and of all bruits, have now and
then alike dreadful fears, and that the characters or impressions of these, are
formed into a pestilent poison, or poisonous idea; whence it manifestly enough
appears, that the plague is not a poison alike with others; For truly
wolfs-bane, the viper, etc. do kill oxen as well as men. Therefore in beginning
our Zenexton or preservative pomander from stones; The Saphyre of a deep sky
color, and the Jacynth full of a yellow golden color, if it be leisurely
rouled into a circle about a Bubo in the groyn, and a pestilent Eschar, by
drawingly bringing it about from the region of the Sun, or light, it causes,
that the same circle do afterward become black, and that the rest of the
poison does exhale out that way, as it were through a chymney. Also if there
are more glandulous knobs elsewhere, yet these do settle down, and perish
together, and do follow at the departure of the drawn poison: but I prefer the
saphyr before the jacynth; For neither is a saphyre in vain read to have been
in the breast plate of the Priest, and the jacynth to have been excluded: For a
Zenexton was anciently, always attributed to precious stones, and heathenism
soon ingraved figures, numbers, and characters thereon: but since gems were not
for the poor, for whom notwithstanding the vast goodness foreseeth with a
large shower before the rich, and has offered himself freely to be the father
of the poor, I am not easily induced to believe, that these Gems are the true
Zenexton of the plague.

A Surgeon of Spain, whose Surname was Guardiola, being chief Surgeon of
the Hospital of those that were infected in the siege of Ostend, showed me a
piece of red Amber, which he said had been his one only preservative amulet
for full three years space: The secret whereof was, to wit, that it had been
rubbed on the seven principal pulses, even unto a heat, namely, on both the
Temples of his head, on his wrists, ancles, and on his left pap: At leastwise,
I saw him to have been always preserved, his other co-assistants being taken
out of the way: But the Pest was on a sandy shore, and that for the most part
molested with a windy sky, and with colds being exceeding destructive and
cruel: But that which I find to be in amber, is not altogether to be despised:
first of all there is in it an attractive faculty manifested and stirred up by
rubbing on the place: and then, amber, although it be in it self transparent
and gummy, yet it is the less strictly closed, and therefore is the more
easily moved and altered by our heat. Again, neither has amber a limited power
of drawing, such as the loadstone has, which allureth iron, and not copper
unto it self; but a general one, and that without choice, so that which is
drawn be light: Indeed it is sufficient for drawing of the pestilent air, and
poison, if it shall draw any light bodies whatsoever unto it self. The signate
or token therefore of this attraction, denotes a preservative external remedy
founded in nature; and so much the more strongly, if it has obtained an
appropriation with a mumial ferment: For so I have oftentimes seen, that by
amber dissolved in the spirit of wine, cures of poisoned wounds have been
wrought, they being otherwise altogether desperate; Yea, even as amber
dissolveth not, being co-melted with other rosins, or fat (which denotes some
singular thing to be homebred in it) surely it demonstrates that the strange
fable, and tumult of Phaeton, and that the name of Electrum or choice remedy,
has not vainly been co-incident unto it. Let him laugh who will at the
rubbings of amber on our pulses; let him run back unto magnum oportet, and at
least he shall admire at the rubbings of apples for the abolishment of warts,
not without fruit: For truly, if a towel being rubbed on a pestilent Bubo, does
snatch to it, and propagate the contagion; why may not also frictions or
rubbings for a good end, bring a mumial co-suiting of disposition? who, I pray
you, may not suspect amber that is rubbed on a pestilential emunctory: and if
the poison, why also by a like process, is he not, at least in doubt, that it
has contracted a mumial co-resemblance? For I remember that cheese being
carried about under the a^mpit, and swallowed by a dog, it served instead of a
snare or bait, and that he so left his own Master, that he believed him to be
carr^ed away by a stranger in a ship. Truly if brui^ beasts, will they, nill
they, do feel this limitation of the mummy, and do obey it, yet they enjoy a
much more free choice, than those things which from an Archeal conception, fall
under a Zenexton; I see not why it shall be wickedness, to have attributed the
same limitation unto Amber: For it is a thing that grows unto admiration, being
in times past brought unto us for the rosin of a tree; at length being believed
by others to be a mineral: yet is it sweat out of the Danish sea: At leastwise
nothing is more acceptable to the stomach, bowels, sinews, yea, and to the
brain, than amber being dissolved in the spirit of wine. Cease thou therefore
to wonder, that so singular an increaser, being also endowed with so singular a
comfortative and preservative faculty, and signed with so singular and
attractive a faculty, is able to root out the Pest from our places and members,
for the comforting whereof, it grows by a singular goodness of divine
providence: For neither does it favor of all unlikelihood of truth, that amber
does by rubbing, attract an odor, by reason whereof, it is rather appropriated
to this individual than the other: For it is plainly a porous and volatile Gum,
and therefore the receiver of a mumial odor, which ^t received by rubbing: For
I have known a method, whereby the virtue of an herb, and animal, is imprinted
on precious stones; and so that however exactly they are washed afterward, yet
the imprinted faculty remains resident and safe: For a yellow Topaz, as through
a moderate heat of ashe^, it loos^th its yellowness; so by the heat of the Sun
it recovereth the yellowness which it had lost in the ashes, through the same
degree of heat.

Red Co^al, by rubbing it on a woman that is sick of her womb, contracteth a
remaining paleness; but if it be rubbed on the flesh of a healthy woman, it
recovers the ancient redness of its brightness.

In the next place, glasses (the most closed or shut up of solid bodies)
wherein the essences or Magisteries of Civet, etc. had been; I have seen to
have kept those foreign odours after repeated and tedious washings; yea, and a
glass, so to have kept the attractive power of a loadstone, because a
magistery of the loadstone had been framed in it. If therefore such things are
wrought in a glass, why not also in amber? which by reason of its porous and
volatile matter, has it self in manner of a hogshead, which being new,
reserves the odor that once seasoned it. Therefore it is no wonder if amber
retain seasoning odours, especially if it be born about by the same person,
whose mumial exhalations it received by friction. Nor also is it of much
concernment, if it divorceth the testimonies of the nostrils: For we also do
not discern by a footstep, whose footstep it may be. For if the holy Scripture
do commend a great virtue in stones; they do not understand that, of dissolved
stones (for the art of resolving them was not as yet then commonly made known)
not of the powders of Stones being drunk; the virtue whereof, being not
co-mixed with the dungs, but for a little while, slides away in passing through
the body. Therefore the speech is of entire stones, which ought to be as well
the attractives, as the expulsives of the malady, and therefore their virtue is
commendable for a Zenexton. If therefore a stone has great virtue for the use
of man, and the hardest of precious stones themselves, are by the testimony of
the wise man, fruitful in virtue; that must needs happen, by beaming into the
body, which they touch at, well nigh, like unto the stars: and therefore also,
amber, through its irradiating transparency, and a more inclining obedience of
effluxing, shall in no wise be more sluggish than gems: and the faculty
thereof, which otherwise sleeps, as it were bedrowsied, no wonder if it be
stirred up by rubbings and heats; especially because an Adamant or Diamond,
although it lose nothing of it self, yet by rubbing, it also allureth chaffs:
For neither does amber draw chaffs or moats, unless it be first rubbed: For it
is a signate, teaching, that frictions ought to go before, if the bedrowfied
power thereof ought to be stirred up by a^akening it out of its sleep, and to
influx its ordained office of succor into us. At leastwise I testify, that a
piece of amber, as it resembles a gem or precious stone, yet can be much more
easily attained by the poor man, than precious stones.

And moreover, Paracelsus highly boasts of the invention of the magnet or
loadstone of man, whereby he supposes, that the Pestiferous air is uncessantly
introduced and so he promises more powerful virtues to be in his Zenexton, of
drawing outward, than there are belonging to our feigned magnet of drawing
inwards: But surely, that man has seemed to me, to be ^ittle constant unto,
and little expert in his own doctrine concerning the Plague divulged in so many
books, to wit, while he makes the heaven to be the Archer of the plague, and
that this plague is naught but a wound of the heaven, as an angry parent; which
thing, if he judges to be true, that poison at least is not drawn by our
Magnet, which is darted into us from so many thousand miles space: and either
the Magnet is undeservedly accused, while as it is without fault, and his
Zenexton is in vain directed, and hung on the outside of the body, against the
drawing of a feigned Lodestone; or he understood not the causes of the
appropriation of a Zenexton, or at leastwise, he might think that he had
dictated but dull causes of the Pest. To what end therefore, does the
remembrance of that Magnet condu^e in this place? the praise of that invention?
For truly, a Zenexton has nothing common with that Magnet, nor against the
same: Be it so; for let there be a Magnet (let us grant it by supposing a
falsehood) in the heart and arteries, which without distinction drinks in the
pestiferous poison mutually co-mixed with the air: But if a Zenexton takes
away, or hinders this Magnet, now the man is of necessity choked, as being
deprived of his accustomed expiring, for the necessities whereof, they will
have the heart and arteries to be uncessantly tired or urged: But if indeed we
had rather have a Zenexton to be a separater of the pestilent air from the
pure, that word contains something beseeming a Fable: because the Zenexton
should at least undergo the office of a Sieve, and Seperater, and supply the
room of the Archeus: But if a Zenexton causes, that our Magnet draw naught but
what is lawful; then the Zenexton should be the Tutor and Schoolmaster of the
Archeus, to wit, that he may rightly perform his office; unless happily, thou
had rather have a Zenexton to be distinguished by the name of an office
alone, and so it should be equally infected with the Archeus, and equally feel
the contagion of the Pest; yea an external thing, foreign to the life, and
perhaps containing a poison, is now assumed with the Etymology of a due Archeus.

Alas Paracelsus, the matter is far otherwise: For it grieveth the Archeus of
his own government: for neither is he intent upon fighting, or separation, in
the Pest, who himself is the only object, and one only workman of the poison:
But he prepares himself for flight, casts away the rains, as being full of a
panick fear, and as being mindful of his own weakness, that he is wholly
subdued by poisons, or the least infection of an odor, by the bi^ing of a
Viper, or stinging of a Scorpion in the top of the finger: Therefore he
refuses discretion, and being affrighted at the beholding of his Enemy, opens
the doors, and casts away the keys behind him, and presently admits of any one
to govern: and so, whatsoever things do happen in a dead carcass, after death,
are in their making at the coming of the Pest. A Zenexton therefore, only
serves, not indeed for admonishing the Archeus of his duty, and appointment,
nor for dividing of the poison from that which is harmless in the objects, much
less for restraining of the natural attraction of refreshment; but that it may
kill, and annihilate the specifical poison, which is conceived as well in the
external air, as within in the Archeus: But surely none of these has need of a
Magnet, nor does any way respect a Lodestone. The invention, and end of a
Magnet, in a Zenexton, was unknown by Paracelsus: For a preservative Amulet,
for every event, if it should respect a Magnet, it should not be of value, but
in the case wherein the pestilent air is drawn inward through the arteries
(which I have elsewhere demonstrated to be frivolous in the Treatise of the
Blas of man) but not, if at any time it be brought by the breath, as neither
where the pestilent poison arises within: Therefore the unknown Zenexton of
Paracelsus, does in no wise satisfy the necessities of Nature, or ends of
healing.

But Hippocrates has seemed to have more nearly beheld the causes of necessity
for a Zenexton: He willing, that the heaven should make three local motions in
us, to wit, within, without, and circle-wise; he then naming the heaven, as yet
by an undistinct Grecisme, for the vital faculty: From whence Successors
thought, that the heaven is contained in us in a motion outward, by a
transpiration, that a foreign Pest by that which is breathed in, may be
hindered: For they say something, and from an unmindfulness, that the bodies of
the infected are preserved in transpiration: But the same doubt, and ancient
perplexity, remains about breathing, and the framing of an internal plague:
and in my judgment, a Zenexton ought not to lock up the pores, nor to shut the
doors of breathing, least the Enemy enter; nor to strive with the Archeus: for
strifes, discords, and brawlings, if ever before, at leastwise while the plague
kindles or rages, is unseasonable; especially, while the Archeus failing in
his courage, casts away his ^eapons.

In the next place, neither must a Zenexton be intent in the more outwardly
separating, cocting, or preparing of the pure from the impure. But that it be
wholly, after the manner of an Antidote, contrary to the poison already
received: not indeed properly against the poison it self: But seeing that its
principal use is in preserving, rather than in curing; Therefore the virtue
required in a Zenexton, most properly consists in this, that it takes away
the mumial appropriation and suiting, without which there is no contagion made:
neither yet should it be a strange thing, if besides, it has obtained the
powers of a medicine to expel the poison. And moreover, Paracelsus relates many
things concerning frogs, and toads, for the Pest, yet all of them confused
ones. In the mean time, he has opened the earnest desires and eyes of many:
For he asfirmeth that toads are convenient for women, even as frogs for men,
and indeed he would have them to be hung up and dried, and a stick being thrust
through their head: He has chosen no month for this act.

At length, he promises that a Toad thus dried (but having prosecuted nothing
of Frogs) being applied to a Bubo in the groyn, will so draw all the poison of
the Pest into it self, that successively, even unto the fourth or fifth Toad,
they do all wonderfully swell: and so he conjectureth at the quantity of the
venom by the number of the Toads. He will also have the dried Toad to be first
steeped and mo^ified in Rose Water: Notwithstanding, either Paracelsus is
unconstant to himself, or he chose some other Zenexton to himself besides the
Toad: For truly, he writes, that the Toad is prevalent only in the Pest of the
groyns, and of women: But for other plagues, he uses other attracters; and he
says, that the chief Incarnative of the Celestial wound (for so he calls
the Pest) is gold, and precious stones.

First of all, I confess, that I have applied Toads unto Buboes, and Eschars,
as well in the breast, head, paps, as elsewhere, as well in men, as in women;
and every where, not without a ready succor, and mitigation of the pain: But
first of all, I never saw an applied Toad to have swollen in the least; the which
also, I therefore afterward held to be ridiculous. And then, that of
Paracelsus is alike frivolous; to wit, that the Pest does no where otherwise
offer it self, than behind the ears, under the armpits, and in the groyn;
because the heavenly Archer does not smite in any other place: For truly, I
have seen a true and mortal plague to have shown it self every where in the
whole body, not only by Eschars, little bladders, Pustules, and swellings, but
also by spots and marks: Therefore Paracelsus supposed the same thing to happen
unto a dried Toad, which befalls a live creature that has taken poisons, and
that is stung by Serpents, or that is killed by the poisons of plants, and
animals: as if the plague of man should be a poison to the Toad; and if this
should happen, the Toad should not command the Pest, but the Pest the Toad:
Neither also, does a dried dead carcass feel what were poisons unto it, while
it was alive; Nor does a dead carcass swell, being smitten by a Serpent: For a
dead carcass, if it shall not be sensible, neither has it retained the
efficacy of tumefying. Therefore Paracelsus was ignorant, that to swell up, is
the property of the vital Archeus, and that swelling proceeds not but
occasionally, from poisons. I admired at the insolent boldness of Paracelsus
writing this thing: for a Toad that is dried, however he may be six hours
steeped, yet he always is incapable of tumefaction or swelling: For the delay
of steeping in a swift disease, is full of danger and loss: I therefore have
steeped him in a small quantity of warm water, who being applied unto the
paining place, has presently assuaged the pain. Truly, if any thing should
exspire out of us into the dead carcass of a Toad, which was there materially
detained, it had breathed out the same way whereby it had entered into the Toad:
therefore swollenness is the action of the Archeus of life efficiently, and
effectively; but it is the occasional action of the poison, and the which
therefore, can be none on the Archeus of a dead and dried Toad: The Archeus
therefore, since he is wanting to a dried Toad, cannot be the cause of
swollenness in that Toad: For poison cease to be poison in respect of a dead
thing; seeing poison be-speaks a relation unto something that has life. I know
that Paracelsus had no actual practice of the plague; indeed, that he has
written many things, and those little suitable thereunto, he having promised
most things from a rashness of belief drawn from the relation of others.

Butler the Irishman, to my knowledge, had cured some thousands at London, of
the plague, and afterward, through the accusations of enemies he being
detained in the Castle of Vilvord, by my asistance obtained his liberty: For he
had commanded a great Toad to be taken after noontide, in the month [called]
June: I hung him up by the legs nigh the chimney, and set a dish of yellow wax
under him: Atlength, after three days hanging, the toad vomited up earth, and
some Insects, to wit, walking flies, their wings shining with a greenish
color, as though they had been gilded: But presently after vomiting, the Toad
dyed: neither vomited he up any thing before three days space, although he hung
with his head downward. But he said unto me, that I had remedy enough for the
curing of forty thousand that were violently taken with the Plague, and
promised that he would show me the hinge of the matter: But being suddenly
banished, he depar^ed.

At leastwise, I commanded these excrementitions filths cast up by vomit, and
likewise the dead carcass of the toad being dried, to be beaten apart, into
powder, and with Gum dragon, I formed Trochies, which I have successefully
used, as well for the prevention of the plague, as for curing of the same.
Afterward in the month [called] July, in the decrease of the Moon, I took old
Toads, whose eyes abounded with white worms, and hanging forth with black
heads, so that both their eyes were wholly transformed into worm; perhaps there
were fifty worms in number, thickly compacted together in every hole of their
eyes, whose heads hung out; and as often as any one endeavored to go out, or to
hang over, the Toad presently, by applying of his fore-foot, forbad his
utterance: But these Toads being constrained to vomit (as I have said) by
hanging them up by the legs, I found to afford a most excellent Zenexton or
preservative^ amulet against the Pest: But I reduced the worms falling down in
the waxen dish, and together with that which he rejected by vomit, into small
Trochies, the dead carcass of the Toad and waxen dish being added thereunto:
But the Trochies being born about at the left pap, drove away the contagion,
and being fast bound to the place infected, presently drew out the poison: And
the Trochies were more ready, and of more validity if they had returned diverse
times into use, than when more new: But I found them to be a most exceeding
powerful Amulet or pomander for the plague: For if the Serpent eats earth
all the days of his life, because he was the instrument of sinning; the toad
eats Earth which he vomits up, all the days of his life: But according to the
testimony of Adeptical Philosophy, the Toad bears an hatred against man, so
that he infects some Herbs that are usual with man, with his corruption, and
that in hope of his death: But he differs from the serpent in this, that at the
sight of a man, he from a natural gift conceives a great terror or
affrightment; which terror from man, attains for, and imprints on himself, a
natural efficacy against the images of the affrighted Archeus in man.

For truly, the terror of the Toad kills and annihilates the Idea's of the
affrighted Archeus of man, because the terror in the Toad is natural, and
therefore radically, and throughout his whole body incorporated in him, even
when dead: but the Idea of terror in the Pest is only accidental and flowing.
The Toad therefore, being in his own nature, afraid of man, increases the
image of hatred, and heightens his powers, that at leastwise he may privily
hurt, and that like the Pest: But this sealed property of hatred, and also of
terror, he carries in his head, eyes, and in the place of the power of
concupiscence: therefore his head, and eyes, while he is as yet a living
creature, are transchanged into live and true worms (such as are bred in
cheese) but that the extreme part of their head looks somewhat black: For at
length, together with his life, so great a multitude of worms falls out, because
while he was as yet a living creature, the whole sheath of his brain seems to
have been wormy: Surely a terrible, and sealy signate, dedicated to the most
terrible and of deaths; Health or safety from our enemies, and from the hand of
those that hated us (to wit) a remedy.

For truly, the hatred and terror of the Toad toward us, prepares a medicine
of health for us: For therefore an hatred of us is proper to, and naturally
incorporated in the Toad, that he carries an Idea of hatred wholly throughout
his whole; even so as the spittle of a mad dog, does by accident the fear of an
Hydrophobia. But besides, whereby the terror of us, and inbred hatred toward
us, in the Toad, may the higher ascend, and the more strongly imprint their
images, the Toad is hung up aloof, nigh the chymney, in our sight; and
therefore even his hatred and terror increases unto death. But that the Toad
does by his ownconceptions, generate Idea's, I will by and by show, by the
sudden death of the Toad himself: Now at least, I will say that I have cast a
Toad into a Lake encompassed with a wall, which on the morning following had
dyed, swimming swollen, upon the water: But he had his back besprinkled with a
frequent black mark: From which signal spots I conjectured, that he bears a
remedy against the Plague even the most cruel one; to wit, the which after a
speedy death, utters its own signs: And it adds an hope, if he promise a
remedy for the most fierce and speedy death, that he shall afford a much more
excellent one for any the more slow death. But that young Beginners may
acknowledge with me, how much the image of hatred can work in this secret: It is
before all things to be noted, that the Pest of man reaches not bruits, as
neither that of them, him; Because no poison operates without a ferment of the
mummy of man, or the agreement of a co-resemblance: For whether that ferment
shall flow out of an infected body, garment, paper, and pestilent air, or in
the next place, arises out of us, and is shut up under the Tartar of the
blood; at leastwise, however it be taken, the plague cannot infect any one
without the communion of a ferment.

This poisonous image therefore, and operating image of hatred, in the next
place, this seminal image of terror in the Toad, kills the mumial ferment,
without which indeed the pestilent poison cannot consist, enter, as neither be
appropriated by us: This I say, is the manner of operating in a Zenexton; to
w^t, whereby the communion of the pestilential air is hindered, as it deprives
the excrementitious and evapourating Tartar of the blood of a mumial ferment:
And it brings in the room thereof, a ferment, the taker away of the pestilent
poison, or an image which kills the pestilent ferment; Because it as it were in
a moment, slays the mumial ferment, the fountain of contagion, or at least,
the fuel thereof, to wit, if it be already present, and hinders it for the
future, whereby it waxes not strong, and it so kills the immediate subject of
inherency, that it be not co-suited with our mummy. The ferment therefore,
easily dies, if the Seat of the Pest be dis-enabled that it grow not; when as
otherwise, every ferment is the mere tincture of a certain odor: For neither
is the poison of the Pest, wasted by the poison of the Toad, by an action
primarily destructive and subduing; but by a secondary action, as the pestilent
Idea of hatred, or terror, extinguisheth the ferment, by whose mediation the
poison of the Pest subsisteth, and proceeds to infect: For seeing the poison
of the plague is the product of the image of the terror of the Archeus,
stablished in a fermental putrified odor, and mumial air, this coupling
ferment, the appropriative mean, and immediate subject of the poison, is also
taken away, and there afterward remains only a fermental putrified subject,
as before, which is to be put to flight by way of sweat: whence it is manifest,
that a Zenexton does at least prevent the appropriation in the first place, and
also takes away the seat or essential thinglinesse of the poisonous Idea of
terror.

And indeed the Lady of Rommerswal Toparchesse in Ecchove, a noble, affined,
and honest Matron, related to me in candor of spirit, that she once beheld a
duel between a Spider, and a Toad, for a whole afternoon: For this, when he
felt himself to be stricken by the Spider descending from above, and that he
was presently swollen in his head, he runs to an herb which he licked, and
being most speedily cured, his swelling assuaged; from whence he setting upon a
repeated fight, was again also smitten in his head, and hastened unto the same
herb; And when as the thing had now the third time happened, the Spectatrese
being tired, cut off the Plant with her knife (but it was the Plantain with a
narrow leaf) and when as the Toad returned thither the fourth time, and found
not the herb, he most speedily swelled all over, and being sore sn^itten with
terror, presently died: But he betook not himself unto the neighboring plants
of the same Plantain, and those frequently growing (for the image of the
conception of fear, and sorrow, produces a speedy death, the hope of a most
speedy remedy perishes in a most furious disease) for when he found not his
own Plantain, he who before encountered from a hope of presently recovering,
forthwith despairing through fear and an idea of terror, died.

For from hence the great fear of this little beast is manifest, the greanesse
and violence of the Idea of dread is conjectured from the speediness of his
death: For to be straightway healed, swell up, and presently die, do manifest
that in this Insect there would be a momentary and present remedy in the
plague; as also, that in the poison, there would be every one his own
conception of terror, formed into an idea; Because such an idea keeps a
duality or distinction with the life, and therefore also that supplants this.
Neither also has a live Toad according to my experience, afforded a Zenexto^
of any great moment: For the grain ought to die if we expect the fruit thereof:
and it is convenient that the terror of us be increased in the Toad: for as
our Pest is not mortal, or contagious to the Toad, so the terror of the Toad
does not any thing increase the terror of the Pest of our Archeus: And unless
the terror cease to be a certain conception, and be reduced into an active
Idea; as it produces not the poison of the Pest in the Archeus, so neither
does it cause a remedy in the Toad: For to this purpose it is required, not
only that the Toad do die by reason of the fear of poison, or of Plantain
failing him, and that he be slain by the terrifying Idea of his own conceit;
but it is of necessity, that the Toad perishes by languishing, by reason of
the ter^our of us, he being hung up nigh the chimney, etc. For then that deadly
terror being inferior unto, and co-fermentable with ou^ Archeus, brings forth
an Idea mortal to the Toad, but profitable unto us: For it beats a
co-resemblance with the terror of our Archeus, forasmuch as terrors do
participate in a terrifying image.

But because the terror of the Toad is not belonging to us, therefore it
frames a poison against the poison of a pestilent terror formed by the
Archeus into the poisonous Idea of the Pest: For there is a most excellent
preservative amulet in the Toad, ordained for man by the Father of the poor.
Consider I pray thee of the Toad with me, in what manner he arises out of muck
or filth putrified through continuance, between the chinks of stones, and there
lives without food, and grows to maturity for very many years: for a Toad is
not seldom times drawn out of the broken stones of Paris, which was detained
there perhaps for the space of an age; For neither does he eat before he
breaths: And the air being once drunk in, he at length undergoes the laws of
death and diminishment: For before he breathed, he lived only, and that by his
own Archeus. Almost all other created things do putrify in a rock: But the
Toad is nourished and grows to maturity in a fermental putrified liquour,
within a rock or great stone.

From hence also it is conjectured, that he is an Animal ordained of God, that
the Idea of his terror being poisonous indeed to himself, should be unto us
and to our Pest, a poison in terror: For as it is sufficiently manifest from
the aforesaid particulars, that the Toad is most disagreeable unto our
co-tempering and suiting; so the Idea of terror in the Toad is exceeding
pestilential to the pestiferous terror it self in us. Since therefore the Toad
is an Insect, most fearful at the beholding of man, which in himself
notwithstanding, forms the terror conceived from man, and also the hatred
against man, into an image, or active real Being, and not subsisting in an
only, and con^used apprehension (even as has already before been nakedly
demonstrated concerning the Idea's of a woman great with child, and likewise of
a mad dog, etc.) Hence it happens, that a poison arises from a Toad, which
kills the pestilent poison of terror in man; to wit, from whence the Archeus
waxes strong, he not only perceiving the pestilent Idea to be extinguished in
himself; but moreover, because he knows that something inferior to himself,
is terrified, is sore afraid, and does fly: For so, in every war and duel,
from an evident dread of the enemy, a hostile courage is strengthened. But so
great is the fear of the Toad, that if he being placed with a direct beholding
before thee, thou do behold him with intent eyes or an earnest look, for some
time, for the space of a quarter of an hour, that he cannot avoid it, he dies
through terror. The Toad therefore, being slain after the manner of
Paracelsus, he dying without terror, is an unworthy Zenexton. The Archeus
therefore, his courage being reassumed, casts away dread, most especially when
as he well perceives the bred poison of his own terror to be killed: For a
Zenex^on acts not after the manner of other agents, no otherwise then as the
poison of the plague is altogether an unwonted poison: Neither does a Zenexton
act materially; but the action of the same is spiritual and altogether
sympathetical: For truly, the co-resemblance of activity, wherein the reason of
founding a Sympathy consists, is in the poison of terror conceived as well
in the Pest, as in the Toad.

But even as the poison of the Plague is irregular, having nothing common with
other poisons; so also a Zenexton being exorbitant or rising high in the
activity of a strange and foreign terror, is a manifest poison to the
pestilent image of our terror, together with a refreshment, confirmation,
strength, and resurrection of the Archeus: which activity of a preservative
amule^, surely the Schools could not contemplate of, because they have not been
able to contemplate, that that of Aristotle, not only in the plague, but also
in other poisons, is false. Indeed the action of a Zenexton is from the victory
of the Patient over the agent: for thou shall remember that the terror and
hatred in the Toad, from man the agent, overcomming indeed, but in no wise
operating, are made, imprinted, actuated agents, and those brought into a
degree, by the proper conception of the Toad; which in the aforesaid Idea are
as it were fugitive living creatures; and therefore they restore the terrified
Archeus of man, and kill the image of the poisonous terror.

Truly in single combats that are spiritual, there is altogether a far
different contention, from that which is wont to be by appropriated corporal
agents: The which I have elsewhere demonstrated, in removing the activities of
contrarieties from the properties of nature. A Zenexton therefore, is of a
magnetic or attractive nature, to wit, acting only on a proper object, while
it meets with it within the sphere of its own activity. It might seem a doubt
to some why the image of hatred in the Toad is a remedy; but why the image of
hatred in a mad dog is a poison: the reason is in the adjoined Idea of terror
in the Toad, which brings forth an inferiority of poison: For the one exceeds
the other in the sturdinesse of conceptions, and therefore also of images: For
a mad dog is bold, rash, and his sealed image enforces its obedience: For
neither is he mad, forasmuch as he fears; but he fears water, as he hates
living creatures: But the Toad is an Animal that is most afraid of us, and as
from his inbred hatred toward us, he is badly conscious to himself (divine
clemency so disposing it); So the images of those conceptions mutually piercing
each other, and accompanying each other, do confer a mark of the greatest
pusillanimity or cowardice dipped in the venom of hatred: Hence indeed the image
of the pestilent terror is killed by the image of the deadly hatred, and our
Archeus is beheld by the image of the cowardly terror, through the application
of the preservative Pomander, as it were in a glass, and does well nigh
reassume the superiority which before he had lost: And therefore the Idea of
terror in the Toad, hates, and also the image of hatred terrifies the Toad,
from whence he puts on a poison for our terror; To wit, by both means, he kills
the image of pestilent terror in the Archeus. There is indeed in spiritual
things a primitive self-love, seeing that every original single duel of
sensitive creatures, issues not but from premediated conceptions; but the Idea
of every ones conceit, is formed in the imagination, and puts on an Entity or
Beingnesse for to do somewhat for the future; For as the images of motions to
be made, do end into motions; so also the images of the Senses are carried,
first inwards, for further deliberations of counsels, and they soon there
degenerate into the images or likenesses of apprehensions, passions, or
disturbances, and from thence they are carried to do something in the body, or
out of it, and they slide and grow according to the directions and inclinations
of passions: In this respect indeed, such images do limit the vital spirits, or
the very operative part of the bowels; according to an impression proper to
themselves: which thing most clearly manifests it self in the poison of a mad
dog, who if he were afraid of us, as he is afraid of water, would not do us
violence, neither would his biting be venomous unto us. For the Spider,
Scorption, etc. are wrathful little Animals, and the which, if the strike us,
they lay up they anger of their own poison in us, or rather the poison of their
anger.

A certain handmaid now and then are spiders, not only the party-colored ones
of the Vine, but also those black ones out of Caves and moist places, and lived
in health thereupon: Wherefore I have considered that the Spider is a fearful
Animal, while he is laid hold of with our hand, and therefore that he does not
bring forth a poison, even as otherwise he does, while he stings us in anger.
From hence indeed, a Scorpion being laid hold of and afraid, heals a wound that
was inflicted by himslef. Two things therefore in the Toad, do offer themselves
in the highest degree; To wit, the image of hatred, by its poisonous quality,
extinguisheth and blunteth the appropriative ferment, that the Archeus does not
put on and drink in the Idea of terror that is bred: but the image of terror
in the Toad recals our Archeus, being sore afrighted, and adds courage unto
him, that of a fleeing Archeus, he may be made a putter to flight. There are
besides a Zenexton, some attractive remedies, such as is the Water-cresse, with
the juice of the leaves of the greater raddish, and likewise of red winter
cherries, and figs, of each a like ^uantity; The which being bruised, are
applied, and the skin is opened in manner of a ci^^le: Also the herb Napellus,
a kind of Wolfs-bane so called, the Grape turned inside out or stripped of his
skin, Monks-hood or Woolfs-bane, being first boiled in Vinegar, and then with a
bruised fig, applied to the place, do draw powerfully, and open the skin, of
which kind of attractives, there are many sorts.

CHAP. XVII. Hippocrates Revived.
ACertain man being familiar with a happy Angel his keeper, entreated him, that
he would beg of God, the remedy whereby Hippocrates cured the popular plague of
the Grecians; hoping that it would not be denied unto the miserable Christians,
the which the Almighty in times past granted to the Heathens: The good Angel
said, Hiprocrates, used Sulphur, Salt, and Pitch: which answer left behind it
the former obscurities: Hence it came to pass, that that man afterward said,
there was enough spoken for these times. Wherefore after a careful diligent
search, at length I resolved with my self that Sulphur in the age of
Hyppocrates was called Phlogiston, that is, inflameable: By which Etymology,
Diascorides soon after said, the best Sulphur was denoted, from its own
property, to wit, because it was wholly consumed by the fire. But because
Hippocrates named the hidden poison of any diseases whatsoever, a divine thing,
in diseases, and because he cured the poison of the pestilence (which is the
chief and standard-defender of poisons, and ^^ contagious diseases) therefore
he began to call Sulphur [(...)] that is, a divine thing; so that from hence
even unto this day, Sulphur is no otherwise written or named, than with the
name of Divine; because it heals the Pest: The which, as it was anciently
believed to be sent only from the Gods, so also it was anciently supposed to
contain a divine succor in it.

For all bodies universally, even of remedies against poison, and the air it
self, are subject to a fermental putrefaction, and to the poison of the plague;
and therefore they are a fit occasional matter for the Plague. Truly Authors do
batter themselves with a tedious disputation, whether Salt be capable of a
pestilent poison? whether a Letter that is closed with a linen thread, be a
partaker of contagion, but not that which is tied with a metallic thread? I
have bewailed the ridiculous Fable of the Italians, and their Study of
brawling: For truly, paper is no less capable of contagion, than flax, from
whence it is made. Silver also, Gold, and the most cleansed glass, and an
Antidote it self, may drink in the foreign poison of the plague: But Sulphur
alone, among created bodies, resists a fermental putrefaction, and the
contagion of the plague; Because Sulphur alone being like unto fire, drives
away all putrefaction through continuance, as well in Hogssheads, as in places
themselves, and blots out the footsteps of any touch and odor: For so Sulphur
also takes away well nigh every scabbednesse of the skin, because it is an
enemy to contagion: Wherefore neither is it a wonder, if the Pest being derived
into the skin from an internal Beginning, be also drawn out by Sulphur. For
since that in the whole Universe, nothing does more readily conceive fire than
Sulphur, because it is as it were a mere fire; no wonder that Sulphur
demonstrates the properties of fire, which are to burn up all things, nor it
self to be infected with contagion.

Truly I have seen in the watery tract of Gaunt, a whole legion of Neopolitans
to have died of the plague, but there was in the same place a Company of
Germans which ^inged their shirts with Gunpowder, that they might excuse their
Laundresses, and also the lice: If any of these perished, it was by reason of
the bloody Flux, but not of the plague: Therefore Hippocrates separated (...)
(that sounds Sulphur, or a divine unexpert or crude fire) which is named in
the Shops Sulphur Vive, from the superfluous earth, only by fusion. But it is
yellow, which being once enflamed, burns moreover even unto the end, neither
does it contract a skin in its superficies, as neither does it leave a dreg
behind it worthy of note; but being once enflamed, it wholly flies away; and
therefore was it named (...) or inflameable. For in the age of Hipocrates, the
manner of extracting Sulphur out of the Fire-stone and Marcasites, was not yet
made known: Wherefore the Sulphur of Italy is better than our Country Sulphur
bred at Leydon. For the Fire-stone exspires forth some Arsenical matter in the
boiling; for why, therefore Arsenick is commonly called the fume of metals.
Hippocrates therefore, at first commanded the houses that were infected with
the plague, to be perfumed with Sulphur: For indeed Sulphur while it is burned,
and its heterogeneal parts are separated, it affords a black smoke, and
belcheth forth a watery and acide o^ sharp Salt, which is constrained into a
liquor, and is called the distillation or oil of Sulphur.

In the next place, out of enflamed Sulphur, the homogeneal part of the Sulphur
does exhale, it arising indeed, by reason of heat, but being not yet enflamed;
and therefore it flies away with the fume or smoke, before it can be snatched
hold of by the flame; For so, o^t of woods, oils being not yet enflamed, do
ascend together with the smoke, and affix a smoakiness or soot as yet
combustible, unto the sides of the Chimney: But Sulphur thus flying away,
together with its smoke, as it is in its former disposition, so neither in this
place, is it of any valor.

But since every seed of burnt Sulphur is destroyed by the flame, for that very
cause it is transchanged into a Gas or wild spirit, which by reason of the
properties of its own concrete or composed body, is an An^idote against the
Pest: For seeing that a medicine ought suitably to answer to the disease, the
water, salt, smoakiness, or volatile flower of Sulphur, cannot be the true
remedy of the plague; but only that subtle and almost incorporeal Gas, which
is therefore straightway comixable with our Archeus: Therefore that Gas
refreshes those that are affected in their womb, with its smell, but not the
oil, not the tincture, milk, or flower of Sulphur.

But after what sort thou may know that Gas of Sulphur to be distinct from
the watery vapor thereof; kindle a sulphurated torch or candle in a glass
bottle, thou shall forthwith see the whole bottle to be filled with a white
fume, and at length the flame to be stifled by the fume: Afterward, keep thou
the bottle most exactly stopped with a cork, and thou shall see a sulphur to be
affixed unto the sides of the vessel, and in the superficies of the water, if
there were any in the bottom: But if indeed, after some days, thou shall put
the same enflamed torch or bottle into the neck of the candle, the flame is
forthwith extinguished by reason of the condensable Gas of the Sulphur; no
otherwise than as the odor of an Hogshead putrified through continuance,
stifles the flame of a sulphurated candle.

But Hippocrates perfumed all the wine which he gave in the plague, after this
manner: He perfumed the pot or cup of a narrow neck, with a candle of burning
sulphur, he powered in wine, to the filling of the pot a third part full, and
stirred the pot being exactly shut, by shaking it a good while together,
upwards, and downwards, until the wine had drunk up all the Gas of the sulphur
into it self: For medicines to be hung on the body, and Amulets or preservative
Pomanders had not yet been made known: But he supplied external medicines that
take away weariness or faintness, in the room thereof, by anointing the body
with Greek Wine wherein he had boiled the most fine powder of Sulphur: But he
besprinkled the same fine powder being dried in the Sun, on those that were in
a sweat, and commanded it to be applied with rubbings. But the Pest, since it
never wants a Fever, and that the Grecans saw the remedies of Hippocrates, they
began first, to call the Pest, and then every Fever, (...), or a fire; Not
indeed, by reason of a remarkable, and necessary burning heat of Fevers
(although it so pleased Galen): For truly, they called the beginning, cold,
rigours and horrors, Py^ or a fire, as well as a burning Causon.

For Hipp^crates lightly ground Sulphur with water, on a Grind-stone, and being
again dried, he kept it for his uses: But he gave twenty four grains of Sulphur
with salted, and hot wine, that he might provoke sweats: But he first made the
salt to crack in a glassen pot, and presently afterward, he melted it, by
increasing the fire; for else, salt contains in it excrementitious filths,
which at the first cracking, fly away, the salt cleaving asunder and leaping a
little: These Spirits do easily putrify through continuance, and subject the
salt to a fear of contagion; for they are very foreign to the salt; the which
although they fled away a good while before the fusion of the salt, yet he made
a melting of the salt, that whatsoever foreign thing was contained in the
salt, might be consumed by the fire: For indeed, he saw that presently after
the invasion of the Pest, the appetite was prostrated, and then also, that
fermentally putrified and burntish impurities grew in the stomach, from whence
arose the headache, vomitings, loathings, doatage, the drowsy evil, etc. which
would hinder the cure of the plague: Therefore he took the common balsam of the
salt of fleshes, which might overthrow the fermental putrified poison, and
putrefactions, by cleansing them away, together with a con^^^ing of the
strength; and he gave the wine being salted, hot, but not lukewarm (...)
restrain the loathings of the stomach, and mightily provoke sweats; and (...)
(...) Sulphur, that it might kill the plague as it were with its odor; because
salt clean^^^h, preserves from corruption, and Sulphur restrains poison: But
he prescribed this sweat for three days space at least, yet oft-times he
extended it unto a weeks space: but they did sweat twice every day, and at
every tur^, for the sixth part of a day, if they were able; on the first days
more, and on the after succeeding days, less: For in time of sweating, he took
away all drink; but the term of sweating being finished, he fed them with
Barley-Cream, and for drink, they had Greek Wine pitched, wherein were a few
grains of the aforesaid salt, and Sulphur: But he laid the leaves of Assara
Bacca, being steeped in vinegar, upon the Bubo, unto the soals of the feet, and
palms of the hands, which after every twelve hours, he commanded to be buried,
because they stink greatly. It came to pass afterward, that Greece be
sprinkled their grapes, diverse times, with the Brine of the Sea, before they
were carried to the Press: For Hippocrates persuaded that thing, that so,
together with it, In^ects might be driven from the grapes: Hence it is, that
the Wines of Greece are salted even unto this day, the reason of this use being
unknown. Unto great Buboes in the groyn, and marks, he applied hot Towels
tinged in rich wine, wherein, as I have said, he had boiled Sulphur.
Furthermore, he reserved a secret to himself, through the sight whereof, he
attained to himself, divine honors: But it was the flesh of a Viper, or or
Snake, which he cleansed: for the utmost part of the tail, and the head, being
cut off, he stripped off their skin, casting away the bowels, together with the
gawl, he reserved only the Heart, and Liver; but he drew out all their blood,
with the vein running down the backbone: But he boiled not their flesh after
the manner wherein it is put into Triacle; but he exactly bruised the same,
together with the bones, and aforesaid bowels, and dried them in a warm Oven,
until they could be powdered; which powder he sprinkled on honey being
sufficiently clarified and boiled, until he knew that fleshes in boiling, had
laid aside their virtue as well in the broth, as in the vapors: But he added
unto this Electuary, the Spice of his Country for to cloak the secret; and
therefore, neither was it made manifest by the Angel. But the cure contains a
mystery; that as Death crept in by the Serpent, it self also, ought to be
vindicated by the death of the Serpent: For Adam being skilful in the
properties of all Beasts, was not ignorant also, that the Serpent was more
crafty than the other living Creatures; and that the aforesaid balsam, the
remedy of death, lay hid in the Serpent: Wherefore the Spirit of Darkness could
not more safely deceive our first parents, than under the Serpents skin: For
perhaps they hoped that they should escape the death sorely threatened by God,
by the aid of the Serpent.

Hippocrates used also wine that was pitched: Wherefore it is worthy our
consideration, that Spain is seldom afflicted with the plague; not because
sins, or filths are wanting, where there are almost no Jakes's: Its a Country,
I say, raging with heats, imitating of, and cobordering on Africa: Nor also,
because their great men do cool their drink with snow: because, at least the
Rusticks and Citizens should pay the punishment of their own sins, with the
plague: But Egypt uses waters and fruits, from whence there is a fermental
putrefaction in their flesh: but Spain uses wine, and indeed that which is
pitched, because, seeing for the most part, they want Hogsheads, they keep their
wines in pitched Hides or Leathern Jacks: Italy has wooden vessels; therefore
it does not, as constrained, make use of pitch, and it is more frequently,
violently taken with the Pest: For pitch being applied to Carbuncles, is for an
ease or comfort, and they are quickly opened; for pitch imitates the blackness
of an Eschar. Among known trees, the pitch-tree alone is made a torch, and by
reason of its fatness, it presently dies, if but a little earth be added to its
Trunk: for God is liberal in his remedies, and that is proper to his goodness:
For death happening by a tree, it has seemed to be ordained for a remedy
against death, unto man that was made mortal by a tree. The smell of pitch is
familiar for a suffumigation unto very many Provinces infected with the Plague:
For so Petus affirms, that Hippocrates had not one only remedy against the
Pest; and that he was sacrificed unto by the Athenians, as it were unto a
protecting starry God. When as therefore, the Greeks saw Hipocrates to use a
remedy known only to himself, unto whom therefore they attributed their life,
health, and whole preservation; they by degrees despairing, the use of salt,
and sulphur went more and more into oblivion, especially if some years that
were free from the plague, interposed: And afterward, every Physician began to
select diverse medicines, hoping that his own was the Antidote of Hippocrates:
From whence there was afterward a standing crop of remedies collected, without
number, for the most part, with empty ears. At length, from a slender senting
of the praise of the Viper, the composition of Triacle arose, it being partly
loaded with a confounding of simples, and their odours being partly dispersed
in time of preparation, and they cast away the better properties of the Viper
in the broaths. At this day, the Antidote of Orvietanus is made of great
account for thplague; because he first dated to swallow any poison unknown unto
him, in the open market place; which thing, the Germans at this day perform
only by the use of the Snake: For they little distinguish the Pest from other
poisons, and have taken little notice, that against the will of the Electuary
of Orvicta^^s, the plague notwithstanding, has lately raged throughout all
Lumbardy: For I omit, that the Pest does radically differ from other poisons.

Quercetanus, and the Writers of this sort, in their Caco-Alexiteries or bad
medicines against poison, and in their young beginnings, do dicta^e very many
remedies (whether boldly, or sottishly, let others judge from the roots of the
Pest supposed) every one whereof is framed, not indeed from knowledge, but from
thinking alone, and the Author of them is worthy of pity, if not of punishment:
For Ranzovius concerning defending health, describes a Saxenian Antidote for
his Son, it being tried diverse times by me, but always in vain, because the
poison consisting in a spiritual image of terror, has nothing in the
aforesaid Antidote, which can radically overcome the same image: and therefore
by reason of the ignorance of the causes of the Pest^, any one has devised
many remedies; and also, has connexed many things unharmoniously together,
against the poison forreignly entering: Indeed, all of them confused, without a
method, experience, reason, and knowledge of the causes: And nothing having
been at all devised against the Pest arisen from the foolish image of terror,
and the perswa^ion of fear^ulness, afterward, from the age of Hipocrates,
every Physician began at pleasure to select diverse remedies, and to connex many
things together, and much more than many, hoping that his own invention was
that of Hippocrates.

In the mean time, the number of compositions increased, and by degrees,
uncertainty supplanted the ancient truth: And although an Antidote which
operateth about the effects of the poison produced in the body, be to be
greatly esteemed; yet while it operateth not on the terrors of the Archeus,
and the image produced from thence, truly, neither can it bring help to the
pestilent contagion; or if any one do revive from the plague with those
Antidotes, that is not done but with an unfaithful succor: For in the plague,
the Archeus himself is well nigh bewi^ched with terror and grief, and stamps a
pernicious image on himself, which is the true Pest; from which, neither does
he voluntarily re-arise, unless by a singular power of nature, and divine
grace. Moreover, as I have elsewhere demonstrated in a particular Treatise,
that the first assaults of conceptions, do not stand in a free disposition of
the will, but that they are framed in the midriffs; So by arguments drawn from
thence, I have fitly or exactly beheld, that the image of terror, and indeed
the plague it self, is formed about the Jurisdiction of the stomach and spleen:
and that thing, I seriously and by long leisure discerned, and have exactly
confirmed from observation, by very many histories; one or two whereof, to have
repeated, shall not be besides our purpose.

A certain young man, beholding his little Sister to be be-spotted with a black
mark, and to be dead, being sore smitten with terror, presently felt a load
about the mouth of his stomach, the admonitress of continual sighing: He daily
used Triacle, Myrrh, and the root of Butterbur being adjoined thereunto: he
ate and drank even unto merriment: At length, on the twelfth day after the
death of his Sister, a Fever, and deep drowsiness laid hold on him, and on the
third day after, he died. A Noble Virgin, having suffered a colike burden, and
anguish of terror, at length, passed over restless nights with a dejected
appetite, with sighs, and oppressions of her stomach, and a panting heart, a
slow and continual Fever took hold on her, with an uncessant struggling of fear,
and hope: For as many deliberations of animosity or courage, and of free
resignation, as she could make with her self, were in vain: Meats also being
despised, there at length, remained place for strong wine; and that also she
soon disdained; neither also was she so greatly afraid of death, as of future
doting delusions:

In the mean time, she laughed at her foolish perplexities, or mournful
vanities, and it grieved her self of her own ^olly: But the Physicians had sent
their own Antidotes unto her, under which, the Duel of her mind increased, no
otherwise than as in those that are bitten by a mad dog, with their disease of
the fear of water; and at length, through the mortal ^orrow of the pestiferous
terror, she now plainly despaired in mind; because she was she, who for three
weeks space, had admitted of no sleep, with a perpetuak Agony, and despairing
of life, and yet was vexed with her self, through la full remembrance or
knowledge of her own foolish struggling; and Opiates being administered, she
found her self worse. At length, between the fear, and desiring of death, she
plainly recovered by the remedy of Hippocrates, in six hours space. In the mean
time, I confess, and admonish by way of protestation, that I have plainly
enough manifested the bosom of the remedy of Hippocrates, that it may be
sufficiently plain only unto the Sons of Art, and true Physicians, and covered
for the future, only to sloathful Physicians, that are enslaved to gain, and to
the envious haters of the truth.

But I have declared, 1. The aforesaid histories, that plagues beginning, may
be manifest not to be as yet seasoned with the pestilent poison, and not yet to
be accompanied with a sufficient image of terror,

2. And that the virtue of the remedy of Hippocrates may from thence be made
manifest.

3. That the first violent motions of confusion, terror, and imagination, do
happen in the midriff, about the mouth of the stomach; To wit, in the Spleen,
whose emunctory is nigh the mouth of the stomach, and so that it is the mark of
that Archer: For in a healthy young man, whom the plague had snatched away in
seven hours time, a dissection of his body being begun, I found a long eschar
now made, to be, as at first the mover of vomit, and afterward the Author of
continual swoonings; so also, to have given an occasion of sudden death; even
as in others, I have noted a threefold eschar to have been made in the stomach,
^n sixteen hours space.

4. That the master of Animal subtilty, has with his white wand of sleep,
chosen the Inn of drowsy sleep, and watchings in the same place.

5. And that the seat of all madness and doatage, is in the same place: And
that thing I have elsewhere profesly founded by a long demonstration.

6. That purging likewise, as also myrr^ed Antidotes for the Pest, are not safe
enough, or worthy of confidence.

7. And that all reason, deliberation, animosity, resignation, consolation,
argumentation, and all the subtilty of man on the contrary, do but wash the
Ae^hiopian, in the Pest, even as also in the disease Hydrophobia.

8. That the endeavor of preservatives is sluggish, as often, and as long as the
seal of the image framed by terror, remains.

9. That such an image stirs up from it self, continual sorrows, and spurns at
the fantasy it self, and draws it captive to it self, no less than the
biting of a mad dog, brings forth an unwilling fear of water, or the sting of a
Tarantula, the do^tage of a tripping dance.

10. That the comfort of sweating alone, is loose in such terrors.

11. That the Idea of fear not being vanquished in the bowel, nor the dreg
wherein that image sits, banished, it is in vain, whatsoever the magistrals, or
compositions of the shops do attempt: For Hydrophobial persons, although now
and then between while, they speak discreetly, fore-feel, and fore-tel a
madness coming upon them, yet they cannot but be driven into the madness of
their own image.

12. That swimming is destructive, and whatsoever restrains sweat.

13. That Barley broaths, pulses, syrupes, and Juleps, are loose and frivolous
remedies for so great a malady.

14. That it comes from a bastard plague unto a true or Legitimate one; yet
that the sick do often fail under the beginning thereof, before it sends forth
its tokens: The which traitorous signs do notwithstanding, presently after
death issue forth.

15. That grateful odours, the perfumes of spices, feathers, or shoes, do
bring no defense or succor for the plague: For by way of example; if thou
seasonest an hogshead of wine putrified through continuance, with the odor of
spices, or with any other odor, except that of Sulphur, it remains
fermentally putrified, and it soon defiles the new wine which thou shall pour
in, as the former. Wherefore sweet smelling things do in no wise take away the
terror, and the poisonous Idea of terror, from the Archeus being once
terrified; Because they take not away the ma^ter of the poison; and much less
do they kill that poison, or remove the terror from the Archeus, as neither do
they refresh the seat thereof, or comfort the part affected.

For Paracelsus commends unto the City of Stertzing that was bountiful unto
him, myrrh being by degrees melted under the tongue, before any other
remedies; and boldly promises it unto the younger sort, for a preservation for
24. hours space: which doctrine notwithstanding, I have experienced to be
false: For I have seen young folks, with the much use of myrrh, to have been
killed by the plague. Myrrh indeed, although it may preserved dead cracases
from putrefaction, instead of a blasam; yet the Pest far differs from
putrefaction; No otherwise than as the eschar of a bright burning iron differs
from putrified blood: And although corruption succeeds in a carcass now dead,
yet the poisonous image of terror does not properly putrify, as it does most
properly slay the vital Archeus, and tranchange him into a poison, with it
self: For he bids that myrrh be held in the mouth: As if the plague knew not
how to to enter but by way of the mouth: Therefore far more advisedly to have
shut up the mouth in silence. Truly the Pest will abhor myrrh, nor will it
da^e to enter in through the nostrils, if myrrh being detained in the mouth,
does dissolve: shall perhaps, the odor of myrrh hinder, whereby the poisonous
image is the less poysonsom, is not poysonsom? Is not hurtful? For shall
myrrh in the mouth, repulse the plague from the Archeus? The same reason is
alike frivolous and foolish for Triacle, vinegar, etc. perfumed with odours.

At length, let mortals know, that in healing, nothing is alike hurtful, as a
rash belief given without a pledge, and truth. Truly, the accusations of the
sick, will at sometime thunder against the negligence, falsehood, decietful
juggles, rashnesses, and false wares of Physicians, whereby people have been
spoiled of their life. But I have discerned by the books of Paracelsus, that he
was a man rash in promising, unexpert in the plague, unconstant in its
remedies, ignorant in its causes, as also ungrateful toward the bountiful City
of Stertzing. Let his honourers spare me, that I am constrained to speak
heartily or plainly for the truth, in a matter of so great moment, least any
one in the plague, should put confidence in his succors.

CHAP. XVIII. The image of terror sifted.
I Have hitherto produced the unheard, of poison of the Pest: To wit, that the
soul, and the vital Archeus thereof, are powerful in an imagination proper to
themselves: But that that power of the a foresaid imagination, is to form
Idea's; not indeed, those which may be any longer a Being of Reason, or a
non-being; but that they have altogether actually, the true Entity of a
subsisting image: which imagination surely, seeing it is a work of the flesh,
and also common to bruits, as to us; hence indeed, it is framed in the outward
man, from which, nothing but [this somethings] being far different from a
spiritual conception, proceeds: But for-the obtainment of which subsisting
entity, the Archeus himself so clothes his own conception (which as yet, is a
mere and abstracted mental Idea) in his own wrappery, or in a particle of his
own air, that what he conceived in himself by an abstracted conception of
imagination, that very thing the Archeus presently arraieth and cloatheth with
the vital air; So as that afterward, it is a subsisting Being, to wit, an
image framed from imagination.

Moreover, as there are diverse unlikenesses of conceptions and passions,
according to the liberty of that Protheus; so undoubtedly there are also,
manifold varieties of those same images, far separated from each other, and the
Idea's of these, being clothed with, engraven in, and having made use of the
vital spirits, do diametrically utter forth unlike operations in us: And
therefore the images of terror are very poysonsom, and potent to defile the
vital spirit bearing a co-resemblance with them, which unhabites as well in the
heart and arteries, as in the very family of the solid parts it self; To wit,
the which image, and most powerful efficacy thereof, I have already before,
and many times elsewhere demonstrated as much as I could: I have said also, and
demonstrated, that the same image is the essential, formal, and immediate
essential thinglinesse of the Pest: Because that the plague is not unfrequently
framed, from a terror of the plague only, although there fore-existed not a
material cause from whence it might be drawn. I have afterward treated by the
way, of the preservation, and curing of the Pest by a Zenexton, and remedies in
times past used in Hipocrates his time; yet ^here has not as yet been enough
spoken for the present age, in order to a cure: For truly, very many
difficulties offer themselves, which have not been sufficiently cleared up.

First of all, the image of terror is only one indeed, in its own kind, and
therefore it may be difficulty understood, that the Pest should be able by the
one only and uniforme Idea of affrightment, to afflict so diverse things, and
not only in distinct emunctories, but equally, so distinct parts throughout the
whole body, at its pleasure.

Secondly, And then, that the same image of terror should be able only by its
beck, to stamp products so different from each other: Such as are Carbuncles,
Buboes, Escha^s, little bladders, Pustu^es, Tumors, Tokens, etc.

Thirdly, in that the one only Idea of terror should invade and besiege, not
only the external parts, but also the stomach, and likewise the head, etc.

Fourthly, that a unity of that Idea, should sometimes produce a most sharp
disease; at another time, a disease that is slow, and twinkling by degrees;
elsewhere, a disease by degrees decaying of its own accord; since such effects
may seem to accuse, rather a diversity of the poison, than an identity or
sameliness thereof.

Fifthly, that the Archeus of man being sore afraid of the poisonous Idea of
terror, and as it were, a runaway, should have the power and courage of
producing an Eschar in the skin, like unto a bright-burning iron.

Sixthly, because doatage, I say, and watching, seem not to bud from the same
Beginning, with a deep sleepy drowsiness. But one only answer, easily blots out
every such kind of perplexity: For indeed, every first conception, and the
first assaults or violent motions of conceptions, do happen beneath the
Di^phrag^a or midriff-partition, which therefore are denied to be subject to
reason, or to be in our power: Wherefore that Hypochondriacal passions do grow
in the same place, every age has already granted: and then, that the pest or
plague is oftentimes immediately introduced from a pestilent terror, none
doubts; which terror, as it is framed by the imagination of that place; So
also, the image of terror is stamped, from whence the imagination has drawn
an Etymology to it self: But such an image is not idle, or without a faculty of
operating; seeing none is ignorant, that most diseases have took their
beginning from naked perturbations or disturbances.

In the next place, terror is not only the dread of the Soul of man, and of
Reason alone; but also the Archeus himself is terrified, and wroth, with a
certain natural fervency, and the illurements of passions. Furthermore, terror
stamps indeed an image, the Effectress of the plague, the Mother of confusion
and terror; but that image assumes not a poison from an undistinct confusion
of terror, from a confused terror, and from the fear or flight of the
forsaking Archeus: But as every Serpent, and mad dog, produces a poison, by
the conception of a furious anger; So also, the terror of the Archeus is not
sufficient for the producement of a pestilent image, unless the fury of the
Archeus shall bring forth a poisonous image, which also pi^rceth and is married
to the image of terror.

Hence indeed it comes to pass, that the Pest is for the most part bred about
the stomach, and does there manifest it self by loathings, vomiting, lack of
appetite, pain of the head, a Fever, drowsy evils, and at length Deliriums or
doting delusions: For truly, I have amply enough demonstrated elsewhere,
concerning Fevers, and in the Treatise of the Duumvirate, that this
household stuff is conversant about the stomach: For an Eschar is not made in a
dead body, but only in live ones; and so, from the life, and Archeus himself
(even as concerning sensations elsewhere) who being wroth, brings forth the
image of fury, which was bred to change its self, and the whole spirit of the
Archeus, and the inflowing spirit of the Arterial blood it self, into a
corroding Alcali: For the vital spirit, which in its first rise, was in the
digestion of the stomach, materially sharp, and which in the succeeding
digestions, is made salt, and volatile, does formally degenerate, and is made a
corrosive salt, and a volatile Alcali, the efficient of the Corrosion and
Eschar: For, for the madness of so strange and foreign a transmutation (to
wit, produced from a strange and foreign image) whatsoever is vital in the
very solid substance of the parts it self, all that, through the wrothful vital
principle being angry and enraged, is enflamed, and brings forth diverse
diseases (which are plain to be seen in the burning coal, in the Persick fire,
in a Gangren, in an Erisipelas, etc.) It is manifest therefore, that from the
same Beginning of the Archeus being sore affrighted, and enraged into a
dog-like madness, it happens, that the plague is ^iversly stirred up, sometimes
in the stomach, sometimes in the skin, Glandules, Emunctory places, and also,
now and then, in the very solid family it self, of ^e similar parts, or bowels;
from whence mortal spots, Eschars, and combustions do happen, according to the
diversity of the parts, whereunto the Archeus being full of fury; and full of
terror, shall divert himself: But that the Archeus being terrified, and a
runaway, and returning as half in a rage, is made so hostile unto the parts
his Clients, over which he alone is president, the confirmation thereof is not
elsewhere to be fetched, than that a thorn is thrust into the finger, which by
the fat or grease of an Have, is safely expelled without discommodities, as
that remedy asswageth the fury of the Archeus: which thorn does otherwise, stir
up a great Tragedy of fury: For the Archeus brings forth a poison in his
Clients, by his own fury, the which otherwise, a simple small wound would
willingly be ignorant of. Conceive thou, how unlike is the wound of phlebotomy,
and the sting of a Be: And likewise the stroke of phlebotomy that is clean,
how far does it differ from the prick of unclean phlebotomy. Its no wonder
therefore that the seat where the image of the conceived terror, and piercing
of the combined image of fury shall first happen, is hostilely disturbed, is
furiously scorched; yet oftentimes poisonous, tempests, are transmitted and
chased unto the more outward habit of the body, by the implanted spirit of
life, unto places I say, whither the Latex or liquor of the veins tends of
its own free accord, in time of health, or they are dismissed unto the external
habit of the body: And therefore, whatsoever is to be done in the Pest, that is
to be cured with speed: For sometimes the image of the Pest, is clothed only
with the inflowing spirit, and then medicines that provoke sweat do readily
succor: But where the inhering and inbred Archeus conceives the image of his
terror, and fury in the solid parts, unless he presently resign up and lay
aside the conceived image, unto and in the spermatick nourishment (I have
called that corrupt nourishment the Tartar of the blood) and produce a tumor,
there is danger least it presently pass over into the very substance of the
solid parts, which contains an unexcusable detriment of death: And therefore,
that the plague may not take up for it self a tough Inn within the body, we
must procure, that the pestilent image do not long float within; but that the
whole household stuff be allured forth, and fall out by sweat: For the Carline
Thistle, is said to have been in times past, shown unto an Emperor, by an
Angel, for the plague of his Army (perhaps therefore called Angel-Thistle)
because the first rise of the image of the Pest, stirs up drowsy evils,
loathings, a Fever, vomiting, and headaches about the stomach; but the herb
Ixia or Chamilion, drives away sleep, and much more deep drowsinesses against
Nature; and therefore they hope, that the extraction of fresh Carline Thistle,
should not be unfruitful for the plague that is newly begun.

The End.
A TABLE Of many of the Chief things contained in this Book: The rest being
referred to the Contents of the CHAPTERS.
A. WHat Accidents properly are, and to what serving, etc. 131, 9. etc.
Acheldamah consumes a d^ad carcass in one day. 671. 54. Adam not cursed. 654.
A demonstration of his fall. 659. What he generated after sin. 663. 17. Why he
and his posterity Bearded. 666. Adam's lust arose from a natural property of
the apple. 668. No motion of lust in Adam before his fall. 682. 85. Of Adam's
understanding. 711. The Praise of Agnus Castus. 707. 52. What kind of knowledge
in the apple. 665. Air not reducible into water. 60. 12, 76, 41. Air the
reducer of bodies into water. 68. 26. Air the seperater of the waters. 71. 4,
152, 19. Air is exceeding cold and dry. Ibid. 76. 40. 1120. Air acts on the
water without a reaction. 76. 41. A vacuity in the air, proved by a manual. 82.
4, 7, 1126. Its magnal or sheath. 85. 20, 692, 12. It is imprinted with the
seal of forms. etc. 133, 18. etc. What office it bears in minerals. Ibid. 20.
How it joins to the vital spirit. 183. 37. Air seperates sulphurs. 184. 45. It
Vola^izeth the blood. 186. 187, 56. Air not capable of a vital light. 189. It
does not nourish the vital spirit. 190. 9. How the Alkahest of Paracelsus
operates on bodies. 65, 7, 105, 6, 104, 27, 479, 43, 787. it is compared to the
fire mentioned in Macchabes. 108. 28. Its operation on a Coal. Ibid. Its
Aenigmatical description. 115, 28. The Revealer of the proportion of light etc.
146. 89. The operation of the liquor Alkahest one the Cedar. 811. Aloes hurt by
washing. 463. 39. Alcalies reduced into a mere simple water. 106. 12. How
alcalies are made. 183. 38. The Commonwealth of Alcalies. 184. 40. Alcalies
why fit for wound drinks. 186. 53 294, 21. Amber draws the virtue from
vitriol without touching it. 764. 22. Amber becomes a Zenexton against the
Plague. 767. 37, 787, 1146. Amulets act by influence. 330, 19. 481 An Amulet
against the Plague. 767. 37. Antimony in its form better than in its
principles. 788. 153 Antimony observes an Influence. 773. 63. How a sweet
Anodine works. 918. No Animal spirit in nature. 187. 58. A good Angel never
appears Bearded. 661. 37. Anasarcha by what produced. 513. Its cure. 521. The
Apoplexy hitherto unknown. 906, 998 Its rise. 917 Its seat. 915 Apple takes
away warts. 154 Apostemes how made. 186. 52, 290, 6 Aqua Fortis, etc. 96. 14
Aqua Vitae, see spirit of wine. How Arcanum's do operate. 473. 15, 164, 15
Arcanum'^ cure all Diseases. 524 Arcanum's never go into nourishment. 577
Arcanum's i^ some sort exceed the powers of nature. 753 Arsenick though never
so well prepar^^ is not to be inwardly administered. 466. 52. It is fixed by
co-melting with saltpeter. 105. 10 The Arterial spirit of life is of the
nature of a Gas. 110. 40 Arterial blood exhales without a Cap^t mortuum. 182.
34 By what. 185. 40 How an Artery becomes hard. 185. 48 The Arteries do not
atract air. 190 Arteries attract spirit of wine, but no juicy things. 203. 41
The Archeus its constitutive parts. 35. 4 110, 41 Its seat. 430 287, 28 What it
is in the beginning of Generation. 133 18, 142, 60 The manner of its operating.
142, 61 etc. Its defects. 549 Archeus sensible of death. 553 Archeus receiving
of evils the cause of our hurt. 1127 Archeus has an imagin^tion of its own
differing from the mind. 1128 Aroph of Paracelsus. 709. 53, 878, 879 Aristotle's
four constitutive causes of things condemned. 18. 3 Astrology natural why
preferred before the stellar astrology. 26. 9 Its supports or props vain. 126.
46 etc. Condemned by an experiment. 127. 48 By a review of the attributes they
give to the Planets. Ibid. 50 Astronomy slighted. 12. 5 Ascites what. 508. 524
Asarum by boiling lays down its vomitive force. 172. 45 The difference of
Ascarides from worms. 221 83 Its cure. Ibid. Asthmawhat. 260. 40, 356 What the
Asthma consists of. 360. 27 From whence the Ashma arises. 261. 42 ^ twofold
Asthma. 357. 9, 358. 368. 68 The Asthma is a falling sickness of the lungs.
361. 29, 368. Common Remedies for the Asthma vain. 3623637. The seat of the
Asthma in the Duumvirate 361. 28 The Asthma not cured but by an Arcanu^^. 362.
40 A moist Asthma from Endemical things drawn in. 363. 45 The reasons of the
Schools concerning the Asthma rejected. 364, 53 The grounds thereof. 365, 366,
367, 58 A dry Asthma is the Falling Sickness of the Lungs. 368. 60 Remedies for
Coughs vain in the dry Asthma. ibid. What remedies are fit for both kind of
Asthma's. ibid. 370, 68 The ^ume of Sulphur profitable in drinks for the
Asthma. 372, 77 The Authors intent to have burnt this book. 10. 13 His
breeding. 11. 1078 He Read about 600 Physical Authors. 13. 15 How stird up to
be a Physician. 14. 20 The way he took to attain knowledge: 22. 43 Why he brake
down the old received doctrines. 37. 3, 433, 18. His persecution. 470. 2 His
dream. Ibid. 3. 1073 His challenge. 526 The Authors observations on his stomach
being loaded. 123. 41. His visions. 265. 13, 716 His vision of generation. 736
His medicines never Exhausted though he cured thousands yearly. 1080 What
happened to the Author upon the rasting of Wolfsbane. 274. 12 The Author
understood wholly in his heart, but not at all in his head. 275. 13 The Authors
search into the cause of Madnesses. 277. 25 The Authors di^^inctions of the
office of a Physician and a Chyrurgion. 1080 How the Author was hurt with the
smoke of Char-coale. 300. 20 How two of the Authors sons died of the Plague.
1135 Of the search of the Author after the Tree of life. 808. Of his dream. 810
How the Author cured himself of a Pleuri^ie. 399. 35, 400 B. BAlsams etc. made
with honey. 467. 56 Barrenness from what. 630 The Beard bred from the stones.
333, 38, 334, 41, 335, 47. Concerning Bezoar. 991 The great virtue of its
milkie juice. 992 Be^s generated from a strangled calf and dew. 478. 1026, 65
Of the virtues of the Birch tree. 892 The Blas of the heart the fuel of the
vita^ spirit. 180 Blas of Government hitherto unknown. 330. 19, 20, 21, 22. The
Binsica of the Rabbis. 24. 51. The Blas of man voluntary. 177. Blas twofold.
Ibid. What Blas is. 78. 1. Defluxions of the Bladder Ridiculus. 856 The venal
blood exhales without any dead head. 404. 21, 112, 5, 182, 34. Its salt made by
a mumial ferment. 473. 19. What operation precedes blood-making. 479. 49. How
it nourishes. 112. 4. Out-chased blood the occasional cause of the dropsy.
517. Blood never putrifies in the veins. 941. Blood-making not hindered in the
dropsy. 517. Blood of the hemeroyds not putrified. 943. Blood of a Bull why
poysonable. 174 49, 783. 19. Of the difference between Arterial and venal
blood. 179. The spirit of the blood not in the liver. 181. 32. The Arterial
blood exhales without any Caput mortuum. 182. 34. By what. 185. 40. The making
of venal and Arterial blood are different. 732 In what time the Blood of man is
renewed. 640 The best part of the Blood the Schools cal^ Phlegm. 1050, 23 An
e^statial power in the Blood. 777, 75 Bloody Flux cured by Horse-hoof fried.
334, 41 Of things cast into the Body. 597 With the manner thereof. 604 Of
things breathed into the Body. 617 A solid B^dy not changed into another Body,
without reducement into its first matter. 241, 6 Bones broken cured by Comfry.
457, 5^ 461, 26 Of the Stone for broken bones. 564 Bone of the Head profitable
against the Falling Sickness. 770, 51 The Emunctories of the Brain. 435, 13 The
defects of the Brain ^ise from the Midriff. 276, 19 Of Bread. 451, 14 White
Briony resolves congealed blood, and profits in the Dropsy. 519 Butler. 557
His wonderful Stone. 558 Butler cured the Plague. 1149 And by what. 1151 Buboes
and Glandules terminated by sweat. 1104 Burial of Malefactors why n^cessary.
1134 Why slain Soldiers ought to be buried deeper than usually they are. 1135
C. IN what respect Camphor is said to cool. 471, 4 The Cabal first manifest in
sleep. 781, 98, 99 What each man's Calling properly is. 124, 36 A new Catheter.
886 Of the operation of Cantharides in the living and the dead. 480, 60 The
original of a Cancer. 544. its progress and Cure. 545. 546. 158 A Canker in the
Stomach cured by a fragrant Emplaister. 115, 22 A Cancer curable by a reduced
Frog. 141 56, etc. Of a Country man's curing the Cancer. 546 Catarrhs or rheums
proved ridiculous. 429 430. etc. Cauteries what. 380. 1 The promises of a
Cautery childish. 381. 6 Nine conclusions against the appointment of Cauteries.
382, 10 A Cautery prevents not a Catarrhe. 384 14 The benefit of Cauteries
accidental. 384, 20 Whom a Cautery may profit. 383, 28, 29 Causticks act not on
the dead as on the living. 499, 170 No nutriment from Clysters. 479, 49
Cli^^ers unprofitable. 969 The praise due to Chastity. 682 Why Cheese loathsome
to many. 115, 25 Chewing food well, necessary. 4^3, ^1 Childbirth hastened by
a Potion. 127, 49 Black Choler according to Hippocrates subsisting in the
Midriff, if dispersed through the Body, begets the Falling-Evil; if into the
Soul madnesses. 29^, 15 What the Choler of the Schools is. 454, 22 How it is
made. 1045 Choler wholly an Excrement. 1048, 16 The bitterness of the mouth not
from Choler: 1060 The Seat of Choler not be found. 1053 No Choler in Nature.
1054 The Incarnation of Christ not according to the order of Nature. 665
Chemistry commended. 462, 32 It creates things which not before were, etc. 477.
36, 486 What one of its chiefest endeavors is. 115. 17 It prepares a universal
Dissolver. 482 Chemical Medicines adulterated by the cavetous. 990 The degrees
of Chemical heat. 202, 35 Of that Cinnabar whereof half an ounce Impregnates a
Barrel of Wine. 578 Whence the yellowish Spittle of Consumptive Persons
proceeds. 440, 39 What a Consumption is. 449, 63 The remedies thereof. 441. 43
Of diseasie Conceptions. 608 Thirteen conclusions from fire, pepper, and
causticks proved by Handicraft-operation, 500 The power of Cold as to reduction
of Bodies into water. 108, 29, 109, 38 Coughs whence. 430, 5, 259, ^3 Purging
in Coughs condemned. 431, 9 No true Remedies found for Coughs. 260 37 Pose the
forerunner of a Cough. 569, 67 Remedies for a Cough the same with a Pleurisi^.
570, 68 Concerning Coral. 991, 719 The virtue of its Tincture 605 Coral by what
it changes its color, and is restored by. 1143 Coraline Secret what. 390, 25,
805 Its preparation. Ibid Crabs Eyes. 991 Their milkie juice. 992 Observations
on Crabs. 886 Their virtues in wounded persons. 294, 295 The ashes of burnt
Crabs against the madness occasioned by a Dog. 297, 15 Cramps cured by man's
fat. 480, 58 What the Crasis of a thing is. 415, 82 The right way of curing.
473, 14 D. THe virtues of Daucus. 837 Of desperate Diseases. 307, 53 A
description of desire. 270 Contemplation of Diseases. 530 Difference between
death and a disease. 537 Death began from carnal lust. 550, 676 In divine
things the Senses are to be cast off. 310, 13 What a Disease is. 452 The
difficulty of curing Diseases concluded from the Seat of the Soul. 455 Of
Diseases according to their occasional cause. 565 Their division. 566 How
Diseases enter the Body. 567 Most Diseases are centrally in the Stomach. 261,
10 Diseases concentred in the vital Spirit proved by dissection. 485. Of the
essence of Diseases. 488, 558 Hitherto unknown. 489, 171, 145 A Disease is a
real Being. 947 Hunger no Disease. 494 Diseases pierce the formal Light. 496 A
Disease begins from the matter of the Archeus. 502 The product of a Disease
differs from a Symptom: 999 How a diseasie occasion augmenteth it self. 521
Cure of Diseases not furthered by Anatomy. 524 Diseases vary in respect of a
six-fold digestion. 620 What the ground of Diseases is. 404, 15, 407, 40, etc.
430, 3: 448, 60, 238, 21, 269 Lunar Diseases their Symptoms. 140, 148 Diseases
Produced by concupiscence. 524 Cure of Diseases. 446 The roots of Diseases from
the beginning. 1092 What the Dew is. 68, 23. What it abounds with. 117, 33
Decoctions censured. 970 Defluxions of the Bladder ridiculous. 856 Distilling
without any Caput Mortuum remaining. 404, 18 Distilled waters of small force.
970 Distillation of Vitriol. 891 Distillation of Urine. 847 Observations
thereon. ibid. Distillation unfolds natural Philosophy. 692 8 Of Diet, its
uselesness as to curing. 451, 9 etc. Of the nature of Diuretick^. 862, 863 Of
the dispensatories of the Schools. 461, 24 Their hurtfulness. ibid. 28
Illustrated by two Examples. 464, 43 Things externally applied, operate under
the sixth digestion. 479, 48 A six fold Digeston. 480, 57: 206 What a depraved
digestion produces. 1104 Of the Retents of digestions, 625, 626, 1003 The
digestive Ferment what. 201, 206 What things help digestion. ibid Of the
threefold digestion of the Schools. 203, 703, 16 There is as many suitable
Ferments as digestions. 206, 2. From whence the force of digestion springs 207,
21 Wh^t helps it. 703, 17. The first digestion. 207 The second digestion. 209,
21, 22 The second and third digestion are begun at once. 210, 28 The third
digestion where it begins. 212 Digestion in the stomach not a formal
transmutation of meats. 215, 48 When digestion may be said to be finished.
ibid. The fourth digestion its Seat. 218, 60 The fifth digestion. ibid. The
sixth digestion. 219, 67 Our digestions why attributed to the Planets. 748
Supreme of all digestions in the stomach. 290, 4 Death how it comes to ^e. 649,
8 After what sort death entered the Apple. 657, 41 Death followed sin. 664, 19
Death comes not from a dry habit of the Body. 729 Death is from a decay of
vital powers. 730 Several occasions of Death. 752, 753 Drif what it is, and
what required thereto. 595 Manner of making it. 596 D^atages observed. 278, 33
What drinks best in sharp sicknesses. 454, 22, 24 The actions of the fancy
from the Duumvirate. 303, 31 The power of desire in the Duumvirate. 304, 37 The
Harmony of life from the Duumvirate, 306, 52 Fatness from the Duumvirate. 308,
59 The Duumvirate. 337 Its Power, Seat, and Works. 340, 341, 364, 49
Understanding is formed in the Duumvirate. 275 Why the Spleen and Stomach are
called the Duumvirate. 287, 26 Authority of the Duumvirate. 296 The Dropsy
Anasarcha, whence. 449, 62 Its seat. 515 Dropsy unknown. 507 Not seated in the
Liver. 509 How stirred up. 512 What the efficient matter thereof is. 513 The
Cure. 521 A Bastard Dropsy. ibid What abstinence from drink may effect in the
Dropsy. 519 Of Dungs and Toads in the Dropsy. 519, 520 Why drowned Bodies
swim after a season. 427, 73 Drowsiness as well artificial as natural helped by
Lixiviums. 303, 31 The vanity of drying up superfluities, 440, 42 Of
drunkenness. 449, 63 Of being drunk with new Wine. 122, 23 Duelech of
Paracelsus. 833 Duelech is made of the Urine. 836, 837 Three Spirits concur for
the nativity of Duelech. 850 Its manner of making with an observation of the
Fountains of the Spaw. 851 What may be found in Duelech. 861 Of the savor of
Dungs. 212, 26 Where the Forment of Dung resideth. 221, 811 E. EArth, why not
reckoned among the primary Elements. 49, 16, 11^, 44 What the Oxiginal Earth
is. ^0, 3. It Is Called the foundation of nature. 4. ibid. It breaks forth to
light in some places. 51, 5 The Earth is a fruit of the water. 66, 23 The
various distinct Pavements of the Earth. 94, 5 The diversity of Soils in the
Earth. 688, 3 In the last Soil the wa^ers live. 689 Of Earthquakes. 93, 2,
etc. It is always a threatner of punishments. 102, 33 Ear-wax good for
pricking of the sinews. 247 Eels bred by Honey and Dew, etc. 478, 37, 1026, 65
Of the virtue of the Liver and Gaul of an Eele. 304, 46 An informative Simil^
of an Eg. 45, 12, 113, 10 The praise of Elecampane. 703, 10 Of the Elements. 48
The two Elements Water and Air untransmutable. 65, 7, 69, 1 Their co-mixture no
constitutive principles of bodies. 134, 24 Elements do not fight nor have
contrariety. 168 They Cannot destroy each other. 1048, 16 Electrum of
Paracelsus against Enchantments. 65 Elixir proprietatis and its pr^paration.
574. Elixir proprietatis not made without the Liquor Alkahest. 813 Of the
Embrio of a Bull-Calf its use. 883 Of Endemicks. 188 Endemical things are drawn
in by breathing. 189, 7 The Progress of Endemical things. 191, 13 The Epitaph
of an Emperor. 528 Of the Ephialtes or Nightmare from what stirred up. 299,
15 Epilepsie whence stirred up. 114, 17 Erisipelas its Cure. 475, 29, 114, 17
Essence what it is. 414, 76, 81 And in some things not so effectual when
separated. ibid. 78 Eve not cursed. 654, 13 Eve not appointed to bring forth in
pain. 654, 14 Eve destowred in Paradise. 666, 33 Excrementitiousness whence
caused. 430, 4 Extracts their invalidity. 459, 12 F. OF the infection of a dead
Falcon. 1134 Fasting when easily brooked. 24, 51 Fever not cured by Phlebotomy.
953 A Fever hitherto unknown. 935 Thirst in Fevers examined. 936, Drink allowed
in Fevers. 453, ^9, 902 Caution about their food. 454, 24 Flesh to be shunned.
ibid. Whence Cold and then hot. 471, 4: 973 What the Sunochus Diary and
Hectic Fever are. 978 Seat of a p^trid Fever. 978 The occassional cause of
Fevers twofold. 979, 980, 986 The Cure. 987 A Diary and Hectic affect only
the vital Spirit. 973 Essence of Fevers discovered. 1002 Feverish matter swims
not in the Blood. 956 The essence of Fevers not from heat. 940 The seat of
intermitting Fevers. 948 The original of Camp-Fevers. 1096 The poisonous
Excrement in Fevers included in the Midriff. 331, 25 What a Ferment is. 31,
24, etc. By what continued. 1124 Ferments being different, do cause different
operations. 479, 48, 115, 26 No transmutation without it. 111, 1207, 2 Why
commanded not to be used. 111, 1 Its properties, etc. 112, 3, etc. The Ferment
of the Plague. 11, 22 There are double Ferments in nature. 112, 8 Ferments the
causes of transmutation. 207, 8 The Ferment of the Stomach not from it self.
ibid. Ferment of the Spleen turns the Spirit of wine wholly into a Salt. 733
Fishes made of water proved. 115, 29 Fishes helpful to Chastity. 667, 38 Fishes
why long lived. 684, 93 Fishes bring forth without pain. 685, 95 Fire no
Element. 48, 9, 50, 1, 134, 24, 138, 35 It receives not its nourishment from
the Air. 84, 16, 134, 24 It generates nothing. 109, 34 What its appointed ends
are. 129, 26 Its diverse Inclinations taught by Positions. 136, 31 Its being no
substantial Body, proved by demonstration. 137, 33 It is the Vulcan of Arts.
138, 38 Actual fire cannot subsist in a mixed Body without consuming it. 1049,
18 What a Flatus is, and its kind, 421, 34. etc. Two irregular ones in us. 424.
50 Whence they arise. 425 61 Where made. 428. 78 A Flint capable of retaining
the solar light. 147, 95, 155, 35 The Bloody Flux how cured. 475, 29 The
quality of food does not hurt, except where medicines are wanting. 702 What a
Fog is. 68, 24 What a Form is, and whence. 130, 2^3, etc. The distinction
'twixt an Essential and substantial form. 130, 7, 133, 22, 143, 67 A fourfold
form. 143, 67 Fox lungs censured. 260, 38 Of the original of Fountains. 6^^
Fountains dispense the seeds of Minerals and Metals. 690, 19 Fountains not
thickened by the air. 691 From whence the best fountains do arise. 694 Of the
Keeper of Fountains. ibid Why they are called sharp. ibid What the sharpness
of Fountains proceeds from. 695, 22 Of the fountains of the Spaw. 696, 1 What
they contain. 697, 5 Why a vein of Iron is invisible in fountains. 698, 8.
Why fountains are different in strength. 698, 14 Of the virtues of the hungry
salt of the Fountains, and how far they act. 699. Whom they do not h^lp. ibid
How they profit in the stone. 700, 12 The qualities of fountains are Relolleous
and Cherionial. ^01, 19 Advice to those that drink of Spaw waters. 702 How the
waters may pass to the midriff quickly. ibid How much he ought to drink, and
what he is to take with it. 703, 10 A Frog how reducible to its first matter.
141, 56 G. GAs, what it is. 69, 29, 71, 10, 106, 14 What it retains. 109, 34
Galen ignorant of the causes of Ulcers, 321, 25 Galen no Anatomist. 423, 43,
303, 3^ Galen never knew Rose Water, Aqua vitae, nor Quicksilver. 10^^ Galens
errors about Ulcers. 319, 14, 1^ Galen ignorant of the Latax. 378, 33 What the
Ga^l's use is in the body. 427, 74 The Gaul a vital Bowel. 211, 34, 1061 It
performs its digestion by a fermental Blas. 214, 46 The Gaul has the nature of
a Balsam. 216, 53 It is taken so in Scripture. ibid. 1041, 24 From what the
Gaul receives a ferment. 1048, 14 The Generation of Fauns, Satyrs, Nymphs, etc.
681, 81 Generation of Tro^ts. 684, 91 Generation of man described. 736, 737,
738. Ginger produces sweat. 250, ^. Glass turns into water under the earth,
etc. 116, 33, 151, 15 The Globe is Oval. 35, ^2 The best manner of drawing
forth Goats blood. 210, 75 Its wonderful virtue. ibid God made not Death. 337,
572, 157, 58, 649 How it came to be. 649, ^, 650, 651 The Essential Image of
God is in the mind. 718 Gold distilled over the Helm. 64, 6 Its ponderosity is
from its seminality compressing the water. 67, 18 Though reduced into the form
of Butter, R^zin, or vitriol yet useless. 478, 42 What it is rendered
efficacious by. ibid Gold and precious stones examined. 970 Purging medicines
hurtful in the Go^errhea. Of the original of the Gout. 291, 9, 842, 292 The
Gout sometimes driven away by fear. 293, 15 Gout not from a defluxing Catarrh,
nor helped by Cauteries. 385, 23, 386, 1 Gout distinguished not by heat or
cold, but by a seminal Essence. ^87, 8 The original of the Gout and its
progress. 388, 13 The Seat of the Gout. 389 Of the curt, with an Epitom^ of the
Gout. 390, 25 Ca^teries and drying drinks ^ain in the Gout. 391, 32, 35 The
action of Government unknown produces many errors. 333, 36 Grapes immediately
eaten hurtful. 107, 16 Grass roots cannot cool the Liver. 319, 1 Of Gunpowder.
107, 21 H. HAres fat pulls out a ^horn. 521. 1160 Being dried cures the bloody
flux 4^3 To what end the motion of the heart is. 179 24 Herbs and ^^rbarists
why disesteemed. 1^ 10 The Schoolmen's way of judging of the elementary degrees
of herbs, erroneous. 69. 28, 459, 1^ Their sloth and error in the search of
their virtues. 15^. 3. etc. Why their preparation requirs much wariness. 458.
11, 1^. etc. Their properties distinguishable by their specific savor. 460.
17, 472 12 Their time of gathering when. 460. 17 468 19, 142, 60 The Heaven
gives neither life nor form 129 1, 132, 14, 108^ It does not cause diseases.
1084, 1086, 1087 1091 What is required for healing. 17^, 44 Heat not the first
(...) of life. 196. 26 Heat not the proper (...) of diges^ion. 199. ^^2 Heat
consumes not radic at moisture. ^17 Heat is not the life. 718 Heat fails not
for want of moisture. 744 H^^^rhoids. 943 Their cure. 944 From whence the pain
in the head may arise. 339. 1^ What ought to be minded in applying remedies to
the head. 276. 20 Of the effect of Remedies applied to the head. 292. 12
Hellebor commended for the heal. 368. 63 Also for madness. 302. 26 The defects
that manifest themselves in the head cured by stomach Remedies. 302. 26 Memory
placed in the head. 304. 3^ A History of a woman infected with the pox. 34 40
Of Count Destaires being opened. 509 Of Cardinal Ferdinand. 951 Of a Hydropical
man. 406. 33, 510, 520 Of a boy troubled with the Iliack passion. 422 38 Of a
Gas stird up by Sal Armoniack and Aqua ^ortis. 426, 62. Of a bursten man. 428.
75 Of a noble woman strangled by affects of the womb, 428. 76 Of a Sonatours
wife in child birth. 443. Of a merchant's ascending the high mountain of the
Canaries. 73. ^^ Of an earthquake at Fa^^agusts. 79. 13 Of thunder. 91. 20 Of
an earth-quak^. 93. 3 Of predictions deciphered in the Stars. 122. 27 Of the
Authors Chamber-fellows walking by night. 141. 53 Of Butler. 563 Of several
wonderful things. 597 Of the Author. 958 Of a man with a Quart an Ague. 91^
History of Crabs. 886 Of a preacher in England. 846 Of a Duke being diffected.
627 Of a woman whose Liver weighed 21. pounds. Ibid. Of a boy that a^e this own
dung. 211. 36^ Of a Printer of Bru^els that lived 23. days of his own dung. 212
Of a Chemist that made vi^^gar yearly by the odor of the vessel. 217 Several
Histories of the distasted (...). 228, 28 History of Paracel^us his Birth and
life. 230 28 History of Groynland fishing. 232 History of a speaking Satyr.
683. 685, 88 Of the bigness and long life of Fishes. 684 93 History of a young
(...) that cat much and ^^ded little. 243.15 Of the Egyptians dead bodies.
245.20, 802 Two Histories of children troubled with the stone. 251 History of a
Toad. 730 History of an old man dying of the strangury. 1060 History of a man
that lost his nose. 764.22 History of the Authors examining of poisons. 274.12
Several Histories of drowned persons. 281.47 48, 49, 50 Several Histories of
Asthmatick persons. 359.360 History of amatron that could not swallow. 361.31
History of an Elder whose lungs were like a stone. 362.42 History of a man
suddenly strangled by an Asthma. 363.46 History of a man of sixty years of age
troubled with an asthma, withdivers observations thereon. 364.50, 365, 366, 367
History of a Maid cured of the Leprosy and how it budded again. 1091 History
of a Bursten man. 301.21 Of a Lawyer that took Henban seeds for dill. 302.21
History of the Authors getting the Itch. 317 2 History of a snorting old man.
370.70 History of one dying of the Plague. 1157 Honey yields no ashes. 404.18,
583, 38 They that eat Honey must abstain from Rye bread. 798 A quaternary of
humors why suspected. 945 Of the weights of Humors in diseased bodies. 946 Of
the deceits of Humors. 1041, 1042, 1045 It is rashness to suppose separation
of Humors the ground of health. 133 Hippocrates distinction of diseases. 530
Hippocrates described in a Letter to Artaxerxes. 1081 Artaxerxes Lievtenants
Letter to Hipocrates, with his Answer thereto. 1081 His Letter to the men of
Coo^, and their Answer thereunto. ibid Hippocrates compared with Galen. 1083
Hippocrates potion commended 1143 Hippocrates revived. Of his remedies against
the Plague. 1154 The several kinds thereof. 1155, 1156 I. OF the occasional
matter of the Jaundice. 217 The Jaundice not from yellow choler. 1057 Jaundice
demonstrated by Anatomy. 1058 A double vice in the Jaundice. 1059, ^ The
Jaundice i^ not from the Gaul being stopped. 1060 The efficient cause of the
Jaundice and the cure. ibid There is an unnamed poison in the Jaundice. 1062,
33 The se^^ of the Jaundice. 1063, 35 The Jaundice by a venom proper to it,
produces a dry Asthma. I^e, how caused. 72, 13, 75, 33 It is lighter then when
resolved into water. ibid. 35 Of the Idea's of diseases. 539 Their piercing.
541 Eight Propositions concerning Idea's of the Archeus. ibid Silent Idea's do
prove an Archeal Idea. 550 Regular Idea's are planted in the seed by the
corruption of the Generater. 548 The birth and original of a diseasie Image.
552 Idea's brought into the venal blood. 554 The powerful Idea's of diseases
are framed in the Duumvirate. 563 Of Soulifi'd Idea's. 607 Exorbitancies
imprint lasting Idea's: 608 The original of diseasie Idea's. 1004 The necessity
of Idea's in a fever proved. 1005 Of the different effect of Idea's. 608, 12,
1121 Idea's of the soul pierce the womb. 609, 18 The progress of Idea's. 611 Of
several Idea's the cure. 612 Archeal Idea's cured by Opiates. 621 What Idea's
are most lasting. ibid Of a mad Idea. 278, 35 The force of mad Idea's is from
the spirit of the midriff. 279, 37 The extinction of mad Idea's. 280, 45, 46,
281 Of the Iliack passion. 421, 30 Cured. 31 The Illiad of Paracelsus what.
690, 20, 695, 22 The Image of terror sifted. 1159 The Image of the mind. 262
The Image of God. 714 Of the immortality of Adam. 745 Imagination how it comes
to be. 270 To what to be attributed. 341 And where seated. ibid The distinction
of Incli^ations. 124, 36, etc. Remedies against Inchantmens. 605 The Intellect
is a formal light. 269.34 The nourishing of an Infant for long life. 797 799
The property of Irish Oak. 150.5. The faculties of a vein of Iron and what it
performs. 700.7 How it profits in the stone. 701.12 Issues how they sometimes
profit. 372.74 How the Author got the Itch with his practice on himself. 317.3,
319, 9 Thirteen conclusions from the same. 318.7 Iuyces how preserved
incorrupt. 461.21, 15^ 172, 45 K. OF the wandering Keeper. 254 Why so called.
257.10 What he performs. 256.6, 258, 24 259.27 How he Erreth. 260 His Restoring
di^^icult. 261.43 How the King's Evil is bred 251.24 A Remedy for the same.
252.26 Kidney Judge of the Dropsy. 512 It conceives the dropsy. 514 Kidneys
differ the urine from the Latex, alone. 558 What it is brings peace to the
Kidneys. 709 52 Kermes Examined. 972 L. LAtex is not the urine. 509 Latex
separated from the venal blood Receives the disposition of an excrement. 512
Its ordination. 518 Latex what it is. 373, 2 The distinction of the Latex from
urine and sweat. 374.5 The absurdities that follow the Ignorance of the Latex.
^bid. 9, 370 Of the several uses of the Latex. 375.12, 14 18 The necessity of
the Latex. 377.28 The vices of the Latex. Ibid. 31 Latex easily receives a
Foreign guest. 378 36 Diseases arising sometimes from the Latex, how cured.
448.61 Laudanum without Opium cures several distempers. 543 Why the Land of
promise hot. 86, 27 Lead, how reducible into Gas. 102.23 Leprosy what. 895
What the L^prosie infects by. 900 Difficulty of its cure. 901 Of the bu^ding of
the Leprosy after curation. 1091 What Leff as is. 116.31 Of the manifold life
of man. 735 Of the middle life of things, etc. 150.8. etc. Impediments of life.
754 How the life of things is changed. 154.28 The middle life of things abides
with us. 150 158.53, 379, 43, 1124 Of the spirit of life. 191 What life is. 740
What Resembles life. 752 Of light, etc. 135.24 Its beams being united is true
and actual fire, Ibid. 26 It Is to be understood of the Suns light. 139, 40, 130,
36 It is No element. Ibid. 37 The difference 'twixt it and the formal light.
144.73 Of its being retained in a flint. 147.95, 155 35 Of the extinction of
life. 159.59 What places most conduce to long life. 723.806 810 Light in us is
hot in fishes cold. 734.747 Of short Life. 747 What may occasion it. 754
Harmony of life from the Duumvirate. 306 52 The Liver never hotter than
needful. 438.27 Liver not the seat of the Dropsy. 510 The shop of
sanguification is not in the Liver. 214.42 It performs its digestion by a
fermental Blas. Ibid. Of the different operation of the Loadstone. 762 The
Medicinal faculty of the Loadstone. 763.19 Loadstone dir^cts it self but is not
drawn. 773 64, 774, 67, 775, 68 The properties of the Loadstone laid asleep by
Garlic. 774 67 The same performed by Mercury. Ibid Why glassmakers use the
Loadstone. 787 143 Logic deciphered and Condemned. 32.5, etc. 67 Long life
Impeded by Milk. 797 What Love is. 719, 722 Love is before desire. 720 The
excellency of love-desire. 314.19, 21, 23 A Lunar Tribute. 7^0 Ludus its
preparation and where to be found. 881, 882 The original of the Lues venerea.
1092. 1903 1094 Lues venerea consists not of matter but of a ferm^ntal odor.
1094 Carnal Lust not from the Reins. 305.42 But from the stomach. Ibid. 43 The
diseases of the Lungs whence they a rise. 440.39 With what their Ulcers are
cured. 441, 43 Why they disburden themselves by spitting. ibid. 45 They are
unmovable. ibid. 442. etc. Their use. 444, 49 The vanity of Ecligmaes in these
distempers 445, 54. Burdened by perfumes. 446, 55 A corrupt Imposthume in them
broken attended on by death. 449, 63 Their difficulty of cure. 260, 41 Remedies
applied to the head for the Diseases of the lungs unprofitable. 357. 3, 4 M.
Sign of madness. 297, 1054, 11 Concerning madnesses. 966, 287 The first and
second degrees of madness. 278, 30, 279, 38 The occasion of madness in the
Midriff. 981, 273, 5, 276, 287, 29, 297, 2, 307 Madness not cured by Opiates.
629, 307, 56 Madness difficult to be understood. 277, 24 Why a mad man feels
no cold. 280, 43 How madness is propagated by biting, etc. 144 76 It Is not
proper to the mind. 145, 70 Of the cure. 281, 47, 48, 49, 282, 52 Maiden hair
good against Enchantments. 605 Where the Magical power in man is seated. 780
The Magic of man when most powerful. 781 The first degree of power dwells
Magically in the forms of the three principles 788, 152 Of the Magic of
Bruits. 789, 155 Humane imagination the foundation of Natural Magic. 791, 168
Magisteries commended. 480, 54 Of the Magnetic faculty. 614 Marrow more in old
creatures then young. 748 What Magnum Oportet is. 153 The power of Magnetism.
762, 11, 763, 21 Magnetism not superstitious. ibid. 14 What diseases have been
cured by Magnetism. 763, 20 Vitriol dies through Magnetism. 764, 21 The
Magnetism of Mummy proved to reach from Italy to Bruxels. ibid. 23 Of the
Magnetism of the ^^^line Thistle ibid. 24 The Magnetism of Philtrous Mummies.
27 The magnetic force of Arsmart, Comfrey, etc. in curing Ulcers. 765, 29
Asarabacca and Elder are magnetical. ibid. 30 Of the Mumial magnetism impressed
on a Chair. ibid. 33 The Saphir an Imitater of the magnetic Unguent. 766, 34
Magnetism is a heavenly quality. 768, 40 God approves of the Magnetism of the
unguent by Relics. 769, 47 How glass becomes magnetical. 774, 65 Rosin
magnetical. ibid. 66 The cause of Magnetism in the Unguent. 776, 71 When the
Magnetic Unguent is brought into action. 777, 78 The Magnetism of the Eagle.
778, 82 By what the power of the Magnetic unguent becomes efficacious. 784,
121 Magnetism not exercised by Satan. ibid. Spirits the Patrons of Magnetism.
786, 138, 788, 150 The Magnetism of things are made by a natural sensation. 787
How Magnetism differs from other properties. 789, 159 The virtue of the
Magnetic unguent from the composition, not the fancy of the Composer. 792,
172 The Magnetism of Red Coral. 1147 The definition of a Man. 21 Man in his
whole substance the Image of God. 718 How he has a likeness of the Heavens.
749 The medicines of the shops vain. 431, 10 The property of a true one. 451, 5
Its extent. 460, 20 Medicine the most ^ccult and intricate of Sciences. 538
Purging deceives the unwary. 556 Force of medicines in their odor. 593 In what
the virtue of a medicine is seated. 177, 42 Metals, why hard to be reduced,
etc. 49, 12 When reduced, they have in them Planetary virtues. 478, 41 Of the
internal Mercury of metals, and its property, etc. 65, 8 Mercury's wonderful
property the outward Sulphur being severed from it. 66, 14, 410, 58 It has an
internal preservative sulphur. 67, 17 The simplicity of the Mercury of a Metal.
410, 53, etc. Why Mercury is immortal. 410, 59, 60 The mouth of the stomach
dedicated to Mercury. 1132 Of Mercurius vitae. 479, 44 Memory why placed in the
head. 304, 35 Memory what. 718 Menstrues their description, use, etc. 740, 741,
742, 743 What the material cause of a Meteor is. 74, 27 Mettallus massculus
described. 514 Metals exceed plants and minerals in healing. 579 Metals have
the Internal faculty of glass. 580 Metalline glasses appease the Archeus. 583
The original and progress of Metals. 155 156 Mercurius Diaphoreticus though
undigested by the stomach stirs up the Duumvirate to the expelling diseases.
884 Its description. 987 The dignity of Mercury. 991. 576 It cures somethings
by glance. Ibid. The first conceits of disturbance in the midriff 299. 13, 302,
23, 304, 34 The veins of the midriff the s^eath of sanguification. 299. 13
Sleep stirred up in the midriff. 304. 39 Of the corrosive spirits of minerals.
476. 32 The property of minerals when changed into a Saline nature. 478. 39
They contain in themselves seminal beginnings. 142. 63 They proceed from water.
149. 2 Mineral Electrum of Paracelsus exptls sorceries. ^05 Of the stifling in
the mine-pits. etc. 84. 17 The mind is conjoined to the sensitive soul. 352.
353, 11, 354, 13 Sharpness of wit not an operation of the mind. 311. 4 Milk of
asses why the best. 220. 761 The defects of Milk. 797 The mind not seated in
the heart nor head. 277 27 But in the Duumvirate proved. Ibid. 28 The mind
knows nothing by imagination. 714 263. 4 Passions are not from the mind but
the sensitive soul. 264. 6 The mind differs from Angels. 265 12 The mind not
sick. 306. 51 What the mind is. 270. 38 A Ternary in the mind unfolded. 269. 36
Why Monarchs want a long life. 811 What the trival Line and flinty. Mountain
is. 830 Of the purity of Air on mountains. 806 How a mola comes to be. 739 Of
the cure of Moals and marks made by a woman with child on her young. 1117 Of
the stink of the mouth how it comes to be. 246. 22 Moss of dead men's skuls how
it comes to be so vertnous. 768, 41 How it answers to the back of the
Loadstone. Ibid. 45 The seed of moss distills from Heaven. 770 51 The light of
the Moon cold. 139. 40 She has a Light of her own. Ibid. 44 Capable of
changing the hot light into a Contrary property. 140. 46. etc. Her office.
Ibid. 47 A caus^r of putrefaction. 141. 54 A reducer to a first matter. 142. 58
The difference between generating creatures subject to its light and the Solar
light. 146. 93 Of moistness and drying. 471. 4 Radical moisture of the
Schools. 726 What muck or snivel is and how generated. 255. 256, 6 Not made of
venal blood. 257 Nor by a natural digestion. 258. 21 What it serves for. 260 N.
NAtivities no discov^rers of man's inclinations. 125, 43 Its point uncertain.
126, 48 Nature ignorant of contraries. 161, 164, 165, 19 How she acts. 169, 37,
170, 38 What Nature is. 171, 39 Nature not every where circular demonstrated.
738 Nature solicitous of Generation. 784, 749 Nature understood chiefly by the
Alchymist. 761, 8 God in miracles follows Nature. 769, 46 What the torture of
the Night is. 449, 64 By what property some creatures see in the night, etc.
140, 49 What the running at the Nose is. 439, 37 The running at the Nose not
healthful. 259, 32 The best nourishment for children. 798 Nurses communicate
their vices to children that suck them. 7^8 O. OF the insect found in the ^ake
apple. 1137 For obstructions. What property opening remedies must have. 476, 31
Fermental odours produce seminal effects. 330 19, The great power of odours in
healing. 110, 44, 114, 16, 19, etc, 593 Odours of Spices refresh fainting
spirits by aspect. ^85 The odor of Quicksilver turns oil of Vitriol into
Alum. 576, 1002 Odours beget ferments. 149 Odours work on the Archeus. 1^3
Putrid odours do not hurt, unless married to a mumial ferment. 1127, 1129 Old
age only from a decay of vital powers 799, 800. How Opium is said to cool. 471,
4 Of its operation. 218. 170, 337, 338, 309 In what Opium may profit. 308. 62 A
true preparing of Opium of great benefit to the sick. 309. 64 The drowsy evil,
sleep, watching, all made in one and the same organ. 297. 3 Orifice of the
stomach the center of the body. 305. ^4 Oil easily redu^ible into water. 408.
49, 105, 3, 109, 31 Why Chemical oils are such weak h^lpers. 415. 83, 480, 51
Reducible into volatile salts. 415. 84 Their operativeness when so. 480, 53 By
what ferment oylinesses are made volatile. 423, 46 Oil, though of Spices,
nourish not. 583 Oil olive preserves iron from rust. 846 A twofold oil
separable in oil olive. 193, 6, 732 Oil of Sulphur per Campanam commended for
preservation of health. 813 P. Palsy what it is. 918 Pain where seated. 895
Pain of the head from what. 339, 340, 14 Paracelsus his doctrine of separation
of Elements rejected. 69, 403, 13 His life. 230, 3 His cures. 802, 771 The
nature and use of his Arcanums. 803 Their names. 804 His diligent search
commended. 402, 2 His error about the salt in man. 405, 30. 413, 74 His
errors concerning Tartar. 234, 236 Paracelsus his doctrine of Tartar sum'd up.
231, 8 Paracelsus the Monarch of secrets. 770, 51 His Epitaph. 771, 53 His
errors concerning the plague. 1089 The secrets of Paracelsus takes away
diseases, but reach not the root of life. 805 Objections against the solving of
Pearls. 992, 971 The Milk of Pearls; its efficacy. 479, 4^ Pepper degenerates
into Iuy. 770, 51 What meant by a Perolede. 74, 24 Their division, etc. 75, 31
Physicians reproved. 7, 3. 431, 10. 439. 35 What his property is, or ought to
be. 430, 1. 455, 26 Their success imputed to natures goodness. 450, 1 Their
vanity as to prescriptions of diet. 450, 2, etc. 455, 26 Wherein deridable.
457, 1 The signs of a true Physician. 107, 1076 The Author grieved that he
learned Physic. 1078 Plague begins always about the stomach. 600, 262 Of what
kind the Plague is. 1073 The Plague an Infant. 1081 The true curing the Plague
died with Hippocrates. 1082, 1083 How the Plague in Egypt varies every seventh
year. ibid. The Heavens do not produce the Plague. 1084 Some Symptoms of the
Plague not seen till after death. 1089 Plague not Endemieal. 1090 Plague not
helped by Diaphoreticks. 1089 A Plague sent from God despises the help of
natural remedies. 1090, 1099 1133 Of a foreign new Plague. 1091 Plague
collected into two causes. 1097 The division of the Plague. 1098, 1099 The
conjoined causes of the Ancients. ibid Putrefaction of humors not the cause of
the Plague. 1100 Triacle, and other Antidotes that resist poison, profit little
in the Plague. 1101 The matter of the Plague what, with its progress. 1102,
1132 The seat of the Plague. 1103 Why the Plague is frequent in signs. 783,
114, 1134 Excrements do not cause the Plague. ibid. Sweating is profitable in
the Plague. 1113, 1127 Things requisite for the Idea of an imagined Plague.
1119 What the fear of the Plague carries with it. 1120 The ferment of the
Plague. 1122 Plague sometime discerned by an O^uor. 1123 Of the form and matter
of the Plague. 1125 The first matter of the Plague, a hoary putrified poison,
existing in the Gas of the earth. 1126, 1127 Plague sometimes rises from
within; sometimes from without. 1127, 1138, 1140 The image of the Plague
consists in an Archeal air. 1128 Why the Symptoms of the Plague are different.
ibid. The poison of the Plague more cruel than that of Serpents. 1129 What
Antidotes against the Plague serve for. 1129 The matter and agent of the Plague
have the same specifical I^entity. 1130 The Plague comunicated by an unsensible
contagion. 1131 The property of the Plague. 1132 The signs of the Plague. 1136
Doubtful signs of the Plague removed. 1139 The quality of a preservative
against the Plague. 1141, 114^ Amulets attain pre-eminence as well in the cure,
as preserving from the Plague. 1142. Toad profitable against the Plague. 1149
Toad a Zenexton against the Plague. 1150 How he comes to cure the Plague. 1152,
1153 Hippocrates his manner of curing the Plague. 1155, 1156 Hippocrates his
remedy against the Plague, recovered one in six hours. 1157 Several
observations about the Plague. 1158 Carline T^^stle profitable in the Plague.
1160 Phlegm made of the Latex. 1042 Phlegm not in the blood. 1043 Phlegm not at
all rightly distinguished by the Schools. 1050 Pimples and swellings in the
face, their cure. 252, 16 Pleurisy its seat. 437, 25 Specificks for it. 458, 5
Phlebotomy hurtful in a Pleurisy. 956, 394, 8. 396, 16 Pleuri^ie suddenly
cured by sweat. 378, 39 A definition of a Pleurisy according to the Schools.
392, 1 The Schools defects in the Pleurisy. 393 Of the Original and progress
of a Pleurisy. 395, 13 A Remedy for a Pleuri^ie how it ought to be gifted.
396, 17 Peripneumonia and Pleuri^ie differ neither in their occasional cause,
nor remedy. 397, 27 The Thorn in the Pleurisy chiefly to be minded. 398, 31
The Cure. 399, 32 Poisons. Why the body swells when poisoned. 427, 72 Their
great virtue when pr^pared. 465, 46 What poisons chiefest for medicine when
prepared. 474. 28 The variety of poisons as to their preperty and
operativeness. 475, 30 What they operate by. 479, 47. 158, 159, 1123 Of the
poison of the Meazels. 742 The Ferments of poisons never duly weighed by the
Schools. 1124, 1125 The Snake a Remedy against poison. 1157 Prayer of silence
what it demonstrates. 311, 6. 313, 1^ The preparation of the Praecipiolum of
Paracelsus. 521 Two Principles and no more. 31, 23 What the Principles of
nature, and the principles of bodies of are. 44, 7. 409, 51 The first rise of
the Doctrine of three principles. 403, 6 A principle of the Schools cond^mned.
45, 8 152, 20 Of the different properties of places. 724 Measuring of pulses.
178, 13, 16 The framer of pulses. 179, 23 Pulsation how made. 180, 28 The ends
of the pulses. 181, 29, 185 The necessity of pulses hitherto unknown. 182, 33
What a h^rdened pulse does betoken. 185, 50 What the use of pulses are. 187, 57
Purges condemned. 3, 9. 961 What property they op^rate by. 477, 33 What the
property of a true one is. 466, 50. 477. 33, 525 Putrefaction promotes the
odours of some things. 414, 18 It destroys others. 161, 16 Why all things soon
putrify under the Equinoctial. 141, 54 What preserves against putrefaction.
152 16, 19 What solely promotes it. 152, 192 Pyrotechny commended. 45. 11 What
the Pylorus is. 222 Of his Government. 223 Of his Blas. ibid. Of the diseases
he stirs up. 224, 10 Of his shu^ting and opening. 225, 16 A sense of appetite
in the Pylorus demonstrated. 226, 20 His rage and restoration. ibid. The use
of the Pylorus. 228 With observations thereon. ibid. The vice of the Pylorus
cured. 227, 22 The four hot seeds usually pacify the Pylorus. 301, 21 Q
QVartans cured by odorous ointments. 114, 17 By an Emplaister. 988, 1011 Seat
of a Quartane: 778 Examination of a Quartane. 963 Quartane not cured by
Physicians. 307, 57, 812 Quicksilver truly prepared, cures the Pox. 1094 What
the Quellem is. And where. 94, 5689, 6 Its greatness. 690, 14 A Question
propounded to all the learned. 167,32 No such thing as a Quint-Essence. 407,
44. 414, 79 R. WHat rain is. 71, 10, 73, 21, 79, 12 Of the Rainbow. 87, 1.
etc. Of the radical moisture of the Schools. 726 Radical moisture explained.
729 Reason condemned. 15. etc. It is in bruit beasts. 20, 34 It makes a man
unstable. 21, 40 When reason fails. 715 Reason not ^t he Image of God. 268,
30, 79 The Rel^llum of Paracelsus. 75, 36 What it is. 66, 25 Powerful remedies
are not of a foody substance 582 Remedies against Enchantments. 605 The Reins
do not stir up lust. 305, 42 How the Reins change the color of the stone. 248,
28 Of the Revelation of several persons. 1092 The Reins do not cause fatness.
308, 59 The errors of Physicians as touching rheums. 432, 15 Rye meal makes
durable mortar. 247 Roses preserve their fragrant putrefaction. 414, 79 S. SAlt
of Tartar volatilized perfects dissolutions. 1002, 1011 It absterg^th. 1032
From whence is the first beginning of Salts. 694 The vital Being is Salt. 193,
19 The various properties of Salts. 473, 22 Salt of venal blood cures the
Falling Sickness. 195, 16 What the chiefest of all is. 473, 24 How Salt arises
in Urine. 842 The operations of Simple Salts, 476 31. 480, The Gas of Salts is
nothing but water. 109, 37 Volatile Salts, their virtues. 991 Hermaphroditical
Salt of Metals, 694 Sand not transmutable, save only by the artificial hellish
fire. 52, 14 The Sea less than the boiling Sand, 690, 14 What the true Sea is.
ibid It has its motion in it self. ibid. Sapphire, its power in the Plague.
765, 34 Why Churchmen wear Saphirs. 766, 36 Why Saturns kingdoms are wished
for. 303, 32 The Mercury of Saturn, etc. 478, 40 Its distillation. ibid.
Against the Contemners of Science. 989 The Schools ignorant of the diseases
that arise in the sixth digestion. 219 The Schools condemned of ignorance and
sloth. 474, 28, etc. Of blasphemy. 145, 78 The error of the Schools about the
first Mover. 176 Scorpions produced from Bazil. 13, 113 Scurvy unknown to the
Ancients. 109 When it first appeared. 1092 How seeds issue from the invisible
world. 935 Seminal beginnings are from an Idea. 436 Seeds act as appointed.
164, 16 No seminal disposition in the soul of man before the fall. 662, 11 The
four lesser hot seeds commended. 427, 75 The proportion of seed in a body is
the 8200. th. part. 106, 12, 1125 How seeds are made. 13, 12 The difference
betwixt a seed and ferment. ibid. Hot seeds are of an easy conception. 143, 66
Seeds in their Original void of savor and color. 693. 2 Of Sense and
Sensation. 895 The Sensitive soul not generated by the mind. 662, 10 It differs
from the mind. 334 The knitting of the sensitive soul with the mind. 251 The
seat of the sensitive soul. 283, 284, 285 It remains always in the vital
Archeus of the stomach. 286, 18. 288, 32 The sensitive soul is a vital light.
ibid. 20 Of the power of the sensitive soul when impregnated with the mind.
354, 13, 14 In simples there is a perfect cure of all diseases. 467, 5 The
natural power of some simples 307, 54 The quality of the first sin. 654, 8 Sin
has n^^ immediately caused death. 655 656 Whence the continuation of original
sin. ibid. 28 Of the difference between actual and original sin. 658, 47 Why
sleep was sent in before sin. 563 Sleep not from a defect. 337, 1 When sleep is
made. 339, 12 Snow on the mountains melts not. 73, 15 Soul of man not generated
from his parent, 662, 12 Soul created by God. 663 Its retreat in our first
parents. 664 A Treatise of the soul. 342 Of the immortality of the soul. 346
The seat of the soul not in the heart. 292, 13 Some defects of the stomach
cured by sweat. 1113 The ferment of the stomach to be regarded. 453, 22, etc.
Why though still moist, yet putrifies not. 479 48 Twelve properties of the
stomach. 560 Some diseases inhabit in the life of the stomach. 561 The stomach
has not its ferment in it self. 267, 11 Sharpness not the vital Ferment of the
stostomack 208, 131 What it is. 210, 29 The stomach does not coct first for it
self. 216, 52 The stomach first sensible of any defect. 285; 13, 14, 287, 26
The stomach of the liver. 20^, 20 The stomach of the gaul. ibid Sobriety
commended. 452, 16 Seat of diseases in the sensitive soul confirmed. 559 The
seat of the sensitive soul. 555 Of specifical savours. 473, 25 Two savours, one
of the tongue, the other of the stomach. 474, 27 Spleen the maker of seed. 305,
42 The situation of the Spleen. 540 It is the fountain of Idea's. 606 Against
black choler in the spleen. 964, 1056 The defect of the spleen is the cause of
the Strangury in old people. 1061 A double ferment in the spleen. 1055 The
spleen inspires a digestive ferment into the stomach. 298 The spleen most
enriched with Arteries. ibid. Of the stomach of the spleen. 299, 13 Of the
external spleen of an Infant. 306, 49 How the soul thinks intellectualy. 23, 48
It is substantial. 144, 70 Its power when freed from corporeal contagion. 144,
75 What the sensitive soul is. 145, 82 Soul acts in the body per nutum, 780,
97, 784, The soul generates Entities. 785, 131 Soul sits in the Duumvirate.
301, 22 Sharpness is the specifical mean in the stomach. 115, 34 It d^ffers
from all other sharpnesses. 193, 10 Stones and Rocks reducible into their equal
weight of Salt. 411, 65 Whence the Strangury in old people is. 855, 624 What
the Stars show forth, etc. 122, 21 How they operate. 121, 14 How they
necessitate. 123, 30 The difference betwixt the Planets and the fixed Stars.
125, 40 How a wise man rules over them. 126, 46 The Stone in man not made by
the intention of nature. 250, 5 Of the causes of the stone, according to the
Ancients. 705, 1 Of their Intentions to cure, and by what. ibid. Their despair.
ibid. Why they have erred in the cure. 706, 12, 708 Heat of the reins, not the
cause of the stone. 707 An example. ibid How the Ancients remedies may profit,
though not cure the stone. 708 Why an expulsion of the stone is not to be
intended. 709 The quality of a remedy resolving the stone. 710, 56 Why stones
are sometimes white. 248, 28 Whence a threefold stone is made. 249, 3 Of the
Stone. 828 The flux of seeds for a stone. 829, 706, 20 After what manner a man
is made a stone. 833 Of the Coagulum and Runnet of the stone by handicraft
operation. 840 Salt profitable in the stone. 843 Of the occasion of the stone.
857 Of the womb of the stone. 866 Its Situation. 867 The pain of the stone
from a contracture* 86 Of the intention to cure the stone. 701, 15, 874 Its
cure. 878, 879 With testimonies thereof. ibid. Of the manner of ministering a
remedy for the stone. 883 Of the stone that makes gold, and its projection.
674, 58, 751, 807 The stone that makes gold, has not the blessings of the
tree of life. 807 Sulphur only resists a fermental poison. 1158 In Sulphur is
the life and death of bodies. 66, 14 Sulphur boiled in Linseed oil. 427, 70 In
oil of Turpentine. 515 The whole band of diseases hearken to some Sulphurs.
577, 260, 39 The Sulphur of Copper, hot, stupefactive, yet sweeter then honey.
304, 39 How flowers of Sulphur profit those that have a Cough. 309, 94 Sulphur
commended against the Plague. 1154 Of the Gas of Sulphur. 1155 The Sun
scorcheth without pain. 72, 14 Is hot. 74, 23, 139, 41, 794 The gifts of the
Almighty are placed in the Sun. 796 Sugar hurtful in most diseases. 462, 30
Loaf-Sugar not so good as the common. 467, 57 Swooning from the Stomach. 302,
303, 27 What that Sweat is that accompanies death and Swoonings. 42 What the
Synovia is. 842, 389, 20 Of Sympathetical Mediums. 616 The cause of Sympathy.
775, 68 Of the Sympathy and Antipathy of things. 1114 T. Taste in the midriff.
909 Tartar, its distillation. 412, 68, 427, 68, 183, 39 Why salt of Tartar
dissolves crude Tartar. 234, 19 How Tartar is made. 233 No disease arises from
Tartar. 235, 1 Tartar not in foods. 241, 8 Tartar af^^^ digestion in the
stomach cease to be a Tartar. 242, 243 Tartar not in drinks. 250, 7 Of the
Tartar of the blood. 1103 Of the original of the Tarantual. 1509 The poison of
the Tarantula. 787, 148 What thirst is, and whence. 471, 8 Thorn in the flesh
how cured. 521 Of thunder. 90, 17 A preservation against its effects on Beer,
etc. 91, 21 The seat of the Timpany and by what it is made. 520 Why Tin is
lighter than other Metals. 107, 20 The Toad commended against the Plague. 1149
How prepared for that use. 1150 How it kills the Ferment of the Plague. 1151 How
quickly he dies with fear. Ibid. The Toad given by God as a Remedy for the poor
against the Plague. 1152 The bone of a Toad cures the tooth ach Toothache
whence caused. 438. 30, 247 Of the original of the tooth-stone. 246 Of the
flourishing and decaying of teeth. 247 25 How the Transmutation of bodies is
effected. 115. 23 The tree of good and evil why forbidden. 656 664, 665, 666,
680 Of the tree of life. 745, 753, 754, 755 Tree of life what qualities it
ought to have. 808 The Cedar tree does signify the tree of life in this world.
810 Of the preparation of the Cedar tree. 811 V. VAlerian good against
Enchantments. 605 All Vegetables not woody, contain a winie spirit. 413. 73
Their Archeus has no anatomical affinity with man. 458, 5 Their whole property
from their seed, and not from the heaven. Ibid. 7 Their degrees whence
different. 146, 88 Why vegetables unprofitable to the sick. 578 Vervain
commended. 605 Venal blood wholly turned into nourishment. 257, 13 Venal blood
never putrifies in its place. 941 The natural endowment of the veins. 942 An
example. Ibid. Vesicatories more hurtful then Phlebotomy. 968 Vital spirit is
salt. 195. 19, 733, 734 Made of Arterial blood. 196 24, 732 By the ferment of
the heart. 733 Actuated by a vital light. 734 The virgin earth. 689 The Author
instructed by visions. 22, 42 His vision of the soul. 726 A vision of a Layick
concerning the Lues venerea. 1904 The spirit of vitriol reduced into an Alum by
its dissolution of Mercury. 473. 21 The dignity of the sulphur of venus and the
nativity of vitriol. 889 The best vitriol where to be had. 891. 695, 15 How
vitriol may be made. Ibid. The preparation of the Sulphur of vitriol. 339. 9
Unguents how applicable. 47, 58 Ulcers their principal vice where seated. (...)
18, 21, 23 Of the Difference of Ulcers. 321. 29 The cure of Ulcers. 322. 31,
323, 35 Volatile things fixed by fixed things. Volatiolation caused by
ferments. 117. 33 To provoke Urine in lingering fevers. 465. 46 What true
provokers are. 473. 19, 476, 31 Urinary salt made by the kidnyes. 473. 19
Observations on distilled urine. 847 Of the various actions of the spirit of
urine. 864 Urine-vessels not enlarged by drink, but by the stone. 708. 41, 42
Urine not an excrement of the Kidneys. 257 11 Of the division of vrines. 1051.
1 Of the errors in the circle of urine. 1052. 4 What the circle in the urine
is, demonstrated. 1052. 5 What the yellowness in urine may signify. 1053. 9
Watery urines after yellow ones signify dotages. 1054 What a troubled urine
signifies. 1056. 26 What the little cloud in the urine may signify. 1054. 20
Of the several sediments of urine. 1056 Examinations of urine by weight. Ibid
W. WArts how cured. 141 55, 154 Water the material cause of things. 32. 31,
105, 3. Proved so by an experiment. 48. 11, 109, 30 Likened to the internal
Mercury of Metals. 65. 8 Never radically conjoined with the earth. 10 etc. The
parts of the water. 71, 8, 410, 54 What its unrestable appointment is. 74. 28
Easily putrefiable under the Equinoctial. 116 30 All bodies thereinto
reducible. 116. 33 The great use of that which comes from the Quellem. 117, 33
Water does not always fall in a circular Figure. 684. 50 When waters loose their
life. 689. 9 Waters the womb of seeds. 693. 1 Why some waters hurt those that
have the stone. 251 Wheat changed into mice. etc. 113. 9 Winds whence
generated. 730, 18, 80, 14, 771, 59 What the wind is. 78, 4 The vanity of the
Schools defining it. 85. 23 Violent ones how allayed. 79. 13 Remedies for
windiness. 4^0. 28 What causes it. 422. 41 Only in defective persons. 424. 54
Some wind in the Ilcon, etc. Natural and necessary. etc. 428. 76 Spirit of Wine
how reducible into water. 69, 27 105, 9, 106, 11 VVines hurt by keeping in
their Gas. 107. 16 Wines profitable to our natures. 966 Spirit of wine passes
into the Arteries without digestion. 194. 12, 731 Cold preserves wines. 232
Why wines wax sour. 234 15, 21 How wines become troubled. 773 62 The labor of
wisdom. 184. 45 Of witches and witchcraft: 568 The Devil how concerned
therein. 569. 1 Of the power of witches. 779. 86 Of the nature and extent
thereof. 780 How a witch may be bound up in the heart of a horse. 782, 109, 110
Witchcraft, Simpathy, and Magnetism do differ. 759. 1 Women why monthly
purged. 405 24 Women are subject to double disieases. 609 358. 17 Women
consume not so much Blood as men. 740 Yet they make more. Ibid. Why they have
so many conceits when with child. 306, 50 Womb its overslowings cured by
odorus ointments. 114. 17 Remedy for a woman in travel. 306. 46 Womb a
peculiar monarchy. 575 A Twofold monarchy of a woman. 609. 15 Womb governs its
self. Ibid. 334. 43 Womb brings forth an alterative Blas. Ibid. Disseases of
the womb differ from products. 610. 19 The progress of the wombs defects. 612.
358 Its cure. 612. 325, 48 Sugar stirs up the sleeping fury of the womb. 612
Wherein the fruitfulness of the womb consists. 630 Where the womb of the urine
begins. 209 23 Womb warreth under its own banners. 306. 52 Of the force of
Imagination in women with Child 1117. 1118 The monarchy of the womb
distingisheth a woman from a man. 335. 48 In words herbs and stones there is
great virtue. 575 Silkworms figure out a shadow of the Resurrection. 684. 94
VVounds assuaged by odours, etc. 114, 17 Hurt by the Moon-beams: 141. 55 Z.
ZEnexton against the plague. 1144 Of the uselessness of some Zenextons. 1145
Precious stones not true Zenextons. 1146 Amber a Zenexton and how so made.
Ibid. The qualities a Zenexton ought to have. 1148 1149. Toad a Zenexton. Ibid
How the Toad is prepared for a Zenexton. 1150 Why he is a true Zenexton. 1152

A Poetical Soliloquie of the Translatour, Harmonizing and Sympathizing with
the Author's Genius.
WHen first my Friend did ask me to translate,
Van Helmonts Works wrapped up in hidden state,
Of Roman dialect; that 'twas a Book
Of Medicine and Philosophy, I took
It in good part enough, and did not doubt
But to perform what I should set about,
By Gods asistance; for I willing stood
Much pains to take about a public good.
I forth with entered on it and did see,
More than my friend, thereof, could tell to me:
For why, since something was begot within
My inward parts which loved truth, but sin
And selfish error hated, I began
To feel and love the spirit of the man,
Whom I perceived like a gracious Son,
To build his knowledge on the Corner Stone;
And out of self to sink in humble wise,
As his Confession in me testifies.
The light of understanding was his guide,
From heathenish Books and Authors he did slide,
And cast them of, that so he might be free,
Singly to stand, O Lord, and wait on thee,
And in the prayer of silence on thee call;
Because he knew thee to be All in All.
And thou did teach him that which will conduce
To the profit of his Neighbor, be of use,
Both unto soul and body, as inclined
To read with lowly and impartial mind:
But as for lofty and and self-seeking ones,
Thou scatter wilt their wisdom, wealth, and bones:
Because thou art not honored in a lie
Whether of Nature or Divinity:
But in the truth of knowledge of thy Life,
And of thy wondrous works which men of strife,
And alienated, can no whit attain,
Till from the fall they do return again.
Helmont, that thou returned'st I believe,
Thy testimony of it thou do give,
When by the light thou say (entering thy door)
Thou changed wast from what thou were before:
And cause thou suffredst by a wicked sort
For being good, and once wast poisoned for it:
That 'twas unjustly, I am doubting past,
'Cause the Enemies conscience pricked him at the last.
And truely'n many places of thy Ream
Words slow forth from thee like a silver stream;
And so, that I at sundry times have found,
Sweet op'nings from the un'ty in the ground.
But did thy life in words alone consist,
Or art thou to be enrowl'd among the list
Of Stoical Notionists, which only spend
Their time in contemplation, and so end
Their days; or were good actions wrought by thee,
Which (as the fruits discover do the tree)
Did show that healing virtue forth did start
From thy fire-furnace, as love from thy heart.
If not, how is it that thou do us tell
Thou ceased'st not Annually to heal
Some Myriades or ten thousands, yed
Thy medicines were not diminished:
Or that thou were so tender of the poor,
(What if I say that bagd from door to door
That thou retiredly did live at home,
And cure them out of Charity, not ro^^
And gape for gain for visits as do most
Physicians who unto rich houses post;
Floating about even as in a flood,
Of poisoned purged filths and venal blood;
And so the peoples wealth, health, life do soa^,
Through the s^ay vi^ard of a Doctors cloak:
But Helmonts hand-pen asit plain appears:
Their false-paint coverings a funder tears:
In room whereof, such Practic^, Theory,
It does insert, that they as standers by,
(Like Bibels Merchants) will ven, we^p and wa^^
When they shall see their trade begin to fail,
And upright Artists held up by the ^an
Of him who owns the good Samaritan.
Yet such School-Doctors shall not thus relent,
Whom Grace and goodness shall move to repent.
This is not uttered out of spleen but pity,
Unto the sick in Country and in City:
No just cause given by these words to hate;
But to be owned by the Magistrate.
And I my self in former silly times,
Through School-tradition, and Galenick lines,
Have wronged my body, weakened my nature,
Clipping my vitals in their strength and Stature?
And though, through Grace, to soul and body to,
It Was turned to good, yet that is no thank to you.
Help Chemists help to pull their Babel down,
Builtby the pride of Academicks Gown;
Let Theophrastus Azoth, Helmonts Lore,
Erect an Engine such as never before.
Hark Chemists, hark, attend Baptista's law,
He speaks to h's Sons, as the Lion by the Paw;
And why as the eye is opened to look,
May y' not discern Hercules by his foot?
Be it sufficient that he gives a taste,
Least precious peat is he unto swine should east.
Be It no dishonor to the Ghymick School,
That some mistakes thereof he does contro^^:
Rather a praise unto the Masters eye,
Household disorders for to rectify.
Strike Chemists strike, strike fire out of your (...),
And force the fire unto the highest stint
Of a Reverb'ratory, such a heat,
As Galen back out of the field may beat;
And fetch the Archeal Crasis Seminum,
To keep the field against a Rololleum.
Srrive not not by reason if you would win the day,
P^ice your Athanar, as he, another way:
Aim not at lucre in what ye undertake,
Your motive love, the spirit your guider make:
That day to day in you the Word may preach,
And night to night unto you knowledge teach:
That so Elias the Artist, if he come,
Ye as prepared, may bid him welcome home.
And all well-wishers unto Science, true,
Unto whose hands't shall come this Book to view:
See that your hearts are simple to the pure,
No filthiness true wisdom can endure:
The milky way must be the paper here,
And th'Inke Nectar from the Olympic sphere:
And then 't may open unto you a path,
For finding that which long been hiden has:
For there is a way by Simples for to cure,
Unto Simplicity the nearest sure;
If not Antiquity, at Scriptures note;
Solomon for 'n example may be brought.
The Author opes a gate in that Divine
Chapter, that treats ^'th power of medicine.
And not a little of Moses C^^^lism
He hinteth at that in of Magnetism:
So truly does the Savior report,
That to the carkas^ Eagles do resort.
In former time, thy younger learning years,
Thou as a tender heart, yet void of fears;
People that had the plagues infection,
Did visit, and by them were spewed upon:
Some breathing forth their life within thy arms,
Unto thy grief, because thou then their harms
Were not so able to repair, until
Thou had attained a great Adeptist skill:
For thou by Revelation do show,
What Co-us used two thousand years ago.
All which supposed, I can freely wink,
At some mistakes whereby thine eye did blink,
As to Religion, because thou were
Honest, upright, sincere, and sound in heart:
For if the folly of them thou had seen,
As other things de^y'd by thee, they would been.
And if in Nature thou art ought mistaken,
Thy many truths are not to be forsaken;
For why ye Schools, ye cannot, neither dare ye
Deny, but that humanum est errare,
Until the minds perfection in the Light,
Which he believed, yet would not claim it quite:
And so his candor is to be commended,
In not assuming what God had not ended.
Yet know that where one truth is you among,
In Helmonts breast there lodged ten for one;
And that not taken up by hearsay trust,
As ye are wont, but stamped by the Just:
For Reason Dialectical, he says,
Must vail the Bonnet unto light in faith;
Since Reason savours of an earthly soil,
Dies with the sense, our Parents did beguil:
And therefore Logic may no longer center
Within men's minds as Sciences Inventer.
And Nat'ralists must needs go to the wall,
As those of Ath^^s in the days of Paul;
Since that four El'ments, Humors, and Complexions,
Are proved plain to be but childish fictions:
Which Ethnicans by fancy blind misled,
Have rashly placed in seeds and ferments sted.
This is some liquor poured out of his bottle,
A deadly draught for those of Aristotle.
Astrol'gers also will be soon undon,
Since Herm's and Venus circle with the Sun:
And since the Planets common Ordination,
Was to stir up a Blas for seasons station:
And since the Heavens can no forms bestow,
To the Prince of life all creatures do them owe.
Ye Theologians, look what will befall ye,
Since man is not defined by [Rationale]
But by a Spirit and Intellectual light:
Now every one may see by his own sight;
And living waters out's own Cistern drink,
Need not ^ew Cisterns that do leak and chink:
Nor tug with pains to dig for earthly Wells,
The Spring's within him as Christ in him dwells:
Nor run to Temples that are made with hands,
Himself's the Temple, if he contrite stands.
And cause a New Birth is required of all,
Since brutal coupling entered by the fall;
And so your follow'rs cannot be reputed
Christians by birth, nay, but must be transmuted.
And since the mind of man may be comp^eated
In this life's time, as sin and self's defeated.
Since Char'ty not to dwell, by many's known,
In those that with the letter up are blown:
For as from mud or dung ascends a stink,
So Pride from Leathing sents up like a sink.
He did refuse to be a Canon great,
Least (as says Bernard.
B.) he peoples sins should eat.
What will protracting crafty Lawyers do,
Since Christ against them has denounced a woe
He would not b^ a Professor of the Law,
Enough for man to keep's own self in awe:
And what will come of Atheists, since it is true,
That there is a Power Eternal (who in ^^e
Of fallen Angels) did man's Soul ereate
(In mortal body an immortal state,)
To live in h's hand in weal or woe, as they
His call of Grace shall or shall not obey.
What of cursed Hypocrites who in deceit,
Take up Profession for a Cloak and Cheat;
Better for Sodom and Gomorrah than
For such, when Christ does come the world to fan.
But stop my Genius, run not out too far,
Although thy shackles much unloosed are,
And vitals subtle, while thou tell the story,
Of what concerns man's good and God his glory;
Least Prince of the Air like Poets Pegasus,
Prevail to make thy wit ridiculous,
By mounting thee too high upon his wing
Of fleshly pride, and Aeolus thee fling
Down from the quiet Region of his sky,
In the Icarian waters for to die,
Or whirl thee higher in his stormy hail,
And sting thy conscience with the Dragons tail:
For if an inch be given (so they tell)
It is not safe for one to take an ell.
Wherefore retreat in time of thy accord,
Least thou incur the anger of the Lord:
And throw thy self along down at his feet,
After the Author thou shall once more greet.
I b'lieve thou were a Medel-master made,
By the Creator of the Root and Blade
Of healing virt's, the Father of lights (I sing)
Whence every good gift does descend and spring.
Thou livedst well, and in the Belgic Nation,
Were a tall Cedar in thy Generation:
A good memorial thou have left behind,
Of what in days now coming, men shall find
Writ in Christ's Bosom, and in Natures spread,
As they are worthy in those books to read.
Thou diedst in peace in Anno forty four,
I doubt not but thou liv'st for evermore.
My friend is also gone, yet I survive,
Lord grant that to thine honor I may live:
And as my life thou gay^st me for a prey,
When in a gloomy and despairing day,
I thought I should have died without the fight
Of thy Love Tokens, and thy face so bright;
So I intre^r upon my prostrare knee,
That I thy way and Cross may never flee:
Than turn a new unto Apostasy.
Or thee dishonor, ra^ker let me die.
Than to depart again out of thy fear,
Better wild horses me in pieces tear:
If the remembrance dwell not in me rife,
Of thy great goodness, pity of my life.
But as large mercy is to me extended;
So what is faulty may be fully mended;
That perfect righteousness may cloth my back;
And I to sound thy praises will not slack,
In life, or death, or suffering by the world,
Who in transgression up and down are hurled;
And Tophe^s pit shall surely help to fill,
If they in time repent not of their ill.
But as he did for's enemies pardon cry.
So do all Chrictian hearts, and so do I.
O holy, holy, holy, holy, God!
Whose Name's exalted in the Ascendant Jod;
My self does tremble, and my flesh does quake,
While I the King of Saints my Subject make:
I dread thee Lord, I dread thy Sovereign fame;
I love thee so, I cannot express the same;
My Spirit's on site, and my heart does flame,
With a desire to sanctify thy Name:
My Soul is melted, and my heart is broke,
In feeling of the force of thy Love-stroke.
Father I thank thee that thou did enable
Me to convey the dish from Helmont^ Table:
And if some crumbs or drops have fell beside,
'Twas what a careful servant might be tide:
It being weighty, full of diverse fare,
If none should over-fall or flow 'twere rare.
A Corydon I h'd rather some me deem,
Than to use dark-phrases that would not be-seem
Rather a Tautologian be dained,
Than to the meanest, leave words unexplained:
Rather a homespun Patcher wanting Art,
Than the Authors meaning willingly pervert:
And if his tongue could speak out of the dust,
He Would justify this Translate all almost:
For though his learned Art I don't comprize,
Yet in the Root our Spirits harmonize.
The Dish lest somewhat of its crumbs and drops,
As it was carried through the Printing Shops;
Yet what the Press has nipt off by the way,
It here returns again by this survey.
ERRATA.
IN the Authors Dedication to the Word. Page 2 lin. 6 read except. In the
Translators premonition. P 2 l 35 r and is. p 3 l 19 dele other. In the Preface
to the Reader. P 11 l 46 r Eternally. p 12 l 28 r the work. p 13 l 35 r world.
In the Poetical Prophecy. P 1 l 4 r spiting. P 14 of the Book l 10 r
knowingly. ibid. l 28 r vain. ibid. r give. p 17 l 37 r it with. p 7 l 32 r
Nuns. p 34 l 55 r first (...). p 57 l 25 (...) as r is. p 295 l 2 r (...). p
298 l 60 r Watchman. p 407 l 28 r whereof they are said to have been the: p 477
l 26 r vital. p 504 l 31 r it is. p 518 l 50 r this [is] ^oheaped. p 535 l 41 r
efficacy. p 537 l 38 r Plato p 519 l 28 r (...) p 575 l 5 r [But] be sides. p
577 l 61 r Lile. p 515 l 18 r another cherry. p 621 l 53 r (...) 710 l 30 r
the God. p 739. l 28 r Mols. p 741 l 22 for any r and. p 825 in the Title of
the disease of the Stone, r root. p 838 l 55 r by p. 1073 l 13 r voice. p 1150
l 12 r worms. ibid. l 44 after terrible, dele and. p 1157 l 1 r the plague.


