S.t CUTHBERT



THE LEGEND OF St. CVTHBERT. WITH THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE Church of DURHAM.

By B. R. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Christopher Eccleston at his shop in St. Dunstans
Churchyard, 1663.

The PROLOGVE.
THough much of the ensuing Discourse be no more consistent with common Reason
and probability, the the Fables in the Alchoran, and so cannot have any design
of engaging the faith of the Reader to the verity of the relations yet things
of this nature giving some shadow of satisfaction to the mind, and being free
from any real prejudice to Virtue of Religion men thriftie enough in the
expense of their time, are not seldom content to allow some wast hours in
reading them, and perhaps with some profit and observation. At that time when
this Legend bears date, Miracles were cheap enough, and the credulous ignorance
of the Vulgar was easily abused with religious impostures. But howsoever such
juggles may appear now to the eyes of the more generally knowing and undeceived
world, I should have charity enough to believe that the antique invention of
them was upon the account of promoting the esteem of Holy Religion, were not
the observation too palpably notorious that they all tended over much to the
end of private gain or reputation to the Miracle-mongers; Not that I call in
question the reasonableness of that ancient policy how ridiculous soever it
appears now; for he was no unwise or unlearned Sir W. Raleigh.
man, which said, That the wisdom of one age is the foolishness of another.

Who was the Author of this Book, or when by him compiled, or upon what
account, (though probably for his own private divertisement) I do ignore in an
equal degree, and am not able to give any other account thereof, then what the
Treatise it self affords. Had he published it himself (without any improbable
conjecture) it had passed censure with greater security, the Author being a
master of so much style and language as the Book it self bespeaks him. I am
only instrumental in committing it to the Stationer, and guilty of the vanity
of this Prologue.

B. R.

THE LEGEND OF St. CVTHBERT; WITH The ANTIQUITIES of the Church of DURHAM.
HISTORY, and PROPHECY (set back to back) make up the true Image of Janus,
whose two faces Time past and future honor as their Overseers. In History,
Time lives after she is dead; in Prophecy, before she is born. In the one she
beholds what she was; in the other, what she will be. But since the Theorie of
Time to come is the prerogative of a Deity, Man must be modestly content with
this blessing bestowed by History upon Mortality, that through our Grandfathers
eyes we may see what has been. This is all our sublunary Eternity, if at the
funeral of things History become the Epitaph, and rescue their memories from
the grave that entombs their ashes. And this duty I owe to that Country, where
I had my Cradle, to renew the decayed Epitaphs upon the Tombstone of her
Antiquities.

Geographers deal with Countries, even as Astronomers with their Asterisms, and
fancy them into shapes and resemblances: so that by the liberty of fantasy,
Italy is compared to a man's leg, Spain to an Oxhide, Britain to an Hatchet;
I may liken the Bishopric to the Letter D, and Durham to a Crab, supposing the
City for the body, and the Suburbs for the claws. This Country lies in the
bosom of the Ocean, and is embraced in the arms of two crystal Rivers,
Teese, and Derwen. The ancient Inhabitants in the time of the Romans, were the
Brigants; in the Heptarchie of the Saxons they were called Deiri: for the
honor of which Province, the Children thereof in the time of Aella being to be
sold at Rome, gave occasion of the replanting of Christianity, by Angustine the
English Apostle, sent hither by Pope Benedictus, at the entreaty of Gregory
then Archdeacon of Rome: who facetely alluding to the names of their Nation,
Province, and King, concluded ut Angli Angelis similes de ira Dei eruerentur,
and Allelujah cantare docerentur. The first of the Saxon Kings (who made
conquest as well of Religion as Men) that in this Province was dipped in the
sacred Laver of Baptism, was the renowned Oswald, Qui Genti suae primitias
sanctitatis dederit; and is observed to be the first of the English Race, that
was illustrious by miracles. This Prince sent once for a learned Monk out of
Scotland ( Aidanus by name) to convert his Subjects from Paganism, and seated
him in the Episcopal Chair of Lindisferne, Anno Dom. 635. where while the
Bishop taught in the Scottish tongue, the King understanding both languages,
stood and interpreted his Sermons in English. This great Monarch, that great
and pious Founder of the Church (to whose womb all the Churches in the North
owe their birth) in a battle with a Pagan Prince lost his life and the day. But
with this advantage (whiles Penda left him not a head to wear a Crown withal)
he received a more glorious Diadem of Martyrdom; And as fury persecuting
revenge after death tore his body in pieces, so the devotion of Time dispersed
the relics to several places, -- Nempe jacere
Uno non potuit tanta ruina loco.
For whose sepulcher there was as great contention amongst the English
Churches, as in old time amongst the Graecians for the Cradle of Homer. His
Corpse were brought to Lindisfern, and from thence translated with St. Cuthbert
his body to Durham Abbey. His Arm was preserved in a Silver Casket at Bedburga,
or Bambrough, not far seated from the Holy Island, and at that time the great
Metropolis of those parts. This sacred Relic retained the blessing of
Aidanus, and was honored as a Monument of incorruption. An History which to
this effect by Beda is related, That upon an Easter day as the King sat at
dinner, his servants told him that there was poor folk that expected alms at
his gate; who forthwith bid him both carry them meat, and distribute the
platter (which was of silver) among them; with which fact of charity Aidanus
(who sat by him) much delighted, took him by the right arm, with this hearty
wish, Never let this arm perish! This glorious Martyrs death was the end of
Aidanus life, and the Pagans at one blow killed a Prince, and a Bishop with
sorrow, who thought it a sin to live, after so good a King was dead: the Soul
of which Bishop St Cuthbert happened to see (in the dead of the night) carried
up with great melody by a Quire of Angels into Heaven: which vision so seized
upon his affection, that resolving upon an holier course of life, he betook
himself to the Monastery of Mailros, built by Aidanus by the bank of Tweede,
and in his journey thither showed a great specimen of his humility, devotion,
and gratitude; for being seized upon both by night, and hunger, he was forced
to enter into an empty cottage, where he found no other host for entertainment
than a horse, who eating, and turning up the hay, discovered part of a loaf,
which some Shepherd had hid; at which the Saint right glad, said Grace, and
thankfully giving the horse one half, satisfied himself with the other, and
lodging there all night, the next day came to Mailros; where he no sooner
entered, but Boysilous Prior of the same Abbey (as if he had read in his
Forehead a Prophetical Physiognomie of his future Sanctity) ran, and embraced
him in his arms, and presented him to E^ta the Abbot, who committed him to
Boysilous for his Tutor, with whom I leave him, teaching him St. John's Gospel;
which book in honor of the Scholar, was kept in Durham in Prior Turgots time,
called Codex Sancti Cuthberti: on which, after so many Centuries of years, no
Moth ever durst presume to feed.

This Lindisferne by the royal Charter of Oswald, became the Mother Church, and
Nursery of Religion amongst the Bernicians under Aidanus, from whom the
Episcopal race of the Prelates of Durham reckon their succession. In ancient
description it was an Island but twice a day, and embraced by Neptune only at
full tide, and at Ebb shaked hands with the Continent: (for so I may call the
voluminous Isle of Great Britain, in proportion of this littel Isle, which in
a Monk of Durhams Topographie was in compass 8. miles.)

In this Holy Island, (so Christened for St. Cuthberts sanctity) stood the
renowned Monastery founded by King Oswald, where Finanus, Aidanus his
successor, built a Cathedral of wood thatched with reeds, which resembles
those times, when

Jupiter angusta vix totus stabat in aede,
Inque Jovis dextra fictile fulmen e^at.
Frondibus ornabant quae jam Capitolia gemmis,
Pascebatque suas ipse senator oves.
But is was not long, till Eadbert, Saint Cuthbert his successor, instead of
this consecrated thatch, apparreld over the whole Church with a robe of Lead; a
work of devotion and cost; though it is not the Mason, but the Worshipper that
makes a Church.

In this Island 14. Bishops successively ascended the Episcopal seat, among
whom St. Cuthbert was accounted as a glorious Star of the first magnitude in
the firmanent of the Church; who when he had lived a Monasterial life 15 years
in the Abbey of Mailros, was preferred by Eata to the Priory of Lindisferne,
which dignity he bare 12 years in such sanctity of life, that the Devil (as I
cannot blame him) was much grieved at his Virtues; who among other Cheats (with
which the Monks make the Devil a fool) in a certain village, as the Saint was
preaching, set an house on fire, to draw the people from his Sermon: which,
when the Country folk marvelled they could not quench, it was discovered to
St. Cuthbert to be fantastical fire, and the Devils delusion. But after 12
years, (as before) he resigned up his Priorship, to become an Hermit, choosing
the Island Fern, seated in the main Ocean, for the place of his Hermitage,
Anno Dom. 676. This Isle, as void of men, as full of Devils, became the scene
or stage whereon Saint Cuthbert acted all his Miracles; for at his arrival, the
Spirits that had frequented this Isle, were glad to fly, and forego their
title. The Rocks poured out their water, and the Earth, (as if there had been a
return of the Golden Age) brought forth Corn without Tillage. And here he
consecrated 9 years to Contemplation, so wholly devoted to Heaven, that he
forgot he was on Earth, and in a whole year to put off his shoes. And although
he wanted Men for his Auditors, yet he ceased not to preach to the Birds, that
eat up his Corn, who so confuted them out of this text, Non aliena concupisces,
that they would never after eat his barley. In like manner he reclaimed two
Crows from stealing, and rapine, that plucked off his thatch from his Anchorage
to build their nest, and made them so penitent, that they lay at his feet
prostrate for absolution, and the next day brought him a piece of Pork to make
him satisfaction, with many more Wonders, if they might be related upon the
credit of a Legend. But here is enough to show what advantage the Monks took of
that Ages Devotion, whose practices were to devise Miracles of their Saint,
which (as Superstition is always credulous) were as easily believed. Thus, to
gain a reverend opinion from the Pagans of Christianity, to cozen the people
with Legends of wonders, who while they defended Truth with Falsehood, and their
Impostures discovered to wiser Ages, have made Religion rather suspected, than
any way advanced it; for Truth never needed the protection of Forgery, but will
carry away the Victory without Hypocrisy. But Saint Cuthbert recalls my
digression to his Isle, where he had so many combats with the Devil, that (if
you will borrow an Optic Glass from Superstition) you may see the print of
his feet in many places there, till this day. It any landed at his Island to
see him in devotion, he ran into his Hermitage, and discoursed out of his
window: only in love he bare to the Abbatesse of Collingham, at great entreaty
he sailed into Cocket Isle to her; where every night (as his custom was) going
down to the shore to pray, two Sea Monsters came kneeling to him, and
worshipping him: who when they had received their blessing, returned to the
deep, and he again to his Anchorage, where whiles he imprisoned himself, and
lived more obscured in his Cell, the more illustrious was his fame abroad; and
in a Synod at Twiford upon Slu, in the presence of King Egfrid, he was chosen
Bishop. This dignity was prophesied unto him, when he was a boy, by an Infant
of 3, years old, who gravely told told him, It becomed not a Bishop to play
with children. But Saint Cuthbert had so wedded his affections to a solitary
life, that neither letters, nor Ambassadors from the Synod, could either
command, or persuade him to take upon him the government of the Church; till
the King himself, attended with the Lords of the Nobility, sailed to this Isle,
and with the same company might have besieged, and taken a City, whiles he was
conquering St. Cuthbert's resolution. Thus (though the case be now altered)
honor pursued him, that fled from her, and preferment found him out, that hid
himself from it. The Bishopric of Hexam was then void, to which Eata removing,
gave place to St. Cuthbert to be installed in Lindisferne. King Egfrid also to
enlarge his Diocese, gave him a great part of the City of York, and also the
City of Luell, with 5. miles circuit about it, where Saint Cuthbert built a
Nunnery, besides other Royal Donations, as the Abbey of Mailros, and Rippon;
But St. Cuthbert his mind was always on his anchorage, whither he shortly
betook himself, and in his Cell ended his life, and began his miracles, Anno
Domini 687. But if I were to make his Funeral Oration, 1 would not insert among
his praises that he was an Anchoret; for thus to unman himself, to contemplate
himself into a Deity, argued more pride, than Religion. It Is true, that an
Hermit is either a god, or a beast; yet since man is more symbolical with the
one, than the other, it is easy to suspect, which way the Metamorphosis will
tend; For if you would have the lively picture of an Hermit truly represented,
look upon Nebuchadnezzar in his curse, when he was driven from men, and did eat
grass as the Oxen, when his body was wet with the dew of Heaven, till his
hairs became as Eagles feathers, and his nails as the claws of birds. Thus
therefore for an Hermit to excommunicate himself from being a holy Citizen of
the World, what is it else but to sin against the Common weal and definition of
a man, to whom society is as natural as to be a Creature: so that whiles others
think it devotion in him, I shall rather think it a melancholy distemper.

Saint Cuthberts last Will and Testament directed to the Monks, was, to bury
him at the East side of his Oratory, in a Coffin that the Venerable Tuda gave
him, and for to wrap, or wind his Corpse in the sheet that Ver^a Abbatesse of
Tinmouth once sent him for a token, which for the reverence of that Holy woman
he had never worn in his lifetime. And lastly, if they should be invaded by
Pagans, to carry his bones away with them. Thus Saint Cuthbert Sainted himselt
in his lifetime, and gave them notice, what a precious Relic he should be,
when he was dead. All these Petition* were duly performed; only at the request
of the Monks, he permitted that his body should be transported to Lindisferne;
where, in St. Peter's Church, at the right side of the High Altar he was
solemnly laid in a Tomb of Stone. Now were the times when the Doctrine of
Miracles begun to build Cburches, and Religious Houses so to swarm, and
multiply, that all England seemed but one great Monastery, and called by the
Pope, Terra Sacerdotum. But Time (that has the Sublunary World for her
continual banquet) has so fed upon these ancient buildings, that some she
quite devoured, others picked to the bone, and what she has left for standing
dishes, Hostility has quite eaten up and defaced: besides that great
Climacterical year, when Henry the 8th durst incur those thundering
Anathemata's, which (by the appointment of the Monks) attended the violation of
Abbey-lands, Si de tot laesis sua numina quisque deorum
Vindicet in poenas, non sat is unuserit.


But I most bewail those Abbeys whose Names are buried in their ashes, and
their very ruins suffer the death of a Sepulcher, and dye twice, because they
want a Monument that they lived. Of these Monuments of Devotion, that live the
life of memory, and belonged once to St. Cuthbert, stood Collingham; This
Monastery consisted of Monks and Nuns, over whom Ebba was some times Abbatesse,
who received her veyle of Finanus the second Bishop of the Holy Island. Among
the Bernicians likewise was the Episcopal seat of Hagustaldum, or Hexam,
bestowed by King Alfred upon Saint Cuthbert, which Malmesbury (somewhat
mistaken in the Scale of Miles) placed but 50 miles from York, and commends
(for beauty of structure) before any building on this side the Alps. In this
Church sat 9 Bishops, among whom the learned John of Beverley (not to be named
by an Oxford man without a preface of honor) was advanced to that dignity by
King Alfred, and then swayed the Pastoral Staff, till he was translated to
York. In his younger years he was brought up (according to the nobility of
his birth) under Hilda Abbatesse of Strenshall, or Whitby in Yorkshire, of
which she was also Foundresse. Afterward he was Scholar to the Genius of
Learning, Theodore of Canterbury, who born at Tarsus is Cilicia, was the first
that brought Learning into England, as well as Religion; who bringing over with
him Homer, (the first we read of in this Isle) and other good Authors,
instructed many Famous Scholars in the Greek Tongue, and Mathematics, where
among the rest I find Saint Beda, Herebald, Whilfride, and this John of
Beverley; who at the translation of the School of Crekelade (which Theodore had
there planted) to Oxford, was the first Master of Art in that University, as it
appreareth out of an ancient Window in Salisbury Library under John of
Beverleyes Picture: And he that goes higher to fetch the Antiquity of Oxford,
than from his time, does but grope in the dark. This age of 800 years is enough
to prove Cambridge the younger Sister, till Lelands deduction will follow, that
Sigebert King of the East Angles founded that University; because Bid, and
after him Malmsbury relate that he erected diverse Schools in this Kingdom; but
in neither Author, Grant or Cambridge is mentioned, nor in any Writer since for
400. years after, to be an University.

But to return with pardon to Saint Cuthbert, who had now lain Eleven years in
his Sepulcher, when the Monks thought by this time to take his bones disrobed
of flesh, and put them among other relics; But whiles they opened his Coffin,
they start at a wonder; they looked for bones and found flesh; they expected a
(...), and saw an entire body, with joints flexible, and his face so
dissembling Death, that else where it is true that Sleep is the image of Death,
here Death was the image of Sleep; nay his funeral weeds were so fresh, as if
putrefaction had not dared to take him by the Coat. This was rather to pay his
debt to Heaven, than to Nature, that after he should restore his soul to God,
he should keep back the payment of his body from corruption. This Miracle of
incorruption Bid reports, who was eleven years old at Saint Cuthbert his
death, in relating whereof he made no Lie, but told one, the History of whose
Life and Death he writ, and took upon trust from the information of the Monks
of Lindisfern, who had deflowred all the miracles of Saints in Holy Writ, and
bestowed them upon their Saint Cuthbert: so barren brained Monks were they,
that would not invent new ones, but such as were writ before to their hands;
for Adam could not be commander of the creatures in the state of innocence, but
St. Cuthbert also must have the savage beasts to do him homage. Abraham could
not entertain three Angels under on Oak, but Saint Cuthbert must have Angels
for his guests as the Monastery of Rippon. The Children of Israel could not eat
Manna, and Angels food, but Saint Cuthbert must have three Loaves bestowed upon
him by an Angel, which were baked in Paradise. A Raven could not bring Elias
flesh, but an Eagle must bring Saint Cuthbert fish. And here also this miracle
has an Idea in the Scripture, that when his Mother sailed with him from
Ireland into Scotland, the books of the Psalms fell into the sea, which
forthwith was swallowed up of a Sea calf, and delivered to them at their
landing: Take but the Psaltes for a man, and the Sea calf for a whale, and here
you have the History of Jonas, with many such Histories of wonders, with which
the Monks delighted the superstition of the times. This illustrious miracle of
Saint Cuthberts body incorruptible after death, raised the Church to that
height of renown, that King Celwolphus in opinion of his sanctity, forsook his
Royalty to become a Monk in Lindisferne, bringing with him such Kingly
treasures and donations of Lands, that he seemed rather to resign his Kingdom
to the Church, than to his Successor, and became a Monk, to make St. Cuthbert a
King, bestowing upon him Warkeworth Castle, Heycliffe, Billingham, Woodchestre,
Huttingham, Edulingham, Elingham; Towns that (for ought I know) have either
outlived their names, or names that have survived their Towns. But above all,
he was a welcome man to their Monastery, that for his sake it was granted the
Monks of Lindisferne of drink wine, who were before to drink water, thought
they that drank after St. Cuthbert in his Cup, found sometimes water turned to
wine, without a Miracle. This devout Prince, after he had diverse years worn a
Monks Cool, was intombed in Norham, which Town Ranulphus Bishop of Durham
fortified with a Castle.

After this Miracle of incorruption, Eadfrid The Bishop caused him to be laid
in a new Sepulcher, and to be placed in more state, and reverence, about the
pavement of the Sanctuary: for it was not fit, that he should have his grave
among the dead, whose body seemed to live without a soul, and with a sleep to
cheat mortalisy of a death.

By this time the very ground that St Cuthbert had trod on was accounted holy,
who made every place he frequented a Church. Eadfrid in Honor of his presence
built up his Hermitage, where (as if after St Cuthbert a genius of Sanctity had
frequented that place) Etheldred a Monk of Rippon lived an Hermit 12 years.

Thus for a long time flourished the Monks of this Church, till the Danes
disturbed their prosperity, who now begun to make incursions upon the frontiers
of this land, continuing their piracies, and invasions, till they had made a
complete conquest in King Harold, which Monarchy shortly after yielded to the
Norman victory, and England twice Conquered in seventy years. These were the
times when so many Monasteries (which the Devotion of former ages had erected)
had their Funerals, and Entombed themselves in their own ashes; Then perished
that famous Emporium of Hartlepoale, where the Religious Jew built a Nunry, of
which (...) own I may say as Hildebert of Rome, Quammagnifueris integra, fracta
doces.

The ruins show how great she was in her Glory, but now remains to passengers
as a Monument of Devotion, and Hostility; Then were demolished the two
Monasteries of St Peter and Paul at Wormouth, and Jarro built by two Abbots,
Celfr^d and Benedict. Those two Societies mutual fraternity had so sirmely
united, that they seemed but one Monastery in two places, and shall ever be
famous, while the memory of Venerable Bede shall be honored of the learned:
for (in those times) in the same Monasteries he had his first education under
Benedict a Reverent Abbot, and one whom Antiquity defraudes not of those due
praises, that he procured choice books from beyond Sea for his Monastery: and
was the first that brought into England the use of Glass windows into Churches.
In his riper years he was brought up by Theodore, under whom he was instructed
both in sacred and secular learning, and attained to that maturity of judgment,
that never writer since has brought greater honor to his Nation: whiles he
confined himself to his Cel, his fame travalled to Rome, where Pope Sergius, in
a letter to Celfrid the Abbot, earnestly entreated him to come in person: but
for ought I know, without accepting the Popes courtesy, he dyed in his
Monastery, which in memory of his presence, after it had lain wast by the
Pagans 208. years, was re-edified by Adwin a Monk

The fury of the Danes still increasing continued by the Sea coast to Tinmouth,
where Herca of St Cuthbert his acquaintance had been Abbatess: so that it was
high time for the Monks to look about them; for they begun to-understand by the
overthrow of their neighboring Abbeyes, that it was in vain to think that the
Danes would (like the Devil) be affrighted away with Holy water, and saw by the
bad success of Monasteries, that it was not safe trusting the protection of a
Saint, and so concluded (according to St. Cuthbert his will) upon flight: and
putting all their relics in Saint Cuthbert his Coffins, left the Pagans the
spoil of an empty Church, Anno Domini 893. now it was Eardulphus his fortune
to be Bishop in those troublesome times, who with his whole Clergy of people
followed Saint Cuthberts body, carried by seven Monks (as Esquire of his body)
besides whom none might presume to touch his Coffin under the danger of Vzzahs
punishment. These miseries had been enough to have unsainted Saint Cuthbert,
when pursued both by foes, and overtaken by an homebred enemy, famine that
would afford him no releif. They were now driven to the Irish sea, and might
well complain with the old Britains to Boethius the Consul, Repellunt nos
Barbari ad mare; Repellit nos mare ad Barbaros, inter haec oriuntur duo genera
funerum, aut jugulamur, out in^rgimur Not far had they sailed from the shore,
when both the Sea and the winds were up in arms, and both agianst their
Pinnace, which both Aeolus and Naptune might have worshipped for her sacred
carriage of a Bishop, and his Clergy, with so many relics, that it seemed
rather a Cathedral then a ship: but the Sea had not that Religion to hear their
prayers, threatening them so near with shipwreck, that they had not that
confidence in their Saint to encourage the Mariners with Ne metuas, Cuthbertum
vehis, who now himself wanted some other Saint to invocate for help, and was in
danger to be drowned, after he was dead. Where had then been the Church of
Durham, and the devotion of Kings to his Sepulcher? Where had then been the
tutelary Deity against the Scots, and the lands of the Church, called Saint
Cuthbert his Patrimony? How then should Saint Cuthbert his Hally. marke-folke
be free from Tribute, and service in War; and the fat Monks fed so many years,
with ease, and plenty; if now their Saint had been entombed in the sea, andhad
erected his Episcopal seat amongst the fishes? This Sacrilegious storm struck
the ship with such a palsy, that it shakt out the Text of the Evangelist into
the Sea: This Book in honor of Saint Cuthbert, Eadfrid had writ with his own
hands, and Bilfrid the Anchorite had curiously painted; in which art of drawing
the Monks were admirable expert, who with such pictures knew bow they enhaunted
vulgar eyes. The art, I confess, is both ingenuous, and commendable; only it
argues, that the Monks were at great leisure. Thus whether the Sea envying the
land such a precious Jewel as Saint Cuthbert was, strove to have it her self;
or whether he himself raised the tempest, to show that their attempt for
Jreland was against his mind, forthwith both the Sea, and the winds conspited,
and brought them to the shore, where was great joy at their arrival, much
sorrow for their Book being drowned; till Hundred, one of the seven squires of
his body, was bid by Saint Cuthbert in his sleep to go seek on the shore at
Whiterne where he found it in its former splendour, without the blemish of a
letter. If this be true, then sure I am, this Book had better fortune in the
Sea, than the Books of Saint Cuthbert have now in his Library at Durham, which
once was a little Vatican of choice manuscripts, but now rather a (...), than a
library: rather a place of a Sepulcher, than a place to conserve books; for
since the art of Printing was invented, whereby men after a more cheap way
could attain to some superficial Learning; old manuscripts were bequeathed to
the Mothes: and Pigeons, and Jack-dawes became the only students in Church
libraries: and books were wounded with penknifes for their pictures, with as
great cruelty, as Cassia, or Johannes Scotus martyrd by their own Scholars.

But to return, Hundredus had also in a night an Oracle from Saint Cuthbert
that he should repair to a Tree, on which he should find a dun Horse profering
his service to draw the Waine, whereon they should lay Saint Cuthbert his
Coffin. The conduct of this Horse (as guided by Saint. Cuthbert) they followed,
whithersoever he went, and at length by the providence of the Horse, or Saint
Cuthbert, they came to Creca, where (for 4. Months) they were kindly
entertained by the Abbot, and had leisure to tell stories of their travailes'
And here again Saint Cuthbert played the Pope, and in a vision sent Eadred Abbot
of Luel, upon and Embassage to the Camp of the Danes, that they should Crown
Guthred King; But what authority Saint Cuthbert had to nominate a King, or what
reason the Army had to believe a dream, must be ranked among his Miracles. Now
for Guthred to be made a King, what is it else but to be Saint Cuthberts
subject, and to oblige his Royalty to those Monks that as impudently incroacht
upon so fair an advantage? For first they obtain the Restoration of the
Episcopal See in Cuncacestle on the street of Eardulphus, where he ascended the
Poncificial chair, under the protection of this new King, to whom (once more)
the aforesaid Abbot must bring a message from Saint Cuthbert in a dream to bid
him give all the lands between Weer and Tyne for ever to his Church; or else
the Monks would be ready to upbraide him with ingratitude: Thus was the poor
Prince robbed of all his Kingdoms, and received a (...) ^o set on Saint Cuthbert
his head. They proceeded also further to demand the freedom of a sanctuary for
St. Cuthbert his Church; that whosoever should commit any crime, might fly to
this Sepulcher, and have 37. days rescue: that neither magistrates, nor
Justice might curb the freedom of offending, either against Heaven or state;
for no other use was commonly made of asylus's, then that men might sin more
securely, and disloyally appeal from the King and his Laws to the protection
of a Saint. Thus was the King cheated of his Sovereignty by the Monks, who had
now got the art of enslaving the devotion of Kings to their private and false
purposes. At this time also the great Alfredus swore fealty to St Cuthbert and
his Clergy by whose help he was persuaded he had got the victory over the
Pagans, and not only confirmed to them by his Royal Charter what Guthred had
given them, but also freed the Inhabitants in the land of Saint Cuthbert from
tribute, and service in War, with fearful Anathemata's to any of his
successors, who durst infringe any of the said liberties. What else was this,
than for a King to deprive himself of that service, which even by the law of
nature is due to a Prince from a subject? In what esteem this St. was to King
Alfred, I gather from the consecration of the Chapel to Saint Cuthbert in the
University College in Oxford, in which College I have seen King Alfrid and
Saint Cuthbert painted together; the King thus bespeaking the Saint in a
Pentameter: Hic in honor tui Collegium statui.

Saint Cuthbert thus replying in an Hexameter, Quod statuisti in eo,
pervertentes maledico.

But I observe that Saint Cuthbert was either an angry Saint, or the Monks used
to curse in his name, as appears by a Distick in Trinity College engraven in a
Wooden beam, built for a fraternity of Monks, by Thomas Hatfeild Bishop of
Durham: Anno Domini 1343.

Terras Cuthberti qui non spoliare verentur,
Esse queant certi, quod morte mala morientur.
But to return, King Alfreds devotion to Saint Cuthbert whom he made to share
with him in his Sovereignty, and honored his name under his own coin, as it
is proved by the true portraitures of some silver Money dug up Anno Domini
1611. in little Crosby in Lancashire, and sent to the Learned Antiquary, and my
honored friend Mr. Thomas Allen of Gloucester Hall in Oxford.

Thus after the aged Eardulphus (the last Bishop of Lindisferne, and first of
Chester) had shared with Saint Cuthbert in prosperity and adversity, and had
seen the flourishing estate of this new Church (sprung up like a Phoenix out of
the ashes of the former) full of days, and honor yielded to nature, and was
entombed at Chester Anno Domini 894. in which year also dyed the victorious
Alfred, who on his Deathbed bequeathed the love he bare to Saint Cuthbert as a
precious legacy to his son Edward: chargeing him to be an Heir as well to his
Devotion, as to his Kingdoms: King Edward also zealous in propagation of Piety
(as if it had been ex traduce to these Princes to honor St. Cuthbert) left his
son Athelstan executor of his love to that Church. In this high and mighty
Prince, the heptarchy completely expired, who was the first absolute Monarch of
this land, after the Saxon conquest, which was great joy to St. Cuthberts
Monks, that they had so great countenance of a King that was as willing as able
to protect them; of whom they gave this report, that never any King so dearly
loved Saint Cuthbert, or bestowed upon his Church more Princely Donations than
Athelstan, whom the Monks had brought to that obedience of misseemely Devotion,
that he came in Pilgrimage to St. Cuthberts shrine barefoot. How could not the
Monks but (like Magicians, when they meet) laugh one at another to see Royalty
so captivated under superstition, and Majesty so dejected, when the end of
their pretended Sanctities was only sloth, and fatness. This devout Prince
leading an army into Scotland diverted aside to Saint Cutberts sepulcher,
imploring his aid, and patronage in his Wars, and with many princely gifts
bought the good wishes of the Monks in his journey. The soldiers also offer,
at the Kings command, 96. pounds, when it had been more sit, that Saint
Cuthbert out of his Church-treasure should have bestowed as much on them, who
with their sword and blood obtained the victory: yet Saint Cuthbert, and the
benedictions of his idle Monks must have the glory of the conquest; which
opinion made King Ethelstans brother in a like occasion into Scotland take
Saint Cuthbert in his way, honoring the Sepulcher with many kingly offerings,
and renewing to them the Charters of his predecessors. And here I will not
deny, but as it may be expedient for the Common Wealth by way of policy, that
some men (though altogether guiltless of that art) be thought by the vulgar
people skillful Magicians, or Conjurers, that they who will rather trust God
with their unlawful secrets then man, might be more afraid to offend, lest
they should be bewrayed: So the King might make good use of that opinion of
Saint Cuthbert, being a tutelary Deity against the Scots; In conceit of whose
protection, certainly the English Soldiers were much encouraged, and animated
to the great disadvantage of their enemies, and obtaining the victory. As also
this persuasion kept this part from frequent incursions, when the Monks had
invented so many fearful miracles that befell those that attempted either by
Hostility or stealth to wrong any thing belonging to the Saint. But I wonder,
how the Monks could maintain this Imposture so many years, when men growing
wiser begun to suspect the falsehood of the Monks, as devisers of miracles for
their own gain: and it seems the Monks were put to a great shift to maintain
the Saint-ships of Saint Thomas Becket, and Saint Cuthbert, when they pretended
such amity between them, that they that belonged to Saint Cuthbert must be made
whole by Saint Becket: a small journey for a sick man to travail between
Canterbury and Durham. But the Monks knew full well, that some would not be
able to undertake the Pilgrimage, others rather to use the Saint-ship of a
Physician; some again to be content rather to dye at home, others to recover in
the way; lastly some, either to dye in their jorney, or else to save the credit
of their Saint, that they should never come thither.

But to return to the Monks of Chester, who with their Bishop enjoyed such
calm of Ease, that they make no noise in History, till the rumor of the
landing of Danes troubled their rest; This was the 115. year after they had
seated themselves in Chester; when Aldwinus then Bishop was bid by Saint
Cuthbert in his sleep to avoid the fury of the Danes. But after six Months,
and peace concluded, in their return from thence, there happened a weighty
miracle: for at Wardenlaw East from Durham, Saint Cuthbert his Coffin was so
heavy, that all the company that accompanied his corpse, could not draw the
waine whereon they lay; by which they perceived so much of Saint Cuthbert his
mind, that he would not be carried to Chester. At length after the preparation
of three days fast, it was revealed to Eadmarus a devout Monk, that Dunholme
was the place of his perpetual rest: and then two or three could draw the cart,
which before the whole Diocese of people could not so much as move. Now
concerning the vulgar fable of the duu Cow and the Milk maid, that directed
them to Dunholme, I find nothing in the Historians of this Church who would not
leave out any thing that concerned Saint Cuthbert by way of a miracle. The
Topography of Dunholme was at that time more beholden to nature for
fortification then fertility, where thick Woods, both hindered the stars from
viewing the earth, and the earth from prospect of Heaven. Here the Monks with
extempory devotion made with boughs and branches of trees rather an arbor than
a Church to place Saint Cuthbert in: but from this Chapel of boughs they
translated him to another Church, Whitekerke, where he rested in ease. Aldwinus
the Bishop raised up no small building of stone work for his Cathedral Church;
where all the people between Coqued and Tease were at work three years, and
were paid for their pains with expectation of treasure in heaven; a very cheap
way to pay workmen for their wages! Into this new Basilica St. Cuthberts
walking body in the 309 years after his first burial in Lindisferne was with
great solemnity inshrin'd in the presence of Cuthred Earl of Northumberland.
Among the Monks that attended Saint Cuthbert to Dunholme was one Rigulphus, who
was 210. years old: an History to be ranked under the same place with the
wandering Jew: a poor Monument to be remembered by, since he gives no account to
posterity of his extended age; when number of years is the only commendation
of a man. Another of Saint Cuthberts followers was Eathred a Monk, who for 6.
years before he died could never speak, but in the Church where (as if Religion
had then lent him a tongue) no man was more vocal to sing his part; these were
the beginnings of the Church of Durham, where Aldwinus the last Bishop of
Chester, and first of Durham, first ascended the Episcopal Chair, Anno Domini
996. in King Etheldreds reign, who whiles Saint Dunstane was baptizing him,
defiled the Holy Saint with the fruit of his womb, at which St Dunstane swore
by God, and by his Mother, that he would prove a lazy fellow; howsoever to
prove the laziness of the Monks of Durham, he gave Saint Cuthbert, Darlington
with the appurtenances, where afterward Hugh Pusar built both a Nunery, and a
Church. To these possessions Sunculphus one of the Nobility added Bradbury,
Mordon, and Sockburge, so ready was the Devotion in those times, to give all to
the Church, and to become poor to be made rich in the world to come.

Aldwinus dying in the 24th. year after his removing to Durham, left only the
West-tower of the Church for Edmundus to finish, who was his successor, and
chosen Bishop by a voice out of Saint Cuthberts Tomb, or perchance by a Monk
(his good friend) who lay hid under it: for I do not read that Saint Cuthbert
ever drank in his pottage, that (as it is by the Proverb) he should speak in
his grave. But without jesting he was a reverend Prelate, whose days had the
honor which his predecessors attaind not to: that now the Danes became
worshippers of Saint Cuthbert in Durham, who had burnt his Church in
Lindisferne: who now from Pagans turned Christians in that excess of Devotion,
that Cumulus their King came five miles barefoot to his Tomb in Durham, and
gave to the Saint his Church so many Towns as would breath a fat Monk to
repeat them, Wacfeild, Evenwood, Ingleton, Middleton, Staindrop, and Rabye,
where the predecessors of the Nevills, who lie entombed at Staindrop Church,
built the Castle, and held it of the Church of Durham, for the annual rent of
four pounds. The Monks of Durham had now so fair a Church for their Saint to
rest in, that they were ashamed that ever he had lain in Chester, where the
Church made of wood seemd to remain a Monument of their former poverty, till
Egilrick the Bishop took away this eyesore, and built Saint Cuthbert a Church
of stone, which methinks was but a Posthumus dignity to the Saint, and like as
if a man should suster his guest to lie meanly, when he is gone to provide for
him a better lodging. In digging the foundations of this Church he found such a
Mass of Coin, that resigning his prelateship to his Brother at Durham, he
returned to his Abbey at Peterburge. But the King hearing of his Wealth, took
occasion to pick a quarrel with him, and seizing upon his riches imprisoned him
at Westminster. This King was Duke William the Conqueror, who approaching York
with an Army so affrighted the Monks at Durham, that once more they must have
Saint Cuthbert upon their back, and fly with him to Lindisferne, coming the
first night to Jarro, the second to Bedlington, the third to Tugahala, the
fourth to Holy-Island, whether they entered dryshod, it being then the time of
low Ebb, though the Monks compared it to the miracle of Jordan or the Red Sea,
as if the water in Homage to their Saint had fled back to give them entrance;
but the Monks shortly repaired again to Durham, where the Conqueror returning
our of Scotland, would needs see the incorruptible Saint so magnified. And
never were the Monks to afraid to have their Imposture discovered; for now
they had no leisure to cheat the spectatours with a living Monk in stead of a
dead Saint: but made so many delays and entreaties to the contrary, that the
King with a Fever of Anger was put in such a heat, that hastening out of the
Church, and taking Horse, the Monks in their History make him never stay his
course, till he had passed over the Tease: King William shortly after went
about to abrogate the royal Charters of the former Kings, whereby Saint
Cuthbert his Hally-wark-folke were freed from tribute. But Saint Cuthbert in a
sleep beat the demander with his pastoral staff, that the next morning not
able to rise, he was glad to send his Cloak to Saint Cuthbert his Sepulcher,
and to ask pardon, before he could receive any ease. After this the King had a
reverend opinion of Saint Cuthbert, and restored Billingham to the Church, with
other villages: and made Walcherus Bishop of Durham) Earl of Northumberland
Thus the Monks had victory over the Conqueror, and brought him under their
Religion, who had subdued the land with his sword. All this while the Church of
Durham was but growing to her (...), and height of Glory, which she obtained
under the Magnificent Prelate William of Carleife, who thought the Church that
Aldwin built too little for so great a Saint, and therefore it was plucked down,
and the foundations of a more ample Church laid: Malcolmus King of Scotland,
and Pryor Turgot laying the first three stones, August 11th. 1093. for which
Famous work Anthony Beak (one of his successors) with a great sum of Money
got him to be canonized, and enrolled among the Saints.

This Reverend ancient Abbey (advanced upon the shoulder of a Mountainous
Atlas) is so environed again with Hills, that he that has seen the situation
of this City, has seen the Map of Sion; and may save a journey to the Holy
land: she is girded about with the Renowned River Wear, in which (as in a
Christalline) she migh once have beheld the beauty, but now the ruins of her
Walls. Into this Sumptuous Church was the last and great translation of Saint
Cuthbert, the tradition of whose incorruption Pryor Turgot and the rest of his
Brethren had great disire to confirm with their eyes, and to show him
publicly to the people at the day of his translation. At night therefore the
Pryor with seven of his Brethren meet at his Tomb, and taking up the stone,
they found a Chest covered with lether, in which they found the Book of the
Evangelist, which had fallen into the Sea; a goblet of pure Gold; and an Ivory
comb: lastly opening the second chest, they beheld the flesh and body of their
Saint lying on his right side to give place to the rest of the Relics, which
were so many that this Coffin seemed a Charnel House; for besides his own body,
there was the bones of Venerable Bede, the head of King Oswald, part also of
the bones of Aidanus, Eudfrid, and Ethelwaldus Bishop of Lindisferne. All which
Relics with due Reverence they placed in another part of the Church, laying
only Saint Cuthbert on his back; they placed King Oswalds head between his
hands. At the day of his translation Ranulphus instead of a Funeral preached
his Resurrection Sermon, and published to the people the incorruption of St.
Cuthbert his body, which after 418 years was yet flexible, and now might plead
prescription with the grave to be immortal. Thus in great Solemnity they
inshrind him besides the Altar in the presence of the Abbot of Sagium, the
Abbot of Saint Mary's in York, and the Abbot of Saint Germans, with thosands of
people spectators of the Miracle. This was the place of his rest, where so many
Treasures were daily offered that the Monks needed not to study Alchimy for
Gold, having such a Philosophers stone as Saint Cuthbert was to convert money
to their purses, who had that repute of Sanctity, and frequency of worshippers,
that in his shrine to this day you may see the pious dilapidations of Ancient
devotion: and the very stones worn out with kneeling. Here Saint Cuthbert for
four hundred years slept without disturbance: only he complained once in a
dream to a Monk of a Mouse that troubled his rest and made her nest in his
Tomb. Hence he lay in Honor and peace, till Henry 8th. sent that Earthquake
among Monasteries and Sepulchers of the Saints which he caused to be opened to
find treasure. Among which (says Harpe-feild) the Tomb of Saint Cuthbert was
so broken up with that Irreverence, that with the violence of the blow upon the
Coffin, they wounded his Leg; finding the whole body entire save the tip of his
Nose that was wanting: his very grave clothes were so free from corruption, as
if they had been kept rather in a Wardrop than in a Sepulcher: upon his finger
he had a Ring with a Sapphire stone in it, which for Reverence of the Saint they
durst not take off, but at the Command of Bishop Tonstal shut up his Tomb as
was before. All this might be true, and yet Saint Cuthbert more beholden to the
art of his Monks, than his own Sanctity, for his incorruption; for it was
Ancient amongst the Egyptians to embalm the bodies of their dead Kings, and
with Searecloathes to preserve their Carcasses for many ages from putrefaction,
and yet they were thought no Saints such as Saint Cuthbert was: in honor and
reverence of whose Saint-ship till Edward the firsts time, none presumed to be
buried in the same Church with him, as though unworthy to lie under the same
roof with such an incorruptible Saint. The most ancient Monuments therefore are
to be searched out in the Chapter House, where Bishop Walcherus Earl of
Northumberland lies entombed, who erected those ancient buildings called the
Farmary, for the Monks of Jarroe, whom with license from Gregory the seventh he
translated to Durham, but was miserably slain in Gates-Head Church: whose
death occasioned Odo Bishop of Bayoun to be sent hither to take revenge; sed
Excessit medicina modum -- For he both depopulated the Church; and robbed the
Country of diverse Ornaments. In the said Charter House lies William of
Carleif, with Pryor Turgot Archdeacon of Durham, and afterward Bishop of Saint
Andrews in Scotland, a polite writer of the History of the Church. Lastly to
omit others, I shall speak a little of Saint Goodrick, who because he is one of
my Country Saints, I will show you what he was, out of an old manuscript writ
by one Nicholaws of the Priory of Finchaly. Saint Goodrick in his former years
was a Pedlar, and carried his moveable shop upon his back from Fair to Fair;
afterward to make a better fortune he ventred into Flanders, Denmark, and
Scotland; and by the way used to visit the Holy Island, much delighted to hear
the Monks tell stories of their Saint Cuthbert: which so deeply affected him,
that he would needs in heat of devotion undertake a Pilgrimage to the Holy
Island: and again after his return to England by the advice of Saint Cuthbert
he repaired to his Holy Sepulcher, and also washing his feet in Jordan, there
left his shoos, vowing to go barefot all his life after. At his second return
he was admonished by Saint Cuthbert in his sleep to build him an Anchoridge at
Fenchallie near Durham, where he lived in that heat of Devotion, that he used
to stand praying up to the neck in the river that run by his Cell, which holy
custom so angered the Devil, that once he stole away his Clothes, as they lay
on the Bank: but Goodrick seeing him, brought him back with an Ave Mary, and
forceing the Devil to be just against his will made him restore them: which
were so course, as (I think) he that stole them, would scarce have worn them:
for his Jerkin was of Iron, of which he wore three suits in the time of his
Hermitage: a strange Coat whose stuff had the Iron-monger for the Draper, and
a Smith for the Tailor; neither was his lodging much unsuitable to his
Clothes, who had the ground for his bed, and a stone for his pillow. His
tutelary Angel often played the Sexton, and rang his bell to awake him to his
Nocturnes; who for want of beads used with pebble stones to number his
prayers; his diet was as coarse as his coat; and as his shirts were made of
sackcloth, so half the Meal that made him Bread was ashes. The Devil used to
act Proteus before him, and with his shapes rather made him sport, than
affrighted him; only as Saint Goodrick sat by the fire, the Devil came behind
him, and gave him such a box of the ear, that he had felled him down, if he
had not recovered himself with the sign of the Cross. Thus after he had acted
a Legend of miracles, he ended his scene and his life Anno Domini 1170. little
deserving this Honor to be bestowed by Hugh Pusar the Bishop on his Cell, who
had told him, that he should be seven years blind before his death: so that the
Bishop believing the Holy Hermit, and deferring his repentance (which Goodrick
meant of the eyes of his understanding) died unprovided for death: But if good
deeds be satisfactory, then died he not in debt for his sins, who repaired many
of the Episcopal manors, builded Darlington Church, founded the Hospital at
Allerton, the famous Sherburne Hospital near Durham; built Elvet Bridge with
the Chappells upon it; who bought of King Richard the first the Earldome of
Sadbury for his successors; and last of all built that beautiful work the
Gallile or our Ladies Chapel, now called the Consistory, into which he
translated Saint Bedes bones, which lie interred under a stone of Marble; from
this place (I conjecture) the great Bell in Alby has its name, and perchance
is the same, which in an Old Manuscript I find to be drawn from London to
Durham by twenty two Oxen: under the Consistory Table lies intombed Cardinal
Langley Bishop of Durham, and Lord Chancellor of England, who built the Music
and Grammar Schools. In the Quire lies Bishop Beaumount under a spacious
Marble inlaid with brass, besides whom Bishop Anthony Beak Patriark of
Jerusalem, who had the principality of the Isle of Man, was inshrin'd in the
Altar. He built (says Leland) the Manor of Aukland, and repaired Barnard, and
Anwick Castle, and made Chester a Collegiate Church. No Ancient Monuments of
Women are to be seen here; for till of late no female was to enter into Saint
Cuthberts Churches; since once on a time (as he was preaching) the Devil came
to his Sermon in the shape of a most beautiful Woman: who so drew away the
attention of the auditors by gazing upon her, that Saint Cuthbert throwing
Holy Water at her found that she was a Devil. But as for Saint Cuthbert
himself, I observe his nature did not much loath the company of his holy
sifters: for Hilda, Alfreda, Verca, Elba, and other Abbatesses were of his
intimate acquaintance: and if he had so distasted that sex, he had not built a
Nunry at Carile. But to return, in the Quire at the North side lies Bishop
Skirlaw, who built the Steeple at Holmes Church; and a great part of the
Lantern of York-minster: who bestowed moreover two hundred pound on building
the distributory at Durham: which is the Checker over the Abbey gates. The
relics of this Abbey were as many as there are Saints in the Popes Almanac;
for hence was Saint Giles to fetch his tooth at the Resurrection, another Saint
his leg, another his hipbone, another his skull, another his knuckle bone: and
if you would know what price relics were at in those days, ask Malmesbury
what Egelmothus Archbishop of Canterbury gave as he came from Rome for Saint
Augustines arm which he brought from Paria, and he will tell you, that it cost
him a hundred talents of Silver, and one of gold, by which bargain he has made
himself (by Record) a fool to posterity, and those that have read that in
Pliny, Mala emptio semper ingrata, eo quod maxim domino exprobrare stultitiam
videtur.

But of all relics to make merry with, this is one; Elfride a Monk had got
one of Saint Cuthberts Hairs, which laid upon the Coals, would be red-hot, and
return again to its former color: thus not so: much as a Hair of Saint
Cuthberts could escape without a miracle. Among other monuments of this Abbey
the brazen deske is not the least, which was the joint guilt of a reverend
Prebend of this Church, and his Son who added the Globe; and the Eagle to that
sumptuous basis and column, which was the twelfth part of a great Candlestick,
found hid in the vault of the Church; who both lie buried under two Marble
stones, inlaid with Brass, as you enter in at the Quire door on your left
hand. The subterraneous passages under this Church, as in other Abbeys, are
many: but what end these substructions should have in the makers intent,
whether to conceal their treasures in time of invasion, or for worse purposes I
cannot determine. By those Cavernes, the Abbey and the Castle certainly shaked
hands together under ground. The Castle was built by William the Conqueror for
the defense of the City, the Iron gate whereof was set up by Bishop, Tonstal,
who also built the Tolbooth. The Tower (in which Philip Potier Bishop of Durham
had License by Richard the first to set up a Minthouse, and coin Money) was
repaired by Richad Fox, and Bishop. Winton the Honorable founder of Corpus
Christi College in Oxford, whereof at this time I am a member. In the Chapel
of which College were two Altars, the one called, Ara Trinitatis, the other,
Ara Sancti Cuthberti.

To conclude, the whole Castle was repaired, and beautifully adorned, and
enlightened with Windows by the Reverend Bishop now Incumbent, under whom the
Church of Durham seems to renew her age, and take a new lease of her Eternity,
which for the internal beauty of her high Altar, Cathedral music, sacred
laver, and other ornaments may challenge her sister. Churches for Priority.

Thus (...),or like one that at once salutes a multitude, I have taken a
confused survey of the Monuments of this Church, with that distracted method
and brevity, that I have rather seemed to take an Inventory of her Antiquities,
than to have compiled an History. As it is I offer it upon one of the Altars,
which the Romans used to erect with this inscription, Diis Patrus.

FINIS.

