FLAGELLVM: OR The LIFE and DEATH, BIRTH and BVRIAL OF OLIVER CROMWELL

(...)

Faithfully described in an Exact Account of His Policies and Successes, Not
heretofore Published or Discovered.

By S. T. Gent.

-- Furto latatus inani
Distulit in seram commissa piacula mortem.
Virg. Aeneid. London, Printed for L. R. 1663.

To the Reader.
THere have been so many vulgar Errors concerning this person, and such
mistakes of his Faculties and Natural Endowments, some being prone to indulge
Humanity, others to Balance his great successes with his evil Designs, and the
rest to abhominate all; that I thought it worthy the present time while those
sad things we have suffered are yet recent in memory, and no lie dare be given
to the Sun by any offuscation of Truth, to pursue his Life with this Memorial.

The World is not ignorant of Him, and yet those few that truly love Him, that
is, Disturbances and Troubles, have great thoughts of Heart as they Phrase it
concerning Him; all the different Sects and Schisms which He kept in perpetual
separation and misunderstanding, now run into a coalition; and like divided
parcels of dying vipers, spraul toward a union with this their Head.

But they will bear find that poison of Asps under his Lips, which as the
Naturalists tell us, will evenome those of the Species that come near it, when
it is cast upon the ground. No man either of Reason or Sobriety, of that party,
can deny, but he was sucked in by that Pestilent Air of his pious pretenses,
and and therefore they will I hope accept of this Antidote for the future in
good part.

Magnae virtutes nec minora vitia, great Virtues and no less vices have been
adapted to most of the great men in the world whose Interest held the 'cale,
for this was still the Impresse of just and rightful Monarchs, whom Posterity
dare say no worse of, because no better. But Tyrannies and the enormous
excesses thereof, leave no such exchange or value of their Crimes, nor can
their Policies, Craftiness, and Pretenses commute with Prudence, Honesty or
Justice.

There has been indeed an ingenious Essay to commend Richard the Third, and to
extol him as an Excellent Prince, and this not from any other Authority but his
Heroic and Famous actions in the foreign and Civil Wars of those times: and
if this Hector be measured by the same Standard, in length only and not in
Breadth, by the whole Circumstances of his Usurpation, he will make a better
subject for such a Pen, 200. years hence, then Fate for some 100 of years, has
troubled the world with.

But when the world shall see that those Felicities of his Sword and Brain were
derived from, and accountable solely to the just Judgment of God, who gave us
up a deserved prey to the Spoiler; and that there was nothing Extraordinary in
him but in the Sins and vengeance of the Times, he being the Scourge of our
Iniquity, they will convert their admiration into a reverence of that Supreme
overruling power.

It is a Common but most observable Sentence of my Lord Chancellours, that the
Malicious influence of some planets had caused this Horrible Defection and Feud
among us: some ages more then other are infested with Troubleworlds, Ours
especially, for there have more Revolts, Detections and Secesses been made in
Europe, then for many Centuries before; not to mention the like commotions, in
the nearest and farthest parts of Asia, the Turkish and the Chinese Empires.

In Europe, I place and reckon this Cromwell as a Medium or Mean, betwixt two
almost his Cotemporaries, Wallenstein Duke of Friedland the Emperors General,
who from an obscure and wasted Barony rose to that Dignity, and thence aspired
to the Imperial Diadem, but perished in the attempt; and Thomas Anello the
famous Fisherman of Naples, who dyed in the frantic possession of the power he
had so wonderfully attained to: for by a mixed adjument of Tumults, and Arms,
and the Command upon the Rabble, and a mutinous disloyal Militia, did Cromwell.
usurp the Sovereignty, though he had the fortune or we rather the Happiness) to
dye in his bed, after the fruition of his envied Greatness.

Tyrants are like plagues and are well termed Pestes Humani Generis, they do
not reign or rage always in all Climes and Countries, but come like other
wonders into the World; the variety whereof do for the present stupifie and
afflict the World, and then leave matter of enquiry and discourse, to assist
against the suddenness and some other shaped violence (for seldom do they
come in the same form) of another rupture and rebellion against Nature.

There was something different in this man's Tyranny from all former precedents,
as there were stronger and stranger Corruptions of manners in the Times He
lived, so that he seemed to be accommodated to them Never were there such wild
speculations, such dorages and caprichio's in point of Religion, which made
half the Nation mad, and run with zeal to the ruin of their Country; Now the
destructivenesse of these Chymera's and Whimsie's of Piety, that austere
Sanctimony under which we labored, could never better be discovered, then by
the divine permission of this man's arrival and ascent to the Supreme power,
thereby giving the world a Specimen of the deep mischief of pretended and
morose Holiness.

That is the design of this Biography of Oliver Cromwell, who has been
excellently shadowed in the lineaments of Agathocles the Syracusan Tyrant, but
here he is drawn in his proper and full proportions; There are it must be
confessed some passages herein coincident with the Histories of the Times which
are borrowed thence, but generally there is very little which is not Novel
altogether, and with which very few persons have been acquainted, as it is
presumed, will appear to the Readers Satisfaction, who is desired heartily to
excuse the tenuity of the Style, in so ample and so Masculine a Subject,
considering it is an Epitome and abridgement, and to pass by or correct the
Errata in the Printing.

Vale.

ERRATA.
PAge 14. line 22. for Sir John read Sir Robert. p. 15. l. 24. in stead of the
Pricks r. Sir James. p. 87. l. 1. Addendum, most abhominably and barbarously
cruel he was in this place, for, near 200 of the better sort and the
beautifullest Women of the City, having (upon the Town being entered) fled to
the Cross, and with the Command of their charming eyes, and those melting
tears, prevailed upon the Soldiers for quarter, now at his coming thither, and
after a laughing jeering enquiry what they did there, and other mocking
insultations, were commanded to be knocked on the head, which those that
promised them life nobly refusing, He commanded another Regiment to encompass
them, and there most horribly massacred them all. In p. 88. l. 16. It is very
observable here, that though against the advice of the Council of War He had
resolved on this Storm; upon the Defeat, He ascribed it wholly to their
confidence in the Arm of Flesh and presently enjoined His old Crambe of a Fast,
throughout the Army. p. 133. l. 5. r. to its vanquished Enemies: Nol's own
argument. p. 136. l. ult. for professing, read possessing.

The Life and Death OF OLIVER CROMWELL THE Late Usurper, etc.
FATE, when it decreed and ordained the unhappy birth of this Famoso, by he
most secret and hidden malice brought him into the World, without any terrible
remark of his portentuous Life, neither Comets, nor Earthquakes nor such like
Violences of nature, ushering or accompanying Him, to the declaring and
pointing out, that the Scourge of the English Empire and Nation was now born;
as she did by indiscernible methods train him up to the possession of the
Throne, and as secretly and cunningly after all his bloody and most nefarious
actions shift him out of it, and with a blast of her spent Fury, turned him
into his wished for Grave.

Nor did she midwife him into this light, which he so horribly polluted by any
unusual preternatural or monstrous way, not with sees, or Heels forward, or
long hair, nor with any marks upon his Flesh, as it is storied of Julius Casar,
our Richard the Third, and others; nor were the^e any presagious dreams, or
fearful divinations of his Mother when she was impregnate with him, as is
mentioned of several, who have proved like him to be the destruction and common
Enemies of Mankind.

None of all these signs revealed or discovered the abstruse, and most reserved
deep and mysterious Fortune of this person, The subtleties, Arts, and Policies
of his destiny, potently and irresistibly conspiring with his as close Treasons
and dissembled Treacheries, to the ruin and overthrow of this Church and State,
singly and insensibly accomplished by the mean and unobserved Hand of this bold
and perjurious politic.

All therefore that to this purpose is noted of him, is this, that he was born
the last year of that wonderful Century of 1500. to begin the next with his
fital Marvails, just before the union of the Two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, by King James; as if it were congenial to Crowns, as to the other
lesser accessions of Felicity in private persons, to have at the same instant a
temperament and alloy to their luster and greatness; that as fortunes right
hand presented a Scepter, so her left hand was ready with a Scourge to wreak
her ^nvy upon the glory and grandeur of that renowned succession to, and
accruement, of dominion.

Every thing has its good and evil Angel, to attend or haunt it, and that
grand and happy revolution was to be afflicted and prosecuted by this Fury to
an almost dissolution of its well composed, united, and established Frame.

He was born and descended of a very ancient knightly Family of his name in the
County of Huntingdon, where for many ages they have had a very large and
plentiful patrimony, it will suffice therefore to deduce him from no further
originals then Sir Henry Cromwell, his Grandfather, a Gentleman highly honored
and beloved both in Court, and Country, who had issue Sir Oliver his eldest
Son, Henry, Robert, Richard, and Sir Philip the youngest, (whose Son upon
Suspicion of poisoning his Master a Lawyer, was accused thereupon and
convicted, and hanged some 35. years ago.) This our Oliver Cromwell was Son of
Mr. Robert Cromwell the third Son of Sir Henry, a Gentleman who went no less
^n esteem and reputation then any of his Ancestors, for his personal worth,
which did seem inherent in that Family, till his unfortunate production of this
his Son and Heir, whom he had by his Wife Elizabeth Steward, the Neice of Sir
Robert Steward, a Gentleman of a competent Fortune in that County, but of such
a malign effect on the Course of this his Nephews life, as hereafter shall be
declared, that if all the Lands he gave him, (as some were Fenny Ground) had
been irrecoverably lost and deluged, by any accident or disaster whatsoever, it
might have past for a most propitious providential prevention of that dire
mischief and miseries that Estate occasioned.

He was born April the 25. in St. John's Parish in the Town of Huntingdon, and
was christened in that Church the 29. of the same Month Anno Domini 1599. where
Sir Oliver Cromwell his Uncle gave him his name, being received into the bosom
of the Church by her Rites and Ceremonies, both which he afterward rent and
tore, and ungraciously and impiously annulled and renounced.

From his Infancy to his Childhood he was of a cross and peevish disposition,
which being humoured by the fondness of his Mother, made that rough and
intractable temper more robust and outrageous in his juvenile years, and adult
and Masterless at man's estate.

No sooner therefore had he obtained the u^ of his Tongue, but his Father
careful of his Education, sent him to School to learn the Elements of Language
and principalls of Religion, both which he studied with the same indifference,
and inside and fallacious endeavor, as afterward appeared by his never
speaking what he thought, nor believing what he heard or was instructed in; so
that his main policy was a radical and original hypocrisy, which growing up
with him, could not but be at last after so many years of Experience most
exquisitely perfected.

From this A. B. C. Discipline and the slighted Governance of a Mistress, his
Father removed him to the Tuition of Dr. Beard Schoolmaster of the Free School
in that Town, where his Book began to persecute him, and Learning to commence
his great and irreconciliable Enemy; for his Master honestly and severely
observing that and other his Faults (which like weeds, sprung out of his rank
and uncultivable nature) did by Correction hope to better his manners; and
with a diligent Hand and careful Eye to hinder the thick growth of those
vices which were so predominant and visible in him; yet though herein he
trespassed upon that respect and lenity due and usual to Children of his Birth
and quality; he prevailed nothing against his obstinate and perverse
inclination. The Learning and Civility he had, coming upon him like fits of
Enthusiasme, now a hard Student for a week or two, and then a Truant or Otioso
for twice as many months; Nunquam sibi constans, of no settled constancy; the
very tenor and mode of his future life till his grand attainment.

Among the rest of those ill qualities which fructuated in him at this age, He
was very notorious for robbing of Orchards; a puerile crime and an ordinary
trespass, but grown so scandalous and injurious by the frequent spoils and
damage of Trees, breaking of Hedges and Enclosures committed by this Apple
Dragon, that many solemn Complaints were made both to his Father and Master for
redress thereof; which missed not their satisfaction and expiation out of his
hide, on which so much pains were lost, that, that very offense ripened in him
afterward to the throwing down all boundaries of Law or Conscience, and the
stealing and tasting the forbidden fruit^ of Sovereignty, by which as the
Serpent told him, He should be like unto a God.

From this, he passed unto another more manly their, the robbing of
Dove-houses, stealing the young Pigeons, and eating and merchandising of them,
and that so publicly, that he became dreadfully suspect to all the adjacent
Country; and this was an unhappy allusory Omen of his after Actions, when he
Robbed the King his Sovereign of his Innocence and Virtues, and prostituted
them to the People and Soul ^ery, and made the World about him afraid of his
Villainies.

'Twas at this time of his Adolescency, that he dreamed, or a Familiar rather
instincted him and put it into his Head, that he should be King of England; for
it cannot be conceived, that now there should be any such near resemblance of
truth in Dreams and Divinations (besides the Considence, with which he ^epeated
it, and the difficulty to make him forget the Arrogant Conceit and opinionated
pride he had of himself does seem to evince, it was some impulse of a Spirit)
since they have ceased long ago. However the Thought or Vision came, most
certain it is, that his Father was exceedingly troubled at it; and having
angerly rebuked him for the Vanity, and Idleness, and Impudence thereof; and
seeing him yet persist in the presumption thereof, caused Dr. Beard to whip him
for them, which was done to no more purpose than the rest of his Chastisements,
his Scholar growing insolent and uncorrigible from those results and svvasions
within him, to which all other dictates and Instructions were useless, and as
a dead letter.

Now to confirm this Royal Humor the more in his ambitious and vainglorious
brain, it happened (as it was then generally the Custom in all great
Free-Schools) that a Play called The five Senses, was to be Acted by the
Scholars of this School, and Oliver Cromwell, as a Confident Youth, was. named
to Act the part of Tactus the sense of Feeling; in the personation of which as
he came out of the Tyring room upon the Stage, his Head encircled with a
Chaplet of Laurel, he stumbled at a Crown, purposely laid there, which stooping
down he took up, and Crowned himself therevvithall, adding beyond his Cue,
some Majestical mighty words; and with this passage also the Event of his
Life held good analogy and proportion, when he changed the Lavvrel of his
Victories (in the late unnatural War) to all the Power, Authority, and
Splendour that can be imagined within the Compass of a Crown.

Nevertheless the Relation of a Father, and one so stern and strict an Examiner
of him, (he being in his own nature of a difficult disposition, and great
spirit, and one that would have due distances observed toward him from all
persons, which begat him reverence from the Countreypeople) kept him in some
awe and subjection, till his translation to Cambridge, where he was placed in
Sydney College, more to satisfy his Fathers curiosity and desire, than out of
any hopes of Completing him in his Studies, which never reached any good
knowledge of the Latin Tongue.

During his short residence here, where he was more Famous for his Exercises in
the Feilds than in the Schools, (in which he never had the honor of, because
no worth and merit to, a degree) being one of the chief Match-makers and
Players at Football, Cudgels, or any other boystrous sport or game; His Father
Mr. Robert Cromwell died, leaving him to the scope of his own inordinate and
irregular will, swayed by the bent of very violent and strong passions.

There is little to be said more of his Father, that is requisite to his Sons
Story, further than this, that whereas it is reported Oliver kept a Brew House,
that is a mistake; for, the Brewhouse was kept in his Fathers time, and managed
by his Mother and his Fathers Servants, without any concernment of either of
these therein, the Accounts being always given to the Mistress, who after her
Husbands death did continue in the same Employment and Calling of a Brewer, and
thought it no disparagement to sustain the Estate and port of a younger Brother
as Mr. Robert Cromwell was, by those lawful means; however, not so reputable as
other gains and Trades are accounted.

It was not long after his Death, er'e Oliver weary of the Muses, and that
strict course of Life, (though he gave latitude enough to it in his wild
salleys and flyings out) abandoned the University and returned Home, faluted
with the Name of young Mr. Cromwell, now in the room and place of his Father,
which how he became, his uncontrolled debaucheries did publicly declare, for
Drinking, Wenching, and the like outrages of licentious youth, none so insam'd
as this young Tarquin, who would not be contraried in his Lusts, in the very
strain and to the excess of that Regal Ravisher.

These pranks made his Mother advise with her self and his friends what she
should do with him, and to remove the Scandal which had been cast upon the
Family by his means, and therefore it was concluded to send him to one of the
Inns of Court, under pretense of his studying the Laws, where among the mass
of people in London, and frequency of Vices of all sorts, His might pass in
the throng without that particular reflection upon his relation, and at worst
the infamy should stick only on himself.

Lincolns-Inne was the place pitched upon, and thither Mr. Cromwell in a
suitable Garb to his fortunes was sent, where but for a very little while he
continued, for the nature of the place and the Studies there were so far
regretful beyond all his tedious Apprentiship to the more facile Academick
Sciences, (by reason Laws were the bar and obstacle of his impetuous
resolutions and the quite contrary to his loose and libertine spirit, that he
had a kind of antipathy to his Company and Converse there; and so spent his
time in an inward spite, which for that space superseded the enormous
extravagancy of his former vitiousnesse. His Vices having a certain kind of
intermission, succession, or transmigration, like a complete revolution of
wickedness into one another. So that few of his Feats were practiced here, and
it is some kind of good luck for that honorable Society that he has lest so
small and so innocent a Memorial of his Membership therein.

His next traverse was back again into the country to his Mother, and there he
fell to his old trade, and frequented his old haunts, consumed his money in
tippling, and then ran on score per force; in his drink he used to be so
quarrelsome as (few unless as mad as himself) durst keep him company; his
chief weapon in which he delighted and at which he fought several times with
^ink^ers, Pedlars, and the like, (who most an end go armed therewith) was a
Quarterstaff; in which he was so skilful, that seldom did any overmatch him. A
boisterous discipline and Rudiment of his martial skill and valor, which with
so much fierceness he manifested afterward in the ensuing War.

These and the like strange, wild, and dishonest actions, made him every where
a shame or a terror, insomuch that the Ale-wives of Huntingdon and other
places, when they saw him a coming would use to cry out to one another, Here
comes young Cromwell, shut up your Doors, for he made it no Punctilio to invite
his Roysters to a Barrel of Drink, and give it them at the charge of his Host,
and in satisfaction thereof either beat him, or break his Windows, if he
offered any show, or gave any look or Sign of refusal or discontent.

His Lustful wantonnesses were not less predominant than the other unruly
appetites of his mind, that there might no vice be wanting to make his Life a
Systeme of iniquity; the public, open and more ingenuous vilenesses of his
Youth, becoming the several dangerous and druell Villainies of his Old Age, it
being now his rude custom, to seize upon all Women he met in his way on the
road, and perforce ravish a kiss, by some lewder satisfaction from them; and if
any resistance were made by their Company, then to vindicate and allay this
violence and heat of his blood, with the letting out of theirs, whose defense
of their Friends Honor, and Chastity, innocently engaged them. And the same
riots was he guilty of against any who would not give him the way; so that he
was a Rebel in Manners, long before he was a Belial in Policy.

I am loath to be too large in such particulars, which may render me suspect of
belying him, out of prejudice or revenge; but I have heard it confirmed so
often from knowing persons, and the stories made use of by his party who did
thereby magnify his Conversion, making him thus dear and precious unto God,
that I was obliged to mention them, partly as due to this Memoir of him, which
pretends to an exact Biography, as well in the minute and small beginnings, as
in the grand and most important Events of his Life; and partly to set him as a
remarque against all Satanical delusions of Instantaneous Sanctity, with which
yet at this very day the World is bewitched though they have seen in him the
Tragical, even Diabolical effects of his Religious Austerity.

Only one thing I may not omit: by these lewd actions he had so aliened the
affections of his Uncle and Godfather Sir Oliver Cromwell, that he could not
endure the sight of him, having in his own presence in the great Hall of his
House, where he magnificently treated King James at his assumption to the Crown
of England, in a Christmas time, (which was always highly observed by him by
Feasting, and keeping openhouse) played this unhandsome and unseemly trick or
frolic; with the Relation of which the Reader will be pleased to indulge me,
because I have seen it raccounted by a Worthy and Learned hand.

It was Sir Oliver's Custom in that Festival, to entertain in his House a
Master of Mis-rule or the Revels, to make mirth for the Guests, and to direct
the Dances and the Music, and generally all manner of sport and Gambols; this
fellow, Mr. Cromwell having besmeared his own Clothes and hands with
Surreverence, accosts in the midst of a frisking Dance, and so grimed him upon
every turn, that such a stink was raised, that the Spectators could hardly
endure the Room, whereupon the said Master of Mis-rule perceiving the matter,
caused him to be laid hold on, and by his Command to be thrown into a Pond
adjoining to the House, and there to be sous'd over head and ears, and rinced
of that filth and pollution sticking to him, which was accordingly executed,
Sir Oliver suffering his Nephew to undergo the punishment of his unmanerly
folly.

By this time and by these ways, Oliver had run himself out of that little
Patrimony he had, and brought his Mother to the same near ruin, when taking a
sad prospect from the brink of this destruction, of his present desperate
condition, a giddy inspiration seized him, and all of a sudden so seemed to
change and invert him, that he now became the wonder, who just before was the
hissing and scorn of all people. And that this Conversion might seem true and
real, he manifested it with the Publican first in the Temple, the Church, which
he devoutly and constantly frequented, affecting the Companies and Discourses
of Orthodox Divines, no way given to that Schism of Nonconformity, into which
Oliver soon after fell, not out of Seduction and Ignorance, but Sedition, and
Malice, and Treasonable design.

But this appearance of such a Reformation in him (as he no doubt forecast it)
did effectually conduce to his present purpose; for these Reverend Divines,
glad of the return of this Prodigal, made it their business to have him
welcomed and received with the Fatned Calf, to remove the prejudices that lie
upon the narrowness of Christianity; and therefore severally and jointly they
deal with Sir John Steward his Uncle (for Sir Oliver would by no means hear of
him, as being assured and confirmed against him out of some good hints
certainly of his own observation) to take him into his favor, and did at last
prevail so upon h^, that he declared him his Heir, and dying soon after, left
him an Estate of Four or five hundred pounds a year; which being got and
obtained by so impious a practice, a kind of inverted Symony, to purchase Lands
by Counterfeit Gifts and Graces, could not escape the canker of Sacrilege; but
in few years mouldered away peece-meal, nothing at all remaining thereof but a
thatcht House, with some Lands of Forty or fifty pounds a year, in a Town
called Wells, within four miles of Wishich in the Isle of Ely.

In the Interim of this Estate, having served himself of those Venerable
Divines, he fell in with some of the preciser sort; began to show himself at
Lectures, to entertain such Preachers at his House, to Countenance that Way,
and be very Zealous in all meetings of such People, which then began to be
frequent and numerous; and to Exercise with them by praying and the like; to
estrange himself from those his benefactors, and at last to appear a public
dissenter from the Discipline of the Church of England. He had Matched a little
before upon the account of this Estate in reversion, with a Kinswoman of Mr.
Hambdens, and Mr. Goodwins of Buckinghamshire, by Name Elizabeth, Daughter of
one Sir... Bowcher, whom he trained up and made the waiting Woman of his
Providence, and Lady-rampant of his successeful greatness, which she
personated afterward as Imperiously as himself; so did the Incu^us of his bed
make her partaker too, in the pleasures of the Throne. Those Men eminent for
Puritanisme together with their Preachers, set him up as the prime man of his
County, for Religion, Integrity, and true Godliness.

But his Estate still decaying, he betook himself at last to a Farm, being
parcel of the Royalty of St. Ives, where he intended to Husband it, and try
what could be done by endeavor, since nothing succeeded (as yet) by Design, and
accordingly took Servants, and bought him all Utensils and Materials as
Ploughs, Carts, etc. and the better to prosper his own and his men's Labor,
every Morning before they stirred out, the Family was called together to
Prayers, at which exercise very often, they continued so long, that it was Nine
of the Clock in the morning before they began their work; which awkward
beginning of their Labor sorted with a very sorry Issue; for the effects of
those prayers was, that the Hinds and Plowmen seeing this zeal of their Master,
which dispensed with the profitable and most Commodious part of the Day for
their labor, thought they might borrow the other part, of it for their
pleasure, and therefore they commonly went to the Plough with a pack of Cards
in their pockets, and having turned up two or three Furrows, set themselves
down to game till dinner time; when they returned to the second part of their
Devotion, and measured out a good part of the afternoon with dinner and a
repetition of some Market Lecture that had been preached the day before; and
that little work that was done, was done so negligently and by halves, that
scarce half a Crop ever reared it self upon his Grounds, so that he was (after
five years time) glad to abandon it and get a friend of his to be the Tenant
for the remainder of his time.

During his continuance here, he was grown (that is, he pretended to be) so
just, and of so scrupulous a Conscience, that having some years before won
thirty pounds of one Mr. Calton at play, meeting him accidentally, he desired
him to come home with him and to receive his money, telling him, that he had
got it of him by indirect and unlawful means, and that it would be a sin in him
to detain it any longer; and did really pay the Gentleman the said thirty pound
back again.

Now was he therefore thinking of transporting himself and his Family into New
England, a receptacle of the Puritan who flocked thither amain, for liberty of
Conscience: But he indeed, for that his purse and credit were so exhausted that
he could no longer stay here, which resolution he had taken up before the
Estate of his Uncle fell to him, and was put aside it, by the amplitude of that
Fortune to maintain him here: with this Estate of his Uncle Stewards, being
again set up in the World, and assisted with his borrowed stock of Sanctity, He
was looked upon as a rising person, the Voyage for New England, (the desperate
Counsel of his necessity) abandoned, and the port and state of his Family
resumed to such a conspicuous Grandeur, that rendered him a Candidate for the
ensuing Parliament, and supplied him before with the Ability of disbursing 500
l. upon account of Irish Adventures toward the settling a plantation in Vlster,
in that Kingdom. Yet was this the very last remains of that accessional
Inheritance, He being forced to borrow money in Town here very precariously and
by the mediation of friends, though for no greater sums then Ten pounds, (nay
formerly ten shillings were acceptable) at several times which he received with
this inducing Expression, That though sometime he had made no conscience of
repaying any money, yet he would punctually now keep his word, which indeed he
did justly observe; and this an eminent Citizen his Friend and School-fellow
has often declared. The last sum he borrowed being very anxiously besought
and entreated, as rising to a 100 l. which upon his growing Greatness was
pleasured him, and most abusefully employed in hyring Wagons for the Earl of
Essex's Army, then advancing against the King. To this constant and insuperable
indigency and ebb of Fortune was he kept and decreed, to the brink of our
Troubles, that his ruins and private misery might the more industriously force
him to the reparation of them; by the public calamities, and then carry him
to the mixed Affluence and Excesses of wealth and state Usurpation.

Nor did he omit any other duty or civility, or Office of love to any,
especially to those of the Household, as they then termed the people of the
Separation; insomuch that he had s^tued himself into the affections of a great
many wellmeaning people, whose suffrages he obtained against his use for them
in the long Parliament.

He was a great stickler likewise against shipmoney, in which danger his great
friend and patron Mr. Hambden was so far embarked: nor was he better affected
to the Scotch War, then growing on, as he to his hazard discovered himself to
some Chief Commanders of the English Army, who in their march against the
Scots, quartered at his House; which Discourses drawing suspicion upon him made
him the more popular in those parts who were generally infected with
Puritanisme.

About the same time one Mr. Bernards coming to be Recorder of the Town of
Huntingdon, some difference about precedence of place happened between them,
Oliver's Spirit being too high to yield to any person in that town, where his
Family had continued of the best rank some years together, and therefore to
avoid the Cession of his Honor to another, he withdrew himself thence just
before the summoning of the Long Parliament, and took a dwelling in Cambridge;
where upon the Election of Burgesses, by the procurement and means of Mr.
Hambden, he was chose Burgess for that place, and so returned.

Having now attained his desire and aims which was to help to blow up those
Coals of dissension and rage, which had kindled in the breast of his
malecontent party so long, and now were like to have free vent to the setting
the kingdoms into a Conflagration; like a right incendiary, where he found any
grievance complained of, he would make himself a party concerned in it; Enquire
into the number and strength of the Faction that managed the Complaint, proffer
his and his friends assistance, encourage them to clamor against the
maladministration, and generally set a foot those mischeivous petitions,
which were brought thick and threefold to the Parliament, till his Faction had
so exasperated the King against them, that there seemed no possibility of
reconciling them, making even all the Kings most earnest endeavors for an
accommodation, arguments of refusing it. And though at first he was none of the
principal of the Cabal, being taken in and tutored by Mr. Pym and Hambden. (as
finding him of a bold and undertaking Spirit of what mischief soever was
propounded to him) yet was he notably and highly instrumental and subservient
to the Conspiracy, and at last arose to such a knowledge and capacity of the
mystery, that he scornd their puny rudiments, when with a deeper Athiesme he
set up for himself.

The determinate time was now come for which the cabal of the Puritan had so
long labored, and that none of those things which had been so direfully
Prophesied of their Schism (if it ever should attain any power or prevalency)
might want, or rather not exceed belief; The whole Kingdom of a sudden, as if
some Magical Charm had transformed the State and shape of it, seemed rather a
Scene or boscage of Wild and brutall Creatures, than a Governed or civil
Community. But because this particular has been so largely treated off and is
yet fresh in memory and will hardly ever be forgotten, it will not be much
material to urge it further, unless to the maintenance of this Maxim; That
the Uproars and Rebellions of Subjects upon what pretense soever, do always
end in the greatest Tyrannies and turn to their most unsufferable and
ignominious miseries, and that their Darling Demagogues, whom with applauses
and Arms they have shouldred up, and have reared and exalted above the reach of
the Law, make it no nicety afterward to trample upon the Necks of their
raisers; and to swim in their Blood which itching swelled their ambition to the
Throne.

Nor did the Volge know when, or could their Boutefeus tell where to cease,
what Issue would happen of these their troubles; Rash and blind Furies that
made way to the unobserved advancement of this private Malcontent, who like
Marius from his lurking holes in the Fens of Minturna after the defeat of his
fortunes, crept into the Supreme Power, and died his purple with a more
indelible tincture of Noble and Plebeyan blood.

The Jealousies and Fears and the like piques and quarrelling pretenses of the
Parliament proving hopeless of reconcilement or accommodation by the artifices
of a Faction, wherein Mr. Pyns, Hambden; and other Puny's with Cromwell, mainly
bu^ed themselves: and the just Judgment of God giving up up, our Peace,
Prosperity and Plenty to the Calamity of a most unnatural War, the long desired
occasion and expectation of those who had lodged their private hopes in the
Common Ruin, did most gladsomely salute the Designs of Oliver, who having
spent the utmost farthing of his Estate, and secured from an Imprisonment by
his privilege as a Member, was one of the first of those adventurous Knights
that mounted the Good Cause behind them, and so took the Field, which now
Ploughed with Swords and Spears, and watered with Blood, answered its long
denied increase, and from a lucklesse Pesant made him a fortunate Pedant Prince.

For Enyo no ^ooner sounded her Trumpets under the Earl of Essex's Banners then
entitled Generallissimo for the King and Parliament, but Gromwell offered him
his Service, and was thereupon honored with a Commission of Captain of Horse,
which to raise, he returned to his own County of Huntingdon, where among the
Zealots he was never had in greater Estimation. He was likewise named a
Commissioner in the Ordinance for the Militia for that and the neighboring
Shires then entering into an Association against the King, the Ground work and
eminent endeavor of this great Conspirator, in pursuance of that rebellious
Project of his party at Westminster; following herein the practice of all
Ringleaders, who do first collect rabbles, and engage and assure places of
retreat and fastness to all Events, though herein he practiced the more
difficult and unprecedented combination of a people, for Wealth, and Sobriety,
and Civility, and judgment (for a great part most contrary to his Designs)
little to be suspected of taking part with him. But it so luckily evened to
him, that by his lopping off, as it were, this Limb of the Kingdom, and
depriving the King thereby of any assistance thence, and of the convenience of
the ports of those Eastern Counties for any foreign supplies, one Canton of
the Kingdom was as planet struck in point of Allegiance, and not only a
Member, -- Mancum and inutile dextre Pers. but of a very sinister consequence
to the Royal Cause, the Gangreen thereof spreading and diffusing it self
through the whole Mass of the Nation, by feeding the Humourous rage of the War
through the whole distemper thereof, till it finally consumed all; this being
the abundant Magazine of Men and Horses for the Parliament Service.

This therefore was Cromwell's first Province or Superintendency, wherein he
exercised the original Office of a Major General, when as yet he sounded no
more then a Captain, being the chief Committee-man of the Association, making
himself most notably eminent by his activity and zealous industry in promoting
the good Cause, and levying and listing of Forces, and Disciplining them, the
skill whereof he had presently learned, from an exact observation of some
veterane commanders, viz. Coll. Dolbier, whom he had by great sums of advance
money, and as extraordinary pay allured to his side.

The gross of those Troops he raised here and sent from this Seminary to the
Camp and School of Action, were such, whose dull Spirits were to be beaten into
the knowledge of Arms, and like the Turks Asapi were on purpose sent thither to
blunt the weapons of the Kings generous Cavalry, on purpose to beget in them a
relash and contemptuous neglect, of so base and despicable an enemy; that such
their regardlesse confidence might conclude their ruin. He himself was all the
while continued by especial Order of Parliament in this Employment like an
Independent Commander to have an Eye upon any Attempts that might be made
thereabouts, and as a purer and preciser reserve to the mixed multitude, that
then from the equal motives of pay and zealotry rusht into the War.

And therefore Oliver, understanding how miserably the Cavalry freshmen of his
party were worsted at every Encounter, and well knowing the nature of the
quarrel; (which was pretended for Religion) resolved and advised, that there
were no men so likely to oppose the conquering Gallantry of those Gentlemen on
the Kings side, then such who were or should be engaged upon account of
Conscience and Zeal which would Spirit them with the same magnanimous
Fortitude, and make them also to endure the difficulties and hardships of the
War, with a more pertinacious Constancy, as having bodies better able, and
minds more finely sublimed upon that score pro aris and focis then the mixed
and most rascally Herd of loose and vicious people.

Against the dangerous evil of this Association, the King directed his
Commission of Array, which was first put in execution in Hartfordshire, by Sir
Henry Conisby High Sheriff of that County, who proclaimed it at St. Albans, and
intended to raise the County to the Kings Assistance, but by the vigilance of
Oliver Cromwell, the Design was prevented; for by that time the Members at
Westminster had notice of Sir Henry's Loyal endeavor, Cromwell with a party of
horse had surprised and seized that party almost in the very instant of their
appearance, and sent Sir Henry and some other prime Gentlemen engaged with him,
Prisoners to London, to the great satisfaction and liking of the Parliament
Grandees, who were at first aghast at an attempt made for the King so near their
own Doors: and thereupon this their Commander was ordered the Thanks of the
House, and from thence forward looked upon as an eminent person, and a Champion
of the Cause, which now jeoparded it in the field, whence the towardly
settlement of these parts, withheld Cromwell in this Province, which like a
piece of the former Heptarchy he himself ruled and governed absolutely and pro
imperio.

His next piece of Service was of the like nature, and of the same evil
Consequence to the King. For diverse Gentlemen of the County of Suffolk (another
of the associated Counties) resenting this Curb upon their Allegiance, and the
saucy Edicts and Commands of the Committees, which were made up of the meanest
of the Gentry, and Burgesses of the Towns, designed together to free themselves
and their Country from the yoke of these new Lords, the chief of these
Gentlemen were Sir John Pe^tus, Sir Edw. Barker, etc. who having in order to
their Conjuncture, rendezvouzed at Lowerstofe in that County, were by the
preventing diligence of Cromwell, seized and secured, and thereby such a
Break-neck given to any future Royal undertakings in those parts (the rendition
of Lyn Regis which then held for the King, soon after following this defeat and
disappointment) that throughout the whole course of the War there happened not
any the least Commotion in favor of His Majesty's Arms, either by supply,
assistance, or diversion.

Things being thus quieted thereabouts and disposed to the Interest of the
Juncto, there remained after the military part, a Scholastical labor for this
Parliamentary Hercules, the zealons cleansing of the University of Cambridge,
the Parent of this Viper, who just before his infectious production into the
main Army, (whither he was now designed) did miserably exenterate her, leaving
her a sad and doleful Skeleton, deprived of so many learned and religious
persons, whose only charge was, that they adhered to the Dictates of their
Conscience, and the Obligations of those Oaths, which just Authority had
enjoined, against the novel and illegal Commands and Covenants, forcibly
imposed and obtruded on them. In this destructive work, his module and method
of Ambition, Cromwell was mainly and chiefly active, as also against the
Orthodox and Protestant Ministry, and their Churches, defacing all the
Ornaments and Beauty thereof, leaving them the ruinous Spectacle of his
Reformation.

And from this Employment now finished he was Commissioned Lieutenant General
to the Earl of Manchester, who had the separate command in a distinct Supremacy
of these associated Counties, and was designed to march Northwards with those
Forces and join with the Scots newly entered England, and the Lord Fairfax,
against the Marquess of Newcastle, who was General for the King in those parts,
and yet balanced the Fortune of War against that potent Scotch Invasion; but
upon the conjuncture and addition of the Earl of Manchester's fresh and well
disciplined and armed forces, the said Marquess was constrained to quit the
field, and distribute his Army into the Garrisons, he himself shutting up the
best part of it in the City of York, which the Confederates presently besieged,
and made several venturous attempts, wherein Cromwell was none of the
backwardest, though always repulsed with loss and considerable slaughter.

The importance of this place, and juncture of time, which either won or lost
the North to the King (who had newly had great success in the West by the
defeating of the Earl of Essex at Lestithiel in Cornwall) caused him to send
away Prince Rupert as Generalissimo, with a very potent Army to raise that
Siege, and fight the Enemy if he found occasion. The Prince accordingly
advanced, and upon his approach the Confederates drew off from their Leagure,
affording the Garrison liberty to join with their friends, when it was resolved
by the Prince, without any delay to give Battle; though the Marquess knowing
what hazard the Kings Interest, and his own, and all the Loyal parties Estates
would thereby be put to, did very much diswade the suddenness of the
Encounter, which notwithstanding ensued on the Evening of the same day July 2.
On Marston-Moor within Three miles of York, and lasted till Night.

It will be tedious and beside our purpose to relate the whole order and manner
of the Battle, further then this, that the Scots and my Lord Fairfaxes Forces
were totally routed and per^ued some miles out of the field, and the day given
for lost, when Cromwell with his associated Horse most of them Curassiers in
the left wing, seeing this discomfiture, fell on with great resolution and
courage, and worsted the Prince and his reserves, and with the same fury fell
upon the Marquisses foot, whose Regiment of White-Coats, and therefore called
his Lambs, yet stood and could not be broken, till the field being almost
cleared, the Parliaments Infantry came up, and then both horse and foot charged
and broke them; Cromwell here made a very great Slaughter and Carnage,
especially in the rout and pursuit, purposely to make his name terrible, this
being his first and grand appearance, gaining here the Title of Ironsides, from
the impenetrable strength of his Troops, which could by no means be broken or
divided.

The success of this day made him indeed highly famous, and his Lawrells most
verdant and flourishing, the Victory being principally ascribed to his courage
and conduct. His Cunctation and temperate delay were highly magnified; and then
his Resolution in the desperation of the Event extolled the firmness and
constant equality of his mind, when intrepidly and fixedly he beheld the
overthrow of the gross of their Army, and thereby animated his Troops to the
more vigorous recovery of the day, now that the adverse fury was spent in the
chase of their Fellows the Scots, whom Cromwell ever afterward though in
Covenant with them, most disdainfully despised, but not only for this reason.

The Credit of this Achievement was industriously cried up at Westminster, and
all the Grandezza's of Scriptural Ovation fitted and accommodated thereto; He
himself with the same conquering Troops, as yet in the same quality under the
Earl of Manchester, was remanded from the North to oppose the King, then
returning victorious out of the West; and because the Earl of Essex had hither
to been unfortunate, therefore this lucky Cheiftain was added as his better
Star, at the second Battle of Newberry, within font Months after Marston Moor;
and here again the Fates favored him, though not with a complete Victory, yet
on that side where he fought with a part of one, and so much as endangered the
person of the King, if the noble and stout Earl of Cleveland had not
hazardously interposed, and bore off the pursuit.

This indifference of Fortune begot very great differences among the Parliament
Commanders, one Taxing the other of Neglect, Treachery, or Cowardice, and by
what means it could come to pass that nothing was yet effected against the
King, whom in the beginning of the War they had thought to have swallowed up
presently? Not were the divisions less at home then in the camp, ^or now the
younger Brother of the Rebellion, the Independent Faction began to appear; a
preciser and severer sort of Zealots, who thought Essex and his Army not
righteous enough, nor fit instruments, in whose hands the work of Reformation
should ever be blessed to an attainment, and that therefore it was fit the Army
should be purged of such Officers, or the Cause would never prosper. To the
same purpose Oliver was tampering with his Myrmidons, frequently bewailing the
want of Faith and Grace in the heart of the Soldiery, which alone retarded the
desired Conclusion, that the great men of the Army minded themselves more then
God or his people, and that purposely they protracted the war, not sparing to
insimulate his own General the Earl of Manchester of the same prevarications,
aggravating the affront he received before Dennington-Castle, and some other
later miscarriages, which coming to the Ear of the said Earl, who rightly
guessed the ambitious Drifts of his Lieut. General. He caused a Charge and
impeachment to be drawn up against him for some misdemeanors in the Army, as
stirring up of Mutiny, etc. and delivered it to the Lords, to whose Bar
Cromwell was summoned, but he refused their Jurisdiction, pleading his
privilege as a member of the House of Commons, who alone had Cognizance of
him: and to be even with the Earl recriminated him in the same manner to the
House of Commons, but both these accusations stuck upon the file without any
prosecution on either side, either party as yet afraid of the other, and
distrustful of their plots, not having yet attained the absolute power from the
King, which was the only subject of the Quarrel. So soon did these twins of the
Usurpation struggle in the womb of their Ambition, and though Presbytery was
midwifed first, yet Independency carried away the Blessing or rather the Curse
of their prosperous Violence.

For the Independents had insinuated such plausible Expedients for the redress
of this evil Management of the Army, and by their austerer Piety (which Oliver
most devoutly personated, being frequent in praying and preaching in his
Quarters) had conciliated such an esteem of their Counsels, which were absolute
Intrigues to the contrary Faction, that a Resolution was taken to module the
Army, and appoint a new General; and in this Consultation great part of the
Winter 1644. was taken up, the rest was spent in a seeming tendency to Peace,
by a Treaty held at Uxbridge, which Affair concerned Cromwell no further then
thus, that it showed how eminent and great a man he was taken to be, being
named in the Parliaments Demands and Propositions, for one of the standing
Commissioners, to whose trust and exercise the Militia of the Kingdom (upon
Agreement) should be committed.

While these and the like Articles were in vain debating, the prosecution of
the War was effectually intended, and the new module so far advanced, that an
Ordinance passed the two Houses, wherein it was forbidden any Member of either
House to have any Command in the Army or Garrisons, and the time limited to
forty days from the publishing the said Ordinance. By this fair and impartial
dealing (as they called it) the Earls of Essex, Manchester, Stamford, and
Denbigh; Sir William Waller, Sir Philip Stapleton, and others were laid aside,
only Lieutenant General Cromwell, was respited for a while longer, because of
his present usefulness in that unsettled Condition of the Atmy, and because he
had been of an unexampled success and Conduct: In the place of Essex, Sir
Thomas Fairfax was made General, and he Issued out Commissions to such whom
the Independents favored, most of the supreme Officers being discarded, and
entitled the Reformadoes, and left a begging their pay, and their Inferior
ones substituted in their places. Among the rest of these New blades, Ireton
was raised to be Commissary General of the Horse, Cromwell's second, who had
newly married (...) of his Daughters, and was as near in brain to him as in
blood.

This continuance of Cromwell in his Command after all the other Members of
Parliament were laid aside at last upon the marching of the Army in the
beginning of the Year 1645. styled him Lieutenant General; a little before
which he had doctrinated his Regiment in the new mode of Addresses to the
Parliament, and to the General, setting forth their acquiescences and gladness
in this frame and module of the Army, and that they were ready to lay down
their lives in prosecution of the good Cause so far advanced: and this
Arche-type was soon after followed by every Regiment and Garrison, whereunto
none but the Creatures and Confidents of Independency were now admitted.

For from the first Headquarters of this Army, Cromwell (having newly come out
of the West, and tendered his Service to the General if the Parliament should
think fit, but intimating his sorrow that he seated he should not have the
Honor to wait upon him (when at the very instant came down another
dispensation) was sent with a flying party of Horse (by his party'^ prevalency
in the House for forty days longer) to intercept a Convoy of Horse which was
the Queens Regiment, the Earl of Northampton's^ and Colonel Palmer's, with
some other Troops, coming to Oxford to bring off the King with his Train of
Artillery, who made such haste, that at Islip Bridge he surprised and routed
them, took four hundred Horse and two hundred Prisoners with the Queens
Standard, and continuing his good speed having got intelligence of (...) Party
of three hundred and fifty Foot under Sir William Vaughan, who were marching
toward Radcot-Bridge, he pursued them and took the said Sir William,
Lieutenant Colonel Litleton, and two hundred more prisoners, and immediately
lummoned Blechingdon-House not far distant from the place, whither some Ladies
were newly come to give a visit to Coll. Windebank's (the Governor's) Bride,
who being affrighted with the suddenness of the danger, never left importuning
the unfortunate Gentleman till he rendered the Garrison, though Cromwell for
want of Foot, could never have forced him out, making use of this Stratagem by
raising a Cry of, Fall on Foot, fall on; for this surrender, upon his coming to
Oxford, by Sentence of a Council of War he was shot to death, leaving his
Widow to blast with her sighs and tears, Cromwell's Laurels, who with this
envious Triumph returned to his General. And this first happy Exploit done by
him in the beginning of the Expedition, was taken and published for a good Omen
of his future Service, and therefore the Prudence of the Parliament was much
commended in continuing him in Command, who was so hopeful and Instrument of
carrying on the remaining work through so many difficulties, which had so long,
and yet seemed so insuperably to impede it. Thus did his Faction and Partisans
prepare and sublime him to his succeeding Enterprises and Designs after the
expiration of the War.

To enhance this reputation and to secure his Continuance in the Army, he next
resolved upon a gallanter, and more hazardous Attempt, the reducing of
Farringdon house, which had been an impregnable and most advantageous Garrison
for the King, the Governor, was Sir George Lisle, a person of an invincible
Spirit, and eminent throughout the War; to the better effect of this Design, he
borrowed 600 foot of M. G. Brown, from Abingdon, and with them fell presently
to storming, but was notably repulsed, losing 50. men, without any success at
all, and before he could get off was attaqued by a party of General Gorings
Horse, commanded by himself then newly come out of the West from Taunton Seige,
who being as vigilant and valourous a Commander as himself, gave Cromwell the
first brush he received in the War, taking three Colors and Major Bethel
prisoner, and so returned to his former Leaguer at Taunton.

In the mean while, General Fairfax by Order of the Committee of both Kingdoms
of England and Scotland, who ordered the Conduct of the War, was advancing into
the West for the relief of the said Town of Taunton, and because the King was
yet at Oxford preparing to take the Field, Cromwell was left behind in the same
parts, where now he quartered with Major General Brown to attend the Kings
motion, and to impede his Conjunctures with the Princes Rupert and Maurice,
then coming with Complete Body of Horse out of Worcestershire, but His
Majesty had equipped so gallant an Army, that Cromwell durst not venture to
fight him or retard his march any whither, so that Fairfax was presently
recalled and ordered to sit down before Oxford, to reduce the King to the care
of that place, and upon advantages to fight him: when News came that the King
having joined with the Princes, and relieved Chestor besieged by Sir William
Brereton, was now returning and bending his March toward the Associate
Counties, the heart and unrouch'd strength of the Parliament Cause, and
therefore Cromwell was immediately dispatched into the Isle of Ely, with three
Troops, to secure that against any Invasion, it being as the Bulwark or
Fortress of the rest. But the King diverting from that course, came and sat
down before Leicester, and after summons stormed and took it, which put the
Parliament into such a fright, that they commanded Fairfax to rise from Oxford,
and presently find out the King and fight him, who was now (as he himself writ
to the Queen) in a better and more successeful condition then any time since
the War. This Order Fairfax (having never sent in a summons to the City, as
forejudging he should rise without it disgracefully) readily obeyed but withal
requested them that they would forthwith dispatch away Cromwell from the Isle
of Ely, to command the Horse, extolling his Experience and Sucoeffe in that
Service.

Accordingly Cromwell reinforced and recruted with some Troops of the
Association, returned to the Army then marching to Northampton, where the
General was informed that the King lay about Daventry, quartering his Foot and
Carriages upon Borough hill, as if he intended to fight upon that ground if
they should advance, but he stayed only till the 1200 Horse which he had sent
to carry the Cattle he had taken out of Leicester and Northamptonshire, for the
supply of Oxford, were returned, intending thence according to advice of his
Council of War to march to the relief of Pomfret Castle in the North, and to
reduce those parts lost to him ever since Marst^ Moor, and so to draw on
Fairfax after him, and fight him at advantage, which he could not do in these
Counties, that were every were Garrisoned by the Parliament forces.

But this Resolution, the quicker Consultation and Opinion of Cromwell soon
disappointed, for by his advice (now that their Army could expect no other
Additions but Coll. Rossiter, who was then also in a Days march of them, for
Sir John Gell was joined already) Ireton was presently dispatched with a Brigade
of Horse to observe the posture of the Kings Army, and if they we^ upon their
March Northwards, to skirmish then in the Rear, and keep them in Action till
the whole body could come up and engage; June the 13. Fairfax came to
Gilsborough, within 5 miles of Borongh hill, whence the Cavaliers, the 120^
Horse being returned, were marching northwards: and the next night to the
wonder and amazement of the King, Ireton gave an Alarm to His Own quarters at
Naseby, whence about a 11. of the Clock the King dislodged and hast^ed to
Harborough, where Prince Rupert and the Van of the Army was quartered; here a
Council of War was presently convened, and by the Kings fatal Opinion
concluded, that because there was danger of bringing off the real of his Army,
the Enemy pressing so near and hard upon them, that therefore they should
desist from their March further Northwards, and immediately turn back upon the
Enemy and give him Battle, relying chiefly upon the valor of the Infantry, now
flusht and encouraged with the Plunder and spoil of Leicester.

This was put in execution (though the major voices were for staying till
General Goring with his forces were come up) and the Kings will obeyed. For
very early in the Morning the Scouts brought word that the King was making all
have to the Engagement, being falsely informed that Fairfax in fear was
retreating to Northampton, whereas he had now disposed of Naseby-field, and
awaited Him, having Cromwell with Whalley on his right wing, and Ireton on his
left, the one opposed to my Lord Langdale, and the Northern Horse, and the
other to Prince Rupert, General of the Cavalry, the King himself being
Generalissimo. To come to the Event, Prince Rupert totally routed Ireton, who
being engaged and driven upon the Kings rightmost foot, was there wounded in
the Thigh with a Halbert and taken Prisoner, and the Field on that hand
cleared; which Fairfax and Cromwell observing, having not yet stirred from
their ground, Fairfax with a short Speech encouraged the Troops to the Charge;
which was seconded with some devout ejaculations from Cromwell, who clapping
Spurs to his Horse fell in with Langdale's Brigade, and quite charged through
three bodies and utterly broke them, nor did he stop till with fine force he
had likewise beat that Wing from their ground, without possibility of rallying
or recovering it again. In this Action, a Commander of the Kings knowing
Gromwell, advanced smartly from the Head of his Troops to exchange a Bullet
singly with him and was with the like galant^y encountered by him, both sides
forbearing to come in, till their Pisto^ being discharged, the Cavalier with a
slanting Back-blow of a broad Sword, having cut the Ribond that tied his
Murrion, and with a draw threw it off his head, and now ready to repeat his
stroke, his party came in and rescued him, and one of them alighting threw up
his Headpiece into his Saddle, which Oliver hastily catching, as being
affrighted with the chance, clapped it the wrong way on his head, and so fought
with it the rest of the day, which proved most highly fortunate (...) his side,
(though the King most magnanimou^ and expertly managed the sight, exposing
himself to the eminentest perils of the Field) and raised him beyond the Arts
and reach of Envy or his Enemies of the Presbyterian party, who had so long
been heaving at him to out him off all Military employment, which concluding so
pertinently and peremptorily for him in this grand Event, did charm the hatred
and prejudice against him, into fear and dread what this arrogance of his
fortune would finally aspire to.

This Battle wholly overthrew the King, who was never after able to make head
against the Parliament Forces, but peece-meal lost his Armies, Castles, and
Towns; Fairfax taking in the remoter Western Garrisons, while Cromwell was
employed nearer to London, being sure to have one eye on the Counsels of the
Parliament, as well as the other intent against the King. Among the rest of
those places taken by him, as Winchester, the Devizes and Langford-house;
Basing-house, that had defeated so many Seiges and ruined so many Leagures, was
not able to withstand the Fortune of this Victor, but humbled it self to dust
and ruin at his first and terrible approach.

The war now almost expired, he began to ruminate on his former Dreams, and to
adjust those strange revolutions and unexpected alterations of the times and
the Government, to his former Fancy, in which he had so much affiance anew,
that he became resolutely confirmed, that all those things were brought about
merely to fulfill that Oracle of his Imagination, That he should be King. And
therefore he thought it a just reverence to his Fate to neglect no advantages,
occasions and means which might conduce to the accomplishment of its mystery,
and conciliate it is constant affection and favor to him. One thing primarily
requisite was the assistance and Counsel of some confident Privado, and to
this purpose he had before pitched upon Coll. Ireton, a man of a most profound
and deep dissimulation and of a most clean conveyance of any mischeivous
design, one very well learned, but who had converted it (as Toads do the best
nutriment unto the most exquisite poison) to barbarous and most Horrid
Artifices of impiety and Treason; this man Cromwell made sure to him first by
marriage as abovesaid, and now by a more mutual endearment, the partnership of
the Sovereignty, which they agreed to seize; and from henceforth they never
ceased plotting and conspiring, now colloguing with this party, then with that,
and fomenting divisions still betwixt all, till with these many strange patches
of Policy, Cromwell made himself a Protectoral Robe, with which he was not many
years after solemnly vested.

In the mean time the King in Oxford fearing a Seige, and having no better
shelter in England to secure himself, after he had in vain woed the Parliament
from this his Court to a Treaty and agreement; designed an escape out of their
hands, and to that purpose (Colonel Rainsborough and other Forces at a
distance lying about all the passes of the City) by Coll. Ashburnhams means,
procured a pass from the General for the said Coll. Ashburnham and his two
servants, to Travel from Oxford upon some pretense of private business of the
Colonel, and by virtue, thereof in a Disguise of a Servant passed their
Guards, and after many traverses delivered himself into the Scotch hands then
beseiging Newark. Herein Cromwell most cunningly and deceitfully first
practiced the Kings ruin, for whereas upon the rendition of that City if the
King had been taken in it, a sudden end had been put to the Troubles by some
composure, which would have marred Cromwell's plots, not to be acted but by a
Stratocracy and an Army; by this means of suffering the King to escape, which
might easily have been prevented, the war was no nearer a conclusion then at
the beginning, if the Scots as was hoped howsoever would have proved honest,
and kept their Allegiance and Faith due to such extraordinary confidence and
trust reposed in them. (...). Now to carry on their Treason the more
irresistibly and indiscoverably, upon a plausible pretense of lessening the
charge of the Kingdom, they concluded to put their Partisans in the Parliament
(who gaped for the spoil of the Kingdom and would be content with that) to
motion a disbanding of some Regiments of the Army, which being a just and
necessary work was assented to by many Patriots who understood not the drift of
the Conspiracy and accordingly Major General Massey and Coll. Cook and their
Brigades were ordered to disband, amounting to Two Thousand five hundred Horse,
which journey work was put upon General Fairfax, who at the D^ performed it
giving them six Weeks pay for many Months arrears, diverse of the disbanded
(...) from very remote Countries, and had passes (...) for Mesopotamia, some
for Egypt, and Eth^^pi^.

M. G. Massey was he whom they aimed at in this Dismission, as too much an
Essexian, and of juster and honester principles then their designs would allow,
of a very great interest in the Army also, and very well esteemed and beloved
by them, as being of a clear spirit and as valorous as the best of them, and
would dare to oppose any rebellious practice whatsoever against the Authority
of their Masters. Besides this Cromwell had a further reach to the future on
the Parliament likewise, first to make hereby a division and beget and stir
some ill humor in the Army, as if that were the leading case, next to make
those Officers that should continue, when they should perceive at whose beck
they must stand or fall, more fixedly dependant on him, and then to instill
unto them his own Traitorous designs and purposes; and so having the Army
entire at his devotion effect and bring to pass his Royal projections. Massey
submitted but carried the revenges of this affront and Cab^l with him to the
Parliament House.

Cromwell upon this Accident was at Westminster, and perceived by the toss and
perplexity the Parliament was in about the King's Person, that it was a brave
thing to be a Monarch, and therefore concluded it very necessary to other his
Elements and Points of Policy to get Possession if he could, of His Majesty,
and thereupon his party, the Independent's F^ction, being so instructed fall
violently upon the Scots, and would have run it up to little less then Treason
for the Scots to detain the Kings (...) this purpose diverse Resolutions and
Messages passed, but it appearing in the Conclusion that the Scots drove at a
Bargain, Cromwell and his Faction must readily agreed to strike it, and so the
King was delivered to the English Commissioners at New Castle.

Yet that nothing might slip or passed which any way promoted his ambitious
purposes, he made use of this agreement of the 200000 l to be paid the Scots,
by his Agents to mutiny the Army under General Poyntz, another Presbyterian
Commander then at York, upon their Guard against the said Scots, as if the
Parliament had no care or respect for them, but that Forraigners should be paid
with their money; and then afterward upon the ceasing that Tumult and military
Sedition, to get Poyntz dismissed, as too remiss and negligent in his Command.
And not long after died the Earl of Essex, one whom Oliver more feared then any
or all the Presbyterian Officers together, Death officiously removing this
great impediment also; so that by this time there was not an Officer left in
the Army that did not acknowledge Cromwell's Sultanship; the General himself
being lulled and bewitched with the Siren Charms of his zealous insinuations.

The Presbyterian Party in the Parliament began now to be sensible, whither
these devices tended, and therefore to Counterplot this Caball of Cromwells,
they resolved upon a new disbanding of some (the Scots having friendly departed
home) and transporting of other Regiments for the service of Ireland, for that
the necessity of that Kingdom did require the Translation of the wa^ thither;
This the Independents presently perceived, and gave Cromwell timely notice of,
who knowing himself to be principally aimed at, caused it by some of his
Familiars to be spread about the Soldiery, that the Parliament by the major
Vote of some corrupt Members, had voted the disbanding of the Army to cheat
them of their Arrears, and then to send them in a necessitous condition into
Ireland, to be there knocked (...) the Head by the Rebels. This presently put
the Common Soldiers into such a rage, who always judge by the first appearance,
that they ^lew out into most opprobrious and reviling Language against the
Parliament but fury being no present remedy to this evil, Ireton an^ his
instructed Pupills prescribe a Module never heard of or practiced in War
before, of a Military Common Council, who should assemble 2 commission
Officers, and two private Soldiers out of every Regiment, to consult for the
good of the Army, to draw up their grievances and present them to the General,
and he to the Parliament, these to be called by the name of Adjutators.

Having thus made sure of the Army, he thought it time now to make sure of the
King, whom the Parliaments Commissioners had brought to his Captivity at
Holmby-house, and therefore Ireton and he having sometime before acquainted
themselves with the King in this his restraint, and vowed and protested their
readiness to serve him, to the ensnaring the Kings belief, while they condoled
the hard usage and unreasonable carriage of the Parliament toward him,
especially in point of Liberty of Conscience, and the Worship of God (His
Majesty's Chaplains having been obstinately refused him) they judged it no
difficult thing to get his person into their Custody and deceive his good
nature, with the same semblances of it in themselves, only the manner was not
presently resolved by them. For without the Generals consent and command it
could not be done in his name, nor might it avowedly be done by the Council of
War, for it would be a peremptory and hazardous enterprise, and engage the
whole Kingdom about their Ears, but at last it was concluded betwixt them that
this surprizal of the King should be fathered on the Council of Adjutators, as
the sense and Act of the Army. Thus in all these pushes and puzzels of
accidents did they extricate themselves by that Mungrill consistory a mere
Chim^^^ or Brainsick Idaea of a convention which was conversant only about
shadows and umbrages of things, while Cromwell ran away with the substance.

This way being agreed upon, one Cornet Joyce a busy pragmaticall person, whom
Cromwell his Familiar had tutoured in the Method of boldness and Rebellion,
was privately conferred with about it, and after some familiar compellations
hugged into the Conspiracy, and immediately dispatched away with a party of
1000 Horse on the 4. of June, to Holmby, where he arrived late at Night, but
being very importunate to speak with the King, was by his order admitted, to
whom he declared his ^^^and, and being demanded by whose Authority, whither by
the General or Council of War, no other answer could be drawn from him, but
that it was from the Army, adding that if the King should refuse to go along
with him he must carry him away per force.

The King nevertheless deliberated the whole night, and consulted with the
Parliaments Commissioners, what was most advisable for him to do, though the
sway of his judgment in (...) him to the Army Custody (from a just (...) of
the sullenness and Rebellious obstinacy of the Parliament) who had by Joyce
offered him (as the last and chief Artifide of Cromwell to all (...) of ranks
and persons) the liberty of Conscience with other specious and dutiful
pretenses.

From Holmby therefore next morning the King was carried to Childersly, then
the head quarters of the Army, though the King desired to go to Newmarket his
own house, as persuading himself in some greater degree of Royalty, then in the
Parliaments Tuition; but this was at first denied and a complementary amends
made him by the General, and more particularly by Cromwell, that His Majesty
could no where be safer or more regally honored then in their quarters, which
were the only Sanctuary of his person.

This daring presumption of seizing the King, gave light to the World what this
Oliver would at last appear, though no certain Conclusions could be made, what
the mischief did presently signify: It was sufficient to Cromwell's design to
amuse the World, and let them guess at the danger he had readily prepared
beyond any sudden remedy. And therefore he now personates the Kings Interest,
professes himself exceeding sorry to have mistaken the quarrel; intimates and
insinuates to the King, that there were a corrupt party (meaning the
Presbyterians) in Parliament, who alone withstood his Resolution, and that He
and all the power and friends he could make, were resolved to assert his
Rights, and vindicate them from those unreasonable injuries of the Juncto, as
he spared not frequently to own the same Honesty to the Kings friends, then
admitted to attend Him; particularly He declared to Colonel John Cromwell (a
Commander in the States Service in Holland) then in England, That he thought
the King of England was the most injured Prince in the World, and clapping his
hand to his Sword in some passion said, Cousin This shall right him: to the
very great Contentment of that Loyal Subject, whom we shall have further
occasion in this Discourse, and from this Passage to mention.

In the mean while the King is at his earnest desire, which Cromwell seemed
most officiously to study, conveyed to Newmarket House, and thither his
friends and Chaplains without any restriction admitted, and such a sudden
change made in the condition of the King as to his Liberty and Honor, that
most of his party were dazeled with the shows of it, and could not foresee the
Treason that was hid under those fair Umbrages: Nor could the King himself (so
cunningly Cromwell carried it) give any true judgment of this his Surprizal,
more then that the Examples and rules of all Policy generally resolved him,
That the Person of a Prince in whosoever hands it remains, adds Strength
and Authority to that Party.

The King being thus in Olivers hands, as he had declared (upon Joyces telling
him, that he had the King in Custody) that he had the Parliament then in his
Pocket; so his next Main Work was to perform his word; and to this intent he
never ceased exasperating the King against the Presbyterian Members in
Parliament, thereby indisposing the King to any accommodation with them, though
the Terms or Propositions sent his Majesty were so unreasonable that they
needed no disswasion to his Assent: but this Ambodexter so invisibly managed
both the injustice of the Juncto, and the indignation and resentment of the
King, that he was looked upon no otherwise then as a partial Spectator and
Wellwisher to the Kings Fortunes.

Nay so far had he proceeded in this Dissimulation and Treachery (the more
detestable, by how much the simple confidence of so innocent a Prince was
abused and deceived) that he stuck not sundry times voluntarily and of his own
accord to assure the King, that if the Parliament failed in their duty, and did
not speedily restore him, and settle the Kingdom, the Army should do it
without them, and that to that very purpose the newly constituted Council or
Court of Adjutators were now proceeding, and that speedily his Majesty should
see the effect of his Faithfulness and Allegiance, while he the more
indiscernably sought, and most nefariously practiced his Ruin.

The Presbyterians in Parliament, were hastily alarmed at these Transactions
of Cromwell; and therefore (the Army having assumed to themselves by decree of
this their Court of Adjutators, a right of Petitioning as English Freemen, as
being no mercenary Soldiers) resolved as was partly hinted before, to divide
the Army and send part of it to Ireland, and forthwith to Cashiere Cromwell and
his Chief Partisans, and to run parallel with his designs, to send
propositions to the King, at the same time as the Army had hammered out some
proposals of more equal and of fairer pretenses then theirs, that the King
acknowledged the just^^ dealing of the Army, with which satisfaction of the
King Cromwell seemed very much delighted, assuring His Majesty that more then
that now proposed (which yet plainly asserted the Regal and Monarchall right)
should in time be brought about, and that he might be confident in him as his
most Dutiful and Faithful Subject.

Thus practiced he with the King by Delusion and Treachery, but against the
Parliament he proceeded in a more forcible way, for his party therein had tried
all ways to overreach the Presbyterian with finesse and Artifice, but found
them so vigilant and sensible of their proceedings and being also far the Major
part of the House, that no issue was to be expected from debates and disputes
with them, for a Declaration was now published, forbidding the Soldiers to
Petition the Parliament, as being under their pay and command, and for
disobedience hereunto Sir Philip Stapleton and Mr. Hollis had drawn their
Swords upon one Major Tuleday, and committed another, one Nicholas T^w to
Newgate in the month of May, and a private resolution had been taken to secure
Cromwell then in Town, and not suffer him to return to the Army now full of
Rebellious mutiny against them, which might have put an end to this grand
conspiracy, and the mischiefs ensuing but Oliver having sudden intimation of
the design got secretly and hastily out of Town, and upon a Flea-bitten nag
without stop or stay arrived at the Rendezvous at Triploe Heath, June the 5.
his Horse all in a foam, and there was welcomed with the Shouts of the whole
Army, to whom he declared the actions and designs of the Parliament.

And here was made that pernicious and destructive engagement of perpetuating
the Army till their desires, that is till Cromwell's devices should be
attained, and this for his better security he caused to be confirmed at another
more general Rendezvous, June. the 14. at New Market, where he himself was the
first man alighting from his Horse at the head of his Regiment and lying upon
his Belly that subscribed it, which was in several Parchment Rolls universally
Followed. I must not omit one further remarque, on this occasion one Edward,
afterward better known by the name of Colonel Sexby, and one Lazingby, both
of the Council of Adjutators, were ordered by the said Council to attend the
Lieut. General Cromwell, then quartering near Colchester in Essex, with a
draught of the engagement, every word whereof was privily dictated by himself
and Ireton, yet at the receipt hereof Cromwell very angerly rising up in his
bed, demanded how they durst presume to give him any Papers, they replied it
was the sense of the Army, and that they were commanded to deliver it; Be you
well assured of that says he in the same rage, and presently thereupon read
it, and instantly changing his Countenance to a mild and devout aspect, said,
It is a most just thing, God prosper it, I will stand by the Army with it to
the utmost of my life and Fortunes, and so after many familiar Caresses
dismissed them, it being his constant custom afterward during this Intrigue,
to take the meanest Soldier by the hand, clap him on the Shoulder, or box him
lightly on the Ear, thereby to ingratiate himself into their affections, and it
accordingly succeeded, in this bold attempt and enterprise upon the Parliament.

For immediately hereupon an Impeachment is drawn up and presented to, and
approved by, this Council of Adjutators against 11. Members of the House of
Commons, the chief of the Presbyterian party, viz. Sir William Waller, Colonel
Massey, Sir John Clotworthy, Mr. De^^ill Hollis, Colonel Long, Mr. Anthony
Nichols, Sir Philip Stapleton, Mr. Glyn, etc. -- the main of which charge was
that they had been the obstructers and prejudicers of several Petitions to the
Parliament for redress of public greivances, retarded the settlement of the
Kingdom, and had shared the Revenue thereof among themselves, and last of all
had underhand complied with the King -- Imputations of all sorts to make some
thing stick, and to catch one parties or others belief of their criminal
Suggestions.

This was accordingly with impudence enough presented to the House of Commons,
though they had expressly declared against this unparalled violence, and
straightways the Army advances nearer to London, resolving not to desist their
march till they were superseded the House, which affront was most abjectly
suffered by the Parliament, and the said Members after some frivolous debates,
suspended sitting till they had cleared themselves: and now Cromwell having
thus awed the Parliament and abused the King, was come to a fair prospect of
his aspired greatness, making good that praesagious saying of his upon the
seizing of the King by Joyce: there remained now nothing to hinder the
facilitating of the residue of his Plot but the City of London, and we shall
see him cajole and Baffle them worse and more insolently then the Parliament.

But before we mention that we must return to the King now traversing the
Country with the Army, and showed to the people in great State, and received
and welcomed every where by them with all demonstrations of joyful Allegiance,
and in like manner yet Complemented by Cromwell: Thus he progressed from
New Market to Royston, thence by S. Albans to Hatfeild, to Windsor, (being
carried toward London almost in the same Road in which he was driven thence)
to Caversham, back again to Maidenhead, to Latimer, Stoke, Oatlands,
Sion-House, almost in view and hearing of those Tumults which forced him away;
while in the interim, Oliver having made a Pique against the Citizens and
revenged one Tumult by another had made the City Submit and receive the
Domineering Army in Triumph through their Streets, with Laurel and other
Ensigns of victory in their hats. With the Army returned those Fugitive
Members, that left the Parliament upon the same Tumults, being invited by
Cromwell to his Sanctuary of Redcoats, while the remaining members had voted
the Kings present coming to London to treat personally with his two Houses, all
which votes being Tumultuously obtained (by instinct of some of Cromwell's own
sending to increase the violence) were afterward vacated after a long
struggling in the Parliament as contrary to Privilege; and the secluded
Members, who had resumed their seats, deserted London and went some over Sea,
others with passes to their own homes in the Country, resigning their ill
employed power to Cromwell, and his Faction in the Parliament, who abused it
ten times more. In Justification of this insolence they published a Declaration
wherein they said, that the Parliament had declared that it is no resistance of
Magistracy to side with just principles, and the Law of Nature and Nations,
being the same Law upon which they had assisted them, and that the soldiers may
lawfully hold the hands of the General who will turn his Cannon upon the Army
on purpose to destroy them; The Seamen the hands of the Pilot who wilfully
runs the Ship upon a Rock, as their Brethren the Scotch-men had also argued.

The said Declaration still-directing them to the equitable sense of all Laws
and constitutions; as dispensing with the very letter of the same, and being
supreme to it, when the safety and preservation of all is concerned, and
assured them; That all Authority is fundamentally seated in the Office, ana but
ministerially in the persons.

But before this great success, the dubious Expectation thereof, had caused
Cromwell to stagger now and then at his first resolutions, (which it prosperous
would at all times help themselves and there ultimately he was fixed whatever
conditions and promises cross accidents should extort from him) and therefore
he was dealing with the King in way of recompense and reward for his Service in
his restitution, that he should be made Earl of Essex, and a Knight of the
Garter, his eldest Son to be of the Bedchamber to the Prince, his Son in Law
Ireton to be either Lord Deputy or at least Field Marshall General of Ireland,
and it was reported by Henry Cromwell, that then Commanded the Generals
Lifeguard, that the King had put himself upon his Father and Brother Ireton, to
make his terms for him and restore him to his Crown: which grant of the Kings,
caused and produced those proposals beforementioned to be contrived, but now in
the very nick of this Juncture set forth and published, called the Proposals
for the settling a just and lawful peace where in the three first and last
particulars the Authority was left as entire in the King as before the rest
were some Caprichio's of Bienniall Parliaments and the like Figaries, whose
impertinences discredited the important veracity of the other. But this feud
betwixt the Presbyterians and Cromwell, ending so fortunately for him, there
being nothing at present to withstand his first and grand intendment, he began
to waive his respects to the King and cast off those disguises wherewith he had
made himself acceptable to the Kings adhaerents, and laid aside the King and
them.

The King therefore gently reminds Cromwell of his promises, repeats to him his
Protestations and urges the Proposals aforesaid (and not only so but in
confidence of the fair meaning of the Army declines a speedier accommodation
with the Parliament) but Cromwell begins to turn a deaf ear, to deny many
things what he had said and promised, to retract from others, pretending the
difference of times and circumstances, that they cannot be performed, telling
the King moreover that He did mistake and not rightly understand his meaning,
and in short that though he would keep his word with His Majesty, that now it
was not in his power, for that the Adjutators were grown to such an ungoverned
and insolent licentiousness. that until the Discipline of the Army could be
recovered, it were in vain to expect any such things as he when he promised
really intended.

The King was at this time at Hampton Court, perplexed on the one hand with the
obstinacy of the Parliament, in their Propositions, being more rigid since the
last garbling by the Army; and on the other with the dangerous Positions of the
Adjutators and the Levelling party both in Camp and City, in which last John
Lilburn was Chief of the Faction, who decryed Monarchy and all former forms of
Government, having something (which Ireton spread by the by as it were among
the Soldiery) in projection, on purpose to stave off all manner and means of
settlement. This at last came to a Systeme or Consistency and was styled an
Agreement of the people, and was now the only darling of the Army and the
Sectaries: being a mixture or miscellany of Politic Notions no way
practicable among Englishmen, being a deformation or destruction of all
things, but an establishment of nothing a mere temporary expedient, and shift
of design; (except always their Arrears, Indemnity and the Period to the
Parliament) and this shape Cromwell assumes also confessing and acknowledging
the excellence, acquity and goodness of the same the only fault in it was the
unseasonablenesse, for as yet it was not his time and his cue to appear so
publicly against the King; and this his Character of it was dressed out and
enlarged with such taking Saint-like Language, as the Phanatick rabble might
best be surprised, and not suspect any of his own venomous designs to be
lurking under the leaf of His holy and sacred pretenses. Withal when his Plot
against the King was ripe for Execution, he caused a Fast to be published in
the Army, (a certain forerunner of mischief with him) where he was as usually
observed to howl and cry and bedew his Cheeks with the Tears of Hypocrisy,
cruelty, and deceit; and after this mock-duty performed, he and the rest of the
Officers pretended to confess their iniquity and abomination, in declining the
Cause of the people, and tampering with the King, and then in the presence of
the All-seeing God, acknowledge the way of an Agreement of the People to be the
way to peace and freedom.

The King was in the mean while, by the fallacious advice of Whalley, and the
practices of Cromwell, (who had caused frequent rumors to be whispered, of
some Assassinate intended by the Levellers against his person) frighted from
Hampton Court, which place was found to be too near to London for fear of a
rescue, in a dark and tempestuous night, in November 1647. and forced to cast
himself into the disloyal hands of Coll. Hamond, Governor of the Isle of
Wight, and Brother to the most Learned and Reverend Dr. Hamond, which
consideration Cromwell forelaid, would invite the King in his distress to
betake himself thither, where we shall leave him in a most disconsolate
Imprisonment; the Votes of Non Addresses being not long after procured by
Cromwell's Menaces to the Parliament, when upon the Debate of them he declared
in such like words. That it was now expected by the good people of the Nation,
and the Army, that the Parliament would come to some Resolution and Settlement,
as the Price of all the Blood and Treasure that had been expended in the War,
and that they would not now leave them to the expectation of any good from a
Man whose heart God had hardened, but if they did, they should be forced to-look
for their preservation some other way. At the end of this Speech he laid his
hand upon his Sword by his side, as was the more observed, because formerly in
the same place it could not keep him from trembling, when Sir Philip Stapleton
a man of spirit and metal baffled him; but Sir Philip and his seconds were now
out of Doors. Next to him spoke Ireton in the very same sense (being newly
chosen a recruit for the Parliament, by their illegal writ of Election)
extolling and magnifying the valor, civility, and duty of the Army, concluding
with the same threats, that if the Parliament would not settle the Kingdom
without the King, then they of necessity must and would.

So that after some Opposition, the said votes passed against any further
Address to be made to the King, and now Oliver thought himself cocksure, and
therefore the King, Parliament, and City being in his power, he had no rub left
to his Ambition, but those Imps and Spirits of his own raising and conjuring
up, the Adjutators and Levellers of the Army, who having conn'd their Lesson of
the Agreement with the people, were became most artful and skilful Governors,
already, boasting in the Country, (many of which silly people they had induced
to their side, upon the account of laying all in common, and in a wild Parity)
that the Parliament sat only during their pleasure, and till a new
Representative then a forming, should take upon them the Government; nor did
they more dutifully respect and behave themselves to their Officers, whom they
counted as pieces of the Prerogative Military and therefore decried all Courts
and Counsels of them, which began to separate and act by themselves, without
the mixture of their Adjutators.

This exorbitancy and height of the Soldiery, was altogether as destructive to
Cromwell, now he had done his work with them for this time, as any of the other
3 Interests, but desperate diseases must have desperate Cures, for immediately
the Headquarters being then at Ware Coll. Eyer a Leveller was seized and
imprisoned, and one Arnold a private Soldier shot to death for promoting the
former solemn Engagement, and Agreement of the People, and after that He
cashiered all such who favored the same; and to fan and cull out the rest he
proceeded to disband 20 out of a Troop, by which the most of that party were
totally excluded; the like was done in London by the Imprisonment of Mr.
Prince, and others of the same Faction.

Having for the present stilled that commotion in the Army, the danger of a
second war seemed a fresh to threaten the Juncto and Cromwell, by reason of
their injurious Votes of Non-Addresse and therefore to prevent so potent and
formidable a Conjunction of all Interests and Parties against him, He now by
his Party and Emissaries, proposes an accommodation between the Presbyterians
and Independents, and a way and means whereby they may be so united; at the
motion of this in the House of Commons, a Gentleman replied, That if there were
any such persons, who had any private Interest different from the public and
under the distinction of parties had prejudiced the Kingdom, he was not fit to
be a Member of that House; Nevertheless it was insisted on that the House
would declare and ratify their Votes of nulling and making void the Votes that
passed in the absence of the Speakers that fled into the Army in 1647. and
their Engagement of adhering to the Army, which were tacitly confessed to be
then unduly procured; so fearful and doubtful was he again of the issue of
those new Troubles he foresee would fall out, and therefore would shelter
himself and justify his Actions by the Authority he had so often bafled.

The same Artifices he used likewise to the City offering them now upon the
like condition of uniting Interests, the freedom of their Lord Mayor and
Aldermen, viz. Sir John Gayr, Alderman Langham, Alderman Adams, and others, and
the setting up again their Posts and Chains, but when they (having already
treated and engaged with the Scots, then in preparation for a March into
England, refused to give ear to any propositions or terms, resenting the base
affronts He and the Army had put upon them, He, questioned his Argent Glover,
who gave him Commission to make any such Overtures, and in great rage turned
him out of his Service.

The danger still increasing, he suffered the Lords as namely the Earls of
Suffolk, Lincoln, Lord Maynard, Willoughby, etc. whom he had impeached of High
Treason after his March into London, to be freed from their Imprisonment in the
Tower, and with them the Mayor and Aldermen aforesaid; and as a further
satisfaction and submission to the Authority of the Parliament, A Declaration
of the Army is published, wherein they bewail their former miscarriages and
misdemeanors toward the Parliament, their meddling with the civil power, and
that force and violence they had offered to the two Houses, and in Conclusion
promise faithfully and dutifully to acquiesce in their Resolutions and Wisdom.
With this Hocus Pocus deluding the Presbyterian party into a kind of stupid
neutrality or rather worse, while yet they would by no means comply with the
King, until Polyphemus Courtesy appeared in this Cromwellian Craft.

The Scots under Duke Hamilton, having entered England, and diverse Insurrections
happening in England and Wales, according as was expected, Cromwell was ordered
by the Parliament to attend the first of them, which was the Welsh and Northern
Armies (though the Scots delayed their March so long till all was near lost in
England) and after a short Siege upon the Defeat at St. Pagons, which was
atcheived in his absence, took in Tenby-Castle; Pembroke Castle held out a
while longer; thence he marched for Lancashire, having joined with Major
General Lambert, who attended the motion of the Scotch Army, and at Preston,
his forces amounting to few more then 9000 Men, whereas the Scots were not
less then 20000, gave Duke Hamilton Battle, and after a very short Dispute,
wherein the English forces under Sir Marmaduke Langdale made him the greatest
Opposition, totally routed the Scotch Army, taking all their Artillery, Bag and
Baggage and some 9000 prisoners, with the Duke himself in the pursuit
Southwards, while he followed the Main of the flying Army Northwards, with a
resolution of putting a final end to that business, and to rid himself of the
Fears which from thence had hitherto perplexed him. Upon this his hasty
advance, Major General Monro who commanded the reserve of 6000 Men to the
former Army, and was marching after them, immediately returned to Berwick, and
so back into Scotland. Berwick upon Cromwells approach rendered it self upon
terms, and hindered not his advance to Edinburgh, where by the Committee of
Estates he was very sumptuously welcomed.

Monro as yet and the Earl of Lanerick with him stood to their Arms upon the
Hamilton account in the West of Scotland, and the Marquess Arguile with another
party stood for the purer Kirk, which since the Dukes march had recovered its
Magistracy and Superiority, and with Cromwell's accessionall Troops could give
Law to the Kingdom: but because Cromwell was loath to venture a new War there,
so far distant from his main design which the Army successes at home had now
matured, and his presence only wanting to accomplish it, he so ordered the
matter that a Treaty was procured, by which all parties were to lay down their
Arms (a greater assurance to him then if the Kirk had been absolute victor) the
Hamiltonians to have indemnity, but none of them to be admitted or elected for
the next Parliament or Assembly General, so that he so absolutely manacled
that Nation, that they had no other use of their hands then to hold them up to
Heaven at the doleful murder of their natural Prince, whom by their primitive
rebellion they had brought to the Block.

Things thus settled in Scotland, he departed thence, having been most highly
and magnificently treated by the Grandees of that Kingdom before and at his
departure, and complemented by the Kirk as their deliverer, which he regested
in as good Scriptural Language, laying his hand on his breast and demurely
looking on their Scotch screwed faces, and laughing to himself what Idiots he
had made of those Politicians at their own sanctified Weapons.

In his way homeward he visited the Seige of Pomfret, and was by the Commander
in Chief against that place importuned, to see it reduced (it being believed
that his fortune or experience Mastered all things) as he was afterward at
Scarborough, which being upon the point of Surrender, he dispensed, for the
Honor thereof, to stay at the last place and have it delivered into his hands;
and so posted for the head Quarters of the Army then at St. Albans, having
subdued all the opposition made this Summer 1648, where he was welcomed with
the highest gratulations of his late achievement, especially by the Officers,
for as yet the Soldiers knew not what to think of him as to their new
Agreement of the People, which was now began again and favored already by
Ireton so much, as that he had it under consideration, and promised to return
it with some additions and amendments of his own.

And that proved that accursed Remonstrance of the Army, in which all the
former freaks of policy were inserted to make up the number, but the burden
thereof was the Treasonable Contrivance of the Kings Death, and the altering
the Government; for first they remonstrated to the Parliament, That all persons
of whatsoever quality or condition, not excepting the King, that had been
guilty of the blood spilt in the late War, should be brought to justice and
condign punishment; Next, That a day should be set for the summoning the
Prince and the Duke of York, to appear and clear themselves of such things as
should be laid to their charge, and if they did not, then to be declared
incapable of succeeding in the Government. Many such there were of the like
Batch, but all of them concluded with a most favorable Aspect to the Royal
party, whose fines and compositions they pretended to have mitigated, and many
more Good Morrows, on purpose to amuse even them too, as they had deceived and
outwitted the Presbyterian. This pestilent paper Cromwell got delivered to the
House of Commons by a select number of Officers, just as they had almost
concluded with the King by a Treaty in the Isle of Wight, to the amazement and
fright of all good Christians and Subjects.

And here Cromwell terminated and centred all the crooked lines of his most
Impious ambition, resolving to stand or fall by this Conclusion, and therefore
immediately, (the Army being then advanced to London to prosecute this
Remonstrance) as he had dispatched Colonel Ewer to take the King out of the
Custody of Hammond, and carry him over to Hurst-Castle, a most unhealthful
place, so did be upon notice that the Parliament had voted the Kings Concession
a ground for a peace and settlement of the Kingdom, command Coll. Pride, a
fellow who had not wit enough to consider his business, to seize upon the
avennues and passages to the Parliament House, and exclude above a 140 Members,
whose names were given him in a Roll, which unheard of and unparalleled
Violation was backed and sccured by Force of Horse and Foot quartering up and
down the City and Suburbs, another lawless and forcible Intrusion upon their
Charter.

The House being thus purged as they called it, and others besides those that
were forcibly secluded, absenting themselves for fear of being engaged and
overpowered in those wicked Counsels which this Action portended, the
remaining Juncto of his culling, a great part whereof were Army Officers not
amounting in all to 60. passed an Ordinance for Trial of the King, the manner
whereof by a High Court of Justice of his and Iretons own forming and
Conception, was fully agreed upon, and the King brought from the said Hurst
Castle, by Winchester, Farnham, and Windsor to St James's in order thereunto.

But of this lamentable Tragedy so much has already been said, that I will not
add this supernumerary load to him here, though it were his principal guilt,
and to which all his other perpetrations were but as subservient. I will only
instance two particulars, relating to this sad and fatal business, which
discover the Abyss of this man's Villainy.

There was mention made before of Coll. John Cromwell; This Gentleman upon the
news the States of Holland had received of this proceeding against the King, at
the instance of Our Sovereign, then Prince of Wales residing at the Hague) to
them, to mediate and interpose in the business, was pitched upon by them as the
only fit person, because of his relation to Cromwell, (who was looked upon
there as the only Author and Contriver of this mischief) to be employed in a
Message to him, with Credential Letters from the said States, whereunto was
added a Blank, with the Kings Signet, and another of the Princes, both
confirmed by the States, for Cromwell to write his own conditions in, if he
would now preserve the life of the King.

The Colonel putting some confidence in what Oliver formerly had told him,
willingly undertook the Errand, and forthwith repaired to London, (just before
the Kings Martyrdom) and found him out at his house, but so recluse and locked
up in his Chamber, with an order that none should know he was within, that he
could not be admitted till he had told his name. After mutual Salutations the
Colonel desired a word or two in private, which being granted, he began
roundly to tell him, of the flagitiousnesse of the Fact, now almost ready to be
committed, and how derestable it sounded abroad, adding that of all men living
he never should have imagined that he would have had a hand in it, having
protested so much for the King in his hearing. Whereupon Cromwell fell to his
old shifts, telling him it was not he but the Army, that it is true once he did
say such words, but times were altered, and Providence seemed to dispose things
otherwise; that he had prayed and fasted for the King but no return that way
was yet made to him; whereupon the Colonel stepping back clapped the Door to (to
the agasting of Cromwell who suspected an assassinate) and coming close to him,
Cousin said he it is no time to dally with words in this matter, look you here
says he (pulling out the abovesaid Papers out of his Pocket) it is in your own
power not only to make yourself, but your Pasterity, Family and Relations happy
and honorable for ever, otherwise as they have changed their name before, from
Williams to Cromwell, so now they must be forced to change it again, for this
Fact will bring such an ignominy upon the whole generation of them, that no
time will be able wipe away.

Cromwell here paused, and seemed to ponder with himself, and after a little
space said, Cousin, I desire you will give me till night to consider of it, and
do you go to your Inn, but go not to bed till you hear from me, I will confer
and consider further about the business. The Colonel did so and about one of
the Clock (within an evening or two of the murder) a Messenger came to him and
told him he might go to Bed and expect no other answer to carry to the Prince,
for the Council of Officers had been seeking God as he also had done the same,
and it was resolved by them all that the King must dye.

The other is of the same piece with the former (not to mention his threatening
of Colonel Downs into an acquiescence with other the Regicides, upon the
adjournment of the High Court of Justice at the Kings request into the Painted
Chamber; nor his like usage of Colonel Ingoldshy, and holding his hand while
he signed that horrid Sentence, and many other particulars of the same Crime)
and perfectly discovers how much an Ath^ist or mocker of God he was in his
pretended piety and Devotion.

The very same day appointed for this Murder Cromwell and the Officers
assembled together, to consider of some means if possible (with security still
to the Nation) of saving the Kings life, and many tediousexpedients were
offered by some not so bloody as the rest, and a speedy Remonstrance to the
Parliament proposed, and in the mean while the King should be Respited.
Cromwell likewise seemed very forward, expressing how glad he should be if such
a thing might be effected, for he was not ignorant, he said, what calumny that
action would draw upon the Army and themselves in particular, though they did
nothing therein but in obedience to the Parliament. But before we (said he)
proceed in so weighty a matter, let us seek God to know his mind in it; hereto
they agreed, and Oliver began a long-winded prayer and continued in it till a
Messenger whom he had appointed for that purpose, came rapping at the door and
hastily told them that they need not trouble themselves about the King for the
work was done, which being unexpected to many of them, did at present astonish
them while Cromwell holding up his hands, declared to them, that it was not the
pleasure of God he should live, and therefore he feared they had done ill to
tempt Him against his will or words to that effect.

When the Kings body was removed and Coffined, Cromwell to satisfy himself of
the full and certain consummation of all his practices against his sacred life
would needs see him himself, and upon his return thence was heard to say, That
if he had not been a King, he might have lived longer.

Other passages there were which concern this doleful subject, both preceding
and succeeding it, as namely Olivers Conferences with Hugh Peter's at Ware, his
feigned letters out of the North to applaud this Fact, and extolling the
Justice and Courage of the Army, by whose means it was, that the great Cedar of
the Forest was fallen, without any noise, and now the time was coming when we
should rejoice under our own Vines and Fig Trees -- whence this Criminal had
his leaves, and we Blood instead of Wine, but of this more then enough.

With much craft and cunning did he now hide his daring ambition, for though it
was thought as feasible for him now to have seized the Crown as afterward,
considering that his Usurpation was to be maintained by Arms, yet he well
knowing what a Faction there was in the Army of the Levelling principle,
ventured not to put his o^acular Title to a present Trial but awayt more
promising opportunities.

In the mean while to quarrel these Levellers, and confine the Democratical
Regiment or a Free state (so was it now called) to a narrow compass, and to
assume the greatest part of the Government to himself especially the executive
power thereof, according as Ireton had projected the module soon after
New Market Heath engagement; a Council of State like the 30 Tyrants of Athens
was established, which consisted principally of his Creatures and this was but
a forerunner of his single Tyranny, like rays by a burning Glass contracted
into one Beam; The word being now given out amongst the Officers of the Army;
That this Nation must have one prime Magistrate or Ruler over them, and that
the Gen^rll has power to make a Law to bind all the Commons of England.

These tendencies to Slavery first of all enraged the Levellers, who having
promised to themselves a good share of the spoil of the Kingdom, found they
were merely deluded, and that all the engagements and agreements were but so
many Rattles by which the Army was drawn on to act Cromwell's designs, who had
on purpose contrived that Council of Adjutators, to engage the mass of the
Soldiery in the danger of his Treasonable conspiracy, that knowing themselves
in the same predicament with him, they must resolve to stand by him, like a
wily Fox who being pursued, will herd himself among Sheep and so avoid the
dogs; but all those hazards and necessities being passed, the Council of
Adjutators was abolished, the Officers now abhominating to suffer the Soldiers
to sit Cheek by Jole with them any longer, the Expedition for Ireland
absolutely concluded on, without satisfaction of Atrears, the Engagement
slighted, and the right of Petitioning, which the Army claimed as Freemen,
denied by their Officers, who put them upon impeaching the 11. Members for that
very reason; And because a near total Defection of the Army followed upon this
soon after, the Engine which Cromwell had used to subvert the Government, being
likely to prove his own Ruin, -- (Nec Lex est Justior ulla
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.)
though the Fates and his Treachery narrowly prevented it, it will be requisite
to show you the sense of the Army, upon the present State of the Usurpation in
this following Petition.

To his Excellency Thomas Lord Fairfax, and his Council of Officers.
May it please your Excellency, and you^ Council of Officers.
We have lately made out humble Address unto the peoples Representators in
P^rliament, concerning some relief to our selves and the Commonwealth, by way
of Petition, the meannest and lowest degree of an Englishmans Freedom that we
know of, and yet the same (to our astonlshment) has much distasted and
imbittered diverse of our Superior Officers (in this Council convening) against
us, as we perceive, and that even unto death.

We therefore being willing to avoid all occasion of offense and division, and
to clear our selves of all imputations thereof, that in Justice and Reason may
be convinced against us, desire, that you would be pleased to consider, that we
are English Soldiers, engaged for the Freedoms of England; and not outlandish
Mercenaries, to butcher the people for pay, and serve the pernicious ends of
ambition and will in any person under Heaven. That we do not imagine our selves
absolved from the solemn Engagement at Newmarket Heath, but to be still obliged
before God and the whole world to pursue the just ends of the same; and you may
remember the many promises and Declarations to the people upon that account,
which like the blood of Abel cries for justice upon the persitious infringers
and pervere^rs thereof in this Army. You may farther remember that it has been
a principle by you asserted and avowed, that our being Soldiers has not
deprived as of our Right as Commoners; and to Petition the people in
Parliament, we do account in the member of our Birthrights; and you may
remember that in the time of the domination of the 11. Members, you complained
against their then radevour to suppress the liberty of the Soldiers to
petition, as an insufferable infringement of the right of the Army and people;
and we hope you did not then condemn it in them, to justify it in your selves:
when the power was theirs, it was then condemned; but now it is yours, how
comes it to be justified? In the point of Petitioning, we expectal your
Encouragement, and not to have man^cles and fetters laid upon it: it is not the
bure name or shadow thereof will satissie us, while we are gulled of the
essence of it. It is a perfect freedom which we desire, not therein to be
subjected under the Gradual Negative voices of a Captain, a Colonel, your
Excellency, or your Countel; to pass the test from one Negative voice to
another for its approvement, we account as the most vexations Labyrinth of
thraldom that in this point can be devised, worse then all oppositions and
infringements of the 11 Members; we had rather that in plain terms you would
deny us our right of petitioning, and pronounce and proclaim us absolute Slaves
and Vassalls to our Officers then secretly to rob us of the right it self. God
has in some measure opened our eyes, that we can see and perceive; and we
desire plain dealing, and not to be met half way with smooth expedients, and
Mediums facing both ways, with specious and fair pretenses, to overtake our
sudden apprehensions, and unawares steal upon us, and so be defeated, as too
often we have been, to the we and misery of the people, and of us. but The
burnt child dreads the fire.

Further we desire you to consider, That the strength, the honor and being of
the Officer, yea and of this Council (under God) does consist in the arm of the
Soldier. Is it not the Soldier that endures the heat and burden of the day,
and performs that work whereof the Officer bears the glory and name? For
what is it, the Officer can do without the Soldier? If nothing, why are they
ashamed to deny us our right to petition?

We have long waited in silence, even while we perceived any hopes of any real
redress from them. But now finding the Military power in an absolute
usurpution of the Civil Jurisdiction, in the place of the Magistrate executing
that Authority, by which the sword of war is incroached into the self same
hands under one Military head, which we disclaim and abhor, as not having any
hand or assent therein at all. And we find a strange and unexpected
constitution of a Council of State, Such as neither we or our forefathers were
ever acquainted with, entrusted with little less then an unlimited power, and
with the whole force both of Sea and Land, in which is combined the most
pernicious interests of all Tyrannies. And which has already swallowed up half
our Parliament, and we sear to be an expedient to cut off our Parliaments, for
ever, for if this Council of State survive the Parliament, how shall we obtain
a new Representative, if the Parliament sit but till a new one be ready to take
their places, farewell Parliaments, farewell Freedoms.

Further, we find the just and legal way of trial by twelve men of the
Neighborhood in criminal cases, ^ttexly subverted in this new constitution of
an High Court, a Precedent for ought we know to frame all the Courts of England
by, and to which our selves may be as well subjected as our enemies. And
considering not one oppression is removed, not one vexation in the Law ^bated,
nor one punctilio of freedom restored, or any fair hopes at all appearing, but
oppression heaped upon the back of oppression, double cruelty upon cruelty, we
therefore from those many considerations, betook our selves as Englishmen to
make our Address unto the Parliament, as the proper refuge and authority of
the people for our and their Address, in which by birth we challenge a right,
as also by the price and purchase of our hazard and blood; and our Civil Rights
we cannot yield up, we shall first rather yield up our lives.

And thus after the weak measure of our understandings, we judge we have given
a rational and full account of the occasion and reason of our Petitioning, and
we hope satisfactory to your Excellency and this Council, humbly praying that
you will make a charitable and fair construction thereof.

And we further desire, that you will take special notice of the serious
Apprehensions of a part of the People in behalf of the Commonwealth, presented
to the House by Lient. Col. John Lilburn, and diverse other Citizens of London,
and the Borough of Southwark Feb. 26. now published in Print. To the which with
due thank fullness to those our faithful friends the promoters and presenters
thereof, we do freely and cheerfully concur, to stand or fall in the just
prosecution thereof, as the most absolute Mod^m to our peace and freedoms that
has been produced, and we hope it will produce an happy effect upon this
Council, to prevent the otherwise innvaidable dissolution and division that
will ensue upon us all, which to prevent shall be the faithful endeavors of
(Sir)

Your Excellencies most humble Servants and Soldiers, Robert Ward. Simon Grant.
Thomas Warson. George Jelles. William Sawyet.



These Petitioners being seized, were tried at a Council of War, but for fear
of too much exasperating the Army were only sentenced in this manner, Coll.
Baxter being then President, who delivered judgment in these words,

Gentlemen; for so I think I may without offense call you, for as yet you are
Soldiers; but truly you are not long to continue so: For you are guilty of
high crimes, as your Letter here by you owned does manifest, being Scandalous
to the Parliament, Council of State, High Court of Justice, and tending to
breed mutiny in the Army; for which you have in an high measure deserved
death; but through the great mercy of the Court that is waved, and truly they
have waved the Sentence again and again, and now they are come as low as
possibly they can: and it being late, I shall declare unto you your several
Sentences which are as follows.

You shall ride with your faces toward the Horse-tails, before the heads of
your several Regiments, with your faults written upon your breasts, and your
Swords be broken over your heads, and so be cashiered the Army, as not worthy
to ride therein; and a Proclamation to be made, that none shall receive you
into any Troop, Company, or Garrison. And this I would have you look upon as a
great mercy of the Court.

Which sentence was accordingly executed upon them, in the Great Palace-yard at
Westminster, March 6. to the exasperation of the Army.

Soon after, all the Army quartering near London, rendevouzed at Ware, where
several Regiments among whom was Cromwell's of Horse, in pursuance of the same
Petition and to be known to themselves, wore white in their Hats; Oliver had
intimation of it, and therefore he appointed two Regiments of Horse from
further quarters who were ignorant of this Combination to appear there
likewise. Being all drawn up in Battalia Cromwell with an angry and down look
rides round, and of a sudden Commands one of those two Regiments to encompasse
a Regiment of Foot, which being done he commanded four men by their names out
of the body, and committed them with his own hands to the Marshal, and
immediately called a Council of War, (while the rest of their partakers slunk
their White Colors into their Pockets and trembled at this boldness of
Cromwell) and tried and condemned them, but by the favor of the Court they
were to cast Lots for their Lives, two only to dye, by which means the two
Guilty persons and whom Cromwell chiefly aimed at, and lusty Fellows also,
escaped, but the two other sneaking ignorant Fellows were presently shot to
death, upon a green bank by the other two, in the face of the Army.

But yet could not this humor be purged out of the Army, though another
Leveller bled for it, one Lockyer a Trooper, who for promoting the same
engagement and agreement was shot to death at St. Paul's Churchyard, and was
attended to his grave like a General Officer, a thousand people of the
Lilburnian Faction following his Hearse all of them wearing Black and Seagreen
Ribbons; Colors that denoted a Storm was coming, the whole Army being now
generally leavened with the same principle and furiously enraged at this
Butchery of their fellow Soldiers being avowedly egged on by the said Lilburn,
and secretly encouraged by the Royal party, who promised them their assistance
in case they should need it.

And it was seen when too late by the Soldiery (the Instruments of that
Tyranny) that they had borrowed their Libertinism at a dear rate, the price of
their Lives; like Cratanders they should rule for a while but then become
Victimes to their short ridiculous Usurpation, while the Revenges of their
Rebellion followed their endeavors after those shadows of their own casting.

The first formidable eruption of it was at Salisbury, where Col. Scroops
Regiment of Horse laid aside their Officers, and with their Colors marched
thence, in order to a conjunction with Harrisons, Iretons, and Skippons
Regiments, who had confederated (by means of those Adjutators) in the same
design: which affair admitting no delay, Fairfax and Cromwell with his own
Regiment advanced to them, to Bagshot, and so to Alton, where they had notice
that they were marched to Abington, whither (after a tedious march of 40 miles
in one day) the General came; and Cromwell fell presently to work with his old
arts of Treachery, for Harrisons Regiment was hasting to the Conjunction.

His first finesse in order to their reducing, was the offer of a Treaty,
wherein satisfaction might be mutually given, and that done, that neither party
should come within 10. miles of one another; whereupon the Levellers marched to
Borford, and being opposed at a Pass called Newbridge over the River, to avoid
any quarrel, and hoping the Soldiery there would no doubt join with them upon
the Treaty, passed a mile lower, and arriving at the Town, relied so much upon
the Generals and Cromwell's engagements, that most of them had put their Horses
to grass, leaving a Corpse de guard of some 60. men, the whole party making in
all 900. consisting of 12. entire Troops, reputed the best in the Army, and
whose defeat would have cost many men's lives, if the Army would have stood
against them. But to save that dissiculty, while those secure Troops were
resting themselves, and their Horses put in the adjoining Meadows, about 12. a
clock at night Coll. Reynolds fell into their quarters, having notice from some
Traitors within of their posture, and presently mastered the guard, not
dreaming of such a Camisado, and seized most of the other, thentipling or
asleep. Here were taken near 900. Horse, and 400. Prisoners, whereof three only
were Executed, one Thomson and two more, who died very resolutely, Cornet Den
expressing his grief and sorrow, was reprieved at the instant of Execution,
which their fellows beheld from the Leads of the Church, and were saluted with
a Message of Decimation; but that Cromwell might ingratiate with the Army; for
his sake, and at his instance they were all pardoned, and sent home to their
own houses. The great Chieftain of them being pursued as he was marching
toward this party, took into Wellingborough-wood, where courageously defending
himself, he was killed by Carbine shot, refusing to take quarter at such
perfidious peoples hands. This Hurly burly being over, and ended like a flash,
the General came to Oxford, where he was highly treated, and he and Oliver made
Doctors of the Civil Law.

This proved the utter Suppression of that party, and rendered the Army entirly
at his command, without any farther dispute of their Leading, so that they
presently submitted to the Lot, which Regiments should be sent to Ireland (then
almost reduced to the Kings obedience by the M. of Ormond) which thus decreed
it, viz. 11. Regiments, One of Dragoons under Col. Abbot. Of Horse, Iretons,
Scroops, Hortons, and Lamberts. Of Foot, Eures, Cooks, Hewsons, and Deans. And
three new ones, viz. Cromwells, Venables, and Phayrs.

Cromwell was ordained Commander in Chief, and tituladoed with the Style of
Lord Governor of Ireland; while Fairfax was lest here to attend the
Parliament, and pass away his time in the Dotages of his Success, giving him
the Honor of subduing that Realm, and preparing it to his Usurtion.

He with a very potent Army was now landed at Dublin. Whereupon a strong
Garrison of 2500 Foot and 300 horse, resolved men under the charge of Sir
Arthur Aston, was put into Drogheda, the nearest Garrison to the late defeat of
the Ms of Ormond which Cromwell having refreshed his Army a while at Dublin
came to besiege. The Town was stormed resolutely thrice, and as well
defended-Sir Arthur Aston being so confident that he advised the Lord
Lieutenant not to precipitate any thing, for he should hold them play a while;
but in the third assault Colonel Wall being un^ortu^ nately killed his dismayed
Sould^ers listened to the offer of quarter before they had need of it, and
admitted them upon those terms. Cromwell having notice that the Flower of the
Irish Army was in his hands, gave order to put all in Arms to the Sword, where
were killed Sir Arthur Aste^, Sir Edmund Varney, Colonel Warren, Coll. Dun,
Finglass^, Tempest, etc. with 3000 Soldiers the best in that Kingdom.

He comes next before Wexford, which having resused to accept of a Garrison,
now the Enemy was under their walls was contented to admit of 500 Men under the
command of Sir Edmund Butler, and the Lord Lieutenant came also in sighth^ the
Town, before whose face Stafford the Governor of the Castle bas^ly betrayed it
to Cromwell, together with the Town, who there are acheroro^fly murdered 2000
more. Rosse was the next place whither a Garrison was sent under the command of
Luke Taaf, with order (the Town not being tenable) to render upon Conditions,
which accordingly a breach being made, they did, and marched away with their
Arms. His next attempt was upon Duncannon, but the noble Wogan and the English
Cavaliers gave him a foil; hence he retreated to Rosse^ ^ere he made a
floating bridge, that to having a passage to the other side he might com^ell
Ormond either to divide his Army to observe his motions, or otherwise to get a
passage into Munster, where he held intelligence with several places that would
then Revolt; and accordingly for all my Lord Taaff was sent thither before hand
to secure them, yet Youghall, Cork, and all the English Towns of Munster
openly Revolted, and many of my Lord Inchiqueens men allured by Money and
Commands in Cromwell's Army, ran over to the Enemy; and his Excellency the L.
Lieutenant having lost the opportunity of Fighting Cromwell by his dislodging
from Duncannon by night, when the Irish were chea^full and earnest to engage,
was never after in a condition fit to venture a battle. He therefore passes
over his Bridge and so into the County of Kilkenny facing his Enemy and moving
up and down after him, while his Lieut. G. Jon^s with parties took in the
Castles, and Carrick was vvretchedly betrayed to him by Martin that commanded
there; whence (...) passes his Army into Munster and takes several Castles by
the appearance only of his Horse, only at Kilteran he received a repulse, but
Ballisannon was sold to him; Kilkenny was taken next, aster a stout defense
made, the Townsmen complying contrary to the Soldiers knowledge who were
driven into the Castle and there conditioned. The next enterprise he went in
hand with was to take Clonmell, kept by Major General Hugh Neake, who behaved
himself so well, that the Enemy having lost 2500 Men before it had gone away
without it, had it not bin that the Gari^on wanted Powder, so that they got
over the River to Waterford in the night, leaving the Townsmen to make
conditions for themselves, which the Enemy not knowing the Soldiers were gone,
readily granted; Soon after Colonel Roch received a brush from my Lord
Broghill in the County of Cork, where the Bishop of Rosse being taken was
hanged.

I have thus briefly discoursed of the War in Ireland, that I might hasten to
the grand event and from the Camp after another expedition conduct him to the
Palace, the main consequence of his Life, which rendered all his other actions
so notable and conspicuous.

The Irish War thus in a manner ended, and the Scotch War ready to Commence,
the Committee of Estates there, having concluded with the King at Breda, and
he upon his Voyage to that Kingdom, where all correspondence with the English
was by Proclamation forbidden, and all manner of Provision stopped from carrying
into England, though the Juncto at Westmi^ster had used all Artifices to keep
the Scots from closing with Him, (who were so far disposed thereto, that they
had barbarously mur^hered the Great Marquess of Montross, a Hero far surpassing
Oliver in Conduct, and who was untimely and unfortunately taken away from the
rescue of his Country) Cromwell (like a Fury) was ready at hand to take revenge
of that Fact. For having been seeretly called for over from Ireland, to amuse
all Parties (both the Irish who trembled at his presence, and made no
considerable resistance against him and his Fortune; and the General himself at
home, who expected not such his sudden ^valship to his Command, which gave him
no time for mature consideration of the design; the Scots, who though Alarumed
by frequent rumors of an English Invasion, yet were not so forward in their
Levies, as having assurance of Fairfax's dissatisfaction) he was now wasted
over into England, preventing the Letters he had sent to the States to know
their express pleasure for his departing that Kingdom.

On the beginning of June he returned by the way of Bristoll from Ireland to
London, and was welcomed by Fairfax the General, many Members of Parliament and
Council of State at Hounsle-heath, and more fully complemented at his Lodgings,
and in Parliament by the Thanks of the House, and the like significant Address
of the Lord Mayor, etc. of London, being looked upon as the only Person, to the
Eccsipse and diminution of the Generals Honor, which we shall presently see
him paramount in the same supreme Command.

The World that considered the carriage of this Politic toward his Prince,
and with what impetuous violence, and short lived ex-tempore Counsels He had
bereaved him of his Life, had wondered that hither to he had suffered the
Command of the Army to rest in (...)'s hand, and had not practiced some quicker
expedient to remove him; that having finished the work of (...) Generation (as
they canted it with Essex) he did not give him a Fig for his labor; but
Cromwell who courted his Minion of Providence, and devoted himself to her care
and (...) of his Desions, would not rashly precipitate his Ambition without her
Augury, but await the Assistance and Concurrence of some promising Revolution,
which those many Military cross rencounters of that turbulent New State did
certainly bode. And the Scotch was, now evening, the lucky minute was come, and
his Brazen Head told him TIME (...) for from hence he dated His Empire and
Sultanship, and the Aere Olivarie, choosing to derive his Succession to the
Supreme Power, rather from the unperplex'd Tradition of the sword, then from an
upstart bold Title to, and a forcible wresting of the Scepter. And yet such
Helps and Hints he waylaid to his Throne, that it was tumoured soon after
abroad, that he was descended of the British Princes, and near allied to Henry
the Seventh, the glory of that race. But to proceed,

This Command of course was devolved upon my Lord Fairfax, and he desired to
accept it, but he being inscrupled by some of the Presbyterian Ministers (who
were highly incensed at this War) as it was cunningly foreseen by Oliver and
his Party, who never endeavored his satisfaction) and pretending a reluctance
from the Obligations of the National Covenant to engage against their Brethren,
totally declined it, transferring the long expected Military Supremacy, by a
Vote of the Parliament to Cromwell, who very zealously accepted the Charge, and
with all readiness prepared for the expedition; which made the second Trophy or
Garland, of those strangely and wonderfully prosperous Free-States of England.

On the 12. of June it had been resolved that the Army should advance
Northward, but it was the middle of July before they Arrived there, for on the
21, of that Month Cromwell quartered at Berwick, from whence he sent a Letter
and Declaration to the Committee of Estates, fraught with hypocritical canting
expressions, which the said Committee suppressed, returning answer, that they
would reply to it by Messengers of their own; and lest any of their people
should be deluded by the like fair words, they made it Treason for any person
to correspond with the English, and fell a oliving all their Cattle and
Provision in the parts next adjacent to them, beyond Edenborough.

Cromwell's Army was now reckoned 16000 effective, with which he came first to
Mordington his Headquarters July the 25. thence to Hadington, within 12. miles
of Edinburgh, on the Hills whereabouts the Scots had encamped themselves,
declining to engage till all their additional Forces were come out of the
High-lands. On the 25. of July the English advanced, and attempted one of the
said Hills where a small party of the Scots were, and beat them presently off,
when a Party of Scotch Horse fell in the Rear with such fury and vigor, that
they wholly disordered it, and with Reserves and Fresh bodies seconded and
pursued this advantage, which being perceived by Major General Lambert and
Coll. Whaley, who had the Rear-guard, they courageously repulsed them to their.
Trenches, in which Action Lambert had his Horse shot under him, was run through
the Arm with a Lance, and was taken Prisoner, but was rescued by one Lieutenant
Empson. This past, and the Army wet and weary in their way to Musclebarough;
betwixt 3 and 4 in the morning, another Party of some 1500 Horse, the flower of
the Army, being veterane Blades, under the Command of Coll. Montgomery and
Straughan^; fell with great fury, and more exact valor upon: them betwixt
sleeping and waking, and brought a terrible fright and dismay upon the whole
Army, Charging almost clear through upon the Sands, but returning with their
Prisoners, were set upon by fresh Troops under Coll. Okey, in good order, and
forced to double their speed home to their Camp, having lost an hundred men (to
the same number in the former attempt) and some of their Officers slain and
wounded, but came off otherwise with honor enough, giving the Invaders little
hopes of so easy a Victory and Conquest, as the Fates had decreed to them, and
their invincible Fortune.

Several jealousies, animosities and discontents were now reigning among the
Scots, more supremely then the Kings Authority; the Kings friends wholly
discountenanced and laid by, even Presbyterians themselves no way understanding
one another; some willing to give the King his Rights without more Stipulation
and Engagements, others of them thinking they I could not sufficiently debase
his Authority, and that it should wholly depend on the Kirk; and to that
purpose severable ever end Postulata were put to him, beyond the Tenor of the
Treaty at Breda; and in fine that party prevailed so, as that the Army then on
foot, was in effect but very little for the Kings Interest and Service, but
was wholy at the disposal of the rigid Covenanters. This was not unknown to
Cromwell, who thereupon never ceased Scribbling and Divulging of the English
Armies good intention to the People of Scotland; With whom they have no
quarrel, but against a Malignant powerful Faction, who had brought in the King
to the disturbance of the public National-peace and Friendship betwixt the
two People, and that he was willing by Conference to give and receive
satisfaction therein, otherwise to decide the Justice of that Cause by Battle.
To which when no Answer would be returned, he advanced on the 10. of August
(having recruited his Army by those Provisions that were plentifully brought by
Sea, the Fleet Sailing an even pace with him and observing the same signals) on
the West Side of Edinborough up to the Line of the Scotch Army playing his
Cannon, which were likewise ansvvered, and Encamped on Pentland-hills a little
above Edinborough-castle; intending to March for Queens-ferry, but the Passes
were so difficult, and other Considerations intervened, that he proceeded no
further. Next morning came a Letter to Him with a Declaration from the Estates
and Kirk by found of Trumpet, Declaring that the quartel being now stated, and
the King ready to consent to their demands, they were resolved to put it to
the Issue and that the World may see what that was like to prove, it will be
worthy the memory of Those Transactions, to particularize them in this short
abstract.

Cromwell being thus fat advanced unto Scotland, beyond the most advised Fears
of the Parliament of Scotland (who had newly welcomed the King at St.
Johnstons) and their Army yet unprepared to sight him, they thought fit to
entertain his Time and divert his Have with a Declaration, wherein most
abominably they disowned the King, without such and such Satisfactions, to the
tenor of the most rigid and undutiful conditions, that the worst of Rebels
could have put upon a Prince, which being once confirmed and assented to by
him, they would be ready to give Battle as the quarrel should then be stated,
and upon which they might expect a blessing. But this wile advantaged not the
Kirk, but only served as a Directory to Oliver, where he should level his
Treasonable projects.

To this Cromwell takes very good occasion to reply, and help our their
sophistry with some more of his own^ and to let the Scots see of how near
affinity the Kirk and the Congregational way were in this respect to the King,
he permitted, nay, caused their Declaration to be publicly read to his Army;
putting the Scotch-Remonstrants upon these Dilemma's; That their professed
disowning of Malignants, and receiving and assisting their Head and Chief, in
whom all their hope lies, cannot consist in common sense or pradence, reciting
(as evidence thereof) the late Popish affairs in Ireland, and Prince Ruperts
roving at Sea) That suppose He (the King) should give security of his turning,
it must be some other way then by a few and feigned formal submissions, for it
is his necessity and his old Accomplices that connsel him to that Compliance: Nor
is it possible for the Scots (in the way that they are now in) to be able to
secure themselves or England; and concludes, that upon this quarrel, if they be
ready to fight, his Army attends there for that purpose; and therefore the
Scots cannot complain for want of an opportunity.

These pestilent and alike dangerous Papers, (which in effect seemed rather an
agreement then cause of quarrel between the Antagonists) were warily
considered by some, even of Kirk-men who loved the King, as of sudden and
desperate consequence to his Majesty's Person and Government, so highly
vilified and disre-garded; so that a Declaration (to the liking of the Kark)
was extorted from him, that there might no cause of pretense remain, either for
their obstinate carriage toward him, or ready compliance with the Enemy.

Hereupon the English Army advanced again, and though several Bodies of Scotch
Horse appeared, yet they presently withdrew upon their approach; which that it
might not be altogether frustrate, Cromwell in sight of them caused a Garrison
(called Red-house, within a mile and a half of Edinburgh) to be Stormed,
wherein were taken 60. Foot, and the House made tenable and manned by the
English; while the Scats (being necessitated for Provisions, and to join with
some other Forces from Fife and the West) had marched two miles beyond
Edinburgh, having a great Hill on the one side, and the City and a River on the
other, so that it was very hazardous to engage them, being drawn up in
Battalia, the great Cuns playing on both sides. In which posture and attendance
the Scots and English stood, and neither changed ground, till Provisions
growing scarce, Cromwell retreated to Pentland-hills (Lambert having had some
discourse and conference with Straughan, etc. about the former equity of their
cause, de lana caprina) and thence with some difficulty (by reason of bad
weather) to Musleborough, for Provant, and thence a few days after to Dunbar,
with intention by shipping or any other way to get into England, being now
closely followed by the Scotch Army in their rear; who rightly guessing the
English to be weakened with long Marches and want of Victual, made cock-sure of
a total Victory, which snatching at before it was ripe for them, fearing
nothing more then that they would escape them, they saw themselves miserably
frustrated, and their despairing Enemy, a most insulting Conqueror.

On Sunday at night, the first of September, the English (making at most not
above 12000. men) came to Dunbar, whither the Scots (keeping close at their
Heels) came also, and drew up their whole Army, consisting of between 20. and
24. thousand men, upon a high Hill within a mile of the Town, to the great
amazement at first of the English; but despair adding resolution to their
courage, they presently drew out in Battalia in the Corn-field near adjoining,
and so stood all night, being encamped upon a Neck of Land, whose Breadth was
not a Mile and a half from Sea to Sea; so that they were by Land quite cooped
up. In considence therefore of an assured Victory, David Lashley who Commanded
this Kirk Army in chief, began to advance as early as the Sun next morning, and
drew down the Hill, fixing at the foot thereof, and about 4. a clock in the
afternoon brought down his Train, there being a great Ditch betwixt both the
Armies. That night the English (by Command) placed themselves close to the
Ditch, and placed their Fieldpieces likewise in every Regiment, that they might
be in a readiness in case the Enemy should attempt any thing upon them, who
were vainly expecting terms of a rendition; boasting that they had them in a
worse pound then the King had the Earl of Essex at Lestithiell in Cornwall.

The Ministers having their voice in the Council of War held by this Kirk Army,
most earnestly urged the Engagement and fight (against those that were of
opinion to let the English escape, and not venture the fortune of War, upon an
Enemy made desperate of which there were (...) many sad examples) saying that
God had delivered Agag, meaning Cromwell, into their power, and if they let him
go, would require him at their hands.

On Tuesday morning at four of the Clock, a Brigade of the English Army drew
down to possess themselves of a pass upon the Road, between Edinburgh and
Berwick, which being had, they might with the more ease and advantage, make
their way home, and in order thereto pass over so the Enemy, to fall upon them.
This Brigade consisted of three Regiments of Horse, of Major General Lamberts,
Commissary General Whalleys, and Colonel Lilburns, and two of Foot. This gave
the Scots a great Alarm, and a fore dispute happened about the pass, which
lasted above an hour, the great Guns playing in the mean time against both the
bodies. At length that stout Brigade gained and possessed the pass, much
gallantry and bravery being showed on both sides. This pass lay at Copperspeth
in the English way homewards, to impede which, they had drawn off their best
Horse upon the right Wing to receive the English, weose Word was the Lord of
Hosts, theirs The Covenant.

The Enemy charged hereupon with their Lanciers, so that that the Horse gave
way a little, but immediately rallied, and the foot advancing to second them,
the Scots were charged so home, that they put them presently to the rout, it
being about six a Clock in the morning, the left Wing of Horse without striking
one stroke, following the same way; The Foot seeing this rout and flight of the
Horse, and not able in any order by reason thereof to engage, were all of a
sudden so confused and confounded, that without any resistance or offer of
Engagement, they threvv down their Arms, and fled, giving the English the full
pursuit of them above eight miles beyond Haddington; the number of the slain
were 40000. 9000 Prisoners, many whereof were desperately wounded, and 10000
Arms, all their Ammunition, Bag and Bagage, Prisoners of Note were, Sir James
L^sdale, Lieutenant General of the Army, the Lord Libberton, employed by the
States to the King lately, and died of his wounds presently after the fight at
Dunbar, Adjutant General ^ickerton, Scout-master Campbel, Sir William Douglass,
Lord Cranston, and Colonel Gurden; 12 Lieutenant Colonels, 6 Majors, 42
Captains, 75 Lieutenants, 17 Cornets, 2 Quarter Masters, 110 Ensigns, Foot and
Horse Colors 200. 27 Guns, some Brass, Iron and Leather, with the loss of not
above 300. English, and one Major Rookisty who died after of his wounds: there
was likewise taken the Purse to the great Seal of Scotland, which was presently
sent up to London, and the Colors with those taken before at Preston, ordered
forthwith to be h^ up in Westminster Hall; The full Contents of all which, was
signified in a Letter from the General in his usual strain of devout zeal,
tending very much to strengthen the Independent against the Presbyterian at
home, and the advancement of a Commonwealth to the imitation of the rest of
the World; the latter part thereof for the severe^ Aspect it had toward the
Ministry in favor of Anabaptists, with which the Army swarmed, I have here
inserted. --

The Ministers of Scotland have hindered the passage of those things ( meaning
his affection to the good people of Scotland) to those to whom (...) intended
them, and now we see that notionly the deceived people, but some of the
Ministers (three or four) are fallen in the fight. This is the great hand of
the Lord, and worthy of the consideration of those who taking into their hands
the instrument of a foolish Shepherd, to wit, meddling with worldly policies,
and mixtures of earthly powers, to set up that which they call the Kingdom of
Christ, (which is neither it, nor if it were it, would such be found effectual
to that end) and neglect, or trust not to the Word of God, the sword of the
Spirit, which is alone able and powerful to that end, and when trusted to will
be found effectually able, etc. This is HUMBLY offered for their sakes (who
have lately turned too much aside) that they might return again to Preach Jesus
Christ, etc. and then no doubt they will deserve and find your protection and
encouragement. Which humble offer was to command a strict Inquisition upon
them, as those most probable to obstruct the new module of his future
greatness. The glory of this field though it were by his own party ascribed to
his valor, yet it laid a great blemish on his conduct, and indeed the rescue
of his honor is principally to be referred to Colonel Monck, whose company he
had obliged in this expedition, (being very understanding in the choice, and as
subtle in the shaking off his Friends and Familiars.) He had newly had a
Regiment conferred on him, made up of recruits and other imperfect companies,
and did now at the Generals request draw and design the fight, and embattle the
Army, and seconded that deliberate speculation with forwardest of action, for
which indeed most of the Officers were very praise worthy: After the fight
Cromwell used some catching courtesies to the wounded Soldiers, and the feebler
sort of Prisoners, but the poor Highlanders and such like, paid dear for that
partial kindness showed their Countrymen, as many as with difficulty lived
being sold for slaves.

On the 14. of September, General Cromwell marched out of Edinburgh with 7. days
provision, for the Scots had not left any manner of subsistence betwixt that
and Sterling, and on the 15. reached beyond Linlithgow, but through bad weather
was constrained to retreat th^ther that night for shelter, the 16. to Falki^k
within a Mile of Sterling, from whence fresh Letters of the old strain were
sent into that City, but the Trumpeter was not suffered to enter, whereupon
order was given for a storm, but upon better thoughts of the danger, forborne,
so that on the 19. of September they returned to Linlithgow (whither came
General Dean to him from Shipboard, being newly arrived at Leith, in the
Speaker Frigot) and fortified the Town, being the road way betwixt Edinburgh
and Sterling, and a sufficient Garrison was left to maintain it, and so on the
22. the English returned to Edinburgh, where Coll. Whally had offered the
Ministers fled to the Castle, leave (...) come out and preach in their several
Parishes, but they refused: Another Cajole to the Kirk.

Cromwell encamping and traversing hereabouts with his Army, but not being able
to effect any thing against the main Army of the Kings that lay on
Sterling-side, resolved to be doing with a Patty that then lay in the West of
Scotland, under the Command of the Colonels Ker and Straughan, with whom
Cromwell had maintained an open intercourse, and had proffered them a
Cessation; driving at this, to take them off and subdivide the Nation in
several parties, and the effect of his Papers, taxing the Scots with the
admission of the King upon the old Malignant score, did operate as he
projected; for thereupon out-comes a Declaration or Remonstrance from these
Western fellows, full of saucy and treasonable language, which accordingly was
voted both by the Commissioners of the Kirk, and the Committee of Estates to be
scandalous and seditious, Sir James Stuart, and Sir John Cheisly, and one Mr.
Leviston (who seemed to countenance it) were strictly watched, and Straughan
taken and made Prisoner in Dunbarton, and after in Cathnes-castle, whence he
escaped and came over to the English at Edinburgh: but 'twas more the sacred
hunger of Gold then zeal for Religion, made him first betray his King and his
Country after, and we shall see all Cromwell's Proselytes of that Nation, both
Dundasse, Warrest^n; and Giffan, to love nothing so much as the Mammon of
Presbytery.

Straughan thus removed, Major General Lambert was sent to prevail with Ker,
either by blows or words, the latter being thought as feisible as the former,
and accordingly on the last of November, having difficultly found, and passed a
Ford over Hambleton-river, Car got notice of it, and resolutely fell into the
Major Generals quarters at a Town of that name; but the Horse being in a
readiness to receive him he lost a 100. men, had his right hand almost cut off,
and was taken Prisoner, and the rest of his party being 5. Regiments of Horse,
2. whereof were the Earl of Cassells, and Lord Kirconbrights, pursued as far as
Air, where Commissary General Whalley was now left to command in chief in
those Western parts. Cromwell had marched with his Army this way as far as
Glasgow in October, but understanding or dreading the enemy would come and
relieve Edinburgh-Castle, with Provisions and another Governor (being in
Treaty with the present for a sum of money) he forthwith retired; having
there took and garrisoned two Houses, while Coll. Whalley took in Dalkeith, and
another nest of Mosse-Tropers, yet his coming thither hindered Major General
Montgomery from marching into those parts, to reduce K^ likewise to his
obedience to the King.

Edinburgh-castle had been besieged some Months and upwards, with little loss
on either side, save that the great Guns from the Castle did some Mischief in
Edinburgh-streets, and one Captain Hamilton was shot in the head with a
Musket, as he was viewing the Castle, and the Morter-peices made semblance of
great terror and annoyance to the besieged; a Mine was likewise carried on
some 60. foot, the Stone being cut all the way; but then they could proceed no
further, being come to the Rock whereon the Castle stands: Nevertheless the
Derbyshire Miners (being 12. in number) did what they could to proceed, the
Enemy throwing Pitch and Flax and other combustible stuff into the Works. At
last the personated Hostility came to a period, and Dundasse old Levens Son in
Law, pretending want of Water, came to a Parley, and having premised a
colorable request of 10. days time, to send to the Committee of Estates, by
whom he said he was entrusted, which he knew was to be denied; and after
several missives betwixt Cromwell and him, concluded the rendition of that most
important place to the Kings Service, in these Articles agreed on, betwixt
Major Abernethy Dundasses man, and Captain Henderson on one side, and Col. Monk
L. Col. White on the other (it was always before called the Maiden, it may
henceforth be called the Prostitute-castle) the Articles were as follow,

That the Castle should be surrendered to his Excellency Oliver Cromwell, with
all the Ordnances, Arms, Magazine, and Furniture of War thereunto belonging, on
Tuesday the 24. of December. 2. That the Governor, Officers, and Soldiers,
should march with Drums beating, etc. in military posture, to such place as
they shall appoint. 3. The public movables, private writs and evidences to
be removed to Serling. 4. That Proclamation should be made for all that bad
goods in the Castle, to come or send, to own and receive them. 5. All sick
Officers and Soldiers, as well such as hurt (in reputation) to have liberty to
stay in Edinburgh, and the English to provide Horses and Wagons for the
Governor and other Officers and Hostages to be given on the Scots part for
performance. There were found in it five French Cannon, nine Dutch half Cannon,
two Culverings, two demi Culverings, two Minions, two Falcons, 28. Brass
Drakes, called Monkeys, two Petards, betwixt seven and eight thousand Arms,
near 80. Barrels of Powder, and a like store of Cannon shot: Col. Fenwick, was
presently upon the surrender, made Governor of this and Leith; Sir Arthur
Haslerigge, and Mr. Scot were present at the rendition thereof, and then
departed, their work being done; which that it may the better appear for a
piece of the vilest treachery any Scot ever committed (though Cromwell ascribes
it in his Letter to the Speaker, to the alone Wisdom of God beyond all humane
power and accomplishment) take this account from the lovers themselves of this
Treason at Edinburgh, The greatest want they had was of Beer, but as for
Oatmeal, Butter, Fresh Water, and Salt Meat, they bad enough, the Master Gunner
told me, that when our Guns were a drawing to the Batteries, he had so placed
his Pieces, that our's could not possibly have been planted without great loss,
but when he prepared to give fire, he was forbidden by the Governor upon pain
of 'Death. His man Abernethy went often out of the Castle, upon pretense of
geiting intelligence (but it was to hold it with Cromwell) sure it is, that
Dundass and he and some others were a little wiser, and went not over the water
as they had made conditions, some of those that did being Imprisoned (the Court
and Camp being sadly affected with this loss) The Provost of Edinburgh, Sir
James Stuart is in Town, but keeps private, lest the Wives in the Street should
abuse him as they did Straughan, and Ker at their coming hither, the Lord
Warreston, who came as he pretended for the Records, is not yet returned, but
stays in Town, for he cares not to go back, He and the rest of that Remonstrant
Tribe are summoned to come to Parliament, Col. Dundass, Straughan, and Captain
Giffan, with Abernethy, Swinton, and Andrews, were else to be Excommunicated
and declared Traitors, which was done Jan. 14. Mr. James Guthry, and the Earl
of Lothian, and Genesis Holborn were generally suspicted, with Sir John Chiefly,
who are every day expected in our quarters, Rutherford and Gillespy are
likewise dissenters from the present manage of Affairs. Ker says, his wound on
his right hand is Gods justice against him, for lifting it up against us in
such a cause as he maintained. And so I will conclude all those treasonable
practices, and fomented divisions of that Nation against their common interest
by this Master of all Treacherous Arts.

Cromwell was again very earnest and intent upon making or finding a way by
Sterling, and therefore on the 8. of February he marched thither again, having
been informed of some Fords thereabouts where he might pass his Army, or at
least impede their raising of new Forces, and waylay their marching into
England. which was given out as the grand design, a Force being left on that
side the water, sufficient to sustain any impression of the English; and to
that expedition Duke Hamilton, Duke of Buckingham, Lord Cleaveland, Wentworth,
Wilmot, and Colonel Massey, who had a noble and full Regiment and was to be
Major General, with Titus, and Col. Graves were designed. Cromwell as was said,
to this purpose, in very tempestuous weather reached his intended passes, but
found the approaches to them so boggy and unpassable, that in the same stress
of weather, his Army half spoiled with cold, and other discommodities, he was
forced to retire again as he had done twice before (having only alarumed the
Scots, and put them into a sudden posture of defense) to Glasgow, and to await
the time of his boats Arrival and a happier season of the year.

This was the first ^eat of Rebellion in that Kingdom, and very fit for his
Head Quarters, an University also; which remembers me that Cromwell a little
while before was chosen Chancellor of Oxford, and honored here with the
public Seal thereof, on purpose to stave off the rapinous, sacrilegious hands
of the Parliament, who were a hammering upon an Act for the sale of
Colledge-Lands, to carry on their Wars; and Cromwell did (as was was well
projected) undertake their preservation, and did express some angry resentment
at the Parliament for this Barbarity, laying his hand as usual upon his Sword;
There was this remarkable herein, that the Delegates of the University declared
not their main design till they had given him his Oath as Chancellor, which was
thought of little security, but only that the solemnity of it might the better
mind him to whom he had given it. Hence after some debates, and public
disputes with the Ministers, viz. Gillespy, Rutherford, etc. of Glascow
aforesaid, concerning the lawfulness of his Invasion, which he performed as he
said, in much weakness of (both Argument and) body, seeing there was no drawing
the Scot out that way to fight, which way they intended for an undisturbed
march, marched back to Edinburgh by the beginning of May (and in his way burned
the Lady Kilsithes house, for holding intelligence with the King) having notice
of the Arrival of his Boats at Leith, for the transportation of his Army into
Fife, which was the last remedy; the failure of victuals in the Scotch Camp,
which therefore they should be forced to abandon and march, proving a mere
delusion.

Cromwell being at Edinburgh, having notice how the King lay encamped at
Sterling, Leshlys Foot quartering on the Southside, and Middletons on the
North-side of the Park encompassed with a Stone-wall; and that abundance of
Provision was brought in daily, supposing they would march; drew al his
remaining forces out of the west with as much care and conduct as could be, and
encamped likewise in the Fields by Edinburgh in a readiness for them, whither
to march or fight: But in the mean time he was taken very ill of his Ague, so
that Doctor Wright and Doctor Bates eminent Physicians, were sent down to
attend his cure, and many blithe and anxious discourses were made concerning his
Death, as either party wished, for he was brought very low; but being recovered
to some degree of health by these Gentlemen, it was presently sounded like a
Proclamation: and I have therefore thought fit to transcribe a piece of the
Letter, that the world may see what queer Hypocrites his attendants, like
himself and his times were, by the pious nonsense and most blasphemous flattery
of this Apocrypha Epistle. If I knew the Secretary or Inditer, I would record
him for his Pen, -- Truly Sir, his Life and Health are exceeding preciou^, and
I account it every day a greater mercy then other that we have his Life,
observing that every dispensation of God draws him nearer to himself, and makes
him more heavenly and holy, and by consequence more useful for his Generation,
in the management of that power God bath committed to him, etc.

This Occasion of his Sickness, minds me of one passage of his Life, wherein
was a Ray or Specimen of his Humanity. He had a Servant a Frenchman, one Dury,
that attended him in his Chamber, whom of all his Retainers he best loved, and
would hardly brook his absence out of his Sight, whether for that he could more
freely communicate his Privacies to a forraigner, who was altogether
unconcerned in them, and therefore of greater secrecy and confidence; or for
his diligence and care of his person, set off with his national fondnesses and
insinuations. This fellow dying not long after, Cromwell did passionately
grieve thereat, and for the memory of this his dear Servant, made ample
provisions by a Pension for his relations, which continued during his
Usurpation. At last with much ado by the helps of Physic, and the especial
constant attendance of those Doctors sent him, and charged with his
preservation by the Parliament; Cromwell fully revived to theirs (afterward)
as well as the Kingdoms sorrow.

The English Army in Scotland was now in motion for grass, and marched upon
their old design of Sterling to Newbridge, so to Lithgow, from whose Castle
Battlements, they might espy the Tents of the Scotch Army encamped in Torwood 4
Miles of this side Sterling (whither his creature Warreston was now summoned by
the Commissioners of the Assembly peremptorily by the third of July) having
cast up a regular and well fortified line with Bulworks mounted with Guns, and
having a River behind them, which they might pass at pleasure; in this posture
they awaited the English, who coming up and facing them the third of July, in
the night following the Scots drew up their Cannon, and planted them on the
brow of the Hill, and next morning saluted Cromwell with 50. great Guns, but
with little Execution, which made him quickly draw out of shot, and give over
his once begun resolution of attaquing them at so much disadvantage. The
English therefore, marched back again, Major General Lambert being sent from
Glascow a week after to view the passes, which he reported by reason of the
boggy approaches there, to be very hazardous. Upon their departure from Lithgow
to Glasco, the Scots removed from Torwood, and encamped at Kilsith a place
environed with insuperable defenses, having a bog on one hand, and craggy
mountains on the other, but the English Army (having eaten up all at Glasgow
and those parts, and trod down the Corn standing, that the Scots might find no
sustenance that way, if they should march) appearing and marching with great
noise, on the other side, they imagining the English meant to clap in between
them and Sterling, hastened back again to their old line at Torwood, July 13.
whither Cromwell followed, and to provoke them to an Engagement, stormed
Calendar House in their view, and put all the Defendants except the Governor
to the Sword, and then seeing there was no possibility of fighting with them,
but that they were resolved to keep them in play, till Winters scarcity of
horse-meat should make them give over and depart the Kingdom, he encamped
himself, awaiting the success of his design by Boat into Fife.

While Cromwell thus attended the Scots at Torwood, within a mile and a half of
them at Falkirk, at length the long expected sucesse of a transportation into
Fife manifested it self: for Col. Overton with 1400. foot of his own, and Col.
Daniels Regiment, with four Troops of Horse of Coll. Lydcots, having with the
loss of a few men gained a place called North Ferry on the other side the
Frith, on the 17. of July, had as the time served entrenched themselves, and
before the Scotch Army then beyond Sterling could reach them with a sufficient
force to drive them out, Major General Lambert was passed over to them, it
being an Arm of the Sea, and had defeated Sir John Brown with 4000. men; The
success and great consequence of which, and the said transportation, I will
briefly sum up in Cromwells Letter.

In pursuance of the providence of God, and that blessing lately given to your
Forces in Fife, and finding that the Enemy being Masters of the Pass at
Sterling, could not be gotten out there without hindering his Provisions at
Saint Johnstons, we by general advise thought fit to attempt Saint Johnstons,
knowing that that would necessitate Him to quit His Pass; wherefore leaving
with Major General Harrison about 3000. Horse and Dragoons besides those which
are with Coll. Rich, Coll. Saunders, and Coll. Barton upon the Borders, we
marched to Saint Johnstons, and lying one day before it, we had it Surrendered
to us; during which time we had some intelligence of the Enemies marching
Southward, though with some contradictions as if it had not been so; but
doubting it might be true, leaving a Garrison in Saint Johnstons, and sending
Lieutenant General Monk with 5, or 6000. to Sterling to reduce that place, and
by it to put your affairs into a good posture in Scotland: We marched with all
possible expedition back again, and have passed our Foot and many of our Horse
over the Frith this day, resolving to make what speed we can up to the Enemy;
who in this desperation and fear, and out of inevitable necessity is run to try
what he can do this way. I do apprehend that if he goes for England, being some
few days march before us, it will trouble some men's thoughts, and may occasion
some inconveniences, of which I hope we are as deeply sensible, and have, and I
trust shall be as diligent to prevent as any; and indeed this is our comfort,
that in simplicity of heart as to God, we have done to the best of our
judgments, knowing that if some issue were not put to this business, it would
occasion another Winters War to the ruin of your Soldiery, for whom the
Winter-dissiculties of this Country, are too hard, and be under the endless
expense of the Treasure of England in prosecuting this War.

It may be supposed we might have kept the Enemy from this, by interposing
between him and England, which truly I believe we might, but how to remove Him
out of this place without doing what we have done, unless we had had a
commanding Army on both sides of the River of Frith, is not clear to us, or
how to answer the inconveniences aforementioned we understand not; we pray
therefore, that seeing there is a possibility for the Enemy to put you to some
trouble, you would with the same courage (grounded upon a confidence in God)
wherein you have been supported to the great things in which God has used you
heretofore, improve the best you can such Forces as you have in readiness, or
may on the sudden be got together to give the Enemy some check, until we shall
be able to reach up to him, which we trust in the Lord we shall do our utmost
endeavor in; and indeed we have this comfortable experiment from the Lord, that
this Enemy is heart-smitten by God, and when ever the Lord shall bring us up to
them, we believe the Lord will make the desperateness of this Council of theirs
to appear, and the folly of it also; when England was much more unsteady then
now, and when a much more considerable Army of theirs unfoiled, invaded you and
we had but weak force to make resistance at Preston, upon deliberate advice, we
chose-rather to put our selves between their Army and Scotland, and how God
succeeded that is not well to be forgotten.

This is not out of choice on our part, but by some kind of necessity, and it
is to be hoped will have the like issue, together with a hopeful end of your
work, in which it is good to wait upon the Lord, upon the earnest of former
experiences, and hope of his presence, which only is the life of your Cause.
Major General Harrison, with the Horse and Dragoons under him, and Colonel
Rich; and the rest in those parts, shall attend the motion of the Enemy, and
endeavor the keeping of them together, as also to impede his March, and will be
ready to be in conjunction with what Forces shall get together for this
service, to whom Orders have been speeded to that purpose, as this enclosed to
Major General Harrison will show. Major General Lambert this day marched with a
very considerable Body of Horse up toward the Enemies Rear; With the rest of
the Horse and nine Regiments of Foot (most of them of your old Foot and Horse)
I am hasting up, and shall by the Lords help use the utmost diligence: I hope I
have left a commanding force under Lieutenant General Monk in Scotland. This
account I thought my duty to speed to you, and rest.

Leith 4. August 1651. Your most humble Servant O. Cromwell.


This shows what sudden troubled apprehension He had of this well designed
March of the Kings, and made him repent his obstinacy of Honor in reducing St.
Johnstons, by which the King got 3 days March of him; but however he excused
this to the Parliament (who were almost in despair, and terribly affrighted at
the News of it) yet they did highly tax him for his negligence, and spoke ill
words of him, which came to his ears, and for which he soon after cried quits
with them.

The King departed from Sterling the last of July, and came into England by the
way of Carlisle, and upon his first footing there was Proclaimed rightful Kin'
of Great Britain, and did thereupon publish his Declaration, wherein He
offered His free Grace and Pardon (to be confirmed by an Act thereafter) to all
His Subjects of England, of what ever nature or crime their offenses were,
excepting Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Cook, the more immediate Murderers of His
Father; and therewith prosecuted His March, being proclaimed in the same manner
through all the Towns he passed.

On the 22, of August, the Van of the Kings Army entered Worcester, some
resistance being attempted to be made by some new raised Forces under one
Colonel James, and by the influence of Baron Wild, but the Townsmen saved them
the labor of driving them out, and most joyfully welcomed these weary Guests,
and such too as in 1645. had been extremely oppressive and intolerably
burdensome, at the Siege of Hereford but their gladness at the Kings presence,
and hope of his Restitution, obliterated all other considerations and
remembrances whatsoever. The Mayor and his Brethren at the Kings Intrad^ did
Him the customary but most cheerful obeysances tendering Him the Keys and the
Mace upon their Knees, and bidding Him and His Forces welcome to this his
Majesty's Ancient and Loyal City, where the same day with great solemnity He
was anew Proclaimed, and the tired Soldiers most abundantly provided for, being
in all Scotch and English some 13000. who had marched 300. miles outright in
three weeks.

In the mean time the Parliament had amassed a numerous Militia in all the
Counties of England and glad were the Members that the King stayed for them,
for nothing was more dreaded then his continued march to London, which place
would have soon ridded their fears, upon an approach of the Kings Army but 30.
miles further from Worcester, but to prevent that, as Essex did before at the
beginning of the War (whose first efforts took this way) Cromwell by long
Marches through Newcastle, Rippou, Ferrybrygs, Doncaster, Mansfield, and
Coventry, had interposed himself, and joined with his Army at Keynton, where a
General Council of all his Officers was held, and a speedy advance to Worcester
resolved on, Lieutenant General Fleetwood being dispatched to bring up his
Forces, then on their way at Banbury, the gross of all the Forces amounting to
above 50000. effective, Militia and all.

By this time Cromwell had surrounded the City of Worcester with his spreading
Host, in as near a compass as the Rivers and Passes would suffer him, the Kings
Army as yet lying out of the Town a mile in the fields. The first pass
endeavored to be taken, was Vpton-Bridge on Fleetwoods side, which Major
General Lambert attempted with 500. Horse and Dragoons, who unespied crept upon
their Bellies on a piece of Timber they had laid over the River, which the
surprising Assailants after a brisk dispute wrested from Colonel Massey. The
Scots l^wing thus abandoned the place, it was presently possessed by a strong
Party of Horse and Foot, in order to the present advance of the rest of the
Army.

The Scots now drawn closer to Worcester made many Salleys, breaking down 2. or
3. Bridges over the River Team, and showing a well ordered and governed
courage; but September the third, that ominous day, he drew out from his own
Post (and having given the signal to the whole Army to fall on) began the Fight
in this manner.

Cromwell himself in person (about 3. a Clock with hss Life Guard, and Colonel
Hackers Regiment of Horse, with part of his own Regiment, and Colonel
Ingoldsby's, and Fairfax's entire) passed over his Bridge of Boats upon the
Severn, and marched toward the City, after him, Lieut. Genesis Fleetwood, who had
been most part of that day marching of 5. miles from Upton to Powick-bridge,
which the Kings Army had broken down, passed with Colonel Goff's and Major
General Dean's Regiments, and jointly advanced, the Kings Forces encountering
them at the Hedges, and disputing every field with them, in such order and with
such gallantry, that these already over (lest they should not be wholly
discouraged with the hotnesse of the service) were relieved by reserves, and
they by others, no considerable progress yet made, the Highlanders proving
excellent Firemen, and coming to the But-end at every foot, till weary, and
their Ammunition spent, the King being then upon the place Commanded them in
some have into the City, and hastened himself to the other side where Colonel
Hayns Regiment, with Cobbets stood about Powick bridge, and were entertained
with no less Manhood and Slaughter, and though Colonel Mathews was the reserve
to the other two Regiments, yet did the Scotch Foot fairly drive them from
their ground, till their little Army being every way engaged, and no seconds or
supplies to be expected, after some wheelings in a careless regard of the
Enemy, as if they feared not to make which way they pleased, they drew likewise
into the Town as did that Brigade which opposed the Regiments of the Lord Gray
Colonel Blague, Gibbons, and Marsh.

But they stayed not long here, for as if their pent spirits had broke out with
greater fury, they sallied out in great bodies upon the Generals side, who had
now brought the Militia Forces into play, the Veterans wisely detrecting to
engage first upon the Storm which was then intended, but there was yet field
matter enough to do. In the Head of one of those squadrons, the King himself
charged with that gallantry which would have become our Admiration in other
men, and showed he had not forgot the Discipline of War in which he had been
brought up from his youth; In one of those Charges he made, Duke Hamilton a
better Soldier and nobler gallanter person then his Brother, received a shot on
his thigh, whereof presently after he dyed. The loss that was sustained by the
Enemy, fell principally upon the Essex Foot, and those of Cheshire and Snrrey,
who returned in thin Troops and Companies to their Counties; but fresh and
entire Brigades and Regiments, in Reserves, namely Desborough's Regiment of
Horse, Cromwell's of Horse, Major General Lambert's of Horse, WWhaley's,
Harrison's, and Tomlinson's Brigades, with other Foot re-inforcing them; the
Scots by the overpowering multitude were driven into the Town, Leshley with
2000. Horse (upon what account not known) not stirring out of the Town to
relieve them, when the Enemy entered pell mell with them, and gained the Fort
Royal about 7. a Clock at night, at which time the King left the Town it being
dusk, and accompanied with some 60. Horse of the chiefest and most confident
of his Retinue, though many more pressed to bear him Company) departed out of
St. Martinsgate, and it was reported that Cobbet very narrowly Mist of him, as
the King left his lodging, whether he first hastened.

The Enemies Foot was now got into the Town, and according to their Order fell
a plundering the Town in a most barbarous manner, as if Turks were again a
Sacking of Constantinople, and giving no quarter to any they found in the
Streets: through this their greediness of spoil, they kept the Horse out lest
they should have shared the better part, and to that purpose kept the Gates
fast a^ they were, and so favored (as God would have it) the Kings escape,
some Scots who had got into one of the Churches held out till next morning,
when they obtained quarter for Life, by which time there was not an Inhabitant
in Worcester friend or for left worth a farthing; but the Loyal Inhabitants
lost little by the bargain, being supplied with fresh wares to their desires
from London, without any scruple of credit or payment and their Debts forborne
till such time as God should enable them, which the Gentry and Inhabitants
round about them endeavored to bring to pass, by their more then ordinary
resort to that Market, for all necessaries and upon all occasions. The Mayor
(being Knighted by the King) and Aldermen were committed to Prison, and the
Wife of one Guyes (who for betraying the designs of the King in that Garrison
was hanged) was revvarded with 200. l. per annum, and 200 l. down.

There were slain in Field, and in Town (in the last the most) and in pursuit
some 3000. and some 8000. taken prisoners in several places, most of the
English escaping by their Shiboleth, the principal were Duke Hamilton, who
presently dyed of his wounds, and at Newport the Earl of Lauderdale, Earl of
Rothes, Earl of Carnworth, Earl of Kelly, Earl of Derby, Earl of Cleveland, the
now Earl of Shrewsbury, Sir John Packington, Lord Spyne, Sir Ralph Clare, Sir
Charles Cunningham, Colonel Graves, Mr. Richard Fanshaw Secretary to the King,
6 Col. of Horse, 13. of Foot, 9 Lieutenant Colonels of Horse, 8. Lieutenant
Colonels of Foot, 6. Majors of Horse, 13. Majors of Foot, 37. Captains of
Horse, 72 Captains of Foot, 55. Quarter Masters, 89. Lieutenants; there were
taken also some General Officers, with 76. Cornets of Horse, 99. Ensigns of
Foot, 90. Quartermasters, 80. of the Kings Servants, with the Kings Standard
which he had set up when he summoned the Country, the Kings Coach and Horses,
and Collar of SS, but that which was Ten times more worth then all, the Kings
person, they had no power to touch.

On the 12. of Sept. Cromwell came to London, and was met about Acton with the
Speaker and the Members, and the Lord Mayor and the Recorder Steel, who in a
set Speech congratulated his great successes, and like a false Prophet, by a
mistaken Prolepsis, applied these words of the Psalmist, -- To bind their Kings
in Chains, and their Nobles in fetters of Iron, in an arrogant Exaltation of
his Atcheivements. Next day the common Prisoners, (being driven like a herd of
Swine) were brought through Westminster into Tuthill-fields, (a sadder
spectacle was never seen, except the ^serable place of their defeat) and there
sold to several Merchants, and sent to the Bar^ the Colors taken were
likewise hanged up in Westminster Hall, with those taken before at Preston
and Dunbar.

He had now passed and surmounted all the dissiculties and troubles that the
Interest of the Crown hither to had threatened, and nothing was wanting to the
Completion of his aims, but the Kings person, most miraculously preserved and
rescued to the perpetual disquiet and vexation of this Wouldbe-Monarch. But
because that sacred story ought not to be blasphemed with the impiety of his, I
will not intermingle any of those blessed Providence of His Escape, with the
direful designments of Cromwell's unobstructed passage to the Throne.

For having superated all outward appearances of danger to his ultimate design,
there remained nothing but a wretched and hated Juncto of Men with whom he was
next to grapple; things so slighted by him and their Authority so scorned after
this discomfiture of the King, that he never vouchsased them a good look. Nay
publicly expressed his resentments of their saucy expostulations of his conduct,
about the Kings march for England, which was mentioned before.

And therefore at his first coming into the House, (where he was entertained
by the Speaker with the second part of Steel's Panegyric) a motion was started
for a new Representative, and all the Codlings and Embryons of Tripl^ and
Newmarket-Heaths Engagements afresh re^med, and those Army expedients for which
^o many Levellers had suffered) now again revived, acknowledged and applauded
for the only conducing means to the long expected settlement.

The main whereof was the proposal of a new Representative to be equally chosen
to succeed the present Parliament. A most abhominated and deprecated evil by
the Members, who having done so much mischief and incurred so much detestation
for practicing his and their mutual designs upon the best Government and the
most incomparable Prince in the world, were almost at their Wits end with
madness at his, and invention of their, (contra) devices.

While these things were debating amongst them and every day produced some
fresh altercation and quarrel about dissolving this and choosing a new
Representative, which the Soldiers not only from their former principle as
English Freemen but now as the Generals Janissaries, and in obedience to his
dictates and commands; with the pretensory advice of his Council of Officers
unanimously and readily urged, (for he had brought the Army to his bow and
disciplined them to a most exact ignorant devotion and obedience to his service
during the Scotch War, where the distance of the Commonwealth-men could not
reach:) his second self his son in Law Ireton died in Ireland, just as he was
coming to the fruition of those grand projections they had both conspired. He
had employed his Vice-government after Cromwell's departure in reducing places
held for the King there being no Field service ever after.

He survived not the total Conquest of Ireland, to which he was by compact and
Olivers Bull decreed, but saw a very fair prospect thereof in the rendition of
Limbrick and the expected delivery of Galloway: and since this concerned
Cromwell and the Agreement between them (which is most certain though none of
those secret compacts are discoverable) I will give the Reader his Character
and this short account of his decease here.

Limrick being taken, Ireton marched to join with Sir Charles Coot to attempt
something further, and together took in Clare Castle, but the weather not
proving so seasonable, and the Soldiers tired out with duty at the Siege of
Limrick, they parted into Winter Quarters, Ireton back again to Limrick, in the
way whither he fell sick on the 15. of November, and after purging and bleeding
and other means used, died of the Plague in that City on the 27. of the same
month, the Commissioners for the Parliament there substituting to his command
in the Army (while the Parliament or General (for Cromwell was lately so made of
Ireland) should otherwise appoint) Edmund Ludlow the Lieutenant General of the
Army in that Kingdom. On the 17. of December his Carcass was landed at
Bristol, and pompously dismissed to London, where it was for a time in state at
Summerset-House, all hung with black, and a Scutcheon over the gate with this
Motto, Dulce est pro patris mori, how suitable, that Countryman best told who
Englished it in these words, it is good for his Country that he is dead: on
Feb. 6. following he was interred in H. 7. Chapel (being carried out with a
pompous Funeral at which Cromwell was chief Mourner, and the Members of the
Juncto attendants in Black with a great deal of State,) but has since found a
fitter repository for his accursed dust. It was believed by the Army who did
credit their own conjectures and others impostures for want of literature that
he was a perfect Commonwealths-man, and would have withstood his Father in Law
in his ambitious intrusions upon the Parliament, and this because he was the
Drawer or Promoter of all the Levelling Fundamentals, but he prevented their
juster judgment by appearing to a greater and most exact Tribunal, and
perished with rottenness in the maturity of his design.

He was absolutely the best prayer-maker and preacher in the Army for which he
might thank his Education at Oxford, though Oliver came but little behind him,
being very frequent and instant, now especially, in such devotions out of all
season and reason, but it was all one to the Soldiers who had nothing else to
do but to Prey and to Pray. The other qualities and conditions of Ireton were
so congenial with Olivers, that in the prosecution of his story I shall but
tell the same things, the evil Spirit after his decease being doubled upon him
by a mischeivous Metempsychosis, a transmigration of soul, which assimilated
their ashes in the same grave at Tyburne.

The Fortune of this Grand atcheivment at Worcester subjugated all the
Dominions of the English Sovereignty entirely under the power of the free
States, the Isles of Scilly, Man, Barbados, and Christophors submitting and
acknowledging their Jurisdiction, all which were reckoned by Cromwell but the
Trophies due to his valor and the reward of his labor; and therefore all
things thus flattering his conceits of Majesty, He was angry with himself for
permitting those delays to his eager Ambition, now complemented, smoothed and
tired by many fine and pretty Evasions of the Members, who wanted not most just
pretenses to detain the Government from his handling; but of this presently.

There was another thing in his eye which troubled him most of all and respited
and superseded his design up on the Rump, which was the Illustrious Duke of
Gloucester then a Prisoner at Carisbrook-Castle the prison of His Father and
the Custody of himself; so long therefore as that Prince should continue here,
he could not expect that a single person could be opposed to his right, without
manifest danger from all parties, who to be revenged of their injuries would
rather comply with the Royal Family then suffer his bold Usurpation. Therefore
to quit himself of that fear, he procured by his Party in the Parliament (who
were resolved to dispose of him here in some ordinary profession to make
Majesty more contemptible in the sight of Men) that for the lessening the
charge of the Commonwealth, the said Duke should be transported into some
place beyond Sea, with a promised Exhibition of some scorned Pension.

The noble Duke being accordingly removed to the great content and joy of his
Relations, who dreaded his Murder, and the satisfaction of Cromwell who was
Gorged with his Royal Fathers, another danger returned from beyond Sea in
exchange of that exported: for the Dutch gave manifest Symptoms of a Rupture
with this new Commonwealth whose insolent depredations at sea had molested and
greatly damnified their Trade, and braved them to a revenge, upon a pique taken
from their rejecting their offers of a Treaty and Amity and suffering their
Ambassadors St John and Strickland to be affronted at the Hague while the
affairs of the King in Scotland, were yet in suspense.

It was therefore a hazardous Enterprise to be fighting with two Commonwealths
together, and to which his confidence and Resolution could not raise him,
without a surer interest in the people, who were to undergo his Tyranny. This
now reprieved the Members from his Decree of Dissolution, while they had tried
the fortune of war with the Dutch, and had put things into such a posture and
certainty, that no home alteration could discompose or disorder it. The
Treasures for the support of the War, being now a filling, a Naval force
rigging and Equipping, and the Honor and glory of the Nation engaged and
concerned. Thus far he cast his Eyes to sorraign Transactions: To return;

At home the Parliament had a greater mischief breeding against them then they
feared from the most dangerous of their foreign Enemies. A dangerous imposture
of ambition, whose quabbing beating payns gave them no rest, nor could all
their skill tell how to assuage or cure it. It swelled every day more and more
in continual addresses, desires, petitions, declarations, till it came to be
ripe, and then burst out to the destruction of this political body. This was
the reiterated and inculcated story of the Parliaments providing for future
equal representatives and putting a period to this, then which nothing could be
more distasteful, and of greater antipathy to the present members, which yet
they did most artfully conceal, and dissemble in a hundred complying Votes and
resolves even to the ascertaining of the longest day, November 5. 1654. for
their sitting, but that was two years too long for Cromwell, whose fingers
itched to be managing a Scepter. In order to this delay, the Committee that
first sat and hatched upon this bill were removed from the nest, and the addle
eggs put under the chil incumbency of other wild foul, and they to proceed
therein with all expedition, a thing so unlikely, that Sultan Cromwell, who
expected a Grand Cairo brood, resolved not to be baffled much longer, or await
the leisure of his mercenary Servants, as after a Fast and humiliation of him
and his Council of Officers, and the Communication of the grounds thereof to
the whole Army in England and Ireland (which was a lamentation for the tedious
continuance of selfinterested persons in the Authority, and other Religious
melancholy about Charity, the want whereof was greatly bemoaned) we shall fully
discover.

Every other day almost more Fasts, or some such religious Exercise was managed
by Cromwell and Harrison, who mainly promoted the same Proposals for a new
Representative, in order to the personal Reign of Christ, and that therefore it
was high time the Government was placed in the Hands of his Saints, for all the
glorious Prophesies thereof were now ready to be fulfilled, and this was cried
up as the Doctrine of the Times.

Cromwell seemed to be of the same judgment and of that Millenary Principle,
designing (as he said) nothing in those Mutations of Government which were
agitating, but in tendency to that great Revolution, so that he had absolutely
fooled Harrison into a confidence of his good Intentions, and that he aimed not
at his own greatnesse^ and thereupon all the party Harrison could make which
was Feaks, Rogers, and Sympsons, Congregations, were impatient to have the
Parliament outed, and their fine module to takeplace, wherein Righteousness
and Holiness should be exalted in the Kingdoms of the World. And now the Turk
and the Pope were horribly threatened, and Oliver looked upon as the great
Instrument that should confound Antichrist.

But though most of the Officers were thus bewitched and besotted, yet a great
many of them had just and strong suspicions what his dissolution of the
Parliament would end in, and therefore secret consultations were held how to
oppose these practices upon the Parliament, in whose Authority conserved and
secured, they were so wise as to see themselves safe and defended from the
After claps of the Rebellion; Among the rest, several Officers of Note came
voluntarily out of Ireland (as some out of Scotland) who had by their general
Fasts perceived the Drist of their General, to withstand Him, and publicly
protest against the conduct of this business, as directly tending to the
overthrow and undoing all, for which so much blood had been spilt, and giving
up the most glorious Cause in the World, to its Nols own vanquished Enemies
Argument.

Major General Lambert nevertheless did concur with him in every particular,
the whole design being secretly imparted to him, and he prom^sed as a reward
for his Assistance, the succession to the Supreme power. This intimacy of
Lambert was of a long standing ever since Prestonfight, and was cemented the
faster by that complacency Oliver took in his Wife; A Woman of good birth and
good parts, and of pleasing attractions both for mind and body. The Voice of
the people was, that she was more familiar with Him then the Honor of her Sex
would allow, and that she had some extraordinary kindnesses for him which she
had not for her husband, and that being the Medium or Reciprocation of
Intelligence between them, she did communicate all her husbands designs, and
conceal some of the others, though she needed not to have been so squeemish, or
reserved for one, whose Depths were never fathomed nor discovered to any one
mortal, Ireton excepted. Of those that opposed him in the Design; Col.
Venables, Scoutmaster-General Downing, and Major Streeter, were the most
eminent, who to that purpose as abovesaid, came out of Ireland; but Colonel
Venables was soon wrought upon, and Mr. Downing offering to speak against it in
the Council of Officers, and getting upon a Table for better Audience, was bid
to come down by Cromwell, asking him what he did there: only Coll. Streater
persisted in his Resolution of giving reasons against it, and being flamm'd
with Harrison with Christ's personal Reign, and that he was assured the Lord
General sought not himself, but that King Jesus might take the Scepter; He
presently replied; That Christ must come before Christmas, or else he would
come too late. For this opportune opposition, and 10. Queries then published by
him in the Army, he was committed to the Gate House, and looked upon by
Cromwell as his Mortal Enemy.

The next Scene of this applauded Comedy was laid at the Cockpit by
White Hall, where Cromwell concealing the number of the Beast in his Apocalypse,
declared to his Council of Officers, That if they should trust the People in an
Election of a New Parliament according to the old Constitution, it would be a
tempting of God, and that his confidence was, that God did intend to save and
deliver this Nation by few; as he had done in former times, and that five or
six men, and some few more, setting themselves to the Work, might do more in
one day, then the Parliament had or would do in a hundred, as far as he could
p^rceive; and that such unbyassed men, were like to be the only Instruments of
the peoples Happiness.

These things had been offered to be debated with a Committee, and a Treaty
agreed, wherein so many Officers, and so many Members should meet, and argue
the business, which signified only the crafty Cunctation of the Parliament (who
made Asses of the Swordmen) St. John's being one of those Referrees, with other
resty Sages of the Anarchy. By this means 4. or 5. Months were spent upon the
Definition of an equal Representative. But Cromwell growing teasty, some began
to make particular excuses, others to promise a new Representative to his mind,
and some to side with the Equity of his Proposals, as most consistent, well
advised, and prudential means, to the Peace of the Nation; such a ridiculous
collusion, that I cannot but anticipate the Event of this Conspiracy with this
Truth.

Upon his return from the Dissolution of the Parliament back again to the
Council of Officers, He acquainted them of his Exploit, and then told them,
That now they must go hand in hand with him, and justify what was done to the
hazard of all their Lives and Fortunes, as having advised and concurred in it.
Adding, That when he went into the House, he intended not to do it; but the
Spirit was so upon him, that He was overruled by it, and did not therefore
consult with Flesh and Blood at all, nor did He premeditate the doing thereof,
though he plainly saw the Parliament designed to spin an everlasting Thread, And
because there are few good Acts of his Life let the Reader score him up One for
the 23. of April 1653.

Oliver himself attended by Major General Lambert, Harrison, and some 8. more
Officers having after several conferences with their Committees (who showed him
the danger of calling a new Representative as the case then stood with the
Commonwealth, for that no qualifications could sufficiently secure the
interest thereof, and that the only way was to recruit the House which could
judge of such Elections by their own Authority) received no satisfaction,
entered the House (some Members being made privy to his design before,
especially Sir Gilbert Pickering who had held consultation the night before
with him, and was up armed in his Chamber till the very time) and after a
Speech therein showing the reasons and necessity of that Dissolution, did
declare it to be so, and required them to depart; saying in some passion to
some of them who began to ask the reason of this, thou art a Whoremaster, thou
a Drunkard, thou a Cheater of the public; and presently M.G. Harrison
peremptorily bid the Speaker to leave the Chair; which be refusing to do
without the Order of the House, and till he was pulled out, Harrison desired
him to lend him his hand, and gently heaved him out; Cromwell also commanded
that Bauble (as he called the Mace) to be taken away, and to be carried no more
in State before him, and so having turned them out of Doors, locked them up and
clapped Guards before them, and about all the Avenues of the Palace, to keep
these spirits out from professing it again.

The News of this Luciferian fall, was quickly spread throughout the City, and
from thence into the Kingdom, being related and received with all imaginable
gladness, while the Members slunk away, muttering to themselves the affront
they had received, and laying their heads together how to retrive themselves,
for loath they were to suffer this Violence, or acknowledge their Dissolution,
which they would by no means hear of. But what ever they fancied to the
contrary, raving at this boldness and audaciousnesse of their servant, as they
styled Cromwell, he minded it not, but went on in his work.

The Government (such as it was) was now lodged in the Council of Officers of
his own making and preferring, and the first thing done by them after this new
module, was the Emitting of a Declaration from Him and His Officers, showing
the grounds and reasons of this Dissolution of the Parliament, with an account
of their intentions as to the present and future government of the Nation:
which that it may appear by how slender a thread the Sword of this lawless
Commander hung over the Heads of those Parliament Tyrants, is very requisite to
be inserted, it holding forth the present Intrigues of Cromwell's designs, and
method of ambition.

Our intention is not to give an account at this time, of the grounds, which
first moved us to take up Arms, and engage our lives and all that was dear unto
us, in this cause; nor to mind in this Declaration the various Dispensations
through which Divine Providence has led us, or the witness the Lord has born,
and the many signal testimonies of acceptance which he has given, to the
sincere endeavors of his unworthy Servants, whilst they were contesting with
the many and great difficulties, as well in the Wars, as other transactions in
the three Nations; being necessitated, for the defense of the same Cause they
first asserted, to have recourse unto extraordinary actions; the same being
evident by former Declarations published on that behalf.

After it had pleased God not only to reduce Ireland, and give in Scotland, but
so marvellously to appear for his People at Worcester, that these Nations were
reduced to a great degree of Peace, and England to perfect quiet, and thereby
the Parliament had opportunity to give the people the harvest of all their
labor, blood, and treasure, and to settle a due liberty both in reference to
civil and spiritual things, whereunto they were obliged by their duty, their
engagements, as also the great and wonderful things which God had wrought for
them; it was matter of much grief to the good and well affected of the Land, to
observe the little progress which was made therein, who thereupon applied to
the Army expecting redress by their means, notwithstanding which, the Army
being unwilling to meddle with the Civil Authority in matters so properly
appertaining to it, it was agreed, that his Excellency and Officers of the
Army, which were Members of Parliament, should be desired to move the
Parliament, to proceed vigorously in performing what was amiss in Government,
and to the settling of the Commonwealth upon a foundation of justice and
righteousness; which having done, we hoped that the Parliament would
seasonably have answered our expectations: But finding (to our grief) delays
therein, we renewed our desires in an humble Petition to them, which was
presented in August last, and although they at that time signifying their good
acceptance thereof, returned us thanks, and referred the particulars thereof to
a Committee of the House, yet no considerable effect was produced, nor any such
progress made, might imply their real intentions to accomplish what was
Petitioned for; but on the contrary there more and more appeared amongst them,
an aversion to the things themselves, with much bitterness and opposition to
the people of God, and his Spirit acting in them, which grew so prevalent that
those persons of Honor and Integrity amongst them, who had eminently appeared
for God and the public good, both before and throughout this War. were
rendered of no further use in Parliament, then by meeting with a corrupt party
to give them countenance to carry on their ends, and for effecting the desire
they had of perpetuating themselves in the supreme Government. For which
purpose the said party long opposed, and frequently declared themselves against
having a new Representative; and when they saw themselves necessitated to take
that Bill into consideration, they resolved to make use of it to recruit the
House with persons of the same spirit and temper, thereby to perpetuate their
own sitting, which intention diverse of the activest amongst them did manifest,
laboring to persuade others to a consent therein: And the better to effect
this, diverse Petitions preparing from several Counties for the continuance of
this Parliament, were encouraged, if not set on foot by many of them.

For obviating these evils, the Officers of the Army obtained several meetings
with some of the Parliament, to consider what sitting means and remedy might be
applied to prevent the same: least that this Cause which the Lord has so
greatly blessed, and bore witness to, should languish under their hands, and by
degrees, be wholly lost, and the Lives, Liberties, and comforts of his People
delivered into their Enemies hands.

All which being sadly and seriously considered by the honest People of this
Nation, as well as by the Army, and wisdom and direction being sought from the
Lord, it seemed to be a duty incumbent upon us, who had seen so much of the
power and presence of God going along with us, to consider of some more
effectual means to secure the Cause, which the good People of this Commonwealth
had been so long engaged in, and to establish Righteousness and Peace in these
Nations.

And after much debate it was judged necessary, and agreed upon, that the
Supreme Authority should be by the Parliament devolved upon known persons, men
fearing God and of approved Integrity, and the government of the Commonwealth
committed unto them for a time, as the most hopeful way to encourage and
countenance all Gods People, reform the Law, and administer Justice
impartially; hoping thereby the people might forget Monarchy, and understanding
their true interest in the Election of successive Parliaments, may have the
Government settled upon a true Basis, without hazard to this glorious Cause, or
necessitating to keep up Armies for the defense of the same.

And being still resolved to use all means possible to avoid extraordinary
courses, we prevailed with about twenty Members of Parliament, to give us a
Conference, with whom we freely and plainly debated the necessity and justness
of our Proposals on that behalf; and did evidence that those, and not the Act
under their consideration, would most probably bring forth something answerable
to that Work, the foundation whereof God himself has laid, and is now carrying
on in the World.

The which notwithstanding found no acceptance, but in stead thereof, it was
offered, that the way was to continue still this present Parliament, as being
that from which we might reasonably expect all good things. And this being
vehemently insisted upon, did much confirm us in our apprehensions; That not
any love to a Representative, but the making use thereof, to recruit, and so to
perpetuate themselves, was their aim.

They being plainly dealt with about this; and told, That neither the Nation,
the honest Interest, nor we our selves, would be deluded by such dealings, They
did agree to meet again the next day in the Afternoon for mutual satisfaction,
it being consented to by the Members present, that Endeavors should be used,
that nothing in the mean time should be done in Parliament, that might exclude
or frustrate the Proposals beforementioned.

Notwithstanding this, the next morning the Parliament did make more have then
usual, in carrying on their said Act, being helped on therein by some of the
persons engaged to us the night before, none of them which were then present
endeavoring to oppose the same; and being ready to put the main Question for
consummating the said Act, whereby our aforesaid Proposals would have been
rendered void, and the way of bringing them into a fair and full Debate of
Parliament obstructed;

For preventing whereof, and all the sad and evil consequences, which must upon
the grounds aforesaid have ensued, and whereby at one blow the Interest of all
honest men, and of this glorious Cause, had been endangered to be laid in the
dust, and these Nations imbroyled in new Troubles, at a Time when our Enemies
abroad are watching all advantages against us, and some of them actually
engaged in War with us; we have been necessitated, though with much reluctance,
to put an end to this Parliament; which yet we have done, (we hope) out of an
honest heart, preferring this Cause above our names, lives, families, or
interests, how dear soever; with clear intentions, and real purposes of heart,
to call to the Government persons of approved fidelity and honesty: believing,
That as none wise will expect to gather Grapes of Thorns, so good men will
hope, that if persons so qualified, be chosen, the fruits of a just and
righteous Reformation, so long prayed and wished for, will (by the blessing of
God) be in due time obtained, to the refreshing of all those good hearts, who
have been panting after these things.

Much more might have been said, if it had been our desire to justify our
selves, by aspersing others, and raking into the Mis-government of Affairs; but
we shall conclude with this, That as we have been led by necessity and
Providence, to act as we have done, even beyond and above our own thoughts and
desires, so we shall and do, in that of this great work which is behind, put
our selves wholly upon the Lord for a blessing; professing we look not to stand
one day without his support, much less to bring to pass one of the things
mentioned, and desired, without his assistance: And therefore do solemnly
desire and expect, That all men, as they would not provoke the Lord to their
own destruction, would wait for such issue as he should bring forth, and to
follow their business with peaceable spirits; wherein we promise them
protection by his assistance.

And for those who profess their fear and love to the Name of God; that seeing,
in a great measure for their sakes, and for righteousness sake, we have taken
our lives in our hands, to do these things, they would be instant with the
Lord, day and night on our behalfs, that we may obtain grace from him. And
seeing we have made so often mention of his Name, that we may not do the least
dishonor thereunto: which indeed would be our confusion, and a stain to the
whole profession of godliness.

We beseech them also to live in all humility, meekness, righteousness, and
love one toward another, and toward all men; that so they may put to silence
the ignorance of the foolish, who falsely accuse them; and to know, that the
late great and glorious dispensations, wherein the Lord has so wonderfully
appeared in bringing forth these things, by the travel and blood of his
Children, ought so to oblige them, so to walk in the Wisdom and love of
Christ, as may cause others to honor their holy Profession, because they see
Christ to be in them of a Truth.

We do further purpose before it be long, more particularly to show the Grounds
of our Proceedings, and the Reasons of this late great Action and Change, which
in this We have but hinted at.

And we do lastly declare, That all Judges, Sheriffs, Justices of Peace,
Mayors, Bailiffs, Committees, and all other Civil Officers, and Public
Ministers, whatsoever, within the Commonwealth, or any parts thereof, do
proceed in their respective Places and Offices, and all persons whatsoever, are
to give Obedience to them as fully as when the Parliament was sitting.

Signed in the Name, and by the Appointment of his Excellency the Lord General,
and his Council of Officers. William Malyn, Secret.
Whitehall the 22. of April, 1663.

To ingratiate now with the Presbyterian who yet kept up their form of Church
Worship and were the most of one public persvvasion, all disturbances in
Churches were prohibited the Phanatick licenciousnesse of the Army, which
svvarmed with Anabaptists, Quakers, and Ranters, and were now mad to be
seizing all the remaining Revenue of Church Lands, in Glebe, Tithe, or
Impropriations. And to this purpose Addresses were eagerly carried on, such
hopes being underhand given them, to strengthen the hands of this Dictator in
carrying on the work of Sion.

He was also complemented by the French Ambassador Bourdeaux, who had made
applications to the Parliament, but was doubtful of effecting his Errand
with those highest and Mightiest States who were grown formidable not only
to the Dutch, but to his Master, who willingly courted them to prevent their
closing with his Rebels of Bourdeaux, only Oliver as we have seen valued
them no more then Scoundrels or Rake Shames, nor would give ear to any more
Enemies of Monarchy.

Being thus by force possessed of the Supreme power, after he had held it some
fevv days, to show the absurd and ridiculous State Caprichio's of the Council
of Officers who as yet managed the Civil Authority, he transmitted it to a new
Council of State, made up of the supremest of them, and some former Juncto men,
who by Proclamation commanded all Officers to execute their Trusts, as
formerly, and required the same obedience; to commute with which they abated
the Tax from 120000. to 90000. per mensem. It was now remarqued that many great
Fires ushered in this Incendiaries Usurpation.

This Council of State did next give birth to that Monster of the little
Parliament, which like an abortive Cub was cast by Cromwell, and fon^ly and
vainly lick^d by Harrison, both which had most different ends on this
Convention, in the one a Temporal, in the other a Spiritual Pride and
Covetousness, (though not altogether purified from the Deceits of the World)
worked in this mysterious knack of a new and unheard of Legislative Authority,
who by the Name of men of Integrity and Fidelity to the Cause of God, were by a
bare summons from Oliver called to the Settlement of the State, that was, to be
Stirrups or Footsteps to the Throne whereon Cromwell should tread, they being
abject and mean people, being such as were named by the Officers, that is, by
Cromwell's Agents to this Council, and of most destructive Principles to all
Community and Society, either as Men or Christians. It is observable, that
Cromwell who utterly rejected the Rump-expedient to his instances of a new
Representative of filling up the House, by foisting in Elections of their own
to which (their Authority standing) they could unquestionably awe the Country,
made not nice of it for himself.

According to their Summons, on the 4. of July, the Members of approved
fidelity, etc. met at the Council Chamber in Whitchal, to whom Cromwell in a
zealous speech much to the purpose of his Declaration, and the occasion of the
present Meeting, stuffed with various citations of Scripture, (I am loath to
nauseate the Reader with any more of his Harangues at large) to his, (but far
from the) purpose, devolved the supreme Trust, which they translated into more
common English, adjourning themselves after a short consultation to
Westminster, and giving themselves the Title and Authority of the Parliament of
England, voting Mr. Francis Rouse for their Speaker, but with a Collateral Vote
that he should continue in the Chair no longer then for a Month; They were
persons for the most part of such mean and ignote extractions, that so far were
they from being taken notice of by their Shires, each of whom but two or three
represented, that they were scarce known in the very Towns they were born, or
afterward inhabited, till the Excise, then Committees for Sequestration, and
the War in the respective Counties, made them infamously known, The rest were
of his Partisans in the Parliament and High Court of Justice.

On the 12. of December. (as it had been directed by the Counsel of State) the
Parliament being Sat, some of the Members stood up one after another, and made
a motion for a Dissolution thereof, for that it would not be for the good of
the Nations to continue it longer; this Court Air almost blasted the men of
Fidelity and Committee Blades, who had scarce warmed their Fingers ends in the
Government, and were newly settling themselves and their friends in a thriving
way, as they had done in their Offices they had passed before, and thereupon
they began one after another to make perorations of the Cause of God and the
godly people committed to their charge, which they could not tell how to answer
to him, if so easily they should give it up, and leave the Commonwealth in
such a distraction, as would inevitably ensue, and Major General Harrison and
Arthur Squib (the great Sequestrator of Haberdasher-hall) were very copiously
zealous in defense of their Authority: But the Military or Court-party being
the Major part, not thinking them worthy of a dispute or longer debate, the
Speaker being of their side, rose and left the House and them Sitting in it,
where to prayers they went, and then resolved to continue Sitting.

In the mean time Rous the Speaker (with the Mace before him and his Followers)
came to White Hall, and there resigned the Instrument he gave them, by which
they were constituted a Parliament, and gave him likewise to understand how
they had left their Fellows: Their surrender was kindly received by Oliver, and
they thanked for the pains they had taken in the service of the Commonwealth,
however he and they had missed of their intentions of the good should thereby
have come to the Commonwealth, which a strange spirit and perverse principle
in some of the Members had solely hindered; and as to them yet Sitting in the
Parliament House, he dispatched away Leiutenant Colonel White a Confident of
his to dislodge them, who accordingly with a Guard of Red-coats came thither,
and entering the House demanded them in the Name of the Genetal to depart, for
that the Parliament was Dissolved, who replying to the contrary, and telling
him they were upon Business, and ought not to be thus disturbed; he asked what
Business, they answered, we are seeking of God; Pugh says he, is that all,
that is to no purpose, for God has not been within these Walls these 12. years,
and so fairly compelled them out, muttering with the same wrath and sorrowful
look-backs, as those that had Sat 30. times the same term, and could almost
have pleaded prescription.

Thus was the Power emptied from one Vessel to another, as the Scribes and
Chaplains of the Grandees phrased it, and could find no settlement, till Oliver
was called to it by his Council of Officers to supply this gap in Government:
and now a Single Person with a Council is the only expedient for the safety of
the People, for that there is no trust nor truth in Parliaments, as their often
abberrations and failures had sufficiently declared; and it was discoursed by
the Abettors of this change, that 'twas not Monarchy which was quarrelled at,
but the corruptions and abuses of it, in its unlimited, unbounded Prerogative,
all which would be avoided, by the circumscription of it in a Protector, by his
Council and a new Instrument of Government, and the supreme power of a
Triennial Parliament, in whom during their Session the Sovereign Authority
should reside.

So they said, and so they did, for after 4 days time (in which Feak and his
Freaking Partisans were almost run from their wits in rage and madness)
Cromwell was appointed and declared for Protector of this Infant Commonwealth
(and it was a tedious interval to him) the Chancery Court at Westminster Hall
being prepared for the Ceremony of the Instalment in this manner, after the
usual seeking of God by the Officers of the Army.

The Protector about one of the clock in the afternoon came from White Hall to
Westminster to the Chancery Court, attended by the Lords Commissioners of the
great Seal of England, Barons of the Exchequer, and Judges in their Robes;
after them, the Council of the Common wealth, and the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Recorder of the City of London, in their Scarlet Govvns; then came the
Protector attended with many of the chief Officers of the Army; a Chair of
State being set in the said Court of Chancery, the Protector stood on the left
hand thereof uncovered, till a large vvriting in Parchment in the manner of an
Oath, was read; there being the power with which the Protector was invested,
and how the Protector is to govern the three Nations, which the Protector
accepted of, and Subscribed in the face of the Court, and immediately hereupon
sat down covered in the Chair; the Lords Commissioners then delivered up the
Great Seal of England to the Protector, and the Lord Mayor his Sword and Cap of
Maintenance, all which the Protector returned immediately to them again: The
Court then rose, and the Protector was attended back as aforesaid, to the
Banqueting house in White Hall, the Lord Mayor himself uncovered carrying the
Svvord before the Protector all the way; and coming into the
Banqueting House, an exhortation was made by Mr. Lockyer, after which the
Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Judges departed.

The Instrument or Module framed to be the Foundation of this present
Government; was chiefly made up of these following heads,

That the Supreme Legislative Authority be and reside in a single Person, and
the People in Parliament, the Execution of that power to be in the Protector,
with the advice of his Council, not to exceed Twenty and One. All Proceedings
to run in the Name and Style of the Protector, and all Honors, Offices, and
Titles to be derived from him, that he may pardon all Offenses but Treason and
Murder. The Militia during the Parliament shall be in his and their hands, but
in the Intervals only in his and his Councils. He and his Council to make War
and Peace with foreign Princes. Not make new Laws or abrogate old without
Consent of Parliament. A Parliament to be called within six Menths, and
afterward every third year, and if need be oftener, which the Protector shall
not dissolve without consent in Parliament, till after 5. Months. The
Parliament of English to consist of 400. to be chosen by more equal
distributions, in Counties and Boroughs; of Scotch 30, and so many of the
Irish. The Summoning of the Parliament to pass under the Seal of the
Commonwealth, to the Sheriffs; and if the Protector omit or deny that, then the
Commissioners of the Seal, be held under pain of High Treason, to issue out
such writs, and in case of failure in him, the High Sheriffs, (and some other
By-blowes concerning the equality, and fairness of Elections under great
penalties.) No Royalist, Irish Rebels or Papists to be capable of being
Elected, and in case they be, to for feit two years Revenue, and three parts of
their goods. None to be elected under the Age of 21. years, nor unless he be a
man of Integrity, a lover of God, and of good conversation. None to have voices
in Election but such as were worth 200. pounds. The Elections to be forthwith
transmitted to the Council of State, by the Secretary of the Commissioners, and
in case of dispute to the Council of State. Sixty to make a Quorum. The
Protector if need be to call Parliaments between the Intervals thereof. Bills
offered to the Protector, if not assented to by him within 40. days, to pass
into Laws notwithstanding. The Protector with the Advice of his Council, in
case of death, or Breach of trust, to substitute new Privy Counselors. A
Competent Revenue to be settled for the maintenance of Ten thousand Horse and
15. thousand Foot, and the Navy, and not to be altered or lessened but by the
Advice of the Council, and upon the disbanding of them the money to be brought
to the Exchequer. No new Levies, nor Laws to be made without consent in
Parliament. All forfeited Lands unsold to belong to the Protector, The
Protectorate to be elective, but the Royal Family to be excluded. Oliver
Cromwell to be the present Protector. All places of trust, and Office to be in
the Protectors disposal; if in Interval of Parliament, to be approved and
confirmed in Parliament. The Rest; for the purity and toleration of Religion,
out of which the Papist and Protestant were to be exempted, and all Laws in
favor of them to be abrogated. All Sales of Parliament to be confirmed.
Articles of War to be made good. And lastly, the Protector and his Successor to
be bound by Oath to observe these present Articles, and to uphold the Peace and
Welfare of the Nation; which Oath was in (...) verba,

I promise in the presence of God, not to violate or inf^inge the matters and
things contained in the Instrument, but to observe, and cause the same to be
observed; and in all things to the best of my understanding, govern the Nations
according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customs; to seek their peace, and cause
Justice and Law to be equally administered.

The Feat needed no more security, as good altogether as its Authority, in this
following Proclamation, which was published throughout England, Scotland, and
Ireland, in these words,

Where as the late Parliament Dissolved themselves, and resigning their Powers
and Authorities; the Government of the Commonwealth of England Scotland and
Ireland, in a Lord Protector, and saccessive Triennial Parliaments is now
established: And whereas Oliver Cromwell Captain General of all the Forces of
this Common wealth is declared Lord Protector of the said Nations, and has
accepted thereof: We have therefore thought it necessary (as we hereby do) to
make Publication of the Premises, and strictly to charge and command all and
every Person or Persons, of what quality and condition soever in any of the
said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conform and submit themselves
to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayor, Bailiffs, etc. are
required to publish this Proclamation, to the end none may have cause to
pretend ignorance in this behalf.

This Miscellany of the Laws, and new projections, suited a great many humors
and different persuasions of the Phanaticks, Independents, Anabaptists and
others, being the second part of the Alchoran. And because there is occasion
for it, we will discourse a little of the present State of Religion, and what
opinion Cromwell best aspected. The Orthodox Protestants were wholly suppressed,
and yet some Reverend persons, as Dr. Usher the Bishop of Armagh, and Dr.
Brownrig the Bishop of Exeter received some shows of respect and reverence from
Him, which he more manifestly boasted in the funeral Expenses of the Learned
Usher, and this to captate a Reputation of his Love to Scholars, and the meek,
modest, and virtuous Clergy. The Presbyterian was rather tolerated then
countenanced, and yet such of them as would comply with his Court greatness,
were much in his eye and his favor; for others of them he cared not,
pleasingly expressing himself how he had brought under the Pride and Arrogance
of that Sect, making those that would allow no liberty to others, sue for it
for themselves. The Independents and Anabaptists he loved and preferred by
turns, and was most constant to them, as the men that would and did support his
Usurpation; only he could by no means endure the Fifth Monarchy men, though by
their dotages he had raised himself to this height; and therefore Feak and
Rogers, were by him committed to Prison in the Castle of Windsor, where they
continued a long while, and not only so, but he set Kiffin the Anabaptist whom
he had taken out of design into his favor, with his party, together by the
ears, with Feaks, to the raising of a Feud between them, the Balance of his
Security in the Government. The like he did betwixt the Presbyterian and the
Independent, a subdivided Schism from the Church of England, as Feaks and
Kiffins were from Independency; whom when out of his zeal to the Unity of
Christian Religion, he seemed to bring together, to compose and accommodate all
Differences; in the near probability of such expedients, he would divide and
more irreconciliably sever and alienate. And this was all his practical
Devotion. But to return;

Great shooting of Guns at night, and Volleys of Acclamations, were given at
the close of this mock solemnity by Cromwell's Janissaries, while the Cavaliers
were more joyfully disposed at the Hopes of the Kings Affairs, but no body of
any Account giving the Usurper a good word or miskiditche with his greatness,
save what was uttered in Fur by my Lord Mayor, and the Accomplices in this Fact,
who tickled his ears with the Echo of the Proclamation done with the usual
Formalities, These Triumphs so disgusted Harrison (as also Col. Rich) that he
withdrew himself from the Gang and turned public Preacher or Railer against
his Comrade Oliver, who was glad to be rid of such a busy and impertinent
Assistant in the moduling of Government: so Cromwell had now two
Common-wealth-contradivided Factions against him, the old and the new
Parliaments, and therefore it nearly concerned him to make much of the
Anabaptist and Sectary, which now succeeded Independency as the Religion
maintained and favored above all other, and Kiffin a great Leader and Teacher,
was now in great request at the Court at White Hall, and contrarily Sir Henry
Vane, jun. was looked on askue, as also Sir Arth. Hazilrig, and Bradshaw, and
Scot, and so the Fabel builders were confounded one amongst another.

The Council appointed by the Officers, or taken rather by himself, by whose
advice he was to govern, were 14. at first.

Lord Lambert. Lord Viscount Lisle. General Desbrow. Sir Gilbert Pickring.
Major General Skippon. Sir Anth. Ashley Cooper. Walter Strickland Esquire Sir
Charles Wolsley. Col. Philip Jones. Francis Rous Esquire. Richard Major
Esquire. John Lawrence Esquire. Col. Edward Montague Col. William Sydenham.
I should have mentioned the Dutch War in its place, which aggrandized him with
the usual victorious success; but because, he was never personally engaged in
the Service, but owed this Garland, as he did the glory of Dunbar to the noble
General Monk, and wore but a second-hand Triumphal Robe; I will not constellate
Him with that Hero's Splendour and Brightness of Fame.

That which properly concerns Cromwell is rather the Dishonor of that War, the
Peace that ensued the Conclusion of it; for the Stomach of that Nation had been
so humbled by several great losses, their Trade so spoiled, and their Subjects
so impoverished, that it was thought impossible for them to have equipped
another Fleet, able to look out Navies in the Face; Withal there were so many
Discontents and Divisions in that popular State, that they were ready to ruin
themselves without any of our help, yet did this puny and unfledged Prince come
to a Treaty and agreement with them, upon most mean and inconsiderable Terms,
when it had been no question but another rub at Sea, or beleaguering their
Ports, would have brought them down to the Humble Complement of Our faithful
Tributaries, which of how great advantage it might have been to the Trade, and
consequently the greatness of this Kingdom, I take not upon me to determine.

His next Affair was a Conclusion of a League with the Queen of Sweeden, which
he transacted by the Embassy of the Lord Commissioner Whitlock, who being
commissioned at his Departure by the foolish Parliament, was invested with new
Credentialls from Cromwell, whom accordingly he owned as his most serene
Highness his Master.

But that which he most aspected, was the two neighboring potent Monarchies of
France and Spain, with one whereof he must of necessity quarrel, and so spend
the ill blood, and convey away those humors which were so redundant in the old
Soldiery, both of the Kings and Essexes Army, and if not employed in some
foreign war, would create him trouble at home; this the French Cardinal, newly
restored to the administration of that Monarchy, timely foresee, and therefore
a Treaty was privately and industriously carried on here by Mounsieur Bourdeaux
Neufville, to an amicable Association and League against the Spaniard.
Cromwell's Covetousness and thirst of Gold prevailing against his Interest and
Ambition and thirst of Malice and Mischief against the Royal Family, which was
now shaded under the French Flower de Lyzes, whereby all petsons expected an
Invasion from hence of that Kingdom, that if it were possible for his Treason,
he might drive it out of the World.

But Mazarine's Golden expedient, and temporary Medium, of shifting the King
and his Relations out of that Kingdom, by virtue of the said League, wholly
swayed and inclined him to a War against Spain, which not long after was
commenced: The greater invitation thereto being Three ships pretended
Hamburgers, but laden with the King of Spains Pieces of Eight, whether for his
Account or no uncertain, that had been newly stayed and seized by the Court of
Admiralty, at the prosecution of one Violet a Goldsmith: and notwithstanding
the Spanish Ambassador, Don Alonso de Cardenas, protested and strugled against
it, were carried to the Tower, and there minted to the Sum of 400000. Sterling.
This and other moneys in the Exchequer, gave the greater courage to his
Ambition, and his raw and unsettled Usurpation. He had also now accepted
satisfaction from the King of Portugal, and was entered into League and
Friendship with Him.

How many are the troubles, cares, and miseries of Tyrant greatness. No sooner
is one design, one passion gratified and accomplished, but another disquiet and
danger invades or perplexes Him. No sooner had he sacrificed to his
Covetousness, but now he must offer Victims to his cruelty the next Assurance
of his hated Throne. There is in the Labyrinth of Vice, as in the orderly Frame
of Arts and Sciences, a Circle, a (...), a Spherical Motion from one evil to
another, till the last terminates at the beginning, their qualities and
quantities being only altered, augmented, or diminished by Time or other
circumstances.

From the deep Design of foreign Mines, He next converted his thoughts upon a
Homespun Plot. A horrible Practice of Machivilian Policy, and Art of Empire,
with which even just Scepters have been polluted, and stained by some unhumane
Ministers of State, upon pretenses of preventing danger (who stand chargeable
even with the Loyal blood this Leach sucked through their Conduits) to entrap
and engage innocent persons (upon Suspicion of others of the same party, who
are obnoxious to the Government) in Machinations and Conspiracies of their own
forming and contrivance, and by their Emissaries betray and then condemn them.
This was the first bloody remarque of Cromwell's Princing, managed by his
Secretary Thurloe, who drew in Col. John Gerrard and Mr. Vowell two eminent
Royalists, into his snare of conspiring the Death of the Protector with others,
who confessed the intention, for which they were both condemned by a High Court
of Justice; ( Cromwell not daring to trust the Laws or a Jury, the Birthright
of Englishmen, no more then did the Juncto of Regicides) and the first beheaded
at Tower Hill, and the other hanged at ( haring-Crosse; the Colonel declaring,
That he was so far from having hand or heart in it, or any encouragement from
the King (as was falsely suggested) that he feared he should not dye right in
his favor as being but suspected, of that (though so just) assassinate: it
being below His Majesty's Honor and Religion. Mr. Vowell referred his Cause,
and his unjust Judges, and the Tyrant to Heavens Tribunal.

This was the Rozin, there wanted now the Consent of the People in Parliament,
to sidle his Instrument. He resolved therefore to call one forthwith, for the
Nation began to murmr at him (and some openly to refu^e obedience) and to
forget the pleasing acquiescence in the change he had made, since they saw he
made it only for himself. The Nine days wonder was over, and they had recovered
themselves to a fresh sense of their Slavery (which might afterward stupifie
and benum them) before the several opposite parties of Royalists, and
Common-wealth-men, could understand one another, and bandy both against Him.

Having now plotted and secured the Elections of as many Sectaries, and of his
Party to the ensuing Parliament, as his young Interest could procure him, in
the Month of July, to recreate himself and his Familiar Thurloe, with some
robust and jogging Exercise, to void the Gravel with which he was much
troubled, He would needs show his skill in driving a Coach with six great German
Horses, sent him as a present by the Count of Oldenburgh, in Hide-Park, but
those generous Horses no sooner heard the Lash of the Whip, but away they ran
with Thurloe sitting trembling in it, for fear of his own Neck, over Hill and
Dale, and at last threw down their unexpert Governor from the Box, into the
Tra^es, and there bad likely to have trod and drawn him to pieces, but
Vengeance was yet again pleased to respite him and put him over to a like
judicial Execution, after his immature Death, in 1660. Of this ominous chance
many ingenlous Songs were made, and one called the Jolt by Sir John Berkenhead,
which being in Print in a History (and in the Rump Songs) though the Author
mistaken, is purposely forborne.

The Elections were made one and the same day throughout England; most of the
Boroughs had but one Burge^s, and the Shires some of them 6. or 7. Knights, all
of them under sure qualifications, of not having been or being of the Cavalier
party; there were 30. also by the Instrument Elected for Scotland; and as many
for Ireland, all or most of whom were English Commanders; on the 3. of Sept.
they met, and adjourned from the House to the Abbey, where Mr. Marshall
preached, and so to the Painted-Chamber, where they had a message from the
Protector to invite them to a Sermon the next day again, when Doctor Goodwin
Preached; and the Protector came in great State in his Coach, Cleypole the
Master of Horse, and Strickland the Captain of his Guard, barcheaded on both
sides; at his entrance into the Church, Lambert carried the Sword before him,
and Whitlock the Purse; the Sermon done, to the Painted-chamber again, and
there in a Speech he set forth these Heads.

That some few years ago, none would have thought of such a Door of Hope; that
he knew there were yet many Humors and Interests, and that Humors were above
Interest, that the condition of England was like Israel in the Wilderne^s (of
which the Sermon was) that this was a Healing day, there was neither Nobleman,
nor Gentleman, nor Yeoman, before known by any cistinction, we had not any that
bote Rule nor Authority, but a great Contempt of Magistracy and Christ's
Ordinances; that the Fifth Monarchy was highly cried up by persons who would
assume the Government, but that desired thing wanted greater manifestation then
appeared for such men to change the Authority by ( and this directed at the
late Parliament.) He desired this Honorable Assembly to remedy all these
Disorders, showed that the wars with Portugal, French and Dutch, do and did eat
up the Assessements, that swarms of Jesuits were crept in to make divisions,
which were grown so wide that nothing but his Government could remedy them; and
let men say what they will, he could speak it with comfort before a greater
then any of them. Then he showed what he had done during his Government, First,
his endeavor of reforming the Laws, having joined all Parties to assist in that
great work; next, his filling the Benches with the ablest Lawyers; then his
Regulation of the Court of Chancery, and then his Darling Ordinance for
approbation of Ministers (which hindered all that List from invading the
Ministry) by men of both persuasions, Presbyterians and Independents, etc. And
lastly, his being Instrumental to call a Free Patliament, which he valued and
would keep it so above his Life.

Then he showed the advantages of the Peace, with the Dutch, Dane, and Swede,
and the Protestant Interest, which he would have them improve and intend
chiefly; that they were now upon the edge of Canaan; that he spoke not as their
Lord, but their fellow servant, and then bid them go and choose their Speaker.

Which they did without presenting of him, his Name William Lenthal, the old
Chairman; and next day fell upon the Instrument, as they had Voted, by parts as
it lay, and questioned the Power; which Oliver understanding, to put them out
of that course which touched his Copyhold, after 9. days he came to the
Painted Chamber, and sending for them, declared and asserted four Fundamentals
in the instrument, which they were not to meddle with or to alter. 1, The
Government by a single person and Parliament. 2. The Imperpetuity of
Parliaments, or no continued succession. 3. The Militia, which was his only.
And 4. Liberty of Conscience; telling them a Free Parli^ment was but a term of
Reciprocation, for that power which made him Protector, made them a Parliament,
and therefore was very sorry they should go about to destroy the Settlement,
which to prevent, and cease such Debates (though he denied any negative voice)
he was necessitated to appoint a Test or Recognition of the Government as it
was established (by every Member) before they sat again.

This bogled at first 3. quarters of them, especially the Commonwealth-men, and
those of the late Long Parliament, so that of four hundred and odd there
appeared but two hundred, but were made up at last three hundred, for the old
ones would not be baulked so, and fell afresh upon the same disputes and ran
out the Articles, resolving to put the whole judgment of the House upon them,
into one entire Bill, and so present it, but in truth to spin out time, and
work upon the Protectors occasions for money, which was proposed in the House,
and coldly and slowly considered.

Just at their sitting down, the Protector published several Ordinances, which
being passed and bore date before; were to pass as authentic as Acts by the
Instrument, one for paying the money into the Treasury, that was raised for the
propagation of the Gospel in Wales, another for making Soldiers free of all
Corporations, and to exercise any Trades; Another to turn out all honest men
under the notion of scandalous Preachers and Ministers, Common Prayer being
their chiefest Imputation; and a fourth to survey Kings Lands, etc. and for
doubling upon Deans and Chapters, which sales those many changes of power had
much retarded and depretiated. The more occult cause of the publication of
these Ordinances, was to let the Parliament understand that Oliver took his
Instrument to be in a good case, and sufficiently warranted already.

In this Convention Lambert labored Tooth and Nail to have the Instrument
confirmed, for by that the Protectorate was left undetermined and Elective,
threatening them that if this Parliament would not, they would call 4. or 5.
Parliaments one after another till it was Enacted; (the same Art of menacing
which Oliver used to the preceding Juncto) but that not prevailing (the
Parliament dissolved) by his Interest in the Army, He procured Addresses both
from Scotland and Ireland, as well as here, declaring their Resolution to stand
by this Government in defense of the Protectors Life and Dignity against all
Opposition; which in this Stratocracy was to be as good a Security as
Parliamentory Assent. There were some Superior Officers, as Lieut. Col.
Majors, and Captains, who were yet for a Commonwealth, who had private
Meetings, and contrived the seizing this Rebel, and deliver him to the Justice
of the Parliament: but by Pride's Discovery, who was made privy to this
business, they were prevented, and their Commissions only taken away; Cromwell
not willing by severer punishments to make a noise that there was such a potent
Faction in the Army.

Lambert was very officious in this matter, as neither resenting the late
affront put upon him by Cromwell (when he advanced Fleetwood in his (...) to
the Supreme Command in Ireland, though with a lesser Title then Lambert, who
made magnificent preparation for his investiture in the Lie^tenartship, and
would suffer no Diminution of that Honor) nor senting his suture designs and
cheats, as to his promised Succession to the Sovereignty here. But I must
Retrospect a little having omitted some things of Concernment to persued the
former discourse.

Cromwell now supplied the Benches of the Court at Westminster, with the ablest
of the Lawyers, whom he had invited to the public service, and Mr. Maynard,
Twisden, Nudigate, Hugh Windham were made Sergeants, and Mr. Hales one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas, where St. John's yet sat, and of the Cabinet to
his Protector besides; having preferred his Man Thurloe (his Secretary at the
Hague) to be his Secretary of State, the Candle or Light of that Dark-Lanthorn,
which St. John's was said to be in these mysterious times of Cromwell, in all
his attempts and designs of consequence and moment.

The Dutch Peace was also concluded on by the Ambassadors and the Commissioners
of the said ^ouncil for the Protector, between whom this private Article was
agreed, that the Prince of Aurange should never be restored to the Dignities,
Offices, and charge his Ancestors held and enjoyed, and this was urged for the
better conservation of the Peace which would in his Restitution be endangered,
because of his Relation to the King.

The Protector dined in great State upon an Invitation from the Lord Mayor,
etc. at Grocers-Hall the 8. of February being Ashwednesday, a very unsuitable
day for any Festival but his Entertainment, who inverted all things, the
streets, being railed from Temple Bar thither the Liveries in their Gowns in
their gradual standings awaiting Him; he was met at the said Gate by Alderman
Viner, the Lord Mayor, who delivered him the Sword there, and having received
it from him back again, bore it on Horseback before him all the way; through
which the same silence was kept, as if a Funeral had been en passant, and no
doubt, it was that muteness which Tacitus mentioned in Tiberius, quale Magnae
Irae vel magni metus est silentium, no apprecations or so much as a How do ye,
being given during the Cavalcade. After Dinner he was served with a Banquet, in
the conclusion whereof he Knighted Alderman Viner, and would have done the same
to the Recorder Steel, for his learned Speech of Government, calculated and
measured for him, but he for good Reasons avoided it; My Lord Mayor was forced
to carry it home, and anger his Wife with it, who had real Honor both in her
Name and Nature. Oliver at his return had the second course of a Brick-bat,
from the top of a House in the Strand by St. Clements, which light upon his
Coach, and almost spoiled his Digestion with the daringness of the affront,
search was made but in vain, the person could not be found, and vengeance was
not yet from Heaven to rain upon him.

He published a little after an Ordinance for the Trial and Approbation of
Ministers, wherein Phillp Nigh, Goodwin, Hugh Peter's, Mr. Manton, and others,
were named Commissioners, the question these men put to the Examinants, was not
of Abilities or Learning, but grace in their hearts, and that with to bold and
saucy Inquisition, that some men's spirits trembled at their Interrogatories,
they phrasing it so, as if (as was said of the Council of Trent) they had the
Holy Ghost in a Cloak Bag; or were rather Simon Magus his own Disciples; and
certainly there were never such Symoniacks in the World, not a living of value,
but what a Friend or the best purchaser was admitted into, to which humane
learning even where a former right was, was a good and sufficient Bar; no less
to the ruin then scandal of the Church of England, and the Protestant Religion
and Professors thereof; ^everal ignorant bold Laics being inducted into the
best Spiritualities, as best consisted with Olivers Interest, which depended
upon the Sectary, and their hideous divisions in Religion. To return;

During those Protectoral Intrigues, the King's Interest had got such footing
again in England, that all, or most of the Gentlemen and Counties thereof, were
engaged for it, and therefore while Lambert managed one Province, the Affairs
of the Parliament, wherein Oliver would not descend so low, as to be
pragmatical, and Sceptically busy with their Debates against His power, as
wrested and usurped from the people; He was mainly intent upon the proceedings
of the Royallists, the particulars whereof he had betrayed to him weekly, a
constant correspondence being held betwixt Him and one Manning a Retainer, and
Under-Secretary to the King at Colen, his Father being killed in his Service at
Alresford in the year 1644.

The price of this Treason was no less then 6000. l. a year, most whereof came
to the King by this fellows hands, as sent over by his and his friends
procurement, but on purpose by so notable a service in the Kings necessities,
to s^rue himself into the secrets of His Majesty's designs.

Hence came the Western Association and Attempt of the noble Penruddock in the
West, to be so suddenly defeated, with the like Insurrections in several parts
of England in the year 1654. For upon certain notice of the days appointed for
their rising, Cromwell to be before hand with them gave out supposed and false
days, and made the like Appearances, particularly at Shrewsbury, by which means
the Confederates came to perceive there was some Treachery among themselves,
and did then wisely desist from the danger of taking public Arms against Him;
For a fuller account of all which, I must refer the Reader to the Histories of
the Times lately published, though I should take notice of his cruelty against
those unfortunate Gentlemen.

The Event of this, by which he had overreached the King in his own designs,
and the Hopes of his rich successes in the West Indies (by robbing another
Prince) whether his Fleet and Army under General Pen and Venables was now
arrived, (which also I shall only mention, for the Story is trite and vulgar)
made Oliver most blithe and confident, and his Court of Beggars and such like
mean people, very gay and jocund; A great deal of State was now used toward
him, and the French Cringe, and other ceremonious pieces of gallantry and good
deportment, which were thought unchristian and favoring of Carnality,
introduced in place of austere and down looks, and the silent Mummery of
Starched and Hypocritical gravity, the only becoming Dress (forsooth) of Piety
and Religion. He had now a Guard of Halberdiers in Gray Coats welted with black
Velvet; over whom Walter Strickland was Captain; and a Lord Chamberlain Sir
Gilbert Pickering; Two Masters of Requests, Mr. Bacon and Mr. Sad'er; a Master
of his Horse his Son Claypool^; and generally all persons of Honor both to His
own person, and his Wives, who very frugally Huswifed it, and would nicely and
finically tax the expensive unthriftiness (as said she) of the Other Woman who
lived there before her. But I must not engage in her impertinencies, though a
many pretty stories might be told of this obsolete Princess.

It will be requisite to speak something of his manner and course of Life, now
raised to a very near fruition of the Sovereignty, this being the Solstice of
his Fortunes. His Custom was now to divert himself frequently at
Hampton Court, (which he had saved from Sale, with other Houses of the Kings
for his own greatness) whether he went and came in post with his Guards behind
and before, as not yet secure of his Life from the justice of some avenging
hand; Here he used to hunt, and at the fall of a Deer, where he would be sure
to be present, embrue his hands in the blood of it, and therewith asperse and
sprinkle the Attendants: and sometimes to cokes the neighboring Rusticks, give
them a Buck he had hunted, and money to drink with it; His own Diet was very
spare and not so curious, except in public Treatments, which were constantly
given every Monday in the Week, to all the Officers of the Army not below a
Captain, where he dined with them, and showed a hundred Antic Tricks, as
throwing of Cushions, and putting live Coals into their Pockets and Boots; A
Table being likewise spread every day of the Week for such Officers as should
casually come to Court, and this was the greatest expense, which and other
charges of the Government, h^ levied as yet by his and his Councils Ordinances,
which were as du^ly and respectfully obeyed as Acts of Parliament.

With these Officers while he seemed to disport himself, taking off his Drink
freely, and opening himself every way to the most free familiarity, He did
merely lie at the Catch of what should incogitantly and with such unsuspected
provocation fall from their Mouths, which he would be sure to record and lay up
against his occasion of reducing them to the Speakers Memory, who were never
like to forget the prejudice and damage they had incurred by such loose
Discoveries of their Minds and Inclinations.

He was a great Lover of Muhck, and entertained the most skilfullest in that
Science, in his pay and Family; in that like wicked Saul, who when the evil
Spirit was upon him, thought to lay and still him with those Harmonious charms;
but generally he respected or at least pretended a Love to all ingenious and
eximious persons in any Arts, whom he procured to be sent or brought to him,
but the niggardliness and incompetence of his reward, showed that this was a
personated Act of Greatness, and that private Cromwell yet governed Prince
Oliver. Among the rest of those Virtuosi, He favored a Poet too, who very
elegantly sang his Marston-Moor (...), but with more misfortune then others,
who made the Muses Slaves to his Triumphs, and Pegasus to draw His Chariot.

He had twenty other freaks in his head, for sometimes before he had half
dined, he would give order for a Drum to beat, and call in his foot Guards,
like a Kennell of Hounds, to snatch off the meat from his Table, and see them
tear it in pieces; the like Joco's and Frisks he would have with other Company;
even with some few of the Nobility, when he would not stick to tell them, what
Company they had lately kept, when and where they had drank the Kings Health
and the Royal Families, bidding them when they did it again, to do it more
privately, and this without any passion, and as festivous and Drol discourse.

But the sad news of the Defeat at Hispaniola, whence he had promised himself
Mountains of Gold, and Roc^s of Gems, to the maintenance of his Mamalukes, and
perpetuating of the Army, coming to his ears, soon after the Marquess de Leda,
Ambassador from the Spaniard, had departed dissatisfied with the preparations
here, and other ill news founding in his ear, that the Commonwealth Party were
very active in the Army, and the Royallists breeding new Designs, he began to
cast off the Merry Devil and act the Tyrant altogether, and not without Cause.
For;

The effects of this Parliament rupture encouraged two most opposite parties to
conspire against the Protector, the Fifth Monarchists and Cavaliers (as we must
so distinguish the Royal Party upon this difference, who) longed for their
rightful Sovereign Charles the Second, the Fifth Monarchy expected King Jesus,
the Courtiers and those engaged by them or with them, with Cromwell himself,
desired King Oliver; and every of these manifested much impatience, but none of
them could attain their Wishes, and when Oliver might afterward he durst not,
The Protector was no way ignorant of this, and therefore he resolved to deal
with the weakest first, which yet by underminings was more dangerous then the
other: The Army was corrupted by that Millenary Principle, and that was to be
purged, so that as Harrison and Rich had been laid aside, and not long after
committed with Carew and Court^ey into several remote Castles; so now General
Monck had order to seize Major General Overton, and the Majors Bramston and
Holms, and other Officers, and Cashier them, after Fines and good Security for
their Behavior; Overton was sent up to the Tower, and his Regiment conferred
on Colonel Morgan; Colonel Okey's Regiment taken from him, and given to a sure
Confider, and so the danger from the Army was quickly suppressed: Cornet but now
Colonel Joyce, was likewise malecontent at this change, and signified so much
to Cromwell's Face, whom he upbraided with his own Service and his
faithlessnesse, but escaped any other Censure then a bidding him be gone;
Cromwell well knowing him to be one of those mad men that would say or do any
thing they were bid.

Now happened occasion, or rather Cromwell made it one, for him to show his
zeal to the Protestant cause, and publish himself to the World the Champion or
Hector thereof; this was also one secret step and reach to the Crown, by
invaing the sacred Title of the Defender of the Faith, due only to the
Hereditary Sovereigns of England^ Herein also he aimed, as in the Proverb, to
hit two Birds with one stone, not doubting but to find another Mine in the
charitable minds and compassion of this Nation toward the parallel suffering
of the old Waldenses in ^iedmont to the Irish Massacres, which were set out and
dressed here with the greater skill of Butchery, then the Actors could hand^omly
do it there, and it was said the Copy was drawn from that Original.

Alderman Viner and Pack were made Treasurers for this money, which amounted to
a very large sum, and reaching the full design of the Protector, a small parcel
whereof was now remitted to Geneva, the French King having newly before
accommodated the business, the Duke refusing to admit Cromwell's Mediation.

There was another Artifice of the Protectors to set this business forward,
and to countenance it, which was, Addresses from the Army here and abroad,
offering their Service in this common cause of the Protestant Religion, no way
doubting but that God in his due time would confound those Enemies of his
people, as he had shown his salvation by themselves, in the same Controversy
to that day.

A new Plot was now started, and most of the Nobility and Gentlemen of England
secured, Sir Geoffrey Palmer, Lord Willoughby of Parham, Lord Lovelace, Earl of
Lindsey, Lord Newport, and Sir Richard Wingfield, Lords Maynard, Petre, Lucas,
and Faulkland, Sir Frederick Cornwallis, etc. and this done by Manning, whose
Villainy was not yet discovered, though to render a due account of him, his
Treachery was before related. County Troops were now also established for
security to his Highness, such Trooper 8 l. a year pay and more in case of
Service, a Captain a 100 l. and Officers proportionably; and as these new
Forces were raised here, so were other old ones disbanded in Scotland and
Ireland, in which last place, the disbanded were yet to be the same kind of
Militia they being settled in the Rebel forfeited Lands, their Tenure being
their Service, and thus that Kingdom was re-peopled. An Agent that had come
hither from Ragotzi Prince of Transylvania, now departed, the Conspiracy
betwixt whom and the King of Sweden, and the Swede and Cromwell was just ripe
for execution.

The Spanish War therefore commencing, the Protector began new practices
against the Cavalier party, whose interest and spirit was against his
Government as high as ever: he foresaw that by the French peace, the King only
shifted and changed war from one quarter to another, and was yet as near as
ever, and in a more opportune and advantageous posture, for that the King of
Spain and he would certainly concur against him, and so the Low Countries, his
Provinces and Ports be open and at the service of our Sovereign, therefore his
party was by all ways, how unjust and tyrannical soever to be crushed and
suppressed: it began with the, Clergy who were neither to keep School, nor cure,
nor be Chaplains, except they give signal testimony of their Apostasy from the
Church; it next extended to all ^orts of men, the revived Act of 1652,
forbidding all Cavallers or such as meant well to the peace of the Kingdom in
their subicription to the personal Treaty in 1648. by a new Proclamation to
that purpose, from giving voices of Electing, or to be elected themselves upon
their utmost peril: then came out a Declaration for Decimating such who were
actually in Arms; and to show the Reasons of such proceedings against them,
Cromwell therein taking it for granted, that the whole Mass of them were engaged
in the late design of Penruddocks, and observing their Malignity to the
Government, by refusing to match their Relations but within themselves, and so
to propagate the quarrel from one Generation to another; that they supplied
their King (as they called him) with money, that their Clergy were as
refractory as ever; and that therefore since by them the peace so endangered
could not be kept, nor the cause and the well affected secured but by keeping
up a standing Army by a constant pay, it was requisite the charge should be
born by those who caused it.

For the better dispatch of this Affair, He had erected a new Military
Authority, like the Turkish Bashaws, distributed into several Provinces or
Counties, with an unbounded power, England being now cantoned into this
Hendecharchy, viz. Kent and Surrey under Col. Kelsey; Sussex, Hantshire, and
Berk-shire under Goff; Gloucestershire, Wilts, Dorset, Somerset, Devon and
Cornwall, under Col. Desborough; Oxfordshire Buckingham, Hartford, Cambridge,
Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolk and Suffolk, under Lieutenant General Fleetwood;
London, Major General Skippon; Lincolnshire, Nottingham, Derby, Warwick and
Leicester under Whalley; Northamptoushire, Bedford, Rutland and Huntingdon,
under villainous Butler; Worcestershire, Hereford, Shropshire and Northwales
under Col. Berry; Cheshire, Lancashire and Stafford under Col. Worsely; York
shire, Durham, Cumberland, Northumberland and Westmorland, under Lord Lambert;
Westminster and Middlesex, under Col. Berkstead, their Commission was to take a
Roll and Account of all suspected persons of the Kings party, and such as were
actually so to receive security of them, in which they were to be bound to act
nothing against the Government, and to reveal all Plots that should come to
their knowledge: they were to suppress all Horse-Races, Cock matches, and other
Concourses of people, to secure the High Ways, to take engagement from
Cavaliers, for their Servants, and Children, and those that did not so, nor
give security, to commit to prison, and to rate and receive the money rising
from this Decimation. In short there was nothing which they might not do; nor
which they did not, such an Arbitrary vast power they had from the Protector.
To this purpose a M. Genesis Office was erected in Fleetstrees, as other Courts
had, where these Recognizances were entered, and all other the like Affairs,
dependencies, and concerns thereof entered and Pecord d; by this means the
Tyrant intended to inform himself of the value and quality of every Estate and
person, together with the number of that party in every County throughout the
Kingdom. Most of those Loyal persons formerly secured, were hereupon set at
liberty, but by another 20. Mile Proclamation driven into the Country, into the
bounds of the several Major Generals, who presently took cognizance of them,
and summoned them to their respective Residences, they sat sometimes without,
other times with some of the old Committees, where they received accounts of
Estates, which were rated to the tenth penny yearly. Some bought off that Tax
and encumbrance by a present Sum, at three years purchase, which was very
acceptable, for money was the thing the Usurper wanted, others looked for a
nearer Redemption, and to be constrained to that payment: the well affected and
godly people voyced this to be a just and reasonable imposition, for when
should they be at quiet, and enjoy themselves in the goods they had got, free
from the interrupting endeavor of this old and restless Enemy; so that there
wanted not Abetto^s and Assistants, to this most religious work of the Major
Generals; who had ordered in the first place, that no Cavalier should keep or
wear either Arms offensive or defensive but streightways deliver them, so that
they lay a the mercy of whomsoever they met, and at the Discretion and charity
of whosoever resorted to their Houses, for what they had left.

The Barbarous Cruelty and Severity of these Bashaws, to the Orthodox Clergy,
while with the Hotnesse of the persecution it suffocated the true Religion, did
warm and foster the viperous brood of ^ects and Heresies into monstrous
luxuriances; For besides the Ranter, who at this time began to infest the
Church, and multiply exceedingly, and the Socinian, who denied the Divinity of
Christ; one Biddle being infamous for those impious opinious, as Erbury
formerly a Minister for Ranting; the Quakers appeared like Locusts, and
overspread the whole Kingdom, even to the Disquiet of Oliver himself, who
could not endure to hear of their Anti-Magisterial-principles, the ^chisme
consisting chiefly of such as had been of the Army or Rebel Faction. The
Height of that Phrenzy and Delusion so possessed the haughty mind of one
Janies Naylor (as if Pride and Ambition were the reigning secular sins) that he
fancied himself to be our Savior, procuring such Worship to be done him, as
was due only to that Blessed Divinity. This Blasphemous Impostor was severely
punished by the consent of Oliver (who perceived Lansb^re, whose Soldier this
was formerly, to stickle for him on design to cajole his party.) But not from
any sense of this Impiety, and zeal to Christ or his Worship, for he had lately
struck a Bargain with the Jews that deny him, but the Ministers who were to
dispute with Ben Israel their Agent, dissenting from his covetous project, He
only gulled them of their earnest money.

By this mixture of subtlety with Cruelty and Rapine of all sorts, he had so
established himself, and his formidable greatness engaging in a foreign War
with the French against the Spaniard in Flanders, whither he sent Commissary
General Reynolds with 6000 men, who jointly took in St. Venant and Mardike in
the close of the Summer 1647 the latter being put into English hands) that the
Royal party began truly to dread his mischievous power, the effects whereof
were felt also in very remote parts of the World, in the Polish and Danish War,
by his partaking with and assisting to the King of Sweden (when he pretended a
Mediation between them, having dispatched Mr. Rolt of his Bedchamber, and
Colonel Jephson to Carolus Gustavus, and Mr. now Sir Philip Meadows, to
Frederick King of Denmark) to the diverting the German Emperor, to the care of
his own Dominions, and by that means depriving the Spaniard of his aid, and
consequently frustrating all His Majesty's designs of recovering, his rights to
these Kingdoms.

I must omit his Successes by Blake at Porta Ferina, and Sancta Cruz, for which
the English valor was famous; as also Sir Richard Stayners taking and Spoiling
7. Galleys from the West Indies, laden with Plate, which were substantial
Tropnies, and made his power dreadful.

And therefore now he thought it time to show his Son Richard to the World,
whom to ^avoid the Suspicion of designing the Sovereignty to be Hereditary in
his Family, and to amuse Lambert (who would not brook other Successor then
himself) His Kival if not Superior now in the affection of the Army He had
kept in the Country, in Hampshire where he had married the Daughter of one
Major of Southampton, with a very plentiful fortune, the support and
maintenance of him now) among the Conve^e of the Centry Roya^sts, to insinuate
into their affections and good liking by some kind of Offices and Civilities he
procured from ^ourt, and by his own debonair and affable Dispositions; The
first publi^ue Honor done him was the Chancellorship of Oxford, in which he
was ^emnly invested after his Father had purposely resigned it, at Whitchall,
next he was ^worn a Pirvy Councellor, and made a Colon I in the Army, to have
an interest in all parties and parts of the body politic, and not long after,
in the next Parliament, after their recesse, the first Lord of the other House,
and now styled the most noble Lord Richard, and rife discourses there were of
Richard the Fourth, but it proved no more then the story of Queen Dick.

His Son Harry Cromwell lately married to Sir William Russells Daughter he
likewise sent in the ^lity of Lord Lieutemant, to succeed his Son.

Law Fleetwood, in Ireland, only Scotland could not be taken from General Monk,
and disposed in the han^s of his more consident Relations, Flectwood or
Desborough being designed for that Government. ^s Daughters likewise were all
married, Elizabeth his Darling, before his late Greatnesle, to a private
Gentleman, one Mr. Cleypo^e of Warwickshire; his Daughter Mary to the Lord
Vi^count Falconbridge, the noble Family of the Bellasis; and his younger
Daughter Frances to Mr. ^obert Rich, eldest on to Robert Lord Rich, and
^randson to Robert Earl of Warwick, all three whereof dyed within one year
after this unfortunate and unglorious Match. So that he thought he had
established his House, but the Foundation being laid in Sand tempered with
Blood, the next gust and boy sterous Wind blew it like Chafe, and seattered
and dispersed it to nothing.

From this haughty confidence he was invited to call another Parliament, and to
assume from thence the long awaited result of his Ambition, the Crown Imperial
of England. All other things moreover did ^e^m to comspire to the same purpose,
except the Levelling Fifth Monarchy party, and Lambert: for the Presbyterian
and other Sect^ries, who had their hands full of Sacrilegious and Treasonable
Penny-vvorths, of Ecclesi^stical, and Crown and Delinquents Lands, were most
eagerly desirous of a settlement of the Government by Law, that might secure
and confirm their purchases; the more indifferent Royallists preferred any
Legal (no manner how or what) Authority, rather then be continually tisked and
oppressed by the outrageous unlimited violence of the Major Generals, whom
Cromwell had on purpose set up, as he did the little or foolish Parliament, to
make another Title he gaped at, more acceptable to the people.

As to the Fifth Monarchy men, he had nearly pried into that danger, and seized
and took the chief of that party, among whom was Venner the Wine-Cooper, being
engaged somewhat after in a Plot, in a house in Shorditch, where some Arms were
taken, and and an Ensign with a Lion couchant of the Tribe of judah painted in
it, having this Motto, Who shall raise him up?

And hereupon Harrison, Carew, Rich, Vice Admiral Lawson, Courtney, Portman,
Day, and the like, were imprisoned in remote places, as Col. Overton, Major
Holms, and others of the same party, had been seized in Scotland, and disbanded
by Genesis Monck, according to Cromwell's Order, and sent up Prisoners to the
Tower of London.

As to the Levellers, he had lately discovered their practices and combinations
against him, and had likewise clapped up the chief of them, one Major Wildman, in
order to his Trial being taken at Marleborough, inditing and drawing
Declarations against him; so that they were at a stand and a loss which ^ay to
proceed, to the unsetling and overthrow of his Tyrannical power; procured by so
many tricks and cheats put upon them by him; so that afterward when they began
private Subscriptions to Petitions, and Addresses to the Parliament against the
Kingship, he peremptorily upon their peril forbid them to intermeddle with
their Consultations, and so awed and dashed them, that they never offered any
more afterward, to hold up so much as a Finger against him. Lambert was the
only impediment, and we shall see him neatly and quietly removed and discarded
like the rest of his former Confidents.

This Olivarian Parliament brought together by these, means was not less awed
in its Election by the Major Generals (they themselves and all their friends
being returned for Members, while the Gentry and other Honest men being
confined or under some qualification or other, could not, or dared not appear,
particularly Col. Berkstead, and Kiffin the Anabaptist, by Voices of Redcotes
got themselves returned Knights of the Shire for Middlesex, with Sir William
Roberts, and Mr. Chute (4 as the Instrument directed;) then in the Admission to
the House, where a Recognition of his Highness and the Government by a single
person, with a Guard of Soldiers was ready placed, and unless each Member
swallowed the one, he might not pass the other, by which means almost 200. were
at the first dash secluded, those within taking no notice of the force, but
referring the excluded to the Examination of the Privy Council.

The first Work this Parliament did was their declaring the Justice of the War
against Spain (the Cromwellian party personating the Interest and Honor of the
Nation, that they might by that be looked upon for all this garbling, as a due
Representative, and to credit their ensuing By-blowes) and a Resolution to
assist the Protector in it; And next as the grand and Liminary work to Oliver's
Regality, An Act for the renouncing the Title of His Majesty, and the whole
Line of King James; seconded with another for the Security of His Highness
person, in which they alleged the peace and safety of the Nation was bound up.

And that this might appear most necessary and opportune, a Plot was hatched by
Cromwell and Thurloe, for further quashing all Levelling and Fisth Monarchy
designs against that party; A Book had likewise been lately divulged, styled,
Killing no Murder, wherein it was proved, that it was most lawful, just,
necessary, and Honorable to kill him, and this Printed with the Name of one
Allen a disbanded Leveller, but so politely and learnedly written, that it
intimated a more exact and curious hand; whose ever it was, it scared Cromwell
almost out of his Wits, and made him betake himself to preventionary Artifices,
and fright Assassinates with his Severity against the suppositious Authors of
pretended dangers.

This Scarecrow was one Miles Syndercombe, a disband of Overton's in Scotland
by General Monck, a Leveller and Fifth Monarchist, both which parties he
conjoined in this trap, as most feared by him: The wily Arts of Thurloe, who
set one Cecil, and Trop of Cromwell's Lifeguard, to urge this Malcontent
into a Conspiracy of The Protector's Death; This was readily assented to, and
several Engines and Instruments fixed for that purpose and places appointed,
and Whitehall Chapel to be fired; all which was from time to time discovered,
and Syndercombe after the last vain experiment, seized and arraigned, and after
a careless defense convicted and sentenced for Treason, which he avoided (as
the Coroners Jury gave their Verdict) by poisoning himself in the Tower the
night before his Execution, and was drawn at a Horse Tail to Tower Hill, and
inhumed, and a Stake driven through him under the Scaffold.

For this Delivery of his Highness the Parliament voted a Thanksgiving, and
attended him at the Banqueting House in Whitehall with a gratulatory Oration,
setting forth the Ruin that was intended in that horrible Treason to the whole
Protestant Religion throughout the World, with the like parasitical designed
Falsehoods, but to the almost spoiling the Complement, the Stairs in the
ascending broke, and samed Richard Cromwell, and others, who for amends were
invited to dinner there upon the Thanksgiving day; and that Courtesy requited
by a more gaudy Gift.

For the next day Alderman Pack (a great Excise Commissioner, and in greater
Arrears for it to 30000 l. and deep in the Piedmont Account) from the advantage
of this Royal Treat, suddenly started a Motion like a Puppet jerkt with a wire,
that in regard of the strange unsettlement and discomposure of the Nation, and
the minds of men, and the ill aspect it had upon Foreign Princes, and all
Trade; that therefore the Protector might be desired to assume the style of
King as the most known and most agreeable Government: and presently tooth and
nail the Court party were at it; and after sundry consultations passed a
Resolution in order to his being Kinged by the second part of the Instrument,
called The Humble Petition and Advice of the Parliament, which being now in
Debate we must leave to a further account.

The suitable political talk of the party of the Usurper, was now engaged in
strained Arguments for a Monarchy in the person of this their Ringleader, and
this Maxim was broached in the News-Book, That there was no everlasting
principle in Government as to any particular form; that Government is but a
temporary expedient, that it is like Vltima tabula post Naufragium, in the
hazard of the Commonwealth the next shift may be made use of. The same was
the inspired reason into the Humble Petition and Advice, which after several
debates and resolutions was drawn into that Consistency, the main whereef was
to desire the Protector to change that Title for the other of King. On the 9.
of April, the Parliament having desired a Meeting with him, came to the
Banqueting House in White Hall, where Sir Thomas Widdrington in a Speech,
commended the Title and Office of a King, as settled here with Christianity,
approved by our Ancestors, consisting with our Laws and Temper of the people,
and then presented him with the module of the Humble Petition, etc. To this
tender, Cromwell in a fit of Devotion, answered, That it was a weighty matter,
and therefore desire a space to seek God, that the charge laid upon him was too
great for him to bear without His Assistance, that the English were the best
people in the World, and required therefore all tenderness and consideration of
their Liberties, etc.

The next day a Committee was appointed to attend him, and receive his Answer,
which being insignificant, they upon report thereof resolved to adhere to their
Petition, and appointed a Committee of above half the House to attend him, to
receive from him his doubts and scruples touching any of the particulars
contained in the Petition, etc. and to offer reasons for his satisfaction, for
the maintenance of the Resolution of the House, and wherein they cannot
satisfy to report. The chief of this Committee were Mr. Whitlock, Lord Chief
Justice Glyn, Lord Breghall, Lenthall, Lisle, Philip Jones, Fiennes,
Strickland, Thurloe, Sir Richard Onslow, Sir Charles Woolfley, etc.

We have through these Labyrinths of his shifted Designs, now clued him to his
Lustful and adulterous Usurpation, which the nocturnal pollutions of his Dream
had so long before fancied and acted in his thoughts.

This was the critical Time, and the very Juncture of his accomplishment of all
his projections upon the Crown, which now seemed to court his Brows by the
complemental tender of a Parliament so picked and culled to his purpose. But it
pleased God, to rescue the Honor and Majesty of England, from the profanation
of his Temples; by some sudden emergent dangers, and Suspicions he raised in
his Breast, and to elude his Royal Phantasmes with Rival and Democratick
apparitions; His Oracles now ceased, and a lying Spirit was in the Mouth of his
Prophets, who in their preachments harped upon this Subject. Now that the
Reader may know how the whole mystery and cabal of this Business was managed
by the above mentioned Committee (who would fain have drawn Oliver under the
yoke of Laws, and retrencht his exorbitant power of the Sword) and Cromwell
(who feared they would fortify his Title, and weaken his Tenure, and had
notice that Lambert labored in the Debauch of the Army) He is here presented
with the sum of that abortive Regal Consultation, which like the Philosophers
Stone, or rather the Apples of Sodom, vanished and perished in the Attrectation.

After many Meetings and Conferences together at White Hall, the Commissioners
being empowered to receive his Highnesses Scruples at his request (the whole
Affair being managed with Royal State and respect to him they came to these
Disputes. It was alleged by the Committee who were to offer and make play,
that the Title of King had been confirmed by all Parliaments, for 1300 years,
and the person, not the name, displeasing to any of them. That it was
interwoven with the Laws, and the very consent of this Parliament in being.

To this the Protector answered, that these were swasory not compulsive or
convincing Arguments. That the Title of the Protector might be made
accommodable to the Laws, by the content of the Parliament, as well as the
Title of King was made so by the same; that the Title of King would be
displeasing to many godly men, and Officers of the Army, who had declared
against the Title and Office.

To these it was replied, That the Title ought to be accommodated to the Laws,
not the Laws to them. That Invention of Titles was suspected as the Veil or
Concealment of some Design against the public; and that therefore the
Parliament of England, had scrupled the new Title of King of Great Britain, to
King James. That if he regarded not his own honor and Greatness, yet he
should respect the Honor and Reputation of the Kingdom. That the name of
Protector had always been unfortunate to the Kingdom during the Minority of
our Princes, and also to themselves. That it being given him by the Soldiery it
sounded of Victory. That when the Kingly Title was abolished in the Roman
Empire, nothing but confusion followed, nor could the State find Rest, either
under Consul, or Dictators, or Prince of the Senate, until the pleasure and
will of Caesar came to be acknowledged for Law.

Other instances there were of the Commissioners, who severally by order of the
Committee delivered their Answers to Him, as namely the reason of the change of
the Style of Lord to King of Ireland in H. 8. time, for the better, and more
regular Government of that Nation, and Examples of a neighboring Protestant
Kingdom of Sweden, who had crowned their Marshal that took up Arms with them
against their Sovereign, but their main Argument was drawn from the Statutes of
9 Edw. 4. and 3 H. 7. by which all persons were indempnified that took up Arms
for the King in being, which was one and the chief reason said Whitlock, why so
many at first assisted the King against the Parsiament, and would be his
Highnesses case and Security. And lastly to his Argument of displeasing many
godly men, and that Providence seemed to cross the introduction of the Kingly
Office by a seven years War to the overthrow of it: He was answered that the
reduction of the Commonwealth to Monarchy, was a greater Act then from Monarchy
to the Protectorate; that in all Governments some men would be unsatisfied, and
that therefore his safest way would be to rely on this Settlement by the
Parliament. But after all Cromwell's Fears surmounted his Ambition, and he told
then in a long Harangue, that He could not accept the Title of King, being
against his conscience.

The Protector having refused the Title of King (awaiting a more opportune time
and advantage to reach to that top and height of his ambition, which inwardly
tormented him) was now by the Parliament to be confirmed in his former dignity,
and a Committee called of the Settlement was ordered to prepare an Explanatory
part to the Humble Petition and Advice, in respect of the Protectors Oath, his
Councils, the Members of Parliament, the other House, which was to consist of
60. and od Lords of Cromwell's Election, of which in their place we shall give
an Account; all which with some Acts being prepared and finished, the Protector
came to the Painted-Chamber, and sent for the Parliament where the Speaker
tendered him these Acts of State, besides others relating unto Trade, etc. 1. An
Act for Assessement of 60000 l. a Month, for 3. Months, from March, for the
three Kingdoms. Another money Act for 50000 l. for three years, at 35000 l.
for England, 6000 l. for Scotland, and 9000 l. for Ireland. An Act for
preventing multiplicity of Buildings in and about the Suburbs of London, and
within 10. Miles thereof; and a whole years Revenue to be paid for every
Dwelling, or House buil upon any new Foundation since 1620. (and this was the
reason and soul of that Law.) An Act for punishing such as live at high rates
and have no visible Estates: And lastly for the observation of the Lords Day;
there was a Bill for ascertaining and satisfying the Public Faith, that these
Patriots might seem to intend the ease of the people, but it was but once read
and committed, and resumed afterward to as much purpose very briskly by the
Council of this Protector. At the Signing of there Cromwell made this short
Speech.

I perceive, that among these many Acts of Parliament, there has been a very
great care had by the Parliament, to provide for the just and necessary support
of the Commonwealth, by these Bills for levying of money now brought to me,
which I have given my Consent unto; and understanding it has been the practice
of those who have been Chief Governors, to acknowledge with thanks to the
Commons, their care and regard of the Public: I do very heartily and
thank-fully acknowledge their kindness herein. The principal substance of the
Humble Petition, etc. was this,

1. That his Highness under the Title of Lord Protector, would be pleased to
exercise the Office of Chief Magistrate over England, etc. and to govern
according unto all things in this Petition and Advice; also, that in his
lifetime he would appoint the Person that should succeed in the Government
after his death. 2. That he would call Parliaments consisting of two Houses,
once in three years at farthest. 3. That those persons who are legally chosen
by a free election of the people to serve in Parliament, may not be excluded
from doing their duties, but by consent of that House whereof they are Members.
4. In the fourth, was shown the qualifications of Parliament-Members. 5. In the
fifth, the Power of the other House. 6. That the Laws and Statutes of the Land
be observed and kept, and no Laws altered, suspended, abrogated, repealed, or
new Law made, but by Act of Parliament, 7. For a constant yearly Revenue, ten
hundred thousand pounds to be settled for maintenance of the Navy and Army; and
three hundred thousand pounds for support of the Government, besides other
temporary supplies, as the Commoas in Parliament shall see the necessities of
the Nations to require. 8. That the number of the Protectors Council shall not
be above one and twenty; whereof the Quorum to be seven, and not under. 9. The
chief Officers of Seat, as Chancellors, Keepers of the Great Seal, etc. to be
approved of by Parliament. 10. That his Highness would encourage a Godly
Ministry in these Nations; and that such as do revile or disturb them in the
Worship of God, may be punished according to Law; and where the Laws are
defective, new ones to be made in that behalf. 11. That the Protestant
Christian Religion, and no other; and that a confession of Faith be agreed upon
and recommended to the people of these Nations; and none be permitted by words
or writings to revile or repreach the said Confession of Faith, etc. Which he
having Signed, declared his acceptance in there words,

That he came thither that day, not as to a Triumph, but with the most serious
thoughts that ever he had in all his life, being to undertake one of the
greatest burdens, that ever was laid upon the back of any humane creature; so
that without the support of the Almighty, he must sink under the weight of it,
to the damage and prejudice of these Nations. This being so, he must ask help
of the Parliament, and of those that fear God, that by their Prayers he might
receive assistance from God: for nothing else could enable him to the discharge
of so great a duty and trust.

That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government
of these Nations, and there being many things which cannot be supplied, without
the assistance of the Parliament, it was his duty to ask their help in them;
not that he doubted: for the same Spirit that had led the Parliament to this,
would easily suggest the same to them. For his part nothing would have induced
him to take this unsupportable burden to flesh and blood, but that he had seen
in the Parliament a great care in doing those things, which might really answer
the ends that were engaged for, and make clearly for the Liberty of the
Nations, and for the Interest and preservation of all such as fear God under
various forms. And if these Nations be not thankful to them for their care
therein, it will fall as a sin on their heads.

Yet there are some things wanting that tend to reformation, to the
discountenancing vice, and encouragement of virtue; but he spoke not this as in
the least doubting their progress, but as one that does heartily desire, to the
end God may Crown their work, that in their own time, and with what speed they
judge fit, these things may be provided for.

There remained only the Solemnity of the Inauguration or Investiture, which
being agreed upon by the Committee and the Protector, was by the Parliament
appointed to be performed in Westminster Hall; where at the upper end thereof,
there was an Ascent raised, where a Chair and Canopy of State was set, and a
Table with another Chair for the Speaker, with Seats built Scaffold-wise for
the Parliament on both sides; and places below for the Aldermen of London, and
the like. All which being in a readiness, the Protector came out of a Room
adjoining to the Lords House, and in this order proceeded into the Hall. First
went his Gentlemen, then a Herald; next the Aldermen another Herald; the
Attorney General; then the Judges (of whom Sergeant Hill was one, being made a
Baron of the Exchequer, June 16.) then Norroy, the Lord Commissioners of the
Treasury, and the Seal carried by Commissioner Fiennes, then Garter, and after
him the Earl of Warwick with the Sword, born before the Protector, Bare headed,
the Lord Mayor Tichborn carrying the City Sword (being the special of Coaks of
the Protector) by his left hand: Being seated in his Chair, on the left Hand
whereof stood the said Titchborn and the Dutch Ambassador, the French
Ambassador and the Earl of Warwick on the Right; next behind him stood his Sons
Richard, Fleetwood, Cleypoole; and the Privy Council; upon a lower descent
stood the Lord Viscount Lisle, Lords Montague and Whitlock with drawn Swords.

Then the Speaker (Sir Thomas Widdrington) in the name of the Parliament,
presented to him a Robe of Purple-Velvet, a Bible, a Sword, and a Scepter, at
the Delivery of these things, the Speaker made a short Comment upon them to the
Protector, which he divided into four parts, as follows.

1. The Robe of Purple, This is an Emblem of Magistracy and imports
Righteousness and Justice: When you have put on this Vestment, I may say you
are a Gown-man. This Robe is of a mixed color, to show the mixture of Justice
and Mercy. Indeed, a Magistrate must have two hands, Plectentem, and
amplectentem, to cherish and to punish.

2. The Bible, it is a Book that contains the Holy Scriptures, in which you
have the happiness to be well versed. This Book of Life consists of two
Testaments the Old and New: the first shows Christum Velatum, the second
Christum Revelatum; Christ veiled and revealed: it is a Pook of Books, and does
contain both Precepts and Examples for good Government.

3. Here is a Scepter, not unlike a Staff; for you are to be a Staff to the
weak and poor; it is of ancient use in this kind. It Is said in Scripture, that
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of the like use in other
Kingdoms; Homer the Greek Poet calls Kings and Princes Scepter-Bearers.

4. The last thing is a Sword, not a Military but Civil Sword; it is a Sword
rather of defense then offense: not to defend your self only but your people
also. If I might presume to fix a Motto upon this Sword, as the valiant Lord
Talbot had upon his, it should be this, Ego sum domini Protectoris, ad
protegendum populum meum, I am the Protectors to protect my people.

This Speech being ended, the Speaker took the Bible and gave the Protector his
Oath: afterward Mr. Manton made a prayer, wherein he recommended the
Protector, Parliament, Council, the Forces by Land and Sea, Government, and
people of the three Nations, to the protection of God. Which being ended the
Heralds by Trumpets proclaimed his Highness Protector of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging: requiring all persons to yield
him due obedience. At the end of all, the Protector with his Train carried by
the Lord Sherrard Warwick's Nephew, ahd the Lord Robert's his eldest Son,
returned in the same posture, the Earl of Warwick sitting at one end of the
Coach against him, Richard his Son, and Whitlock in one, and the Lords Lisle
and Mountague in the other Boot, with Swords drawn, and the Lord Claypool
Master of the Horse, led the Horse of Honor in rich Caparisons to White Hall.
The Members to the Parliament House, where they prorogued their sitting to the
Twentieth of January.

He was now settled and established in his first assumed Dignity, to the
satisfaction of some part of the Army, only Lambert was gravelled with that
clause in it which gave the Protector power to name his Successor. Whereby he
savv himself deprived and frustrated of his Hopes, and that Contract that had
passed betvveen them. Cromwell therefore to secure himself, set the Army
Regiment after Regiment to subscribe Addresses congratulating his legal
Authority, and declaring their readiness to assert Him therein with their
lives and Fortunes; being the very same Method he had used before to prevent
any Designs against him in the Army, when he was left upon his own bottom by
the Parliament before.

In the mean time a more potent enterprise was formed by the Kings Interest,
and the appearance of the Marquess of Ormond (as my Lord Wilmot from beyond
Sea, was engaged before in Penruddock's rising in the West) about Sussex,
whither some English forces for Flanders in the Kings pay and service were to
have been transmitted; but by the traitorous discovery of two former eminent
Royallists, which Cromwell by great pensions had corrupted, one a Knight, the
other a Minister, and one that a hand in the killing of Rainsborough, the whole
Intrigue was discovered, the Marquess narrowly escaping back again to the King,
who was dispatching General Marsin with his Forces then in readiness.

He was no sooner rid of the danger of this, but he was puzzled with Lamberts
Cabal, who had inveagled and almost debauched Fleetwood and Desborough
Cromwell's nearest Relations with his but emulous pretended Democratick
principles; so that Cromwell (having dissolved the Parliament at their access
in January, when according to the new Instrument the^ met in a full House, who
began and were resolved to undo all again that had passed during their
Seclusion, nor would own the other House of upstart Mechanic Lords, but flew
so high as bringing Oliver into question for those confusions of the State) was
now in as ticklish a condition as ever; therefore Lambert was gently laid
aside, and his Commission taken from him, and his Regiments taken from him and
disposed to better hands, and Spies and Eves-droppers dispersed through the
Army to give him intelligence of their Affections and Inclinations.

This made him most suspiciously fearful, so that he began to dread every
person or strange face he saw (which he would anxiously and intently view) for
an Assassinate, that Book of Killing no Murder perpetually running in his
mind; It was his constrant Custom to shift and change his lodging, to which he
passed through twenty several locks, and out of which he had four or five ways
to avoid pursuit: when he went between White Hall and Hampton Court, by private
and back ways, but never the same backward and forward, He was always in a
Hurry, his Guards behind and before riding a full Gallop, and the Coach always
filled, especially the Boot with armed persons, he himself being furnished with
private Weapons; and was now of more then difficult access to all persons.

A Plot was again on foot, and like a Mongril design that had no issue, was
made up one half by the Cavalier, and the other half by himself (who was sure
not to be behind hand in such designs) for which Sir Henry Slingsby, Dr. Hewyt,
and 3. other private persons lost their lives by a High Court of Justice, the
Severity whereof so afflicted or affected the mind of his Daughter Cleypoole,
that falling sick with the pains and torments of an Ulcer, in her intestines,
which stopped her terms and made her frantic, she never ceased roaring against
that bloody man, her Father.

He was now again adorned with another Success and Triumph, by the Defeat of
the Spanish Army and surrender of Dunkirk into his hands, Lockhart his Kinsman
and General of the English Forces, being made Governor thereof, which I am
constrained to pass without any further remark and from the height of this
glory, level him with the dust of other Mortals.

This Kingdom was now almost stupefied and tired out with struggling against his
Government and Domination, when it pleased God to call him to an account of all
that Mischief he had perpetrated; Ushering his End with a great Whale some
three Months before on the second of June, that came up as far as Greenwich,
and was there killed, and more immediately by a terrible Storm of Wind, the
prognostic that the great Leviathan of men, that Tempest and overthrow of
Government, was now going to his own place.

He was taken sick at Hampton Court having not been well in mind sometime
before (troubled with the last frantic words of his beloved Daughter Claypole,
who threatened Judgment like another mad Cassandra, and with the insinuations
and encroachments of the Republican party into the Army, nor were must of his
Relations taint free of those principles, but were winding toward them:) the
disease was a bastard Tertain which appeared not at first of any danger, but
after a weeks time it began to show very desperate symptoms, wherefore he was
removed to White Hall, where his Chaplains and others of that pious Family,
kept private meetings and fastings of which they were to vainly confident (as
before) that they obtruded their unseasonable thanks to God for the certainty
of it, and with the same unseasonable flattery and pickthank with the
Protector, deluded him into the like persuasion, so that he told his
Physicians, He should not dye this bout; but the Fits proving worse and worse,
and causing him to talk idely, and to faint often, They in Council concluded,
he could scarce survive another Paroxysme, at which the Privy Council being
astonished, they immediately repaired to him, about his settling a Successor,
whom by the Petition he was to declare in his lifetime; but he was then scarce
himself, which they perceiving, interrogated him, if he appointed not his Son
Richard, whereunto he answered in the affirmative. It was thought that he had
designed Fleetwood in his ultimate thoughts but the distraction of the choice
betwixt his Son and Son-in-law, had made him leave it undetermined (a private
Will relating to his Family he made at his first sickning at Hamptoncourt.)
Continuing in this condition, he dyed on Friday the said 3d. of September at 3.
of the clock in the afternoon, though diverse tumors were spread, that he was
carried away in the Tempest the day before; His body being Opened and Embalmed
his Milt was found full of corruption and filth, which was so strong and
stinking, that after the Corpse were Embalmed and filled with Aromatic odours,
and wrapped in Cere-cloath, six double, in an inner sheet of Lead, and a strong
Wooden-coffin, yet the filth broke through them all, and raised such a noisome
stink, that they were forced to bury him out of hand; but his name and memory
stinks worse.

The Corpse (presently after his expiration) being buried for the aforesaid
reason, a Coffin was on the 26. of September, about 10. at night, privately
removed from White Hall in a Mourning Horse, attended by his Domestic
Servants, to Sommerset house, where it remained in private for some days, till
all things were in readiness for public view; which being accomplished, his
Effigies was with great state and magnificence exposed openly; multitudes daily
flocking to see the Sight, which appeared in this order.

The first room where the Spectators entered, was wholly hung with Black: at
the upper-end whereof, was placed a Cloth and Chair of State: In like manner
was the second and third, all having Scutcheons very thick upon the Walls, and
Guards of Partisans placed in each room for people to pass through. The fourth
room was completely hung with black Velvet, the Ceiling being of the same; here
lay the Effigies, with a large Canopy of Black Velvet fringed, which hung over
it. The Waxen Picture lying upon it is back apparrell'd in a rich Suit of
Velvet, robed in a little Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced with a rich gold Lace,
furred with Ermins: upon the Kirtle was a large Robe of Purple-Velvet, laced
and furred as the former, with rich strings and tassels of Gold. The Kirtle was
girt with a rich embroydered Belt, wherein was a Sword bravely guilt and
hatched with gold, which hung by the fide of this fine thing. In the right hand
was a Scepter, in the left a Globe; upon his head was placed a
Purple-Velvet-Cap furred with Ermines, suitable to the Robes: behind the head
was placed a rich Chair of Tissued gold, whereon was placed an Imperial Crown,
which lay high that the people might behold it. The Bed of State whereon he
lay, was covered with a large Pall of Black Velvet, under which was a Holland
Sheet, born up by six stools covered with Cloth of Gold. About the Bed was
placed a complete Suit of Arms and at the Feet of the Effigies stood his Crest.
This Bed had fixed about it an Ascent of two steps; a little from thence stood
eight silver Candlesticks, abut five foot high, with white wax Tapers standing
in them, of three foot long. All these things were environed with Rails and
Ballasters apiece, covered with Velvet; at each corner thereof was erected
an upright pillat, which bore on their tops Lions and Dragons, who held in
their paws Streamers crowned. On both sides of the Bed were set up in Sockets,
four great Standards of the Protectors Arms with Banners and Banrols of War,
painted upon Taffaty, About the Bed stood men in mourning bare-headed; and
without the Rails others to receive people in, and turn them out again.

When this Show had been seen for many weeks together, the Scene was then
altered; the Effigies being removed into another room, it was there set up,
standing upon an Ascent under a Cloth of State; being vested as it was before,
lying: only now his purple-Velvet-Cap was changed for a Crown. In the same
manner (as formerly) were men waiting upon him bare-headed. In this manner he
continued until the 23. of November. which day was appointed to to carry him in
solemnity to Westminster-Abby.

This great Funeral was performed with very great State, in this manner
following. All things being in readiness, the Waxen Picture of the Protector
(with a Crown on his Head, a Sword by his Side, a Globe and Scepter in his
hands) was taken down from his standing, and laid in an open Chariot, covered
all over with Black Velvet, adorned with black Velvet, and with Plumes and
Scutcheons, and drawn by six Horses in black Velvet. The Streets from
Somerset House to Westminster-Abby, were guarded by Soldiers in new Red-coats
and Black Buttons, with their Ensigns wrapped in Cypress: which made a Lane to
keep off Spectators from crouding the Actors.

The Procession.
In the first place went a Marshal attended by his Deputy, and 13. more on
horseback, to clear the way; after him followed the poor men of Westminster by
two and two, in Mourning Gowns and Hoods; next to them, the Servants of those
Persons of quality that attended the Funeral. These were followed by the
Protectors late domestic Servants, with his Barge-men and Water men. Then came
the Servants of the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs of London. Following them, were
Gentlemen Attendants on Foraign Ambassadors and Public Ministers. After
marched the poor Knights of Windsor in Gowns and Hoods: then the Clerks,
Secretaries, and Officers of the Army, Admiralty, Treasury, Navy, and
Exchequer: next, the Commissioners of the Excise, of the Army, and Committee of
the Navy. Then the Commissioners for approbation of Preachers: behind these
followed all the Officers, Messengers, and Clerks belonging to the Privy
Council, and both Houses of Parliament. Next in order followed his Physicians,
The Head officers of the Army, the Officers and Aldermen of London. The Masters
of Chancery, and his Highness Council at Law, The Judges of Admiralty, Judges
of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London. The Persons Allied in Blood to the
Protector, and the Members of the other House, The public Ministers of
Forraign-Princes. The Holland Ambassador alone, having his Train held up by
four Gentlemen. Then the Portugal Ambassador, and the French Ambassador, in
like manner. The Commissioners of the Great Seal. The Commissioners of the
Treasury. The Members of his Privy Council. All the Grandees in Close Mourning
(but it was once advised other ways for fear of a surprise in the Streets) the
rest but in ordinary.

The whole Assembly passing along in divisions, were distinguished by Drums,
Trumpets, Banners and Horses, whereof there were eleven in all, four being
covered with black Cloth, and seven in Velvet. These passing in fine order, at
length came the Chariot with the Effigies, on each side of which were six
Banner-Rolls (twelve in all) born by several Persons; and likewise several
Pieces of the Protectors Arm, carried by eight Officers of the Army, attended
by the Heralds. Next went Garter principal King of Arms, attended by a
Gentleman on each hand bare-headed, Next came the chief Mourner. And to
conclude all, came the Horse of Honor, in very rich Trappings imbroydered on
Crimson-Velvet, and adorned with white, red, and yellow Plumes of Feathers,
being led by the Master of the Horse. The Rear of this brave show was brought
up by the Protectors Cuard of Halberdiers, the Warders of the Tower, and a
Troop of Horse.

The Effigies in this manner being brought to the West-Gate of the Abby-Church
of Westminster, it was taken from the Chariot by ten Gentlemen, who carried it
to the East end of the Church, and there placed the Picture in a most
magnificent Structure, built in the same form as one before had been (on the
like occasion) for King James, but much more stately.

And here they lodged and Usurped a Grave (the impatient Spectators fretting at
this pompous Mummery and Magnificent cheat, taking his funeral triumphs for a
more solemn Cozenage of the Executioner, till the due inevitable justice of
Heaven found them out, after the reduction of His Sacred Majesty in peace to
His Kingdoms, which would very difficultly have been so accomplished if this
resolute destroyer had survived to that blessed time.

On the 30. day of January 1660, that day 12 years of his most nefarious
parricide, his Carcass with Bradshaws and Iretons, having been dug out of
their Graves, were carried to the Red Lion in Holborn, and from thence drawn in
Sledges to Tyburn, where they hanged from Ten of the Clock in the morning till
Sunset, with their Faces toward White Hall, and were then inhumed under the
Gallows, and His Head set upon Westminster Hall to be the becoming Spectacle
of his Treason, where on that Pinnacle and Legal Advancement it is fit to leave
this Ambitious wretch.

FINIS.

