Nov. 24. 1693.
I do Allow of the Printing of this Book:

R. Atkyns.

MAXIMS AND RULES OF PLEADING; IN Actions Real, Personal and Mixed, Popular and
Penal:

Describing the Nature of Declarations, Pleas, Replications, Rejoynders, and
all other Parts of Pleading; showing their Validity and Defects, and in what
Cases they are Amendable by the Court, or Remediable by the Statute Law, or
otherwise.

LIKEWISE, Which of the Parties in his Plea shall first Offer the Issue, and
where Special Matter may be given in Evidence upon the General Issue; of
Demurrers upon Evidence; of Verdicts, General and Special, and of Bills of
Exceptions to the same; of Judgments, Executions, Writs of Error and False
Judgment; and of Appeals, Indictments, and Informations, and the Pleadings
relating thereunto.

Published from the Manuscript of Sir ROBERT HEATH, Knight; Lord Chief Justice
successively of the Courts of Common Pleas and King's Bench, in the Reign of
King Charles the First.

With Additions of New Matter to every Title, from all the Reports since his
Time.

LONDON: Printed for Abel Roper, at the Mitre near Temple Bar, MDCXCIV.

TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Incomparable Treatise, made the Sentiments of the Great
Littleton his Rule, in Choosing that Subject He so much Commends in his
Tenures, viz. The Science of good Pleading, as the most Nice and Critical Part
in the Study of the Law; which He has Managed in such an Extraordinary Method,
that all Men of Sense, of that Profession, cannot sufficiently enough Admire
and Value this His most Excellent Discourse of Pleading, suitable to the
Greatness of his Performance therein

To do him Justice, No Person (among the Writers of the Common Law) has been
more happy in the Contrivance of his Design, being so Concise, and his Matter
so handsomely Couched, that I must beg the Reader's Pardon, if I confess it to
be very difficult to Imitate him, without taking up as much Time, as He was
pleased to allow himself; which, by the way, was not within the Limits of my
Province: However, I have so far taken Care to come near him, that the Author
himself, if he were alive, would not, I presume, altogether dislike what I have
done.

But the greatest Obstacle I am to remove, is, what some Persons, who have seen
the Original, do Object, That it is only taken from the Year-Books, Plowden' s
Commentaries and Dyer' s Reports; Things probably good in their Times: But
alas! (say they) what is that to the most Refined, Polite, and never enough
Valued, Equalled, much less Outdone, Reports, Abridgments, Tracts, etc. since
their Times? (Though these are not wanting in our Composition) I think to all
this I may modestly Answer:

That the Year-Books are the very Foundation of the Law; Plowden and Dyer
perhaps Inimitable; and, I hope, this may be further said, without Offense,
That had it not been for the Clear, Pespicuous Light of the Year-Books, the
later Reporters would have but grop'd (as it were) in the Dark, and been
beholden too much to that uncertain Goddess, Experience (the Mistress of Fools,
as accounted by the Learned) which, how far Experimental Knowledge differs from
Right Reason, drawn by Succession of Time, from the Maxims and Rules of the
Ancients, in all Ages, I leave the Reader to guess at; and, if he Doubts, to
Consult his Coke upon Littleton.

W. B.

MAXIMS, AND RULES OF PLEADING.
CHAP. I. Of Counts, or Declarations.
A Declaration, A Declaration, what?
is the setting forth, comprizing, or exhibiting in Writing, the Cause of
Action in any Suit, or Plaint, grounded upon the Common or Statute Law, wherein
the Party supposes himself to be injured. This has been by some supposed in
an Action Real, to be most properly termed a Count; but that, being a Norman
(or Law- French) word, is frequently, if not as often, used in our Books, in
all other Actions, whether Personal or Mixed, for a Declaration.

A Count or Declaration therefore (being Terms equivocal, Of the formal Parts
of which a Declaration ought to consist.
and so used in the following Discourse) ought principally to contain Three
things:

First, The Plaintiffs and the Defendant's Names, (which in Actions Real are
called, Demandant and Tenant) and the Nature of the Action; and this by some is
termed the Demonstration, or Demonstrative Part of the Count.

Secondly, The Time, the Place, and the Act; in which ought to be comprehended,
How, and in what manner the Action did accrue, or first arise between the
Parties; When, what Day, what Year, and what Place, and to Whom the Action
shall be given; which is called the Declarative Part of the Count.

And Lastly, The Perclose or Conclusion, which is Unde deterioratus est, etc.
In which the Plainti^f ought to Aver, and Profer to prove his Suit, and show
the Damage he has sustained, by the Wrong and Injury done unto him by the
Defendant.

And this Definition, (consisting of a Tria, somewhat resembling the Logical
Major, Minor, and Conclusion) some of the Ancients (among whom none more fond
of it than Mr. Fleetwood, Temp. Eliz. Regin.
the Famous Recorder of London) conceived to be a perfect Syllogism.

The Statute of 36 Ed. 3. cap. ult. seems to help want of Form in Counts, in
these words; -- By the Ancient Terms and Forms of Pleaders, no Man shall be
prejudiced; so that the Matter of the Action be fully showed in the
Declaration, and in the Writ --. However, it was always at least so presumed by
the most Eminent Pleaders and Sages of the Law, by drawing this Conclusion from
the words; Count ne abatera pur default de Form, issint que eyt Substance; that
is to say in English, A Declaration shall not abate for want of Form, so that
it has substance. But Counts are more especially Relieved, when defective, by
the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 14. of Jeofails after Verdict, although they want
Form or Agreement with the Register. Note well the Statute, and what Cases are
remedied by the same. For, notwithstanding the Statute of 36 Ed. 3. Vide Tit.
Jeofails and Repleaders, infra. Maxim.
before recited, there is holden a Maxim in our Books, That, It suffices if a
Bar be good to Common Intent; but a Count in the Substance thereof must be good
to every Intent. And so is 3 H. 7. 11, and 12. where the Retorn of a Writ of
Rescous was adjudged ill, because the Sheriff named no Place where the Rescous
was made; the Retorn of a Sheriff resembling a Count, which must be good to
every Intent. And so is 3 Ed. 4. 21. That a Declaration must be certain to
every Intent. And yet, In some Cases a Count shall be holden good by
Intendment; as 3 H. 6 35. the Plaintiff in Debt did Declare upon an Obligation
made at D. which extended into two Counties; yet it shall be taken without
other Declaration to be made in the County where the Action is laid; where
Note, that the County is not by express Name declared. And 20 H. 6. 23. the
Plaintiff in Account did declare, that the Defendant was Receiver until the
Feast of St. Michael, but showed not which St. Michael; and by Intendment shall
be taken for St. Michael the Archangel. And 38 H. 6. In Debt by a Servant
against his Master for Wages, he declared upon a Retainer for Eight years,
taking for every year Twenty shillings; it shall be intended from year to year,
according to the Statute.

Next is to be considered what shall vitiate a Count, and what shall not. And
first Note well, that it has been held for a Maxim, among the Sages of the Law
and Ancient Pleaders, that for Surplusage the Count does not abate;
(Surplusagium non nocet) as is 9 H. 6. 25. by Rolfe: And so is 46 Ed. 3. 21.
Where in a Quod ei deforceat the Demandant did allege Esplees in himself, and
likewise in the Donor, and yet good: Although, as it seems by the Book of 3
H. 6. 41. if the Count want Esplees, the same is ill. And so is 9 H. 6. 41.
where said, That if one, in an Attachment upon a Prohibition does not expressly
declare, that the Prohibition was delivered to the Defendant; Ill: For there is
said to be a Form to be observed. And by 4 Ed. 4. 14. and 20 H. 6. 18. a Blank
or Space left in a Declaration does abate the same. But, by 24 Ed. 3. 35, and
54. if the Obligation be Anno Domini only in the Date, without mentioning the
King's Reign, the Declaration may be so also; and, as it seems, may be
otherwise; viz. e contra.

By 11 H. 4. 72. its said, That in Debt against the Ordinary or Jailer, you
shall not need to declare how they were made Officers, because an Action lies
against Officers in possession. And Note, that where a Condition contained in
the Obligation is to the advantage of the Plaintiff, there he must declare
thereof by 21 Ed. 4. 36. Otherwise if it be to his disadvantage, or contained
in the Condition of the Obligation; and to that intent is 22 Ed. 4. Bro. tit.
Count 13. where any thing is to be done by the Plaintiff; and 33 H. 6. 3.
puts the difference, where it is contained in the Obligation, and where in
the Condition: And to that Intent is 9 H. 6. 15, and 16. But yet 26 H. 8. 1.
the Condition was Indorsed to this purpose, That if the Obligee deliver to the
Obligor a Bull, that then the Obligation shall be void; otherwise not: There
the Plaintiff is to Declare upon the Condition; but Shelley doubted, if he
shall be compelled to do the same of necessity. And by 3 H. 6. 8. If the
Defendant do bind himself by Indenture in Forty Pounds, to perform all
Covenants contained in the same, the Plaintiff shall declare upon the Breach of
every Covenant, to which the Defendant shall plead, Covenants performed
generally; and then the Plaintiff shall assign one or more Breaches specially,
whereupon Issue shall be joined. But as before, so in Annuity pro Consilio
impenso and impendendo, the Plaintiff in Annuity, or in Debt for the Arrearages
thereof, ought to count that he did (or was ready to) give Counsel, because a
Consideration Executory: Otherwise of Council Executed; as is 3 H. 6. 35. 38 H.
6. 22. 5 Ed. 4. 104.

But yet 21 Ed. 4. 49. Brook, Count 72. this difference is Ruled there, That
where an Annuity is so brought by a Special Officer; as by a Keeper, Bailiff,
Steward, etc. there he must declare of the Service; but otherwise in a
Declaration pro Consilio, because more general, there the Defendant may assign
the* Breach, or lay the default; quod Nota. Also, if an Annuity be granted to
an Attorney pro Consilio impenso and impendendo, and a Suit happens to be
depending, after the Grant made, between the Grantor and a Stranger, and the
Attorney (not being requested to give Counsel in that Cause to the Grantor)
gives Counsel to the Stranger therein: Resolved by the Court, that this is not
against the Intent of the Grant, but that the Annuity (notwithstanding such
Advice given against the Grantor) should continue, 4 H. 8. 13.

Note, it is not material, when you declare in Annuity, to set forth the Title
or Estate of the Grantor, but only to say, that the Grantor did grant the
Annuity, Co. Entries, Annuity 49. And by 15 H. 7. 6. it appears that the
Plaintiff in Formedon may declare of a Gift, Count de Done fans Seisin.
without Seisin: And so is 34 H. 6. 48. upon Dimisit; and also Common
Experience. And note, where there be two Defendants, Several Counts in one
Declaration.
and the one appears, and the Plaintiff Counts against him in Trespass in the
Simulcum, that he with the other (such aday) did the Trespass, and when the
other came, he counted against him in like Form, as is 46 E. 3. 25. But against
the latter the Plaintiff varied in the Day. And 44 Ed. 3. 41. Br. 583. a Man
may have Detinue of Charters and of Chattels jointly, because there one thing
is the ground of the Action, viz. the Detainer. And 41 Ed. 3. Damage 75. and 1
H. 5. 4. one may have an Action of Debt, where part of the Money is due upon
Bond, and other part by Contract, because there Debt is the only Cause of
Action.

So, by 19 Ric. 2. Case 52. In things of the like Nature, one Declaration may
contain diverse several Wrongs; and therefore in an Action upon the Case, the
Plaintiff declared against the Defendants, First, For hindering him to hold his
Leet. Secondly, For disturbing his Servants and Tenants, in gathering his
Tithe. Thirdly, For threatening so, that the People, etc. durst not come to a
certain Chapel, to do their Devotion, and present their Offerings: And,
Fourthly, For the taking away his Servants and Chattels. Where the Plaintiff
shall Count de novo, and where not.
And see 22 H. 7. Bro. 87. The Plaintiff did Count de novo against the
Defendant, and the Priee in Aid, after Aid prier. And 5 H. 5. 13. He shall also
Count against Tenant by Resceit, mutatis mutandis. The like seems should be
against the Vouchee. Yet by 8 H. 6. 16. the Plaintiff shall not Count de novo
against the Garnishee. And 14 H. 6. 3. one shall not Count against him that
comes in upon the Grand Cape, until he has saved his Default.

And Note, Rules to be observed in declaring of the Day, the Year, and Place.
touching the declaring of the Time and Place, first, by 9 H. 6. 115, 16. That
in Wast, and such like Mixed Actions, as also in Actions Real, one shall not
Count of the Day, Year, and Place; otherwise in Personal Actions. And to the
same Intent is 7 H. 7. 5. And therefore 35 H. 6. 50. a Parson brought an Action
of Debt for the Arrerages of an Annuity granted unto him until he should be
promoted to a Benefice, and Declared, that he took a Wife, which determined the
Annuity; yet because he did not show the Place where he took her to Wife, the
Count was ill. And so is 35 H. 6. In an Action of Debt brought by an
Administrator, for not showing in what Place the Administration was committed
unto him: But it is otherwise of an Executor; for he is not bound to show where
he was made Executor, because he may be Executor of his own Wrong.

And Note, 35 H. 6. 38. where the Plaintiff in Debt did Count upon a Lease of
four Acres for the Rent of three Pounds; and the Defendant did plead to the
Count, that he did Let those four Acres and other Lands, and a good Plea: But
the greater Doubt, whether he should in that case take a Travers; for in our
Books it is obvious, That if the Plaintiff in his Declaration mistake the
beginning of a term of Years, The disadvantage of mistaking the Time, Years, or
Number of Acres.
the Land, or number of Acres; or declare upon a simple Contract, when it is
Conditional, the same is no good Declaration, and Advantage thereof may be had
as well upon the General Issue, as otherwise. And in Fogassa's Case, in Pl.
Com. If the Plaintiff Count generally upon a Lease, and the Defendant plead, ne
Lessa pas (non dimisit,) the Plaintiff shall not give in Evidence a Lease by
Deed. And 28 and 29 H. 8. Dier 32. an Action of Debt was brought upon a Lease
of six and twenty Acres, the Defendant said, that the Plaintiff Let the same,
and four Acres more; Absque hoc, that he Let the six and twenty Acres tantum;
whereupon Issue was taken, and the Verdict found the Demise only of one and
twenty Acres; and thereupon the Question was, Whether the Verdict had found for
the Plaintiff, or for the Defendant? And by Fitz. and Englefield it was found
for the Plaintiff, because Agreed of both sides, that six and twenty Acres were
Let, and the Question was upon the four Acres: But Baldwin and Shelley seemed
to be of Opinion, that the Verdict was ill: But Shelley said therein, That if
the Defendant had pleaded a Plea without a Travers, (because he had confessed
the Count, and more, it would have been good.) Or if the Travers had been,
Absque hoc quod predictus le Plaintiff dimisit les four Acres more, it had been
well enough.

But touching this Matter of Travers, Note.
of the Quantity, Time, or Place, see more in the Titles Travers, Issue, and
Verdict, afterward in this Book.

And see 11 H. 6. 5. That if in Debt for Rent it appears by the Count that
one of the Days is not yet come, the Writ shall abate; Several days of payment,
and where Execution upon the first default, where not.
but otherwise in Avowry by all the Court: Nota diversitatem. And see
Fitzherbert's Natura Brevium, in his Writ of Debt, That where diverse Days of
payment are contained in a Recognizance, upon the first default shall go out a
Scire facias; but upon a Bill for Debt, not until the last Day: Notwithstanding
it has been held, That in an Action upon the Case, upon an Executory Promise,
the Plaintiff might have his Writ upon the first default, and Recover for that
loss; and so upon every default.

It appears by 7 Ed. 4. 15. and 1 Ed. 4. 4. 39 H. 6. 4. 11 H. 4. 55. and 50
Ed. 3. 4. in Brook, Title Brief, by the better Opinion, That in Debt, Resceit
of Parcel, Hanging the Writ, does abate the whole Writ; but that (as it
seems) is intended where the Count and Demand is of one entire Contract; as a
Precipe of a Manor, and Entry into part: For it is otherwise (as it seems)
where a Precipe is of sundry Acres, and the Demandant enter into but one of the
Acres: But (by the same Book 50 Ed. 3. 4.) that ought to be pleaded, Puis le
darein Continuance: And (by most of the other Books) if the Action were upon
Specialty, then it can neither be pleaded to the Writ, or in Bar of the Action,
without Specialty; and if the Defendant conclude his Plea, in Bar, it goes but
to the Action for part: But (as it seems) be the Action either upon
Specialty, or not, if the Defendant plead in Bar the Resceit of parcel, either
before, or hanging the Writ, he must plead the same by Deed, and it goes but
to that part: But if the Plaintiff brings an Action of twenty Pounds, and
declare that he is satisfied of ten Pounds, the Writ does abate of his own
showing; for he ought to bring his Action only for that which is behind, and
declare himself to be satisfied of the rest: But if he bring his Action for the
Whole, and Nil debet; or a Release be pleaded to Part, that goes but to the
same; and so it seems by the Plea, quod non debet predict as vigints libras,
nec aliquem denarium inde.

And in the said Book of 11 H. 4. Debt was brought for Forty Pounds, declaring
part upon a Lease, parcel upon a Contract, and part for Work done: And to part
the Defendant tendered his Law, to other part he pleaded, ne Lessa pas (non
dimisit,) and to the residue he tendered the Money in Court; and the Plaintiff,
as to the Plea of the Lease, took Issue; and, to that of the Money tendered, he
Rejoined, that he had received it accordingly; and, as to the residue, he
refused the Law; and to that, and the Point of Receipt, the Writ only did
abate, quod nota.

Where the Writ and Declaration are General, Reasons for Pleading the Common
Bar, and giving a new Assignment by Replication.
as in Trespass Quare clausum fregit, if the Plaintiff so Declare, the
Defendant, as all the Books agree, may plead a Special Plea to enforce the
Plaintaiff in his Replication to assign the Place more certain: But this Plea
of the Defendant must be also very certain, as 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Dyer 161.
for the Defendant to say, That the Place where is six Acres, is no Plea, unless
he also give it a Name, or Boundaries: And so is 22 H. 6. 24. that the
Defendant shall plead certainly; and this for the advantage of the Defendant,
for if he plead the General Issue, the Plaintiff may in any Place in that Town
assign the Trespass: Or else, as is the Book 28 H. 8. Dyer 23. If the Defendant
does say, that the Place where is six Acres, which is his Freehold, and the
Plaintiff Reply, That it is not his Freehold, etc. If the Plaintiff have a
Close of like quantity, it shall be intended the same: But the Plaintiffs New
Assignment must also be as true and certain to all Intents, as is 9 Eliz. Dyer
204. It must be both true in the Name, and in the Boundaries; and must not be
(as there) una acr' prat' sive terr'.

And as 1 H. 7. 11. and 21 H. 6. 2. and other Books, the Plaintiff must say
also in his Declaration, alia quam, etc. And then, as in 14 H. 4. 24. the
Defendant shall not plead, that the Place where is all one, etc. but shall have
advantage thereof best by the General Issue, if the Pleas aforesaid be entered;
and so is, 1 Ed. 5. 4. Yet in the said Book 21 H. 6. 2. the Defendant did
Rejoyn, that the Place was all one, etc. and known by one Name. But as 27 H. 8.
22. where the Defendant in his Bar said, The Place where was an Acre and three
Roods; the Plaintiff might have assigned the Trespass in the three Roods,
without the Acre, and the Bar, as to the Acre, to no purpose. And 1 H. 7. 11.
the Defendant did plead, That the Place where was three Acres parcel of the
Manor of B. of which A. did him enfeoff, etc. To which the Plaintiff Replied,
That the Place where was the said three Acres, and thirty Acres more, parcel of
the said Manor; and no Plea, because he does not say, Al' quam; or agreeing
with the Defendant's Answer: So that it seems the Plaintiff may Reply to, or
take Issue upon the Defendant's Plea, if it should be untrue, as for the most
part, the first part of it is.

And it should seem also by 9 Ed. 4. 24. and diverse other Books, Declaration,
ab antiquo, certain in Trespass, as at this day, by Rule of Court in C. ^.
That the Plaintiff may at his pleasure, in his Declaration of Trespass, Count
of the Place certain, by Name and Number of Acres, and there the Defendant must
Plead at his Peril: And so are the Books of 5 Ed. 4. 124. and 9 H. 7. 6. in
Trespass of Goods; and as 38 H. 6. 5 H. 7. 8. and other Books in Entry upon the
Statute of R. 2. and 8 H. 6. But 21 Ed. 4. 18. in Trespass quare domum fregit,
without giving a Name, the Defendant may enforce the Plaintiff to a new
Assignment; notwithstanding by Brian and Littleton, 15 E. 4. 23. in manner
Ruled, that the Plaintiff in his Declaration in Trespass, naming the Place
certain, is but Nugation; to which the Defendant by the Plaintiff's Act, shall
not be enforced to Answer: As if the Plaintiff in Debt upon an Obligation does
declare, that the Defendant is of full Age, the Defendant may Plead, that he
was within Age without Travers: But (as there it seems) in an Assize of Rent
the Plaintiff may declare either Generally or Specially, at his pleasure;
according to which last recited Book is 20 Ed. 4. 9 and 10.

Where it is said also, Rules for Declaring in Replevin and Trespass.
that the better Opinion is, to Declare in Replevin, according to the Ancient
Use, that is to say, to name only the Town in the Declaration, and not the
Place, or number of Acres; and so is 9 Ed. 4. 43. And yet notwithstanding see
the Book of 14* H. 6. 3. that in Ejectione Custodiae the Defendant did Plead
Jointenancy, and the Plaintiff assigned anew: So 9 Ed. 4. 23. in Detinue of
Charters; but there the better Opinion seems, that no New Assignment ought to
be. By 38 H. 6. the Defendant in Trespass did Justify for a Way through the
Plaintiff's Close, and the Plaintiff assigned the Trespass in another place of
that Close. And 39 Ed. 4. 7. the Defendant Justified that day by the
Plaintiff's License: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That the Defendant came
back again the same Day, and re-entred his Close; where also it appears, that
where one Justifies the same Day, he need not conclude, Que est eadem
Transgressio. Vide Brook, Tit. Trespass. Vide Noy's Reports, fol. 70. Roll's
and Walter's Case; where in Replevin the Defendant avowed Damage fesant, as
Tenant to I. S. who was seized in jure Ecclesiae, and demised to him for years;
and held good without saying, that he was Parson: But, secus in Quare Impedit;
for there the Plaintiff must name the Defendant Parson Imparsonee, because till
then, in that Case, he cannot plead in Bar.

By Co. 1 Inst. fol. 145. the Sheriff ought to take two sorts of Pledges in
Replevin, one by the Common Law, ad prosequend' Querelam; and the other by the
Statute, De Retorno habendo. Note, the Plaintiff in Replevin must allege a
Place certain, where the Beasts, Cattle, or Goods were taken. By Co. 1 Inst.
fol. 145. several persons, whose Beasts, Cattle, or Goods are taken, shall not
join in Replevin; nor is it a good Plea to say, that the Property is to the
Plaintiff and another. But by Co. lib. 7. in the Case of Swans, a Replevin lies
of such things in which one has but a qualified Property, as of Beasts that
are ferae naturae, and made tame, so long as they have Animum revertendi. So 2
Ed. 2. Fitzherbert, Title Avowry 182. Replevin lies of a Leveret, or of a
Ferret; and by the Register Original, fol. 81. it lies of a Swarm of Bees. And
by 7 H. 4. 28. and 6 H. 7. 29. it is at the Plaintiff's Election in many Cases,
to have Replevin or Trespass for his Cattle or Goods taken, which he will; but
he cannot have an Action of Trespass against his Lord for taking them.

But by the Books of Entries, viz. Rastal. 567 and 572. and Coke 610. and
Fitzh. Not. Brevium, fol. 69. b. Replevin lies de averiis capt' and detent'
quousque, etc. and de aliis averiis capt' and adhuc detent'; and there said,
that when the Plaintiff declares, that the Defendant yet detains the Cattle,
and the Defendant appears and makes default, the Plaintiff shall recover all in
Damages; and also it is there said, that if the Beasts are chased into another
County after they are taken, the Party may have a Replevin in which of the
Counties he pleases, or in both. Also it appears in Dyer's Reports fol. 280.
That if the Plaintiff be Nonsuited before Declaration, and he sueth out a Writ
of Second Deliverance, and is again Nonsuited before Declaration, the Defendant
shall have the Cattle irreplegiable, without any Avowry.

Note, If Replevin be before the Sheriff by Writ, it may be removed by the
Plaintiff into the King's Bench or Common Pleas by Pone, without Cause, and by
the Defendant with Cause mentioned in the Writ; but if it be before him by
Plaint, then it may be removed by the Plaintiff, by a Writ of Recordari facias
loquelam issuing out of Chancery, without showing Cause; but if the Defendant
removes the Plaint by that Writ, he must show Cause therein.

Note also, If live Beasts or Cattle, and Goods and Chattels (which are Dead,
or things Inanimate) are named together, and Replevied by one Writ, as they
may, the live Beasts or Cattle must be named before the dead, as Quandam vaccam
suam and quedam averia sua, que J. S. cepit.

Note farther, That by the Common Law, when the Goods or Chattels of any Person
are taken, he may have a Writ out of the Chancery, commanding the Sheriff to
make Replevin of them, and this Writ is Vicontiel, and in the nature of a
Iusticies, (by which the Sheriff may hold Plea of any value, and in all Cases;)
but when the Defendant claims property, and when more than one live Beast is
taken, then the Form of the Writ is, Quod Replegiari faceret J. S. quendam
Spadonem, vel Equam, etc. And when many dead Chattels are taken, then the Writ
shall be, Quod Replegiari faceret bona and catalla sua, and the Plaintiff must
ascertain them in the Declaration; but if but one dead Chattel be taken, then
the Writ shall be, Quod Replegiari* faceret J. S. quoddam Examen Apium.

3 Cro. 627, 628. the Plaintiff brought Trespass for taking an Hide; and the
Defendant pleaded in Justification, That the Major and Communalty of London
were seized of an House called Leaden Hall, where he took the said Hide
Damage-feasant, as their Servant, etc. To which the Plaintiff Replied, That
Leaden Hall is an ancient Market for Fridays, and that he bought the Hide there
on such a Friday; and that he had the same on his Back, to carry away, quousque
the Defendant took it prout in Narr': And though Objected, that the Replication
is not good, because he concludes not, Que est eadem Captio, etc. for that he
varies from the manner of the Caption, and by his Pleading takes from the
Defendant's Authority; yet Resolved good without it, because it agrees with the
Defendants Plea, in Time and Place of the Caption.

So, 3 Cro. 8. 98. in Trespass, the Defendant pleaded, that he is Clericus and
seisitus de Rectoria de A. in jure Ecclesiae, and makes Prescription for him,
and all his Predecessors, Parsons of that Church, to have had a Way, time out
of Mind, in such a place; but says not, that he was a Parson; and
notwithstanding it was Objected, that he had not enabled himself to make a
Prescription; yet forasmuch as he has alleged, that he is seized in jure
Ecclesiae, it tantamounts thereto, and is good.

CHAP. II. Of Bars, or Pleas to Declarations.
A Bar, in our Law, signifies a Destruction for ever, or Taking away for a time
the Action of him that has Right; and it is called, A Plea in Bar, when such a
Bar is pleaded, Co. 1 Inst. fol. 372. Plowd. fo. 26, 28. Colthirst's Case.
Brook, Title Bar, Number. 101, and 5 H. 7. fo. 29. There are also Pleas in
Abatement of a Writ, Plaint, or Count.

A Plea in Abatement, in our Law, being as much as Exceptio dilatoria with the
Civilians, ( Britton, cap. 51.) or rather an Effect of it: For the Exception
alleged and made good, works the Abatement. And this Exception may be taken
either to the Insufficiency of the Matter, or Incertainty of the Allegation, by
Misnaming the Plaintiff, Defendant or Place: To the Variance between the Writ
or Count, or Specialty, etc. To the Incertainty of the Writ, Plaint or Count:
To the Death of either of the Parties before Judgment had, and for diverse other
Causes: Upon which Defaults the Defendant may pray, that the Writ, Plaint or
Count may Abate, that is, the Plaintiff's Suit against him may Cease for that
time.

There is also a Plea in Abatement to the Jurisdiction of the Court, called a
Foreign Plea, which is, where a Matter is alleged in any Court, that ought to
be tried in another: Or, a Refusal of the Judge as Incompetent, because the
Matter in question is not within his Jurisdiction: As if one lay Bastardy to
another in a Court Baron, Kitchen, fo. 95. Anno 4 H. 8. cap. 2. and 22 Ejusdem
cap. 2, and 14.

But before we Treat of Pleas in Abatement, we shall consider, What Pleas shall
Conclude the Defendant, by his Appearance, Continuance, etc. As to which the
Tenant or Defendant ought especially to take Care, that by his Appearance, and
taking of Idem dies or Imparlance, he Conclude not himself of his Advantage in
Pleading; for by our Law Books Idem dies is before Continuance, and Imparlance
after, and by Consent of the Party: And therefore Note, That after Imparlance
General, one shall not plead to the Jurisdiction, as is 22 H. 6. a. But if the
Imparlance be Special, viz. Salvis sibi omnibus and omnimodis Advantagiis tam
ad Breve quam ad Narrationem, it is otherwise: But to the Writ (it seems
after a General Imparlance one may plead Jointenancy, Non-tenure, Over-Dale and
Nether-Dale, and the like, whereof he is not Estopped by his Appearance, as is
the Book of 9 Ed. 4. 36. But Misnosmer, and the like, after a General
Appearance, and Imparlance, he shall be Concluded of, as are the Books; and
therefore the way in that Case is to appear in this manner, viz. J. S. qui
implacitatur per nomen J. D. comperuit and habet diem, vel petit licenciam
Interl^quendi, vel petit visum, Salvis sibi omnibus Advantagiis, etc.

And by 8 H. 6. 18. Of Pleas to the Jurisdiction of the Court.
If one plead to the Jurisdiction of the Court after Declaration, the same
shall not be Entered until the Plea be discust, and the Continuance shall be
upon the Writ. And by 50 E. 3. 9. upon the View, one shall plead Ancient Demesne
to the Jurisdiction; and sometimes the Court shall oust the Parties of
Jurisdiction, although they themselves seem to take no advantage thereby, as in
22 Ed 4. 23. b. in Trespass between the Parson and Vicar; otherwise he ought to
plead it, as before. And by 3 H. 4. 12. Foreign Pleas.
and 8 H. 4. 18. a Foreign Plea in a Personal Action, is to the Jurisdiction;
otherwise in a Real Action. And by 21 Ed. 4. 10. the Judgment in that Case is,
as in other Pleas, that the Writ shall Abate.

Next we shall consider what Pleas may be pleaded to the Jurisdiction, and they
are Ancient Demesne, County Palatine, Cinque Ports, etc. But according to 44 Ed.
3. If the Defendant plead to the Jurisdiction, and Conclude to the Action, the
Jurisdiction is admitted; unless as in 1 R. 3. 1. Natura Brevium, and other
Books, where Trespass is brought Vi and armis, or where the Freehold is pleaded
in the County Court, or Court Baron, then the Court ought to take Consideration
therein. And it appears by 49 Ed. 3. 34. That every Castle of the Cinque Ports
is intended Gildable, and not of the Ports, quod nota. And the Lieutenant of
Dover Castle was Assest in King James the First's time, in the Subsidy; and 4
Ed. 4. 16. the Tower of London, by Middlesex.

This Plea to the Jurisdiction being to be pleaded at the first, unless in
special Cases, as before: The next in order, is to the Person, then to the
Count, after that to the Writ, and to the Action of the Writ, and the last is
in Bar.

And therefore next to the Pleas to the Jurisdiction, Order of Pleading.
are those to the Person, which according to Littleton are six in number, Of
Pleas to the Person.
viz. Villenage, Utlary, Alien, Horse de Protection, Profession, and
Excommengement. In pleading the last of which, the Defendant must show the
Letters of Excommunication, which Plea does not abate the Writ; for upon the
Plaintiff's showing his Letters of Absolution in Court, he shall have a
Resummons against the Defendant; and by 33 H. 6. 23. Profession or Alien may be
also pleaded to the Action.

And touching Pleas to the Count, Of Pleas to the Count.
farther than before is mentioned, they are diverse, as Variance from the Writ,
wanting Form or sufficient Declaring upon the Condition, and the like, as the
Case requires; for which see afterward, and Brook, Title Count.

And as concerning those Pleas which are to be pleaded to the Writ, Of Pleas to
the Writ.
they be of two sorts, viz. the one Apparent in the Writ, of which the
Defendant may at all times take advantage, and the other resting upon the Plea
of the Defendant; as Misnosmer, Iointenancy, Non-tenure, Non habetur aliqua
talis Villa, or Over-Dale and Nether-Dale, of the Place where the Action is
laid, and not of which the Defendant is named; unless in Cases where Utlary
lies, and that the Lands lie in A. and not in B. and the like, which the
Defendant is bound to take in time, and to look that he be not Concluded of
them by his General Appearance, Continuance, or Imparlance, as before is
mentioned: And Note, that it appears in a Report 3 Eliz. That if the
Defendant for Matter apparent plead to the Writ, he shall in the beginning and
ending of his Plea, petere Iudicium* de brevi; but otherwise in the Conclusion
only.

And touching Pleas to the Action of the Writ, Of Pleas to the Action of the
Writ.
they are, where by the Plaintiff's own Declaration, or the Defendant's Plea,
it appears that the Plaintiff ought not to have the same, but another Writ.
And, as 26 H. 8. Brook, Brief 409. The Defendant may choose either to Conclude
to the Writ, or to the Action of the Writ. And so 9 Ed 4. 31. where Dower was
brought against a Guardian; and he said, he was not Guardian: Judgment de Brevi.

In the next place we will proceed to the Form of the Defendant's Pleadings: Of
the Defendant's Pleading, and first of his Defense.
And first, touching his Defense against the Plaintiff, it appears 34 H. 6.
33. and other Books, in Bro. Title Defense, That in diverse Actions, as namely,
Assise, Dower, Darein Presentment, Mortdancestor, Per quae servitia, Attaint,
and Scire facias, the Defendant shall only say Venit and dicit, without other
Defense. And 46 Ed. 3. 23. in an Assise of Nuisance in the Common Pleas, there
shall be Defense, otherwise not; and in Brook's Abridgment, Title Defense, Number.
67. where one Pleads to the Jurisdiction there shall be no Defense.

But it appears in the said Title 2 Ed. 4. Half Defense.
and 40 Ed. 3. and 35 H. 6. That where the Defendant pleads to the Person, he
may make half a Defense, viz. Venit and defendit vim and injuriam, without
saying quando, etc. And so is 7 H. 6. there in a Praemunire, or Plea to the
Jurisdiction, it is only said, Venit and defendit vim and injuriam: So as by
these and other Books, in the said Title of Defense it appears, that in Pleas
to the Jurisdiction, or the Person, the Defendant, as before, cannot make above
Half Defense: For if he adds to the same the words quando, etc. which make the
Whole Defense, the ability of the Jurisdiction and Person is thereby admitted;
but in Pleading to the Writ one may make a Full Defense, as appears by all the
Books of Entries.

The Full Defense is in some Cases Ordinary, Of the Ordinary Full Defense.
and in others Special: And the Ordinary Full Defense in some Actions is, Venit
and defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. and in others, Venit and defendit
jus suum quando, etc. and where the Defendant shall in his Defense say, Venit
and defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. are these Actions, viz. Account,
Action upon the Case, Covenant, Debt, Detinue, Ejectment, Ne injuste vexes,
Partition, Parco fracto, Quare Impedit, Quo jure, Replevin, Rescous, Recaptione
Averiorum, Recto, Rationabili part bonorum, Rationabilibus Estoveriis; in all
Actions where Debt and Trespass are given by the Statute; in all Actions of
Trespass de Clauso fracto, or de Clauso and domo fractis, with their Incidents,
as, de Bladis and herba depast', conculcat', consumpt', succis'; Averiis,
pedibus ambulando, etc. or, de Arboribus succis', amputat', etc. or, de
Sepibus, Fossatis, Solo; Eradicat' vel amputat', implet', subvers', etc. or, de
Bonis capt', asportat', spoliat', etc. or for Battery, False Imprisonment, or
Menacing the Plaintiff or his Servants; as also in Waste, and other Personal
and Mixed Actions.

But in a Writ of Intrusion, and every Praecipe quod reddat, Ayel, Escheat, and
the like, the Defense is, Venit and defendit Ius suum quando, etc. And in some
Cases the Defense is more Special than before, as Brook, Defense 45. In Recto
quando Dominus Remisit Curiam suam, the Defense shall be Venit and defendit Ius
praedicti Petentis and Seisinam suam quando, etc. And ibid. 16, and 40. in
Nativo habendo the Defense shall be, Venit and defendit jus suum, and omnem
Nativitatem, quando, etc. And also vide Ibidem 23, 30, and 31. That in Actions
upon the Statutes of Mainteance, Laborers, and the like; and in Recaptione
averiorum, the Defense is Venit and defendit vim and Injuriam quando, etc. Et
quicquid, etc. And in Prohibition upon the Statute of Ric. 2. and H. 4. Venit
and defendit vim and injuriam, quando, etc. Et omnem Contemptum. Et quicquid,
etc. And in an Appeal of Mayhem, as appears 40 Assize 9. the Defense is, Ven'
and defendit vim and injuriam, Et omnes Felonias and Appella de Mayhemio, Et
quicquid quod est contra pacem Domini Regis Coronam and Dignitatem suas, etc.

And it also appears in Brook 46. that where the Defendant pleads
Misnosmer, Misnosmer how pleaded.
he shall allege the same before Defense, and then shall make Defense, and
show the certainty of the Misnosmer: And the Vouchee, as it appears there,
Number. 24. shall make his Defense in this manner, Et praedictus A. B. ut Tenens
per Warantiam suam defendit Ius sum quando, etc. And Ibidem 14 H. 6. 18. it is
a Doubt, whether one shall take his Protestation before or after Defense; and
by 21 H. 6. it is said, That to every of the Plaintiff's Pleas the Defendant
shall make his Defense de novo; quod nota.

And touching Protestations, Of Protestations.
we shall first consider what they are, and in the next place inform you how,
and in what manner they ought to be pleaded.

A Protestation in Pleading therefore, is by some defined to be a Defense of
Safeguard to the Party that makes it, from being Concluded by the Act he is
about to do, that Issue cannot be joined upon it, Plowd. fol. 276, b. per Walsh
ibidem. Or, it is a Form of Pleading, when one does not directly affirm or deny
any thing that is alleged by another, or which he himself alleges.

But by Plowden, in Grayslake and Fox's Case in his Com. it is said to be, A
Saving or Excluding of a Conclusion, and (by that Book) ought to be after the
Defense, which is (in that Point) left doubtful by the beforementioned Book of
21 H. 6. 26. and may not be contrary in it self, or double. As in the before
recited Case of Grayslake and Fox, Protestando, that he made no Testament, pro
Placito, that he made not the Plaintiff his Executor; because if he made no
Testament, he could make no Executor: And, as it there appears, the Effectual
Matters of the Bar ought not to be taken by Protestation: Yet in Clear Haddon's
Case, the Protestation was, Null Wast fait; and he pleaded, that the Reversion
descended to another, and the like.

The next Point in order to be discussed, Of Color in Pleading.
is touching Colors in Pleading; what is properly signified by the same, and
in what Actions they shall be given.

Color signifies a Probable Plea, but in truth, What it signifies.
False; and has this End, to draw the Trial of the Cause from the Jury to the
Judges: As, in Trespass for taking the Plaintiff's Cattle, the Defendant says,
that before the Plaintiff had any thing in them, he was possessed of them, as
of his own proper Goods, and delivered them to I. S. to re-deliver to him
again, upon Request; but I. S. giving them to the Plaintiff, who supposing the
Property was in I. S. at the time of the Gift, took them, and the Defendant
took them from the Plaintiff, and thereupon the Plaintiff brought his Action:
This is a good Color, and a good Plea. Vide Doct. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 13.
and Brook, fo. 104. Title Color in Assize, Trespass, etc.

And, In what Actions it may be given.
First, Colors may be given in Actions of Trespass (as is said above) of
Cattle, In Trespass.
of Goods, or in Land; or in Assize, In Assize.
where the Defendant is supposed a Wrong-doer, and does not plead the General
Issue, but a Special Plea to excuse himself of the Wrong, there the Law does
not allow his Plea good, unless he suppose in the Plaintiff some Color to
bring such an Action: For the Law of it self does not intend any Man so
injurious, without Color, to charge another with Wrongs.

And Color also by 19 and 21 Ed. 4. Br. 56. may be given in Entry sur
Disseisin of Rent; In Entry sur Disseisin.
and so is 2 Ed. 4. 17. and in the said Year-Book, fo. 27. Color was given in
Ravishment de Guard; and 19 and 22 H. 6. Br. 19, and 23. Color may be given in
Forcible Entries.

And so is 35 H. 6. 54. and other Books, that Color may be given in an Action
upon the Statute of 5 Ric. 2. In Action sur Stat. 5 R. 2.
and in no other Writs, or Actions, as I can find: Nor in these neither, Upon
what Plea.
as the Pleading may be; as, if the Defendant pleads the General Issue, and
do not Justify; or pleads some Plea that merely Determines the Right; as
appears in Brook 14 Assize, a Feoffment with Warranty, Fine, Recovery, and the
like. The like Law is 21 Ed. 4. 18, and 15. where one Justifies for Distress,
Wreck, or Waifs and Estrays, or by any other Matter of Record: But see there
other Books, viz. 2 and 12 Ed. 4. 38 H. 6. 7. and 37 H. 6. 7. varying, whether
one shall give Color where the Defendant does Justify for Wreck, Waifs, and
the like, etc. And so 34 H. 6. 10. in the same, and for Offerings.

And where the Defendant does Convey from the Plaintiff himself, Conveyance
from the Plaintiff.
in some case he shall give Color, and in some not: As 6 H. 7. 14. where the
Defendant Conveyeth from the Plaintiff for life, or years, there he shall not
give Color; and so is 22 H. 6. 50. otherwise, as it seems by 8 Eliz. Dyer 146.
where the Defendant pleads a Lease for years, from a Stranger. But by 15 Ed. 4.
31. If one plead a Feoffment in Fee from the Plaintiff, by mean Estates, he
shall give Color: Yet by Brook 86. If one plead a Feoffment from the Plaintiff
himself immediate, he shall give no Color.

And as it seems by the same Book, and 18 Ed. 4. 3. that he that Justifies, As
Servant.
as Servant to another, shall give no Color; and by 22 H. 6. 50. and 12 E. 4.
15. he that pleads his Freehold shall give no Color. His Freehold.


But by the same Book, and 12 H. 6. 18. He that pleads a Descent shall give
Color, Descent.
because it binds only the Possession, and not the Right. And by 15 H. 7. 10.
and 21 H. 7. 23, Aid le Roy.
where one Prays in Aid of the King, there no Color shall be given. And 21
Ed. 4. Brook 56. he that Pleads to the Writ, To the Writ, or to the Action of
the Writ.
or to the Action of the Writ, shall give no Color. But by 5 H. 7. 10. If the
Defendant Entitle himself to a Devise, he shall give Color: Whereof see more
in the Title of Color in Brook.

In the next place shall be shown, What be sufficient Colors.
what are Sufficient Colors, and in what manner they are to be pleaded.

And 50 E. 3. 18. where there were Lord, Mesn and Tenant, Lord, Mesu, and
Tenant.
by Ten shillings Rent; and the Mesn brought an Assize against the Lord, and he
pleaded this Matter without giving any Color. And by 20 H. 6. 27. If one
brings an Action for Trespass done in D. and the Defendant Justifies in
another Place, Justification in another Place.
and Traverseth Absque hoc quod ipse est Culpabilis in D. there he may give
Color.

And by 22 Ed. 4. 24. 5 Ed. 4. 134. and 21 H. 6. 32. etc. Color must be always
given by the first, Color given by the first, not mean Conveyance.
and not by any mean in the Conveyance. And therefore 38 H. 6. 5. the Defendant
pleaded, that A. was seized, to whom B. Released, and gave Color by B. and ill.

Neither may Color be given by a Stranger, Not by a Stranger.
as appears by 38 H. 6. Brook 16. and, as it seems, ought to be given by an
Estate not apparently determined, Estate determined.
as is 19 and 21 Ed. 4. Br. 56. where, in Trespass against a Parson, Color was
given to the Plaintiff by a Lease for Life of his Predecessor; but yet there
doubted: And 7 H. 7. 13 and 14. the Defendant gave Color by a Lease pur auter
vie, which was dead; and Good: So that it seems by these Books, that although
the Estate appear determined, yet the Color is Good.

But where a Possession defeated is given to the Plaintiff, Possession defeated.
as 9 H. 6. 32. where the Defendant in an Assize, or in Trespass, does plead,
that he was seized, until by A. disseised; who did enfeoff the Plaintiff, and
he did Enter; a good Color.

And so is 2 H. 4. and 9 Ed. 4. 15. where Color was given by one whose Estate
was defeated by Recovery: And so seems 35 and 37 H. 6. Brook 6. where the
Defendant does plead, ^iens*
that A. took his Goods, and gave them to the Plaintiff, and after that he, the
Defendant, took them again; and held a good Plea.

And accordingly is 2 H. 4. 13. where it is not Immediate Wrong: Otherwise,
where he does plead, that he was possessed until the Plaintiff took his Goods,
and he did afterward retake them from the Plaintiff, for that does amount only
to the General Issue; but there it is more doubted in another Case, where the
Defendant in Trespass of Trees did plead, that he was seized, until by the
Plaintiff disseised, who did Cut the Trees, and squared them; and then he, the
Defendant did re-take them.

And see Brook 64. that Color ought to be by a Title, Color ought to be of a
doubtful Title.
or Possession, doubtful to the Lay People, whether the same be good in Law, or
not; Color to the Plaintiff.
and must be given to the Plaintiff, and not to another that enfeoffeth the
Plaintiff: And therefore 2, and 19 H. 6. Br. 1, etc. it is a good Color to
say, That the Plaintiff Claiming as Executor, As Executor.
when he was not, etc.

And for the Defendant to give the Plaintiff Color by the Bailment of A.
Bailment.
who afterward gave to the Defendant, is a good Color by 6 H. 7. 7. But 28 H.
6. 4. to give the Plaintiff Color only by a Bailment, Ill; notwithstanding to
give him Color by the Gift of the Defendant, as Bailor, by 7 H. 6. 31. is good.

And so is 21 H. 6. 36. and 35 H. 6. 54. to say, That the Plaintiff pretending
his Father to die seized, Descent pretended.
when he did not, did Enter, no Color; because the Defendant himself
destroys the same. But 9 H. 4. Bro. 9. that the Plaintiff supposing his
Father to die seized in Fee, when but for Life, is a good Color.

It is a good Color in Trespass, Parson.
by a Parson, to say, That he Claims by the Bishop, and not by the
Predecessor of the Parson, as is 8 H. 6. 9. But 19 H. 6. 20. that the Plaintiff
Claiming as Parson, when he never was Inducted; no Color: Otherwise if Parson,
21 H. 6. 30.

But to say, That the Plaintiff Claimed as Heir, when he was a Bastard; Bastard.
a good Color; and so is that Year, fol. 21. Or to say, That the Plaintiff
pretending Title to a Reversion, without Attornment, Attornment.
a good Color.

And 19 H. 6. 46. 16. to give Color by a Coparcener or Iointenant, Coparcener,
Joyntenant. Heir.
is Good: And 21 H 6. 43. Doubted* whether a good Color to say, that the
Plaintiff claims by the Son and Heir of him, by whom the Defendant does
pretend Title: And 24 Ed. 3. 50. to give Color as Heir of the part of the
Father, Heir special.
etc: Good.

By 2 Ass. 7. it is a good Color to say, That the Plaintiff Claimed to Enter
as Lord by Escheat, Escheat.
etc. But otherwise, as it appears by the same Book, to give the Plaintiff
Color merely by Abatement, Abatement.
is no Color: But by 12 H. 7. 25. it is a good Color to say, That the
Plaintiff Sowed the Corn, Emblement.
and he did Reap and Cut the same.

And 18 Ed. 4 10. a good Color by a Lease at Will. Lease a volunt.
And 22 Ed. 4. 23. it is a good Color in Trespass for Tithes, to say, That the
Plaintiff claims as Parson, Parson.
and the Defendant as Vicar. Vicar.


And by 40 Ed. 3. 23. it is a good Color to plead, That the Plaintiff Claiming
by Confirmation, Confirmation.
made to her Husband and her self; or by the Confirmation of an Infant, or
Tenant in Tail; or Claiming Dower, did Enter; although a Woman having Right,
cannot enter into her Dower: Yet all these are good Colors.

Other Cases there be of Colors; but by those above cited, the Reason of the
others may well appear.

The next Point, touching Matter of Form in the Defendant's Plea, How the
Defendant shall Conclude his Plea.
is the Conclusion of his Plea; and when his Plea shall be to the Writ, or
otherwise.

By 8 H. 6. 18, and 19. in London, or other Places where they have Special
Grant not to be Impleaded elsewhere, there they Conclude Judgment de brevi, and
shall not Conclude to the Jurisdiction: And 38 H. 6. 19. where the Defendant's
Plea does prove, that the Plaintiff may have another Writ in the same Court,
there he shall Conclude to the Writ, and not to the Jurisdiction: But by
Prisot, 37 H. 6. 24. if the Plea be in Bar, and the Conclusion to the Writ, it
shall be taken in Bar; and so is 34 H. 6. 1, and 2.

But of the contrary side is 37 H. 6. 48. in Forcible Entry, If the Defendant
Pleads to the Writ, and Concludes to the Action, he shall be Condemned; because
by his Conclusion he has admitted the Writ to be good. The like Law, if he
Plead to the Jurisdiction, and Conclude to the Writ.

And by 26 H. 8. Brook, Brief 409. If the Plea be to the Action of the Writ, he
may so Conclude to the Writ: And as it appears in the Titles of Estoppel and
Waranty, If a man Plead in Bar an Estoppel, Waranty, or the like, he shall
Conclude upon the same, and not to the Action, although it were in a Writ of
Right; as in Fitzherbert's Natura brevium, in the Writ of Right Patent
appears.

But it appears to be otherwise at this day, Nota.
by all the Books of Entries: For the Tenant, or Defendant, after his Defense
immediately, does not only defend the Action by these words, Et dicit quod
praedictus A. (the Plaintiff) Actionem suam praedictam inde versus eum (the
Defendant) habere non debet; but also in the End of his Plea, immediately after
his Averment uses again the same words with an Et caetera (etc.) And so is the
Practice at this day.

Next in order, we shall Treat of Averments, Of Averments in Pleading.
their Natures and Signification, and in what Cases they are to be made use of
in Pleading; and where not.

The word Averment, Averment defined.
is diversely used in our Law; by some it is taken to be, where a man pleads a
Plea in Abatement of the Writ, or Bar of the Action, which, he says, he is
ready to prove, as the Court shall award. Others say, it is an Offer of the
Defendant, to make good or justify an Exception pleaded in Abatement or Bar of
the Plaintiff's Action; and signifies also the Act, as well as the Offer of
Justifying the Exception.

Averment likewise, is either General or Particular.

A General Averment, which is the Conclusion of every Plea to the Writ* or in
Bar of Replications, or other Pleadings, containing Matter Affirmative, ought
to be Averred with an, hoc paratus est verificare, etc.

Particular Averment is, where the Life of Tenant for Life, or Tenant in Tail,
or the Age of an Executor, or the sense or meaning of Words in an Action of the
Case for Slander, are Averred in these words, Cum hoc quod idem J. S.
verificare vult, quod, etc.

And touching the General Averment, When the Defendant shall aver his Plea.
used in the Conclusion of the Defendants Plea, by the words, Et hoc paratus
est verificare, etc. that ought to be to all Pleas in Bar, and to the Writ: But
by 3 Mar. Bro. Averments 81. need not to be to an Avowry, because an Avowry is
in the Nature of a Count or Declaration; yet in the Books of Entries, it is
sometimes used in Avowries, and most commonly in all Pleas of Replication, but
not in Rejoynders; neither seems it to be hurtful, if used where needless, for
then but Surplusage, and Surplusagium non nocet.

But upon the General Issue, or a Plea in the Negative, or a Plea apparent in
the Writ, ought to be no Averment; and 27 H. 8. 14. Adjudged, that upon a
Challenge to the Array there needs no Averment.

And it appears by 2 H. 7. 2. that in a Replication, Quod non habetur tale
Recordum per quod liquet, etc. Et hoc paratus est verificare per Recordum
illud, is contrarient and naught: Where it is said also, That if a Plea want an
Averment, or have not a sufficient Averment, the same is not good; quod nota.

And it appears by 37 H. 6. 14. that in a Forcible Entry the Defendant pleaded
Excommengement in the Plaintiff, without any Averment, because no Answer is to
be made to that Plea.

But it appears in the Books of Entries, That where a Plea is either pleaded to
the Jurisdiction, or to the Person, by Matter en fait, as Profession or
Villenage, there be always Averments, whichs seem to be of Necessity, by the
last recited Book, because to these Answers may be made; quod nota.

And Note, that by the Book of 37 H. 6. 23. If one have a Plea to the Whole, he
may plead the same to a Part: Where it is said by Moyle, That a Release or
Justification, or any Matter in the Affirmative, pleaded without an Averment of
the Plea; or pleaded in the Negative, as Nil debet, and the like, without the
Conclusion, Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam, (and yet, 1 and 3 Mar. 124. the
General Issue was pleaded without that Conclusion, and good) or to plead a Bar
in an Assize, without taking the Tenancy upon him, where diverse are named in
the Writ, the same is Ill.

There needs no General Averment in a Plea, or Particular Averment in a
Declaration, of that which will come in more properly on the other side, Hob.
Rep. 78. 124.

And by the same Reports, 88. 106. there will need no Averment in a
Declaration, where it appears there are Reciprocal Remedies. But by the same
Book, 251. where the Administrator, durante minori aetate, is Plaintiff in a
Suit, there the Nonage of the Executor must be Averred; Secus, where he is
Defendant.

Yet by Sheppard's Abridgment, Tit. Averment, fo. 230. the Executor of a
Grantee of a Rent or Reversion, expectant upon an Estate for Life, may not Avow
his Distress without an Averment, that the Arrerages incurred after the Death
of the Tenant for Life. Adjudged.

And so by Hobart, fo. 141, 142. he that pleads a Dispensation to hold in
Commendam, confirmed by the Kings Charter, must aver the Performance of the
Condition contained in it.

So by Perkins, cap. 147. If the Defeasance of a Recognizance be dated before,
if in this Case any use be to be made of it, it must be Averred to be delivered
at or after the time of the Recognizance entered into.

By Coke's Rep. lib. 8. Case of the. City of London, and lib. 9. 54. Averment
needs not be of what is apparent; as the Constitution made in London,
concerning the Sale of of Wares and Merchandises appearing to be agreeable to,
and waranted by their Charter, the same needs not be Averred to be so; and if
the Son bring an Assize of Mortdancestor, he needs not to Aver, that it is
within the time of Limitation, for that it appears to be so.

And by the same Author, Lib. 7. 40. although any other Consideration, than
what is a Deed, may not be Averred; yet where there is an Express Consideration
in it self in the Case; as where a Use of Land is limited to a Wife; this
implies a sufficient Consideration in it self, and therefore needs no Averment.

By Hobart 32. an Averment may be upon a Will; but by Co. lib. 5. 68. an
Averment will not lie of any thing that is against or besides that, which is
against or besides that which is expressed in a Will, nor of any thing that
cannot be gathered, to be the Mind of him that made the Will, by the Words
thereof, nor of any thing that does not cohere with the Will, especially if the
Devise be of Lands: As where one Devises to A. and the Heirs of his Body, the
Remainder to B. and the Heirs Males of his Body, on Condition that he or they,
or any of them, shall not alien, etc. In this Case no Averment may be taken by
Witnesses, that it was the Intent of the Devisor to include A. within the
Condition by the words He, or They, etc. So neither may an Averment be taken,
that the Intent was to give it to any other besides the Devisee.

But by Hobart 50. an Arbitrament in Writing, may not be supplied by an
Averment. And by Bulstrode, first Part, fo. 220. and Popham, fo. 201. it
appears, that if Tenant for three Lives make a Lease to another, the Lessee, in
an Action brought by him, needs not to aver the Lives under which he claims.
Nor by Goldesborough, fo. 97. needs he that sueth an Administrator upon the
Assumpsit of the Deceased, aver he had Assets, after Debts and Legacies paid.

So by Hobart 297, and Coke on Littleton 373. it appears, that if a Tenant
disclaim upon an Avowry in Replevin, he shall have Judgment, though it be false:
For no Averment will lie against a violent Presumption, though it be false.

By the Book of 34. H. 6. 42. and of 9 Ed 4. 4. an Averment may be had against
any part of the Rolls or Records of County-Courts, Hundred Courts,
Courts-Baron, or other Courts belonging to Lords of Manors.

But by Dyer 348. 177. no Averment will lie against such a Retorn as is
definitive to the Trial of the thing Returned; as the Retorn of a Sheriff upon
his Writs, the Retorn of the Mayor, Aldermen and Sheriffs of London upon a Writ
of Habeas Corpus, sent to them, and the like.

But if it be such as is not Definitive, as upon a Rescous, or the like, there
an Averment, and a Trial upon it may lie. So, if it be such a Retorn as may
endanger a man's Life or Inheritance.

Also by the Statute of 1 Ed. 3. cap. 3. and Goldesbrough 129, 130. and Croke 2
Part, fo. 13. an Averment will lie against the Bailiffs of Franchises, so that
the Lords thereof be not prejudiced thereby.

The same Law of Certificates: For by Co. Lib. 7. 14. and Lib. 9. 31. and Bro.
Abr. 332. no Averment will lie upon such a Certificate, as is a Definitive
Trial in Law of the thing Certified; as the Certificate of a Bishop touching
Bastardy, Excommunication, Marriage, etc.

But by Co. Lib. 7. 14. and Lib. 8. 121. and Leon. 1 Part, Case 285. an
Averment may lie, and shall be received against a Certificate which is only to
give Information, and in the Nature of a Trial; and may also lie against a
Certificate upon a Commission out of any Court; and may likewise be received
against the Certificate of Commissioners, that affirm a man to be a Bankrupt.

But by Bro. 332. If a Bishop Certify, that such a Parson does not pay his
Tenths Iuxta formam Statuti, no Averment shall be received against it.

And in More, Case 295. an Averment will not lie against a Justice of the Kings
Bench, or Common Pleas, and the Custos Brevium, quod habetur Warantum Attorn',
albeit the Party himself (against whom the Certificate is) be dead, and a Scire
facias issued out against his Heir.

So in Yelverton 34. an Averment will not be admitted against a Fine taken by
Commission, that there is no such man of the Name of one of the Commissioners.

By Co. on Littleton 171. If a Partition be by Writ, although it be unequal it
may not be avoided by Averment; for such Averment against the Retorn of a
Sheriff, shall not be good: But by Winch, in his Reports fo. 100. an Averment
may be made in another Action, though not in the same.

By Co. Lib. 8. 31. and Dyer 244. and Plowden 277. where a man has two Sons of
one Name, and one of them has been long absent and thought to be dead, and
this is the Eldest, and by Will he gives his Land in general to his Son of that
Name, and the Eldest Son is alive: In this Case an Averment will lie, that it
was his intent to give it to the Youngest, and not to the Eldest Son; and upon
a Trial the Jury may find it so.

But by Co. Lib. 4. fo. 4. no Averment will lie, that the Devise was to any
other use, but to the use of the Devisee himself.

And by Godbolt in his Reports, fo. 131. If one devise Land to the Heirs of I.
S. and the Clerk writes it, To J. S. and his Heirs; this may be helped by
Averment, for the Intent is written, and more, and it shall be naught for what
is against his Will, and good for the rest. But if the Devise be to I. S. and
his Heirs, and it is written, but to the Heirs of J. S. there an Averment will
not help: For an Averment to take away a Surplusage, is good; but not to
increase that which is defective in a Will.

And Note, That an Averment will lie against a Testament, or Letters of
Administration, although they be under the Seal of the Court, and it shall be
tried by the Country.

And by Godbolt 214. an Averment may be, that one is Sued out of his proper
Diocese, if it does not appear in the Libel, where one is Sued in the Arches.
So where one Sueth in the Court of the Admiralty, for a thing done upon the
Land, an Averment may be, that the Contract was made infra Corpus Comitatus.

And by 20 H. 7. 11. an Averment, in some Cases, shall be received against a
Verdict, to prove it false.

But by Dyer 242. If the Matter contained in an Award, and the Matter contained
in the Submission of that Award, do not agree, it will hardly be supplied by
Averment.

And lastly, by Coke's Commentary upon Littleton, fo. 352. b. it appears, that
the Use of an Averment is, to ascertain that to the Court which is generally or
doubtfully alleged, that so the Court may not be perplexed, of whom, or of
what it ought to be understood; and a man shall never be Estopped from making
such an Averment, to ascertain the Intent of the Parties; if it be not utterly
inconsistent with that which is alleged: For an Estoppel being to Conclude a
man from speaking that which is Truth, must be certain to every Intent, and
shall never be taken by Argument or Inference.

But of this see more Tit. Estoppel, infra.

Next in Order, Of Pleas in Bar.
some Points shall be discussed touching Matters in Bar; and herein shall be
shown, What Pleas are sufficient in Bar for the Matters of the same, and what
not. And,

First, What Plea is good in Bar without Deed.

Touching which there is a Maxim in Law, That where the Action lies merely
upon the Deed, Maxim in Law.
as upon a Bill, or Obligation, or the like, there no Plea can go in discharge
of the same, without Deed; as all the Books agree.

Yet 10 H. 7. 14. if one Count upon a Lease by Indenture, or a Bailment by
Indenture, the Defendant may plead Nil debet, or Non detinet, but not Non
dimisit, by Littleton.

Quaere, of a Bargain and Sale by Indenture, for Money to be paid at a Day: For
28 H. 8. Dyer 20. upon a Bill testifying a Receipt of Money to be laid out in
Pruans, the Defendant shall not wage his Law.

The like 37 H. 6. 18. in an Annuity with Clause of Distress, Levied by
Distress, or Payment without Acquittance, a good Plea: Otherwise, if granted
without Distress; where holden also, that if one be bound in a Bond, with
Condition to pay such an Annuity, be the same with Distress, or without, he may
(as I conceive) plead Payment without Acquittance, because contained in the
Condition of the Obligation.

And by 27 H. 8. in Statam's Case, in an Action against the Sheriff, upon an
Escape, because the Action is not merely upon the Record, as Debt upon a
Judgment, the Defendant may plead, That he let the Prisoner go at large by the
Commandment of the Plaintiff.

And yet it is holden in Trespass, for taking away the Plaintiff's Apprentice,
21 H. 6. 31. to be no Plea, to say, That before taking of the Apprentice away,
the Plaintiff discharged him of his Service without Deed; quod nota. And so
indeed seems 1 H. 7. 14. in Dove's Case, in Covenant against an Apprentice.

And 30 H. 6. 40. no Plea in a Scire facias, to have Execution upon an Annuity,
to say, That the Plaintiff did deliver him the Deed of Annuity as a Release,
and afterward took it away from him again.

The like seems by 1 H. 7. 14. in Dove's Case before recited, in Debt upon an
Obligation; yet there holden, That by some Pleas, as Matters in Law, viz.
Infancy, Duress, Razure, and the like, one may avoid a Deed en^ealed.

In the next place we shall observe, Of Bars to avoid Circuit of Action.
What shall be taken to be good Bars, to avoid Circuit of Action; which it
seems the two last recited Cases are not: And therefore see first, 19 H. 6. 62.
That if I grant to my Tenant, to hold without Impeachment of Wast, in Cessavit,
etc. Or, the King grants to one, to be discharged of Disms, the same may be
pleaded by Rebutter, and the Party not put to bring his Action of Covenant, or
to sue by Petition.

And so it seems of Wast, in 21 H. 6. 47. be the Grant by Lease; whereof Doubt
is made afterward in 21 H. 7. 23, and 30. where the Principal Case was, That
the Obligee granted, that if he did Implead the Obligor (before such a Day) the
Obligation should be void; and a good Bar. And upon that Reason shall the
Garnishee, or Tenant by Resceit, Rebut by a Release or Waranty.

And upon the Reason aforesaid it is, that where one Thing is granted in Law,
so another, (especially of Things Executory, and not Executed) if he be
Interpleaded of that which to him appertains, he shall plead the same in Bar of
that whereof he made the Grant; as appears by Perkins, in the Title of
Exchanges, where Rent is granted for Distress.

But yet by 15 Ed. 4. 9 Ed. 4. and 24 Ed. 3. Abridged by Brook in the Title of
Conditions, 61. it seems in that Case to be to the contrary, because Executed,
and therefore not like where an Annuity is granted pro Consilio. The like,
where one holds to Enclose, taking the ancient Pale, or where one grants to
me an Annuity, to have a Gorse, or a Gutter in my Land, because an Easment.

And by 15 H. 7. 10. If you Covenant to serve me, and I to give you Five Pounds
for your Service: Or, you Covenant to Marry my Daughter; and I, in like manner,
to give you Twenty Pounds, as a Marriage Portion: If you serve me not, or Marry
not my Daughter, I may plead the same in Bar. Otherwise, if the Covenant on
either part had been expressly, and not depending upon the others Act.

Next shall be shown, How to plead the Performance of a Condition of an
Obligation.
In what manner one shall plead in Bar, the Performance of a Condition of an
Obligation. And,

First, Touching the Performance of Covenants in Indentures, omitting the
variety of Ancient Books, it appears 27 H. 8. 1. and 33 H. 8. Brook, Covenant
35. That the Defendant ought to plead the Indenture, and the special manner
particularly, how he has performed every Covenant.

See also accordingly 10 and 11 Eliz. Dyer 279. and 28 H. 8 Dyer 26. But, as it
seems there, need not aver, quae sunt omnia and singula Conventiones, etc.
because referred to a Matter in Writing: The like of a Record. And for that
Reason, it seems of necessity, that he need not to plead, prout in eadem
Indentura. Quaere tamen.

But if not referred to Writing or Record, as has been said before, then it
shall be otherwise: As, if I am bound to Enfeoff you of all my Lands in Dale, I
must show the Number of Acres, and plead also, quae sunt omnia, etc.

Yet now, Note.
at this Day the Course of the Practice is, (notwithstanding the Covenants are
reduced into Writing, after they are recited in the Plea) to insert this
Clause, Prout per eandem Indenturam before apparet.

And as to Pleading Performance of the Conditions of Obligations, they d^ vary
according as the several Cases are. And,

First, Conditions to save harmless.
By 28 H. 8. Dyer 30. the Condition was, That the Obligee should peaceably
enjoy, etc. And the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff did peaceably
continue his Possession, until such a day, at which time the Lord distrained
for Rent; and a good Plea.

But 30 H. 8. Ibidem 43. where the Condition was, to Warant and save harmless
against Lord and King, and to have and peaceably Enjoy. The Defendant pleaded,
Quod habuit and pacifice gavisus fuit; where said by diverse, that the Plea is
ill, and but Argumentative, that is, he has peaceably Enjoyed the Land; Ergo,
he has Waranted the Land, and saved the Plaintiff harmless: For he might be
Impleaded in a Praecipe, and the other not waranted, and yet hold it peaceably,
or might be distrained for Issues lost, etc. and therefore ought to have
pleaded expressly, quod non fuit dampnificatus per Regem nec per aliquem alium;
or, that the Plaintiff was Impleaded, and he did warant, etc. Quaere inde, for
Baldwin, e contra.

The Condition of an Obligation (2 Eliz. Dyer 184.) was to warant, defend, or
save harmless, as well the Person of the Obligee, as the Premises, against one
Culpepper; where the Defendant alleged in his Bar a former Lease, by reason
whereof neque le Obligee, nec les Premises possint nec potuerunt esse
dampnificat' per praedictum (Culpeper.) To which the Defendant Replied the
Special Matter in Law, without Concluding, Et issint dampnificat'; where holden
the Defendant's Bar was ill; and that he ought to have pleaded, Non fuit
dampnificatus, or the Special Matter, and Conclude, Issint non dampnificatus;
and the Plaintiff's Replication, for want of a proper Conclusion, ill also.

And 3 Eliz. Ibidem 186. in the like Case, the Defendant Pleaded, quod Quer'
non dampnificat' fuit per A. and the Plaintiff in his Replication showed a
Special Damage, and Concluded, Et issint dampnificat'; and the Defendant by his
Rejoinder pleaded, Null tiel Record; quod nota.

Note also, That in an Action of Covenant, brought 28 H. 8. Dyer 31. One of the
Covenants in the Indenture was, That the Defendant ought to make and suffer for
the Assurance of the Plaintiff, all things that should be devised by the
Counsel of the Plaintiff, if he were required: And the Defendant taking
Protestation for Plea, said, that he was not required. To which the Plaintiff
Replied, That I. S. was of his Counsel, who devised a Release, which he
required the Defendant to Seal; but he refused to do the same: To which the
Defendant Rejoyned, Que ne Refusa pas; and by all the Court holden a Departure,
and that the Defendant ought to have Pleaded at first, Non requisitus fuit; and
the Plaintiff in his Replication needed not to have spoken of any Refusal. But
where the Condition was, for the Performance of an Arbitrament of I. S.
touching, etc. so as it be delivered in writing before, etc.

The Defendant, Mich. 7 and 8 Eliz. Dyer 242, and 243. pleaded by Protestation
non fecerunt, etc. Pro Placito quod praedicti Arbitratores ante, etc. non
deliberaverunt, etc. Upon which the Plaintiff in his Replication, showed when,
and where the Arbitrators made the Arbitrament, and the several parts thereof,
and alleged the Breach in one Point: Upon which Replication the Defendant did
Demur; because in his Plea he answered not the delivery of the Arbitrament, but
by a glance, and not directly.

Note the words of the Condition and the Plea; notwithstanding quod
Arbitratores non deliberaverunt, etc. and good.

It appears by Cro. 2 Part, fo. 352. in the Case of Stain against Wild, that
where there was Debt brought upon an Obligation, to perform an Award of all
Suits and Demands between the Parties, so as it be made of and upon the
Premises, ready to be delivered to the Parties before such a day, etc. and
that they made such an Award de and super Praemissis, scil. that the Plaintiff
should have and enjoy a Horse in Controversy between them, and that the
Defendant should pay him 3 l. before Michaelmass toward his Charges, and they
should Release each to other all Matters whatsoever between that and
Michaelmass. And the Plaintiff assigned Breach for Non-payment of the 3 l. And
on Demurrer, held good for the Plaintiff. For though it was pleaded, That the
Arbitrament was made de and super Praemissis; yet these General words will not
help the Plaintiff, unless he avers, that there were no more Causes between
them, and then the Release appointed being void, there is nothing Ordered for
the Defendant's benefit.

See more of this 7 H. 6. 6. 39 H. 6. 9. 2 R. 3. 18. and 22 H. 6. 22.

So in Tyer's Case, Trin. 23 Car. 1. in Banco Regis, Stile's Rep. fol. 4. Where
in Debt upon an Obligation to perform an Award made the 10th of May, ready to
be delivered the 11th of May. The Defendant pleaded, quod Arbitratores nullum
fecerunt Arbitrium, etc. To which the Plaintiff Replied, That the Award was
made the 10th Day of May, ready to be delivered the same 10th day of May. The
Defendant Demurred for Duplicity and Departure: Resolved, Not: It being a thing
whereof Issue is to be of the Award, and not of the Day of the Award.

But by 1 Leon. 71. in Bret and Andrew's Case, In Debt on an Obligation with
Condition to perform an Award, which was, To deliver up all the Houses that he
had. The Defendant pleaded, That he delivered up all, etc. without showing what
they were, and Adjudged ill: And where it was Awarded, That he should discharge
and save harmless A. from such an Obligation, he pleads, Non dampnificatus; and
ill also: For he was not only to save him harmless, but to discharge him of the
Bond, and both of them ought to be showed, how done particularly.

So by 27 H. 6. 1. in Debt upon an Obligation with Condition to perform an
Award; which was, To Enfeoff, or Release, or pay 20s. The Defendant pleads
Performance generally, not showing which of them he has performed; and ill.
For although Performance of any one of them would have been a good Excuse, yet
he must show what he has performed.

So Bendloe's Rep. 5. A. and B. were jointly and severally bound to stand to an
Award to be made between them and I. S. The Arbitrators Awarded, that A. should
pay 30 s. to B, and that B. should pay unto I. S. Ten shillings. In Debt on the
Bond it will be no good Plea for A. to say, that he had performed the Award,
without showing in what manner it was performed; and likewise how B. had
performed it, for he is bound to him also.

And in Skinner and Andrews's Case, Hill. 20 Car. 2. in Banco Regis, Rotulo 292.
In Debt on a Bond, to perform an Award, Ita quod it be made before the 25th of
March; where the Defendant pleaded, Null Arbitrament fait. To which the
Plaintiff Replied, that ante vicesimum septimum diem Maii, the Arbitrators made
an Award, and good, without saying, Infra tempus limitat'; for they may
Traverse nullum Arbitrium, etc. without Traversing the Day, and if it be not
before the Day; the Jury is bound to find it*

Note, by Dyer 75. Kelway 121. Plowd. 11. 19 H. 6. 37. there is a difference
between Arbitrament and Concord: For an Arbitrament may be pleaded, though the
time of Performance of it be not yet come; but a Concord must be Executed and
satisfied before it can be pleaded; for there is no way to force the doing of
it, as there is in Case of Arbitrament.

By Bridgman's Rep. 58. it appears, That if the Arbitrament be made of a thing
submitted unto, and of other things, it will be good for what is submitted
unto, and void for the rest; and a Breach laid in that which was submitted
unto, will give good Cause of Action.

Vide Croke 3 Rep. 549. Edwards versus Marks, in Debt upon an Obligation with
Condition, To appear in the Court of King's Bench (such a day) and there Elect
two Arbitrators, who (with two more to be Elected by the Plaintiff) shall
Award, etc. The Defendant pleaded, That he appeared there at the Day, and there
Elected two Arbitrators for himself; but that the Plaintiff was not there time
enough for the Award to be made, nor had the Plaintiff his Arbitrators there;
and good.

But in the Case of Corbet versus Cook, Cro. 3* 466. In Debt upon an
Obligation with Condition, to appear in the Court of Kings Bench such a day,
etc. The Defendant pleaded, That the Court was Adjourned to Hartford, and that
he appeared there, and Adjudged to be ill, because he said not prout patet per
Recordum.

So in Dighton and Clark's Case, 2 Leon. 199. Debt was brought upon an
Obligation, the Condition whereof was, That I. S. shall not disturb the
Plaintiff in his Possession, by any Indirect means. To which the Defendant
pleaded, That he did not disturb the Plaintiff in his Possession by any
Indirect means, but by due Course of Law; and Objected, the Plea ill, because
not showed how by due Course, viz. what Suit: But Agreed, the Plea had been
good, if he had only said, Not disturbed by any Indirect means; but doubted if
not ill, because he Pleads over by lawful Means, and says not what, so that it
may be tried.

So, by Latch Rep. 16. and 1 Leon. 136. In Debt upon an Obligation, with
Condition (inter alia) for the Obligor to Account: To which the Defendant
pleads, Conditions performed. The Plaintiff Replies, That the Defendant did not
Account, and ill, because he shows not what he had to account for: And
difference is taken, when the Condition is in the Negative, Not to do a thing,
then it is sufficient to say, he did not do it; and when in the Affirmative, to
do, as to perform his Office, or to Enfeoff him of all his Land, etc. there he
might show what his Office was, and what Lands he had, and that he did Enfeoff,
etc.

Vide Mich. 2 R. 3. fo. 17. Placito 44. and Trin. 4 H. 7. Placito 6.

It appears by 9 Ed. 4. 12. Bar to Common Int^^t.
and other Books, That if a Bar be good to Common Intent, it suffices.

But by 22 E. 4. 83. If the Defendant pleads in Bar a Record or Estoppel, that
must be certain and good to every intent.

And therefore in 21 H. 6. 1. the Defendant in Maintenance did plead, That the
Party was his Servant, and that he did Retain A. to be of his Counsel; and, for
the Reason aforesaid, it shall be intended, that he retained him with his
Servants Money, and not with his own Money; quod nota.

And by Touchstone of Precedents, Tit. Pleas and Pleading, fo. 192. Reg. 7. a
Bar may be good to a Common Intent, though not to every Intent; as if Debt be
brought against five Executors, and three of them make default, and two appear
and plead in Bar a Recovery had against them two of 300 l. and that they have
nothing in their hands over and above that Sum. If this Bar should be taken
strongest against them, it should be Intended that they might have Abated the
first Suit, because the other three were not named, and so the Recovery not
duly had against them; but according to the the Rule the Bar is good: For that
by Common Intendment it will be supposed, that the two others did only
Administer, and so the Action well considered, rather than to imagine that they
would have lost the benefit and advantage of Abating the first Writ.

So by 3 H. 7. 2. Plowd. 26. If a Bar have Matter of Substance in it, and be
good to Common Intent, it is sufficient, albeit it be not good to every Special
Intent. As where one Sues as Executor, and the Defendant says, That the
Testator made the Plaintiff and one I. S. Executors, and do not say after this
That he did not make the Plaintiff Executor; yet this may be sufficient. So in
Trespass, where the Defendant pleads, that the Place is his Freehold, this is
good; yet the Plaintiff may have a particular Estate. So upon an Obligation to
perform Covenants; the Defendant alleges two Covenants, and says, he has
Performed them, and does not say, There are no more Covenants in the Deed to be
by him performed; yet this is good, for it shall be Intended that there are no
more for him to perform.

But Ibidem, No substantial part of a Bar may be omitted: As, where one is
bound to do a thing between such and such a time; and the Defendant says, That
he did it, or did it before the Day; this is not sufficient, but he must show,
that he did it such a Day within those times. So if one says, He was Lord of a
Manor, and entered for an Alienation in Mortmain, and do not show that he did
it within the Year; for this shall not be Intended, unless it be showed.

Yet per Plowden puis 28. If one plead a Feoffment in Bar, it shall be allowed
as good, albeit it might be by an Infant, or per Duress, etc. unless it be
showed on the other side. And if the Lessor Covenants with the Lessee, that if
he be ousted within the Term, that he shall have as much other Land, he must
show that he was Ousted on such a day in certain within the term.

So to plead in Bar, that I. S. died seized, and R. S. Entered as Son and Heir
to him; this is good, though he say not that he was his Heir; for that shall be
Intended, and the best shall be taken for the Defendant.

So Ibidem, in an Assize, if the Tenant plead in Bar a Descent to the
Plaintiff, and two others, and that he has the Estate of one of them; it is
good, and yet he might have it by Disseisin; but it shall be taken in the best
Sense, that he had it lawfully.

So per eandem, in Colthirst's Case, where the Ancestor is Tenant pur auter
vie, and the Heir pleads, that he Entered as Heir to him, and says not, that he
Entered first after his death, for Occupanti conceditur.

And Ibidem, if a Lease be made to A. and B. for Life, the Remainder to C. and
if C. shall dye during the Life of A. or B. then that it shall remain to E. for
Life, si ipse vellet esse Residens, etc. and E. (being Defendant) pleads his
Entry, after the Death of A. and B. and C. and does not say, when they died,
nor when he entered; yet held to be good in a Plea in Bar.

For per eundem 32 and 33. if it be a Condition, it shall be Intended that the
Defendant did Enter as soon as his Title accrued; and if the Case be otherwise
in truth, than by Common Intendment it is taken to be, the Plaintiff must set
it forth in his Pleading: As in a Formedon in Discender, if the Tenant pleads
in Bar a Release of the Demandant, without Waranty, it is good; and yet the
Release might be made by the Demandant in the Life of his Father, and then it
is no Bar to the Issue.

But it seems by Brook, in his Title of Pleading, 155. that in a Declaration or
Replication this way of Pleading is not good: For though a Bar may be good to
Common Intent, yet a Declaration (and consequently a Replication, or other
Pleadings of the Plaintiff) ought to be good to every Intent.

But by Co. Lib. 3. 52. If one declare upon an Escape in London, and the
Defendant does Justify by the Taking again of the Prisoner in another County,
and answers not the Escape in London; this will not be good, for every part
of the Charge must be answered.

And Lastly, It appears by Hobart 127, 128. that a Plea that has some Matter
of Law in it, though it seems to amount but to the General Issue, is always
allowed.

Note, There be some Pleas in Bar, Upon what Ple^ the Plaintiff shall have
present Judgment*
upon which the Plaintiff shall have Present Judgment.

As 16 H. 7. 19. where in Covenant to Perform Divine Service; The Defendant
pleaded, that the Chapel was decayed. So in Curia Claudenda, if the Defendant
plead Sufficient Enclosure; or in Warantia Chartae, Nient Implede; or in a Writ
of Mesne, Nient Disir' in some Default; or upon the Plea of Riens Arrere in
Annuity; or upon Ne surcharga pas in Admeasurement of Pasture; or Ne disturba
pas in a Quare Impedit, etc.

In other Cases the Plaintiff, upon the Defendants Plea, shall be barred for
the present, and yet afterward have the Effect of his Suit by Scire Facias, or
the like Process upon that Judgment, or by New Action.

As appears in 19 H. 6. 27. in Debt against an Executor, who pleads Plene
Administravit, which is found for him, and so the Plaintiff is Barred pro
tempore, viz. until Assets come afterward to the Defendant's Hands, and then
the Plaintiff may have a New Action. So in Debt against an Heir, who pleads
Riens per Descent; or in a Formedon pleads the Waranty of his Ancestor with
Assets, and after the Assets are Recovered against him, he shall have a New
Formedon; and if he Alien the Assets, his Heir shall have a New Formedon.

But as 21 H. 7. 10. where in Formedon, Cui in vita, Mortdancestor, and the
like, such a Plea is pleaded either against the Issue in Tail, or the Heir of
Tenant by the Courtesy, etc. and no Assets found, and after Assets descend, the
Defendant in the first Action shall have Scire facias for the Assets, if the
first Action be a Formedon; otherwise, as it seems, for the first Land. Quaere.

And see 11 H. 4. and 4 H. 6. Bro. Tit. Scire fac' 74, and 130. in the last of
which it is doubted, when Executors plead Fully Administered, and it is found
for them, and afterward Assets descend; whether the Plaintiff be not driven to
a New Action, or may have a Scire facias thereupon, scil. upon the first
Judgment.

Which seems not by the Books 40 Ed. 3, and 43 Ed. 3. abridged by Brook in Tit.
Scire facias 17 and 29. where a difference is taken when the Plaintiff is
Barred, and when he does Recover.

In the next place shall be shown, Of Pleading Accord, or Arbitrament.
How an Accord or Arbitrament is a good Bar.

And for this see first 4 H. 7. 16. That in Debt upon a Contract, Lease, or
Arrerages of Account before the Plaintiff himself, Arbitrament is a good Plea,
(although the Demand be certain;) otherwise of Arrerages of Account before
Auditors, because it seems to be Matter of Record, and the Defendant cannot
Wage his Law, Qu. then in Debt upon a Lease for years.

And 13 Ed. 4. 5. is, That an Award is no Plea in Attaint, or other Matter of
Record; but if the Matter of Record be mixed with a Matter en fait, then it is a
good Plea.

But in Wast, as is 11 H. 7. 13. Accord or Arbitrament no Plea, because the
Action Mixed, nor in any Real Action; but in Forger of Faits, and other Actions
upon Statutes, Accord or Arbitrament is a good Plea.

But 5 Ed. 4. 7. this difference is taken, that Accord pleaded is not good,
without a Satisfaction executed before the Action brought, and that it must be
Executed in the whole, and not in part; (as is 6 H. 7. 10.) But an Arbitrament
is, without Execution, a good Plea, because an Action lies thereupon.

And therefore 19 H. 6. 29. the Defendant did plead, That in Satisfaction he
gave the Plaintiff a Pottle of Wine, and did not plead the same by way of
Accord, soy prist.

But see thereof more especially for the Pleadings in the Books of Entries.

And in some Actions, Where VVaranty a good Bar.
especially Actions Real, the Waranty of the Ancestor of the Plaintiff shall be
a good Bar; but then the Conclusion of the Plea must be considered, which
appears by the Books of Entries to be, Si encounter le Garanty son Auncestor
qui Heir, etc.

But as it appears by 14 H. 4. and H. 7. 12. and other Books in the Title
Garanty in Brook's Abridgment, the same by the better Opinion, is no Plea in
Trespass, until the Freehold come in debate.

Yet 21 Ed. 4. 18. Ibidem 63. the Defendant in Trespass did plead, That I. S.
was seized in Fee, to whom the Ancestor of the Plaintiff did Release with
Waranty, whose Estate the Defendant had, and Concluded ut supra; and there is
no Question made, whether that Plea might be in Trespass; but whether he that
made himself no Title, shall plead the same.

Notwithstanding 20 H. 6. 20. in Trespass upon the Statute of Rich. the
Feoffment of the Ancestor of the Plaintiff, with Waranty, holden no Bar: But
there it is said, That if the Defendant plead his Freehold, the Plaintiff may
have the Plea aforesaid, and Conclude, Judgment si encounter le fait son
Ancestor, etc.

And 20 H. 7. holden no Plea, that the Plaintiff did Confirm to the Defendant
Lessee for years with Waranty; nor that in Assize by Tenant by Statute, the
Waranty Collateral of his Ancestor, a good Bar, because but a Chattel demanded;
yet there holden, that a Ward may be granted with Waranty, and the Voucher may
be in a Writ of Ward.

And see 5 H. 7. 18. and other Books, in the Title of Waranty, and 22 H. 7.
That a Sale of a Chattel, without Esplees of Waranty, binds not the Seller to
Warant, and that Waranty also must be made at the time of the Sale, and not
after, and no advantage thereof to be taken by way of Bar, but by way of
Action; quod nota.

In the next place we shall consider, Auterfoits Bar.
where the Plea of Auterfoits bar shall be a good Bar, and where not.

And therefore for that, first see 12 Ed. 4. and Bro. Action sur le Case 92,
and 110. that Ley gager in Detinue, is a good Bar in an Action on the Case for
the same Goods.

And by Bryan 2 R. 3. 14, and 19. in Account upon Goods delivered, it is a good
Plea to say, That in Detinue before brought by the Plaintiff, the Defendant did
Wage his Law.

And so seems 15 Ed. 3. Fitz. Assize 96. that in an Assize, a Retraxit by the
Plaintiff in another Assize, is a good Bar: Otherwise of a Nonsuit by
Experience; for until the Statute of Second Deliverance one might have one
Nonsuit after another in Replevin ad infinitum; quod nota.

But if the Plaintiff be once barred by Judgment, in the same or in one of the
like Nature, or in an Action of a higher Nature, he shall be also Barred in
another meaner Action.

But as it appears in 14 Assize 6. the Using of a Writ of Entry is no Bar in a
Formedon; nor in an Assize, to plead, That the Plaintiff had of this Land
brought a Formedon; but the same is a good Plea to the Writ: And so is 4 Ed. 3.
Bro. Bar. 61.

But, Recovery pleaded.
as it seems, to Plead a Recovery of the Land in question against the
Plaintiff, or one whose Estate he has in the same, or higher Nature of Action,
it is a good Bar, by many Books.

And 18 Ed. 4. 28. Bro. Ioynder in Action 70. that in Trespass upon the Statute
of 5 Ric. 2. by three Persons, a Recovery of a Third part of a Moiety against
one of them, and Execution thereupon, a good Bar.

But, as it seems in 21 H. 6. 55. no Plea in Detinue of Goods to say, that
before in Detinue and Garnishment against him (the Defendant) he did Recover
the Goods.

And 19 H. 6. 239. in an Annuity by Prescription against a Parson, who Prayed
in Aid, and Traversed the Prescription, and found against the Parson, and
afterward in a Scire facias he would have had the same Plea again, but could
not, although all the first Jury were dead, because it was his Default.

But see Brook, Bar 12. 20 H. 6 and 43 Ed. 3. in Debt, A former Recovery by the
Plaintiff pleaded, no Bar, without Execution.
where said, That if the Defendant plead a former Recovery by the Plaintiff in
Plea Real, or Personal, without Execution, it is no Bar; because he that
Recovered may at his pleasure bring a New Writ.

And so is 9 Ed. 4. 50. in Trespass; as likewise 4 H. 7. 7. where Three are
bound jointly and severally, but Execution is had only against one of them; yet
this shall be a good Bar for the other two.

The next Thing observable in Pleading, Where the Plea shall go to part, or to
the whole.
is to know, Where the Plea of the Defendants, or one of them, shall go to
part, or to the whole.

For which see first, 9 H. 6. 46. That if in a Praecipe against Two, One does
plead in Bar for his Part, and the other does plead a Plea that goes to the
Whole, as Bastardy, etc. yet it shall not bar the Plaintiff against the other:
But it is otherwise in a Personal Action, for there the Plea to the Whole shall
be first Tried, and if found against the Plaintiff, shall serve for both the
Defendants.

And by 31 H. 6. 23. If one pleads a Plea in Bar in an Assize, that goes to
the Whole, he may at his pleasure Conclude it but to the Moiety: Where it is
said by Prisot, That if one Pleads a good Matter in Bar, and Concludes to the
Writ, it shall be taken in Bar.

In the next place we shall Treat of Certainty in Pleading. Of Certainty in
Pleading.


And first, Where the Defendant in his Bar, shall be forced to set down the
Certainty of the Land, or give a Name to the same.

For which see 5 H. 7. 28. in Trespass of Goods, the Defendant did plead, that
the Place was his Freehold, and that he took the Goods there Damage fesant; the
Defendant was forced to set down the Land in certain, because he made Title to
the Goods; so if he makes Title to the Land by Feoffment: But otherwise, if he
Plead merely his Freehold.

And so is 22 H. 6. 24. in Trespass: But see 5 H. 7. 28. that in Forcible
Entry, because the number of Acres is set down in the Declaration (as in a
Praecipe, or in an Assize) the Defendant shall not in his Bar give the Land a
Name, or other Certainty, but ought to Plead at his peril: But otherwise
(according to the Ancient Practice) in Trespass and Replevin; except (as
before) where the Defendant pleaded his Freehold, and the Plaintiff did not set
forth the Particulars of the Land in his Declaration, which he is now of late
compelled to by Rule of Court.

But for the understanding of this and all other Matters relating to Practice,
more fully and at large, see before in the Introduction of this Discourse. And
further, for Certainty in Pleading, take these General Observations.

First, see Plowden 32, 65, 80, 81, 86, 191, 229. that which is alleged by way
of Conveyance and Inducement to the Substance of the Matter, needs not to be so
Certainly alleged, as that which is the Substance it self; as before, where a
Lease is made to A. and B. for Life, the Remainder to C. and if C. die during
the Life of A. or B. that it shall go to E. for his Life, etc. and E. in
Pleading shows the death of A.B. and C. but shows no time of their Death.

And by Plowden 80, 121, 123, 126, 128, 129. that which a man cannot have
Certain knowledge of, he is not bound to plead Certainly; nor to set forth that
precisely that is out of his knowledge, or to which he is a Stranger, or by
Common Intent he cannot see; as a Deed that belongs to another Man.

And by Co. Lib. 9. 108. that shall be said to be Certainly pleaded, which may
be made Certain by Intendment, according to the Maxim, Id Certum est, quod
Certum reddi potest.

But Co. Lib. 4. 97. and Plowd. 395. that is more Certain, which is Certain of
it self. Yet, where the Defendant in Pleading makes Title to himself by a
Lease, Habendum, for so many years as I. S. shall name, Cum hoc, that I. S. did
name so many, there the Averment makes it Certain enough, and good.

So, many times when there is an Incertainty in a Case, by the addition of a
Reference to a Certainty, it may be made good: As Perkins, Sect. 36. an Estate
is granted to I. S. the Remainder to him that shall come first the next Morning
to Paul's, and one does come there that is capable; this is a good Remainder,
for it may be made Certain by Averment.

So, Pasch. 39 Eliz. in B. R. Morgan and Iohnson's Case, one binds himself by
Obligation to pay me all such Sums of Money as his Brother owes unto me; this
by Averment may be made Certain, and is good.

So, Plowd. 191. if one Grant his Manors of A. and B. and say not in what
Parish or County they are in; or make a Lease of all his Lands in the Parish of
A. and says not in what County; these Grants in Pleading may be made good by
Averment.

So, if the King by his Letters Patents grants to one all the Manors and
Advowsons that did belong to the Priory of H. or that were of I. S. who was
Attainted: These Grants by 32 H. 6. 20. and Co. Lib. 9. 47. may be made good in
Pleading by Averment.

But by Anderson 1 Part, 102. an Indictment was upon 8 H. 6. quod intravit in
unum Tenementum; and held void for the Incertainty.

And March Rep. Case 168. in Ejectione firmae, and Not Guilty pleaded, the Jury
found them Not Guilty for part, and Guilty in tanto ut Ius Mesuagii in
Occupatione, etc. quantum stat super Ripam, and the Verdict was held void for
Incertainty.

And so is 40 Ed. 3. 15. and Co. Lib. 9. 74. in Debt brought against Executors,
who plead plene Administravit, and the Jury find they have Assets, but say not
to what value; this is also void for Incertainty.

And by Plowd. 144, and Co. Lib. 10. 40. there must be a precise Affirmation of
a thing in Pleading, where it relates to Matter of Substance; yet if the
Pleading hit not the very Words, if it contain the Matter by necessary
Implication, it may be good enough.

And by Plowd. 435. a man is not bound to one Form of Pleading, or to the
Common Form, so he plead the Substance of the Matter.

And by Hobart 72, 78. 124. That need not be said on the one side, that will
come properly on the other.

And by Plowd. 104. 202. and Co. Lib. 10. 40. If a Plea has two Intendments,
the strongest shall be taken against him that pleads it, and it shall be taken
most for the advantage of his Adversary: As, in a Release pleaded to an Action
of Trespass, the time when it was made must be showed, for it might be
delivered before or after the Trespass: and if not showed when, it shall be
taken to be before.

And, Idem Lib. 9. 109, 110. where Covin is alleged in the Avoidance of an
Act, it will be sufficient to show it Generally, for it is secret and can
hardly be known; and therefore a man shall not be forced in Pleading, to show
it exactly or certainly.

And by Hobart 163. General Issues may be pleaded without any Inducement.

Lastly, By Plowd. 84. 63, 65. Co. Lib. 9. 109. Dyer 27. Yelv. 103. Hob. 258,
297. Truth and Certainty ought to be in Pleading; and therefore Falsehood,
Incertainty and Repugnancy ought to be avoided in Pleading. And although, as
has been said before, Surplusage does seldom hurt the Pleading; yet Imperfect
Pleading is always dangerous.

Vide Brook' s Abridgment, Tit. Pleading 94, 95, 96. 115. Plowd. 179. 229. 431.
Hob. 23. 208. Dyer 27. and Co. Lib. 7. Butt' s Case, for variety of Matter upon
this Subject.

CHAP. III. Of Replications, Rejoynders, etc.
AFter the Defendant has made his Bar, Replication, Rejoinder, Sur-rejoynder,
what.
or Plea, that is to say, has given in his Answer to the Plaintiff's
Declaration, the next part of Pleading in Course must be the Plaintiff's
Replication; which is an Answer, or Exception to the Defendant's Plea; and a
Rejoinder is, where, after the Plaintiff in the Action has Replied to the
Answer of the Defendant, the Defendant does again make Answer to the Plaintiff;
and if after that the Plaintiff shall Answer again to the Defendant, such
Pleading is called a Sur-rejoynder.

As to Replications and Rejoynders, the Learning of them is more properly to be
seen in every particular Action, under their respective Titles of Pleading; but
touching some Particulars, we shall observe,

First, Where the Plaintiff is in a manner bound to answer the Defendant's
Plea; yet, if he will, may Plead at large, without Answering the same.
Where the Plaintiff is in some sort bound to Answer the Bar of the Defendant,
but may notwithstanding Plead at large, not answering the Bar; which is (in a
manner) altogether in an Assize, where a General Bar, with Color, is pleaded.
And, by 34 H. 6. 46. not in Entry in nature of an Assize, nor other Action.

And so is 21 H. 6. 18. and also 34 H. 6. 22, and 48. in Trespass, and all
other Actions (except Assize,) where although the Bar be at large; yet the
Plaintiff ought either to Traverse it, or to Confess and Avoid the same.

Where it appears, Plea at Large, what.
that a Plea at large is, where the Plaintiff in his Replication medleth not
with the Defendant's Bar: As to say, That a Stranger was seized, and did
Enfeoff him; or, That his Father was seized, and died seized, and so he was
seized until, etc. not showing expressly the Descent to be after the Defendant's
Title.

And 38 Ed. 3. 10. the Defendant in Trespass did plead his Freehold; and the
Plaintiff Replied, Que il prist ses arbres, prist, and could not, but was
forced to make Title.

And 1 and 2 Mariae, Dyer 171. the Defendant in a Replevin avowed, that B. was
seized, and let to him for years; to which the Plaintiff Replied, that antequam
B. aliquid habuit, A. was seized and let to C. whose Estate the Plaintiff had;
and doubted, whether it were not a mere Title, as before at large, because he
does no way encounter with the Avowry, nor Confess and Avoid the same, but only
with the word Antequam.

Where also a Case is Vouched in 41 Ed. 3. how the Defendant in Trespass did
plead his Freehold; to which the Plaintiff Replied, Que long temps devant le
Defendant riens avoit en le Franktenement J. S. fuist seisie, Et Less a luy
pur ans, and so was he possessed until, etc. and holden a good Plea.

But 3 and 4 Mariae, Dyer 134. where the Defendant in Trespass does plead his
Freehold, the Plaintiff is to Traverse the same, or to Convey a Title to
himself, and allege a Disseisin and Regress, and the Trespass mean; quod nota,
and vide accordant 34. H. 6. 32.

And by 42 Ed. 3. 2. the Defendant in Trespass, for taking a Ship, pleaded the
Gift of the Plaintiff; and the Plaintiff would have Replied, that he took his
Ship prist, and ill; and after would have added to that his Plea, Absque hoc,
that the Ship was the Plaintiffs tempore doni, and ill also; and lastly would
have pleaded, that tempore doni the Ship was to Alice at Style, and was not
suffered; wherefore he added to his Plea, that (after the Gift) Alice gave the
same unto him, and so he took his Ship, and that holden a good Plea: And the
Defendant Rejoyned, That it was the Ship of the Plaintiff at the time of the
Gift.

And 49 Ed. 3. 19. the Defendant in Trespass did Prescribe in Common; to which
the Plaintiff Replied, that the Place was his Several; Absque hoc, that the
Defendant had Common there: But where the Plaintiff in an Assize shall be
forced to Answer the Bar, without making Title at Large. Vide Bro. Abridgm.
Tit. Assize, viz. to every Special Bar.

And what shall be good Replications and Titles, further than has been
beforementioned, see the Abridgments of Fitz. and Bro. Tit. Replications and
Titles, where the same more plainly appears: As, if against an Act of
Parliament, Recovery, or Matter of Record, the Title must be set forth
Specially, and de puisne temps; and so 10 Ass. 23. of a Waranty: But against a
Matter en fait, the Plaintiff maywell say* That after his Father was seized,
and died seized, without showing coment.

And as it appears by 47 Ed. 3. 13. If the Title be before the Fine or
Recovery, it may be general.

And 18 Ed. 4. 10. the Defendant in Trespass pleaded a Gift in Tail by the
King; and the Plaintiff Replied, Ne dona pas; and good.

And 9 Ed. 4. 46. where the Defendant gives to the Plaintiff a Title, and in
his Plea destroys the same, That Matter the Plaintiff may Maintain, or
Traverse, without other or further Title.

And so is 40 Ed. 3. 5. and 3 Ed. 4. 18. where holden, that where the Defendant
in Trespass made Title by a Gift in Tail of a Stranger; the Plaintiff Replied,
That he was seized until the Defendant did the Trespass, and Traversed the Gift
in Tail; and good, although his Title was but of his own Possession.

Next shall be shown, Where no need of Replication, or Rejoinder.
In what Cases there is no occasion either for Replication or Rejoinder. And
therefore,

First, It appears by 2 Ric. 3. 9. that where Error is alleged, in that which
the Course of the Court does approve and allow of, there needs no Answer to the
same.

And by Littleton, 12 Ed. 4. 13. where one does Counterplead the Possession
upon a Voucher; or plead, Quod parts ad finem nihil habuerunt, mes A. etc. he
shall add also, Et hoc petit quod, etc.

And so is 22 H. 6. Bro. Replic. 21. But 7 H. 6. 20. to the contrary in the
Plea of Parts ad Finem.

But 31 H. 6. 21. as also 22 H. 6. and in all other Cases where the Plea is in
the Negative, as Non Culp', Ne dona pas, Ne unque seisie que Dower, Null Tort,
Nil debet, etc. Otherwise upon Pleas in the Affirmative.

But this Matter is more proper to be Treated of in the Title of Issues.

But by 2 H. 4. 4. where the Defendant in Debt did plead, that the Plaintiff
had nothing tempore dimissionis.

And 11 H. 4. 79. where said, that an Issue shall be always upon an Affirmative
and Negative; except in Special Cases.

Vide Dyer 2 Eliz. 182. Where one Replication shall go to several Bars.
the Tenant in a Formedon by Fish to parcel, did plead one Fine, and so to the
other parcel another Fine. To which the Plaintiff Replied, Quod seperal' Fines
minime proclam' fuerunt; and good, although there said, that it would have been
better, to have made several Replications.

Then it is to be observed, where not only Rejoynders, but also Surrejoynders
ought to be.

As 5 Ed. 4. 108. where in Debt upon an Obligation with Condition, for
performing an Arbitrament, if the Defendant pleads, Quod Arbitratores non
fecerunt, etc. And the Plaintiff does say, Prist que cy, that is ill; for he
ought to show the Award and allege the Breach, and the Defendant must thereto
plead, That they made no such Award; to which the Plaintiff must say, Prist que
cy, and the Defendant Rejoyn, Que prist que non.

And so you may see Count, Bar, Replication, Rejoinder, Surrejoynder, and
Rebutter to Surrejoynder in Pleading.

A Rebutter is, Rebutter, what.
where a man grants Land to the use of himself, and the Issue of his Body, to
another in Fee with Waranty, and the Donee Leaseth out the Land to a Third
person for years, the Heir of the Donor impleads the Tenant, alleging the Land
was in Tail to him; the Donee comes in, and by virtue of the Waranty made by
the Donor, Repels the Heir, because though the Land was Entailed to him, yet he
is Heir to the Warantor likewise.

So, if I grant to the Tenant, to hold absque Impetitione Vasti, and afterward
Implead him for Wast made, he may Debar me of this Action, by showing my Grant;
which is likewise a Rebutter. Bro. Abr. Tit. Bar 23, 25. Nov. Lib. Intr. verbo
Rebutter, Co. 1 Inst. 365. a. Vide 6 H. 7. 4.

But see hereof more properly in the Title of Pleading.

CHAP. IV. Of General Issue, and Special Evidence.
NExt in Order, we will proceed to Issues. And,

First, With those that may be brought under the Division of General Issue, and
Special Evidence: In which we will set down the Evidence proper to the Nature
of the Issue; and then, what Special Plea the Defendant may have, and not be
forced to the General Issue.

The word Issue has diverse Applications in our Law; but that which concerns
our purpose, is taken for that Point of Matter depending in Suit, whereon the
Parties join, and put their Cause to the Trial of the Jury, and is an Effect of
a Cause preceding; as the Point referred to 12 Men, is the Effect of Pleading
or Process.

Issue in this signification is either General, or Special.

General Issue is, where the Defendant makes a short and peremptory Defense to
the Plaintiff's Declaration, and is always in the Negative; as Non assumpsit to
an Action upon the Case, Nil debet to an Action of Debt, and the like. And,

A Special Issue is that, whore Special Matter being alleged by the Defendant
for his Defense, both Parties join thereupon, and so it goes either to a
Demurrer, if it be Quaestio Iuris; or to a Trial by the Jury, if it be Quaestio
Facti. Anno 4. H. 8. cap. 3. Nov. Lib. Intration. verbo Issue, and 18 Eliz.
cap. 12.

But Evidence is taken for any Proof, be it Testimony of Men, Records, or other
Authentical Writings of Contracts, etc. written, sealed and delivered.

And it is called Evidence, because thereby the Point in Issue is to be made
Evident to the Jury: Probationes debent esse Evidentes, i. e. Perspicuae and
faciles, Co. 1 Inst. fo. 283. And,

First, Evidence upon Non Culpabilis.
As to General Issues, we shall begin with the Proper Evidence upon the Plea of
Non Culpabilis.

By 19 H. 8. 6. upon Non Culpabilis, it is no Evidence to say, that the
Enclosure was defective, because thereby the Trespass is confessed.

So, by 9 H. 7. 3. upon Non Culpabilis in Rescous, the Defendant shall not give
Non Tenure in Evidence.

And Keilway 59. upon Non Culpabilis in Trespass, a License may not be given in
Evidence to excuse the Trespassor, for this must be pleaded.

By Co. Lib. 10. fo. 56. upon the Issue, Non Culpabilis in Trover, it will be
good Evidence to prove the Conversion, that the Plaintiff demanded the thing
sued for, and the Defendant refused or denied to deliver it.

And by Plowd. 14. the Jury may find him Guilty upon this; but being Specially
found, the Court cannot do it.

And by Hobart 187. an Unreasonable Detainer is good Evidence for this.

Vide Godbolt's Rep. 234. where in Trespass for taking away Timber, and the
Boughs of Trees felled, the Defendant pleaded, as to the Timber, Non
Culpabilis; and to the Boughs, made a Special Justification by Custom of the
Manor, that the Lord was to have the Timber, and the Tenants the Branches or
Boughs for Estovers, to be burnt in Terris and Tenementis Custumar' Manerii:
And because the Defendant did Entitle himself to a House and Land, and gave the
Custom in Evidence for the Land only, it was held it did not maintain the Issue.

So, by Stile's Rep. 335. it appears, that where in an Action upon the Case the
Plaintiff declared of a Nuisance, viz. that in such a Way the Defendant had
dug a Hole, ratione cujus, as he was Traveling in the said Way with his
Horse, he did fall and hurt himself, etc. On Non Culpabilis pleaded, the
Evidence was given, that the Plaintiff's Servant was driving his Masters Horse
in the Way laden with Lead, and by reason of this Hole he fell, etc. and it
was held no good Evidence to maintain the Issue.

But by 18 H. 6. 22. where in Parco fracto the Defendant did plead Non
Culpabilis, and gave in Evidence, That the Plaintiff had not a Park by
Prescription, nor by Grant; and it was held good.

By the Books 11 H. 4. 24. and 19 H. 6. 34. in Trespass the Defendant may give
in Evidence, Evidence for Abridgment of Damages.
That the Plaintiff has part of the Goods again in Abridgment of Damages.

And by 3 Ed. 4. Bro. 67. that a Shop is parcel of the House.

By 14 H. 3. and 16 Ed. 4. 1. upon this Plea the Defendant may give in Evidence
a Lease; but by 25 H. 8. Bro. 82. cannot give in Evidence a Lease at Will, no
more than a License.

And so is 12 H. 8. 1. in Wast, where said, that in Wast he cannot, upon Null
Wast fait pleaded, give in Evidence, That he Cut the Timber for Reparations;
nor upon Non Culpabilis, to give in Evidence se defendendo, or a License; but a
Gift he may: But in Wast he may give in Evidence, that the Premises were
ruinous at the time, or burned by Enemies, or the like.

But Title in an Estranger upon such a Plea (as is the said Book of 25 H. 8.
Bro. 81.) and to Justify by his Commandment, is no Evidence; but ought to
plead the said Answer, as the License of the Plaintiff himself (as it seems,)
or one pretends Common, etc.

But if the Defendant pretend an Interest from a Stranger in the Land it self,
although but an Estate at Will; yet he may plead Non Culpabilis.

The next, upon the Issue of Nihil debet.

By the Book of 28 H. 8. Dyer 29. the Defendant may give in Evidence, What
Evidence may be given upon the Issue of Nil debet.
that the Contract was Conditional, or may plead the same, as appears there,
without Traverse: The like, as it seems upon Non Assumpsit, in Action upon the
Case.

And 27 H. 8. 21. in Debt upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. of Farms, upon the
General Issue, viz. Non habuit, etc. he may give in Evidence the taking for
Provision of his House, according to the Proviso of that Statute.

And in 20 H. 6. 24. in Debt upon an Account, the Defendant may plead Null tiel
Account, or Nil debet, and give in Evidence, that there is no Account between
the Parties.

And so is 9 H. 7. 3. in Rescous, the Defendant shall not give in Evidence,
Non-tenure; and yet may, upon Nil debet, give Ne Lessa pas in Evidence.

But there, and 22 H. 6. 33. upon the Plea of Non detinet, the Defendant shall
not give in Evidence a Mortgage.

Nor by 16 H. 7. 15. may he upon that Issue give in Evidence, that he had the
thing of the Plaintiff as a Pledge for Money not yet paid.

But quaere, if he may give in Evidence an Agreement after the Bailment, that
does alter the Property.

And 21 Ed. 4. 20. Nota.
If the Plaintiff in his Declaration mistake the Contract either in the Sum, or
in the Thing sold, Nil debet will be a good Plea.

But 34 H. 8. Bro. 89. in Debt upon an Escape, if the Defendant plead Null
Escape, he cannot give in Evidence, No Arrest.

Then upon the Issue Ne Lessa, or Ne Enfeoffa pas, holden in Fogassa's Case,
That upon the Issue Ne Lessa pas, the Plaintiff shall not give in Evidence a
Lease by Deed; but may a Lease Conditional, as on an Agreement Conditional.

And so is 14 H. 8. 17. the Parties being in Issue upon a Grant, Evidence was
given of a Grant; so he obtained the Will of his Lessor.

And 12 Ed. 4. 4. upon a Feoffment pleaded by Deed, Evidence cannot be given
without, or by other Deed.

And 50 Ed. 3. 6. if a Demise to the Baron and Feme be pleaded, a Fine sur
Release to them is no Evidence to prove the same.

And 18 Ed. 4. 29. if one plead Ne Enfeoffa pas, he may give in Evidence, that
the Parties were Jointenants.

But 15 Ed. 3. Bro. 95. the Issue Ne dona pas may be Maintained by a Devise:
And, as the Books are, upon a Feoffment, a Lease and Release are good Evidence.

And by 1 and 2 Mariae, Dyer 116. upon Non dimisit modo and forma, one shall
have advantage of the Date and Number of years.

Next, Non est factum, etc.
what Evidence shall be given upon the Pleas of Non est factum, riens passa,
etc.

First, It is doubted 1 and 2 Mariae, Dyer 112. that whether upon the Plea, Non
est factum, the Defendant may give in Evidence, that the Plaintiff afterward
pulled off the Seal.

But 15 Ed. 4. 18. upon Non est factum generally, Minime Lit^^ratus*
he may give in Evidence, Nient Lettered, etc.

And so 14 H. 8. 28. upon Delivery, as an Escrow.

But 5 H. 7. 3, and 8. upon Riens passa, Non est factum it seems cannot be
given in Evidence; tamen quaere.

And Note, That in Actions of Maintenance, or other Actions upon the Statutes,
in some Cases the General, and in others the Special Issue shall be taken: For
which see their proper Issues in the Nature of every Action.

And therefore, First, in Maintenance it appears, by 28 H. 6. 6. that if the
Defendant in Evidence show a Special Maintenance, as sworn in a Iure
Patronatus, and the like, that will not stand with the General Issue.

But 22 H. 6. 35. upon the General Issue he gave in Evidence, That at the
Request of the Party he gave him Counsel to sue out a Supersedeas, and good,
because no Maintenance; but in that Case, ought of necessity to plead the
General Issue.

And if the Defendant in Maintenance, be charged with a Special Point of
Maintenance, he must Answer to the same, and the General Issue then shall be no
Plea for him.

And what be the Proper Issues in Actions upon the Statutes, see that Title in
Brook's Abridgment; as in Forcible Entry, Non ingressus est contra formam
Statuti.

But 3 Ed. 4. 1. doubted, whether he may not plead Non Culpabilis in Trespass
upon 5 Ric. 2. and 1 Ed. 5. 4. In that Case the Plea of Non Culpabilis,
admitted upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. of Farms (as before-cited,) Non habuit,
nec, etc. And upon the Statute of Livery, Que ne dona pas les Robes, and not
Non Culpabilis; quod nota, and the like.

And it appears in Dyer, 3 and 4 Mariae 145. that in Debt upon a Pain given by
Statute, Nil debet per Patriam, is a good Plea: But there, and in 50 Ed. 3.
doubted in Debt upon an Escape against a Jailer.

And 18 Eliz. 346. in an Information upon the Statute of Usury, Non Culpabilis
a good Plea.

Next, Horse de son Fee.
of the Plea of Horse de son Fee.

Upon which it seems, 27 H. 8. 20. that the Avowant giving in Evidence Seisin
of Rent, without a Fealty, not sufficient.

And 10 Ed. 4. 10. if one plead Horse de son Fee, the other shall not show a
Tenure, Et issint deins son Fee; but, Deins son Fee, prist, etc.

Then of the Issue, Ne unque Executor, or Pleinment Administer.
Ne unques Executor, or Pleinment Administer, where it is holden, 9 H. 7. 14.
that upon either of these Pleas, if the Plaintiff does Reply, Assets, or, that
he did Administer, he need not show what Assets, or what thing he did
Administer special.

And 9 Ed. 4. 40. upon the Plea of Ne unques Executor, the Defendant may give
in Evidence, that he is Administrator, or, that the Goods were given him in
another County; which the Jury are bound to find. The like of Assets in any
other County, given in Evidence.

And 3 H. 6. 3. where the Issue upon Assets in mains del Executor, it is good
Evidence for the Plaintiff to say, that he sold the Land by the Appointment of
the Testator, etc.

And where the Issue is upon Prescription, Issue upon Prescription, or Custom.
by 34 H. 6. 36. if the Plaintiff give in Evidence a Deed within time of Mind,
the Defendant may Demur upon the Evidence. Demur upon Evidence.


Otherwise by 12 H. 4. 24. if the Deed be time out of Mind: For such a Deed,
although it were the Kings Patent, cannot be pleaded.

And 4 and 5 Mariae, Dyer 164. if one Prescribe for Common Appurtenant to two
several Houses, for twenty Beasts, and give in Evidence, that he has Ten to
either House, the Issue fails.

So, if he fail of his Proof in the same Nature his Plea is, it is ill.

As 1 and 2 Eliz. Dyer 192. Issue was taken upon the Custom of a Manor,
relating to a Copyhold Estate, whether the Widow ought to hold for Life, and
the Evidence proved only during her Widowhood; and ill; quod nota.

So, by Co. 1 Inst. 283. if in Debt upon an Obligation the Defendant plead Non
est factum, and give in Evidence the Bond is Joint and not Several, this is
ill, and will be no good Evidence; but if pleaded Specially, would have barred.
Or, if in an Assise Null tort is pleaded, and a Release after the Disseisin is
given in Evidence.

So, by Keilway 55. where the Issue in Trespass, for Assault and Battery, is
Not Guilty, and the Defendant gives in Evidence son Assault demesne: The
Evidence in none of these Cases will be good.

But by Co. Lib. 5. 119. and Lib. 11. 27. if in Debt on an Obligation the
Defendant plead Non est factum, and upon Trial gives in Evidence, That the Seal
of the Bond was broken off, and put on again; or, That any part of it was
Razed; it will be a good Proof to bar the Plaintiff.

And Idem, 1 Inst. 283. if the Point in Issue be upon a Transitory Trespass,
done at a day or place certain, and the Proof given is, That it was done at
another day before, or at another place; this is good enough: But otherwise it
is, where the Proof is, that it was done at a time after the Day laid in the
Declaration.

So, by Plowd. 8. if the the Point in Issue be a bare Agreement, or simple
Contract, without any Complex Matter, and the Evidence prove it to be an
Agreement Special; this will be good. So if it be of a Feoffment Absolute, and
the Proof be of a Feoffment Conditional.

And by Co. 6. 47. if in a Suit against an Executor or Administrator, the Issue
be Assets in London, the Proof of Assets in any place in the World besides,
will be sufficient to maintain it.

So Dyer 271. and Crompt. Jurisdiction of Courts 12. if it be in case of Heir,
on an Action grounded on a Specialty against him, and the Point in Issue be
Assets by Descent, it will be sufficient if he can prove Assets any where in
England: And i^ it be Assets in one County, it will be sufficient to prove
Assets in another County.

And by Brownlow's Rep. fo. 233. Part 1. If there be two Batteries made between
the Plaintiff and Defendant at several times, the Plaintiff to maintain the
Issue, must prove the Battery made the same day he has laid it in his
Declaration, and shall not be admitted to give another Day in Evidence.

And now in the next place we will show, Where the Defendant may Traverse, and
not be forced to the Genera^ Issue.
Where the Defendant may Traverse any part of the Plaintiff's Conveyance of his
Action, and not be forced to the General Issue.

For which see, first, 2 and 3 Mar. Dyer 121. where the Lord Mountegle brought
an Action upon the Case for a Chain of Gold, upon a Trover against the Countess
of Worcester, supposing that he was possessed, and lost the same, which came to
the Defendant's hands, who sold the same to Persons unknown. To which the
Defendant did plead, Quod non vendidit, etc. Modo and forma, etc. and seems
good, because a principal part of the Declaration; and although but Conveyance,
yet because he cannot Wage his Law, he may have this Traverse. As the Defendant
in Debt upon a Lease for years may plead Non dimisit: And so in Debt upon
Arrerages before Auditors, may plead Non Computavit.

But as 22 Ed. 4. 29. in Debt upon an Award Null tiel Arbitrament; in Detinue
upon a Bailment Ne baila pas; or in Debt upon a Contract Ne achata pas, no
Plea; because the Defendant may Wage his Law: And so the Defendant may plead
Non ejecit, Non rapuit, Non manutenuit, Ne forga pas, etc. or Non est
Culpabilis modo and forma, at his pleasure.

But 28 H. 8. Dyer 26. Non dampnificatus no Plea in Action upon the Case; and
holden lately, by better Opinion, That a Conversion in an Action upon the Case
(for a Trover) simply, is never Traversable; but by an Alio modo, as a License
to use the same, etc. quaere inde.

And 18 H. 6 Bro. 94. in an Action De Parco fracto, the Defendant cannot plead,
that it is no Park.

But 12 Ed. 4. 7. in Trespass by a Prior, Warden or Sheriff, or by one for the
Taking away of his Servant, a good Plea for the Defendant to say, that the
Plaintiff was no Prior, no Warden, or no Sheriff, or that the Party was not
Servant to the Plaintiff.

And yet in 11 Ed. 4. 4. if the Feoffment of the Master and Brethren, or of the
Father be pleaded, it is no Plea to say, that there are no such Brethren, or
that there is no such Father, but must plead Non est factum; for the other
Pleas are but Argumentative.

Then ought to be known, Where the Defendant shall be forced to the General
Issue, or may Traverse the Place laid by the Plaintiff in his Declaration.

For which see 4 H. 6. 13. as Abridg'd by Bro. Tit. Traverse, where in Trespass
laid in Dale, the Defendant does Justify in Sale, Absque hoc quod ipse est
Culpabilis de aliqua Transgressione in Dale; and the Plaintiff driven to Answer
to the same, and the Defendant not enforced to the General Issue.

And so is 12 Ed. 4. 19, and 39.

But 9 H. 6. 62. and 14 H. 6. 23. the Defendant in that Case forced to the
General Issue, and the Jury bound to find it upon Pain of Attaint.

But in the last recited Book, viz. 14 H. 6. that the same is according to the
Discretion of the Court.

And 28 H. 8. Dyer 19. Fitz against Baldwin, that the Defendant may have the
Plea, where he said, That Baldwin spoke for sparing of Parchment.

And 22 H. 6. 26. where, by his Justification in another County, he is driven
to the General Issue.

Then we shall Consider, Where the Defendant may plead Specially, and not be
forced to the General Issue.
In what other Cases the Defendant may plead Specially, and not be forced to
the General Issue.

For which we must first Consult 9 H. 6. 11. where it is said, that the
Defendant in Trespass of Goods pleaded, that A. was possessed, and gave them to
him, without that, that he took any Goods of the Plaintiffs; and nothing
Entered, but the General Issue.

Vide 21 H. 6. 13. where the Special Matter did amount but to the Traverse of
the Seisin; yet the same was Entered, for there said to be done or not at the
Discretion of the Court.

So, by 22 H. 6. 17. upon Nontenure the Plaintiff Averred the Tenant Pernour of
Profits, and the Tenant showed how his Pernancy was a Rent reserved upon a
Lease for Life, Absque hoc, etc. and suffered.

And 9 Ed. 4. 30. a Servant retained, taking yearly Twenty shillings, or a
Robe; the Defendant in Debt pleaded, that he had paid the Robe; and good, by
the better Opinion.

And 34 H. 6. 43. the Defendant in Trespass of Warren, did plead the Freehold
in John S. and that he by his Commandment did the Trespass, and enforced to the
General Issue.

And 21 Ed. 3. 30. in Detinue of an Obligation of 20 l. the Defendant said,
That an Obligation of 30 l. was delvered to him; Absque hoc, etc. and suffered.

And 11 H. 6. 35. in Debt against an Executor the Defendant pleaded, that the
Testator gave him all his Goods, except such, and to the residue plene
Administravit; and suffered.

And 5 H. 7. 3. in Trespass of his Servant, the Defendant may plead, that he
was not Servant.

And 39 Ed. 3. 19. in Trespass by a Bishop, the Defendant pleaded, that he did
it when the Temporalties were in the King's hands; Absque hoc, that he was
Culpabilis before; and good.

And 22 Ed. 4. 45. the Defendant in False Imprisonment pleaded, That his Master
did Imprison the Plaintiff in a Chamber, Nota.
and gave him the Key to keep, and because the Plaintiff was a Clerk of the
Court, the Defendant was forced to the General Issue.

And 14 H. 6. 2. the Defendant, in the like Action did plead, that, by
agreement of the Plaintiff, he did lead him to Dale; and forced to the General
Issue.

And 21 H. 6. 39. the Defendant in Trespass did plead, That the Plaintiff did
Command his Servant to put in the Defendant's Beasts, and that the Defendant,
when he had Notice, put them out; and good.

And 39 Ed. 3. 15. the Tenant in Dower did plead, that the Demandant had an
Eign Baron in Life, Et issint nient loyalment accouple, and nothing Entered but
Nient loyalment accouple.

And so, 19 H. 6. 17. if the Defendant plead Bastardy, and the Plaintiff
Replies, that he was born in Espousals, Et issint Mulier, nothing shall be
Entered but Mulier. The like of the Pleas of Ne unques seisie que Dower.

Yet 39 H. 6. 9. the Tenant was admitted to plead, That he Let to the
Plaintiff's Husband, at Will, which so continued; Absque hoc, que seisie de
tiel Estate que Dower; and so may the Defendant in Debt plead Generally, Non
est factum, or that he is Unlettered, etc. and so Conclude, Non est factum.

And, 11 H. 4. 83. in the like Case, the Defendant did plead, That the Baron of
the Plaintiff nothing had but in Scil. Jointemncy.
Jointure with A. To which the Plaintiff Replied, That A. did Release, and the
Court did persuade her to plead only Seisie que Dower. And in Dower of Rent the
Defendant did plead, Ne unques seisie: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That the
Rent was granted payable at Michaelmass, before which day her Husband died, Et
issint seisie que Dower, and the Special Matter ousted.

And 21 Ed. 4. 22. the Tenant in Dower did demand the View, which the Demandant
did Counterplead, for that her Husband died seized, and the Defendant forced to
the General Issue, without showing Matter of an Especial Tail.

See more hereof in the Title of Traverse.

In the next place we shall Cite some Cases, Evidence agree, or disagree with
the Issue.
additional to the former, to show, Where the Evidence does stand with the
Issue, and where not.

For which see first, 30 H. 8. Dyer 41. upon the Plea of Ne unques seisie que
Dower, the Defendant shall not give in Evidence an Estate upon Condition, or
other Estate in the Husband, defeated by the Remitter of the Heir, or the like.

And 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 112. the Defendant, upon Non est factum, gave in
Evidence, That the Plaintiff afterward pulled off one of the Seals of the
Obligation; and Doubted.

And 3 Eliz. Dyer 192. upon the Plea of Ne unques son Baily pur Account render;
the Defendant shall not give in Evidence, That according to the Bailment he did
deliver the same over; nor is the same Plea good before Auditors; quod nota.

And 5 Eliz. Dyer 222. if the Defendant in Debt upon an Obligation, plead the
Payment at the Day, he cannot give in Evidence an Acceptance of the same, or
other thing in lieu thereof before the day.

And 10 Eliz. Dyer 276. upon Null Wast fait, the Defendant shall not give in
Evidence, That the Premises were amended before the Action brought; and yet
see before that, to say, they were Ruinous at the time of the Lease, and the
like, shall be good Evidence in this Case.

And 10 Eliz. Dyer 272. in Debt against an Heir, who pleaded Riens per descent;
the Plaintiff Replied, Assets in London, and gave in Evidence Assets in
Cornwall; and Doubted: But clear of Assets of Goods.

Where 21 Ed. 3. is Vouched, That where Issue is upon Tender of Homage in a
Foreign County, they cannot find the same Tender in the County where the Land
is; but may in any other Place, in the same County where it is alleged to be
Tendered; quod nota: Where it is also said, that Assets alleged in Dale, and
alibi in Com. C. all the same must be Traversed.

And yet 13 and 14 Eliz. Dyer 305. in the Case of an Obligation made in
Ireland, in Debt against the Obligor in London, Issue was taken, If the
Obligation at the time of the death of the Obligee were then in London, viz. in
Parochia beatae Mariae, when it was in the same Ward, but not in the same
Parish, and therefore ill: But see more of this in this Title, in the several
Titles before and after.

Then also further than before is declared, Evidence sufficient for the Jury to
take Cognizance of.
shall be shown, What is sufficient Evidence, that the Jury shall be obliged to
take Cognizance of.

And therefore, first, see 9 Ed. 4. 40. where, upon the Plea of Ne unques
Executor, if the Defendant give in Evidence a Gift, or Release in a Foreign
County, the Jury are bound to take Notice thereof upon pain of Attaint: Where
said also, That if the Mise be joined in a Writ of Right, the Grand Jury are
bound, upon Pain of Attaint, to find a Release.

And so is 40 Ass. 23. and Brook in this Title 33. in Redisseisin, because but
an Inquest of Office, and a Release not pleadable in those Actions.

But by 43 Ass. 41. a. Release in an Assize cannot be given in Evidence;
otherwise of a Feoffment. But Littleton is of Opinion, that the Jury may, if
they will, upon the General Issue, find a Condition broken, or a Release, as it
seems, that does Extinguish Right, although they may not be forced thereto upon
pain of Attaint.

And so it appears 22 Ed. 4. 19. That in Decies tantum the Jury are not bound
to find a Taking in a Foreign County, although they may, if they will; but if
they find it by Express words, then the Verdict is also ill: And so of Assets,
and such Things Transitory; but otherwise of Local Trespasses.

And 4 Ed. 4. 1. in a Writ of Entry, in Nature of Assize of Common, the
Plaintiff gave a Prescription in Evidence, and good; because in this Action, as
in an Assize, there is no Title laid in the Count.

And 7 Ed. 4. 16. where Divorce or Restore pleaded to the Writ, the same may be
given in Evidence.

And it seems by 3 H. 6. 33. That where a Matter in Law is given in Evidence by
one, the other may Demur.

Next, What Writings the Jury shall take notice of, or may be delivered unto
them.
we shall Observe, What Deeds and Writings are sufficient Evidence, such as the
Jury are to take notice of, or shall be delivered unto them.

First, It appears 11 H. 4. 17. and there laid down as a Rule, Rules.
That no Deed or Writing whatsoever, shall be privily or secretly delivered to
the Jury, that was not openly showed.

And, by 11 Ed. 4. 25, and 38. That an Office before an Escheator, unless
Exemplified, not to be delivered to the Jury, no more than a Testimonial; nor,
by that Reason, the Jury bound to Credit the same.

And 34. H. 6. 25. a Part of a Fine Indented, unless Exemplified, not to be
delivered to the Jury, but with the Consent of both Parties.

No more shall any Copies of Books, by 9 H. 6. 6. But a Part of a Fine, not
Exemplified, delivered in Evidence, (as in Newse and Scholastica's Case) or any
other Evidence, that they are not bound to take notice of, they may yet, at
their pleasure, respect in their Verdict, or find the same Specially.

But 7 Eliz. Dyer 239. doubted, where the Jury may find a Private Act of
Parliament, not delivered to them in Evidence, Exemplified, or otherwise.

And the Matters aforesaid (as it seems) are no Cause to Demur upon the
Evidence, Demurrer upon Evidence.
no more than in Fogassa's Case, because but one Witness; for that the Jury
may, upon their own Knowledge, give a Verdict without Evidence: Nor in any Case
may one Demur upon Evidence, unless he will admit the Evidence to be true: Nor
without the Consent of the other Party (as it seems,) which, according to the
Opinion of many, may put himself upon the Jury to find a Verdict, which they
may do either Generally or Specially, at their pleasure; which, if they do
Specially, they avoid all occasions of Attaint.

See for Demurrers in Evidence the Books following, viz. 9 H. 6. 33. where it
is said, That upon a Matter in Law, the other Party may Demur in Law, for it
belongs not to the Lay-Jury to Judge thereof; but that, it seems, ought to be
such a Matter that the Judge must take to be doubtful.

And so in the before-cited Case of Fogassa, That the King's Attorney did Demur
upon the Evidence, and that (as it there appears) whether the other would
agree, or not: But whether so in Newse and Scholastica's Case, quaere.

And see the Book of 34. H. 6. 36. where the Plaintiff in Annuity, by
Prescription, showed a Deed, in Evidence, within time of Mind; and the
Defendant prayed, That the Evidence might be Entered, and he would Demur upon
the same, and the Plaintiff would not agree to it; quod nota. But if the Court
think the Evidence good, the other side may (as in Tatam's Action upon the Case
27 H. 8.) desire the Justices to Seal a Bill of Exception, Bill of Exception.
which in the Writ of Error he may allege, and not in Arrest of Judgment, ex
Rigore Iuris.

And see Dyer, 6 H. 8. 2. where in Debt against an Executor, the Defendant did
plead plene Administravit, and gave in Evidence a Redemption of a Pledge with
his own Money, upon which the Plaintiff did Demur, and by Assent of both Parties
the Jury was discharged; quod nota.

And so seems Experience at this day, that in Demurrer on Evidence the Consent
of both Parties is requisite.

CHAP. V. Of Special Issues, and manner of Joining them.
IN the next place we shall Observe, Of Special Issues, and the manner of
Joining them*
the Manner and Form of Joining other Issues, (that is to say) Special, being
such as are different from the General Issues, we have already treated of, in
respect of the Special Matter contained in them.

And, First, by 26 H. 8. 3. if the Issue be Joined on the Defendant's part,
then must it be, Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam; but if upon the Plaintiff's
part, then in this manner, Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per Patriam; and so is
Dyer 18 Eliz. 253.

But then it ought to be known, as that which is very Material in Pleading,
Which of the Parties shall offer the Issue.
which of the Parties, in their Pleas, shall first Offer the Issue; where
holden generally in that Title in Brook, That he which Pleads the first
Negative, shall (as before) Conclude the Issue.

And yet Ibid. 2 H. 7. 4. the Defendant in Debt upon a Lease did plead, That
the Plaintiff, Riens ad tempore dimissionis, without such Conclusion; and the
Plaintiff said, That I. S. did him Enfeoff, Et sic ussoit, etc. Et hoc petit
quod inquiratur per Patriam.

And Ibid. 11 H. 4. 19. Issue shall be always Joined upon a Negative, Rule.
after an Affirmative alleged before; or, e contra.

And Ibid. 9 Ed. 4. 36. If the Defendant do plead in the Negative to the Writ,
Rule.
the Plaintiff shall Reply in the Affirmative, and Conclude the Issue.

And Ibid. 7 H. 6. 43. It appears, Rule.
That if the Plaintiff declares in the Negative, (as in Disceit, That the
Defendant did Sue the Plaintiff in Debt in the Name of N. absque voluntate sua)
it suffices for the Defendant to say, Que il sua per son Assent, Et de hoc
ponit se super Patriam; quod nota.

And Ibid. 19 H. 6. 1. the Defendant did plead to the Writ, Rule.
That he was abiding at Dale; and no Plea, without saying also, and not at B.
as the Plaintiff did Name him; because the Issue shall always be upon a
Negative.

And there it appears, Rule.
that one of the Defendants in Trespass pleaded, That one of his Companions was
dead the day of the Writ purchased; no Plea for the Plaintiff to Reply, Que il
fuist en vie al Dale, but must also say, Et nemy mort; quod nota. As to say, by
way of Replication, in the like Case, Mulier and nient Bastard, or Frank and
nient Villein, Et hoc petit quod inquiratur per Patriam; quod nota.

And so 11 H. 4. 90. the Defendant pleaded the Freehold of J. S. etc. and the
Plaintiff Replied, that it was his Freehold; he must say also, Et nemy le
Franktenement J. S. or, Absque hoc que est le Frank: enement J. S. etc.

And it appears 18 Eliz. Dyer 353. Rule.
That he who takes the Traverse by Absque hoc, ought not properly to Conclude
the Issue; but the other Party, beginning his Plea with Ut prius dicit, etc.
may.

It appears also by 33 H. 6. 22. That he who pleads, Parts ad Finem nichil
habent, or does Counterplead the Possession, or pleads Ne unque seisie que
Dower, Ne dona pas, Null Tort, Non Culpabilis, and the like; because these Pleas
be in the Negative, he shall Conclude with the Issue, Et de hoc ponit se super
Patriam.

But 12 Eliz. Dyer 290. in the Plea of Parts ad Finem, etc. the Party that did
plead the same had his Election to Conclude the Issue, or not.

See also 2 and 3 Mar. Dyer. 121. That where the Defendant did plead in the
Negative, (as in an Action upon the Case) he did Traverse the Sale, and did not
Conclude, Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam, but with Unde petit Iudicium si
praedictus Quer' Actionem suam praedictam versus eum habere debeat, etc. and
yet good; because a Perfect Issue may be Joined thereupon; quod nota.

Nevertheless, Where Issue shall be taken upon Affirmatives only, without
Negatives.
in some Cases, Issue shall be taken upon Affirmatives, without Negatives.

As 6 Ed. 4. 6. Where the Defendant in Replevin does Avow, as within his Fee:
The Plaintiff may Reply, Horse de son Fec, prist.

And so in Debt against an Executor, who pleads Pleinment Administer; and the
Plaintiff Replies, Assets.

And in a Writ of Right the Tenant pleads, That he has better Right, etc. and
the Plaintiff Replies, That he has better Right to Demand, etc. which is
somewhat doubted in 32 H. 6. 25. touching the Plea of Horse de son Fee.

Next in Order, Of Tender, or Refusal.
Of Tender and Refusal in Pleading.

Tender, What they are.
in our Law, signifies, Carefully to Offer, or circumspectly to Endeavor the
Performance of any thing belonging to us: And Refusal, is the Denying or
Refusing to accept of the same, when offered.

As by 16 H. 7. 13. In Debt upon an Obligation the Defendant pleaded a Tender,
and a Refusal by the Plaintiff; and the Plaintiff took the Refusal by
Protestation, and Traversed the Tender, as he ought, because no Refusal without
a Tender.

See Dyer 28 H. 8. 31. In Debt upon an Obligation, the Condition whereof was to
make an Assurance of Lands upon Request, as by the Counsel of the Plaintiff
should be devised: And the Defendant pleaded by Protestation, That the
Plaintiff's Counsel made no Devise, and for Plea, That he was not Required. To
which the Plaintiff Replied, That his Counsel devised a Release, which he
Requested the Defendant to Seal, and he Refused: And the Defendant would have
Traversed the Refusal, and could not, but ought to maintain his first Plea,
that is, the Request; and the Plaintiff should not have mentioned a Refusal,
but have Concluded the Issue upon the Request, the Defendant offering a
Negative Plea before.

And so 36 H. 6. 15. the Defendant in Debt did plead an Award, to pay 10 l. at
such a Place, which he was ready at the time to do, and the Plaintiff came not
to receive the same. There the Plaintiff may say, That he was there ready,
without Traverse; because the Defendant had Tendered a Negative Plea before.

Then, Of the Issue Negative Pregnant, what it is.
Of the Issue, Negative Pregnant; which is, a Negative that implies, or
contains in it self, an Affirmative.

As where an Action, Information, or such like, is brought against one, and he
pleads in Bar to the Action: Or otherwise, a Negative Plea, which is not so
direct an Answer to the Action, but that it includes also an Affirmative.

As if a man be Impleaded, to have done a Thing on such a Day, or in such a
Place, denies that he did it Modo and forma declarata, which implies
nevertheless, that in some sort he did it.

Or, if a Writ of Entry, in Casu proviso, be brought by him in the Reversion,
upon an Alienation of Tenant for Life, supposing that he has Aliened in Fee,
which is a Forfeiture of his Estate, and the Tenant to the Writ says, That he
has not Aliened in Fee; this is a Negative, wherein is included an
Affirmative: For though it be true, that he has not aliened in Fee; yet it may
be, he has made an Estate-Tail, which also is a Forfeiture, and then the Entry
of him in the Reversion is Lawful.

Vide 33 H. 8. Br. Issue 81. Where upon an Information, for buying Clothes at
B. contra formam Statut', Ne achata al B. contra formam Statut', ill; but ought
to be, Ne achata pas, Modo and forma, etc.

Yet 16 Ed. 4. 5. One pleads a Release puis le darein Continuance, Nient son
fait puis le darein Continuance; a good Issue.

And 12 Ed. 4. 4. One did plead a Feoffment by Deed; and the other Replied, Que
ne Enfeoffa pas, modo and forma; and good, without answering to the Deed.

As in a Formedon, to Count of a Special Gift, the other-ought to say, Ne dona
pas, modo and forma: Where its said by Littleton, That if the Plaintiff proves
not the Feoffment by Deed, he fails.

Now, Modo and forma, what.
Modo and forma, are Words of Art in Pleading, namely, in the Answer of the
Defendant, whereby he denies the Thing laid to his Charge, Modo and forma
prout, the Plaintiff has Declared against him: As the Civilians in like case
say, Negat allegata, prout allegantur, esse vera.

And it is to be Observed, that (upon Issues) these Words, Modo and forma, are
not always of Substance, as appears by Littleton, in his Chapter of Releases,
where the Disseisee enters upon the Heir of the Disseisor, who brings his Writ
of Right.

Or, where (as before) one in a Writ of Casu Proviso, does Count upon an
Alienation in Fee; and the other does say, Ne Aliena, modo and forma, and found
that he Aliened for Life.

Or, where the Defendant in Trespass does plead, That the Plaintiff does hold
of him by Fealty, and Ten shillings Rent, and so demands Judgment of the
Writ, Vi and armis; and the Plaintiff Replieth, Que il ne teigne modo and
forma: And if the Verdict find, that he holds only by Fealty, yet good.

And so in Trespass of Battery, If the Jury upon the General Issue find the
Defendant Guilty at any other day and place, before the Plaintiff supposes his
Trespass.

But see more of Issues afterward, in the Titles, Traverse, Pleading, etc.

The next in Order, Of Traverse in Pleading. What it is.
is touching Traverse in Pleading; which signifies in Pleading, to deny some
Point, Matter, or Thing alleged on the other side, the formal Words of which
are in our French, Sans ceo, in Latin, Absque hoc, and in English, Without that.

And, first, to begin with the Time: It is plain, (as has been already said)
that if the Defendant in Trespass pleads Non Culpabilis, he shall have no
advantage of the Time, but the Jury may find him Guilty at another day, be the
Trespass Transitory or Local.

And by Littleton, in his Chapter of Releases, so. 13. In Trespass of Battery,
and the General Issue pleaded, the Jury may find the Defendant Guilty at
another day and place.

And so is also 19 H. 6. 47. and 39 Ed. 3. all in the Title of Traverse; But in
Case of Trespass, and other Actions, if the Plaintiff in his Declaration, lay a
time before his Cause of Action, the Defendant in all Cases upon the General
Issue, shall have advantage thereof.

But, on the contrary, if once he have Cause of Action, it so still continues
until he have discharged the same, and therefore he may lay it after the day:
The like, as it seems upon the Issue of Non dimisit; for (as before, Littleton,
in the Chapter Releases) the Words Modo and forma in an Issue be not always of
Substance: Quaere tamen, if not, as if in the Number of years.

And, Time, where, and how Traversable.
as diverse Books be, In many Cases where the Defendant does Justify, he may
Traverse the Time before, and in some Cases the Time after, and in other some,
the Time before and after.

And therefore, where the Defendant, in Trespass of Lands or Goods, makes
himself Title, by a Feoffment, Gift, or otherwise, which still is in force such
a day after, he shall only Traverse the Time before the Trespass supposed.

And so is 15 Ed. 4. 23. 22 H. 6. 29. and other Books in the Title of Traverse:
And where by a Lease, or other Title, made and determined before the Day of the
Trespass, there he must Traverse the Time after and before his Lease: But
whether the Plaintiff may there Traverse that Justification has been a
Question, because in so doing he Departs from his Declaration. Departure.


And the better Opinion of the same Book of 15 Ed. 4. 23. is, That the
Plaintiff may.

But 22 Ass. 36. the Defendant in Trespass of Battery did plead a Release, and
Traversed the Time; and the Plantiff Replied, the Release was obtained by
Duress, and by the better Opinion no Plea, for the Reason aforesaid.

And 2 R. 3. 11. the Defendant in Trespass of Assault and Battery, Justified at
another day of the Plaintiff's own Assault, Absque hoc that he was Guilty antea
vel postea; and the Plaintiff Replied, De injuria sua propria, and ill, for the
Reasons aforesaid; quod nota.

And 43 Ed. 3. 11. the Plaintiff in a Replevin did Declare the Taking the 1st
of May, and the Defendant did Avow in the same Place at another Day for Damage
fesant: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That it was his Common.

And the Rule of the Book is, Rule.
for that the Taking shall be intended the Day in the Avowry, Concerning
Departure.
the Plaintiff's Replication is a Departure.

And to that Intent is 33 H. 6. 14. where the Defendant in a Quare Impedit did
Claim nothing, but as Ordinary; Judgment, if without a Special Disturbance: To
which the Plaintiff Replied, That such a Day, Year and Place he did Present,
etc. To which the Defendant did Rejoyn, That at the same day the Church was
Litigious, sans ceo, que il Refusa apres cel Iour: To which the Plaintiff
alleged a Tender after, and a Refusal; and by the Whole Court holden a
Departure; quod nota.

So that, by these later Books, it appears (if the same be Law) that the Day in
most Cases, may be made Material upon the Defendant's Plea and Traverse; which
in some Cases shall be only to the Time before: As namely, when the Defendant
pleading a Feoffment, and the like, which being intended to continue, proves
that he cannot be Guilty after: And sometimes the Time after, as when in
Trespass he pleads a Lease determined, made in another Kings Reign: Or else
the Time before and after, as appears in Brook, in the Title of Traverse.

But where his Plea enableth him but to one Special Time, and Justifies at
another Day within his Special Time; as, De son Assault demesne, or a License
for a Time, or a Special Maintenance, or for Common for a Time, or the like:
There the Defendant is to Traverse the Time before and after, for the most
part, as appears in the said Title of Traverse, 5 Ed. 4. 5. 10 Ed. 4. 2. 20 H.
6. 5, and 23. 31 H. 6. 37. and other Books there.

But, as 2 Ed. 4. 24, and 25. If the Defendant Justify for a Time in a former
King's Reign, then he shall Traverse the Time after only; because upon that
Writ he cannot be Guilty before.

And 27 Ass. 12. He that Justifies in Maintenance, as one of the Indictors,
needs not Traverse the Time before, or after; and He that Justifies as a
Commissioner, the Time before.

Then shall be shown, Place and County, where Traversable.
Where the Place and County are, by the Defendant in his Answer, to be
Traversed.

For which see partly before, in the Title of General Issue, That in Trespass
Local, if the Defendant Justify in another Place in the same County, he may
choose so to do, and Traverse the Place, or plead the General Issue at his
Pleasure; but if, in that Case, his Justification be in another County, (by the
better Opinion) he shall be forced to the General Issue; (and so seems 9 H. 6.
62. in this Title of Traverse) and the Jury bound to find the same, upon Pain
of Attaint.

It appears also, in the same Title, that although the Matter in the
Declaration be Transitory; yet if the Defendant's Justification goes only to
another County, or other Place, there the County or Place is Traversable, and
he cannot plead the General Issue.

For which see 27 H. 6. 1. 43 Ed. 3. 29. 7 H. 6. 35. 9 H. 6. 50, and 71. 21 H.
6. 8, and 9. and diverse other Books in the same Title of Traverse, in Brook;
where it appears, That if the Special Justification be in any other County, the
County is Traversed; otherwise the Place, if the Justification be in the said
County.

And by many of these Books it appears, That if the Defendant does Justify, by
reason of a Special Bailment in another County, or of the Plaintiff's own
Assent, he is to Traverse the County; but if he Justify for the like Matter in
the said County, he is to take no Traverse; quod nota.

And so is 21 Ed. 4. 29. by all the Court, That if the Defendant in Debt upon a
Contract of a Horse, allege the same to be in another County, upon Condition,
and Traverse the former County; tamen quaere, because in that Action and
Detinue the Defendant may Wage his Law.

And 22 Ed. 4. 39. the Defendant in Trespass for Taking away his Goods, did
Justify by Commandment Conditional, viz. to Take them only in another County,
and Traversed the County where the Plaintiff laid his Action, and good

And so is 34 H. 8. Bro. Traverse 36. 8. In an Action of Disceit, for Making of
False Clothes in Bartholomew-Fair, contra formam Statut'; the Defendant said,
That he made them bien and duement at D. in another County, and Traversed the
Making of them in Bartholomew-Fair; and good.

And always, in a Replevin, the Place of the Taking is Traversable; for which
see 16 H. 7. 7. where the Plaintiff declared of a Taking in A. in the County of
Oxon, in a Place called P. and the Defendant said, That the Taking was in P. in
the Town of O. sans ceo que il prist in A. and holden, That the Defendant at
his pleasure may either Traverse the Town or the Place; quod nota.

Next shall be shown, Where the Plea is good without Traverse.
Where the Plea is good without Traverse, and where the Traverse does make the
Plea ill.

And therefore, first, see 28 H. 8. Dyer 29. where the Defendant in Debt upon a
Contract showed, That the Contract was Conditional, without Traverse, and good,
and the Traverse was on the other part.

And Ibid. eodem Anno 33. one did declare upon a Lease of 24 Acres; and the
Defendant pleaded, That he Let the same, and 4 Acres more, and good; and ought
to take no Traverse, because Confessed, and more.

Yet 35 H. 6. 38. and 32 H. 6. 3. Bro. Tit. Traverse, seem to the contrary, and
their Pleas to the Count.

And 3 Eliz. Dyer 202. in Account by Edward Clear, Administrator of Sir John
Clear, against Barty and the Duchess of Suffolk his Wife, who pleaded, that
Sir John Clear made Walter Herend his Executor without Traverse, and Demurred
to in Law.

See Mich. 10, and 11 Eliz. 280. in a Replevin between Wootton and Sir Anthony
Cook, in Dyer; where Cook did Avow, as in his Freehold: To which Wootton did
Reply, That the Land did descend to him and Cook in Coparcenary, without
Traverse.

But it is there said, That if one Avow, that A. was seized in Fee, and granted
to him a Rentcharge; and the Plaintiff Replies, That A. was seized in Tail at
the time of the Grant, and died, he ought to Traverse, Absque hoc quod fuit
seisitus in feodo.

And see the Case of Vernon, Mich. 21 and 22 Eliz. Dyer 366. Ruled, according
to a like Precedent 12 H. 8. Rotulo 639. That where Vernon in his Avowry did
Claim by descent, as Heir to the Lord Powis; Gray in his Replication to that
Avowry did show, That the Lord Powis did Will it to him, Absque hoc quod terr'
discend'. The like, as it seems, if Gray had Conveyed as Heir in a nearer
Degree.

And so is 19 H. 8. 60. there Vouched. But otherwise, as it seems, if he had
Claimed by Survivorship, or in Coparcenary.

And 11 H. 7. 9. the Defendant in Trespass, as Servant to another, Justified
the putting in his Master's Cattle: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That he put
in his own Cattle, and good, without Traverse on his part; for it may be he put
in his own and his Masters also.

And see 22 Ed. 4. 39. that the Writ and the Count is but a Supposal; and
therefore, the Defendant pleading a Matter in Fait, shall take no Traverse, but
the same shall first begin on the Plaintiff's part: As if the Defendant does
plead, Iointenancy; or the Defendant in Dower does plead, That the Husband of
the Plaintiff had nothing but in Jointenancy with B. Or where Bastardy is
pleaded, or the like.

And so is 2 Ed. 4. 28, and 29. where in Ravishment de Guard the Defendant did
allege Iointenancy in the Ancestor, and others. And so where one does plead
the like, either in Abatement of the Writ, or Avowry.

See 21 Ed. 4. 36. the Defendant in Debt did plead, That the Plaintiff was Born
in Scotland, Iudicium de Brevi; and the Plaintiff Replied, That he was Born in
England, without Traverse, and that for the Mischief of the Trial.

As is 6 H. 7. 5. where said also, That if one plead a Feoffment, the other may
say, That it was upon Condition, without Traverse.

Vide cel Liver, and see 5 H. 7. 11, and 12. where it does stand upon a Matter
in Law; as against a Priest, to allege Unity of Possession, and the like;
there no Traverse.

And see 7 Ass. 10. a Plaint in an Assize of 4 Acres of Meadow; the Defendant
did demand Judgment of the Plaint, because it was Pasture; quod nota.

And see 14 H. 6. 17. in Ravishment de Guard of which side the Traverse shall
be, and where any Confessing or Avoiding is, there no Traverse.

And so Note, in what Cases there shall not be any Traverse; as namely, where
the Defendant does but plead in Abatement of the Writ, Count, or Avowry; (or
does (as before in most Cases) plead in Bar, because the Writ and Count is but
a Supposal) where one in his Plea does Answer the other, and more; or for the
Mischief of the Trial; or because of a Matter in Law, etc.

Next is to be known, Where the Dying seized, or Descent, Traversable.
Where the Dying seized, or the Descent, is Traversable.

For which see the said Book 19 H. 8. mentioned in the last Division, where it
is said, That the dying seized, and not the descent, is Traversable.

And as that Book, so seems Brook in Traverse 6. and yet in the last Division
in Vernon's Case, and others, the descent Traversable.

And 22 H. 7. 31. the Defendant in Trespass made Title by Descent, and the
Plaintiff in his Replication, by the same Person, did so too, with a Traverse,
Absque hoc quod Tenementa discend' al Defendant.

Then, Where the Dying seized, or Abatement, Traversable.
When the Dying seized, or the Abatement, shall be Traversed.

By 18 Ed. 4. 1. 26. the Defendant in Trespass did plead, That A. was seized,
and did Enfeoff him: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That long time before A.
was seized, his Father was seized, and died seized; after whose death A. did
Abate, and Enfeoffed the Defendant, and the Plaintiff Entered, etc. And by all
the Court the Defendant may maintain his Bar, and Traverse the Dying seized, or
the Abatement, at his pleasure; because it is the Plaintiff's Title, and if any
part of his Title be false, the other shall have the advantage thereof.

The like 5 Ed. 4. 137. in a Writ of Entry, in the Nature of Assize.

See 5 Ed. 4. 85. in the like Case of an Intrusion, where it seems the Special
Matter of the Title, and not of the Intrusion, is Traversable.

And so seems to be 3 H. 7. 7. in the former Case of the Abatement, because the
descent not answered, which does Entitle the Plaintiff, where his Ancestor died
seized of such an Estate as does Toll an Entry.

And 39 H. 6. 26, and 27. an Abatement is Material and Traversable, where he
that alleges the same, makes Title by him that died seized; otherwise not.

And 38 H. 6. 22. in the like Case as before, in a Writ of Entry the Defendant
did Traverse the Abatement, and not the Gift in Tail.

Then is to be observed, Where Dying seized, Conveyance, or Disseisin,
Traversable.
Where the Dying seized, the Conveyance, or the Disseisin alleged, shall be
Traversable.

For which see, first, Andrews his Case, Mich. 21 and 22 Eliz. Dyer 365. the
Plaintiff in an Ejectione firmae did declare upon a Lease, made by my Lord
Cromwell, against which, the Defendant being Andrews his Farmer, did plead,
Quod diu antequam le Plaintiff, ou son Lessee, aliquid habuit in Praemissis,
one John Blount was ^eised, who Enfeoffed Andrews his Father, who died seized;
and that Andrews let it to the Defendant, upon whom Blount Re-entred, and did
him oust, and Disseised Andrews, and did Enfeoff my Lord Cromwell: To which,
the Plaintiff taking the Parts of the Defendant's Plea by Protestation, did
maintain Blount's Feoffment to my Lord Cromwell, Absque hoc that Blount
Disseised Andrews. And it was long Debated, Whether in this Case he ought to
Answer the Descent, or the Feoffment to Andrews; and the rather, because both
the Plaintiff and Defendant Claim by one Person.

And Lastly, notwithstanding the Books of 21 H. 6. 12. and 30 H. 6. 2. and 5
Ed. 4. and 4 and 5 H. 7. which Cases were in Trespass and Assize, for that this
Case was in Ejectione firmae, which contained Title in the Declaration, which
Title ought to be answered by the Defendant, and no Bar with a Color good; and
for that the Disseisin is also a Substantial part of the Bar, it was holden, to
be in the Plaintiff's Election, either to Traverse the same, or the Descent, or
Feoffment, at his pleasure.

And according to the same was Vouched 5 Ed. 4. 5. in a Formedon, and 9 H. 6.
where taken for a Rule, Rule.
That a Disseism alleged either in Bar, or Replication, is always Traversable.

And 15 Ed. 4. 22. takes difference, where the Disseisin is alleged in Fait,
and where only by way of Supposal; as in a Declaration, in a Writ of Entry, and
the like.

And 5 Ed. 4. and 4. in this Title in Bro. 218. the Disseisin Traversable.

And 30 H. 6. 7. Bro. in this Title 360. is, That in Trespass, the Disseisin,
and not the Descent is Traversable; but otherwise in an Assize.

And diverse other Cases there be hereof, but the Case of my Lord Dyer may now
serve.

Then we shall show, Where Seisin in Fee alleged, shall be Traversed.
Where the Seisin alleged in Fee, is to be Traversed.

Touching which Point there be many Cases in our Books, the first whereof we
shall Cite, is 26 H. 8. 4. where the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit declared,
That he was seized in Fee, and did Present: To which the Defendant did plead,
That he himself was seized, and granted proximam Advocationem to A. and the
Plaintiff by the Grant of A. did Present, and took no Traverse, intending the
Plaintiff's Declaration to be sufficiently Confessed and Avoided: Where the
Reporter makes a Mirum, Mirum.
because he did not Traverse the Seisin in Fee of the Plaintiff.

See the like 11 Ed. 4. 11. because Confessed and Avoided.

And see 33 H. 6. 49. where the Defendant in an Assize did plead, That his
Father was Seized in Fee, and by Protestation died seized, etc. that the
Plaintiff may make Title by a Stranger, Absque hoc quod Pater le Plaintiff
aliquod habuit in Praemissis.

In the Abridgment of which Case it is said, That by the Book 8 H. 8. he may
say, Absque hoc quod Pater Querentis fuit Seisitus in Feodo.

And 5 Ed. 4. 1. the Defendant in Trespass of Goods did plead, That the
Property was in him, and he Bailed them to A. to keep, who gave them to the
Plaintiff, and he, etc. To which the Plaintiff Replied, That he was possessed,
etc. Absque hoc, that the Property was in the Defendant, prout, etc. And so,
where the Defendant pleaded, That A. is seized in Fee, etc. the Plaintiff may
say, That B. Let it to him at Will, etc. Absque hoc, that A. was seized in Fee;
or, Absque hoc, que Riens avoit forsque al volunt; quod nota.

And see accordingly 18 Ed. 4. 3. 21 Ed. 4. 17, and 83. and 4 Ed. 2. Bro. in
the Title of Traverse 372. which Book is, That the Defendant alleged one A. to
be seized in Fee, etc. and the Plaintiff Traversed the same; but not, Absque
hoc, que Riens avoit, quod nota.

And such a Traverse, Traverse holde^ a Ieofail.
1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 112, holden a Ieofail.

But 22 Ed. 4. 38. if the Defendant say, His Father was seized in Fee; and the
Plaintiff Replies. That A. did Let it to his Father, who held over his Term, He
shall take no such Traverse, because of the Doubtfulness.

And upon this manner of Pleading is a Notable Case in Dyer 365. Anno 21 Eliz.
where in Replevin the Defendant, as Baily to Sir Francis Leak, made Conusance
for Damage fesant, as in the Freehold of the said Leak: To which the Plaintiff
Replied, That he was seized of Butt-Close, contigue adjacen' in Dominico suo ut
de Feodo; against which Sir Francis Leak ought to Enclose, etc. To which the
Defendant Rejoined, That Butt-Close was the Freehold of I. S. Absque hoc, quod
le Plaintiff fuit seisit' in Dominico suo ut de Feodo; where holden, that the
Traverse was good, and if the Plaintiff be Mistaken in his Estate, it shall be
found against him; where holden also, That it was his Folly to allege such a
Precise Estate in himself, whereof the other, by this Issue, shall have
advantage; and that it had been sufficient for him to allege, That he was
seized of Butt-Close, without showing how; and then the Defendant had been
enforced to have Traversed, Absque hoc, quod Querens aliquid habuit: And so if
the Plaintiff had had but an Estate at Will, or a License of the Owner, hac
vice, it had been sufficient; quod nota.

Then, Of the Traverse, Aliquo alio modo.
as to the Traverse, Aliquo alio modo.

If, according to 22 H. 6. 35. and other Books, the Defendant does Justify by
an Especial Maintenance, he must Traverse, Absque hoc, que il maintain in
aliquo alio modo; but otherwise, if his Cause of Justification prove no
Maintenance.

And so 5 Ed. 4. 119. in a Petition, where the Petitioner gave to the King a
Special Possession, Sans ceo, que il avoit unque possession de ascun auter
Corody, nisi in forma praedicta.

And so 4 Ed. 4. 13. the Defendant in Trespass, upon the Statute of 5 R. 2.
Justified, That a Distress being Awarded against the Plaintiff, out of the
Court of A. he desired the Bailiff, to Aid him to Distrain, Quae est eadem
Intraco', etc. and ill, because he claimed nothing in the Soil; but when he
added further the Traverse, Absque hoc, quod ipse Intravit in aliquo alio modo,
then good, for doubt of the La^gents: And by Others, he sall say, Absque hoc,
quod ipse Intravit, (sicome le Brief suppose) prout per Breve supponitur: And
by Others, in this Case he ought to plead the General Issue.

And 13 H. 6. 13. in Debt against an Executor, the Defendant pleaded, that the
Party died Intestate, and that the Ordinary committed the Administration to A.
and the Defendant, as Servant to A. sold the Goods, Absque hoc, quod ipse
Administravit in aliquo al^o mod^.

But this manner of Pleading seems to be, for the Avoiding the danger of the
General Issue; for which see more in that Special Title.

Then, Which of the Conveyances to be Traversed.
Which of the Conveyances alleged, is to be Traversed.

And therefore see first, 27 H. 8. 2 and 3. where said, That if the Defendant
in Trespass do plead, That the Plaintiff Let it to A. who granted his Estate to
the Defendant; the Plaintiff shall not Traverse the Grant to the Defendant, but
his own Lease.

And so is 15 H. 7. 2. and 3. In an Action of Trespass brought by the Prior of
Tower Hill, because the Plaintiff's own Lease; where it was also Agreed, That
the most Material Matter, alleged by the Defendant, is always Traversable; as
a Recovery, or Descent, and the like; and not any the mean Conveyances, because
he is in Possession, against which the Plaintiff ought to make a sufficient
Title.

But by Fineux and Keble, Nota.
Where by way of Replication many Conveyances are pleaded, the Defendant may
Traverse which of them it pleases him.

But as the said Year of H. 7. fo. 11. If the Defendant in Trespass Convey a
Title by Mean Estates from a Stranger, and not from the Plaintiff, and give
Color; the Plaintiff may Traverse which of them he will.

And so is 16 H. 6. Bro. Traverse 346. because a Bar at large.

But if he say, That A. did Enfeoff him, by force whereof he was seized, until
by the Plaintiff disseised, and he did Re-enter, etc. (which Plea, as it seems,
is good without Color) the Plaintiff ought, in that Case, to Traverse the
Disseisin.

But if, as in that last Case, the Defendant had Conveyed, as by a Gift in
Tail, the Plaintiff there may Traverse the Gift in Tail; quod nota.

And see 4 Ed. 6. Nota.
Bro. Traverse 154. The Plaintiff in Assize against a General Bar, did make
Title by Feoffment and Descent, which did Remit him; Remitter.
where holden, That the Defendant cannot Traverse the Feoffment, but the
Descent, which is the Material Matter of the Title.

And 35 H. 6. 59. in Trespass by a Bishop against a Prior, who said, That his
Predecessor was seized, and died, and then himself Elected, and gave Color: To
which the Plaintiff Replied, That he was seized, until by A. disseised, upon
whom the Predecessor of the Defendant did Enter, etc. There the Defendant is to
Traverse the Dissesin by A. Nota.
as most Material.

But as it appears by the same Book 27 H. 8. first cited in this Division, That
although the Defendant Convey by Mean Degrees from the Plaintiff himself; yet
if he plead false in any Point, the Plaintiff by like Pleading may Traverse him.

As, in the said Case of 27 H. 8. he may say, That after his Lessee did
surrender to him, Absque hoc, that he did assign his Estate to the Defendant,
modo and forma, etc.

And 43 Ed. 3. 7. the King in a Quare Impedit made Title by an Heir in his
Ward, Conveying the Descent to him by Mean Degrees of Cosinage, the Defendant
shall not say, Null tiel in Reie nature (nulla talis persona in Rerum natura) as
in the Mean Conveyance of Kindred; quod nota.

But in a Mortdancestor, or other Action Ancestrel, as is 9 Ed. 4. 6. the Mean
Conveyance of Kindred is Traversable: But there said, to be otherwise in any
other Action, by the Books, in all Cases of Challenge.

In the next place, Commandment, where Traversable.
it will be requisite to know, Where the Commandment is Traversable.

For which see 37 H. 6, 7. where the Defendant in Trespass did plead, That the
Freehold was to I. S. and that he by his Commandment did the Trespass; and the
Plaintiff made Title by a Lease from a Stranger, Absque hoc, que le Defendant
Enter per Commandment J. S. and good, per Cur.

And see 14. H. 6. and diverse other Books there Vouched in Bro. Traverse 325.
That if the Defendant in Trespass do Justify by the Commandment of the Owner,
the Commandment is Traversable; quaere tamen.

But in all Cases where the other Conveys from the same Person, the Commandment
is Traversable.

The like, Qui Estate, where Traversable.
as it seems, of Qui Estate, if both Parties Claim from one Person, as 11 H. 4.
81. 19 H. 6. 56, and 57. 10 Ed. 4. 6. 18 Ed. 4. 10. and 6 Ed. 4. 12. in the
Title of Traverse in Brook.

But see more hereof in the Title Qui Estate, where the same is Traversed,
although they do not Convey by one Person.

And in some Cases there are several Traverses to be taken in one Plea; Several
Traverses to be taken in one Plea.
as, by Experience, the Defendant in an Information, that pleads a Special
Plea, or is to Traverse an Office, ought to Confess and Avoid, or Traverse
every of the Kings Titles alleged.

And see 12 Ed. 4. 14, and 19. That the Defendant in Trespass did plead a Gift
in Tail to his Father, and gave Color; and the Plaintiff made Title by a
Common Recovery: To which the Defendant did Rejoyn, That his Father, before the
Recovery made a Feoffment, and took an Estate back again, and then after the
Recovery, and before Execution, died; Sans ceo, que le Recoveror entra en vie
son Pier; Three Traverses to one Replication.
Et sans ceo, que son Pier avoit auter Estate tempore brevis; Et sans ceo, que
le Recoveror fuit seisie prout in Replicatione specifica^': Et issint le
Recovery feint, etc. and admitted.

And 22 H. 6. 16. Two Traverses to one Plea.
One Utlaw'd by the Name of I. S. of D. Butcher, came in upon the Capias
Utlagatum, and said, That he was Demurrant at S. and not at D. and was a
Husbandman, and not a Butcher; and so two Traverses taken.

In some Cases there shall be Traverse upon Traverse: Where a Traverse may be
upon a Traverse.


As 9 H. 6. 1, and 2. and other Books, where in a Praecipe against Two, one
pleaded Non-tenure, and the other Iointenancy with a Stranger, and Traversed,
Sans ceo, que le auter Riens avoit; and the Plaintiff Replied, That the
Defendants are Tenants, as the Writ supposes, and Traverseth Absque hoc, que
le Stranger Riens avoit.

And see 18 Ed. 4. 10. Where the Defendant may Traverse without making Title.
That if the Defendant in Trespass make Title by a Feoffment or Gift in Tail,
and give Color to the Plaintiff, the Plaintiff without making any Title, may
Traverse the Feoffment or Gift, per totam Curiam praeter Brian; but contrary in
Assize.

Yet by Brook, or the Reporter, the Law seems with Brian; and for that the
Defendant is in possession (it seems) the Plaintiff shall be forced to make
Title against him, as well in Trespass as in Assize; quod nota.

Next, of the Plea of Tout temps prist, Tout Temps prist, what.
or Semper paratus; which is a Plea by way of Excuse, or Defense, for him that
is Sued for any Debt or Duty belonging to the Plaintiff.

As in Debt upon an Obligation, with Condition for the Payment of a lesser Sum
to the Obligee; although the Place be named in the Obligation, yet the Obligor,
by 7 Edw. 4. 3. is bound to plead, Tout temps prist, and Tender les deniers in
Court; yea, although the Obligee (as it was pleaded there) Refused the same,
because part of the Sum contained in the Bond.

Otherwise, if the Condition be to Perform an Arbitrament, etc. as is 16 H. 7.
7. etc.

And yet 7 H. 6. 18. the Obligor is not bound to Tender at another Place than
where mentioned in the Obligation, no more than the Tenant, who Tendered his
Rent upon the Land at the time of the Distress.

And if a Defeasance to an Obligation be for the Payment of a Lesser Sum, the
Obligor, according to 33 H. 6. 3. need not to plead, Uncore prist.

And 21 Ed. 4. 42, and 52. If an Obligation be with Condition for the payment
of a Lesser Sum, and the Obligor Tender, and the other Refuse, he shall not
plead, Uncore prist.

But 21 H. 6. and other Books against the same, and so is Experience at this
day.

And 21 Ed. 4. 25. the Obligor did in this Case of Payment of a Lesser Sum,
plead Uncore prist, where its said, That if the Obligee take Issue upon the
Tender, and found against him, he has lost the Advantage of the Obligation for
ever.

And according to this Learning is 20 Ed. 4. 1. and other Books.

But if the Condition be to make a Feoffment, or to perform an Arbitrament, or
to pay Money to a Stranger, he shall not plead Uncore prist.

The like 16 H. 7. 7. 11 H. 6. 27. and 22 H. 6. 39. of an Abitrement.

The like 19 H. 8. 12. 27 H. 8. 1. and 14 H. 6. 23. where to do any Collateral
Act, although to perform Covenants, and one of the Covenants be, to pay his
Rent; as the same Book 27 H. 8. is.

Then is to be known, Where Tender shall be made in Court, and where not.
Where the Tender shall be made in Court, and where not.

Vide 7 H. 4. Bro. Tit. Arbitrament 12. where the Defendant in Trespass pleaded
an Arbitrament in Bar, to give a Piece of Cloth, and had the same in Court.

The like 8 H. 6. 25. of Money to be paid.

And yet 21 Ed. 4. 8. in Dower, the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff
detained a Hamper of Evidences: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That she was
always ready to deliver the Hamper of Evidences; by Reason whereof she had
Judgment Maintenant, and yet she had not the Hamper in Court.

And 24 Ed. 3. 31. if the Defendant in a Writ of Ward Claim nothing, but
because of Nurture, he ought to have the Infant in Court.

And so is 24 Ed. 3. although the Infant be Sick.

And yet Fitz. 8 Ed. 3. he found Mainprize to have the Infant in Court.

And 6 Ed. 4. 11. the Defendant in Detinue of Corn did plead. Tout Temps and
uncore est, without having the Corn in Court; and the Plaintiff Replied, That
(such a Day) he Required the same, and the other Refused to pay; and Issue
thereupon.

Then, Uncore prist, in what other Case to be pleaded.
In what other Case a man shall plead, Uncore prist.

As 14. H. 7. 32. and 15 H. 7. 1. in a Writ of Annuity, which was granted until
the Plaintiff was Promoted to a Benefice: If the Defendant do plead a Tender
hanging the Writ, he ought not to Tender the Arrerages also, because the
Plaintiff shall have Debt for the same.

And 33 H. 6. 26. the Garnishee in Detinue did plead, That the Goods were
delivered to the Defendant upon this Condition, That if the Garnishee did
perform the Arbitrament of I. S. then he should have them; and that I. S. did
Arbitrate, he should pay to the Plaintiff Forty shillings, which he did Tender,
and need not plead, Uncore prist; for that the Money was not in demand in that
Action.

And upon that Reason is 7 H. 4. 3. That if the Defendant in Trespass of Goods
make a sufficient Justification, although he Confess a Detainer, yet he need
not plead, Uncore prist.

And by the Book of 1 R. 3. 1. in Debt upon a Single Bill, or Obligation, by
the way, the Defendant may plead, That he was, and yet is ready to pay, if the
Plaintiff would have delivered him an Acquittance: by which it should seem,
that the Plaintiff in that Case ought to Offer an Acquittance, as he is to
demand Rent that is payable on the Ground; quaere inde.

In which said Case, and 21 Ed. 3. which are abridged by Fitzherbert, in his
Title of Verdict 13. If the Defendant Tender Parcel, the Payments being
several; as Rents at several Feasts, and the like: There, if the Defendant,
upon the Demand of the Plaintiff, or otherwise, where he is bound to Tender,
without demand, do Offer Parcel, the Plaintiff is bound to Receive the same,
and the Defendant may plead it, as it seems, to the Whole.

The like in Detinue of several Parcels; (but otherwise of an Entire Sum, or
Parcel) where in the said Book of 1 R. 3. its said, That if the Plaintiff in
Detinue of several Parcels, lay an Entire Value, as he may, then if the
Defendant can plead, Tout temps prist, of any Parcel (or, according to some,
do, before Verdict, Offer any Parcel in Court) the Plaintiff is at a Mischief,
touching his Recovery of the Value of the rest, because he has not laid
several Values: But if in that Case there be a Verdict, then is the Sum of the
Value made a thing Entire, whereof the Plaintiff is not bound to Receive part
without the whole

But of this Plea of Tout temps prist, Estoppel, or Counterplea.
the Defendant may be Concluded.

As if he Imparl, by the Book of 5 Ed. 4. 141. which was in Dower.

Otherwise, if in Debt he came in upon the Distress, as is 7 H. 4. 9. because
it may be he was Nient Summon' by the Sheriff.

Otherwise in Annuity, 2 H. 4. 3. and 14 H. 6. 3, and 4. after an Essoin in
Dower, because it may be laid by an Estranger, the Defendant shall plead, Tout
temps prist.

And so is 7 H. 6 7, and 17.

And by 2 H. 4. 7. if the Tenant in Dower came in the first day, and pleaded
Tout temps prist; the Demandant cannot Reply, That before she demanded Dower in
the Country, because the Writ affirms the Tenant's Title; quod nota.

Then is to be Considered, Of the Plea, De son Tort demesne.
the Plea of De son Tort demesne, That upon many Iustifications, the Plaintiff
is to Answer to the Matter of the Defendant's Plea especially, and not to
Traverse generally, De son Tort demesne sans tiel Cause.

As 16 H. 7. 3. where the Defendant in Trespass does Justify, as by
Commandment, License, or Delivery of the Plaintiff.

And so is also 12 Ed. 4. 11, and 20 Ed. 4. 4. And so is 9 Ed. 4. 4.

The like by Brian and Townsend, 2 H. 7. 3. where the Defendant in False
Imprisonment does Justify by Reason of a Robbery, and that the Common Voice and
Fame went upon the Plaintiff.

The like, as it seems by the same Book, 20 Ed. 4. where the Defendant does
Justify by reason of a Matter in Law, and to see if Wast were done; or, To
Enter a Tavern to Drink.

And by 33 H. 6. 41. and 14 H. 4. 31. the Defendant in Trespass did Justify,
for that the Ancestor of the Plaintiff held of his Master by Knights Service,
and that by the Commandment of his Master he seized the Plaintiff; here the
Plaintiff is to Traverse the Commandment.

And so is also 14 H. 4. 32. in the Case of an Apprentice.

And so 44. Ed. 3. 18. where the Plaintiff pleaded a Grant.

And 38 Ed. 3. 3. the Defendant in a Replevin did Justify by reason of an
Execution upon a Recovery in a Court Baron, and De son Tort demesne General, no
Plea.

And so is 33 H. 6. 29. if the Defendant do Justify by the Kings Patent,
because a Matter of Record.

The like 10 H. 6. 3. where the Defendant in Trespass did Justify, to make
Replevin by a Warrant of the Sheriff; or came in Aid of the Servant that had a
Warrant to Arrest the Plaintiff, as is 2 H. 4. 6.

The like 2 H. 5. 1. where the Defendant in a Replevin does make Conusance, as
Bailiff to A.

And so 28 Ed. 3. 98. if the Defendant do Justify the Taking of Goods by the
Commandment of A, to whom the Plaintiff is Villain.

And so 16 Ed. 4. 4. where the Defendant in Trespass does Justify for Disms,
Tithes.
severed from the Nine parts.

And 28 H. 6. 9. the Defendant did Justify in Trespass by reason of a Way, and
the Plaintiff Replied De son Tort demesne, Absque hoc, que le Defendant and ses
Ancestors ount use d'aver tiel Chymin, etc.

Notwithstanding see this Title in Brook, in many of these Cases, the Issue of
De son Tort demesne sans tiel Cause, sufficient; and especially where the
Defendant does himself make no Title, but as Servant, or does come in Aid of
the Sheriff, or the like; and in all Cases d'Assault le Plaintiff; or, where
the Sheriff makes a Warrant to his Servant; or, for Suspicion of Felony, or
the like.

And as 5 H. 7. 9. where the Defendant does Justify by Custom of Faldage.

Or 9 Ed. 4. 22. where the Defendant in Trespass Justified for Wreck; and in
many other Cases where the Defendant does Justify by Matter in Fait, the same
General Replicati^^, De son Tort demesne, has been admitted.

Next, Qu^ Estate, what.
of the Plea of Que Estate, which signifies verbatim, Which Estate, or the Same
Estate; and is a Plea, whereby a man Entitling another to Land, etc. says,
That the Same Estate himself had, he had from him.

As in a Quare Impedit the Plaintiff alleges, That such Four Persons were
seized of Lands, whereunto the Advowson in question was appendant, in Fee, and
Presented to the Church; and that afterward the Church became void, Que Estate
--, that is, Which Estate of the said Four Persons he has now during the
Vacation, by virtue whereof he Presented, etc. Vide Bro. 175. Tit. Que Estate,
and Co. 1 Inst. 121.

And see also 2 H. 6. 10. where holden, That the Plaintiff in his Declaration,
or Title, shall not Convey to himself by a Que Estate.

Otherwise in a Replevin after Avowry; for after Avowry, the Defendant is
become Actor.

And so is 3 H. 6. 28. and accordingly are diverse Books in Brook, in this Title
Que Estate.

And Mich. 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 172.

And yet, as appears in the same Title, 2 H. 4. 13. and other Cases there, that
where the Defendant by his Bar does admit the Plaintiff Tenant to the Land,
there the Plaintiff in his Replication, Conveying to himself Title to the same,
may do it by a Que Estate.

And by the Book 3 H. 6. 11. 22 H. 6. 34. and diverse other Books in this Title
in Brook, The Avowant may in his Avowry Convey to the Plaintiff an Estate in
the Tenancy by a Que Estate, because he is a Stranger to his Title, which
seems Reason.

And it appears by the same Book in Dyer, fo. 172. That a Term cannot be
Conveyed in Pleading (be the Party Actor, or otherwise) by a Que Estate.

And to that Intent is 7 Ed. 3. Brook in this Title 31. be the same a Term, or
Estate for Life, or in Tail.

And yet there 38 Ass. 4. the Defendant in an Assize did Convey from T. by
Statute, by a Que Estate.

And see 5 H. 7. 39. 40 Ass. 28. 15 Ed. 4. 16. and 2 H. 4. 20. of Tenant in
Tail, especially if the Party be to aver his Life.

And see in this Title Bro. 12 Ed. 3. That the Tenant may Rebut by reason of a
Waranty by a Que Estate; but not be Vouched.

And see 22 H. 6. 13. and 26 Ass. 8. But 10 Ass. 5. to the contrary.

And see also the Books 11 H. 4. 81. 37 H. 6. 32. and 1 Ed. 6. in this Title 4.
That a Que Estate is not to be alleged in any of the Mean Conveyances, Showing
how.
but to the Tenant himself, without showing Coment, notwithstanding the same
has been suffered.

And it appears also, that in Pleading a Que Estate, the Party by whom such
Estate is Conveyed, must be showed in Pleading, to have a Good Estate; as by
Recovery, Feoffment, or Release, or the like; and not sufficient to say, That
A. was seized, whose Estate the Defendant has.

And so is 7 Ed. 4. 26. and 9 H. 7. 14.

Vide 21 Ed. 4. 21. That Tenant in Dower coming in by Law, Conveyed her Estate
by a Que Estate.

And so, 6 Ed. 4. 12. although he came to the Land by Disseisin.

And so seems 31 H. 8. Bro. 48. if he Recover the same; but against that is the
Book of 39 H. 6.

And it appears also, Chose in Grant,
That a Thing that lies in Grant, cannot be made Title to by Que Estate,
although by way of Bar.

And so 11 H. 4. 89. of an Hundred.

And so 24 Ed. 3. 22. and 31 Ass. and 12 H. 7. 16, and 18. of a Rent or Common;
except it be incident to some thing that may pass without Deed, unless he show
a Deed to maintain his Prescription.

And although in many Cases it be sufficient Title; Not Traversable, but in
particular Cases.
yet, as it seems 6 Ed. 4. 12. is never Traversable, but where both Parties
Claim by one Person.

And yet see 19 H. 6. 56. and 11 H. 4. 81. where the Que Estate Traversed,
although the Party that did take the Traverse, did not Claim by the same Person.

And see in that Title 6 Ed. 4. 12. and 18 Ed. 4. 29. That where the Defendant
does give to the Plaintiff Title by a Que Estate, there the same is Traversable
by the Plaintiff.

Next in Order, Double Plea, what.
we shall say something of Double Pleas.

A Double Plea is that, wherein the Defendant alleges for himself Two several
Matters in Bar of the Plaintiff's Action, whereof either is sufficient to
Effect his Desire, which shall not be admitted for a Plea.

As, if a man allege Several Matters, the one nothing depending upon the
other, the Plea is accounted Double, and not admittable; but if they be
mutually depending each upon the other, then it shall be accounted single.

And touching Double Pleas, see thereof the said Title in Brook's Abridgment;
as namely, where one Answer will make an End of all, as Ne dona pas, and the
like, there no Doubleness; or if the Defendant plead diverse Matters, and rely
upon One of them; or do show in his Pleading diverse Matters of Inducement, or
of Suspicion; or does allege Two Presentiments in a Quare Impedit, the one in
the Guardian or Particular Tenant, and the other in the Party himself.

And 40 Ed. 3. 11. diverse Matters alleged to oust the Conusance.

11 H. 6. 10. to prove a Maintenance, the Party may show diverse Matters.

And Ibid. 11. That Appendancy and Prescription is double.

But 13 H. 8. e contra.

And by diverse Books, a Lease and Release, double.

And where one binds himself in 10 l. in the Indenture, to perform diverse
Covenants, the Plaintiff can declare but upon the Breach of one, if he demand
the 10 l.

Otherwise, if he bring an Action upon the Covenants, as appears by 11 Ed. 4.
10.

And by 9 H. 7. 23. One pleads, that he was seized, until by the other
disseised; against whom he did Recover, and not Double, because the one is
Conveyance to the other.

And by 5 H. 7. 36. where one cannot come to the one Plea without the other,
there no Doubleness, as Seisin and Feoffment, and the like.

And 4 H. 7. 17. and 1 H. 7. 14.

And by 5 H. 7. 1. Non dederunt arbitrium in scriptis, Double.

And by 21 H. 7. 10. a Collateral Waranty and Assets, Double; and the like.

Whereof see more at large in this Title of Double Plea, in Brook and
Fitzherbert; and in Partridge and Strange's Case in Plowden's Com. and in that
Case in Dyer, That Barganizasset and Concessisset, not double, because words of
one signification.

And accordingly also 35 H. 6.

Then ought to be known, Diverse Pleas* and one goes to the Whole.
How one shall have Diverse Pleas, when one of them shall go to the Whole.

And therefore, first, see 1 Ed. 4. 29. In an Assize of the Office of Clerk of
the Crown, brought by two Persons, where the Defendant pleaded to one of the
Plaintiffs, That he was an Alien, and to the other Null tiel Office, because the
last went to the Whole; it was holden to be double.

And yet 37 H. 6. 30. the Defendant pleaded a Fine to the Whole, and did
Conclude to the Moiety, and so for the other Moiety, and good.

And eodem Anno 38. the Defendant did Justify to the Third Part for one Cause,
and to the other Two Parts by another Cause.

And Mich. 13 and 14 Eliz. Dyer 305. the Defendant in Trespass of Trees may
plead, as to the Cutting, Not Guilty; and as to the Taking, he may plead a Gift
of them.

And so 33 H. 6. 12. and 48 Ed. 3. 18. in Debt against an Executor, the
Defendant did Plead to part an Acquittance, and to the rest, plene
Administravit.

And so is 28 Ed. 3. 91.

See more hereof in this especial Title, Deux Pleas and un va al Tout, in
Brook, where this Difference is holden, That if one Person pleads diverse Pleas,
and the one of them goes to the whole Writ or Action, that only shall be
received.

And where several Pleas are pleaded by diverse Defendants, Which of the Pleas
shall be first Tried.
in any Personal Action, and one of them goes to the Whole, that Plea shall be
first Tried, and the rest of the Defendants shall have Advantage thereof.

Where also a difference is taken between this kind of Pleading and a Double
Plea; and touching this, any Person may show the same to the Court, as Amicus
Curiae; and the other, none but the Party.

And see the Book of 9 H. 6. in that Title 4. which takes this difference, That
if there be two Defendants in a Real Action, and they plead severally to the
Action, and One of their Pleas goes to the whole, as Bastardy, and the like,
the other shall have no Advantage: But otherwise, if one of them does Plead to
the Writ, the same shall be first Tried, and the other shall have advantage of
it.

The like in Personal Actions to the Action.

But if there be but one Defendant either in Real or Personal Actions, and he
pleads several Pleas to the Writ or Action, and one of them goes to the Whole,
that which goth to the whole shall only be taken.

And accordingly seems 37 H. 6. 37.

Then shall be showed, Monstrans de Faits, ou Records.
Where the Plea is ill, without showing of the Deed, or Record.

First, It appears 20 H. 7. 6. That he which is a Stranger to the Patent and
Deed, and claims nothing by the same, or by him that has Right, shall not
show the same: And some question 1 H. 7. 24. if the Termor of a Common shall.

And 29 Ass. 21. seems, That he that deriveth but a Particular Estate shall
not. But 14 H. 4. he that deriveth any Interest, be it Particular, or
otherwise, by Commandment shall show.

And 21 Ed. 4. 50. a Servant that Justifies a Distress for his Master, shall
show the Deed; but otherwise of an Incumbent that pleads a Grant of Prochein
Avoidance to his Patron, because he claims only the Incumbency and not the
Patronage.

And 9 H. 7. 13. one brought a Quare Impedit, and Counted, that A. was seized,
and did Grant proximam Advocationem to B. and after did grant to C. who granted
the same to him; and the Question was, Whether he should show the Deed made to
B.?

And 42 Ass. 2. one shall plead a Will without showing, because it appertains
not to him.

And 22 Ass. 52. the Under-Escheator shall show the Patent. But 28 H. 8. Dyer
29. not.

And 39 Ed. 3. 37. the Grantee of Prochein Avoidance, was not enforced to show
a Composition, which declared to be his Grantor's Title, because he had not his
whole Estate.

But 22 H. 6. 42. the Servant shall; but otherwise of the Servant of a
Collector that Distrained for a Tax, because an Act of Parliament the Principal
Matter of his Title.

And 7 H. 6. 1. he that prays to be Received by reason of a Remainder; or a
Woman that demands Dower of Rent, shall not show the Deed, because it does
not belong to them.

And upon this Reason see the Books 38 Ed. 3. 37. 14 H. 4. 30. 11 H. 4. 83. and
diverse other Books, That where the Deed does appertain to him, there he shall
not be forced to show the same.

And so 35 H. 6. 31, and 32* where his Authority is determined, and the Patent
does appertain to another; as to another Officer, and the like.

And this Learning is approved of in Plowden, in the Case of Second
Deliverance, brought by Throgmorton against Tracy, where one pleaded a Lease by
a Corporation, to begin after another was determined; where holden, That the
first Lease need not be showed for Three Reasons:

First, Because it did not belong to him.

Secondly, Because that Estate was determined. And,

Thirdly, Because the Defendant's Estate was Executed.

And further, touching the Learning in this Point, see Dyer, first, 28 H. 8.
fol. 29. left doubtful, whether a Particular Grantee shall show the Main Grant.

And Ibid. 30 H. 8. 54. rather that he shall; and therefore learn what the Law
in that Case is.

And some Books take a difference, where one deriveth himself an Interest to
the Whole in Part of the thing, there he shall show; but if but to part of the
Estate, then not.

Next, Where the Estate is Executed.
Where the Estate is Executed, there need not the Deed, for the most part, to
be showed.

And first, 15 Ed. 4. 16. If one Convey to a Possession Executed in himself by
the Grantee of a Reversion and Attornment, there he need not show the Deed.
Otherwise to a Rent, or to Land in Remainder by Grant of a Corporation.

But the Issue in Tail of a Rent Executed shall have a Formedon in the
Discender.

And by 11 H. 4. 39. and 14 H. 4. 31. if a Remainder be once Executed, the
Issue in Tail may have a Formedon, as of a Gift in Possession.

But in a Formedon in Remainder, the Deed must be showed.

And so is 18 H. 8. 4. and 34 Ed. 3.

Yet 10 Eliz. Dyer 277. in a Formedon in Remainder, upon a Gift to Uses in
Tail, holden, that he need not show the Deed for two Causes: One, because the
Estate may be made without Deed; and the other, because it appertained to the
Feoffor.

And therefore 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 174. a Stranger to a Deed shall plead a Grant
without saying, that it was by Deed.

And by Dyer 28 H. 8. 29. Tenants in Common, making Partition to Present by
Turns, when it is once Executed, the Deed thereof need not after to be showed;
quod nota.

The like Law, Executors and Administrators.
as it seems of Executors and Administrators, touching the showing of the Will;
where the difference is, that being Defendant, or bringing an Action of his own
Possession, he shall not be compelled to show the Will, or Letters of
Administration.

And so is 21 H. 6. 23. 10 Ed. 4. 1. 16 Ed. 4. 1. and diverse other Books,
although the Plea be but to the Writ, as that he is Administrator.

But 42 Ed. 3. 4. 3 Ed. 3. 31. and 7 H. 6. 41. In Trespass de bonis asportat'
in vita Testatoris, he must show the Will.

And so is 6 E. 4. 1. and 16 Ed. 4. 8.

But by 19 H. 6. he need not show it in another Term.

And this difference of Plaintiff and Defendant is confirmed in Plowden's Com.
in Graysbrook and Fox's Case.

Next, Vouchee.
we shall show, How the Vouchee shall be forced to show a Deed.

And therefore, First, by 22 Ass. 88. he that Voucheth as Assignee, shall not
only show the first Deed, but the Deeds of Assignment also; and to that intent
is 3 H. 6. and other Books in this Title in Bro. 5.

But he may Rebut by the first Deed. Quaere tamen.

For 3 H. 7. 13 and 14. seems, that he need not show the Deeds of Assignment
upon Voucher.

And see 48 Ed. 3. 5. That the Tenant in Dower vouching the Heir of full Age,
yet ought to show a Deed; quod nota.

But yet see 50 Ed. 3. 25. That in the same Case, or in any other, as it seems,
he that does Vouch one, unless he do pray also that the Parol may demur for
Nonage, shall not need to show any Deed to the Demandant.

For which see more at large in Brook and Fitzherbert's Abridgments, in the
Title Voucher.

And 10 H. 7. 21. he that Voucheth as Assignee of the Reversion, to save the
Tail, shall show: But Keble e contra, and Vouched diverse Books.

And then, Action sur Record.
How an Action may be upon Record without showing.

It appears 9 Ed. 4. 5 H. 7. and 32 H. 6. in Brook, hoc Titulo 158 and 159. Be
the Action in the same Court, or another, the Party that brings the Action
shall not be enforced to show the same: But if the Record be in the same Court
unremoved by Error, or otherwise, the Defendant may demand Oyer of of the same,
and shall have it; but if otherwise, he is bound to take Conusance thereof, and
to plead Null tiel Record, and thereupon the Record it self shall be sent down
by Mittimus.

And so is 39 H. 6. 4. But by that Book it suffices if the Tenor of the Record
be Certified.

And 7 H. 6. 18. one brought Debt in the Common Pleas, upon Damages recovered
in Trespass at York, in a Court of Piepowder, containing the Tenor of the said
Record in his Count, and how it came into the Chancery, and thither by
Mittimus; and yet the Defendant did plead, Null tiel Record, quod nota.

But touching this Point further, How the Record shall be Certified, and where
the Tenor of the Record will serve, or not, see Dyer 8 Eliz. 250. 6 Eliz. 227.
3 Eliz. 187, 188. and otherwise there.

Then it appears, That although one have not the Deed, yet if it appear of
Record in the same Court, pleaded by another at that time, he shall have
advantage of it.

As 40 Ass. 34. In an Assize against two, the one having a Waranty to Bar the
Plaintiff, pleaded the same for his part; and although he would not suffer his
Companion to help himself by the same, yet the other took advantage thereof.

As by Littleton, in his Chapter of Estates upon Condition 90 and 91. If a Deed
be once pleaded, the other may show, That in the same there is a Condition, etc.

And 24 Ed. 3. 73. the Defendant pleaded a Release, which the Plaintiff did
deny, and after was Nonsuit: And in another Action brought in the same Court,
the Defendant did plead the same again, without showing as a Deed gainsaid,
remaining in the Court.

And by 21 Ed. 4. 48 and 49. If a man plead Letters Patents remaining of Record
in the said Court, he shall not show them; and so said to be the use of the
Exchequer.

And 1 Eliz. in Dyer 17. a Lease of a Bishop Enrolled in the Chancery, pleaded
without showing, and it seems ill by that Book.

CHAP. VI. Of Pleading in General.
THen touching Pleading in General, Null Seisin allege.
more than before has been discoursed of in the several Divisions. And,

First, Where one in Pleading shall show, how he was seized.

And therefore in some Cases, One may Convey to himself an Estate, without
showing how he that gave it was seized.

And by 34 H. 6. 48. in the Writ or Count may be said ( quod quidam J. S.
dimisit) That such an one Let, without showing that he was seized. Otherwise by
way of Bar or Title.

And so 9 H. 4. 5. 21 H. 7. 26. and 10 H. 6. in a Formedon, may say, Dedit.

And next, Where one shall say he was seized; In Dominico suo, etc. In Dominico
suo, etc.


For which see, first, Littleton, where the Thing lies in Demean, as Land, or
Rent, etc. Or where otherwise, as Advowsons.

And 30 H. 6. 7. one of a Way did say, In Dominico suo ut de feodo and de jure.

And 21 Ed. 4. 80. of a Copyhold, in Dominico suo, etc. secundum Consuetud'.

And see 7 H. 6. Dyer 83. of Tithes, one shall say in Dominico suo ut de feodo,
because palbable, etc.

And see in Wortley's Ejectione firmae, in Plowden, That of a Reversion
dependant upon an Estate for Years, In Dominico suo, is the proper Pleading;
but the Plea of De Feodo admitted.

Then next, Where in Pleading shall be said, In Iure Uxoris, etc. In Iure
Uxoris.


See, first, 27 H. 8. 21. where Lands are given to the Baron and Feme, and the
Heirs of the Body of the Feme, the Plea shall be, Quod fuerunt seisit' simul,
and haered' de Corpore le Feme.

And 12 H. 7. 14. the Defendant in Trespass did plead, That He and his Wife
were seized in their Demean, as of Fee; and said not In jure Uxoris, or
Conjunctim, and yet good; because, if he have Title to any part, it is not
material in what manner.

And so in Wortley's Case in Plowden, of a Term in Right of his Wife.

Next, Where two Persons are seized.
Where more, and one Interessed.

See 37 H. 6. 24. where Lands are given to Two, and the Heirs of One of them;
the Pleading shall be, Quod fuer' seisit', viz. the one, In Dominico suo ut de
feodo, and the other, In Dominico suo ut de lib'o Tenemento.

And then of the Plea, In Iure Coronae.
In Iure Coronae.

34 H. 6. 34. In a Quare Impedit, the Plaintiff made Title, for that King Henry
the Fourth was seized, etc. and did not say, In Iure Coronae, and good; for
there is said to be no other Form.

And see 7 Ed. 6. Dyer 83. accordingly, touching Religious Lands, where the
said Book of 34 H. 6. is Vouched, and showed to be the better Pleading.

And so is 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 103.

And touching the Pleading of In Iure Domus, In Iure Domus.
the said Book of 1 and 2 Mar. holds the same good, being alleged in a
Master and Brother, without showing, In jure Domus; because it cannot be
intended otherwise.

The like in Fulmerston's and Steward's Case, in Plowden: Otherwise of a Bishop.

And see a good Difference in Grindon's Quare Impedit, in Plowden, If a
Religious House be seized of a Parsonage Impropriate, and part of the same be
in Question, the Seisin must be alleged, ut in Iure Rectoriae: But if the
Advowson, or the whole Parsonage be in Debate, then the Seisin must be
alleged, ut in Iure Domus.

Then, Seisin alleged, without showing of what Estate.
Whether it be sufficient to allege a Seisin in any, without showing of what
Estate.

See, first, 24 Ed. 3. 75. where one pleaded, That his Father was seized, and
died seized, etc. and showed not of what Estate; and ill; because a Title made
thereby.

But otherwise in Dyer, 21 and 22 Eliz. 365. in Sir Francis Leak's Case, in a
Replevin, where the Question was about keeping the Enclosure; the Avowant did
say, That he was seized in his Demean, as of Fee, etc. which was Traversed;
where said, That he need not in this Case show any Estate whereof he is seized,
because touching this Matter his Estate is not Material.

Yet holden 21 Ed. 4. 52. He that pleads an Estate for Years, shall show, how
he that Let it him was seized; Particular Estate, how to be pleaded.
quod nota.

Then, How he that has but an Estate for Life, or an Estate-Tail, or an Use,
shall plead the same without showing the beginning thereof.

And, first, touching an Use, the Books, for the most part, are, That such an
one was seized to his Use, without showing how the same was Created.

And 36 H. 8. Bro. Pl. 160. is, That it is good.

And so 21 H. 7. 6. and 28 H. 8. Dyer. But cannot say, That A. was seized in
Tail, without showing de quo dono.

And touching that, 16 H. 7. has a difference between an Office and Pleading.

And 13 H. 7. 18. is, That one may plead, that A. and others were seized to his
Use in Fee; but not in Tail, without showing Coment.

Vide Dyer 1 Eliz. Doubtful.

And 1 Ed. 4. 65. where one did Justify for Tithes, as Parson Imparsonee, he
ought to show, How he came to the Parsonage.

And Mich. 6 and 7 Eliz. in Dyer 79. the Plaintiff in Partition did declare her
self to be Coheir in Tail, with the Defendants, of the Inheritance of the Duke
of Suffolk, without showing the Beginning of the Tail, because it does affect
the Possession of the Defendants, and does demand no Lan^.

And 1 Mar. Dyer 100. If Tenant for Life or in Tail, bring a Writ of Entry, he
shall declare the Seisin, Ut de libero Tenemento.

Then, Where the Estate must be showed to Continue at the time, etc.
Where in Pleading for Certainty to every Intent, it must be showed, that the
Estate did Continue at the time; or the like.

As 10 H. 7. 26. and 7 H. 7. 3. If one Justify by the Commandment or Lease of
Cestuy que Use, he must show expressly, that the Use Continued at the time.

And so 10 H. 6. 21. If a Recovery be pleaded against one by Default, he must
say expressly, That he was Tenant at the time: Or, in Pleading of a Release by
Fine, or otherwise, That the Party was Tenant at the time.

And so 21 and 22 E. 4.

And see Dyer, 2 Eliz. 178. where one pleaded, That a Prior and Convent were
seized of a Reversion, Ac postea Concesser' Reversionem: And did not say, Et
sic inde seisitus; or, de tali statu seisit'; and there said, it shall be
intended to Continue.

And Ibid. 3 and 4 Mar. 143. In Pleading of a Descent the Form is, Et sic
seisit', de tali statu suo obiit inde seisit'.

And 20 Eliz. Dyer 361. One pleaded a Grant of a Rent to him out of Land,
without showing expressly, That the Grantor was seized of the Land at the time,
etc.

Then is to be known, Which of the Parties shall set forth the Place where,
etc. in Pleading.
When, and of which Side the Place in Pleading shall be showed.

For which see a good Case, 1 Ed. 5. 3. where holden, That if the Defendant
plead, that A. was possessed, it shall be intended in the same County where the
Action lay.

The like, if one plead a Release of Action, Arbitrament, or the like.

But if one plead a Surrender, and Release of Right, and does allege no Place,
it shall be intended upon the Land, per totam Curiam.

And 10 H. 7. 6. In Debt against an Executor, the Defendant did plead, That
there was another Executor in Life, and showed not at what Place; because if
the other deny the same, he shall in his Rejoinder say, In vie al Dale, etc.

And so 2 Ed. 4. 14. In Debt against an Abbot, upon a Contract, Quod venit ad
Usum Domus; the Defendant said, Quod non venit ad Usum Domus; and the Plaintiff
in his Replication showed at what Place.

And 12 Ed. 4. 10. He that Justifies by Commandment of a Stranger, shall show
the Place; but otherwise, as Servant.

And 6 Ed. 4. 10. takes this Diversity, That where one by way of Bar (where he
shall recover nothing) does plead a Release, Acquittance, vel hujusmodi, there
he shall need to show no Place: Nor where the Defendant does Justify in a
Replevin, and does not pray a Retorn.

But in another Avowry, Declaration, or Title, otherwise; there the Place is
Traversable.

And so is 3 H. 7. 11. in a Retorn of Rescous.

And 3 Ed. 4. 27. He that pleads a Lease for Years, shall set forth the
Place: Otherwise of an Estate for Life.

And 5 Ed. 4. 121. He that pleads a Payment upon an Obligation, must plead a
Place.

And 28 H. 8. Dyer 14. He that pleads the Birth of one, by the Better Opinion,
shall not need to show the Place where, etc. but it may be alleged after,
where it is showed, that he is in Life; yet there holden, That in Debt upon the
Arrerages of an Annuity, 35 H. 6. granted till he was Promoted to a Benefice,
and that he had taken a Wife; there the Place where ought to be Specially
alleged; quod nota.

And in VVortley's Ejectione firmae, in Plowden's Com. where the Plaintiff in
his Count did Declare upon a Lease by diverse Mean Conveyances; holden there
sufficient, to show where his own Lease was made, and not where the Farmer, or
where the Parties died; nor when, and where the Prior was Elected, etc.

And 10 H. 7. 18. where it is pleaded, Bona Notabilia, in diverse Dioceses, how
to be pleaded.
That the Testator had Goods in diverse Dioceses, moveable; he ought to show, in
what Place, and what Goods, that the Court may Adjudge, if sufficient.

But 30 H. 6. 1. If the Plaintiff upon the Plea, Ne unques Executor, or Riens
per Descent, Reply, That the Defendant did Administer as Executor; or that he
had Assets Enter mains, or Assets by Descent, he shall show in what Place, but
not what Things, or what Lands.

And so is also 19 H. 7. 14 and 29. unless in some Special Case there declared;
as, the Defendant does show how he administered certain Goods Circa Funeralia,
ultra quae, etc. There if the Plaintiff will show he Administered any other, he
must show what they were; quod nota.

Then, Where the County shall be taken by Intendment.
Where, if a Place be showed in Pleading, the County shall be intended.

As 5 Ed. 4. 138. the Defendant in Debt pleaded, That the Plaintiff had
Received parcel at D. pendente Brevi, and no Plea, without showing in what
County D. is: But otherwise in a Writ, where the County is alleged before in
the same.

And 4 H. 7. 8. where it was Surmized, that A. had broken the Peace at B. and
because not showed in what County B. was, therefore ill.

But 39 H. 6. 13. in an Annuity by Prescription, and Seisin alleged by the
Plaintiff at B. not showing in what County, and whether B. was a Town or not;
and yet holden, that it shall be intended in the same County: As in a Writ of
Praecipe de terris in B. or a Writ of Trespass, etc.

And 36 H. 6. 12. one brought a Writ of Maintenance, and declared of a
Maintenance in the Common Pleas, not showing where the Bench was; and doubted.

Then, Where the Day or Time shall be certainly alleged in Pleading.
in the next place, shall be shown, Where, when, and how, a Day or Time certain
shall be alleged in Pleading.

As by 38 H. 6. 3. it seems to be sufficient to Plead, That the King granted
to A. for Life, and after by his Letters Patents of such a Dare granted the
Reversion to him, not showing the Date of the first, or by his Letters Patents
reciting, how that he had granted for Life, before he had granted the Reversion
to him; Quaere inde.

For 9 Eliz. Dyer 259. such a Plea, in the Case of a Common Person, thought ill.

And 20 Ass. 16. is said, That in an Assize in London, is used to put in the
Plaint the Day and Year of the Assize, as in Personal Actions: But otherwise in
other Assizes, no more than in Real or Mixed Actions.

And so is 7 H. 7. 5. That in Real Actions the Plaintiff shall not need to
declare of the Day, Plac, and Year, as in Personal.

Yet 10 H. 6. 17. the Defendant in Trespass did plead the Gift of the
Plaintiff: To which the Plaintiff Replied, That, after that, the Defendant gave
the same to him again. And the Defendant by his Rejoinder did maintain his Bar,
Absque hoc, That he did Re-give those Goods after the first Gift; and suffered.

And see 20 H. 8. Dyer 27. where one pleaded a Defeazance, not showing any Day.
Vide Librum.

And 3 H. 6. 31. in Trespass for Taking his Servant; the Defendant pleaded,
That before he was Retained with the Plaintiff, he was Retained with him; there
the Plaintiff shall say in his Replication, That, such a day, he was Retained
with him, before which Time he was not Retained with the Defendant.

And 36 H. 6. 44. in an Account by an Executor, the Defendant did plead, That
the Testator made the Plaintiff and A. his Executors. To which the Plaintiff
Replied, That afterward he made the Plaintiff his Sole Executor: To which the
Defendant in his Rejoinder, was forced to show what Day the Testator made the
Plaintiff and the other his Executors, Absque hoc, That he made the Plaintiff
afterward his Sole Executor; quod nota.

And Note, That in Bullock's Case in Dyer, 10 Eliz. 281. The Plaintiff in
Replevin did plead the Feoffment of the Bishop of Sarum, without showing it to
be by Deed, or at what Time.

Then shall be considered, How an Act Spiritual shall be Pleaded. Act
Spiritual* how to be pleaded.


And therefore, first, 11 H. 7. 8. Concurrentibus hiis quae de Iure
requiruntur, is not sufficient in Pleading of an Union; but must show, who made
the same, as the Pope, or the Ordinary, etc.

Anno 7 Ed. 4. 32. one Conveyed by a Prior, who was afterward Translated to be
an Abbot, was forced to show how he was made Abbot; as that the Pope granted to
such a Bishop to make him.

And 5 Ed. 4. 7. one brought Debt against the Provost of the College of T. in
Cambridge, of a Sale of Goods to his Predecessor; who afterward was amoved,
and the Defendant Elected, and without showing Coment; quod nota.

And Mich. 12 and 13 Eliz. Dyer 292. it appears in a Quare Impedit, that one
did declare of a Deprivation, and did not show before whom the same was, and
holden very sufficient; for if it be gainsaid, it may come in the Replication,
for to have a Writ to the Bishop for the same.

Then, Of Pleading Matters of Record; as,
touching the Pleading of Matters of Record.

It is said in 21 Ed. 4. 54. That he that Pleads an Utlary in the same Court,
Utlary.
may begin at the Exigent, if he will, because good, Recoveoy in Debt.
until it be Reversed; and that in Debt upon a Recovery, he may begin at the
Judgment, or at the Original, at his pleasure, per totam Curiam.

And see 36 H. 6. 5. That in Debt upon a Recognizance, Recognizance.
omitting the Condition, good, Adjudged upon the Plea of Null tiel Record; where
'twas said by Danvers, That if part of a Record make for one, and part against
him, he may in Pleading, or in his Delaration, take the one, omitting the other.

But Ashton and Prisot were to the contrary, viz. That the party in Pleading a
Recovery, is to begin at the Original, and not to omit so much as any
Continuance, Summons, or Severance.

And 37 H. 6. 14. Retorn of a Writ.
by Prisot, If one plead a Retorn of a Writ, he shall plead, That I. S. Vic',
did Retorn the same before John Prisot, and other his Companions, Justices,
etc. But in pleading the Purchase of a Writ, he must not say, Que tiel Iour il
purchase un Brief, mes que il purchase un Brief portart Test tiel Iour,
retornable devant les Justices del Common Bank, and not as in the Case of a
Retorn of the Sheriff devant Prisot, and ses Compagnions, etc. quod Nota.

For which see more in Brook and Fitzherbert in their Abridgments, in the
Titles of Record, and Failer de ceo.

And for pleading of a Record, see Yelverton 39. Cro. 2 Part 817. Preston
versus Preston, Style' s Rep. 22. Case 1. Co. 1 Inst. 225, 453. Co. Lib. 10.
92. Lib. 5. 52, 218, 260.

But see Plowden's Com. in Dyve and Maningham's Case; where in Debt brought by
Dyve upon an Obligation, the Defendant showed, That one was in Execution upon a
Statute, and for his Delivery was this Obligation made to the Plaintiff, as
Sheriff; where holden, that this Record of Execution, not being the Force of
the Defendant's Bar, but the Conveyance thereof, need not be pleaded Specially
from the beginning.

So in an Action of Disceit against an Attorney; or where one does Avow, by
reason of an Execution upon a Statute; as is 34 H. 6.

But, Inter alia.
as it appears 22 Ed. 4. 8. to plead a Recovery of Twenty Acres, (Inter alia)
ill; but ought to plead, That he did Recover Forty Acres, whereof these Twenty
Acres were parcel: Nor shall he plead, That I. S. was seized of Twenty Acres
(Inter alia,) and did Enfeoff him (Inter alia;) but ought to plead as before:
Yet said there, it might be permitted in pleading a Feoffment.

And the same Case of Dyve and Maningham, Acts of Parliament, how pleaded.
takes this difference between the Pleading of an Act of Parliament, and a
Recovery; quod nota.

Where holden also, That the Defendant in that Action, could not take advantage
of the Statute of 23 H. 6. being but Particular, although it be touching all
Sheriff's in General, without Pleading; but containing diverse Things, may well
be pleaded (Inter alia) or so much as does avail him.

And in Fulmerstons and Steward's Case there, either of the Parties may take
advantage by Pleading of so much of the Statute of 31 H. 8. of Monasteries.

But in the Case of Debt there brought by Partridge, against Strange and Croke,
upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Buying of Titles, holden by all the Justices,
except Mountague, That the same being General; need not Specially to be
recited; as, to pray to be Received, and to Demur Generally upon a Vouchee out
of the Lieu.

But by all the Justices there, the Misrecital makes the Declaration ill: For
in Pleading many times, a thing not Material is made Effectual.

And there in Debt, by Stradling against Morgan, a Receiver, upon the Statute
of 7 Ed. 6. for Taking great Fees there, set down by Statute, Exception was
taken, for not reciting the Statute of 34 H. 8. that set down the Fees.

And in Williams and Barkley's Case, in Coke's Reports; although one did but
plead part of that Act, which did Enable the Queen to Take, yet sufficient;
where said, That every one has Interest in the King, therefore the same is a
General Act.

See the like Learning in Dyer, as 28 H. 8. 27. where a Condition of a Lease
made to a Parson, was, That he should not Grant the Estate over, if he will
have advantage of the Statute of 21 H. 8. which Enacteth, That such shall be
granted their Terms over, it must be Specially pleaded, because Particular, as
a Private Custom. And this Statute is but General in Particularity; as a
Statute that Pardons all that were of the Party of Richard the Third; of the
Statute De Medietate Linguae; or if a Statute were made, That Tenants for Life
shall not be punished in Wast, and the like.

And as it has been taken of late, in all Cases of Pardons, by Act of
Parliament, if any Persons be Excepted for the same thing.

And Ibid. 7 Ed. 6. 83. by the Better Opinion, in an Assize of Tithes, given by
the Statute of 31 H. 8. the Plaintiff in his Plaint need not to mention the
same Statute, as well in respect the said Statute is General, as that it is to
give Jurisdiction to the Common Law, as a General Pardon by Parliament; and
Resembled it to the Case of 14 H. 4. were Conusance granted, and after a New
Action is given by Parliament, the Grant shall not extend to the same: But
otherwise where the Action was before, and other Things granted to be within
the same.

Where said also, That in Pleading a Feoffment by Cestuy que Use, according to
the Statute of Ric. 3. need not to mention the Statute; or in Pleading a
Feoffment to use at this day, to say, That it was Executed Vigore, etc. of the
Statute of 27 H. 8. Or, in Pleading a Devise, to Recite the Statute of Wills;
quod nota.

Then, Per Nomen, how pleaded.
How one shall Plead by a Per Nomen.

And, First, 30 Ed. 3. Fitz. Tit. Feoffments 18. One pleaded a Grant to I. S.
and A. sa Feme, Per Nomen I. S. and Uxoris ejus.

And 1 H. 7. 28. the Tenant in Assize did plead a Feoffment, de praedicta
terra, per Nomen omnium Terrarum, quae sibi discendebant de part Patris; and
took no Averment, because of the word Praedict'.

And so 33 H. 8. Bro. Tit. Pleading 143. in a Praecipe de Manerio de B. the
Tenant pleaded a Recovery de praedicto Manerio, Per Nomen, etc.

So, if I. S. pleads a Feoffment made to him Per Nomen I. N.

Where holden also, That he may plead the Feoffment Generally of the same
thing, without a Per Nomen; and the Variance in the Deed, not Material: But
there said, to be better to Plead it with a Per Nomen.

Touching which, see more in Dyers and Plowden's Reports; as namely 7 Ed. 6.
Dyer. 83. where, in Serjeant's Case, the Plaint being of a Portion of Tithes,
issuing out of 300 Acres in N. did make his Title in the same Plaint, That Hen.
8. dedit and concessit praedictam Portionem (inter alia) Per Nomen totius
Portionis, etc. provenien' de Terris Dominicalibus Archiepiscopi Eborum jacen'
in N. nuper Monasterii dudum spectan', adtunc vel nuper in Tenura A. and did
not Aver in facto, That the Lands put in View were the Demean Lands of the
Archbishop, in the Tenure of A.; and yet (as there seems) good; but not for
the Reason aforesaid, but in respect there was other Certainty enough.

As 26 Ass. of a Grant of 20 Carucat' Ligni in Bosco de D. quas habuit de dono
Patris; that Deed De dono Patris needs not to be shown or averred, because of
other Certainty enough.

And so 2 Ed. 4. where one does Release all his Right in White-Acre, quem
habuit per discensum, etc.

Where said also, That if one of the Recitals be false, yet the Patent good
enough, because Certain in some part; and then in Averring that which was false
might be hurtful, and that the Counsel should then deserve their Fees ill.

Where said also, That if false in all, yet the Patent good, and aided by the
Statutes of 34 and 35 H. 8. of Confirmations, etc. but there not stood upon;
but if the Patent had been of the Land, which the King had by the Attainder of
I. S. or in a Release in a Common Person's Case, of all such Lands as
descended, etc. there, although pleaded by a Praedict', yet an Averment ought
to be.

The like Learning, where sufficient Certainty is in the Patent, as 3 and 4
Mariae in Wast, between Wyburn and Dorril.

The like in Wortley's Ejectione firmae, in Plowden; where the Grant was, of
all that his Farm in the Occupation of A. needs no Averment of the Occupation.

But in Throgmorton and Tracy's Case, his Per Nomen must not be direct
contrary, or repugnant.

Then, Of the word Continetur Continetur.
in Pleading.

First, Holden 28 H. 6. 3. that to plead, Quod patet by the Obligation, That A.
and B. was bound Jointly, ill; but ought to say, In facto, that they were bound.

But 21 H. 6. 51. good Pleading of a Condition of an Obligation, Quod patet ni
dorso, etc. or, Quod patet ni dorso, that part paid; but with a Quaere inde.

And 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 118. to plead, Quod Indentura Testatur quod dimisit, ill.

As 21 Ed. 4. 44. Quod patet per Recordum, etc. and in Browing and Beaston's
Case, it was holden ill, to plead the Condition of a Lease by way of Continetur
in the Indenture, although the said Indenture is Confessed in Pleading:
Otherwise, if Entered, de verbo in verbum.

As 9 H. 6. to plead the Grant of a Rent, cum Clausula districtionis.

Then, Touching the Pleading, by, or without the word Praedict'. Praedict'.


And therefore, first, see 21 H. 7. 30. where one pleaded a Release apud Villam
Westm', and after in the same Pleading, naming Villam Westm', did not say
Praedict'; and yet the Justices held, That it should be taken by Intendment to
be in the same County.

Yet 5 Ed. 6. Dyer 7. the Plea, Quod quidam I. S. shall not be intended the
same Person named before, but another.

And in the Case of Throgmorton and Tracy, in Plowden, on a Writ of Second
Deliverance, one pleaded a Lease made apud Dale Praedict', when not before
mentioned, and good.

Notwithstanding, Nota ben^.
in News and Scholastica's Case, in the Reports, upon an Assize; the Writ
having this word Praedict' more than necessary, Judgment was therefore stayed;
quod nota.

Then, as to this Word, Ut, in Pleading. Of the word, Ut, in Pleading.


It is said 5 H. 7. 2. That in Pleading a Descent one shall say, That it did
descend to him, ut filio, etc. or, as in a Justification, Quod ipse ut
Ballivus, etc. and need not to say in Fait, That he is Bailiff, or Heir.

But in a Special Verdict, in an Assize, 3 and 4 Mar. Dyer 132. found, That I.
S. and I. D. Where a General Plea shall be pleaded for avoiding of Mischief.
Ut Supervisores, did Let, and doubted if good.

Vide 6 Ed. 4. 2. where the Condition of an Obligation was, To serve one by
Seven years, without absenting himself at any time without License. And the
Defendant did plead, Quod servivit per septem Annos, and se non absentavit per
idem Tempus, sine Licentia; without showing the Number of Years, he might be
Licensed more times.

And therefore in the Case between Bulkley and Rice Thomas, in Plowden's Com.
the Plaintiff did allege, That he was Chosen Knight, per Majorem Numerum,
without showing the Number in certain; quod nota.

Then, Of Pleading an Entry, etc.
it appears 22 H. 6. 43. If one do allege an Abatement, Intrusion, or
Disseisin, he ought to allege it so Specially, and not, That the Party did
Enter, etc. for that may be intended a Lawful Entry.

And so it is in Plowden's Com. in the Ejectione firmae brought by Williams
against the Lord Berkley, touching the Pleading of an Entry upon him, and
Letting to another; when he should have said, That he did Enter, and him
Disseise: For by his Entry only he could not Let to the other, he being in
Possession; quod nota.

But in alleging an Intrusion for an Abatement, it has not been holden, such
a Sufficient Matter to make the Plea, ill; quod nota.

Then, touching the Plea of Negative Pregnant, Negative Pregnant.
see before in Title Issue, there set down under the Division of Modo and
forma, and in the Special Title thereof in Brook's Abridgment.

And see Dyer fo. 17. Number. 95.

But especially Plowden's Commentaries, fo. 121. That although the Plaintiff in
his Declaration did but show quod licet, he was Chosen Knight, Per Majorem
Numerum; yet holden good, and the most Eloquent Pleading: Where you may see
also diverse Writs, Pleas, and Latin Authors there Vouched, to prove the word
Licet an Express Affirmative. Licet, an Express Affirmamative.


Then, Where an express Seisin, or Possession, must be alleged, and not
implied, Express Seisin, or Possession to be alleged, not implied.
in Pleading.

For which see 9 Eliz. Dyer 257. where one brought an Action of Covenant upon
this word Demise, declaring of a Lease by Tenant for Life to himself, showing
his Death also during the Term, and how that he in the Reversion did Enter, and
oust him; and Exception taken to the Declaration, for that he did not show
Expressly, that he was possessed, and after expulst, but by Implication.

Where holden also, That this word Demise, Nota been.
does not Charge the Executor.

And in Dyer 9 and 10 Eliz. 254. Of the words, Virtute Cujus, or, Per quod, etc.
one brought Debt upon a Lease made by himself to A. who Devised the same to
the Defendant, who did Enter, and was possessed: And Exception taken, because he
said not, Virtute cujus he did Enter and was Possessed; because he might Enter by
reason of another Title.

And in the Sergeant's Case, Quorum praetextu.
in Dyer 7 Ed. 6. 83. where diverse Mesn Steps and Degrees are showed in the
Plaint, how the Tithes came from the Abbot to the King's Hands; and that to
say, Quorum praetextu is very good, and refers to all of them.

But as its said 7 H. 7. Nec auget aut minuet sententiam; for there, by reason
of Virtute cujus, it shall not be intended that the Use there alleged does
continue.

Then, How a Deed shall be Pleaded. A Deed, how to be pleaded.


See 5 Eliz. Dyer 221. in a Writ of Annuity against the Successor of a Prebend
of A. granted by his Predecessor; he did Declare, That the Predecessor, Per
scriptum suum geren' dat' vicesimo die Januarii, and deliberat' eidem Quer'
tricesimo die ejusdem Mensis; and did not say, primo deliberat' ut Factum; so
that this word, Suum, does suppose a perfect Deed 20 Ianuarii, at which time
the Predecessor was not Inducted.

See, touching this Matter, a Case 1 Eliz. Dyer 167.

Then, Of the Pleas, Non est Factum, or Riens passa. Of the Pleas, Non est
factum, or Riens passa.


For which see, first, 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 116. where in an Ejectione firmae of
Tithes, the Defendant pleaded a Grant and Assignment from the Plaintiff
himself; and the Plaintiff, by his Replication, maintaining his Count, took a
Traverse, Absque hoc quod vendidit per praedictam Indenturam totum statum, etc.
To which Exception was taken, That he, being privy to the Deed, ought to
Traverse the same, especially when the thing granted does not pass without Deed.

But by Stamford, he ought to have pleaded, That he had nothing in the Term at
the time of the Grant: As, in avoiding a Release, to plead, That the Party to
whom, etc. had nothing at the Time: Or, to have pleaded, Non est Factum: And
for these Reasons, and others, the Jury were discharged, and a Replegiar'
awarded.

But touching this Matter, Whether he that is privy to a Deed may plead Riens
passa; or where one Privy or Estranger shall plead, Ne Enfeoffa; or Ne Granta
pas per le Fait; or, Ne Charga pas, Ne Relessa, Non est Factum, Nient Comprise,
or the like, see accordingly in Brook, in his Title Estraunge al Fait.

Then, Where an ill Plea is made good by Reference to another.
Where a Plea in it self is not good, but by Referring the same to another Plea.

First, See 28 H. 8. Dyer 27. in Debt upon an Obligation, brought by the Abbot
of Westminster, declaring the same to be made at Westminster 10 die Novembris,
Anno duodecimo Henrici Octavi: To which the Defendant did plead, an Indenture
of Defeasance, not alleging any Date, or saying post Confectionem scripti
praedicti; and the words in his Plea, Eisdem die and anno, shall not be
referred to the Date of the Obligation mentioned in the Plaintiff's
Declaration; because the Defendant is a Stranger to the same, and his Adversary.

And further, If one of the Defendants in Trespass plead a Release of the
Plaintiff made after, and the other plead a Release also Eisdem die and Anno;
that is ill.

And 14 H. 7. one of the Defendants in a Quare Impedit, made Title as Patron,
etc. and the Incumbent did plead, That he was Presented by the other ex Causa
supradicta; and ill. Quaere tamen.

And in the same Case its said, That in Pleading an Indenture, he shall not
need to say, Prout per Indenturam praedictam before liquet, or apparet; Of
Pleading, Prout per Indenturam, or Scriptum before liquet and apparet.
yet he may say so if he will.

And so is Mich. 7 and 8 Eliz. Dyer 242. in Pleading an Arbitrament; and
likewise in Pleading the Covenants of an Indenture, or a Record, need not say,
Quae sunt omnia and singula; Quae sunt omnia, etc.
as in pleading a Condition, to Enfeoff the Plaintiff of all my Lands in
Middlesex, etc.

And 19 Eliz. Dyer the Defendant in an Ejectione firmae did plead, That the
Lessor Devised to the Plaintiff for years, and then alleged in his Plea, a
Custom to destroy the same, and did not say in his pleading, Quae est eadem
dimissio; Quae est eadem dimissio.
and ill, as it seems. Quaere inde.

And see 29 H. 8. Dyer The Defendant in Wast did Justify the Cutting of Trees,
to Convert to Arable, pro melioratione, without showing, Quod est idem Vastum;
Quod est idem Vastum.
and Exception taken for that Cause.

And in the same Book Mich. 7 and 8 Eliz. Dyer 242. the Submission was touching
Kelstorne, and the Arbitrament was of Brokes by another Name, and took an
Averment, That the same Place and Kelstorne being all one, and ill, without the
usual Course. Et non al' neque diverse.

In Partridges Case in Plowden's Com. Et non alia neque diversa. Surplusage.
fol. 77. b. is said, That Surplusage in a Plea does not make the same ill,
where was pleaded the Grant of a House, and ten Acres to the same appertaining.
And so of the word Praedict', when the thing is not before spoken of.

Then ought to be observed, Pleading* Devant son temps or Mispleading,
That a man take care he Plead not his Cause, but in due Time, for otherwise it
shall be taken for nothing.

For which see in Walsingham's Case, in Plowden's Commentaries, where before it
appeared in Pleading what Estate Sir Thomas Wyat had; he pleaded, that Sir,
Thomas had Issue yet living.

As if one Declaring upon an Obligation does show, That the Obligor was of full
Age.

The like in Pleading a Feoffment to say, It was Simple, and without Condition;
and if Issue be taken upon the same, it is Mispleading and a Ieofail.

Then shall be shown, Un Plea fait auter bon.
Where an Ill Plea may be made good by Admittance.

For which see, first, 29 H. 8. Dyer 39. In Debt upon an Obligation, not
Declaring at what Place, and the Defendant pleaded a Release; the Declaration
good.

The like 18 Ed. 4. 17. If in Debt the Plaintiff Count in like manner of a
Lease for years, and the Defendant pleads, Non dimisit; but otherwise it would
have been, if he had demurred: But more question, as the Case was there in
Dyer, in an Appeal against an Accessory, declaring his Notice in another
County, to which the Defendant did demur in Law: For by Demurring all Matters
in Fait, contained in a Declaration, or Pleading, are Confessed.

As if the Defendant in an Ejectione firmae, will Confess and Avoid the
Plaintiff's Lease, by saying, It was made by Tenant for Life, although his Plea
be otherwise apparently ill, and the Plaintiff demur upon the same.

And see 6 H. 7. 10. where the Defendant in Trespass did plead a Concord to do
Two things, and pleaded the doing of One; and the Plaintiff Replied, Null tiel
Concord; and found for the Plaintiff, and yet taken to be a Ieofail Ieofail.
by the Court: For that the Bar is not good to any Intent; because a Concord
without Satisfaction, is an apparent ill Plea in the Law: And where there shall
be such an ill Plea, that is not good to any intent, a Replication or a Verdict
cannot make it good.

But it is otherwise where the Bar is good to some Intent, and to other Intent
not: As in this Plea, Riens entermains Iour del' Brief Purchase, or Nontenure,
in like form, without saying, Ou, ne unque puis, there the Replication, Assets,
or Tout Iour del Brief; and Verdict thereupon will make it good, because good
to some Intent.

Vide 12 Ed. 4. 6. where an ill Issue; as Negative pregnant, Double Plea, or
the like; and found with the same, is made good by the Verdict: Otherwise, if
found against it.

See more hereof in the Titles of Repleaders and Ieofails, as also of Verdicts.

And Note, That the Defendant in Time may waive his Pleading, and betake him to
the General Issue.

As 34 H. 6. 29. the Defendant in an Assize did plead in Bar, and although the
same was Entered, and in another Term, yet he pleaded the General Issue.

And see Mich. 9 and 10 Eliz. Dyer 265. the Defendant did Wage his Law, and at
the Day would have Confessed for part, and Waged his Law for the rest; and by the
Better Opinion could not, nor Waive his Law, and plead to the Country, without
the Consent of the Plaintiff, as it seems.

For which, see more in the Title of Waiver, in Brook:

As namely there 31 Ed. 1. The Tenant did Vouch one who was found; and yet he
afterward Waived his Vouchee, and pleaded the General Issue.

So there 4 Ed. 4. 28. touching Aid Prayer.

And 4 Ed. 3. 56. one that does Counterplead the Voucher, may at another Day
waive the same, and admit the Vouchee.

And see there also, That he who pleads to the Writ, or in Bar, may
afterward waive the same, and plead the General Issue.

Quaere, If after Issue, or Demurrer Entered.

For by the Book of 11 R. 2. Fitzh. Issue 146. after Demurrer, without Consent
of the Parties, the Defendant cannot waive the same, and plead the General
Issue.

And so seems 50 Ed. 3. 19. If one plead to the Writ in an Assize, whereupon
Issue is Joined, and Adjorn'd for Trial, he cannot waive the same, and Plead in
Bar.

Quaere, If altogether in respect of the Adjornment; for otherwise it were an
advantage for the Plaintiff to have his Writ Confessed to be good.

And 50 Ed. 3. 19. the Defendant in Cosinage did plead an Estoppel: Estoppel.
Judgment, if the Plaintiff shall be received to say, That his Father died
seized; and the Plaintiff did Confess and Avoid the Estoppel, and therefore the
Tenant would have waived his Plea, and pleaded in Bar, and could not; but said
there, That he might well do it in an Assize de Mort d'Ancestor: Nota
diversitatem.

And see the same Book of 50 Ed. 3. 19. and sundry other Books, and Experience,
That after Plea by Baily, the Defendant in Person, or by an Attorney, may plead
Matter in Bar, whereof a Certificate of an Assize does lie.

But 3 H. 6. 16. if an Infant plead by Guardian, he may afterward come in
Person, and Plead himself at his pleasure: For that the Admittance of a
Guardian for him is the Act of the Court, which shall in no case prejudice him.

And also see 5 Ed. 4. 122. The King after Demurrer entered by himself, may
waive the same by his Prerogative, and take Issue.

And so is 28 H. 6. 2. and that he may Declare, de Novo, the same Term; but not
in another.

But see in the Title Prerogative 116. That in an Information he shall not
waive his Issue, and Demur; but otherwise upon a Traverse.

And see accordingly in Plowden's Com. in Partridge's Case, touching his
waiving of Demurrer, and taking Issue; and e contra: But if another Party be
joined with the King, as there, then the King shall have no advantage.

CHAP. VII. Of Repleaders and Ieofails.
THen the Learning touching Repleaders and Ieofails, Repleader.
ought to be known. And, First, Its Cause.
Touching the Cause of Repleaders; which is, for that the Pleading has been
ill and vicious, Ieofail, what.
Or the Issue misjoyned, and then its called a Ieofail.

Or, as 22 and 23 H. 6. and other Books, where part of the Matter contained in
the Plaintiff's Suit, is Omitted to be answered, and the like.

But as 6 Ed. 4. 2. if an ill Plea be made good afterward by Admittance (as
has been said before) that is no Cause of Repleader.

But otherwise, as it seems by the Books of 7 Ed. 4. 1. and 35 H. 8. The Court
(the Jury being at the Bar) if there be a Ieofail apparent in the Record,
Ieofail.
will discharge the Jury.

And this Repleader, for the most part, has been upon Misjoyning of Issues, or
before Demurrer, and not after.

Yet 9 H. 6. 35. in a Replevin, the Defendant did plead an ill Bar, and the
Plaintiff a worse Replication; whereupon the Defendant did Demur, and a
Repleader awarded.

And so is Dyer 3 and 4 Mar. 139. the like; If the Rejoinder had been ill, and
they shall begin at the first ill Plea.

But see Plowden, in Trespass, brought by Hill against Grange, That the
Plaintiff Demurring upon the Rejoinder, his Replication being good, Judgment
shall be gien for or against him, as the Law does fall out. But his Replication
being ill, it seems there, that they shall Replead.

Quaere inde; for at this time greatly doubted, Whether Judgment shall not, in
like case, be given against him that pleads the first ill Plea: For, by the
greater Opinion, no Repleader after Demurrer.

And in Smith and Hart's Case, 31 Eliz. the Avowry being good, and the Bar and
Rejoinder in a Replevin ill, no Repleader after a Demurrer: But if the
Declaration be ill, or such an Avowry, which is in nature of a Declaration; or,
by that Reason, a Replication where no Title is made in the Declaration; there
Judgment shall be given against the Plaintiff without any Repleader. Quaere
tamen.

Then, At what Plea the Parties shall begin to Replead.
Where the Parties shall begin to Replead.

The same Book, 9 H. 6. says, At that Plea which first was faulty; and so is
21 H. 6. 14. 22 H. 6. 19. and 5 Ed. 4. 18.

And by that Book 22 H. 6. In what Place.
it appears, That an Issue in an Assize, Adjourned in the Common Pleas to be
Tried, in which pleading there was a Ieofail, the Parties shall Re-plead in the
Bench, and not be Remanded to Replead in the Country; quod nota.

Then, At what time.
At what time they shall Replead.

For which see 22 H. 6. 57. where Mispleading was, and the Parties after
Verdict, by Nisi prius, were awarded to Replead; quod nota.

Where its said also, That it has been often so used until Judgment, although
the Defendant have no Day in Court to be demanded.

And see in Brook, in this Title 39, in Abridging the same Case 9 H. 6. That
after the Defendant has Confessed the Action, yet there may be a Repleader.

These Mis-pleadings, Statutes aiding Ieofails, or Mis-pleadings.
in some sort, are Aided by the Statutes of Ieofails, of which there be four in
number; namely, Anno 32 H. 8. cap. 30. Anno 18 Eliz. cap. 14. Anno 21 Iac. 1.
cap. 13. and Annis 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 2.


The, 32 H. 8. cap. 30.
first, after this manner, viz. That upon Issues tried in any the King's Courts
of Record, Judgment shall be given, any Mis-pleading, want of Color,
Insufficient Pleading, Ieofail, Mis-continuance, Discontinuance, Mis-conveyance
of Process, Misjoyning of Issues, want of Warrant of Attorney for the Party
against whom, etc. or other default of the Parties, their Counselors, etc.

The Second, 18 Eliz. cap. 14*
namely, 18 Eliz. cap. 14. to this purpose, viz. After Verdict, upon Action in
any Court of Record, notwithstanding default of Form, False Latin, or Variance
from the Register, or other default in Form in Writs Original or Judicial,
Count, Declaration, Bill, Plaint, Suit, or Demand, or Want of Original or
Judicial Writ, Imperfect or Insufficient Retorn, Want of Warrant of Attorney,
Default in Process upon, or after, any Aid Prayer or Voucher; but not to extend
to Informations: As by the two first Statutes may appear.

Now hereupon it is observed, That neither of the two Statutes, above-recited,
extends to Aid any person before, but after Verdict, and not upon Demurrer.

And that the Statute of 32 H. 8. which goes only to Defaults in Pleading and
Matters therein mentioned, and not to Declarations, extends but to the Kings
Courts of Record, and not to other Inferior Courts.

But touching Mis-pleading, and the Matters therein mentioned, it helps in
Indictments and Informations after Verdict, which the Statute of 18 Eliz. does
not, but Aids only in Declarations, Writs, and the Cases therein particularly
set down; quod nota.

Out of both which Statutes of 32 H. 8. and 18 Eliz. have since been taken
diverse Cases, as namely upon the first Statute, if no Issue be joined at all;
or as a Report 8 Eliz. by Catlyn, where an Issue is joined that is not proper
to the Action, as Not Guilty, in Debt.

See, touching that, the Book 28 Eliz. Dyer 347. where Not Guilty is pleaded
upon an Information of Usury. The like upon the Statute of 18 Eliz. if the
Declaration be ill for Matter.

As if Tenant for Life does bring a Quod permittat in the Debet only, when the
same ought to be in the Debet and Solet: And Agreed by all the Court 31 Eliz.
where the Venire facias to the Coroners, without Cause at all; or, as the Case
there lies, where the Justices of Nisi prius awarded to the Coroners a Tales,
and Verdict thereupon, which was no such Mis-continuance of Process, as is
helped by the Statute of 32 H. 8.

So if the Trial be in a wrong County.

Quaera tamen inde, for Mich. 2 and 3 Eliz. Dyer 188. and Mich. 21 and 22 Eliz.
ibid. 367. seem contrary, although Process awarded to the Coroners without
Cause; and although (as the first of the said two Books is) the Trial was not
between the Parties to the Writ; but between the Tenant and the Vouchee.

Yet Ann^ 32 Eliz. it was said to be Ruled, That if one pleads an Award in
Trespass without Satisfaction and Issue, and Verdict taken upon the same, yet
not helped by that Statute; quaere inde.

And Mich. 33 Eliz. in the Case between Upton and Walsh, no Venire facias being
put upon the File, Ruled to be aided by the Statute, although it could not be
found.

See a Report 1 and 2 Mariae, where the Declaration does not warant the Writ:
As in Debt, where it does appear, that the Day is not yet come; or in Trespass,
that the same is committed after the Date of the Writ; or, a Declaration be in
the Debet and Detinet, by an Executor. The same, and the like, although Issue
and Verdict thereupon, are not helped by the Statute of 32 H. 8.

Note, by what has been said, it appears, That the said Statute of 32 H. 8.
being (touching Mis-pleading, and the Matters therein contained) in any of the
King's Courts of Record, that the same helps not, in that Case, in any other
Court of Record.

For, as it seems in Stradling's Case, in Plowden's Commentaries, If a Statute
give an Action in any of the King's Courts of Record, the same will not extend
to Oxford, although the Style be Cur' Domini Regis, or to the Exchequer or
Chancery.

And yet if a Statute provides Remedy for a thing by an Action that lay before
(as it appears in Bro. Tit. Conusance,) and does not limit by Express Terms
where the Suit shall lie, there it will lie in any of the said Courts.

In which, if the Law be so, then touching Mis-pleading and Mis-joyning of
Issues in other Courts, the same is, as it was at the Common Law before the
Statute of 32 H. 8.

See Trin. 29 Eliz. Of Matter^ Remediable by the Statutes of Ieosails.
Goldsborough's Reports 48. where, in Case sur Assumpsit, the Defendant pleaded
Non Assumpsit, and found for the Plaintiff; and Moved, There Is no Place laid in
the Declaration, where the Promise was made; and its there said, That when an
Issue is Mis-tryed, it is not helped by the Statute, and here no place is
alleged, whereupon the Trial may be had: But per Cur. the Statute shall be
taken liberally; so that if the Verdict be once given, it shall be a great
Cause that shall hinder the Judgment; for when it is Tried and Found for the
Plaintiff, he ought to have Judgment.

And Trin. 10 Iac. 1. Godbolt 194. In an Action brought in the Common Pleas,
after Verdict moved to stay Judgment, that the Venire facias did vary from the
Roll in the Plaintiff's Name; for that the Roll was Peter, and the Venire,
John, and the Postea agreed with the Roll, his true Name: Where holden, That if
no Venire goes forth, the same is aided by the Statute of Ieofails; and it is
in Effect here, as if there were no Venire fac. or Hab. Corpora; yet, if the
Sheriff do Return a Jury, the same is helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

And Pasch. 12 Iac. Brownl. 2 Part 167. Upon a Motion to stay Judgment, it was
Objected, That the words, Et habeas ibi Nomina Iur', were omitted in the Venire
fac', but Venire fac' Duodecim, etc. were in the Writ, and good per totam
Curiam; for that the first words are supplied by the last, and the Omission
helped by the Statute of Ieofails, after Verdict.

And see Mich. 21 Iac. Cro. 2 Part 672. In Case for Words, brought in Chancery
by a Clerk there, a Venire was awarded Retornable in B. R. in this Form; viz.
Venire facias duodecim quorum quilibet habet 4 l. terrarum, aut minus, etc.
Moved to stay Judgment, that the Venire was ill, and not helped by the Statute
of 27 Eliz. cap. 6. for that extends only to Writs of Venire fac. in the
King's Bench, Common Pleas, [Exchequer Excepted in Stradling's Case before, page
179.
,] Justices of Assize, and no other Courts, and the Chancery is omitted, and
therefore the Venire not waranted by the Statute. But per Cur. This Clause
inserted in the Writ, although not waranted by the Statute, yet is not
prejudicial to any, but makes the better Trial.

And, by the Common Law, the Judges may direct a Venire, to be Quorum quilibet
habeat tantum de Terris; and Precedents were showed out of Chancery, where the
Venire was, as in this Case.

And per Cur. If it was not good at the Common Law; yet now c^early made good
by 32 H. 8. Wherefore Adjudged pro Quer.

So Trin. 9 Car. 1. Cro. 1 Part 215, and 228. In a Scire facias in Chancery
against C. upon a Recognizance of 200 l. The Defendant was Returned Dead,
whereupon a Second Scire facias issued against the Heir of C. and the Tenants
of the Lands of C. tempore Recognitionis; upon which the Sheriff Returned T.
Terr-Tenant of such Lands, omitted to Return any thing concerning the Heir:
Whereupon the Defendant pleaded, That he had nothing in the Lands at the time
of the Recognizance, nor ever after.

It was found for the Plaintiff, that C. was seized, and moved in Arrest of
Judgment; because nothing was Returned against the Heir, viz. That there was
not any Heir, or the Heir had nothing: And it is a Non-Return of the Sheriff,
and not a Mis-Return, and is not helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

But per Cur', Though the Return had been better, if it had been found who was
Heir, and that he was Warned, or that there was not any Heir in the said
County; yet it was well enough, and the Mis-Return or Insufficient-Return of
the Sheriff, quoad the Heir (not being named in the Retnrn) is but a
Dis-continuance, helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

Vide Hob^ 326. Where the Plaintiff Declared in Debt, upon a Demise for Rent:
To which the Defendant pleaded, That before the Rent became due, the Plaintiff
did Enter upon him, not saying, He did Expel, or Hold him out; so that Issue
was only, Quod Quer' non Intravit; and found for the Defendant, and Judgment
given for him: For though the Plea was Insufficient; yet the Verdict did fully
answer the Issue.

And see Hob. 76. Banks versus Parker, In Trespass, for taking a Kettle at W.
The Defendant Justified, by reason of the Custom of the Manor of T. And the
Plaintiff took Issue de Injuria sua propria absque tali Causa; and the Venire
was awarded de Visn' de W. and Manerio de T. upon the Roll, and a Verdict for
the Plaintiff: And though the Plaintiff should not have Traversed the Cause
generally, but the Custom; yet that was Adjudged to be helped by the Statute of
Ieofails, as Matter of Form; because Absque tali Causa contained the Custom,
and more.

And Idem ibid. Parker versus Parker, The Plaintiff brought Trover and
Conversion of certain Goods against the Defendant, and the Declaration was
Entered upon the Imparlance-Roll, with Blanks or Spaces for the Day and Year of
the Plaintiff's losing the Goods, and of the Defendant's finding and converting
them to his own proper use; but the Issue-Roll, and the other Proceedings were
perfect in this Point.

And per Cur', the Imparlance-Roll, being the Original, cannot be made perfect
by the Issue-Roll, which was waranted by it; but in regard a Verdict was given
for the Plaintiff, upon the Issue of Not Guilty, the Court gave Judgment for
him: For the Declaration, as Entered on the Imparlance-Roll, was good enough in
Substance; for the Trover and Conversion being laid in the Praeterperfect
Tense, was before the Action brought, and so the Fault in the Declaration being
only in Form, is helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

And Idem 117. Napper versus Jasper and George; where Issue was taken in
Trespass upon a Prescription, That I. S. Prebendary of the Prebend of P. in the
Church of S. and all his Predecessors, Prebendaries, etc. had used Time out of
Mind, to keep a Shepherd for certain Sheep of theirs, following the same Sheep,
for the better keeping of them feeding together in a certain Pasture, from the
Sheep of the Earl of S. in the same Place; and the Issue was found accordingly:
And Moved, That this was a Void Verdict; for the Prescription was senseless, and
could not stand, That the Sheep could be kept Time out of Mind, from the Sheep
of the Earl of S. being but one man's Life.

But yet the Plaintiff had Judgment according to the Verdict; for the Substance
of the Issue was, The keeping the Prebendaries Sheep feeding together, and the
other part was but a Consequent of it, That by that means they were kept from
the Earl's Sheep.

Vide Styles Rep. 206. where the Plaintiff declared upon an Assault and Battery
in Surrey: To which the Defendant pleaded Justification in Middlesex; and the
Plaintiff Replied, That the Defendant did Beat him in Southwark, which is in
Surrey, de Injuria sua propria, absque tali Causa; and the Issue was tried by a
Jury in Middlesex, and found for the Plaintiff; and Objected, That the Trial
was not good, because the Venire facias was from one Place, when it should have
been from both; for here are two Issues to be Tried, and so not within the
Statute of Ieofails.

But per Cur', the Trial is well enough, for though two Issues, yet by Pleading
they are made one, and so within the Statute of Ieofails, and helped by it.

And see Godbolt 85. where the Plaintiff declared in Account of diverse Receipts
and Parcels: To all which, except one, the Defendant pleaded to Issue, but for
that one Parcel he pleaded nothing: Whereupon it was Moved, That the Plea was
Dis-continued for not answering to that Parcel, which Dis-continuance was not
aided by the Statute of 32 H. 8. and the Plaintiff could not have Judgment
according to his Declaration, because of the Parcel to which no Answer was
made, no Judgment could be given.

But per Cur', the Statute of 32 H. 8. did Extend to it; for the words of that
Statute are, -- After Verdict found Judgment shall be given, any Discontinuace
notwithstanding.

And see Cro. Part 2. 534. where the Plaintiff declared in Trespass, -- Quare
Clausum fregit, Et alia Enormia ei intulit: The Defendant pleaded the General
Issue, Non Culp. and the Jury found 400 l. Damages, in respect of the Abuse
done by the Defendant to the Plaintiff's Wife; and to stay Judgment, it was
moved, that the Venire facias wanted these words, -- Quilibet Iur' per Pleg',
and therefore is, as if there had been no Return of the Writ.

But per Cur', this is not a Blank Return, where no Return is at all, or where
the Name of the Sheriff is omitted; but this is an Insufficient Return, helped
by the Statute of Ieofails: For the Omission of the Pledges, is but want of
Form, and not like to Hussey's Case, where there was no Pledges Returned upon
the Original.

And Idem Part 2. 353. where the Plaintiff did declare in Trespass against the
Defendant, for Entering his Close and House in G. To which the Defendant pleaded
in Justification, That the Sheriff had directed a Warrant to him upon a Capias
Utlagatum, to Take one I. S. who (as the Common Voice went) was at the
Plaintiff's House; whereupon he went thither in a Foot-Path through the said
Close, and asked the Plaintiff's Leave to Enter his House, to search for the
said I. S. and the Plaintiff giving him Leave, he Entered the same, and not
finding I. S. there, returned the same way: The Plaintiff took Issue upon the
License, and had a Verdict; and to stay Judgment, it was Objected, That there
was not any Replication for the Close, or any Issue joined thereupon; so that
all was Discontinued.

But per Cur', Judgment shall be given for that which is found; and that which
is Discontinued, is helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

Vide Hob. 176. where in Trespass the Defendant did plead, That Locus in quo
(no Place being assigned) was two Acres called B. in L. which was his Freehold.
And the Plaintiff Replied, That Locus in quo, was a Piece of Land containing
Twenty Acres, Al' quam, etc. To which the Defendant Rejoined, Quoad aliquam
Transgr' in praedictis viginti Acris -- Non Culp'. Upon which the Plaintiff
joined Issue, and the Verdict found for him: And to stay Judgment, the
Defendant moved, That this was no Issue; for there was no Twenty Acres, nor
Place certain in the Declaration.

Yet per Cur', the Plaintiff shall have Judgment; for though it be not in the
Declaration, yet cannot be said a Departure from the Declaration, for both
Parties agree the Trespass to be done at L. and so no Verdict out of the
Matter, nor Issue; but a Verdict helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

And see Goldesbrough's Rep. 158. where in Trespass, for Entering the
Plaintiff's House, and breaking his Close, the Defendant pleaded, That the
House and Close contained Twenty Acres, and was his Freehold: To which the
Plaintiff Replied, -- Quod locus in quo est unum Mesuagium, to which he
Entitles himself; and because by his Replication he only made Title to a
Message, and did not maintain his Declaration, which was the Mesuage and
Close, Awarded Nil Capiat per Billam.

Quaere, If this amounts to any more, than a Dis-continuance of the Close only,
and so helped by the Verdict.

But Cro. Part 2. 528. In Debt upon four Bonds, for payment of Money, three of
them were Tried in London in Trinity Term, and the fourth at Lent Assizes
after; and there was not any Continuance from Trinity Term to Lent Assizes,
which was much insisted upon; yet the Court gave Judgment for the Plaintiff.

So Brownlow's Rep. Part 1. fo. 81. a Bill was Exhibited against one of the
Clerks of the Court of King's Bench for Money due upon Bond; and Issue being
joined, the Cause was Tried, and found for the Plaintiff: And to stay Judgment
it was Objected, That the Bill not being filed, was not helped by the Statute
of Ieofails, nor within the same.

To which Opinion the Court seemed to Incline, but gave leave to the Plaintiff,
to File a Bill, that so the Matter might be put to Arbitration.

So Hob. 181. a Bill was Exhibited in Debt against an Attorney of the Common
Pleas, upon which a Verdict was had for the Plaintiff; and to stay Judgment it
was Objected, That the Original Bill was not Filed with the Custos Brevium, as
it ought to be: But because the Tenor of the Bill was Entered of Record in haec
verba, it seemed to be in the Nature of the want of an Original after Verdict,
and so helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

To which Opinion the Court did incline; but would Advise of it, because it had
been otherwise Adjudged in that Court before.

But then we shall Enquire, Matters not Remedied by the Statute.
What Matters are not Remedied or Helped by any, or either of the Statutes of
32 H. 8. and 18 El. beforementioned.

For which see, first, Goldesbrough's Rep. fo. 49. where the Plaintiff brought
his Action against the Defendant for an Assault and Battery; and the Defendant
was Condemned therein by Nichil dicit, and a Writ of Enquiry of Damages issued
out; and then the Plaintiff's Attorney died, and another Attorney, without
Warant, prayed the Second Judgment, and had Execution thereupon.

Cur', If the Attorney dies after Judgment, a New Attorney may pray Execution
without Warant; but here the Attorney died before the Second Judgment, and
therefore he that comes after, ought to have a Warant of Attorney.

Prothon. If one of the Parties dies after Judgment, the Writ shall abate.

And per Cur', This is not within the Statute of Ieofails; for a Verdict is
that, which is put in Issue by the Joining of the Parties.

So Hob. 112, 113. The Plaintiff declared in Trespass for an Assault and
Battery made upon him by the Defendant, who pleaded Justification, and Conveyed
an Estate to himself by Copy of Court-Roll in a certain Piece of Ground, Parcel
of the Manor of D. whereof I. S. was seized in Fee; and because the Plaintiff
came upon it, he laid his Hands molliter upon him.

And the Plaintiff, in his Replication also, Conveyed to himself an Estate by
Copy of Court-Roll to another Piece of Ground within the said Manor, and lays
a Prescription in the said I. S. Lord of the Manor, to have a Way over the
Defendant's Piece of Ground: Upon which they were at Issue, and Verdict for the
Plaintiff.

And per Melieur Opinion, this was no Issue at all, nor Thing, nor possibly
Issuable, and therefore the Verdict must also be void, and so not helped by the
Statute of Ieofails: For a Verdict cannot make that good, which the Court sees
cannot be in Law; so that this is in the Office of the Court to judge.

So Cro. Part 2. 526. In Trespass brought in the King's Bench, for Taking and
Carrying away three Loads of Wheat, set out for Tithes, contra Pacem Domini
Regis, the words Vi and Armis were omitted.

Per Cur', the Bill shall abate, for it is the Essential part of the
Declaration, and that which induces the Court to set a Fine for the King, and
it is not helped by the Statute of Ieofails: And so Adjudged Hill. 13 Iac. in
the Case between Welsted and Tailor, where Judgment was Reversed, because Vi
and Armis was omitted.

Vide Hoh. 127. In Debt upon the Statute of 21 H. 8. the Writ was, Praecipe A.
quod reddat Nobis and B. qui tam pro Nobis, quam pro seipso sequitur Centum and
december Libras, quas Nobis and praefat' B. debet. And the Count was, for Taking
to Farm six Acres of Land, and holding the same for six Months, Per quod Actio
accrevit, for 60 l. And for further Taking to Farm other Lands, and holding the
same for five Months, Per quod Actio accrevit, for 50 l. To which the Defendant
pleaded, -- Quod ipse non debet praefat' B. qui tam, etc. praedict as Centum
and december Libras, neque aliquem inde Denarium in forma qua, etc. whereupon
Issue was Joined, and the Jury found, That the Defendant did owe 30 l. and for
the Residue -- Quod non debet.

And to stay Judgment, it was Objected,

(1) That the Verdict expresses not for which Farm, nor which of the Months the
30 l. was due; sed non allocatur, for the Demand and Issue were for 110 l. in
several, though it would have been more formal to have distinguished them.

(2) The Defendant has not Answered the Writ and Declaration, for the Plea
ought to have been as the Demand is, -- Quod ipse non debet dicto Domino Regi,
and praefat' B. qui tam, etc. And this was allowed, because Penal Laws are
Excepted out of the Statute of Ieofails.

And see Hob. 101. where Judgment was Reversed, because there were no Pledges
to Prosecute Entered for the Plaintiff, and so not within the Statute of
Ieofails; because a Penal Law excepted out of the same.

But see Trin. 30 Eliz. in Com. B. Goldesbrough 90. where a Writ of Right was
brought against Baron and Feme, of two parts of Forty Acres of Land in S. who
pleaded, That I. S. was seized, and devised to his Wife one of the Tenants for
Life, the Remainder to B. in Fee, who was his Heir, who died, and they prayed
in Aid of B. who joined in Aid with them, and then they came and pleaded to the
Grand Assize; and the first Day of the Term the Assize appeared, and sixteen of
them were Sworn, whereof four were Knights, the rest Esquires and Gentlemen;
and the Title was, as before in Trinity Term, Anno 28. for B. was Tenant in that
other Action for the Third part.

Per Cur', This is not aided by the Statute, for here is no Certainty in the
Grant; yet if the Thing granted had had a certain Name given to it, as
Black-Acre, or the like; then, though the Parish had been mistaken, it would have
been good enough.

See more of these two Statutes of 32 H. 8. and 18 Eliz. after, in the Title
Error.

In the next place, We shall take a view of the two last Statutes, concerning
Ieofails, viz. 21 Jac. 1. cap. 13 and 16. and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. and enquire,
what Mis-pleadings are aided by the same, and what are not.

By the Statute of 21 Iac. 1. cap. 13. Stat. 21 Iac. concerning Ieofails.
after Verdict given in any Court of Record, the Judgment thereupon shall not
be stayed, or reversed for any Variance in Form only, between the Original Writ
or Bill, and the Declaration, Plaint, or Demand, or for lack of an Averment of
the Parties Life, or Lives, so as it be proved he or they be in Life; or for
that the Venire facias, Habeas Corpora, or Distringas, was awarded to a wrong
Officer, upon an Insufficient Suggestion; or that the Visne was in some part
Mis-awarded, or sued out of more or fewer places than it ought to be, so as
some one place be right named; or for Mis-naming any of the Jurors, either in
the Surname or Addition, in any of the Writs or Returns thereof, so as Constat
de persona; or for want of a Return of any of the said Writs, so as a Panel be
returned and annexed thereunto; or for that the Officer's Name is not set to
the Return, so as it appears by Proof that the Writ was returned by him; or by
reason that the Plaintiff, in an Ejectione firmae, or in any Personal Action,
being under Age, did appear by Attorney, and the Verdict pass for him.

This Act shall not extend to any Writ, Declaration or Suit of Appeal of Felony
or Murder, nor to any Indictment or Presentment of Felony, Murder, or Treason,
nor to any Process upon any of them; nor to any Writ, Bill, Action or
Information upon any Penal Statute.

And by 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. Stat. 16 and 17 Car. 2. concering Ieofails.
it is Enacted, That after Verdict Judgment shall not be stayed nor reversed in
the King's Courts of Record at Westminster, or Courts of Record in the Counties
Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, or Durham, or Courts of the great Sessions, in
any of the Twelve Shires of Wales, for default of Form, lack of Pledges; or but
one Pledge to Prosecute, Returned on the Original Writ, for default of Entry of
Pledges upon a Bill or Declaration; or for default of bringing into any Court,
of any Bond, Bill, Indenture, or other Deed, mentioned in the Pleading; or for
lack of Allegation, of bringing into Court of Letters Testamentary, or Letters
of Administration; or by reason of the Omission of Vi and Armis, or Contra
pacem; or for mistake of the Christian Name, or Surname of the Plaintiff or
Defendant, Sum of Money, Day, Month, or Year, being rightly named in any Record
preceding; or in the same Record, whereunto the Defendant might have Demurred.

Nor for want of Hoc paratus est verificare, or Hoc paratus est verificare per
Recordum; or for that there is no right Visne, so the Cause were Tried by a
Jury of the County or Place where the Action is laid; nor for not Alleging or
Omission of Prout patet per Recordum.

Nor shall any Judgment be Reversed after Verdict, Confession by Cognovit
Actionem, or Relicta Verificatione; or for lack of Misericordia or Capiatur; or
by reason that a Capiatur is Entered for a Misericordia, or a Misericordia for a
Capiatur.

Nor by reason that Ideo Concessum est per Curiam is Entered, for Ideo
Consideratum est per Curiam.

Nor for that Increase of Costs, after a Verdict in any Action; or where a
Nonsuit in Replevin is not Entered to be, at the Request of the Party to whom
the Judgment is given.

Nor by reason that the Costs are not Entered to be by Consent of the Plaintiff,

But that all such Omissions, Mistakes, and such like as these, not being
against the Right of the Matter of Suit; nor whereby the Issue or Trial are
entered, may be Amended by the Judges of the Courts.

This Act shall not Extend to Appeals, Indictments, or Presentiments of Treason,
Felony, or Murder; nor to Bills, Actions, etc. upon Penal Statutes, other than
concerning Customs and Subsidies of Tonnage and Poundage.

And by the same Statute it is provided, That no Execution shall be stayed in
the same Courts by Writ of Error, or Supersedeas after Verdict and Judgment in
any Action Personal, whatsoever, till Security given, according to the Statute
made in the Third Year of the Reign of King James the First, Chap. 8. whereby
it is Enacted,

That in Writs of Error brought upon any Judgment after Verdict, in any Writ
of Dower, or Ejectione firmae, Execution is not to be stayed, unless the
Plaintiff in the Writ of Error become bound to the Plaintiff in the Action, as
the Court shall Order, That if the Judgment be affirmed, or the Writ of Error
discontinued by default of the Plaintiff; or the Plaintiff be Nonsuit in the
Writ of Error, that they shall pay such Costs and Damages as the Court shall
appoint: And the Court may Enquire, what Special Loss the Plaintiff in the
first Execution has by this Delay; and this the Court must also give him by
way of Increase of Damages.

This Act does not Extend to Writs of Error brought by Executors, nor
Administrators, nor any Action Popular, nor other Action brought on a Penal
Statute, Except Debt for not Setting out of Tithes; not to any Indictment,
Presentment, Inquisition, Information, or Appeal.

And here we may also Observe, as before, That neither of these two last cited
Statutes extend to Aid any Person before, but after Verdict, and not upon
Demurrer. Nor does either of them help Mis-pleading, or defects in Indictments,
Appeals, Informations, Inquisitions, or Presentiments, or any Actions or Suits
upon Penal Statutes; except such as relate to Customs and Subsidies of Tonnage
and Poundage.

What Defects in Pleading, or otherwise, are aided by the said Statutes, we
shall give you some Examples of, as follows:

And, first, see Pasch. 23 Car. 1. Rotulo 51. in B. R. Morefield and Webb's
Case, Reported by Aleyn, fo. Placito Where, in a Writ of Error upon a Judgment
in the Palace Court at Westminster, in an Action upon the Case, upon a Promise,
and Verdict for the Plaintiff; it was moved for Error, That the Habeas Corpora
Iur' was not Returned Served, but only a Panel of the Juror's Names annexed to
it; which Case is Aided by the Statute of 21 Iac. 1. cap. 13. of Ieofails,
which helps, when there is not any Return upon the Writs of Venire facias,
Habeas Corpora Iur', and Distring as Iur'; so as a Panel of the Names of the
Jurors be Returned and annexed to the said Writs.

Whereupon it was Objected;

(1) That the Statute of 21 Iacobi extends only to Writs, and not Precepts,
which issue out of the Palace-Court.

(2) That the Palace-Court was Erected by Letters Patents 6 Car. 1. which was
after the Statute.

But Resolved,

1. That the Palace-Court is within the Intention of that Statute; for it
provides Amendment in any Action, Suit, Plaint, Bill, or Demand.

And Justice Jones was angry, That Rolls questioned, if this Statute did extend
to the Grand Sessions in Wales.

But agreed per Cur. That the Statute shall not extend to Inferior Courts in
these Points.

2. Resolved, That it Extends to Courts, Erected after the Statute, and so not
within the Equity thereof.

And see Mich. 13 Car. 2. in B. R. Tubb and Walwyn's Case, Keble Vol. 1. Pl.
137. Tit. Averment, where the Plaintiff moved to stay Judgment in Ejectment,
because the Life of the Party (during whose Life the Defendant has a Lease)
was not Averred (according to 10 Ed. 4. 18.) Averment de vie.
which by 21 Iac. 1. cap. 13. is to be Inquired of by the Sheriff, or other
Officer, as the Court shall think fit.

And by Foster, the like Rule was made before the Statute, in the Lady Morleys
Case, after Verdict, as here.

But see Mich. 21 Car. 2. Lee versus Edwards, in Modern Reports fo. 14.
Averment de Cure.
where an Action upon the Case was brought upon two Promises:

And the First was, That in Consideration the Plaintiff would bestow his Labor
and Pains about the Defendant's Daughter, and would Cure her, the Defendant did
Promise to pay so much, and would also pay for the Medicaments.

Secondly, In Consideration the Plaintiff had Cured the Defendants Daughter,
the Defendant did Promise to pay so much.

And to stay Judgment, it was Objected by Raymond, That the Plaintiff did not
Aver in his Declaration, That he had Cured the Defendants Daughter, the
Consideration of the first Promise being Future; and both Promises found, and
entire Damages given.

But Twisden said, It is well enough; for now it lies upon the whole Record,
whether he has Cured her, or not; but if it had rested upon the first Promise
only, it had been ill.

And in the second Promise, there is an Averment of the Cure; so that now,
after Verdict, it is helped; and the want of an Averment is helped by a
Verdict, in many Cases.

Vide Hill. 22 and 23 Car. 2. Rotulo 233. in B. R. Hoskins versus Robins,
License Mis-pleaded.
in Sander's Reports, Part 2. fo. 32. where said, That the Insufficiency of
Pleading a License, is helped by the Statute of Ieofails, after Verdict.

And see Mich. 24 Car. 2. in B. R. Holman against Dodde, Issue Mis-joyned.
Keb. Vol. 3. Tit. Amendment, Pl. 15. where the Plaintiff in Debt, upon an
Obligation to perform Covenants in an Indenture, assigns Breach for Non-payment
of Rent at Michaelmass, according to the Lease, but then, or 40 Days after, by
the Bond.

To which the Defendant did Rejoyn, That he paid the same at Michaelmass; Et de
hoc ponit se super Patriam, Et praedictus, the Plaintiff similiter.

After Verdict, it was Moved by Staples to stay Judgment, for that the Issue is
Mis-joyned; and though it were quod praedictus Robertus (who was the Defendant)
for Rowlandus (the Lessee,) and the Directions to the Clerk were right; yet
being no Issue, there was no Verdict, and so not Aided by the Statutes of 16
and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8.

And here its no Issue, That the Defendant did Perform, Et de hoc ponit, etc.
Et praedictus, the Plaintiff similiter.

For (as in 1 Cro. 317. Pl. 380.) its an Issue by the Rejoinder, That Robert
did not pay, etc. therefore not Aided by the Statute; according to 2 Cro. 579.
Pl. 9. in Aldridge's Case:) But the Rent being Reserved only at Michaelmass by
the Lease, though the Bond be at Michaelmass, or 40 days after, is well enough.

Vide Pasch. 26. Car. 2. in C. B. Naylor versus Sharpley, and al', Coronator'
Com' Palatin' Lanc', in Modern Reports 188, 189. where one brings Debt against
the Sheriff of that County, and Sues him to the Outlawry, and directs a Capias
to the Chancellor, who makes a Precept to the Coroners of the same County,
being Six, to take his Body, and have him before the Justices of the Common
Pleas at Westminster at such a day: And one of the Coroners being in sight of
the Defendant, and having Opportunity enough to Arrest him, does it not; but
they all Return -- Non est inventus, though he might have been Taken every day.

Whereupon the Plaintiff brings his Action in Middlesex against all the
Coroners, and has a Verdict for 100 l.

And to stay Judgment, Sergeant Baldwyn Objected, That the Action ought to have
been brought in Lancaster.

He agreed to the Cases put in Bulwer's Case, in Co. Lib. 7. where the Cause of
Action arises equally in two Counties; but here, all that the Coroners do,
subsists and determines in the County Palatine of Lancaster; for they make a
Return to the Chancellor of the County Palatine only, who makes a Return to the
Court.

He insisted upon Hussy and Gibb's Case, in Dyer 38. and further said, That
this Action is grounded upon two Wrongs; one, The not Arresting him when he was
in sight; and the other, For the Returning, Non est inventus, when he might
have easily been taken. Now, for the Wrong of one of them, they are all
charged, and entire Damages given.

He Allowed, That two Sheriffs make but one Officer; but said, That every
Coroner is responsible for himself only, and not for his Companion.

Sergeant Turner and Pemberton, contra; That the Action was well brought in
Middlesex, because the Plaintiff's Damage arose there, by not having the Body
here at the Day.

They cited Bulwer's Case, and Dyer 159. b. and Agreed, That the Chancellor of
the County Palatine Returns to the Court, the same Answer that the Coroners
Return to him; so that their False Return is the Cause of the Prejudice that
accr^es to the Plaintiff in this Action, the Ground whereof is the Return of
Non est inventus; which is the Act of them all.

That one of them saw him, and might have Arrested him, and that the Defendant
was daily to be found, etc. are but mentioned as Arguments, to prove the False
Return.

And they Conceived, That an Action would no more lie against one Coroner, than
against one Sheriff in London, or any other Place, where there are two.

Then, as to the first Objection taken by Baldwyn, they said, That admitting
the Action to be laid in another County than where it ought; yet after Verdict
it is Aided by the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. if the Venire come from any
place of the County where the Action is laid: It is not said, in any place of
the County where the Cause of Action arises. Now, this Action is laid in
Middlesex, and so the Trial by a Middlesex Jury is good, let the Cause of
Action arise where it will.

Cur', That Statute does not help your Case; for it is to be intended, when the
Action is laid in the proper County, where it ought to be laid, which the words
Proper County implies.

But they inclined to give Judgment for the Plaintiff, upon the Reasons given
by Turner and Pemberton.

And see Keble, Vol. 2. Pl. 8. Tit. Escape, Hepping against Huneyard, where, in
an Action on the Case, for Rescuing of one taken in Execution, after Verdict.

Stroud moved to stay Judgment, on Hetley 34. That no Action upon the Case will
lie against the Sheriff, or by him: Sed non allocatur, for the Sheriff may be a
Beggar; and therefore though the Plaintiff may have an Action upon the Case
against him for the Escape, yet he may take the Prisoner again.

And as to its being said, That the Party being Arrested by the Sheriff of
Devon, at Topsham, the Defendant rescued him at Exeter; the Court agreed, the
Escape to be the same all over England; but that it ought to have been showed,
how the Party came into Exeter: For this cannot be intended; nor (being the
Substance of the Matter) is it Aided by the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8.

And Idem Vol. eodem Pl. 26. Frain and Uxor Administratrix of Smalman versus
Painter, where, in an Action of Debt for Rent, the Plaintiffs did declare, That
the Intestate, out of his Term, made an Under-Lease to the Defendant, yielding
and paying, etc. and that the Intestate died (such a Day,) and Administration
was committed to the Plaintiff's Wife.

To which the Defendant did plead, That the Intestate Assigned to K. to
commence after his Death; Absque hoc, That he died possessed of such a Term,
prout: And upon this Traverse Issue was joined, and Verdict for the Plaintiff.

And to stay Judgment, Sanders Objected:

(1) That the Action was in the Debet and Detinet; which cannot be by
Administrators, as Plaintiffs.

(2) That the Rent is reserved Half-yearly, and there is a Year and Quarters
Rent found due, which is impossible.

Jones pro Quer', The Right is Tried, and so the Declaring in the Debet and
Detinet, when it ought to have been in the Detinet only, is Aided by the
Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. of Ieofails, as in the Case of Cumber
against Walton.

(3) The Exposition of the Year and Quarter is well enough, the Time being one
of the Terms upon which it was reserved.

Cur', If it did not appear the Plaintiff were Administrator, as it does, the
Debet were of the Substance, and Aided by the Statute, which the Court agreed;
and the Second Exception was mistaken, otherwise it had been ill.

And Idem Vol. eodem Pl. 51. Tit. Slander, Croft against Winter; where an
Action upon the Case was brought for words spoken in London of a Minister, viz.
He is a Thievish Rogue, and stole a Plate out of Wadham-College in Oxon. And
the Plaintiff having a Verdict in London to stay Judgment,

Sanders moved for the Defendant, That here was a Mis-Trial, Mis-Trial.
which ought to have been at Oxford; as in Ford and Brook's Case, Cro. Part 3.
261.

Jones contra, on the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. this being Tried by
a Jury in the proper Place, and the Justification should have been in London,
the Felony being Transitory and not Local; as Robbery, etc.

And the Court Agreed, this was a Ieofail. Ieofail.


Twisden, The Felony is Local, whether it come in by way of Justification or
Declaration; and as in the Case of Throbwalke, the Justification makes the
Matter to arise there; as where a Constable, on an Action laid here in London,
does Justify in Essex, there the Trial must be in Essex.

Keeling Chief Justice, and the Court Agreed to it in the Case of a Constable:
But in Case of a Sheriff, or Bailiff, its Aided by the Statute, especially the
words being confessed to be spoken in London. And Judgment was Affirmed.

CHAP. VIII. Of Intendment.
IN the next place we shall give an Account, more amply than before, What
Construction the Law does make of the Intention of the Parties, as to
Contracts, and other Matters.

And for this, first, see Cro. 1 Part 141. Paynter versus Paynter, Trin. 6 Car.
1. in B. R. where, in an Action upon the Case sur Assumpsit, the Plaintiff
declared, That the Defendant Promised, if the Plaintiff, ad ejus Instanciam,
would Marry his Daughter, he would pay unto him 20 l. and give to him 20 French
Crowns toward a Wedding-Dinner.

And the Plaintiff says in Fact, That he Married the Defendants Daughter, and
required him to pay the 20 l. which he had not paid.

Upon Non Assumpsit, it being found for the Plaintiff, it was Moved, That the
Declaration was not good; for the Promise is but Conditional, viz. If the
Plaintiff, ad Instanciam Defendentis, would Marry the Defendants Daughter; and
so he has not Averred the Performance of the Condition.

But the Whole Court conceived upon this Agreement, To Marry the Daughter ad
Instanciam, and he Marrying her; it shall be Intended, ad Instanciam, without
Averment.

And see Cro. 1 Part 163. Mich. 7 Car. 1. in B. R. Taverner and Skingles Case;
where the Plaintiff Declared in Debt upon an Obligation, with Condition to
Perform the Award of I. S. and I. D. so that they made it before the 10th Day
of October next, under their Hands and Seals: And if they do not Agree, then to
stand to the Umpirage of I. N. so that he made it in Writing under his Hand and
Seal, before the 28th of October following.

The Defendant pleaded, That I. S. and I. D. did make no Award before the 10th
day of October.

The Plaintiff Replied, It is true, They did not; but I. N. did make the
Umpirage and Award before the 28th day of October, (inter alia) the Defendant
was to pay 30 l. unto the Plaintiff upon such a day, at such a place: And for
Non-payment, etc.

It was Moved, That the Submission was void, and uncertain; for it is, -- That
if they do not Agree; and it does not appear to what they should agree; sed non
allocatur, for the words, If they do not Agree, have the Intendment -- If they
do not Agree, to make their Award under their Hands and Seals before such a
day. For otherwise it is quasi a Non-Agreement within the Condition.

(2) It was Objected, That the Award was void, because the Money was appointed
to be paid at the House of one W. S. a Stranger; sed non allocatur; for the
Appointment of the Payment of the Money at a Strangers House (especially as
here, being a Common Inn) cannot be unreasonable, nor an unlawful Act; for, by
Intendment, the Plaintiff shall procure such Kindness, that the Money may be
paid there; so the Award was Adjudged good prima facie, and the Plaintiff had
Judgment.

And see Style's Rep. 465. Wood and Gunston's Case, Mich. 1655. in B. R. where
in an Action upon the Case, for Scandalous words spoken of the Plaintiff, viz.
for calling him Traitor; the Issue was tried at the Bar, and the Jury found for
the Plaintiff, and gave him 1500 l. Damages: And upon Supposition, that the
Damages were Excessive, the Defendant moved for a New Trial.

It was said, That after a Verdict, Partiality of the Jury ought not to be
Objected or questioned, and therefore no New Trial.

Glyn Chief Justice: It is in the Discretion of the Court to grant a New Trial;
but that must be a Judicial, and not an Arbitrary Discretion; and the Court may
take notice of the Miscarriages of Juries, and grant New Trials upon them: For
a Jury may sometimes, by Indirect Dealing, be moved to side with one Party, and
not to be Indifferent between both Parties; but it cannot be so Intended of the
Court. And a New Trial was Awarded.

And see Co. Lib. 5. 120. Long's Case, where in an Indictment of Murder, Error
was alleged, because the Indictment was said to be taken before W. S.
Coronatore Dominae Reginae infra Libertatem dictae Dominae Reginae Villae suae
de Cossam praedict' per Visum Corporis; and it was not alleged to what Places
the Liberty did Extend, nor what part, or any part of the Town of Cossam, was
within the Liberty: So as it does not appear, that the Coroner had
Jurisdiction; and it was said, That Indictments which do concern Life, and
which are the King's Counts, ought to have a plain and precise Certainty, to
which the Party may answer, and shall not be taken by Argument.

But Resolved by the Court, that the Indictment was good enough: For if an
Indictment be Certain to a general Intent, the same is good enough: And in this
Case the Indictment is certain enough to a general Intendment, because Cossam
is within the Liberty of Cossam; and that the Town it self shall be Intended to
be out of the Liberty of the Town, is a strained Construction, which the Law
will never allow of.

And see Co. Lib. 4. 65. Fulwood's Case, Mich. 33 Eliz. where A. being seized
of a House in London, acknowledges a Statute to the Chamberlain of London, for
Orphanage-Mony, according to the Custom; and afterward acknowledges another
Recognizance before the Recorder and Mayor, to B. who sued Execution thereupon,
and had a Liberate, but it was not Returned; and the Sheriffs, upon that,
delivered the House in Execution to B.

The Successor of the Chamberlain sued Execution upon his Recognizance, by
Elegit, to the Sergeant at Mace.

Amongst other Matters in this Case, it was Objected;

That here was no Recognizance in the nature of a Statute found; for the Jurors
have found -- Quod A. veniebat coram Recordatore Civitatis London, and T. O.
Majore Stapulae, Et recognovit se debere B. 200 l. and does not say, --
Secundum formam Statuti, etc. nor -- Per scriptum suum Obligatorium.

Whereas the Statute of 32 H. 8. provides, that it shall be by Bill Obligatory,
sealed with three Seals. But it does not appear by the Verdict, that it was
according to the Statute, and although that Verdict, being the words of
Laymen, shall be taken according to their meaning, and there needs not so
precise Form in them, as in Pleading; yet the Substance of the Matter ought to
appear either by Express words, or by words Equivalent; so as there ought to be
a convenient Certainty, the which, if it be false, the Party for such Falsity
may have an Attaint.

But it was Resolved, that the Verdict was good; for inasmuch as they have
found a Recognizance before the Mayor and Recorder, etc. It shall be in a
Verdict of Laymen, Intended according to the Statute, for otherwise they
cannot take any Record; and also the sequel of the Verdict does imply, That
there was a Recognizance in the Nature of a Statute, otherwise no Execution
could be sued thereupon.

CHAP. IX. Of Bills of Exception.
THen touching Bills of Exception.

This (as it seems by 27 H. 8. in Tatam's Action upon the Case) is, when one of
the Parties, for the Insufficiency of the Evidence on the other side (as he
conceives it) does offer to Demur upon the same, and the Court thinking it to
be good, or the other Party Refusing the same, do not Agree to it; then the
Court ought (upon Request) to Seal to the Party, so refusing, this Exception in
a Bill, which upon a Writ of Error (as appears by Fitzh. Not. Brevium) may be
assigned for Error; Stat. Westminster. 2. cap. 31.
whereupon, by the Statute, a Writ (if need be) is to be Awarded to those
Justices, to acknowledge or deny their Deed; but (as it seems) by the said Book
of 27 H. 8. need not, de Rigore Iuris, be allowed in Arrest of Judgment.

And it appears by Fitz. Natura Brevium, and 11 H. 4. That this Bill must be
Sealed before Judgment, and not after.

For the Formal Drawing up of Bills of Exception, see one to the Evidence upon
the Trial at the Assizes, in an Action of Trespass, Assault, and False
Imprisonment, brought by Verdon against Decele, Heyward, and others, in the
King's- Bench, Hill. 33 and 34 Car. 2. in Brownl. Latin Redivivus, Tit. Bills
des Exceptions, and ibid. Mich. 32 Car. 2. where a Writ of Error was brought in
the King's- Bench at Westminster, upon a Bill of Exception, to Evidence upon a
Trial at the Bar of the Common Pleas Court in Ireland, upon an Ejectione
firmae, with some others there, under the same Title.

CHAP. X. Of Verdicts.
A Verdict, is the Answer of a Jury, made upon any Cause committed by the Court
to their Trial: Which is twofold, Special, or General.

A Special Verdict is, when they say at large, That they find such and such
Matters to be done by the Tenant, or Defendant, so declaring the Course of the
Fact, as in their Opinions it is proved; and as to the Law upon the Fact, they
pray the Advice of the Court thereupon.

And this Special Verdict, if it contain any ample Declaration of the Cause,
from the beginning to the end, is also called a Verdict at large.

Whereof see diverse Examples in Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, Lib. 3. cap. 9.

A General Verdict is that which the Jury find in General Terms, upon a General
Issue:

As in an Action of Disseisin, the Defendant pleads, No Wrong, No Disseisin;
then the Issue is General, whether the Fact be a Wrong, or not; which being put
to the Jury, they weighing the Evidence, do either bring in their Verdict for
the Plaintiff, That it is a Wrong, and Disseisin; or for the Defendant, That it
is No Wrong, No Disseisin. Vid. Co. 1 Inst. fo. 228. a. and New Book of
Entries, Tit. Verdict.

First, As to a Verdict, it must be sufficient in Matter and Form, be the same
Special or General; as, if the Jury do not Assess Costs and Damages, where the
same ought to be found, and the like.

And therefore 21 Ed. 4. 11. where a Tender of Homage was found to be made, and
not showed in what County; the same was ill. Quaere thereof, for it appeared in
the Pleading, etc.

Next, Damages; where to be found Entire, and where Several.
where the Damages are to be found entire or several,

Touching which, see a good Case in 1 Ed. 5. 5. where the Plaintiff did Count
in Detinue of Damages touching every part in several; and the Jury found for
the Plaintiff to the Damage of Twenty Pounds entirely, if the Things could not
be had; where, by the Better Opinion, the Damages ought to be found several, as
the Declaration was.

See the same Case more at large in Bro. Tit. Count; and so is 3 H. 6. 43.

And by 9 H. 6. 66. in Wast, the Jury ought to sever the Damages for every
several Tree, and every several Parcel; but in a Writ to Enquire of Damages,
shall find none, because Confessed.

And 8 H. 4. 6. The Jury severed the Damages in a Praemunire, against the
Principal and Accessory, as they ought to do.

And so 19 H. 6. 32. in Forcible Entry, where some found, to Detain Forcibly,
and others, to Enter Forcibly.

And see also in the Title Damages, in Brook, 22 H. 6. 73. where several
Issues, several Damages.

And see there afterward, how Damages may be severed; and so it is better to
be many times: But Costs, according to 36 H. 6. must be entire.

And 17 Ass. 22. in Trespass against Two, where one was found guilty of part,
and the other of other part, the Damages severed. And so is 22 Ass. 76.

But 29 Ass. 33. if one Person be found guilty of several Trespasses, the
Damages may be assest entirely.

And see Bro. Damages 118. 5 Ed. 4. That if one of the Issues be a Ieofail, and
the Damages entirely Assest, it is both ill.

And 11 H. 7. 19 and 20. in Trespass against Two, of two Horses taken
severally, Damages must be several: Otherwise, if one be charged with several
Trespasses.

See more hereof in the said Title of Damages, in Bro. Abridgment.

And, Verdict aid bon Pleading.
Where a Verdict shall make ill Pleading good, see before in the Title of
Pleading, in that Special Division.

As 21 H. 6. Bro. Verdict 91. where the Demandant intending to Counter-plead a
Resceit said, That the Plaintiff Riens avoit Iour del Brief, and said not, Ne
unque puis, which was ill; yet, if it be found for the Priee, the Verdict has
made the Plea good; otherwise not. The like of Nontenure.

But by Brook, The same after Verdict is helped by the Statute of Ieofails.

The like 22 Ed. 4. 46. Que le Baron ne suit seisie que Dower jour del'
Espousals.

The like 5 H. 7. 14. If an Executor plead, Riens entermains Iour del Brief,
etc.

The like 6 H. 7. 6. 3. H. 7. 8. and 20 H. 6. 22.

Then, Verdict contral' Matter de Record.
Where the Verdict is contrary to other Matter of Record.

As 11 H. 6. 42. Bro. 96. in a Writ of Error, the Death of one of the Parties
to the Writ was alleged such a Day, Et alii e contra; and the Death found
accordingly; yet because it appeared by the same Record, That the said Party
alleged to be dead, had appeared three Days after in Person at the Nisi prius
in the first Action, therefore this Verdict was holden a Ieofail.

And 14 Ass. 9. the Special Verdict was found a Record for the Defendant; and
the Plaintiff, to disable the Verdict, showed the Record to be otherwise, and
good.

And 25 Ass. 2. The Defendant in an Assize did plead, That he did Enfeoff the
Plaintiff within Age, and after did Enter upon him. To which the Plaintiff
Replied, That the Defendant was at Age the same time, and so found accordingly;
and the Party being in the Court in Person, was Adjudged by Inspection within
Age, and that stood, and the Verdict holden for none.

And so 9 H. 6. 37. If the Defendant in Debt Plead Matter, that proves his
Deed, and yet conclude Non est factum, and it be found accordingly; yet
Judgment shall not be given upon the Verdict, but upon his own Confession; quod
nota.

And 3 and 4 Mar. Dyer 147. a Verdict could not find, That the Party himself
was Estopped by Indenture.

Then, Of Special Verdicts.
touching Special Verdicts, there is a Statute, viz. Westminster the 2d, which
says, Quod Iustic' ad Assisas non Compellerentur, etc.

By Equity whereof, as it appears in the Parson of Homeland's Assize of
Fresh-Force, in Plowden's Commentaries, as well upon every Special Issue, as
General, the Jury may give a Special Verdict; where the Issue in that Case was
upon the Entry, pendant le Brief.

And so are diverse other Books to that Intent; as 33 H. 6. 30, and 31. and 18
Ed. 4. 48. upon the Plea of Non Detinet.

And so 43 Ass. 1. upon the Issue Frank, and de Frank Estate.

And so 42 Ed. 3. Bro. 85. upon the Issue, Ne unque seisie que Dower, or, Ne
dona pas.

And so 41 Ed. 3. 10. where the Resceipt was Traversed.

And so 33 H. 6. where the Issue was, If the Grantor of a Rent, had any thing
at the Time of the Grant.

And so 3 H. 6. 3. upon the Issue of Assets entermains, and Assets per descent.
And so in every General Issue.

Yet 7 H. 4. 11. upon the Issue of son Franktenement, the Court would not
suffer a Special Verdict.

But 1 and 2 Mar. Dyer 117. One did Traverse a Lease, and the Jury found
specially, and awarded to Replead.

And so 11 Eliz. Dyer 284. in Crowch and Butler's Case, where the Issue was by
an Absque hoc, and not a General Issue.

But 30 Ed. 3. Fitzh. Abridgment Tit. Judgment, in Parco fracto the Defendant
said, That the Plaintiff's Wife delivered the Beasts out of the Pound, Absque
hoc, que il infreint le Pound; and the Jury found a special Verdict, That the
Headborough, in the absence of the Baily (according to Custom) did deliver the
same, and good; and the Defendant discharged, although the Verdict be Special,
upon the Issue of Absque hoc, because there it is as a General Issue.

And so is 32 H. 8. in an Assumpsit to make Two things: The Defendant said,
That he did assume to make other Two things, without that, that he did assume
in such manner, etc. and found that he did assume to make one of the Things
contained in the Declaration, and not the other, and the Verdict, for that last
recited Reason, good for the Plaintiff for that one Thing. Otherwise, if an
Issue be upon a Traverse Absque hoc, That A. and B. did Enfeoff.

And see in Plowden's Commentaries in Walsh's and Sander's Case, That upon an
Indictment of Felony a Special Verdict may be found.

And it appears also, Mich. 1 and 2 Eliz. Dyer 173. That in an Attaint a
Special Verdict was received.

Then ought to be known, Of what things the Jury may take Cognizance.
What things the Jury may take Conuzance of in their Verdicts; as namely,
Matters in a Foreign County, Conditions, Records, Releases, and the like.

And, Of Matters in a Foreign County.
first, touching Matters in a Foreign County, the Book of 22 Ed. 4. 19. is,
That upon the General Issue in Decies tantum, the Jury may take Conusance of
Money taken in another County: The like of Assets, but need not be thereunto
enforced; Qu. inde, because Transitory, and not like to Trespass in Land; but
may not Specially find the Taking in another County.

And so seems 1 Ass. 16. That they could not find the Death, or a Letter of
Attorney expressly in another County. Quaere tamen. Et vide Bro. 24.

The like 7 Ed. 4. 15 and 16. of a Resignation in another County, or a Divorce.

And 3 and 4 Mar. Dyer 132. the Jury found a Lease in London, and alleged as
an Exception. And touching the Damage that arises in another County by an Act
they are bound to find; as Battery of the Plaintiffs Servants in one County, by
reason whereof he lost their Service in another County, although it be so
declared.

And by 9 H. 6. 62. in Trespass of Battery, or Taking of Goods, the Jury may
find him Guilty in another Town in the same County: Otherwise of Trespass Local.

But by 2 Ed. 3. 11. cannot Expressly find a Tender of Homage in another County.

And it appears 7 H. 6. Fitzh. Abridgment, Tit. Assize 359. that the Jury may
Specially find a Condition annexed to a Feoffment, according to Littleton: But
otherwise to a Release; but may not find a Waranty, because that cannot be
without Deed. And in a Writ of Right, the Jury may find a Release of Right; but
not a Collateral Waranty.

And so is 33 Ass. 11. touching a Feoffment upon Condition.

And so 28 Ass. 17. and 17 Ass. 20. of a Confirmation that does Enlarge an
Estate; otherwise not: But not a Release.

16 Ass. 15. and 43 Ass. 41. A Feoffment given in Evidence, the Jury in respect
of the Livery are bound to find; but may not take Conusance of a Release.

And by 21 Ass. 28. the Jury did find a Feoffment upon Condition, not given in
Evidence.

Then, How the Jury may find a Matter of Record.
How the Jury may find a Matter of Record.

See, first, 3 H. 7. and 2. H. 4. That if a Jury find an Utlary, or a Writ of
Non Molestando, or another Matter of Record, the same is void.

Yet 28 Ass. 17. a Verdict found a Recovery, etc.

And 26 Ass. 5. Verdict found a Fine not pleaded, or given in Evidence sub pede
sigilli, whereof is a Mirum made in the Case, by the Reporter: And so the like,
the same Year, Placito 3. upon a Recovery found by Verdict.

And 26 Ass. 2. The Verdict in an Assize found an Attainder, and the Court
there took it ill.

But touching this Learning see Newse's and Scholastica's Assize in Plowden's
Commentaries; where it is said, That a Note of a Fine, or a Recovery, without
the Record it self, Sub pede sigilli, or the Number-Roll, may be given in
Evidence, if the Jury will so accept of it: Otherwise of Pleading the same.

And so holden without doubt upon the same Book 26 Ass. and other Books, That
the Jury may; and in some Cases ought to find a Matter of Record, which seems,
when given in Evidence, Sub pede sigilli.

See more hereof in the Chap. of General Issue, and Special Evidence, antea.

Then, Spiritual Matter, how to be found by the Jury.
How the Jury shall find a Spiritual Matter.

First, see 21 H. 3. 9. where a Verdict in an Assize found, That the Father of
the Tenant had taken the Order of a Deacon, and after Married the Defendants
Mother, etc.

And 8 Ass. 5. it was holden, That the Jury in an Assize, may find the
Plaintiff or Defendant to be a Bastard; but if it were Pleaded, it shall be
Tried by a Certificate from the Bishop.

And 29 Ass. 2. A Verdict in an Assize found a Divorce; for that it is not a
Matter of Record, but a Matter in Fait; quod nota.

Then, Where the Jury find a Special Matter, and Conclude contrary.
it appears in Amy Townsends Case, in Plowden's Commentaries, That if the Jury,
or an Office, find a Special Matter, and Conclude contrary, the Court shall not
in their Judgment respect the Conclusion, but the Special Matter found; quod
nota.

And so is 28 Ass. 17.

But, as appears, 16 Ass. 15. if they find a Special Matter, and Conclude
according to the Law, the Special Matter is waived.

And see 18 Eliz. Dyer 153. The Jury found, Quod non Concessit prout Def. etc.
when it should be the Plaintiff, and Assigned in Error.

Then, Verdict varying from Issue; where good, and where ill.
In what Cases the Verdict, varying from the Issue, shall be good, and where
ill, and for whom the same does find.

For which see before in this Chapter of Verdicts in the Division of Special
Verdict, and in the Chapter of Issues, where they find Part, or another Day,
and the like: And see the Titles Count or Declaration, and Traverse; as also
the Cases ensuing, viz.

36 H. 6. 2. In the Case of Null tiel Record pleaded, and a Recognizance upon
Condition certified.

And 16 Ass. 19. it is holden, That upon the Issue, Ne enfeoffa pas, the Verdict
may find a Conditional Feoffment.

And 30 Ed. 3. 5. the Defendant in Account did plead Pleinment Account devant
A. and B. and the Verdict found, That he did Account before B. tantum; and a
good Verdict for the Defendant; quod nota.

And 21 Ed. 4. 10. in Entry, upon the Statute of Ric. 2. the Verdict upon the
General Issue found him guilty of Entry only into two parts of the same, and
good accordingly.

And 10 H. 6. 13. in Debt against the Heir, who pleaded Riens per Descent; to
which the Plaintiff Replied, Assets in Dale, and the Verdict found Assets in S;
and a good Verdict, for the Place is not material.

And 1 Ass. 14. if one of the Defendants in an Assize be acquitted, yet the
Plaintiff shall have Judgment against the other; and yet they Pleaded Jointly
to the Plaint, Non Disseisiverunt.

See 2 Ed. 3. 49. Brook, Tit. Verdict 20. If Executors plead, Plene
administraverunt, and it be found, That they did fully Administer to Ten
shillings, the Verdict does pass against them, and shall answer the whole
Action. Quaere inde.

And 7 H. 6. 33. the Issue was upon the Feoffment of A. and B. and the Verdict
found, That A. did only Enfeoff; and, by the Better Opinion, found against him
that does plead the same. Quaere inde.

And 40 Ed. 3. 35. If in Debt against Two, who plead Non est factum, it be
found to be the Deed of one of them, and not of the other, yet the Plaintiff
shall Recover.

And see 28 and 29 H. 8. Dyer 32. where one Declared in Debt upon a Lease of
Twenty Acres: To which the Defendant pleaded, That the Plaintiff Let the same
Twenty Acres, and Four Acres over, sans ceo que il demise les 20 Acres tantum;
whereupon they were at Issue, and the Verdict found the Demise only of 21
Acres; and great Doubt was, for whom the Verdict was found, or whether for
neither of them, and so a Ieofail.

And see Dyer 1 and 2 Mar. 115. in Debt upon an Obligation, the Breach of the
Condition was assigned in Cutting down Twenty Oaks, and Issue thereupon; viz.
Quod non succidit praedict as viginti Quercus, nec earum aliquam: And the Jury
found, that he Cut Twelve, and the Plaintiff had Judgment.

And see 22 Eliz. Dyer 367. in an Information of Usury the Defendant did plead;
Quod non habuit aut acceptavit praedictas Octoginta libr as pro lacro, etc. and
the Jury found, Quod acceptavit quadraginta libras; Et pro Resid', Non
Culpabilis; which was there (among other things) assigned for Error, and
nothing else taken notice of.

And see 47 Ed. 3. 19. One did pray to be Resceived in Default of the Tenant
for Life, and the Demandant said, That the Tenant had Riens, Prist, and so at
Issue; and the Verdict found, That neither the Tenant, or the Priee, had any
thing: Where holden, That it was found against the Priee; and the other Matter,
Que ils ne unque ount Riens, not Material; quod nota.

And see 36 H. 6. 29 and 30. If a man in Pleading confess any thing contrary to
his Form of Action, his Writ shall abate; but otherwise if the Verdict find the
same.

Then, Where the Jury find more than is in the Issue.
Where the Jury find more than their Issue.

Vide 45 Ed. 3. 25. the Defendant in Trespass of Battery did plead the General
Issue, and the Verdict found the Defendant Guilty the day mentioned in the
Declaration, and another day also, ad dampnum december librarum; and good, for
intended the Assault did continue.

And 26 Ass. 35. the Verdict did find, that the Plaintiff in the Assize, was
seized and disseised, but no Disseisor named, and the Writ did abate, although
not pleaded.

But 39 H. 6. 13. in Mordancestor the Defendant did plead a Bar, which was
found against him; and the Jury enquiring further of the Points of the Writ,
did find against the Plaintiff; and yet Judgment given for him, because there
the Points of the Writ ought not to be enquired of.

And see 7 H. 6. 8, 9, 20. if the Verdict found the Issue, and more; as the
Issue there being upon a Descent, do find the same, and a Continual Claim,
that, as to the Continual Claim, is Surplusage.

And so 39 Ed. 3. 38. the Plaintiff did Count in Annuity by Prescription, which
was Traversed by the Defendant, and the Verdict found for the Plaintiff, and
also Riens arrear, and Holden, as to that Surplusage.

The like 13 Ass. 4. in an Assise of Rent the Defendant made Default, and the
Plaintiff, to ascertain the Count made Title to a Rent-Service, and the Jury
found a Rent by Prescription, and yet the Plaintiff Recovered; quod nota.

And 13 Ass. 2. in an Assize by I. S. Clerk; the Verdict found, That he was
Prebend, Nient nosm; and the Assize did abate.

See more hereof in the Division, immediately before the last Case.

And, Verdict for the Plaintiff; yet he is Barred.
In some Cases the Verdict found for the Plaintiff, and yet he shall be Barred.

As 40 Ass. 6. in a Mortdancestor all the Points of the Writ found for the
Plaintiff, and yet he was Barred for this Reason; for although he was Heir to
his Father, yet because his Elder Brother by the Half-Blood did Enter, he was
Barred.

Then, Where the Jury give diverse Verdicts.
Where the Jury give diverse Verdicts.

As Mich. 3. and 4 Eliz. Dyer 204. To part they gave a Verdict at the Bar for
the Plaintiff, and being Remanded to enquire of the rest, came again and
changed that Verdict, and with the rest gave for the Defendant.

So in Sander's Quid Iuris clamat, more strongly, where the first was but a
Private Verdict; quod nota.

And know, Verdict must be by 12, except by Writ of Inquiry.
That every Verdict, unless by Writ to Inquire of Damages, ought to be by
Twelve.

And therefore 41 Ass. 1. a Verdict taken at the Assizes by Eleven, when the
Twelfth would not agree, 'twas holden ill, and a new Venire facias awarded, and
so the Original stood; quod nota.

Where said, That the Justices ought to have carried them in Carts; and by
other Authority, The Justices may Fine such a Jury for their Obstinacy, after
Examination.

And Observe, Verdict de been Esse.
That if a Protection be laid at the Assizes, and the Justices doubt, whether
the same do lie, or not, they may take the Verdict de been Esse; as 35 H. 6.
58. and other Books are.

Then, Where the Verdict shall be void in part, or a Ieofail.
Where the Verdict shall be void in part, or in the whole; or where a
Repleader, and a Scire facias de novo.

See the Cases before in this Chapter of Verdict, especially in the Division of
Special Verdict; or where it does vary, or is contrary to the Issue.

And see afterward in Misdemeanour of the Jury, and the same Case of 41 Ass.
of the Verdict by Eleven; and 2 and 3 Mar. Dyer 132. a Doubt only moved,
Whether a Verdict shall be void in the Whole, or not.

And, Lastly, Misdemeanour of the Jury, where it makes a Verdict ill.
Where the Misdemeanour of the Jury, or one of them, shall make the Verdict ill.

See Brook in the Title of Verdict; as namely 20 H. 7. 3. where all of them did
Eat before they did Commune of the Verdict, at their own Costs, and the Verdict
good; but if at the Costs of the Party for whom they found, then ill; otherwise
not.

Where its said also, That in respect of Necessity or Sickness, one or more of
them may Eat, or Drink.

And accordingly is 14 H. 7. 29. where the Jury, at the Nisi prius, by reason
of a sudden Tempest departing from the Bar, one of them entered into an House,
where he drank at the Request of a Stranger; that told him, The Earl of Kent' s
Part was better; as well for that the Verdict was found against the Earl of
Kent, as that the Matter was not showed in time before Verdict; but it was
Cause sufficient to Fine the Juror.

The like of an Escrowl delivered to one of the Jurors, etc.

And accordingly is 24 Ed. 3. 24. the Justice at Nisi prius being informed,
That the Sheriff had let the Jury go at large, to Eat and Drink, Refused the
Verdict, Fined the Jury and the Sheriff, and awarded a New Venire facias for
Trial of the Cause.

Yet see 14 H. 7. 1. where, in the Common Pleas, the Jury found for the
Plaintiff, and yet the Defendant had a New Venire facias; for that the Jurors,
after their Charge, did Eat and Drink, and Disallowed the first Verdict.

And it appears in Welden and Elkington's Case, in Plowden's Commentaries, That
one of the Jurors was Fined, for having a Box of Marmalade about him; but the
Verdict not avoided: But after a Privy Verdict, as is 2 H. 4. 21. and 5 Ed. 4.
6. 1. and at their own Expenses, the Jury are suffered to Eat and Drink
together, until, etc.

CHAP. XI. Of Judgments.
NExt in Order, Forms of Judgment^.
We shall Treat of Judgments.

And, First, touching the Form of a Judgment, see 3 H. 4. 2. That whether the
Plea be to the Writ, Count, or in Bar, and Judgment thereupon to be given for
the Defendant, that the Words of the Judgment are all one, and shall be
Expounded either Peremptory to other Actions; or otherwise, as the Matter of
the said Plea does require.

As if one does Demur upon the Count, the Judgment shall be, Eo quod
Insufficiens est in Lege Quer' nichil Capiat per Breve: Or Generally, Nichil
Capiat per Breve (sive Billam,) Et quod Defend' Eat sine die; and shall, as
before, in another Action be Peremptory, or not, as the Case of the first Plea
requires.

And 3 H. 4. 11. In Debt in London, the Defendant pleaded a Foreign Plea, and
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, Quod Quer' sequatur ad Communem Legem, Et
quod Defeat sine die; and there, in a New Action doubted, whether this Judgment
might be pleaded in Bar.

And 3 H. 4. 18. in that Case the Judgment is recited to be, Quod Quer' nichil
Capiat per Breve, Et quod Def. Eat sine die; quod nota.

In the next place, What Day Judgment shall be given.
What Day Judgment shall be given.

For which see 9 Ass. 11. That it shall not be given until the Fourth Day; and
if a Writ of Attaint bears Date before the said Fourth Day, it shall abate.

Then, Where, i. e. in what Court Judgment shall be given.
Where Judgment shall be given.

For which see 21 H. 7. 35. where its said, That if an Office Traversed in the
Chancery, be sent into the Common Pleas to be Tried, the Judgment shall be
given there, because the one Court and the other is coram Rege.

And 6 Ass 4. 16. That if an Assize upon a Foreign Release pleaded, be
Adjourned to be Tried in Banco, and found for the Plaintiff; if he will Release
his Damage, he may have Judgment there: Otherwise, it shall be Remanded to
Inquire of Damages.

Then shall be shown, Causes to stay Judgment.
What be Causes to stay Judgment.

As 11 H. 4. 10. and 19 H. 6. 10. If the Court think the Damages given to be
too great (as the Cases were there in Trespass and Replevin) the Court may stay
Judgment, until the Plaintiff have Released part of the Damages.

And so 11 H. 4. 17. where, after Verdict, it did appear by Examination, that
one of the Parties had delivered an Escrowl to the Jurors.

And so 11 H. 4. 71. If it appear by Matter of Record, That the Land is in the
King's Hands.

And 39 Ed. 3. 35. The Court upon Discretion did stay Judgment, because it was
supposed the Action to be brought by Covin.

Then, Judgment final.
Where Judgment shall be Final.

It appears 26 H. 8. 8. That before the Mise is joined in a Writ of Right, or
where the Tenant in that Action Voucheth, no Judgment shall be final against
the Vouchee.

Yet see 44 Ed. 3. Bro. Judgment 45. A Feme Covert was Received, and did Join
the Mise, and Judgment final given against her; yet thereof, and of an Infant,
left doubtful, 9 Ed. 4. 16.

See Fitzh. Not. Brevium, in his Writ of Right.

Then, Where the Plaintiff may have Judgment for part, and relinquish the rest.
Where the Plaintiff may have Judgment for part, and Relinquish for the rest.

For which see, first, 16 H. 7. 17. where the Plaintiff in Debt did Count part
upon a Lease of Land in London, and part of other Land: As to the first, they
were at Issue in London; and to the rest, at Issue also to be Tried in a
Foreign County; and the first Issue found for the Plaintiff ad dampnum xx d.
and Costs xx s. and the Plaintiff did Relinquish the other Issue, and prayed
Judgment for that, and had it.

And in the like Case 32 H. 6. 4. the Plaintiff demanded Judgment of that Debt
found, and Damages, and Relinquished his Costs until the other Verdict found.

And so seems 3 H. 6. 37. and 42 Ed. 3. 25. In Debt, part upon an Obligation,
and part upon a Contract: As to the Obligation the Defendant did Confess, and
to the other the Plaintiff was Nonsuit, and yet had Judgment for the other.

And 50 Ed. 3. 11. in Trespass against Two, if the one of them be Attainted
before the other appears, the Plaintiff shall not have Judgment against him
before the other appear and Plead also; except he will Release against the
other.

And so 45 Ed. 3. 3. Where one of the Defendants in Trespass does make default.

And 36 H. 6. 13. the Defendant in Debt, as to Parcel pleaded tout Temps prist,
and to the rest Nil debet; where its said, That the Plaintiff may have Judgment
of the Parcel confessed Maintenant, and of the Damages, for the Court may Tax the
same; but Cesset Executio quousque, because of the Costs.

But 22 H. 6. 48. if in Debt the Defendant plead to the Issue for Part, and a
Nil dicit to the Residue; as to the same the Plaintiff shall have Judgment
presently; but as to the Damages, he shall stay until the other Issue be Tried,
although it be in Cases where Damages ought to be severed.

But see 5 Ed. 4. 108. where in Trespass against Baron and Feme, the Baron did
plead Non Culpabilis, and the Feme a Foreign Plea; whereupon Issue was taken,
that was a Ieofail; the Plaintiff cannot relinquish the same, and Pray Judgment
against the Husband, because the Damages are not to be severed; but the Husband
shall have advantage or disadvantage of the Verdict of his Wife, if the Issue
were good.

So if Two other persons in Trespass plead severally, and the one of the
Verdicts a Ieofail, because of the Entirety of the Damages: Otherwise, if the
Defendants were severed in the Process, Pleading, or Demurrer.

And in Trespass against Two, who plead Non Culp', the Plaintiff cannot sever
his Judgment, but his Execution; and he must have Judgment before the Release.

And 5 Ed. 4. 124. it appears, That if diverse Pleas be pleaded, and one of them
goes to the Whole, the Plaintiff may Release that for doubt of the Sequel.

And see 15 Ed. 4. 25 and 26. That if in Trespass against Three, one makes
default, and the other pleads a Plea that goes to the Whole, the Plaintiff
may pray his Judgment against him that made Default, and Relinquish against the
other.

Then, Two Judgments in one Action.
Of Two Judgments in one Action.

As 36 H. 6. 2 and 3. by Prisot, in Ravishment of a Ward, the Judgment shall be
of Damages with the Body; and if the Sheriff Return, That the Heir is married,
the Plaintiff shall have a Scire facias for the greater Damages; and upon that
he shall have another Judgment and Execucion.

The like by him in Detinue, and also in Debt against Executors; where in the
one Case, if the Sheriff Return, That they are lost, and in the other a
Devastavit, the Plaintiff shall have a New Scire facias, and have Judgment de
bonis propriis. Quaere, For, according to Littleton, the first Judgment shall
be Conditional, viz. De recover les biens cu Guard, etc. Et si, etc.

And so is 22 H. 6. 41. in Detinue, according to Littleton.

And, Where Judgment shall be with Cesset Executio.
Where the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, but Execution shall cease.

See 24 Ed. 3. 61. in Dower, of Rent granted to Cease during the Nonage of the
Heir.

Also in Perkins; and there likewise, where Dower is brought, and a Term in
being before the Marriage.

And see 15 Ed. 4. 11. and 3. or 4 Ed. 3. 42. in Trespass against Three, they
all plead Non Culp' as to part; and quoad resid' plead a Gift of the Goods, and
Issue thereupon; and at the Nisi prius two make Default, and a third pleads a
Concord, puis darrein Continuance, and prayed the Issue might be Tried against
the two by Default; for that no Continuance can be made of it, they being
absent; and if not Tried now, 'twill be Discontinued.

Objected, That goes but to Part, and there is now a Plea which goes to the
Whole, which is to be Tried first: For if that be against the Plaintiff, though
he should have Verdict on the other, he can have no Judgment.

But for the Inconveniency, and for that this Plea to the Whole comes after the
Venire facias, and the other was before, therefore 'twas Tried; but if both had
been before the Venire facias, it could not have been: and 'twas found for the
Plaintiff, and Judgment was had with a Cesset Executio till the other was
Tried; for the Concord was laid in another County. So the Plaintiff Released to
him, and took Execution, though the Judgment was on the first Plea.

CHAP. XII. Of Executions.
EXecution is the last Performance of an Act, Execution, what.
as of a Judgment in a Suit, viz. Where Judgment is given in any Action, That
the Plaintiff shall Recover the Land, Debt, or Damages, as the Case is; and
where a Writ is awarded to put him in Possession, or to do some other thing
whereby the Plaintiff may be the better satisfied his Debt or Damages, that is
called a Writ of Execution; and when he has the Possession of the Land he sues
for, or is paid off his Debt or Damages, or has the Body of the Defendant
awarded to Prison, then he has Execution.

And where the Plea is in an Inferior Court, as County Court, Hundred-Court,
or Court Baron, and they defer Execution in favor of either Party, or other
Cause, then the Party may have a Writ de Executione Iudicii.

Vide Co. Lib. 6. fol. 87. a. Where is said to be two sorts of Executions, the
one final, the other with a quousque, tending to an End.

An Execution final, is that which makes Money of the Defendant's Goods, or
Extends his Lands, and delivers them to the Plaintiff, which he accepts in
Satisfaction, and is the End of the Suit, and all that the King's Writ Commands
to be done.

The other Execution, with a Quousque, is tending to an End, but not final; as
in the Case of a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, etc. which is not final, but the
Body of the Party is to be taken, to the intent to satisfy the Plaintiff; and
his Imprisonment is not absolute, but until the same be performed.

And by Co. Lib. 8. 141. the Method of obtaining these Executions, are by
certain Judicial Writs, some of which are against the Person, some of them
against the Goods and Chattels, some of them against the Lands, and some
against the Body, Goods, and Lands.

And by Co. ubi supra, The Execution for Debt, is Fourfold: 1. Of Goods only,
by Fieri facias. 2. Of the Moiety of Lands, by Elegit. 3. Upon a Statute, or
Recognizance. 4. Of the Body, by Capias ad Satisfaciendum.


Then, Against whom Execution by Capias will lie.
Touching Executions upon Judgments by Writs of Capias ad Satisfaciendum.

First, Shall be declared against what Person an Execution will lie by Capias.

As namely, 26 H. 8. 7. Not against an Abbot; but upon a Testatum, the
Plaintiff may have an Elegit into another County: Otherwise of a Knight; the
like as an Abbot, of a Bishop, Duke, etc. if it be not upon a Rescous, or other
Contempt, as 11 H. 4. 15. and other Books are.

And by Co. Lib. 8. 141. and Lib. 5. 88. and Lib. 6. 53. and Lib. 3. 12. Magna
Charta 2. 18. Westminster. 2. 11. This Writ of Execution may not be had against a
Duke, Earl, or Baron, or their Wives, but in some Special Cases; nor against an
Heir, or an Executor, but in some especial Cases.

Then, In what Cases Execution may be had by Capias.
In what Actions, and other Cases, Execution may be had by Capias.

See, first, 34 H. 6. and 48 Ed. 3. Bro. 12. That in Scire facias upon a
Recognizance, no Capias.

Yet 7 H. 4. 34. granted for the King in a Recognizance for the Peace.

Nor against Executors, in whose hands Assets were found, if not (as it seems)
upon a Devastavit Returned.

See more touching Executions against Executors in that special Title
Devastavit, in Brook's Abridgment.

And in 42 Ed. 3. 11. if one Recover in an Action upon the Case against an
Hostler, because he is not charged upon a Wrong, but a Laches, no Execution
lies by Capias.

The like in an Action upon the Statute of Hue and Cry.

And so is 42 Ass. 17. in the Case of an Hostler, although there was a Capias
in the Mean Process.

But 2 H. 4. 6. and Roll. Abridg. 898. one in Dower did Recover Damages, and
could not have Execution of them by Capias, because no Capias in the Mean
Process.

And so 11 H. 7. 15. in an Assize.

And 7 H. 6. 45. No Execution by Capias against one not Party to the Writ; as
there, where, upon Issue in Detinue found against the Garnishee, the Plaintiff
recovered the Thing against the Defendant, and Damages against the Garnishee,
and could not have Execution of the Damages by Capias.

And Note this Difference, 40 Edw. 3. 25. That in Detinue of a Bag or Box of
Writings, Execution lies by Capias: Otherwise if there be one or more Writings
in Certain; quod Nota.

Vide Pluis in Bro. Tit. Capias and Process, Court Baron, Ancient Demeasn,
Statute Merchant, etc.

And yet as appears, 11 H. 7. 15. In an Assise, where no Execution by Capias
lies against the Party for the Damages; yet if the Disseisin be found to have
been with force, and the Party to be taken by Capias pro Fine, Execution by
Capias pro Fine.
(either within or after the year, as the said Book is) he shall remain in
Execution for the Party, Quod Nota, Et quaere inde.

And so is 7 H. 4. 39, and 40. Not mentioning whether the Capias were within
the year or after; for in all other Cases the difference is taken, where the
Defendant is taken within the year upon the Capias pro Fine, and where after:

For in Fitz. Not. Br. 121. In the one Case he shall remain in Execution
without the Plaintiffs Request, and in the other not, although he do request the
same.

And 7 H. 6. 5. Somewhat doubtful, if the Plaintiff request not the same.

But 7 H. 4. 4. is clear without request of the Plaintiff, because the words of
the Writ are, Ad Respondend' tam Nobis quam Parti.

And see 14 H. 7. 15. and 15 H. 7. 5. In an Assise, where the Disseisin was
found with Force, and the Record removed, and the Defendant taken pro Fine
Regis within the year; yet could not remain in Execution at the request of the
Party, because there he could not have Execution without Scire Facias.

And so is 1 H. 7. 20. When it is after the Year, or in the time of another
King.

But as appears 11 Ed. 4. 67. This is no Execution for the Party, but at his
Election; for although, as the Case was there, he was discharged by consent of
the Plaintiff upon Recognizance given; yet the Plaintiff had at his Pleasure a
new Execution.

And so is 4 Edw. 4. 16. Escape.
But more doubted, whether there the Jailer may let him go at large by the
Commandment of the King, and it seems there that he cannot.

And 22 Ass. 74. One taken pro Fine Regis upon a Disseisin, found Pledges pro
Fine, and there said, That he should not go at large, if the Plaintiff request
him to be in Execution; quod nota.

And see the Book of 14 H. 7. 28. That after a Fieri Facias awarded, and not
returned, the Defendant was taken within the year upon the Capias pro Fine, and
at the request of the Plaintiff could not be detained for his Execution, but
found Pledges for the Fine, and went at large: Otherwise if the Scire Facias
had been returned Nichil; quod nota.

Vide Rolls Abridgment, fol. 901. Where said, That if one be condemned for a
Fine to the King, and Damages to the Party, in an Action where a Capias lies in
the Original, and he is taken by Capias pro Fine at the suit of the King, and
after suffered to escape, the Party Plaintiff may have Execution by Fieri
Facias or Elegit, or he may sue the Sheriff for an Escape.

Vide March's Reports, Case 86. Where one is imprisoned for the Kings Fine, and
upon an Habeas Corpus it is returned, That he is in Execution also for the
Damages of the Party, it shall be intended at the Prayer of the Party.

But by 13 H. 7. 6. If one be taken by Capias pro Fine, in such a Case wherein
he shall be said to be in Execution for the Plaintiff also, and he do after sue
Execution against the Defendant by Fieri Facias, or Elegit; in that Case the
Defendants Body is discharged from Execution as to the Plaintiff.

Vide Mores Reports, Capi^s Utlagatum.
Case 172, and Leonards Reports, First Part, 51. Where G. recovers in Debt in
the Common Pleas, and upon Error the Judgment was affirmed, and he had Process
of Outlawry, and the Party was taken upon the Capias Utlagatum, within the year
after the Judgment, upon Process continued, without Discontinuance against him:
And it was held that he should be in Execution without any Prayer for it, and
without Scire Facias, because the Process was continued; and though the Original
Judgment were in another Court, and that after the year he might have a Scire
Facias.

But if one be taken at the Suit of the King pro Fine Regis, after the year
upon Process continued, he shall be in Execution for the King, but not without
Prayer.

But if the Defendant be taken pro Fine Regis in a Suit wherein no Capias lies,
nor Capias ad Satisfaciendum will lie for the Party; yet in that Case upon the
Prayer of the Party Plaintiff, he shall be in Execution for him, but not
without Prayer.

And see Dyer, fol. 306. Where said, That in all Cases generally where the
Plaintiff may have a Capias ad satisfaciendum in the Suit, and the Defendant is
taken by a Capias pro Fine, or a Capias Utlagatum after Judgment, there the
Defendant shall be in Execution presently at the Suit of the Party also,
without any Prayer or Motion to the Court: And in Case where he may have a
Fieri Facias, and no Capias ad satisfaciendum, as in Assise, Redisseisin, or
the like, and the Party is taken by a Capias pro Fine, and Committed to Prison
at the Kings Suit; In all these Cases upon a Prayer, and Moving the Court, the
Defendant shall be in Execution for the Party also, but not without Prayer; and
in Case where the Plaintiff has a Judgment, and does surcease his time, so
that now he cannot have Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum, or Fieri Facias
without a Scire Facias: In these Cases, if the Defendant, after this, happen to
be taken by a Capias pro Fine for the King, or by a Capias Utlagatum after
Judgment, he shall not be in Execution for the Plaintiff without Prayer, or
Moving the Court.

In the next place shall be shown, Where Execution shall be had by Capias,
Fieri Facias or Elegit.

And, Where Execution by Capias, Fi. Fa. or Elegit.
first, you ought to know, That upon Judgments by Course of the Common Law,
were only Fieri Fac' and Capias, as namely in Trespass or Indictments; where
Process of Outlawry, Fieri Fac' or Capias at the Election of the Plaintiff; and
where no Process of Outlawry, only Fieri. Facias; until first Remedy was given
by the Statute of Westm' 2. cap. 19. which is, If a man recover Debt or
Damages, it shall be at his Election to have a Fieri Facias de Terris and
Catallis, or the Sheriff shall deliver to him omnia Bona and Catalla
(Debitoris) Exceptis Bobus and Affris Carucae, quousque Debitum fuit levat' per
Rationabil' Precium and Extent', and if he be Ousted, he shall have Assise and
Redisseisin.

And after in the same Statute, Cap. 47. De hijs quae Recordat' sunt like
Execution given upon Recognizances; upon which have been diverse Cases in the
Law of great Learning put since that time, as namely 50 Edw. 3. 4. In Decies
tantum the Elegit was Returned Nichil, and afterward the Defendant was taken
by Capias pro Fine, and by the better Opinion could not stay in the Execution
for the Party.

And by 5 Edw. 4. 41. 19 H. 6. and 30 Ed. 3. in Bro. 93. After an Elegit
awarded and returned Nichil, no Execution by Capias.

And see 13 Eliz. Dyer 299. That after an Elegit the Plaintiff could not have
Debt.

But as 21 H. 7. 19. after one Elegit returned Nichil, the Plaintiff may have
another.

But by all the Books, if the Writ of Elegit had not been returned at all, then
the Plaintiff might have a New Execution by Fieri Facias or Capias, as appears
by 17 Ed. 4. 4. where before the return of the Elegit the year did Elapse, and
after the Plaintiff had a Scire Facias and a Capias.

And 42 Edw. 3. 11. after diverse Writs of Fieri Facias upon Continuance, one
was returned Nichil, and the Plaintiff had several Elegits in diverse Counties.

And by 45 Ed. 3. 19. after a Fieri Facias returned Nichil, a Capias was
awarded.

And 10 Ed. 4. 3. after Execution by Fieri Facias of part, the Plaintiff had a
Capias for the Rest; and so is 18 Ed. 4. 12.

But by 22 Ass. 43. the Body being in Execution, no further Execution shall be
by Elegit or Fieri Facias.

And by 15 H. 7. 14, and 15. after a Capias one shall not have an Elegit, no
more than a Capias after an Elegit.

So that hereupon, and by Fitzh. Not. Brevium it appears, That after a Fieri
Facias executed in part, or not executed, the Plaintiff shall have either
Capias or Elegit; but if he betake himself either to Capias or Elegit, and
those Writs be returned, he must still keep to the same, and to no other
Execution; quod nota.

See more of this in Brook Title Elegit.

See also Dyer 4 and 5. Mariae 162. How the Plaintiff Recovering 40 l. against
one that has Land in diverse Counties, may, dividing his Debt, or entirely,
have several Elegits.

But by Hobart 58. There may not be two several sorts of Executions out an
once, but one after another.

Yet Idem fo. 2. If one Elegit be sued out, and entered of Record, though the
Plaintiff get nothing by it, yet he shall never have other Execution till
something be found, and no man will Record the Execution till he find somewhat.

Vide Yelvertons Reports, fo. 52. Where said, That if a man be taken upon a
wrong Writ of Execution, though it be returned Executed, yet because he in Truth
never was in Execution, a new Capias may issue out against him.

And Idem 180. Where Goods are taken in Execution in another County, upon a
Testatum returned, That the Defendant Nulla habet Bona, etc. in London, where
the Action was Tried, but in the County of B. where the Goods were taken, which
is false, the Execution shall be avoided, and the Party restored to his Goods
again.

But by Moor, Case 428. though the Court grant an Erroneous Execution, yet that
will not excuse the Sheriff where there is an Escape.

Yet by Hetley, Rep. 157. Where the Sheriff upon a Fieri Facias takes a part of
the Defendants Goods in Execution, and delivers them to the Plaintiff, and they
be taken from him, he shall have Execution de novo.

And by Popham in his Reports, fo. 206. one may be discharged out of Execution
by word only, as where one is in Execution at my Suit, and I bid the Sheriff
let him go, this is a good discharge.

Vide Dyer, 306. Upon Escape, Sheriff chargable in Debt or Case.
Where said, That in all Cases, where the Law does once adjudge a Defendant to
be in Execution at the Suit of the Plaintiff, if the Sheriff suffer him to
escape, he shall be chargeable to the Plaintiff for the same in an Action of
Debt, or upon the Case:

Yet by Popham 41. if he be taken in a Fresh Pursuit, Fresh Pursuit.
though in another County, by that he shall be in Execution again.

And by Co. lib. 3. 71. where the Sheriffs of London at the going out of their
Office, by Indenture did deliver B. in Execution to the New Sheriffs; and he
being in Execution at the Suit of C. and D. did make his Escape. D. only is
named, C. sues the Escape, and had Judgment; Old Sheriffs must give notice to
the New of those in Execution.
and held that B. was not in Execution of the Old or new Sheriffs, and, that
the Old are to give notice to the New Sheriffs of them in Execution, though they
be upon Record; and the Prisoners are in Custody of the Old Sheriffs, though out
of Office, till delivered to New; and if the Old Sheriffs die, the New must
take notice of them at their Peril; and the Prisoners are in Custody of the
Law, between the death of the Old and the coming in of the New Sheriffs.

But see Co. lib. 4. Blomfields Case, where two were bound jointly and
severally by Bond, both sued and condemned, and taken in Execution, the one
escaped, the other brought an Audita Querela; and held not to lie.

Vide Rolls Abridgment, 904. Where said, That if A. be taken in Execution on a
Capias ad Satisfaciendum at the Suit of B. and escape from the Sheriff, and no
return is made of the Writ, nor is the Writ filed, or any Record made of the
Award of the Capias; B. may have a Scire Facias against A. and thereupon what
Execution he will.

And see More, Case 1177. and Hob. 55, and 56. Foster and Iacksons Case, If the
Defendant die in Execution, this is a discharge of the Execution for ever, as
an Escape is: Yet Co. lib. 5. 86. contra.

But by Hob. 59. If two be bound jointly and severally to me, and I sue them
jointly, I may have a Capias against them both, and the Death or Escape of the
one shall not discharge the other: But I may not have a Capias against one, and
another kind of Execution against the other, when I sue them jointly: But when
I sue them severally, I may sever them in their several kinds of Execution; but
yet so, as if a very satisfaction be had of one, or against the Sheriff upon
the Escape of one, the other may be relieved by Audita Querela.

But if a Capias ad Satisfaciendum be had against one of them in this Case, so
as there is such an Execution as is a Satisfaction, no other can be had against
him, or his Heir or Executor, if he dies, here none may be had against either
of the others: For where the Law gives three or four kinds of Execution by way
of Choice, and the Plaintiff chooses a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and the
Defendants Body is taken thereupon, it cannot be for part as in a Fieri Facias.

Vide Anderson, Part 1. Case 166. Where the Plaintiff sued a Capias ad
Satisfaciendum against one of the County of C. that was brought into Court in
Custody of the Sheriff, where the Plaintiff was present, and being asked by the
Court, whether he would pray, that the Prisoner might be committed to the
Fleet, answered, that he would not.

And this he did because the Prisoner was poor, and not able to pay, and had
escaped out of the Sheriffs Custody, against whom, he said, he intended to
bring his Action; and thereupon the Court discharged him of his Execution, not
committing him to the Fleet, nor leaving him in the Custody of the Sheriff,
because the Sheriff did not pray it.

Then, Elegit. Its Force.
as to the Force of an Elegit.

See Westminster. 2. cap. 18. Dyer 206, 335. Co. lib. 7. 49. and lib. 4. 67, 68.
Fitzh. Not. Brev. 48. Plowd. 224. 178. 2 H. 4. 14. Bulstrode part 2. 98, 99.
Lane 20. That upon an Elegit the Sheriff is to make Execution of a moiety or
one half of all the Houses, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, Rents, Reversions and
Hereditaments, whereof, and wherein the Defendant at the time of the Judgment
had, or after had any sole Estate, or Interest, in Fee, Tail, or for Life, into
whose hands soever the same do afterward come.

So also, if the Husband and Wife do hold Lands for their two Lives, they are
Extendable upon this Writ.

But a Right only to Land, an Annuity, Copyhold-land, the Land the Husband
holds in Right of his Wife in Fee, or for Life, is not Extendable after her
Death, nor liable to Execution.

And all the Goods and Chattels, except only the Beasts of the Plow, which the
Defendant has, or at time of Execution had, are liable to Execution on this
Writ, as on a Fieri Facias: But no Goods and Chattels really, and Bona Fide
made away before Execution, are liable to be taken upon this Writ.

Vide Hob. 57. An Elegit may be sued of Lands in Ancient Demesne.

And ibidem, it may be sued after a Capias or Fieri Facias both, and after a
Capias returned non est inventus.

But by 13 H. 7. 1 Co. lib. 5. 87. 25 H. 7. 15. 33 H. 6. 47. 28 H. 8. 9. 19 H.
6. 4. and. 17 Ed. 4. 4. after an Elegit sued out and returned, the Plaintiff
may not have a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, or a Fieri Facias; but he must have an
Alias Elegit, or an Elegit in another County.

And by Hob. ubi supra, The Plaintiff may have an Alias Elegit, or an Elegit in
diverse Counties, one after another.

And Idem 58. An Elegit may be had for a Residue after a part is levied by a
Fieri Facias; and if upon the Elegit nothing be taken but Goods, which are not
enough, the Plaintiff may have a Fieri Facias.

But ibidem Dubitatur, whether if a Lease of Lands for three years be taken,
which is not enough, if now the Elegit be Peremptory.

Then ought to be known, How a man's Bail, Execution against Bail or Mainprise.
or Mainprise shall be had in Execution or discharged.

For which see, first, 47 Edw. 3. 25. and 26. Mainpernors, what?
That Mainpernors are there taken but to observe the day, that is to say, They
are such Persons as do take or receive a man into Friendly Custody, that
otherwise is, or might be Committed to Prison, upon security given by them for
his forthcoming or appearance, at the day assigned, or return of the Writ, or
Process: So that he that is Mainprised, is always said to be at large, and go
at his own liberty, not of Ward, after the day is set to Mainprise, until the
day of appearance, by reason of Summons, or otherwise.

But it is otherwise, Bail, what?
where a man is let to Bail to four or two Persons by a Judge till such a day,
for there he is always accounted by Law to be in their Ward or Custody for the
time.

And they may, if they will, keep him in Ward or Prison all the time, or
otherwise at their pleasure; so that he that is so Bailed, shall not be said by
the Law to be at large, or at his own liberty.

For, as before, 47 Ed. 3. in Trespass the Defendant coming in by Capias found
Mainpernors, and had a Supersedeas, and at the day appeared, and made an
Attorney, and the Mainpernors discharged: But Experience is otherwise at this
day, for the Mainpernors now answer the Execution in default of the Principal.

And 8. H. 4. 21. three Persons brought a Homine Replegiando, and found
Mainpernors to prosecute with Effect, where said, That if they fail, the
Defendant shall have Execution against the Mainpernors.

And 2 H. 4. 6. an Inquest did pass against the Defendant, who was demanded,
and came not, and his Mainpernors awarded to Prison, quod nota, Quaere tamen
inde, for by experience at this day, no Execution can be had against the
Mainpernors, unless some Writ of Execution be returned against the Principal,
Nichil, or Non est Inventus, and the Bail or Mainprise be discharged upon the
bringing in of the Principal, either hanging the Plea, or after Judgment before
Execution; for after Execution is once had against the Bail or Mainpernors, the
Principal is discharged; Quaere tamen inde.

And this Bail may be after discharged, as by death of the Principal, Demise of
the King, etc.

And as 32 H. 8. Brook Tit. Mainprise, If a Record be removed out of London by
a Writ of Privilege, although the same be after Remanded by Procedendo, yet the
Mainpernors are discharged.

The like where Judgment is to Replead, and the Plaintiff makes a New
Declaration; But if the Privilege were never allowed, then it is otherwise, as
it seems 31 H. 8. Procedendo 13. and Surety in Brook 28.

See likewise 38 H. 6. 4. 12. Where one having cause of Privilege in the Court
of Common Pleas, was Arrested in London, and drawn into Plea in one of the
Sheriffs Courts there, and before Judgment he delivered a Supersedeas to the
Inferior Court, yet they proceeded to Judgment, and the Party was taken in
Execution, and brought by Habeas Corpus in the Court of Common Pleas, and the
Court awarded, That the Party should be discharged of the Execution.

Vide Co. Rep. lib. 5. fol. 70. If the Principal upon a Special Bail do not pay
the Money, or render his Body, after Judgment, in discharge of his Bail, then
(and not before) Execution is to be had against the Bail.

And see Goldesbroughs Rep. fol. 175. Where said, That Execution may not be
sued out against the Bail, till a Default be returned against the Principal.

But by Hob. 116. If the Bail be in Execution, and a Writ of Error be brought,
the Court may not discharge him.

Vide Touch. Prec. 64. If a Capias be awarded, and returned non est inventus
against the Principal, and the Bail bring him not in, if the Principal die,
although there be no Scire Facias against the Bail, yet the Bail is chargable;
for though the Court will excuse the Bail, yet the Bail if they bring in the
Principal before the return of the second Scire Facias, this is ex gra^ia
Curiae, and not of necessity.

And Mich. 14 Iacobi in C. B. The Case was, That Judgment was given against one
in the King's Bench, upon which he was in Execution, and had another Judgment
aagainst him in the Common Pleas; in which Court, the Sureties to save their
Bail, brought him to Bar by Habeas Corpus to render his Body; but, before that,
he had brought a Writ of Error in the King's Bench to reverse the Judgment in
the Common Pleas; but the Record was not removed: In this Case the Court said,
That when a Man comes in to save his Bail, he shall not be Committed, if the
Party do not pray it; but when Error is brought, before that he be in
Execution, it is a Supersedeas, so that they cannot Commit him at the Prayer of
the Party.

And Waller, Praenotary, said, That the Bail is to render the Principals Body
in Execution, so that the Plaintiff may have it in Execution; but here he
cannot, in regard a Writ of Error is brought, and therefore the Bail shall be
discharged.

Vide Latch's Rep. fol. 192, 193. One had Judgment in Debt in the Common Pleas
against the Defendant, and there, after the year, without any Scire Facias took
out a Capias against him, and Arrested him; and upon this he brought Error in
the King's Bench, where the Judgment was affirmed; whereupon he was discharged,
and the Plaintiff took him again by a Capias ad Satisfaciendum, without any
Scire Facias out of the King's Bench; and there this difference was taken,
where one is lawfully taken in Execution, and after discharged by Writ of
Error, upon which Judgment is affirmed; there a New Capias will not lie against
him, but Execution shall go out against the Sureties, unless he will render
himself; but otherwise, where one was never lawfully in Execution, when the
Judgment is reversed, there he may be taken again.

Vide Rolls Abridgment 888. If in Debt against I. S. two become Bail for him,
and the Plaintiff Recover, and the Process continued till Judgment against the
Bail, Execution may be against either of the Bail, without naming the other.

And, Idem 896. he may have Execution against one of the Bail at one time, and
after have Execution against another of the Bail.

But, Idem 897. if a man have once Execution against the Bail, he may never
after have Execution against the Principal: Or, if once against the Principal,
never after against the Bail.

And, Idem ibid. if the King Recover in a Scire facias, on a Recognizance
acknowledged in Chancery, he can have no Execution against the Body: But a
Capias lies on a Judgment in a Scire facias on a Recognizance acknowledged by
the Bail, in an Action in the King's Bench.

But no Capias will lie upon a Judgment in a Scire facias, on a Recognizance
acknowledged by the Bail in the Common Pleas; but there an Action of Debt will
lie upon the Recognizance.

So, if the Bail, in an Inferior Court, enter into a Recognizance, That if the
Principal pay not the Damages and Costs recovered, or render himself to Prison;
Tunc Concedit the Damages and Costs, de terris and catallis suis levari ad opus
Querentis, no Capias will lie upon this Recognizance.

So, neither for the Plaintiff in Detinue, to recover Damages against the
Garnishee, because (as by 7 H. 6. 45. before-cited) not party to the Writ.

So, if an Inferior Court be held by Charter, and the Bail there Enter into
Recognizance, no Capias will lie for this.

But by Hobart 284. Abridged by Rolls 898. If the Principal, after Judgment,
render his Body in Court in Exonerationem Manucaptorum, and the Plaintiff does
not take him in Execution, and this is Entered of Record (as it must be) the
Plaintiff may after this Take him in Execution by Capias ad satisfaciendum.

And, Idem 899. if A. Recover against B. in the King's Bench, Damages and Costs,
and upon this has Judgment against the Bail, after Scire facias; and after B.
and the Bail join in a Writ of Error upon the Statute, in the
Exchequer-Chamber, and while this is Transacted, the Year and Day is Elapsed;
in this Case, the Court of King's Bench may grant Execution: For it is a void
Writ of Error, and as if none had been brought.

And, Idem 891. if a Recognizance of Bail be taken by a Judge of the
King's Bench at Serjeants-Inn in London, upon an Original brought in London, and
it be Certified and Enrolled in the King's Bench; it seems it may be extended in
London or Middlesex.

In the next place we shall Consider, Execution by, or without Scire facias.
Where Execution may be had by Scire facias, and where it may be had without.

And, Scire facias, what.
first, as to the Writ of Scire facias ought to be known, That Execution must
be had within a Year of the Judgment; otherwise it cannot be taken out, till
there be first sued out a Scire facias, which is a Writ Judicial going out of a
Record, and lies, where one has recovered Debt or Damages in the Kings Court,
and he sueth not to have Execution within the Year and Day, he must have his
Writ to warn the Party, and if the Party comes not, or if he comes and says
nothing in discharge or stay of the Execution, then the Plaintiff shall have a
Writ of Fieri facias, to Command the Sheriff to levy the Debt or Damages of the
Defendant's Goods.

Or, where the Process is a Capias, he may have another Writ of Execution,
called a Capias ad satisfaciendum, to Take and Imprison the Body of the
Defendant, till he satisfy the Party, Plaintiff.

And so on a Judgment to Recover Lands; if the Plaintiff do not sue out
Execution within the Year after the Iudgmen^* he may not have Execution till he
have (...) Summoned the Defendant to show C^use; why Execution should not be
had against him.

And if the Defendant cannot be found upon Summons, or cannot, or does not show
Cause, why Execution should not be made, then a second Judgment is awarded,
That Execution be done upon the first Judgment.

And here (by Co. 1. Inst. 290. and Dyer 148.) this Writ of Scire facias being
Entered, the Tenant or Defendant may thereunto plead any Matter accruing after
the Judgment, as Release, Outlawry, etc. to prevent the Execution:

But it appears by Old Natura Brev. 163. Dyer 270, 271. Hobart 56, and 57. Cro.
1 Part 185. Bulstr. 2 Part 230. Lane 16. Finch's Ley 477. That if the Plaintiff
sue out Execution within the Year, he may Continue the Judgment after the Year,
without Scire facias.

But see Fitzherbert's Natura Brevium, Tit. Scire fac', and Brook's Abridgment
134. by which (as also by diverse other Books) it appears, That Execution may be
had within the Year against a Party to the Judgment, without a Scire facias;
but otherwise, if the Record be removed into another Court.

And with these Authorities does agree 14 and 15 H. 7. And it appears also
there, That the Year shall not be accounted from the Time of the Recognizance,
but only from the Time of the Payment.

And, 23 H. 8. ibid. 119. if one Recover in Annuity, a Fieri facias shall go
out within the Year, and after Scire fac' infinite, because Executory.

And with this agrees Bro. 28. where said, That if one Recover in a Writ of
Annuity, he may have a Fieri facias of the Arrerages incurred within the Year,
and a Scire facias after, as often as the Annuity is behind, and no Writ of
Annuity after. And in every Scire fac' in which he Recovers, after the first
Judgment, he shall have Execution of the Arrerages within the Year, by Fieri
facias.

And 11 H. 4. 34. Bro. 119. after Judgment had in Annuity, the Plaintiff after
a Scire fac' may have a Fieri fac', to levy it as it becomes due.

And 21 Ed. 4. 1, and 2. if Rent be granted by Fine, the Party may have a Scire
fac' in Infinitum (as before in Annuity, or) as in Covenant upon Covenant, as
one Recovering in Trespass may bring a New Action.

And 22 H. 6. 15. Bro. 54. one Condemned in the Common Pleas, and in Execution,
Attainted after in an Assize, Remanded also thither, and could not be Committed
there, for that Execution also, without Process.

And see 39 Ed. 3. 15. Bro. 122. One had a Scire fac', to Execute a Judgment in
a Praecipe quod reddat, and Execution thereupon by Default; and after surmized
to the Court, That the Person against whom he had his Writ of Scire fac' and
Judgment, was not Tenant, but one B. against whom he had another Scire fac';
quod nota.

And Note, by the Book of 22 H. 6. 11, and 12. That at the Common Law, until
the Statute of Westminster. 2. De hiis quae, etc. If one had Recovered in Debt, and
taken out no Scire fac' within the year, he was obliged after the year to take
out a New Writ of Debt.

And see by the Book of 5 Ed. 4. and Experience, That where a Scire fac' is had
upon a Judgment, there shall be no Execution without a Garnish, ( i. e. giving
Notice, or Warning to the Party) or two Nichils returned.

Vide 19 Ed. 4. 5. where said, That in all Cases where the Heir, Executor, or
Administrator may sue to have an Execution of any thing recovered by the
Ancestor, Testator, etc. he must first have a Scire facias against the Party
against whom the Judgment is had, to warn him to show Cause, why Execution may
not be had for him against the Defendant; and then if he either make Default,
or at his Appearance cannot show good Cause, why Execution should not be had
against him, Execution shall be awarded for the Plaintiff, as it should have
been for him under whom he claimed.

Vide Roll's Abridg. 890. If one recover Damages of A. whereof part is levied
by a Fieri facias, but not all, and A. dies; the Plaintiff may have a Scire
fac' against the Heir at his Election.

And, Idem 900. a Scire facias lies upon a Recognizance (if the Conusor be
dead) against the Heir in general, or against I. S. Son and Heir of the
Conusor, without suing of the Ter-Tenants, for he shall have no Contribution
against the Ter-Tenants.

And see Dyer 208. If a Judgment be had against one that has Land, who dies,
and the Land discends to his Heir, after a Scire facias had, he may have
Execution of this Land in the Heirs hands, by Elegit against him.

Vide Co. Lib. 5. 88. If a Judgment be had in the Common Pleas, and removed
from thence by Writ of Error into the King's Bench, and there confirmed within
the year; the Plaintiff may have the same kind of Execution in that Court, as
he might have had in the Common Pleas, without any Scire facias.

But by Hob. 196, 197. where the first Action is laid, there the Execution must
be by Scire facias, if it be had.

Vide Godbolt 76. where W. had Judgment in Debt, in the Common Pleas, against
F. and after the Year, without Scire facias, took out a Capias against him, and
Arrested him; whereupon he brought Error upon the Judgment in the King's Bench,
where the Judgment was affirmed, and F. was discharged. W. took him again by an
Alias Ca. sa. without any Scire fac' out of the King's Bench, and upon that the
Sheriff returned a Cepi. It was Moved, Vide Tit. Err^r* Division 1.
He might be discharged, for that having been once in Execution in the
Common Pleas, and set at liberty, by Sureties, in the King's Bench, upon a Writ
of Error, he ought not to be taken again: But denied by the Court. For there
said, That one being in Execution, and discharged by Privilege, may be in
Execution again.

But 16 H. 7. 2. and 21 Ed. 4. 67. as also 8 H. 7. 10, and 12. contra.

Vide Cro. 1 Part 334. where Judgment was had in Debt by Husband and Wife, for
the Debt of the Wife, as Administratrix of her former Husband, and after
Judgment and before Execution the Wife died; the Husband brought a Scire
facias, and Scire feci being Returned, had Judgment by Nichil dicit; and held,
the Scire fac' ought not to have been brought by the Husband; but being done,
the Judgment thereupon, though Erroneous, must stand, till Reversed by Error.

Next, Matter and Pleas that stay Execution.
we shall consider, What Plea or Matter will stay Execution.

For which see first 10 H. 6. 6. That in Debt, or Scire fac' upon a Judgment,
or Redisseisin, no Plea that the Defendant has Error hanging of the first
Judgment.

And so is 37 H. 6. 16. in a Scire facias in the Common Pleas after the Record
removed, until it be Reversed: For its there said, that it is but Tenorem
Recordi removed, and that if nothing be done in the King's Bench upon Error, or
the Judgment be affirmed, then at the Election of the Plaintiff in the first
Judgment, he may have Execution in the Common Pleas; quaere tamen.

But 19 H. 6. 7, and 8. if the Record be not removed, or the Party be not
delayed, the Court uses to grant Execution, notwithstanding Error.

And so 7 H. 6. 42. if the Plaintiff in Error do not sue out a Supersedeas,
Execution shall be granted, notwithstanding his Writ of Error be allowed.

But 4 H. 6. 31. no Debt, or Scire fac', after the Record be removed by Error,
unless for a Nomine poenae in the Annuity.

See more hereof afterward, in the Title Error.

Next, Pleas in Bar of Execution.
What other Pleas one shall have in Bar of Execution.

See Brook 6. in Abridging the Case of 20 H. 6. a good Plea, That formerly the
Sheriff by another Writ levied the Money, or took the Body in Execution,
although the Writ was not Returned.

And so 21 H. 6. 5. where also 37 H. 8. and 19 Ed. 3. are Vouched somewhat
differing.

The like 44 Ed. 3. 18 in a Scire fac' upon Arrerages of Annuity; although
there, Payment, or Riens arrere, be no Plea.

Vide Dyer 344. If a Judgment be against an Heir by Nichil dicit, in an Action
against him on the Deed of his Ancestor, on a Scire fac', he cannot plead Riens
per Descent at the time of the Writ brought; but Execution shall be against him
of his own Lands by Elegit.

And see Godbolt 79. where Judgment was given on an Obligation of 400 l. and a
Scire fac' was sued on the same Judgment for 300 l. and the Party did not
acknowledge, that he had received the other 100 l. and held, That the Scire
fac' should not Abate, and that he should have Execution.

But by More, Case 693. in a Scire fac' on a Recognizance, Joyntenancy will
Abate the Writ.

Vide Noy 143. where A. recovered against B. in Debt, and afterward brought a
Scire fac', To which B. pleaded, That A. was Outlawed, and held a good Plea, if
he be Outlawed after the Plea in Bar pleaded in the Action of Debt.

But otherwise it is if he be Outlawed before; for then B. might have pleaded
that in Bar of the first Action.

And it was said there, That the Money being in Court, if the King's Counsel
pray to have it for the King, they must show the Outlawry sub pede Sigilli, and
he must confess himself the Party Outlawed.

And see Godbolt 96. where Debt was upon a Recovery in a Scire fac' in London,
on a Recognizance taken in the Chamber of London; and it was not showed, That
it was a Court of Record, and that they had been used to take Recognizances:
And Exception was taken to it, and Cases put, That though a judgment were void,
yet Execution might be by Scire fac', and the party might not plead that in a
Writ of Error.

And this difference was taken, where Execution was sued on such a Judgment,
and Debt brought upon it; and held, though Debt might not be brought on such a
Judgment, yet, That upon a voidable Judgment a man should recover, and might
take out Execution, and that it should stand good until the Judgment were
Reversed.

And see Mo. Case 672. where said, That in a Scire fac' to have Execution, it
is a good Plea to say, That the Plaintiff has assigned the Damages to the
King, though the King has not levied them; so that the Sheriff has levied them
by Fieri fac', though he has not Returned the Writ.

By Co. Lib. 8. fo. 12. if one pleads a Plea to a Scire facias, unto which the
Plaintiff demurs, the Defendant may join in Demurrer, and plead over part of a
Statute ad Informandum Curiam.

By 1 Cro. 65, 66. The Plaintiff shall not, after Issue, find a Fault in his
own Pleadings, and take advantage thereof: As in a Scire fac' against an
Administrator, durante Minori Aetate Executoris; the Defendant pleads, Plene
Administravit specially: The Plaintiff Replies, Quod Devastavit, but does not
say Quis Devastavit; but the Issue was, Quod praedictus A. B. (the
Administrator) non Devastavit; and it was found for the Defendant: Upon which
it was moved in Arrest of Judgment by the Plaintiff, and alleged for Cause,
That it is not said in the Replication, who Devastavit, and so might be the
Executor under Age; sed, non allocatur, for the Plaintiff shall not take
advantage of a Fault in his own Replication after Issue.

And with this agrees 1 Cro. 135. where said, That the Plaintiff, after Verdict
shall take no advantage of his own ill Declaration.

Vide 1 Cro. 39. Co. Lib. 5. 39. b. Lib. 7. 4, 6. Lib. 8. 59.

Vide Mo. Case 11. fo. 78. where an Executor pleads to a Scire facias upon a
Judgment against him, Plene administravit jour del Brief purchase, and ill, for
he might have paid Specialties before.

The like, if he had pleaded Nulla bona temps del mort le Testator, ou unque
puis; but the Plaintiff lost the advantage he might have made of that ill Plea,
by taking Issue.

Where there be several Defendants, they must join in Dilatories, though they may
sever in Pleas to the first Action.

As Pasch. 26 H. 8. Pl. 7. where a Scire facias was brought against Two, for
Damages recovered in Assize by Three; one of the Defendants pleaded, That one
of the Plaintiffs suggested by the Writ, to be dead, was alive at the time the
Scire facias was brought; and the other Defendant pleaded, That another of the
Plaintiffs supposed by the Writ to be alive, is dead; and ill: For they ought
to Join in their Pleas to the Scire facias, because they are Dilatories; though
there said, they might have severed in their Pleas at first to the Writ or
Action.

But Mich. 7 H. 7. Pl. 8. Mich. 10 H. 7. Pl. 6. and Mich, 12 H. 7. Pl. 3. one
Imparls, and the other demands the View in a Praecipe quod reddat: Quaere tamen
de hoc.

Then, Venditioni Exponas.
of the Venditioni Exponas.

If the Sheriff Return -- Quod cepit bona ad Valenciam, Et quod non invenit
Emptores, the same Writ of Venditioni Exponas is to be awarded out.

Touching which see 34 H. 6. 36. where the Sheriff did Return, That the Goods
were not taken by him, but by his Predecessor, Et ideo venditioni exponere non
potuit; and thereupon a Distringas nuper Vic' was awarded: See the Form thereof
in Brook 11.

And see Cro. 1 Part 567, 568. where the Sheriff took Goods on a Fieri facias,
and before Sale the Record was removed by Error, and a Supersedeas awarded; and
yet upon Cepit bona returned by the Sheriff, a Venditioni Exponas was awarded.

And by Yelverton 6. If one recover Debt on an Obligation, and delivers a Fieri
facias to the Sheriff, to levy the same, and the Defendant brings a Writ of
Error upon the Judgment, and has a Supersedeas upon it to the Sheriff; here so
much Goods as the Sheriff took by virtue of the Fieri facias, before the
Supersedeas came to him, shall be liable to satisfy the Plaintiff, and a
Venditioni Exponas shall go out upon it: But after the Supersedeas comes to the
Sheriff, he must not proceed upon it.

And by Dyer 363. If the Sheriff Return upon a Fieri facias -- Quod cepit bona,
and non invenit Emptores, or delay to deliver the Goods, the Plaintiff shall
have a Vendition^ Exponas to compel him to sell the same and bring in the Money:
But if he Return, That the Goods were taken by his Predecessor, the Plaintiff
may have a Distringas nuper Vic', to Command the former Sheriff to sell the
Goods, and bring in the Money.

But by Co. Lib. 3. 12. after the Sheriff has Returned on a Fieri facias, --
Non invenit Emptores, the Plaintiff cannot have a Capias ad satisfaciendum, or
an Elegit.

Vide Co. Lib 5. 90. If the Sheriff levy Money on Execution, and give it to the
Plaintiff, though he Return not the Writ, yet the Execution is good: And the
Sheriff ought to use his utmost Endeavor to levy the Money on a Fieri fac' upon
the Defendant's Goods and Chattels, and for that purpose to Enquire after them;
and it behooves the Plaintiff to Enquire also, and search diligently if he can
find any; and upon finding them; to give Notice to the Sheriff, who ex Officio
is to take and sell them, if he can; otherwise he must be Empowered by a
Venditioni Exponas; by virtue whereof he may sell them, and give the Plaintiff
his Money.

But by Yelverton 44. If the Sheriff do seize the Defendant's Goods on a Fieri
fac', the Property is not altered; yet the Sheriff may not sell them without a
Venditioni Exponas, where he has made no Return of his Writ, and is out of his
Office.

Then, Clericus Beneficiatus.
Touching Execution against a Clerk.

If the Sheriff Return, Clericus est Beneficiatus upon a Fieri fac', then shall
be awarded a Writ to the Bishop, to Sequester his Spiritual Promotion. See
thereof 13 H. 4. Abridged by Brook, Pl. 38.

But that seems upon the Return of Nulla habet bona, etc. See hereof more in
Brook, Process 2.

And see 21 Ed. 3. 7. Bro. 44. Where the Defendant may be Committed by the
Court, without Process.
That if the Party Condemned be present in Court at any time within the Year
and the Day, and deny not, but that he is the same Party, the Court, at the
Request of the Plaintiff may Commit him in Execution: Otherwise, after the Year
and the Day; quod nota.

And so 21 Ed. 4. 13. if the Defendant be present in Court at the Judgment.

See also accordingly, Dyer 2 and 3 Eliz. 182, 183. and 14 Eliz. 306.

And see more hereof in Bro. Tit. Office de Court.

And see 21 Ed. 3. 29. Of Executions in the Ports or Franchises.
where, upon a Return of a Writ of Execution upon a Statute Merchant Returned
Nichil, the Plaintiff did surmize, That the Lands did lie in the Cinque Ports,
and had a Writ of Execution to the Constable of the Ports.

And see 1 Ed. 4. 10. In Durham.
for Lands in Durham.

And by 22 Ass. 12. In Court Baron.
Execution shall be in Court Baron, but by Distress; as in a Return
Irreplegiable.

Yet 38 Ed. 3. 3. seems otherwise.

And so seems 7 H. 4. Abridged by Bro. Pl. 26.

And see 18 Ed. 4. 4. Of the Sheriffs Breaking open a Door, or Chest, to do
Execution.
and Co. 5 Part 93. That if the Sheriff do make Execution upon a Fieri facias,
or otherwise, at the Suit of a Common Person, and break open his House, Door,
or Chest, Trespass does lie against him, for Breaking of his House, Door, or
Chest, although the Execution will be good; fieri non debet factum valet.

Yet by 18 Ed. 2. Abridged by Fitzherbert, Tit. Execution 152. The Sheriff may
break Door or Chest to do Execution; for otherwise th Plaintiff shall lose the
Effect of his Suit.

And 11 H. 4. 7, and 9. Franchise.
if the Sheriff enter into a Franchise, and do Execution, the same is good
according to the Rule above; and yet he is a Trespassor to the Lord of the the
Franchise, who may have an Action of Trespass upon the Case against him, for
Infringing his Liberty. But if a Bailiff of a Franchise do any such Execution
without his Franchise, that will be void.

And by 40 Ed. 3. 21, and 22. The Sheriff in Execution of Dower of Rent cannot
drive the Beasts from the Ground, although he may deliver Execution by the
Beasts, a Clod, or Bough.

But upon a Capias Utlagatum, or a Capias for Felony, the Officer may break
open the Doors.

Otherwise (as it seems) not, although the Execution be a Non omittas propter
aliquam Libertatem.

But the Sheriff, or his Under-Officer, may (as it seems) upon any Capias,
Enter into any man's Ground, or House open, to Arrest any man that he sees
Enter; and if his Prisoner Escape, may follow and break open Doors to take him.
Quaere inde.

And see Bro. Abridgment, Tit. Faux Imprisonment.

And by Justice Jones and Berkley, 12 Car. 1. in B. R. If the Sheriff have a
Fieri facias, or Capias ad satisfaciendum against a man, and before Execution
he pay him the Money, he may not do Execution afterward; for if he do,
Trespass, or False Imprisonment will lie against him for it.

And see Co. 4 Part 91. Iinmayn's Case, where it appeared, That there were two
Joint-Tenants of a House, one of which acknowledged a Statute, and died
possessed of diverse Goods therein; and the Sheriff came to Extend the Goods,
and he and the Jury offered to Enter the House, to Extend the same; but the
Defendant, intending to disturb the Execution, shut the Door, so as the Sheriff
could not Enter to do his Office.

In which Case, these Points were Resolved;

First, That if a Recovery be in a Real Action, or in an Ejectione firmae, the
Sheriff upon an Habere facias Seisinam, or Possessionem, may break the House to
do Execution; because after the Judgment, it is not the House of the Defendant.

Secondly, In all Cases where the King is Party, after the Sheriff has
signified the Cause of his coming, if no Door be open, he may Break-open the
House to do Execution; but if he may Enter it without Breaking of it, or upon a
Request, if in such Case he Break the House, he is a Trespassor.

Thirdly, In all Cases of a Common Person, If the Door be open, the Sheriff may
Enter the House of a Subject, to do Execution against Body or Goods.

Fourthly, That it is not lawful for the Sheriff, upon Request and Denial, in
Case of a Common Person, to Break the House of a Subject, to Execute any
Process: And the Sheriff cannot Break the House by virtue of a Fieri facias,
but he shall be a Trespassor: But if he does so, and does Execution, the
Execution done by him is good.

And see for this Co. 11 Part 82. Bowle's Case; and see 18 Eliz. 44. by all the
Justices.

Then ought to be known, Discharge by Error, and Mainprize.
How one in Execution shall be delivered without Payment.

And therefore, by 16 H. 7. 2. If the Party be in Execution, and the Record be
removed by Error, and he find Mainprise to Prosecute with Effect, and to
satisfy, etc. although the Judgment be affirmed, he shall never be in
Execution by his Body upon the same, unless he will render his Body, to save
his Sureties voluntarily.

And so is 21 Ed. 4. 67. if the Plaintiff be once in Execution.

And so is 8 H. 7. 10.

But by the said two Books last cited, Execution in B. R. after Error.
If no Execution be awarded before the Writ of Error, then Execution in the
King-Bench may be awarded.

And so is 6 Ed. 4. 19. If a Judgment in a Mean Court be reversed by a Writ of
False Judgment, or Error in the Common Pleas.

And so is 12 H. 4. 24. if he that Removed the Record do nothing.

See accordingly 39 H. 6. 3 and 4. and after, in the Title Error.

Then is to be Observed, Discharge by Escape.
That in some Cases an Escape is a Discharge of Execution for ever: As namely,
If the Prisoner in Execution go at large, by Consent of the Plaintiff, or of
the Jailer.

But as 13 H. 7. 1. is, If he Break Prison of himself, and afterward the
Jailer take him again, because of his own Wrong, whereof he shall have no
advantage, he shall remain for the first Execution, unless the Plaintiff, by
bringing an Action of Debt against the Jailer, do refuse that Advantage against
the Prisoner.

And so seems Stamford.

Yet 14 H. 7. 1. although the Jailer may take him, yet the Plaintiff shall have
no Advantage thereof.

But by 11 H. 4. 12. the Plaintiff may also have Debt against the Party.

And by 41 Ass. 15. after an Escape of the Prisoner and Death of the Keeper of
the Prison, the Plaintiff prayed a New Capias against the Defendant, and it was
granted.

Quaere, If not to be in Execution again, because no Remedy else for the
Plaintiff.

And 33 H. 6. 47. If the Party in Execution die, the Debt is discharged.

So, against him, if he Escape.

See Mo. Case 1177, and Hobart 55, 56. Foster and Iackson's Case; where said,
That if the Defendant die in Execution, it is a Discharge of the Execution for
ever, as an Escape is.

Yet see Co. 5 Part 86. contra.

But by Hob. 59. If two be Bound jointly and severally to one, who sues them
jointly, he may have a Capias against them both, and the Death or Escape of the
one, shall not discharge the other.

But he may not have a Capias against one, and another kind of Execution
against the other, when he sues them jointly; but if he sues them severally, he
may sever them in their several kinds of Execution; but yet so, as if once a
very Satisfaction be had of one, or against the Sheriff upon the Escape of one,
the other may be relieved by Audita Querela.

But if a Capias ad satisfaciendum be had against one of them in this Case, so
as there is such an Execution as is a Satisfaction, no other can be had against
him, or against his Heir or Executor, if he die: For where the Law gives
several kinds of Execution, by way of Choice, and he Chooses a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and the Body is taken, it cannot be for part, as in a Fieri
facias.

But see the Statute of 21 Iac. 1. cap. 24. how the Law is thereby changed in
this Point. For it is Enacted by that Act, That he, or they, at whose Suit any
Person is charged in Execution, for Debt or Damages recovered; their Executors
or Administrators may, after the Death of the Person so charged in Execution,
lawfully sue forth New Execution against the Lands and Tenements, Goods and
Chattels of the Person so Deceased, in like manner, as if the Person Deceased
had never been in Execution.

And see Roll's Abridgment 903. That if one Recover in Debt against I. S. and
then Outlaw him on the Judgment; and afterward I. S. is taken within the Year
by Capias Utlagatum, at the Suit of the King, and dies in Prison before any
Prayer made by the Plaintiff, That he might be in Execution at his Suit: This
is no Satisfaction; therefore the Executor or Administrator of him that is
dead, may be charged for the Debt, notwithstanding he was in Execution by being
taken upon the Capias Utlagatum.

But by Anderson 1 Part, Case 273. if one that has an Execution of Land,
Release one Acre of the Execution, all is Extinct by the Release of the
Execution in one Acre.

And by Hobart 60. If the Party in Execution Escape of his own wrong, the
Plaintiff can have no other Execution of him or of his Executors. But if he
take one in Execution, where there are several Debtors by one Obligation, there
he may take another after the Escape of that one; or he may have Satisfaction
from the Sheriff upon the Escape, at his Choice.

And by Co. 5 Part 86. and 6 Part 13. and 8 Part 152. and Dyer 152. If the
Defendant pay the Money, he is discharged: But if the Plaintiff makes any
Release, or other such like Act, to the Defendant, being in Execution,
amounting to a Discharge; this will not be a Discharge Ipso facto, but by this
means he may have a Discharge. And yet, if the Plaintiff himself shall deliver
the Prisoner out of Execution, he is thereby Ipso facto, discharged of the
Execution for ever.

So, if the Plaintiff does acknowledge Satisfaction upon Record.

So, by 13 H. 7. 1. Plowd. Com. 36. and 33 H. 6. 47. If one taken in Execution
upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum does Escape, and the Plaintiff bring his Action
against the Sheriff, or has a Cepi Returned on the Writ, and it be Filed; by
this the Defendant is discharged against the Plaintiff for ever. But if no Cepi
be Returned, nor Action brought against the Sheriff, the Law will Adjudge the
Party to be out of Execution.

But by Co. 5 Part 86. If Two be in Execution for one Debt, on a Bond made by
Two, and the Sheriff suffers one of them to Escape, this will not discharge the
other, till the Plaintiff has Recovered his Debt of the Sheriff.

But by Co. 8 Part 143. and 38 H. 6. 4. If one be in Execution upon a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and the Court adjudge the Judgment or Execution Erroneous, and
so null it; by this the Defendant is discharged of that Execution.

Yet by Fitz. Not. Brev. 146. If Two be in Execution for one Debt, and one of
them dies under Execution, that will not discharge the other.

But 38 H. 8. Dyer 6. Discharge by Privilege of Parliament.
One in Execution being a Burgess of the Parliament, and discharged by a Writ
of Privilege; doubted, whether discharged for ever.

But by the Statute of 1 Iac. 1. cap. 13. it appears, That if a Prisoner be
delivered out of Execution by Privilege of Parliament, it is no discharge; but
after the Privilege is gone, he may be taken again.

So, Pasch. 30 H. 8. Dyer 62. Trewynyard's Case, where Trewynyard, being a
Burgess of Parliament, was taken upon an Exigent, after a Capias he brought a
Writ of Privilege of Parliament, and the Sheriff let him at Liberty:

In this Case it was Resolved,

First, That the Privilege was Grantable, notwithstanding the Execution;
because the King and Realm have an Interest in the Body of every Burgess of
Parliament, and the Commonweal shall be preferred before the Interest of any
private Person.

Secondly, That, after the Parliament ended, he might be taken in Execution
again: For that the Plaintiff shall not be prejudiced in his Execution by the
Act of the Law, which does Wrong to no man.

See 3 Ed. 6. Dyer 66 and 67. Going at large by Baston, i e. Keeper, or
Tipstaff.
where the Sheriffs of London, in Debt upon an Escape, by going at large by
Baston in London, did plead, That their Predecessors let him at large, and good.

And Note, by Dyer 4 and 5 Mar. 162. 10 Eliz. 275. and 12 and 13 Eliz. 206. If
the Prisoner have the King's Protection to go at large by Baston, it is an
Escape; and the Warden of the Fleet may be Charged upon an Escape.

And see the same Book of Dyer 10 Eliz. where Debt was brought against the
Marshal of the King's Bench, or his Deputy.

And see Plowden's Commentaries, in Platt's Action of Debt against the Sheriffs
of London; where it seems, That by the Custom of the City of London, one in
Execution in Ludgate, may go by Baston within London; but otherwise in
Southwark.

But Note, the same Book of Dyer, in 3 Ed. 6. That the Sheriffs of London were
there Charged, for suffering one in Execution in Ludgate, to go at large in
London by Baston; quod nota.

Then, Discharge by Act of the Court, Law, or Plaintiff.
Where the Act of the Court, of the Law, or of the Plaintiff, does discharge
the Party of the Execution.

As namely 24 Ed. 3. 44. If one recover the Land and Body in a Writ of Ward,
and Release the Body, the Land is thereby discharged.

But otherwise of a Grant.

The like seems 40 Ass. although the Land be Extended and Granted over.

The lik in Pop^'s Case, in Plowden's Commentaries, If the Cognizor, after
Execution, Enfeoff the Cognizee of part; but it is otherwise before Execution;
for there the Lands be in the Hands of the Cognizor, and his Body is Charged.

See 6 Ed. 4. 4. Attaint of Felony.
and 24 Ed. 3. 45, 46. That if one in Execution be Outlawed, or Condemned for
Felony, and afterward have his Pardon; yet touching his Body, the same shall
still remain in Execution.

Notwithstanding, by the same Book of 6 Ed. 4. if he take himself to his
Clergy, he shall be out of Execution: And so seems the Book 7 Eliz. 248.; but
ibid. 261. e contra.

See hereof Bro. Abr. 272.

And see 10 Eliz. 275. By assent of the Court, and Parties.
That one in Execution, by Agreement of the Parties and the Chief Justice, went
at large for a time, and came afterward to Prison, and no Discharge.

But by 4 Mar. Dyer 162. and 12 Eliz. 296. and other Books, The License of the
Queen, or of the Barons of the Exchequer, by Baston, or any of the Chief
Justices License, is no sufficient Warrant for the Jailer to suffer the
Prisoner to go at large.

Then, Sheriff Fined for Disobeying a Supersedeas.
Where the Sheriff shall be Fined for a Contempt in doing Execution, after a
Supersedeas delivered to him.

For which see Hill. 11 Iac. in B. R. Thomas and Owen's Case, Bulstr. 2. Part
194; where, after a Judgment in Ejectione firmae, and Habere fac' possessionem,
a Writ of Error was brought, and a Supersedeas granted, directed to the
Sheriff, to stay Execution; and this Writ of Error and Supersedeas were showed
to the Sheriff, who contrary thereto did Execute the Writ of Habere fac'
possessionem. It was holden by the Court to be a great Contempt; and a Writ of
Restitution was Awarded.

CHAP. XIII. Of Error, and False Judgment.
THe word ERROR, Error, what.
has a twofold signification:

And, first, it is taken for some Fault in a Suit at Law; which is sometimes in
the Proceedings before Judgment, and then it makes void the whole Record, and
sometimes in the Judgment it self, and then it has the same Effect: But if it
be after Judgment in the Execution, then the Execution is only thereby
destroyed; but the Judgment it self, and all the Proceedings, had before the
obtaining thereof, shall stand good, and a New Execution is only to be made
out. And where there are two Judgments, as in some Cases there be, there the
last may be avoided, and the first stand good. And where the Execution is
avoided for such Mistakes, the Party shall have Restitution of that which was
taken from him thereby.

And in this Sense it is sometimes in Matter of Fact, as where one of the
Parties to the Suit is dead when the Judgment is given; and this, if it come to
be Tried, is to be Tried by Jury: And so of the like Errors.

Or, it is where any Discontinuance is in the Suit, or undue Proceeding,
appearing by the Record it self.

And this sometimes is in Matter of Law, when it shall appear by the Record it
self, That the Judgment in the Action was not given according to Law.

And these two last kind of Errors, appearing in the Record it self, are to be
tried and determined by the Judges of the same, or some other Court.

These Errors also, are some of them in the Lineal Proceedings of the Suit; as
in the Writ, Count, Plea, Replication, Rejoinder, Sur^ejoynder, Rebutter, or
Surrebutter.

Or, they are in some Collateral Matter relating to the Suit; as in the Bail,
Removal of the Suit, or the like.

Or, it may be in the improper, or undue Commencement of the Action, namely,
where one Action is brought for another, or in the Form of the Writ, or the
like.

Secondly, Error is taken for the Writ of Error it self, which is the Remedy
given to the Party, who suffers by the Error, for his Relief.

This Writ of Error, Writ of Error, what.
called in Latin, Breve de Errore corrigendo, is thus defined by Fitzherbert in
his Natura Brevium, fo. 20. A Writ of Error does lie to Redress a False
Judgment given in any Court of Record, as in the Common-Bench, London, or other
City, having Power (by the Kings Charter or Prescription) to hold Plea of Debt,
or Trespass above 40 s.

In what diversity of Cases this Writ lies, see the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 8.
and Register of Writs Judicial, fo. 34.

And see the Statute of 3 Iac. 1. cap. 8. That no Writ of Execution shall be
stayed by any Writ of Error to be brought, until a Recognizance with two
Sureties be given in the Court to prosecute it, and to pay the Costs and
Damages assessed, if the Judgment be affirmed.

And see the Statute of 21 Iac. 1. cap. 24. That double Costs shall be paid by
him that brings a Writ of Error to delay Execution, if it be after Verdict and
Judgment in Debt for Tithes, in an Action upon the Case, on a Promise to pay
Money, upon Trover and Conversion, or in Detinue or Trespass.

See also the Statute of 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 8. whereby it is Provided; That
in Writs of Error, to be brought upon any Judgment after Verdict, in any Writ
of Dower, or Ejectione firmae, Execution is not to be stayed, unless the
Plaintiff in the Writ of Error be bound to the Plaintiff in the Action, as the
Court shall Order: That if the Judgment be affirmed, or the Writ of Error be
discontinued by Default of the Plaintiff, or the Plaintiff be Nonsuit in the
Writ of Error, that they shall pay such Costs and Damages as the Court shall
appoint: And the Court may Inquire what special Loss the Plaintiff, in the
first Execution, has by this Delay; and this the Court is to give him by way
of Increase of Damages.

But this Act is not to Extend to Writs of Error, brought by Executors or
Administrators, nor any Action Popular, nor other Action brought on a Penal
Statute; except Debt, for not setting out of Tithes, nor to any Indictment,
Presentment, Inquisition, Information, or Appeal.

In the next place shall be shown, How one shall proceed to Reform Erroneous
Proceedings against him.

As namely, If the Judgment be in the Common Pleas, then it shall be by Writ of
Error returnable before the Justices of the King's Bench, as appears by
Fitzherbert's Not. Brevium; upon the Return whereof, after the assignment of
the Errors, and not before, Scire facias.
he shall have a Scire facias, if the Matters assigned be doubtful to the
Court, otherwise not.

But in Error against the King, there shall bo no Scire facias.

And Note, That the Record shall not be Entered, till the Parties have a Day by
Scire facias; and if he assign one Error, he shall have advantage of all other
in the Record; except such as be Errors in Fact, which he shall never have
advantage of after a Scire fac' awarded, and but one Error in Fact may be
assigned.

And the Form of Assigning of Errors, Form of assigning Error.
as there appears, is to assign them particularly, and not in omnibus Erratum
est.

And against an Assignment of Error in Fait, there in omnibus Erratum est is no
good Plea.

Where it also appears, Discontinuance.
That if all that Term in which the Record is removed, the Plaintiff in Error
does nothing; or if he assign his Errors, and sue out no Writ of Scire facias,
retornable the same Term, or the next, all is Discontinued, without a New Writ
out of the Chancery -- Quae coram vobis resid'.

And so it is (as it seems) by 9 H. 6. 13. Nonsuit.
if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit in a Writ of Error.

And so 3 H. 6. 26. if the Writ abate.

But of a Writ of False Judgment otherwise, as it seems.

And as the same Book 9 H. 6. If the Plaintiff in Error do nothing, the
Plaintiff, in the first Judgment, upon two Scire fac' shall have Execution, or
if he be Nonsuit in the first Writ; quaere.

And by 20 H. 6. 18. If upon the Scire fac', then if the Plaintiff be Nonsuit,
the Court may award Execution, unless he bring a New Writ of Error presently.

And where the Plaintiff is in Execution, By Attorney.
there he must assign Error in Person; otherwise by Attorney.

And Note, Record, not Transcript removed.
That upon a Writ of Error the Record it self is always removed, and not the
Transcript.

But by 24 Ed. 3. 24 and 25. Original.
the Original Writ is not at first removed, unless the want thereof be assigned.

Except upon a Fine, Fine.
which if the Justices Reverse, they shall send for the Record of the Fine, and
avoid it.

And so 44 Ed. 3. 28. Bro. 24. In a Franchise.
how Error of a Fine non rite levat', in a Franchise, shall be prosecuted.

And sometimes Errors shall be redressed in the same Court, In the same Court.
as Error in Process in the Kings Bench, because the Default of the Clerks; but
not without Writ, though the same Term.

But the like may be done the same Term, in the Common Pleas, without Writ; but
in another Term, neither by or without Writ.

And it appears by the same Book, Durham.
That Error in Durham, in any Mean Court there, shall be redressed by Writ of
Error there, before the Bishop himself.

And the like in Ireland, Ireland.
in the King's Bench there; but Error there, or before the Bishop himself in
Durham, shall be redressed in the King's Bench here.

And 19 H. 6. 12. Error in County-Palatine, Palatine.
to be redressed here at Westminster; and Errors in Wales, Wales.
to be redressed (by Justices Errants there, if there be any, otherwise) in the
King's Bench here; quod nota.

And 21 H. 7. 33. Callice.
Error in Callice was Redressed here, although the Judgment was there,
according to the Civil Law.

And see 24 H. 6. 241. Chester.
and 18 Eliz. Dyer 15. How Error in Chester shall be redressed.

And touching Erroneous Proceedings in London, London.
if they be in the Sheriffs Court, the Writ shall issue out of Chancery,
causing the Record to come before the Mayor (be the Judgment upon Writ out of
Chancery, or upon Plaint only;) Supersedeas.
and another Writ, that after the removing of the Record, they Award no
Execution.

But if the Plaintiff, in Error there, will not proceed; then a Writ is to be
Awarded to the Mayor, to make out Execution.

But if the Erroneous Judgment in London be given before the Mayor and
Sheriffs, Hustings.
in the Hustings, then to be Reversed by Commission out of the Chancery; upon
which the Commissioners shall Award a Precept, to cause the Record to come
before them, and to summon the Parties.

And by the same Book, last cited, In Assize.
the form of a Writ upon an Erroneous Judgment in an Assize, be the same
Adjorned into the Bench or otherwise, does appear.

And where an Erroneous Judgment is given in the Chancery, Chancery.
the same shall be Reversed in the King's Bench.

As 14 Eliz. Dyer 315. where a Deed bore Date before the Recognizance, and
delivered after.

And touching Erroneous Proceedings in all other Inferior Courts of Record,
Inferior Courts of Record.
the same are to be Reformed by Writ of Error out of the Chancery, retornable
at the Pleasure of the Party, either in the King's Bench, or the Common Pleas;
and to assign Errors, and warn the Parties, as before.

And see 14 Eliz. Dyer, ubi supra, Error in Chancery reformed in C. B.
That an Erroneous Judgment in the Chancery, was Reversed in the Common Pleas.

Quaere of the Erroneous Proceedings in the Cinque Ports, Cinque Ports.
-- Ubi Brevia Domini Regis non currunt. For by the Book 30 H. 6. 6. of Debt,
against a Jailer of the Cinque Ports, upon an Escape; Holden, That an Erroneous
Judgment there was Reversable before the Constable of Dover.

And so seems the Book of Diversity of Courts, by a Special Writ out of
Chancery, directed -- Custod' Quinque Portuum, who shall write to the Barons
for the Record.

And so 23 Eliz. Dyer 376. Shipway.
at Shipway; and, if it be Reversed, the Mayor and Iurats to make a Fine, and
the Mayor to be Deposed.

But 3 and 4 Eliz. Dyer 206. Attaint of a Judgment in Romney-Marsh. False
Judgment.
an Attaint here of a False Judgment in Romney-Marsh.

But if Erroneous Proceedings be in the County Court, Hundred-Court, or
Court Baron, either in Plea Real (as Droit Patent) or Personal, or by Writ or
Plaint, the Writ shall issue out of Chancery: If in the County Court, then
directed to the Sheriff; and if in another Court, then is the Writ an Accedas
ad Curiam to the Sheriff, and ought to be Certified by the Suitors; for if no
Suitors, then no Writ of False Judgment.

And Note, Real Action.
That upon a Judgment in a Real Action in an Inferior Court, the Writ of False
Judgment lies against the Tenant of the Land, and not against him that is
Party to the Judgment.

Neither does it lie for the Defendant in a Real Action, until the Demandant
has Entered upon him.

The like, Personal Action.
as it seems, in Personal Actions, not before Execution.

But in an Assize of Fresh Force, Fresh-force.
no Writ of False Judgment, but a Writ of Error.

And when all the Record is Certified, as well the Original, as all the Mean
Process, then the Plaintiff is to Assign his Errors. And if he proceed not, but
be Nonsuit, the other shall not have Execution without a Scire facias, against
the Plaintiff in the Writ of False Judgment, who then shall Assign his Errors,
and put in Sureties, etc.

And it appears in the said Writ of False Judgment, That if the Defendant in
that Writ of False Judgment make Default after Appearance, a Grand Distress
shall be awarded against him. And, if he make Default again, or cannot save his
first Default, Judgment shall be given against him, without respect to the
Errors, as it seems. And if, upon the Record Returned, the Defendant offer to
Aver, That the Record was otherwise, it shall be Tried by the Country; quod
nota per Stat. 1 Ed. 3.

And touching Error in the Exchequer, Error in the Exchequer.
none lay at the Common Law before the Statute of 32 Ed. 3. which speaks only
of Error in Process; and that they should amend the Rolls, and send them into
the Exchequer, to proceed to Execution; and yet they do Reverse Judgment, etc.

But by the Book of 15 Ed. 4. 18. the Chancellor and Treasurer cannot proceed
to Execution, as the Justices of the King's Bench may do; but must Remand the
same into the Exchequer for that purpose.

And it appears, Forma brevis de Errore.
28 H. 6. 11. That the Writ of Error ought to recite the Judgment to be given
coram Baronibus, and not coram Thesaurario and Baronibus.

And of Error in the Common Pleas, Error in C B.
the words of the Writ must be, Coram Capital' Iustic' and Sociis suis; for
that is the Form of Entry of the Pleas there.

And touching any Erroneous Judgment given in the King's Bench, Error in B R.
see the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 8. How Erroneous Judgments in certain Actions
in the King's Bench, there particularly named, and not touching the King, may be
Reformed in the Exchequer-Chamber, or in Parliament; and if in the
Exchequer-Chamber, then before the Justices of the Common Pleas, and the Barons
of the Degree of the Coif, and the Record to be brought back again into the
King's Bench.

And see the Statute of 31 Eliz. cap. 1. of Discontinuance of Writs of Error in
the Exchequer and the King's Bench, That it shall not be needful for all to be
present.

And by the Writs of Error in the Register it appears, By a Stranger to the
Judgment.
That sometimes a Stranger to the Judgment may have his Writ of Error, as,
Tenant by Resceit, Vouchee, He in the Reversion or Remainder, and the Tenant,
both at one time. And if the Feme be Resceived upon the Default of the Husband,
both of them may have Error, or False Judgment.

And if Erroneous Execution be awarded upon a Recognizance, the Feoffee may
have a Writ of Error, as appears 17 Ass. 24.

See Dyer 4 H. 8. 1. accordingly, and that he in the Reversion by the Common
Law might have it when his Title accrued; and by the Statute of 9 R. 2.
presently.

But 21 Ed. 4. 27. in Debt against a Sheriff, upon an Escape, he shall have no
advantage of Error in the first Record, because he is a Stranger to it.

And so is 9 Ed. 4. 3. That a Stranger shall not Falsify, but in that which
disproveth the Cause of Action.

But 22 Ed. 4. 30. the Vouchee, Tenant by Resceit, Garnishee in Detinue, or
Foreign Attachment in London, may have these Writs.

Then shall be considered, Heir, Executor, or Successor.
Whether the Heir, or Executor, or Successor, shall have these Writs.

And first, by Fitzh. Not. Brev. touching the Successor, if the Matter touch,
and lie in Succession, then the Successor of the Abbot, Parson, and the like,
shall have these Writs.

But if Judgment in Debt or Damages in an Action Personal, be given against a
Bishop or a Parson, his Executor, and not the Successor shall have these Writs.

And for Debt or Damages recovered, the Administrator or Executor, and not the
Heir shall have these Writs.

But touching that which the Heir is to have by Descent, of that the Heir shall
have Error, and False Judgment.

The Heir shall likewise have a Writ of Error, to Reverse an Utlary of Felony
or Treason against his Father; as appears by Fitzh. Not. Brevium; and by that
Reason the Executor shall have a Writ of Error to Reverse an Utlary in Trespass
or Debt against his Testator, because of his Right to the Goods.

And so is 11 H. 4. 65.

But where the Writ of Error does both Entitle the Heir and Executor; Damage^.
as where Judgment in an Assize, or Entry sur Disseisin, etc. is given against
one, who dies; if the Heir do not bring Error or Attaint for the Principal,
the Executors are remediless for the Damages and Costs recovered.

And so seems the Book of 9 Ed. 4. 12. 314.

But if the Heir Reverse the Judgment, he shall not (as it seems) be restored
to the Damages; but the Executor, by Scire facias upon that Judgment of
Reversal.

Yet if two Jointenants lease Land and Damage, the Survivor shall be restored
to the one and the other.

And accordingly 46 Ed. 3. 13. the Feme had an Attaint of a Verdict against her
and her Husband, although the Goods of the Husband subject to the Damages.

And so 19 Ed. 4. 6. the Executor shall not have Damages recovered in Detinue
of Charters, before the Heir have a Scire facias to have the Charters.

And see 50 Ed. 3. 3. where one in the Remainder in Tail recovered in Wast, and
before Execution died without Issue, and his Executor had Execution.

And see 11 H. 4. 16. That if one of the Sisters after Abatement die, and the
Aunt and Niece join in Mortdancestor, the Damages, from the Death of the Aunt
Jointenant, and before the Damages for the surviving Aunt, to be several: Where
also appears, That if found for the Baron and Feme, Plaintiffs in an Assize,
and that the Goods of the Husband were taken, like Judgment as before shall be
given.

And 14 Ed. 3. Fitzh. Execution 15. if three Coparceners recover, and one of
them die before Execution, the Damages survive not, except they had once joined
in an Elegit.

See more hereof before in the Title Execution, and in the Abridgments of Brook
and Fitzherbert under that Title.

And by this Reason the Heir to the Land, What Heir shall have these Writs.
and not the Heir at the Common Law, shall have these Writs; as the Heir in
Tail Special, and Borough English, and the like: For it is not like to a
Condition, or Waranty, as are 9 H. 7. 24. 3 H. 4. 19. and other Books.

Then we shall see, Of Es^oppels in assigning Error.
What things one shall be Estopped by or past the Advantage, to assign Error.

For which see Fitzh. Not. Brev. as follows, viz. That if one Utlawed do
purchase his Charter of Pardon, yet he may have Error to Reverse the Utlary.

And so is 18 Ed. 3. But against a Disclaimer, the Tenant shall have no Writ of
Error.

But as there, and 6 Ed. 3. after Non-tenure found against him, he may.

And one Condemned shall not assign Error in the Process.

Yet he that does Confess the Action, shall have a Writ of Error.

And it appears there also, Entry sur Disseisin.
That if in a Writ of Entry sur Disseisin there want these words -- Quod clamat
esse Ius and Haereditatem, if the Tenant plead, he shall not have advantage
thereof by Error.

And so in a Writ of Detinue of Charters of Land, and in the Count the
Certainty of the Land is not declared; yet thereof is a qu^ere.

And so of the like to this (for which see Brook's Abridgment, Tit. Error, and
25 H. 8. Dyer 5.) That the Party having Interest in the Land by Descent, or
otherwise, shall neither have Error, or Attaint.

Some things there be also, What shall not be Assigned for Error.
that one shall not Assign for Error: As,

That the Clerks of their own Heads gave Judgment: Or, That the Jury gave a
Verdict contrary to the Judgment; because these are Repugnant to that which the
Court do as Judges.

Neither, as there appears, may many Things be assigned for Error, that were
for the advantage of him that does Assign them: As,

That he made an Attorney; was Essoined; had Aid; the View, or the like, when
it ought not; or that he had a Day longer than he ought, as appeats in Bro.
Abridg. Tit. Error.

See 14 Eliz. Dyer. 315. that the Plaintiff shall not Assign, That he wanted
the Judgment -- Ideo in misericordia; nor the Defendant -- Quod Capiatur, etc.

And touching Diminution; Diminution, what.
which according to Fitzh. Not. Brev. 25. and Bulstr. 1 Part 43. is, where a
Record is Certified in part, but not all of it, so that there is some
Diminution in part thereof, then the Party concerned in it may have a Writ
directed to the Court from whence it came, to send the whole (...).

See the Book of 9 Ed. 4. 32. where one of the Errors assigned, was the want of
a Writ of Re-summons: To which the Defendant did plead, In nullo Erratum est,
and had a Writ to Certify; and yet upon the Assignment of Error in fait -- In
nullo est Erratum was held no Plea.

And so Note, That after the Plea of -- In nullo est Erratum, the Defendant had
advantage to allege Diminution.

Yet 7 Ed. 4. 25. to the contrary.

See 22 Ed. 4. 24. touching this Matter.

See also 11 Ed. 4. 10. That one shall not allege Diminution in a thing mere
contrato the Record.

And see 15 Eliz. Dyer 321. That where Diminution is alleged, a Certiorari
shall be awarded.

And Note, by the Book of 19 H. 6. 7 and 8. If after the Writ of Error be
allowed, Supersedeas.
the Plaintiff in Error Remove not the Record, the Judges of the Common Pleas
will award Execution: Or, if he make the Retorn of the Writ of Error too long;
or, if they think the Errors assigned to be frivolous.

But the Court of King's Bench may award a Supersedeas.

And by 21 H. 6. 26. If one in Prison, upon a Judgment to Account, brings
Error; yet he shall remain in Prison; quod nota.

And it appears 21 Ed. 3. Bro. 61. That a Writ of Error hanging, is no
Supersedeas to have a Scire facias against a Stranger to the Judgment.

And as appears by 28 and 29 H. 8. Dyer 32. and 18 Ed. 4. Debt lies upon the
Judgment, notwithstanding Error, and for the Costs, although the Judgment be
Reversed.

See 23 Eliz. Dyer 375. where, Error in Parliament.
upon a Recovery in Assize, Error was brought in the King's Bench, and the
Judgment there affirmed; and a New Writ was brought in Parliament upon that
Judgment, and the Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, brought the Record
into Parliament, as likewise the Transcript; and after that they were Examined,
Remanded the Record; and diverse Errors were assigned in the King's Bench.

Then touching Amendment of Errors escaped in the Proceedings of a Suit, Of
Amendments of Erroneous Proceedings.
and in what Cases the Judges of the same Court may amend them, and save the
bringing of the Writ of Error; and where they must be Redressed by Writ of
Error, and cannot be otherwise done, see 14 Ed. 3. cap. 6.

And see Cro. 2 Part 479, 526, 528, 545, 672. That there are some Errors in the
Proceedings of Suits, that the Judges of the Courts wherein they are depending,
ought to take Notice of, and Cause them to be amended; as all apparent Faults
in Proceeding in the Action, as in False Latin, want of Form in the Writ,
Insufficiency in an Office or Indictment, Mis-awarding of Process, etc. As if
an Exigent go forth where none lies; Impossibility in the Plea, as, in
Account, supposing the Defendant to be the Plaintiff's Receiver for Seven
years, and he pleads -- Plene Computavit (tali die,) which is the first Day of
the Seven years.

In these and the like Cases, the Court is to take notice of it ex Officio, to
Abate the Writ, award a Supersedeas upon such Offices, Indictments, or Process,
to stay Judgments, if the Defendants Plea be found against him, etc. and this
without any Exception taken, or motion made by the Party.

The Judges likewise are to see, that neither Party in a Suit be prejudiced by
any Error or Mistake in the Clerks of the Court, as by writing a Syllable or
Letter too little, or too much, or by Razing, Interlining, Adding or
Diminishing of Words or Letters, in any Record, Process, Warrant of Attorney,
Writ, Panel, or Retorn: All which, though they appear suspicious to the Court,
yet the Judges may amend them.

And see Co. Lib. 4. 62. Lib. 5. 37, 45. Lib. 8. 133. Lib. 11. 6, 7. Dyer 367.
and Stat. 21 Iac. 1. cap. 13. That in Case of Appeals, and Indictments for
Felonies and Utlaries thereupon, and after Demurrer joined and entered, the same
Court wherein they are depending, may amend the Imperfections in want of Form,
other than such as the Party demurring unto shall particularly set forth in his
Demurrer.

And after a Verdict given in any Cause, on either side, neither Party in the
Suit shall be hurt, by reason of any Variance in any Matter of Form only,
between the parts of the Record, or for lack of an Averment for Life (if the
Party be alive, and it be proved by Examination) or by reason any Venire,
Habeas Corpora, or Distringas is awarded to a wrong Officer, or that the Visne
is Mis-awarded, or any one of the Jurors Mis-named in any of the Writs or
Retorns, so he appear to be the same Person; or for lack of Entry, or Mis-entry
of the Retorn of those Writs, so a Panel be returned and annexed to them; or
for that the Officers Name is not put to the Retorn, so the Writ be returned by
him; or that the Plaintiff, being an Infant, does prosecute in Ejectment, or
any Personal Action, by Attorney: For the Judges of the Court have Power of
themselves to amend all these things.

And see Bridgman's Reports 70. Bulstr. 1 Part 178. Brownlow's Rep. 30, 35, 57,
80, 130, 136, 144, 149, 151. Co. Lib. 1. 76. Lib. 2. 57, 77. Lib. 5. 38, 144.
Stat. 23 Eliz. cap. 3. and Stat. 27 Eliz. cap. 9. By all which it appears, that
most Mistakes in Fines and Common Recoveries are not fatal, but may be amended.

But by More, Case 332. the Justices may not Reform Error in Law before
themselves, though it be the same Term; but Error in Fact, or Process, they may.

So, by Dyer 195, 196. an Utlary in the King's Bench was Reversed by Error in
the same Court; but that was for Error in Fact, not in Law, as if no Utlary in
the Case.

And Trin. 26 Car. 2. in B. R. it was holden, That the Clerk in the King's Bench
may amend the Roll, until a Recordatur be made thereof, either upon Writ of
Error, or by Rule of Court.

And see Mich. 8 Iac. 1. in C. B. Co. Lib. 8. fo. 156. where said, That before
the Statute of 8 H. 6. cap. 12. no Original might be amended in the
Common Pleas; and this Statute enables that Court to amend only Misprisions,
namely, when the Clerk mistakes one word for another, or where he writes Words
which are not Latin: As,

9 H. 7. 16. hos breve, for hoc breve; or

Bendloe' s Rep. fo. 19. Imaginavit for Imaginatus fuit; or by Mistaking the
Words of an Original, to say, Ostens. quare non fuit, for fuerit.

Or, as 22 Ed. 4. Mistaking the words of Form, namely, Praecipe quod solvat,
for Praecipe quod reddat. In all these Cases there shall be no Amendment.

But Mich. 9 Iac. 1. in C. B. in Ejectione firmae, Weeks against Blackstead,
Lessee of Camden; where, after Verdict to stay Judgment, the Defendants Council
Objected, that there were two Errors in the Record, one in the Declaration,
namely, prout praedictus Willielmus, for praedictus Johannes; and the other was
in the Issue, viz. Et de hoc ponit se (meaning the Defendant) super Patriam, Et
praedictus Willielmus (the Defendant again, for Johannes the Plaintiff)
similiter.

Per Cur', these are but Misprisions of the Clerk, and not Errors, and shall be
amended, being like to the Mistake in 10 H. 7. 23. and 11 H. 7. 2. where
Defendens was written for Querens, and Johannes for Rogerus, and amended by the
Advice of all the Justices.

And by Coke Chief Justice, Misprisions were amendable the same Term at the
Common Law; because, during the Term, the Record is said to be in pectore
Iudicis, and not esteemed to be on the Roll so absolutely, but that they may
amend the same at their Discretions.

But the Justices of the Common Pleas, after a Writ of Error, cannot at all
amend the Roll, where a Judgment was given the same Term, and is mistaken in
the Entry, because the Roll is not a Record of that Term.

And by 5 Ed. 3. this was so at the Common Law, until the Statute of 14 Ed. 3
gave power to amend Misprisions in another Term.

But 46 Ed. 3. the Case was, that Defendens was mistaken for Querens; but could
not be amended, because an Old Roll; and the Statute gives Power only to amend
New Rolls of the same Term they are Entered.

By the Statute of 26 H. 8. the Justices of the Common Pleas, have Power to
amend a Plea-Roll, in Misprision only; but not Omissions.

Misprisions are Vicia Scriptoris, Faults of the Clerk; as the Declaration
varying from the Writ, or the Roll from the Original, or the Mean or Judicial
Process; these by 19 H. 6. shall be amended, if it be only in default of the
Clerk.

But if in a Plea, Errors not amend^^le.
that be Omitted which should be Averred, this shall not be amended, because it
ought to have been part of the Plea, and cannot be said to be any Default of
the Clerk; but a mere Omission, which makes the Plea imperfect.

So, Mich. 5 and 6 Mar. Dyer 164. a Record came out of Ancient Demesne in Banco,
by Writ of False Judgment, and the Writ was -- Sub sigillo suo and sigillis
quatuor legalium hominum ejusdem Curiae; which according to Fitzh. Not. Brev.
fo. 18. b. ought to have been -- per quatuor legales homines, etc. upon which
the Court doubted, if it might be amended; but seemed to be of Opinion, That
the Plaintiff might have a New Writ to the Justices of the Common Pleas, to
Authorize them, to proceed to discuss the Errors in the Record, which lay
before them.

So, 2 Mar. Dyer 105. a Common Recovery was suffered to Bar the Issue in Tail;
and the Warrant of Attorney was, That -- Alicia po. lo. suo, for Elizabetha;
also the Writ of Error was -- de loquela quae fuit in Cur' nostra coram Iustic'
nostris per breve nostrum -- It was a Quaere, if it were amendable; but
Resolved in Blackmores Case, Co. Lib. 8. fo. 152. quod vide, and nota.

And see Brownl. Rep. 2 Part, fo. 300. where a Writ of Error was brought by
Frances Fulgham against Sergeant Harris, in this manner -- Praecipe, etc. quod,
etc. Franciscae Fulgham, Viduae, contrary to the Form of the Register, which is
-- quae fuit Uxor, and not Widow; and the subsequent words were -- rationabilem
dotem Tenementorum quae fuerunt Francisci Fulgham quondam viri sui. Per Cur',
this is Error; for though it varies not in substance; yet because it is contrary
to the Form of the Register, it shall not be amended.

So Cro's Iacobi 21 Merrel's Case, in a Writ of Error, of a Judgment in the
Common Pleas in Ejectment, it was assigned for Error, That the Plaintiff
declared, that I. S. 25 Martii, Anno sexto Iacobi, had demised to him for Seven
years, by virtue whereof he Entered, and was thereof possessed, until the
Defendant, postea scilicet Anno sexto, did oust him.

After Imparlance, the Plaintiff made a Second Declaration, wherein he supposed
the Ejectment to be done 26 Maii Anno supradicto, and of this Ejectment the
Writ was brought; it was found against the Defendant, and Judgment for the
Plaintiff, and whether it was Erroneous, because no day was mentioned in the
first Declaration, was the Question.

Agreed, That the first Declaration is the Principal, and if any Matter of
Substance be omitted in it, it cannot be helped or amended by the second, for
that is but a mere Recital; and therefore if the first be not good, the Trial
is Erroneous.

But per Cur' the first Declaration was good, for the Demise is laid to be 25
Martii, sexto Iacobi, which is the first Day of the year, and the postea
scilicet 6 Iacobi, that the Defendant Ejected him is certain enough; for the
Year when the Ejectment was made, and the Day of the Ejectment, are not
material, being before the Action brought.

Then, Of Error in Fines and Common Recoveries.
Of Errors in Fines upon Writs of Covenant, and Common Recoveries upon Writs of
Entry in the Post.

For which see, first, Brownl. Rep. 2 Part, fo. 300. where, upon a Fine the
first Proclamation was made in Trinity Term 5 Iac. the second in Michaelmass
Term, 5 Iacobi, the third in Hillary Term 6 Iacobi, when it should have been
Hill. 5 Iacobi, and the fourth and fifth Proclamations were in Easter Term 6
Iacobi.

Per Cur', This is palpable Error; for the fourth Proclamation was not entered
at all, and the fifth was entered as of Hillary Term 6 Iacobi, when it should
have been of Hillary Term 5 Iacobi, and so cannot be amended, because it was of
another Term.

And see Cro's Iac. 77. Earl of Bedford's Case; where, in a Writ of Error to
Reverse a Fine, it was assigned for Error, that the Writ was -- Praecipe, etc.
quod teneat, etc. Conventionem, etc. de octo Mesuagiis, duobus Toftis, december
Gardinis; and it was Certified, de octo Mesuagiis, december Gardinis, etc. and
Adjudged no Error.

But see Cro's Caroli, fo. 300. Done and Smithy's Case; where a Writ of Error
was brought to Reverse a Fine levied by Baron and Feme, and others; and the
Writ of Covenant wat directed to the Coroners, with this Clause -- fiat
Executio brevis praedict' per Coronatores, ita quod Vic' se non intromitteret,
because the Sheriff was one of the Cognizees; and this was Objected for Error;
because, as there said, if the Sheriff had been sole party to the Fine; yet the
Writ ought to have been directed to him, because but a Summons, for the Sheriff
may summon himself.

But Resolved to be Error, because a Doubt in Law, if the Sheriff, as
Plaintiff, may Execute a Writ upon himself; and therefore the general Course
is, to direct the Writ to the Coroners, to avoid such Doubt.

And see Co. Lib. 5. fo. 38. Tey's Case, where A. and B. his Wife levied a Fine
of diverse Manors, Lands and Tenements to I. S. and I. D. in several Towns in
the County of E. in which diverse Grants and Renders were made; and in the third
Render, all the Manors, Lands and Tenements were rendered to A. and B. and the
Heirs of the Body of A. and in the fourth Render, part of the Premises were
rendered to B. in Tail, the Remainder to the Right Heirs of A.

It was Resolved, that the same was not Error;

First, That the fourth Render, as to that was contained in the third Render,
should be in the quality of a Charter, which needs not such a precise Form as a
Judgment.

Secondly, That the Conusor should not assign that for Error, because he gets
an Estate by it; and no man shall reverse any thing for Error, unless he can
show that the Error is to his advantage.

So More, Case 202. Infant.
If an Infant levy a Fine, and take an Estate by Render, he may not have Error
for this.

And see Mich. 31 Eliz. in B. R. Leon. Rep 1 Part 317. Pigot and Harrington's
Case, where Baron and Feme were Tenants for Life, the Remainder in Fee to an
Infant, and they three levied a Fine, and the Infant only brought Error to
Reverse it.

It was Objected, that they all Three ought to join in the Writ, according to
29 Ed. 3. 14.

But per Cur', the Writ is well brought, for the Error is not Assigned in the
Record; but, without it, in the person of the Infant, and that is the Cause of
Action for him, and for no other; and the Fine was reversed, as to the Infant
only.

Vide Cro's Iacobi 330. Point's Case, and Bulstrode's 1 Part 206. Batts and
Ienning's Case; where Inspection of an Infant in Error, to Reverse a Fine upon
the day of Adjornment of the Term, held good by all the Judges of England.

And see Mo. Case 701. That a Writ of Covenant, Retornable before the Date, is
Error.

CHAP. XIV. Of Appeals, Indictments, and Informations.
APPEAL, according to Co. Appeal, what?
on Littleton, Lib. 2. cap. 11. comes, from the Latin word Appello, to Call;
quia Appellans vocat Reum in Iudicium, and is used in our Law, for the private
Accusation of a Murderer, by a Person who had Interest in the Party murdered.

It is as much as Accusatio with the Civilians; for, as in their Law,
Cognizance of Criminal Causes, is taken either upon Inquisition, Denunciation,
or Accusation, so it is in ours upon Indictment or Appeal. Indictment
comprehending both Inquisition and Denunciation. Accusation, or Appeal, being a
lawful Declaration of another man's Crime (of Felony at least; for though there
be an Appeal of Mayhem, yet that, according to Bracton, is but in a manner an
Action of Trespass) before a Competent Judge, by one who sets his Name to the
Declaration, and undertakes to prove it, upon the Penalty that may ensue of the
contrary.

Appeal, by others, is defined to be, The violent pursuing of a Subject unto
Death; and is the most nice kind of Suit that is commenced at the Common Law,
for every small matter will quash the same, if it be not freshly pursued; and
shall in diverse respects be taken strictly in favorem vitae.

And Note, That the Process in every Appeal, is to bear Date the same day of
the Retorn, and if not, it will be a Discontinuance of the Process.

Note also, That the Omission of any word, which is material, in the Writ of
Appeal, will abate the same.

And it is to be Observed, That the Process in an Appeal, does vary from all
other Proceedings at the Common Law; for there shall be no Amendment of a Writ
of Appeal, nor is the Discontinuance of it helped by any Statute.

Then, Where the Heir shall not have an Appeal of Murder.
Where an Appeal of Murder will not lie for the Heir.

For which see Mich. 33 H. 8. Dyer 50.

The Statute of 31 H. 8. made it Treason for a Woman to Poison her Husband. A
Woman Poisoned her Husband: Afterward the Statute of 32 H. 8. Of General
Pardon, pardoned the Offense; the Heir brought an Appeal of Murder: And it was
the Opinion of all the Justices, that now an Appeal of Murder did lie for the
Heir; for that now Murder was turned into Treason, and the greater Offense
shall extinguish the lesser.

And see Co. Lib. 6. fo. 13. in the Case of Pardons acc. and 7 Eliz. Dyer 235.
where Petty Treason is pardoned by a General Pardon, there one who killed his
Master was Indicted of Murder, and holden, the Indictment did not lie against
him; but being found Guilty, was Reprieved.

And see Mich. 33 H. 8. Dyer 51. and 33 Eliz. Co. Lib. 4. 45. where an Appeal
of Murder was brought against W. to Answer to A. B. alias dict' A. B. Fratri
and haered' of the Person murdered; but because the Plaintiff in the Appeal
was named Brother and Heir in the Alias dictus, which is no part of the Name,
the Appeal did Abate, and the Defendant discharged by the Court.

And see 5 Ed. 6. Dyer 69. where there were three Brothers, and the Middle
Brother is killed, and the Eldest Brother dies within the Year, without
bringing any Appeal, and the Question was, If the Younger Brother might
maintain an Appeal? It was not Resolved, but left a Quaere.

See 11 Ed. 4. 11. Stamf. 59. 20 H. 6. 43. by Fortescue, that he shall not; but
16 H. 7. 15. contra.

Then, Appeals brought by Infants.
How Appeals shall be brought by Infants.

First, See Pasch. 17 Ed. 4. Pl. 4. and More, Case 646. where an Appeal was
brought by an Infant, and the Defendant prayed to be dismissed, because the
Plaintiff was an Infant.

Per Cur', If the Defendant be guilty, he shall stay in Ward till the Infant
comes of Age.

But by 27 H. 8. 1. b. the Plaintiff now shall appear by Guardian.

By Co. 2 Inst. 5. If an Infant bring an Appeal of the Death of his Ancestor,
the Parol shall not demur for want of Battle, but the Infant shall be outed of
it, as if the Appellor were Old, or Maimed.

But Mirror of Justices 127. contra, the Parol shall demur.

And see 2 Ed. 4. 19. b. and 20. a. acc. and 11 H. 4. 93. a.

And Pasch. 27 H. 8. 25. an Infant brought an Appeal of Murder in the time of
H. 8. and prayed, that the Parol might demur; and Resolved it should not.

By 35 H. 6. 10. If an Infant be found guilty of Felony, it is in the discretion
of the Court to give Judgment or not, as they find the Infant has Discretion,
or Malicious Intent.

By Owen 59, 63. Of pleading to Appeals.
and Popham 115. in an Appeal of Murder, after Pleading to the Writ, the
Defendant must Plead over to the Felony, else it is a Confession of it, for
there his Life is in question.

And see 3 Cro. 223, 224. where in an Appeal of the Death of an Husband, the
Defendant pleads -- Ne unques accouple, etc. and quoad, etc. Not Guilty. The
Plaintiff Replies, -- fueront accouple, but pleads nothing to the rest; yet it
seems the Plea is not Discontinued, because the first Plea is not Triable at
Common Law, so answers not the Plea over.

See 1 Cro. 247. Southby and Price's Case, An Appeal of Murder was brought in
A. being the next County to B. where the Murder was done, the Writ shall abate:
For by 26 H. 8. cap. 6. Indictments may be in Counties next adjoining; but not
Appeals.

By Yelverton 204. Bradley and Bank's Case, and 2 Cro. 283. Discontinuance of
Process in an Appeal is not aided by Appearance afterward.

And by Yelverton, ibid. Conviction with Clergy is a good Bar in Appeal.

And Idem 205. Non Culpabilis ad Murdrum and Feloniam praedict', is a good Bar
in an Appeal of Manslaughter.

See Dyer 348, 349. where A. Appeals one as Accessory to B. C. of D. in the
County of E. who pleads Nulla talis persona in rerum natura, as B. C. die
impetrationis brevis, nec unquam postea: It Is good though there be one named B.
C. in another County.

And so it is, if he were dead the Day of the Writ brought.

But 26 H. 6. 8. A. brings an Appeal, and the Defendant pleads, Nulla talis
persona in rerum Natura die impetrationis brevis. It seems not to be a good
Plea, for he should have pleaded, Quod Quer' obiit ante diem impetrationis
brevis; or, Nulla talis persona unquam fuit in rerum Natura.

By Keilway 106, 107. the Court will not suffer the Defendant to plead Variance
between the Appeal and the Indictment, and to Conclude to the Felony.

Vide eundem ibid. What Pleas are Peremptory in Appeals.

By Co. Lib. 3. fo. 30. If a Stroke be struck in one County, and the Party die
in another County, an Appeal of Murder may be brought in either of the
Counties, although nothing be done in that County where he died, toward his
Death.

By Co. Lib. 4. fo. 47. one Appeal of Murder must be brought against all the
Parties, Principals and Accessories, and not several Appeals; and the
Declaration must be against them all; for the Wife brought an Appeal of Murder
of her Husband against diverse, and afterward brought another Appeal against
others.

Resolved by the whole Court,

That all the said Appeals, but the first, should abate.

That she ought to have one Appeal against them all.

That she cannot have two Appeals of Death, but ought to join all in one Writ.

That if one brings an Appeal of Death against diverse, and all but one makes
Default; yet the Plaintiff must declare against them all.

But by Keilway 83. In Murder an Appeal shall be first brought against the
Principal, and after that, another against the Abettor.

So per eundem ibid. an Appeal of Robbery shall be first brought against the
Principal, and then against the Accessory.

An Accessory shall be discharged, where the Principal before Judgment obtains
his Pardon; as appears by Co. Lib. 4. fo* 43. where the Brother and Heir
brought an Appeal of Murder against A. B. as Principal, and C. D. as Accessory
of the Death of his his Brother.

The Principal pleaded, Not Guilty; but was found Guilty of Manslaughter, and
had his Clergy.

It was Resolved in this Case, 1. That the Accessory was discharged, because he
could not be guilty before the Fact, in case of Manslaughter. 2. Although the
Principal was Convicted, yet, forasmuch as he had his Clergy before Judgment,
the Accessory shall be discharged.


So, where the Principal upon his Arraignment confesses the Felony, and before
Judgment obtains his Pardon, the Accessory is thereby discharged.

Vide Cro. Car. 382, 383. where an Appeal was brought against two, one for
Petty-Treason, the other for Felony: The Defendants pleaded Not Guilty the same
Term in which the Appeal was Arraigned, and therefore there was no other
Declaration filed: But if they had pleaded a Plea which was adjorned to another
Term, or had not pleaded that Term, then it ought to have been filed.

And it was then agreed by the Court,

That the Plaintiff might take out one or several Writs of Venire facias, for
doubt of Challenge.

And see Co. Lib. 4. fo. 45. That Auterfoits Indicted of Manslaughter, and
thereof Convicted, and Clergy allowed, was a good Bar in Appeal of Murder.

But contra, if the Indictment be insufficient.

And see 6 Ed. 6. Dyer 88. where an Appeal is brought by a Woman, of the Death
of her Husband: To which the Defendant pleaded Not Guilty, and afterward the
Plaintiff took another Husband; and it was Adjudged, that the Appeal was
determined by her Intermarriage.

See 3 H. 7. 5. where in an Appeal of Death one Challenged above 35, and had
Judgment of Pein fort and dure, that is, was Pressed to Death.

So 21 Ed. 3. 18. Bro. Tit. Corone, Pl. 43. fo. 181. where one against whom an
Appeal of Robbery was brought, did stand Mute out of Malice; and it was found
by the Jury that he could Speak; whereupon he was presently Condemned to be
Hanged, and the Appellor had his Goods: But if it had been by Indictment at the
King's Suit, he should have had Judgment of Pein fort and dure.

Lastly, by Co. 3 Inst. 212 If the Defendant in an Appeal be Vanquished or
Slain, the Judgment is the same, that is, Suspendere per Collum.

And thus much shall suffice of Appeals.

In the next place, We shall say something of Indictments, and the Pleadings
thereupon, and what will Maintain or Quash the same.

An Indictment is an Accusation, Indictment, what?
drawn and engrossed in Form of Law, in the nature of a Bill (or Declaration)
against one for some Offense, Criminal or Penal, and presented to the Grand
Jury to be Inquired of, who, in case they Find the same, do write Billa vera
upon it; but otherwise do Indorse the word Ignoramus thereupon.

An Indictment is always at the Suit of the King, so that he who Prefers it, is
no way tied to the Proof of it upon any Penalty, except there appear
Conspiracy. It ought to be drawn with the greatest Exactness, Curiosity and
Certainty; and the Day, Year and Place must be sure not to be omitted.

Indictments are called Pleas of the Crown, and are exhibited for Treason,
Felony, Misprisions of Treason, High Misdemeanors against the Commonweal, and
all other Crimes which touch the Life, or Mutilation of a Man; and these cannot
be Prosecuted in the Name of any one but the King, because he only can Pardon
them, as Offenses committed against his Crown and Dignity.

By Co. 3 Inst. 106, 107. If any of the Grand Jury discover what persons are
Indicted of Felony or Treason, they are guilty of high Misdemeanour, and shall
be Fined and Imprisoned, for thereby the parties Indicted may Escape.

Vide Co. 3 Inst. 230. and 4 Rep. Sier's Case, where said, That it is not
necessary for the Coroner to set down the Day precisely in his Inquisition of
Felony or Murder; for if it be alleged to be a day before, or after the Fact
done, the Jury ought to find the party Guilty, and also find the Day when it
was done, and the Attainder shall relate to the Day found in the Verdict: And
if he be found Guilty thereupon, he may plead Auterfoits acquitte.

But if they find him Guilty generally, his Feoffee or Lessee may falsify the
time, if alleged before it was done to their prejudice.

By Co. 4 Rep. 46, 47. Wrote and Wigg's Case, an Inquisition was taken before
the Coroners of the Sejeantry and of the County, concerning a Death, etc. at D.
within the Verge, and, by him that pleaded a Conviction in Bar thereupon,
averred to be Indented; but, it not appearing to be so by the Inquisition it
self, it shall be intended otherwise, and so the Inquisition insufficient, and
the Conviction thereupon void, and no Bar.

Vide Dyer 323. a. 323. b. where an Indictment was brought against diverse for
saying, and hearing of Mass, and every one was Fined one hundred Marks upon the
Statute of 1 Eliz. where said, That the word Minister includes Priest, and
Clerk is sufficient to prove one a Priest, And where one is Convicted of three
Offenses upon three Indictments at one time, he shall be Fined only for the
first.

And by Popham, in his Rep. fo. 93. In Indictments of Jesuits upon the Statute
of 27 Eliz. for coming into England, mention must be made, that he was born
within the Kingdom of England, and that he is a Jesuit; but need not show where
he was made a Jesuit.

Vide Stile's Rep. 245, 312, 324, 350. That an Indictment or Information
brought against Two, or more, for speaking Words, etc. may be good; but in
Cases of Felony a joint Indictment against them is not good.

By Cro. 2 Part 479. the Court is to take notice ex Officio, of all apparent
Faults, as Insufficiency in Indictments, and toaward Supersedeas thereupon, if
it be found against the party Indicted, without any Exception taken by him
thereunto.

And by Dyer 367. Co. 11. Rep. 6. in Case of Indictments and Outlawries
thereupon, the Court may amend all Imperfections therein, as to want of Form.

But by Stile's Rep. 437. a Caption of an Indictment of a former Term, cannot
be amended in another Term; but the same Term it may.

Then, What shall Quash an Indictment; what not.
What shall be sufficient Causes to quash Indictments, and what shall not.

See, first, Dyer 50. b. Co. 4. Rep. 41. a. 44. b. 47. a. 3 Cro. 739. One
strikes a man in March, who died thereof 15 April, and the Indictment
concludes, that he killed him in March: It Is not good; but that he killed him
upon the 15th of April is. But the best way is to Conclude generally, and say,
he killed him, without naming the day.

And Note, That in an Indictment of Murder, the word Murdravit supplies ex
Malitia praecogitata; and so does Furatus fuit, Felonice cepit.

But where an Indictment was, That A. assaulted B. at C. and ipsum Murdravit,
without saying, adtunc and ibidem, it was holden to be ill, for want of naming
the Place; for the Assault and Murder are several things, and may be done at
several places.

So, an Inquisition taken by a Coroner in this Form -- Berk ss. Inquisitio
capt' primo die Maii, without saying where, was Adjudged to be ill.

So, by Co. 3 Inst. 135. if one be Indicted for Poisoning another with
Rats-bane, and it be proved, that he was Poisoned with Cantharides, it does
well maintain the Indictment, because Poison is the substance of them both; but
killing by Weapon, or otherwise, will not maintain such Indictment.

But if the Indictment be for killing with a Sword, Dagger, or other Weapon, it
will maintain the Indictment, because it is killing under the same Clauses, by
Weapons.

See Dyer 99, a. 285, a. 370, a. where holden, That an Indictment de Morte, or
for stealing the Goods, Cujusdam ignoti is good; for the party slain, or
robbed, may not be known.

So, Stile's Rep. 124. an Indictment for Assaulting one John of the Parish of
A. omitting his Surname, holden to be good, as well as of Killing quendam
ignotum; and if he should be Indicted again, under the whole Name, he may help
himself by Averment.

But by Cro. 2 Part 606. an Indictment for Striking in the Churchyard, was
quashed, because it was -- Ad Generalem Sessionem Pacis tent' apud B. not
mentioning the County; for though the County were in the Margin, and so may be
intended that County; yet Indictments shall not be taken by Intendment.

Yet by Cro. 3 Part 108, an Indictment was of a Riot, That he coram A. and B.
Iustic' Domini Regis, etc. and Exception was taken to it, that it should have
been, coram A. and B. duobus Iustic', etc. But Resolved by the Court, That
false Latin shall not quash an Indictment where the Intendment is evident.

But see Stile's Rep. 155. and Cro. 3 Part 331. contra.

And see Cro. 3 Part 137. an Indictment of Murder -- quod in Brachia sua dextra
percussit -- held to be senseless and uncertain.

And so, to say -- instanti die obiit, without the word Ibidem, or naming the
Place where, is as ill.

So, by Co. 3. 194. an Indictment for Murder, on the Coroners Inquest, being --
quod percussit cum gladio, not saying Felonice, was quashed for that Reason.

So Idem ibid. 583. an Indictment -- quod felonice and burglariter fregit
domum, was held to be no good Indictment for Burglary, because it wanted the
word Noctanter.

But by Gaudy Justice, it is good for the Felony; yet because the Addition was
in the Alias dictus, and not in Primo nomine, it was quashed as to both.

And Id. ibid. 920* an Indictment of Burglary was -- quod Burglarit fregit, and
Exception taken to it, because not said Burglariter; but Resolved to be good.

Yet Co. Rep. 4. 39, b. Burglarit for Burglariter, was Adjudged ill.

So, in Ryley's Case, Murderaverunt for Murdraverunt, held not good.

So, Idem, ibid. and Dyer 261, a. 304, b. Felonice and ex Malicia sua
praecogitata fregit, will not serve instead of the word Murdravit; for vocabula
Artis are not to be supplied by words that tantamount.

And by Stile's Rep. 12. the like Law is in Cases of Rape.

So, by Cro. 2 Part fo. 20. an Indictment shall be taken strictly, not by
Intendment; and therefore to say, quod Rapuit Foeminum, without saying
Felonice, was held ill.

See a Notable Case in Co. 5 Rep. fo. 120, 121, 122. where an Indictment was
upon the Coroner's Inquest for Murder, and Exceptions taken to it:

First, Because it is super Mammillam in anterior' part Corporis; and Mamilla
is spelt with a double m, and so false Latin: But Resolved, false Latin shall
not quash an Indictment, though it will an Original; but an Insensible word, in a
Material place, may. Also super Mammillam is but a Redundancy, for super
anteriori part Corporis, intending the Trunk, was certain enough. But super
Caput, super Faciem, in dextra part Corporis, in sinistra part Corporis,
super sinistram or dextram Manum, Brachium, Latus, etc. without addition, is
not.

Secondly, It Is Dans unum vulnus, for unam plagam; but that was Ruled, well
enough.

Thirdly, The length, breadth and depth of the Wound was not showed, but
because it was showed, that he was shot through with a Pistol, that was certain
enough; for they are but set forth to show the Mortality.

Fourthly, 'Twas said Dans unum vulnus totaliter penetrans, etc. and thereto
Objected, That it was not the Wound, but the Total did penetrate; but that was
Ruled to be (...) enough, for the Wound went through.

Fifthly, There wanted the word Percussit, for it was dans unum vulnus without
the word Percussit; and for that, though it was shooting with a Pistol, the
Indictment was quashed as Insufficient.

And see Cro. 1 Part 334. an Indictment against Two, for striking in a Church,
where the Grand Jury found Billa vera as to or (...) Ignoramus for the other;
and Exceptions taken to it,

First, Because the Bill is laid jointly -- quod fecerunt, sed non allocatur;
for that is but false Latin, which of it self shall not quash an Indictment.

Secondly, The Bill is -- contra formam Statuti, and yet it does not appear by
the Indictment, that the striking was with a Weapon, and that lies not within
the first Clause of the Statute, and the second Clause gives only
Excommunication to the Offender ipso facto; and contra formam Statut', cannot
stand in an Indictment of Battery at Common Law.

So Leon. Rep. 2 Part, 183, 184. an Indictment was upon the Statute of 5 Ed. 6.
4. for Drawing in the Church upon one A. B. without saying, That he did it with
an Intent to Stab him, and for that Cause holden to be ill; and moreover, for
that it Concluded -- contra formam Statut', it did not appear to be like to an
Indictment at Common Law.

See Cro. 697. acc.

And see Noy's Rep. 171, 172, 173. an Indictment for striking one in the
Churchyard, quashed upon two Exceptions:

First, Because it is laid -- quod extraxit Gladium and percussit, instead of
Extraxit Gladium ad percutiend', according to the words of the Statute, which
are -- If any person maliciously Strike in the Churchyard, or Draw any Weapon
there with an Intent to Strike, etc.

Secondly, Because the word (...) was omitted in the Indictment, which is a
Material Error, because expressly named in the Statute.

Then, For Indictments of Nusances, Nusances.
take these Rules:

See Cro. 3 Part 63. where an Indictment against one, for making a Nuisance in
the Horse-way, was quashed, because it was not said the Kings-way, or the
Highway.

And Note, by 22 Ass. an Indictment does not lie for a Nuisance done to a
partilar Place; for it must be said, to be done to all the King's Liege-People.

So, Idem, ibid. 148. an Indictment for stopping an Highway, was said to be --
ad Nocumentum diversorum Lige^runs Domini Regis, etc. and quashed, because too
particular, for that thereby only is intended a Nuisance to some, not all the
King's Subjects.

So, Leon. 2 Part 183, 184. an Indictment was for not Repairing a Bridge; where
said -- Ita quod Ligei Domini Regis ibidem transire non possunt, ad Nocumentum
eorum; and for that Exception was taken to it, because not said -- ad Commune
Nocumentum; for when the King's Subjects are named in an Indictment, it ought
to be expressed to be a Common Nuisance.

So, Mich. 16 Car. 2. in B. R. Rex versus Morris, an Indictment for keeping a
Glass-House -- ad magnum Nocumentum Subditorum Domini Regis, was quashed,
because not said -- ad Commune Nocumentum; and Sergeant Maynard doubted, if
this Offense were Indictable.

And see Cro. 3 Part 90. Leon. 1 Part 117. and 27 Ass. 6. one was Indicted at
the Assizes -- Quare vi and armis, he enclosed Land wherein others had Common;
and Ruled, That an Indictment lies not in this Case, because it is no Public,
but a Private Nuisance; and the vi and armis ill, for one cannot forceably
enclose his own Land.

Lastly, it was Objected, That the Indictment did not lie here, because
Justices of Jail-deliver have no power to take an Indictment of Nuisance.

And see Bendl. Rep. 152. an Indictment was Exhibited against one, for Erecting
a Wear in the River W. which Concludes -- ad Nocumentum omnium Inhabitantium in
Comitatu H. and Resolved by the whole Court, though not said to be -- ad Commune
Nocumentum, or -- Nocumentum omnium Ligeorum, or Subditorum; yet General
enough, because a Nuisance to the whole County of H.

And see Cro. Car. 274, 275. Vi and armis.
an Indictment against one -- Quare vi and armis, he burnt his own House; Jones
and Berkly were of Opinion, That it did not lie Vi and armis, because the House
was in the parties own possession: But Croke was of the contrary Opinion, and
said, That if a Servant runs away with his Masters Goods, committed to his
charge, the Indictment against him shall be Vi and armis.

And Note, That an Indictment upon the Statute of Hen. 6. of Forcible Entry, --
Quod pacifice intravit and ipsum expulit and extratenuit, was Adjudged to be
ill, for want of the words Vi and armis, and manu forti.

So, Cro. Iacobi 20. an Indictment upon the Statute of H. 6. not showing how
the Entry was Pacifice, or Falso, was holden ill by two Judges.

And Mich. 13 Car. 2. in B. R. an Indictment upon the same Statute, saying
Pasifice ingressus, for Pacifice, and having no Manu forti in the whole
Indictment, was for that Reason quashed, and the Clerk of the Peace fined for
it.

So Cro. Caroli 422. Contra pacem.
an Indictment for Erecting an House upon the Highway, and streightning it,
ill, for want of the words contra Pacem.

Mich. 16 Car. 2. in B. R. an Indictment was against one, for Seducing a Man
into an ill House, and cheating him of his Money.

By 29 Ass. 45. an Indictment against one as Communis Latro, Incertainty.
or Common Forestaller, Champertor, Conspirator, etc. without charging the
Party with some particular Fact, is not good.

But by 30 Ass. 37. an Indictment of Common Confederacy is.

And by 38 Ass. 11, 12. an Indictment for taking Charters of Land quashed, for
not setting forth what the Charters were.

But Pasch. 18 Car. 2. in B. R. and Roll's Abridg. 2 Part 79. an Indictment
against one for being Communis Oppressor, was Ruled good upon Exception; but
the Court was of Opinion, that -- Communis Forstallator is not good.

See Mo. Case 302. touching the words Communis Fur, Latro, etc.

Pasch. 16 Car. 2. in B. R. Resolved, A Rule to distinguish, where an
Indictment, and where an Action of the Case does lie.
That an Indictment lies for the Breach of a Private Statute, where no
particular Penalty is provided; if the Statute concern a multitude of Persons,
so as an Action of the Case will not lie: But if it concerns a Particular
Person or Interest, an Action of the Case lies, and not an Indictment.

An Information, Information, what?
is a kind of Declaration, as well at the Suit of the King, as the Informer
(therefore called a Qui tam, from the words in the Information, A. B. qui tam
pro Domino Rege, quam pro seipso sequitur) for the Breach of some Statute, or
Penal Law, wherein some part of the Penalty, as a Moiety or Third part, is
given to him; and may be either by Action of Debt, or Information.

Informations are also brought by the Attorney General only, in Cases where the
whole Penalty or Forfeiture is given, by some Penal Law, to the King.

Vide Co. 6 Part, Gregory' s Case, 3 Inst. 43, 194, 223. 340, 356. 15 Eliz. ca.
5. 29 Eliz. ca. 5. 21 Iac. 1. ca. 4. Cro. 3 Part 375. touching the Duty of an
Informer.

By 18 Eliz. ca. 5. Every Informer upon Penal Statutes must Exhibit his
Information in Person, not by Attorney; and pursue it by himself, or Attorney;
a Note of the Day of the Month of the Entry of it must be made; no Jury must be
Compelled to Westminster, to Try any Offense done Forty Miles off, unless the
Attorney General, for special Reasons requires it; and the Informer not to make
Composition, without License of the Court, on pain of Pillory.

By 15 Eliz. ca. 5. Defendants in Informations upon Penal Statutes, may Appear
by their Attorneys, where they are Bailable by Law; or by the leave and favor
of the Court.

But by 31 Eliz. ca. 10. This last Act shall only extend to Natural Subjects,
and Denizens.

By the Statute of 21 Iacobi ca. 4. for all Offenses against Penal Laws, the
Information must be laid in the proper County where the Fact was done, and not
to be received till the Informer has made Oath, That it was done in that very
County, and that within a Year before; and the Defendant may plead thereto the
General Issue.

But this Statute shall not extend to Informations, touching Recusants, Tonnage
and Poundage, Transportation of Gold, Silver, Powder, Shot, Wool, Wool-fells,
or Leather.

And by Cro. 3 Part, 138. Co. 3 Part, 138. 5 Part, 48. 583. 11 Part, 65, b. 3
Inst. 141, 238. Mo. Case 715. Leon. 1 Part. 292. If the Informer dies, the
Attorney General may proceed for the Kings Moiety after his death.

And so it is, if the Informer will not Prosecute any further.

And so, if the Attorney General will not Prosecute any further, or will not
Reply, as the Course is for him to Reply alone, in these Cases the Informer may
Prosecute for his Part; for after the Suit begins the Informer has an
Interest, which the King cannot Release, or Pardon.

And it appears by Stile's Rep. 329, 330. where an Action or Information is --
tam pro Domino Rege quam pro part; there, if the Judgment be Entered only for
the Party, it is Erroneous.

And Idem 318, 319. upon an Information, where part of the Money did belong to
the King, the Party sued Execution of all to himself; the Execution was ordered
to be stayed, and a New one awarded, and in the mean time the Money to be
brought into Court.

And Idem 387. an Information was Exhibited for several Things; whereof some of
them appeared to be done before the Date of the Information, and other part of
them afterward; yet all well, if done before the filing of the Information,
and Bail upon it, for then the Action begins.

See Mo. Cases 165. Cro. 1 Part 24. 2 Part 366, and 666. by Dyer, where a
Statute appoints the Information to be brought within a Year; yet if it be
brought within six years after, it is sufficient for the Party.

And so Cro. 1 Part 341. in Demands less than due, good for the King, though ill
for the Informer.

And see 35 H. 6. 27. b. in an Information for Detaining the Kings Goods, it is
sufficient to say, That they were in his Possession, without showing how they
came, as it must be in Trover, or Detinue, by a Common Person.

See Noy's Rep. 118. where the Defendant pleads to an Information upon the
Statute of 23 H. 8. for selling Beer without License, that there is another
Information depending in the Exchequer for the same Offense; it is a good Plea,
if there be no Covin in the Case, and if there be, the Informer may set it
forth in his Replication.

Mich. 22 Car. 2. an Information was brought in the King's Bench against one,
for being Perturbator Pacis and Communis Oppressor, and for that he took
unreasonable Distress of diverse of his Tenants; after Verdict, Judgment was
staid for Three Reasons:

First, Because not said which of his Tenants.

Secondly, For that Information lies not for unreasonable Disterss; but Action
upon the Statute of Marlbridge 43.

Thirdly, Because Communis Oppressor, and Perturbator Pacis, are words too
General to ground an Information upon.

So Hill. 15 and 16 Car. 2. an Information was brought in the King's Bench
against one for using the Trade of a Draper; and Ruled to be ill for two
Reasons:

First, Because not saying, it was a Trade at the time that the Statute of 5
Eliz. was made.

Secondly, Because it wanted the words Contra pacem.

But Mich. 24 Car. 2. in B. R. an Information That diversis diebus and vicibus,
between such a day and such a day the Defendant did such Offenses, held good,
though in a Criminal Case.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS, And Their CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. p. 1 Of Counts or Declarations.
A Declaration, what? ibid. Of the formal parts of which a Declaration ought to
consist, p. 2 Counts shall not abate for want of Form, so that they have
substance, by the Statute of 36 Ed. 3. cap. ult. ibid. p. 3 And Counts, when
defective, Relieved by 18 Eliz. cap. 14. of Ieofails, ibid. Contra, per Maximi,
for a Count in Substance, must be good to every Intent; though it suffices, that
a Bar be good to Common Intent, p. 3 Though a Declaration must be certain to
every Intent; yet in what Cases it shall be holden good by Intendment, ib. 4
Vide Chap. 8. of Intendment, p. 207. A Declaration shall not abate for
Surplusage, p. 4 But a Blank, or Space in the Declaration, shall abate the
same, ibid. Either Anno Domini, or Anno Regni only, may be mentioned in the
Declaration, according to the Specialty, ibid. In Debt against the Ordinary; or
against a Jailer, the Plaintiff needs not declare how they were made Officers,
because an Action lies against Officers in possession, p. 5 Where a Condition
contained in the Obligation is to the advantage of the Plaintiff, there he must
declare thereof: Otherwise, if it be to his disadvantage, or contained in the
Condition of the Obligation, ibid. Of Declaring upon Indentures of Covenants,
ib^d. Of Declaring in Annuity pro Consilio impenso and impendendo, by a
Counselor, Attorney, etc. or by a Special Officer, as a Keeper, Baily,
Steward, etc. and the difference Ruled therein, ib. 6 In Formedon, the
Plaintiff may Declare of a Gift without Seisin; otherwise in a Bar, p. 6 Where
two Defendants, and the one appears, and the Plaintiff Counts against him in
Trespass, that he ( Simulcum the other, such a day) did the Trespass, and
against the latter the Plaintiff varied in the Day, ib. 7 Of several Counts in
one Declaration, p. 7 Where the Plaintiff shall Count de Novo, and where not,
ibid. Rules to be observed in declaring of the Day, Year and Place, p. 8 The
disadvantage of Mistaking the Time, Years, or number of Acres in a Lease, ibid.
Of several days of Payment, and where Execution upon the first default, where
not, p. 10 Reasons for Pleading the Common-Bar, and giving a New Assignment by
Replication, Where the Writ and Declaration are general, as in Trespass, etc.
p. 11, 12 That Declarations in Trespass have ab antiquo been certain, as they
are at this day, by Rule of Court, in the Common Pleas, p. 13 Rules for
declaring in Replevin and Trespass, p. 14, 15, 16, 17
CHAP. II. p. 18 Of Bars, or Pleas to Declarations.
A Bar, or Plea, ibid. 19 What Pleas shall Conclude the Defendant by his
Appearance, Continuance, etc. p. 19 Of Pleas to the Jurisdiction of the Court,
p. 20 Of Foreign Pleas, ibid. Of the Order of Pleading, p. 21 Of Pleas to the
Person, ibid. Of Pleas to the Count, ibid. Of Pleas to the Writ, p. 22 Of Pleas
to the Action of the Writ, ibid. Of the Form of the Defendant's Pleading, p. 23
Where the Defendant shall make Defense, and where not, ibid. Of the Defendants
making but Half Defense, ibid. Of the ordinary Full Defense, p. 24 Misnosmer,
how pleaded, 25 Of Protestations, ibid. Of Colors in Pleading, what is
properly signified by the same, and in what Actions they shall be given, p. 26,
27, 28 What be sufficient Colors, and in what manner they are to be pleaded,
p. 29 Color ought to be by a Title, or Possession, doubtful to the Lay People,
whether the same be good in Law, or not; and must be given to the Plaintiff,
and not to another that Enfeoffeth the Plaintiff, p. 31 How the Defendant shall
conclude his Plea, p. 33 Of Averments in Pleading, p. 34 Averment defined,
ibid. When the Defendant shall aver his Plea, p 35 Of Pleas in Bar, p. 43 Of
Bars to avoid Circuit of Action, p. 44 How to plead the performance of the
Condition of an Obligation, p. 46 Of Conditions to save harmless, p. 47 Of
Conditions to perform Awards, p. 48, 49 Of the difference in pleading an
Arbitrament, and a Concord, p. 52 Of Conditions for Appearance, ibid. Of
Conditions, not to disturb the Plaintiff in his Possession, p. 53 To Account,
ibid. Of Bars to Common Intent, ibid. No substantial part of a Bar to be
omitted, p. 55 Upon what Plea the Plaintiff shall have present Judgment, p. 57
Of Pleading Accord, or Arbitrament, p. 59 Where Waranty is a good Bar, p. 60
Where Auterfoits Bar shall be a good Bar; where not, p. 61 Of Pleading a
Recovery of Land in question against the Plaintiff; or one whose Estate he has
in the same, or higher Nature of Action, p. 62 A former Recovery by the
Plaintiff pleaded, no Bar, without Execution, p. 63 Where the Plea shall go to
Part, or to the Whole, ibid. Of Certainty in Pleading, p. 64
CHAP. III. p. 69 Of Replications, Rejoynders, etc.
REplication, Rejoinder, Surrejoynder, what? ibid. Where the Plaintiff is in a
manner bound to answer the Defendants Plea; yet, if he will, may plead at
large, without answering the same, ibid. Plea at Large, what? 70 In what Cases
there is no occasion either for Replication or Rejoinder, p. 72 Where one
Replication shall go to several Bars, p. 73 Rebutter, what? p. 74
CHAP. IV. p. 75 Of General Issue, and Special Evidence.
ISSUE, what? ibid. Evidence, what? p. 76 Of the proper Evidence upon the Plea
of Non Culpabilis, ibid. Of Evidence for Abridgment of Damages, p. 78 What
Evidence may be given upon the Issue of Nil debet, p. 79 Where the Defendant
pleads -- Null Escape, he cannot give in Evidence -- No Arrest, p. 80 Of the
Evidence to be given upon the Issues Ne Enfeoffa pas, or Non Feoffavit; Ne
Lessa pas, or non dimisit; or where the Parties are at Issue upon a Grant or
Feoffment pleaded by Deed, or where a Demise to Baron and Feme is pleaded; as
also upon the Issue Ne Dona pas, or Non Dedit, ibid. What Evidence shall be
given upon the Pleas Non est factum, Riens passa, etc. p. 81 In Actions of
Maintenance, or other Actions upon the Statute, in some Cases, the General, and
in others the Special Issue shall be taken, p. 81 Of the Plea Horse de son Fee,
and what Evidence shall be sufficient to be given thereupon, p. 82 Of Evidence
upon the Issues Ne unques Executor, or Pleinment Administer, p. 83 Where the
Issue is upon Prescription, if the Plaintiff give in Evidence a Deed, Within
time of Mind, the Defendant may Demur upon the Evidence; but otherwise, if Time
out of Mind, ibid. Of giving Evidence upon a Prescription for Common
appurtenant, ibid. Of Evidence given upon a Custom, p. 84 Where the Defendant
may Traverse any part of the Plaintiffs Conveyance of his Action, and not be
forced to the General Issue, p. 85 Where the Defendant shall be forced to the
General Issue, or may Traverse the Place laid by the Plaintiff in the
Declaration, p. 87 In what Cases the Defendant may plead Specially, and not be
forced to the General Issue, p. 88 Where the Evidence does stand or agree with
the Issue, and where not, p. 91 What is sufficient Evidence, that the Jury
shall be obliged to take Cognizance of, p. 92 What Deeds and Writings are
sufficient Evidence, such as the Jury are to take notice of, or shall be
delivered unto them, p. 94
CHAP. V. p. 97 Of Special Issues, and the manner of joining them.
WHich of the Parties in their Pleas shall first offer the Issue, ibid. That he
who pleads the first Negative, shall Conclude the Issue, ibid. That Issue
shall be always joined upon a Negative, after an Affirmative alleged before;
or e contra, p. 98 That, if the Defendant do plead in the Negative to the Writ,
the Plaintiff shall Reply in the Affirmative, and Conclude the Issue, ibid.
That, if the Plaintiff Declares in the Negative (as, That the Defendant did sue
him in the Name of N. without his assent, it suffices the Defendant to say,
That he sued him by the Consent of N. and offer Issue thereupon, ibid. Where
the Defendant did plead to the Writ, That he was abiding at D. no Plea, without
saying also, and not at B. as the Plaintiff did name him; because the Issue
shall always be upon a Negative, ibid. So, one of the Defendants in Trespass
pleaded, That one of his Companions was dead the day of the Writ purchased; no
Plea for the Plaintiff to Reply, That he was alive at D. but must also say, and
not dead. As to say, by way of Replication, in the like Case, Mulier, and not
Bastard; or Frank, and not Villein; and offer the Issue, p. 98 The Defendant
pleaded, That the Place where, etc. was the Freehold of J. S. etc. and the
Plaintiff Replied, That it was his Freehold; he must say also, and not the
Freehold of J. S. or he must Traverse, Absque hoc, That it is the Freehold of
J. S. etc. ibid. That, he who takes the Traverse by Absque hoc, ought not
properly to Conclude the Issue; but the other Party beginning his Plea with Ut
prius dicit, etc. may, p. 99 That, he who pleads Parts ad Finem nichil habent;
or does Counterplead the Possession; or pleads, Ne unques seisie que Dower; Ne
Dona pas; Null Tort; Non Culpabilis, and the like; because these Pleas be in the
Negative, he shall Conclude with the Issue, Et de hoc ponit se super Patriam,
ibid. But in the Plea of Parts ad Finem, etc. the Party pleading the same, may
have his Election to Conclude the Issue, or not, ibid. So, where the Defendant
pleads in the Negative, he may Traverse, and not Conclude with the Issue, but
with Unde Iudicium si Actio, because a Perfect Issue may be joined thereupon,
ibid. Where Issue shall be taken upon Affirmatives only, without Negatives,
ibid. Of Tender and Refusal in Pleading, p. 100 Of the Issue Negative pregnant,
p. 101 Of the words Modo and Forma in Pleading, p. 102 Of Traverse in Pleading,
p. 103 Time, where and how Traversable, p. 104 Rule, concerning Departure in
Pleading, p. 105 Place and County, where Traversable, p. 107 Where the Plea is
good without Traverse, and where the Taverse shall make the Plea ill, p. 109
Where the Dying seized, or Descent, is Traversable, p. 112 When the Descent, or
Abatement, shall be Traversed, p. 113 Where the Dying seized, the Conveyance,
or the Disseisin alleged, shall be Traversable, p. 114 That a Disseisin
alleged either in Bar or Replication, is always Traversable, p. 115
Difference, where the Disseisin is alleged in Fait, and where only by way of
Supposal, ibid. Disseisin Traversable, ibid. In Trespass, the Disseisin, not
the Descent Traversable; otherwise in Assize; ibid. Where Seisin alleged in
Fee, shall be Traversed, ibid. Where a Traverse holden a Ieofail, p. 116, 117
Of the Traverse, Aliquo alio modo, p. 118 Which of the Conveyances alleged to
be Traversed, p. 119 That the most material Matter alleged by the Defendant,
is always Traversable, ibid. But where, by way of Replication many Conveyances
are pleaded, the Defendant may Traverse which of them he pleases, ibid. Where
the Plaintiff against a General Bar, makes Title by Feoffment and Descent,
whereby he is Remitted, there the Defendant cannot Traverse the Feoffment, but
the Descent, as the most Material part of the Title, p. 120 Where the Defendant
is to Traverse the Disseisin, as most Material, ibid. Though the Defendant Convey
by Mean Degrees from the Plaintiff himself; yet if he plead false in any Point,
the Plaintiff by like Pleading may Traverse him, ibid. 121 Where the
Commandment is Traversable; as, where the Defendant pleads the Freehold is to
I. S. and that he did the Trespass by his Commandment, and the Plaintiff makes
Title from a Stranger, and Traverses the Commandment of I. S. and good, ibid.
But made a Quaere if, where the Defendant Justifies by the Commandment of the
Owner, the Commandment is Traversable, ibid. But, in all Cases, where the the
other Conveys from the same Person, the Commandment is Traversable, p. 122 The
like of Qui Estate, if both Parties claim from one Person, ibid. Where several
Traverses shall be taken in one Plea, ibid. Where there are Three Traverses to
one Replication, ibid. Where two Traverses to one Plea, p. 123 Where a Traverse
may be upon a Traverse, p. 123 Where the Defendant may Traverse without making
Title, ibid. Of the Plea of Tout Temps prist, Uncore prist, or Semper paratus,
and Tender, ibid. Where Tender shall be made in Court, where not, p. 125 Uncore
prist, in what other Case to be pleaded, p. 126 Of Estoppel, or Counterplea to
Tout Temps prist, p. 128 Of the Plea De son Tort demesne, or Injuria sua
propria; That upon many Justifications, the Plaintiff is to Answer Specially to
the Matter, and not to Traverse generally, De Injuria sua propria, absque tali
Causa, p. 128 As where the Defendant Justifies in Trespass, by the Commandment,
License, or Delivery of the Plaintiff, ibid. Or, where the Defendant Justifies
in False Imprisonment by reason of a Robbery, and that the Common Fame went
upon the Plaintiff, ibid. Or, where the Defendant Justifies by Matter in Law,
and to see if Wast were done; and to Enter a Tavern to drink, p. 130 Where the
Defendant Justifies in Trespass the seizing of the Plaintiff by his Masters
Commandment, for that the Plaintiffs Ancestor held of his Master by Knights
Service, there the Commandment is to be Traversed by the Plaintiff, ibid. And
so it is in the Case of an Apprentice, p. 130 And so, where the Plaintiff
pleaded a Grant, ibid. But, where the Defendant Justifies in Replevin by Reason
of a Recovery in a Court Baron; or, if the Defendant Justify by the Kings
Patent; there De Injuria sua propria general by the Plaintiff, to such
Justification, no Plea; because Matter of Record, ibid. The like, where the
Defendant Justifies in Trespass, to make Replevin by a Warant of the Sheriff;
or comes in Aid of the Servant, that has a Warant to Arrest the Plaintiff; or,
where the Defendant in Replevin makes Cognizance, as Bailiff to A.; or, where
the Defendant Justifies in Trespass, for taking away of Tithes, severed from
the Nine parts, p. 129, 130 In Trespass, the Defendant Justified by reason of a
Way; and the Plaintiff Replied, De Injuria sua propria, Absque hoc, That the
Defendant, and his Ancestors, had used to have such a Way, etc. p. 130 That the
Issue of De Injuria sua propria, absque tali Causa, shall be sufficient, where
the Defendant makes no Title to himself, but as Servant; or comes in Aid of the
Sheriff, or the like; and in all Cases of the Assault of the Plaintiff; or,
where the Sheriff makes a Warant to his Servant; or, for Suspicion of Felony,
or the like: And, where the Defendant Justifies by Custom of Faldage; or, in
Trespass for Wreck; and, in many other Cases, where he Justifies by Matter in
Fait, there the General Replication, De Injuria sua propria has been admitted,
p. 130 Of the Plea Que Estate, Qui Estate, or Quel Estate; that is, Which, or
The same Estate, what? p. 131 That the Plaintiff in his Declaration, or Title,
shall not Convey to himself by a Que Estate, p. 131 But, in a Replevin, after
Avowry, he may; for then the Defendant is become (Plaintiff, or) Actor, ibid.
So, where the Defendant by his Bar does admit the Plaintiff Tenant to the Land,
there the Plaintiff in his Replication, Conveying to himself Title by the same,
may do it by a Que Estate, ibid. So, the Avowant may in his Avowry Convey to
the Plaintiff an Estate in the Tenancy by a Que Estate, because he is a
Stranger to his Title, ibid. That a Term cannot be Conveyed in Pleading (be the
Party Actor, or otherwise) by a Que Estate; be the same a Term, or Estate for
Life or in Tail, p. 132 Yet the Defendant in an Assize did Convey from one by a
Statute, by a Que Estate, ibid. And so of Tenant in Tail, especially if the
Party be to Aver his Life, ibid. That the Tenant may Rebut, by reason of a
Waranty by a Que Estate; but not be Vouched, ibid. That a Que Estate is not to
be alleged in any of the Mean Conveyances, but to the Tenant himself, without
showing how; notwithstanding the same has been suffered, p. 132 That in
Pleading a Que Estate, the Party by whom such Estate is Conveyed, must be
showed in Pleading to have a good Estate; as, by Recovery, Feoffment, Release,
or the like; and not sufficient to say, That A. was seized, whose Estate the
Defendant has, ibid. Tenant in Dower, coming in by Law, may Convey by a Que
Estate, p. 133 So, he that comes to the Land by Disseisin. So, he that he
recovers the same, ibid. That a thing that lies in Grant, cannot be made Title
to by a Que Estate, although by way of Bar. ibid. As of an Hundred, Rent, or
Common: Except it be incident to some thing that may pass without Deed; unless
he show a Deed to Maintain his Prescription, ibid. Que Estate not Traversable,
but in Particular Cases, ibid. Of a Double Plea, and what it is? p. 134 Where
one Answer will make an end of all, as Ne dona pas, or the like, there no
Doubleness; or if the Defendant plead diverse Matters, and rely upon one of
them; or do show in his Pleading diverse Matters of Inducement, or of Suspicion;
or alleges two Presentiments in a Quare Impedit, the one in the Guardian or
Particular Tenant, and the other in the Party himself, there no Duplicity,
ibid. But diverse Matters may be alleged to oust the Conusance, or prove a
Maintenance, p. 134 Yet Appendancy and Prescription, and a Lease and Release,
will make a Plea double, ibid. Where one binds himself in 10 l. in the
Indenture to Perform diverse Covenants, the Plaintiff can declare but upon the
Breach of one of them, if he demand the 10 l. but otherwise, if he brings an
Action upon the Covenants, p. 135 Where one pleads, That he was seized, until
by the other Disseised, against whom he did Recover; not double, because the
one part of the Plea is a Conveyance to the other, ibid. So, where one cannot
come to the one Plea, without the other, there no Doubleness; as Seisin,
Feoffment, etc. ibid. Non dederunt Arbitrium in scriptis, held by some to be
double, ibid. So, a Collateral Waranty and Assets, double, ibid. But,
Barganizasset and Concessit, not double, but words of one signification, ibid.
How one shall have diverse Pleas, when one of them shall go to the Whole, ibid.
As, where an Assize of the Office of Clerk of the Crown was brought by two
Persons, and the Defendant pleaded to one of the Plaintiffs, That he was an
Alien, and to the other Null tiel Office; here, because the Last part went to
the Whole, the Plea was holden to be double, ibid. Yet the Defendant pleaded a
Fine to the Whole, and did Conclude to the Moiety, and so for the other Moiety,
and good, ibid. So, the Defendant did Justify to the Third Part for one Cause,
and to the other two Parts by another Cause, p. 136 So, the Defendant in
Trespass of Trees may plead, as to the Cutting, Non Culp', and as to the
Taking, he may plead a Gift of them, ibid. So, in Debt against an Executor, the
Defendant pleaded an Acquittance to part, and plene Administravit to the rest,
ibid. If a Person pleads diverse Pleas, and one of them goes to the whole Writ
or Action, that only shall be received. ibid. Which of the Pleas shall be first
Tried, ibid. 137 Where the Plea is ill, without showing the Deed or Record,
ibid. Where the Estate is Executed, there needs not the Deed, for the most part
to be showed, p. 140 How the Vouchee shall be forced to show a Deed, p. 141 How
an Action may be upon Record, without showing, p. 142 Though one have not the
Deed, yet if it appear of Record in the same Court, pleaded by another at that
time, he shall have advantage of it, p. 143
CHAP. VI. p. 145 Of Pleading in General.
WHere one in Pleading shall show, how he was seized, ibid. Where one may
Convey to himself an Estate, without showing, how he that gave it was seized,
ibid. In a Writ, or Count may be said, Quod quidam J. S. dimisit, without
showing, how he was seized; but otherwise by way of Bar, or Title, ibid. Where
one shall say, He was seized in Dominico suo, etc. ibid. Where in Pleading
shall be said, in Iure Uxoris. p. 146 Where Lands are given to Two, and the
Heirs of one of them, the Pleading shall be, Quod fuer' seisit'; viz. the one
In Dominico suo ut de feodo; and the other, In Dominico suo ut de libero
Tenemento, ibid. Of the Plea, In Iure Coronae, ibid. Of the Plea, In Iure
Domus, p. 147 Whether it be sufficient to allege a Seisin in any, without
showing of what Estate, ib. How he that has but an Estate for Life, or an
Estate Tail, or an Use, shall plead the same without showing the beginning
thereof, p. 148 Where, in Pleading, for Certainty to every Intent, it must be
showed, that the Estate did Continue at the time, p. 149 Which of the Parties
shall set forth, the Place where, etc. in Pleading, p. 150 Bona Notabilia in
diverse Dioceses, how to be pleaded, p. 152 Where the County shall be taken by
Intendment, ibid. Where the Day, or Years shall be certainly alleged in
Pleading, p. 153 Acts Spiritual, how to be pleaded, p. 155 Of Pleading Matters
of Record, as Utlary, Recovery in Debt, Recognizance, Retorn of a Writ, etc. p.
155, 156 How the words [Inter alia] are to be used in Pleading, p. 157 Acts of
Parliament, how to be Pleaded, ibid. Per Nomen, how pleaded, p. 160 Of the word
Continetur in Pleading, p. 162 Of Pleading by or without the word Praedict',
ibid. Of the word, Ut, in Pleading, p. 163 Where a General Plea shall be
pleaded for avoiding Mischief, ibid. Of Pleading an Entry, etc. p. 164 Of the
Plea Negative Pregnant, ibid. That the word Licet is an Express Affirmative, p.
165 Where an Express Seisin, or Possession, must be alleged, ibid. Of the
words Virtute cujus, Per quod, Quorum praetextu, etc. ibid. A Deed, how to be
pleaded, p. 166 Of the Pleas Non est factum, or Riens passa, ibid. Where an ill
Plea is made good by Reference to another, p. 167 Of Pleading Prout per
Indenturam, or Scriptum before liquet and apparet, p. 168 Of the words, Quae
sunt omnia and singula, etc. in Pleading, ibid. Of the words, Quae est eadem
Dimissio, in Pleading, ibid. Of the words, Quod est idem Vastum, in Pleading,
ibid. Of the words, Et non alia neque diversa, in Pleading, p. 169 Of Pleading
out of Time, or Mispleading, ibid. Where an ill Plea may be made good by
Admittance, ibid. Where the Defendant may waive his Pleading, and betake
himself to the General Issue, p. 171
CHAP. VII. p. 174 Of Repleaders, or Ieofails.
CAuse of Repleaders, ibid. Ieofail, what? ibid. At what Plea the Parties shall
begin to Replead, ibid. In what Place, ibid. At what Ti^e, p. 176 Statutes
aiding Ieofails, or Mis-pleadings, viz. 32. H. 8. cap. 30. 18 Eliz. cap. 14. 21
Iac. 1. cap. 13. and 16 and 17 Car. 2. cap. 2. ibid. Observations upon the two
first Statutes, p. 177 Cases upon the said two Statutes, p. 178 Of Matters
Remediable by the Statutes of Ieofails, p. 180 Of Matters not Remedied by the
Statute of Ieofails, p 189 Of the Statutes of 21 Iacobi and 16 and 17 Car. 2.
concerning Ieofails, p. 193, 194 Observations upon the two last Statutes, p.
197 What Defects in Pleading, or otherwise, are aided by the said Statutes,
ibid.
CHAP. VIII. p. 207 Of Intendment.
WHat Construction the Law does make of the Intention of the Parties, as to
Contracts, and other Matters, ibid.
CHAP. IX. p. 212 Of Bills of Exception.
BIll of Exception, what it is? ibid. Need not, de Rigore Iuris, be allowed in
Arrest of Judgment, ibid. Must be Sealed before, and not after Judgment, p. 213
CHAP. X. p. 214 Of Verdicts.
VErdict, what? ibid. Must be sufficient in Matter and Form, p. 215 Damages,
where to be found entire, where several, ibid. Where a Verdict shall make ill
Pleading good, p. 216 Where the Verdict is contrary to other Matter of Record,
p. 217 Of Special Verdicts, 218 Of what things the Jury may take Cognizance, p.
220 How the Jury may find a Matter of Record, p. 221 Spiritual Matters, how to
be found by the Jury, 222 Where the Jury find a Specil Matter, and Conclude
contrary, p. 223 Verdict varying from the Issue, where good, where ill, ibid.
Where the Jury find more than is in the Issue, p. 226 Where, though the Verdict
be found for the Plaintiff, yet he shall be Barred, p. 227 Where the Jury gives
diverse Verdicts, p. 228 Verdict must be by Twelve, except by Writ of Inquiry,
ibid. Verdict de been Esse, ibid. Where the Verdict shall be void in part, or a
Ieofail, ibid. Misdemeanor of the Jury, where it shall make a Verdict ill, p.
229
CHAP. XI. p. 231 Of Judgments.
OF the Forms of Judgments, ibid. What Day Judgment shall be given, p. 232
Where, or in what Court Judgment shall be given, ibid. Causes to stay Judgment,
ibid. Where Judgment shall be final, p. 233 Where the Plaintiff may have
Judgment for part, and Relinquish the rest, ibid. Of two Judgments in one
Action, p. 236 Where Judgment shall be with Cesset Executio, ibid.
CHAP. XII. p. 238 Of Executions.
EXecution, what? ibid. Of the Method of obtaining Executions, p. 239 Execution
for Debt fourfold, ibid. Against whom Execution by Capias will lie, ibid. In
what Cases Execution may be had by Capias, p. 240 Of Executions by Capias pro
Fine, p. 241 Of Executions by Capias Utlagatum, p. 243 Where Execution shall be
had by Capias, Fieri facias, or Elegit, p. 245 Upon Escape, the Sheriff
chargable in Action of Debt, or upon the Case, p. 248 Of Fresh Pursuit, ibid.
Old Sheriffs must give Notice to the New of those in Execution, ibid. Where two
bound jointly and severally, and in Execution, and one Escapes, and he brings
Audita Querela, and held not to lie, p. 249 Whether the Defendant dying in
Execution, be a Discharge for ever, as an Escape is, ib. Elegit, its force, p.
251 Of what an Elegit may be sued, ibid. Of Execution against Bail or
Mainprise, 252 Mainpernors, what? ibid. Bail, what? p. 253 Of the Writ of Scire
facias, what it is? and where Execution may be had by Scire fac', or without,
p. 258 What Plea or Matter will stay Execution, 264 What other Pleas one shall
have in Bar of Execution, p. 265 Of the Writ Venditioni exponas, where it is to
be awarded, and the power of the same, 269, 270 Of Execution against a Clerk,
upon the Retorn of Clericus est Beneficiatus, p. 271 Where the Defendant may be
Committed in Execution by the Court without Process, ib. Of Executions in the
Cinque Ports, Counties-Palatine, or other Franchises, ib. 272 Of the Sheriffs
Breaking open a Door, or Chest, to do Execution, ib. 273, 274 How one in
Execution shall be delivered without Payment, p. 274 That the Party in
Execution may be discharged by Error and Mainprise, ibid. Where an Escape shall
be a Discharge of the Execution for ever, and where not, 275, 276 Death of the
Defendant in Execution, no discharge of the Debt, p. 277 Discharge by
Privilege of Parliament, 279 Of going at large by Baston, Keeper, or Tipstaff,
p. 280 Where the Act of the Court, the Law, or the Plaintiff, does discharge
the Party of the Execution, p. 281 Where the Sheriff shall be Fined for
Disobeying a Supersedeas, p. 282
CHAP. XIII. p. 283 Of Error and False Judgment.
ERror, what? ibid. Writ of Error, what? p. 284 Of a Writ of Error, where it
lies, and the Statutes that concern the same, p. 285 How one shall proceed to
reform Erroneous Proceedings against him, p. 286 Whether the Heir, or Executor,
or Successor shall have these Writs of Error and False Judgment, p. 294 What
Heir shall have these Writs, p. 296 Of Estoppels in Assigning Error, ibid. What
shall not be Assigned for Error, p. 297 Diminution, what? ibid. Of Error in
Parliament, p. 299 Of Amendments of Erroneous Proceedings, ib. Of Error in
Fines and Common Recoveries, p. 306
CHAP. XIV. p. 309 Of Appeals, Indictments and Informations.
APpeal, what? ibid. Where the Heir shall not have an Appeal of Murder, p. 310
How Appeals shall be brought by Infants, 311 Of Pleading to Appeals, p. 312 Of
Indictments, and the Pleadings thereupon, and what will maintain or quash the
same, p. 317 Indictment, what? ibid. What shall quash an Indictment; what not?
p. 320 Of Indictments of Nusances, p. 325 Of the words Vi and armis in an
Indictment, 327 Of the words Contra pacem in an Indictment, ibid. Indictments
quashed for Incertainty, p. 328 Rule to distinguish where an Indictment, and
where an Action of the Case does lie, ibid. Information, what? p. 329 Of the
Duty of an Informer, ibid. Information must be laid in the proper County where
the Fact was done, p. 330 If the Informer dies, or will not Prosecute, the
Attorney General may proceed for the Kings Moiety, ibid. If the
Attorney General will not Prosecute or Reply, the Informer may for his part,
ib. Where an Action or Information is tam pro Rege quam part, if the Judgment
be Entered only for the Party, it is Erroneous. ibid. So, where the party sues
Execution of all to himself, Execution shall be staid, etc. 331 If an
Information be Exhibited for several Things, some before the date of the
Information, and some after; yet all well, if done before the Filing of the
Information, ib. Where a Statute appoints the Information to be brought within
a Year; yet sufficient to be brought within 6 years after, ibid. If the Demand
be for less than due, it shall be good enough for the King, etc. ibid. In
Informations for Detaining the Kings Goods, it suffices to say, That they were
in the Kings possession, without saying how, etc. ibid. Auter Information
pendant, in auter Court, pur mesme l'Offence, a good Bar, etc. ibid. Judgment
staid after Verdict against one, for being Perturbator Pacis and Communis
Oppressor, and for that he took unreasonable Distress, of diverse of his
Tenants, and why, p. 332 Information against one for using the Trade of a
Draper, Ruled ill, and why? ibid. That the Defendant, diversis diebus and
vicibus, between such and such days did such offenses, good; though in a Criminal
Case, ibid.
FINIS.

