THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY OF Heliodorus.

In TEN BOOKS.

The First Five Translated by a Person of Quality, The Last Five by N. TATE.

To which are prefixed, The Testimonies of Writers, both Ancient and Modern,
concerning this Work, viz. Dr. Peter Heylin, Cosmograph. Phil. Melancth.
Stanizlaus Equ. Polon. Vincentius Obsopoeus, Cornelius Sutorius, Thomas
Dempsterus, Hieronymus Comme^^^^^

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Edward Poole, at the Ship over against the Royal
Exch^^^^ in Cornhil. MDCLXXXV^^

To His GRACE THE Duke of Beauford, etc.
My Lord,
AS I have long had an Ambition of presenting some ^ssay to Your Grace's
Patronage, ^ was likewise sensible that no ^erformance (which was entirely ^y
own) could, without Pre^^mption, aspire to that Honor: ^ut this Address comes
Armed with a double Apology; not on^^ the fixed Reputation of the Work in the
Original, but on account of the Translation it self, being half performed by a
Person of Quality and Judgment. By whose untimely Death we were denied the
Happiness of his farther Progress, and I was prevailed with to think that the
World would rather dispense with my course finishing of the Piece, than lose
the part which he had so well begun. Beside the Testimonies of the Learned for
my Author^ it is yet to be added, That he was not only the First who attempted
this way of Writing, but the Best^ The Ca^sandra^ and Cleopatra o^ the French
were Scions from thi^ Stock, nor shall we envy them the Reputation which those
Authors seemed chiefly to de^ign, the diversion of the Ladies. Heliodorus has
as well contrived for their favor, yet so as to make the Amor subordinate to
Instruction, and every where an occasion of d^spensing that Learning and
Experience, with which he was so wonderfully furnished. The Philosophy and
Politics delivered in the Romance of Barclay have rendered it worthy the
perusal of the greatest Stratesmen; yet, on the first view, we shall find the
Argenis to be but a Copy of Chariclea. But after all his maxims of Conduct, and
Examples of Virtue, methinks I see the Authors Genius tremble to come under
your Graces Inspection, who have in Practice so far excelled the most perfect
Images that he could feign. Of what Importance your unshaken Loyalty, Industry,
and Prudent Management, has always been toward the Happiness of this Nation,
is best known to persons of your own high Sphere, where your Grace is placed a
Star of the first Magnitude. But Your more immediate Influence for the public
Safety, in the late season of our Extremity, was so manifest, that thousands
were Spectators of its Operation. The proud Invader himself acknowledged his
measures to be broken in their Foundation, by your presence in Bristol, the
main Fortress of his Hopes; from which he was obstructed by Your Grace's
matchless Interest and Conduct. For a Parallel to this Service, we must run up
to your own great Ancestor, whose Name shall be Sacred to Posterity as long as
Marquess of Worcester's Seat, last Garrison held out for King Charles I.
Ragland Castle shall have one Stone left upon another.

I have too just a sense of Your Grace's Character to attempt your Panegyric;
yet, in Gratitude, I am obliged to say, That while Your Grace is blessed with
Qualifications to adorn the Noblest Court, it is Your peculiar Glory to have
Magnificence and Condescension to charm all Mankind. That Clemency I must make
my Sanctuary for this Address, and leave Your Encomium to some more able
Genius, while the height of my Ambition is to subscribe my self

Your Grace's Most Devoted Humble Servant, N. TATE.

Testimonies of Eminent Persons, Ancient and Modern, concerning the following
Work.
Heylin, lib. 2. p. 200.
HEliodorus the Author of that Ingenious Piece, called The AEthiopick History,
which he so prized, that he chose rather ^o lose his Bishopric, than consent
to the Burning of his Book, which ^ Provincial Sy^od had adjudged to the Fire.
A piece indeed of rare contexture and neat contrivance, without any touch of
loose or lascivious Language, honest and chaste affection being the subject of
it, not such as Old or Modern Poets show us in the Comedies or other Poems: for
here we have no ^ncestious mixtures of Fathers and Daughters: ^o Pandorism of
Old Nurses: no unseemly acti^n specified, where heat of Blood and opportunity
^o meet: nor indeed any one passage unworthy of ^he chastest Ear.

Phil. Melancth.
THE Style is Florid without Affection; the Variety of Councils, Accidents and
Events contained therein is wonderful; exhibiting most Images of humane Life,
so that it may be read by all with equal Profit and Pleasure.

Stanizlaus. Equ. Polon.
THE reason why Learned Men have thought The Ethiopian History of Heliodorus,
worthy the perusal of Post^rity, is very evident, the design being equally
accommodated to the Instruction and Diversion of the Reader. In which, besides
the Elegance of Style, not only changes of Fortune, but examples of Virtue are
set forth.

Vicentius Obsopoeus.
I Recommend The Ethiopian History of Heliodorus, as the most absolute Image
of all humane A^^ections; a perfect Example of Conjugal Love, Truth and
Constancy being wonderfully drawn in the Characters of Theagenes and Chariclea.
I pass over the Beauty, Contrivance, and Artifice in the expression. Of all
Greek Authors that ever came into my hands, I must affirm him to be the most
pleasant and will venture to say the most Learned. For the Truth of his Tale I
leave it to himself, but for the probability it may compare with any History.
For the Argument which is vario^s, I can aver it to be complete; for as much as
it is, besides the continued pl^asantness of the Tale, full of admirable turns
and surprises; he has most skilfully given the Cosmography of many places; laid
open the secret causes of Nature in many Instances; learnedly described the
Rites and Customs of many Nations; the nature of diverse Mountains, Rivers,
Stones, Herbs, and Regions of Egypt and AEthiopia especially, Countries the
least known; mingling all with such beautiful digressions, that in the whole
Work he has left nothing imperfect or what might give offense to the most
Critical Reader.

Cornelius Sutorius.
THis Work is so furnished with wisdom in Councils and Government of humane
Affections, such Discipline and knowledge in all circumstances of War; such
Inconstances of Fortune and varie^y of humane affections, that it seems wholly
derived from the purest Fountains of Eloquence.

Thomas Dempsterus.
HEliodorus the Phoenician, the most Eloquent and chaste Writer of Loves; most
Delightful and Artificial in the management of his Story.

Hieronymus Commelinus.
HEliodorus the most Elegant Author, in whose Volumn are many Sentences, Grave,
Solid, Ethick, Pol^tical, Oeconomick. How many things therein subservient to
antiquity no where else delivered. This is attested by diverse amongst the
Ancients, viz. in the Melissa of Antony, and the C^nturies of Maximus: to
instance in modern Authors would be endless. I will mention Barnabas Brissonius
instead of all: Whosoever reads his Treatise concerning the Persian
Principality, will easily find how much he was obliged to this Author.

LICENSED, TO. L' ESTRANGE.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The First Book.
THE break of day had now dispersed the darkness, and the Sun with earliest
beams, gilded the summits of the Mountains; when a Troop of Men that had no
Living but by Robberies, and Rapine, appeared upon the Promontory that elevates
it self over one of the Mouths of Nilus, named the Heracliotick: Being
assembled, they made a stand to take view of the Sea, that lay like a vast
Valley underneath them; but when they saw nothing that presented hope of Prey
(all the Ships they discovered, sailing off to the Main) they cast their Eyes
toward the neighbor Shore, and encountered this Object.

A Ship at Anchor, no men in her, yet heavy laden, as might easily be judged
afar o^f, for she was of that burden, as she drew Water to the third Deck. The
Shore was covered with a Massacre of men, some dead, others were but half dead,
and the parts of their Bodies that yet panted, gave assurance to the beholders,
it was no long time since the Fight was ended; nor were these the Marks of a
just Quarrel, they were the said Relics of an unfortunate Feast. There were
Tables that stood yet full ^urnished, and some that were overturned betwixt the
Arms of those that sat at them; others lay like Tomb-stones over the Dead that
had (as it is probable) hid themselves under them: Many Bowls and Pots were
cast down, and many yet held in their hands that had taken them either to
drink, or to cast at their Enemies heads; for the suddenness of the Mutiny, and
the necessity, had taught them a new way, and (instead of Darts and other
offensive Weapons) armed them with the Cups they drank in. They lay, one cloven
with an Axe, another his Brains beat out with Shells that lay ready on the
Sands, some bruised to pieces with Leavers, many burnt with Coals of Fire, and
diverse others, diversely Murdered; but the most were Shot to Death with Arrows.
In sum, Fortune in a little time had produced strange variations, contaminating
the Wine with Blood, changing the cheerfulness of a Feast into the horrors of a
Battle, promiscuously mixing their Meat with Wounds, and Drinking Healths with
Death; preparing such a Stage for the Egyptian Thieves to be Spectators; but
from those heights they could not understand the Play; for they plainly saw a
defeat, but no Masters of the Field; an absolute Victory, but no Spoils taken;
a Ship unmann'd, but else untouched; hulling in that dangerous Road, as if in
full peace, and in the midst of the greatest security in the world.

But though ignorant of the Cause, they were greedy of the Prey; and resolved
to make themselves the Conquerors: So they marched forward to the pillage; and
when they were not far from the Ship, and near to the dead Bodies, there was
presented to their sense, a sight of greater astonishment than the former.

It was a young Lady, sitting upon a Rock, of so rare and perfect a Beauty, as
one would have taken her for a Goddess, and though her present misery oppressed
her with extremest grief, yet in the greatness of her affliction, they might
easily perceive the greatness of her Courage: A Laurel crowned her Head, and a
Quiver in a Scarf hanged at her back; she rested her left Arm upon her Bow, and
let her Hand carelessly hang down upon her right Thigh; she leaned on her other
Arm, laying her Cheek upon her hand, and fixing her eyes upon a young Gentleman
that lay not far distant from her; he was covered in his wounds, and now began
to raise himself a little, as if awaking out of a deep sleep, almost of Death
it self; yet such a stock of Beauty shined in his Face, and the Blood that
rained down so set off the whiteness of his Skin, as made him show most lovely;
the pain he felt, seemed to weigh down his Eyelids, and the Beauty of the
Lady, to attract and open them.

He had no sooner recollected his Spirits, and scarce breathed, but with a
languishing voice he pronounced these words.

Sweetest, Is it true that I yet behold you Living, or (perishing in the
execution) have you increased the number of the dead? can you not, not even in
Death be ravished from me, but will your shadow be yet a loooker on, and sharer
in my Fortunes?

It is from you replied the Maid that I expect my Fortune, Life or Death; this
you here see (showing him a Steeletto in her lap) has yet not done its office,
hindered by the happy signs of your recovery.

This said, she leaped from the Rock, and the Thieves upon the Mountains
surprised with fear and astonishment ran to hide themselves behind the Bushes:
For she appeared more Divine when she was upon her Feet; her Arrows in her
Quiver clashing as she stepped, her Robe (that was Cloth of Gold) glittering in
the Sun, and her Hair that flowed under her Coronet (like the Priestesses of
Bacchus) reaching almost to the ground. One said she was a Goddess, and sure
the Goddess Diana, or Isis the Patroness of their Country; others conceived her
to be a Votaress to some God, that inspired with divine fury had made so great
a slaughter.

This while the Maid running to the Gentleman, cast herself upon his Body,
wept, kissed him^ wiped his wounds, and embraced him so closely as if she could
hardly be assured she had him in her Arms.

The Egyptians observing this, presently altered their Opinions; What, said
they, are these the actions of a Goddess? do Goddesses kiss dead Men? and with
so much commiseration! So encouraging one another, they marched on, and found
the Lady dressing the young man's wounds, and coming close ^ehind her, did not
dare to attempt any thing, not so much as to speak to her; but the noi^e they
had made, and their shadows cast before her Eyes, moved her to turn her Head;
and when she had seen them, she again declined her Face; and applied her self
to bind up her friends wounds, not so much as the least daunted with the
unusual Aspect, and color of these armed Egyptians: So powerful is sincere
affection, as it despises all other pleasing or displeasing thi^ (...) and
transports our whole care and thoughts (...) the object we love dearest: But
when the Thieves passed on, and stood in front before her, and seemed as if
they would attempt something, she lifted up her Eyes again, and seeing them so
black and ugly,

If you be (she said) these dead men's Spirits, you do us wrong to trouble us,
since most of you with your own hands slew one another; if any of you fell by
ours, it was but in our just revenge, to repel the violence you offered to my
Chastity; but if ye be living men, I should take you to be Thieves; if so, you
come mos^ opportunely: Free us, I beseech you, from these evil^ that oppress
us, kill us, and put and end to all our misery: These passionate wodr^ she
spoke with as sad an Accent.

But they (neither understanding her words nor meaning) left her with the
wounded Gentleman, not putting any surer guard upon them then their own
weakness; and hasting to the Ship, they unladed her, every man carrying out as
much Gold, Silver, Precious Stones and Silks, as they were able to bear,
neglecting other Commodities (though rich and various) and when they had every
one as much as satisfied their Avarice, they laid it down upon the shore,
making it up into packs, and dividing it, not by reason, or after the just
value of the things, but equalling them by weight, reserving for the last, to
resolve what to do with the young Gentleman and the Lady.

Mean while there appears upon the Mountains a second Company, two riding
before them as their Captains; these were no sooner perceived by the former,
but without preparing for the fight, or daring to take with them any part of of
the spo^l, lest it might give occasion to the Enemy to pursue; the fear that
struck their hearts, made them take their heels with the greatest agility that
was possible, for they were but Ten, and those they saw coming were twice that
number. Thus the Lady was twice taken, and yet not Prisoner. Now these others,
though they had an extreme longing to be at the pillage, and had already
devoured it in their hopes, yet the Apprehension, that troubled their Spirits,
not knowing the cause of these events, retained them for a while; for they
imagined the first Thieves had made that horrible Slaughter; and observing the
Lady in all the dangers that threatened her, to be no more afraid than if there
had been no such thing, careful only of the young man's wounds, that seemed to
pain her more, than if they had been her own; they remained mightily amazed, as
well at the generosity of her courage, and rareness o^ her Beauty, as at the
delicate shape and exact stature of the wounded young man; who ^egan to resume
his natural Color: After they had long considered, their Captain stepped forth,
and took her by the hand, commanding her to rise and go with him; but she that
understood not his Language, and yet doubted what he meant, drew the young
Gentleman along (nor would he part with her) and setting her Steeletto to her
Breast, threatened to kill her self, if they might not go together: The Captain
understanding her more by action and signs, than by her words, and hoping if
the young Gentleman recovered, he would serve him in designs of higher Nature;
made his Page alight, and he also dismounting, caused the two Captives to be
mounted on his Horses, and himself setting forward on foot, whilst his men
trussed up the Pillage, went with the Prisoners to help them, if happily their
weakness should not su^^er them to help themselves, nor did their Captivity
want a Glory, to see the Conqueror humbled to the Conquered, and to be waited
on by him that had them in his power: So great is the Appearance of Nobility,
and Magic of a Beauty, as to subdue the inhumane Nature of Thieves, and to
mollify the hearts of the most Barbarous. When they had now passed along the
Sea Shore, about half a quarter of a Mile, leaving the left hand-way, they
turned uphill, and climbing over, doubled their paces, to arrive by daylight,
at a Lake on the other side the Mountain.

This part of the Country is by the Egyptians named the Bucolia, or Pasture,
in which there is a Valley that receives the Innundations and disburdenings of
Nilus, growing into a Lake of an infinite deepness in the m^dst, but near the
sides it is but shallow and marish: Here the Egyptian Thieves live together
with a kind of policy, and observing a certain form of a Republic: Some dwell
in Cabbins or Huts, builded upon little spots of Earth, that rise above the
water in diverse places of the Lake; others live in Boats, that they use both
for ferrying over, and habitations for themselves and wives, who are there
brought a-Bed; their Infants first suck the Mothers-milk, and within a while
are weaned, and use to eat Fish, got in the Lake, and broyled in the Sun; when
a little one desires to go, his Mother ties a Cord to his Foot, that reaches
no farther than the Boat, committing him to this new guide.

Thus all that are born within the Lake, account it for their Nurse and
Country, and hold it as a strong protection to their Robberies, and to that end
such kind of people ^lock hither from all parts; for the water serves them for
a wall, and the great quantity of Reed and Cane that grows about the borders,
stands before them as their Bulwark, and therein they have cut out so many
ways, intermazed one within another (which their practice makes easy to them)
and cuts off all hope of incursion from the Enemy.

The Sun now declining to the West, the Captain and the rest of his company
arrived at this Lake, and dismounting the two Prisoners, carried the Prey
aboard their little Boats; presently all their Fellows that had stayed at home,
some from one side of the Fenns, and some from the other, came running to meet
their Captain, and received him as their King, doing him all humble reverence;
but when they had viewed the riche^ of the Prize, and the divine form of the
Maid^ they conceived their companions had robbed some Temple, and taken away
the Priestess, or the living Image of some Goddess; so with a thousan^ glorious
Praises, elevating their Captains Valou^ to the Heavens, they all conducted him
to his place of residence, which was a little I^land cut off from theirs, and
reserved only for him, and some few appointed to be always near his Person:
B^ing landed here, he commanded the multitude should retire home, and not fail
to attend him the next morning: Himself with some few of his Friends made a
short Supper, then committed the two Prisoners to the custody of a young
Grecian (taken by the same Thieves not long before) to the end he might serve
for their interpreter; and giving him order they should be lodged in a Tent
joined to his own, charged him to dress the Gentleman's wounds, and see that
none should do injury to the Lady, whilst he wearied with the labor of his
Journey, and the care of present business went to rest.

But when silence r^igned in all the I^land, about the first watch of the
Night, the Maid being alone, used her solitude, and absence of her keeper, as
an occasion given her to ease her Spirits with complaining, the cal^ of the
Night exciting her sad thoughts, and being able to see nothing that might
divert her mind; when she had deeply sighed to her self (for she was separated
by command of the Captain, Theagenes lying with Knemon, and she resting on a
poor low Palate) weeping as if her heart would break.

Oh Apollo ( she said) how much greater is our punishment than our offense!
cannot all our past miseries extinguish thy revenge? We are deprived of the
sweet presence of our Friends and Parents, we have been taken by Pirates, we
have been tossed at Sea by Tempests, and a thousand times in danger of ou^
(...), we are now at Land a prey to Thieves: Alas are ^e yet reserved to be
more tormented? Where at l^st will thou end the Progress of our Miseries? To
dye with a noble Fame, were a sweet death; but if an^ Villain shall offer to
force me, which my Theagenes never yet attempted, with my own Hands I will
prevent him, and strangle this betraying Bea^ty, keeping my Virtue to adorn my
Epitaph, whilst thou Apollo shall be called the most cruel Judge.

She would have proceeded, but Theagenes thus interupted her; Cease my dearest,
my Soul Cariclea: it is true you have reason to complain, but you provoke the God
more than you do believe; we ought not to contradict the will of Heaven; by
Prayers not Injuries, that which is greater than our selves, must b^ appeased.
You say true, reply^d Cariclea, but pray how do you? Better he said, since
Ev^ning; I thank this Gentleman, he has applied that to my wounds, has much
aswaged their inflammation. You shall find your self more easy to Morrow
Morning (added their Keeper) For I will gather you such an Herb, as shall heal
your wounds at the third dressing; I have tried the properties of it by many
experiments, since my self was taken Prisoner here; for none of my Captains men
have ever come home wounded, but in a little time I have effected their cure by
the same means; and do not you wonder I take such particular care of you, for
your Fortune represents my own; I must needs pity a Grecians misery, that am my
self a Grecian. A Grecian, (Oh Immortal Gods! cried the two Prisoners for joy)
I am both by Language and Birth. This yet (said Theagenes) gives us some
breathing space from our afflictions; but how may we call you? my Name is
Knemon. Of what part of Greece? Of Athe^s. Do us the Favor I beseech you, to
let us know your Fortune: Forbear (said Knemon) do not make my woes to bleed
afresh, nor let not me with abundance of my Evils increase yours; neither would
the whole Night suffice for the Narration; and you after your many Labors had
need of rest and sleep: But they insisting, and telling him that it would not
be a little comfort to them, to hear of chances like their own: Knemon begins
thus;

My Fathers Name was Aristippus, a Native of the City of Athens, a Senator of
the higher Court, and of no mean Fortunes: It happened that my poor Mother
having paid the Tribute that all humane Creatures owe to Nature, my Father
resolved upon a second Marriage, because he had as yet but one Son, and did not
think him worthy of all his care; he therefore matched with a Woman, named
Demoeneta^ she was Fair enough, but had a Soul the most black and fowl: She had
no sooner entered our House, but she made her self the absolute Mistress of it,
and reduced all things to her Power and Pleasure; charming the good man my
Father with her Beauty, and officiously observing all his Humors: For she (if
ever Woman) had the art to move the violence of Af^ection, and to make him
passionately in love with her; if Affairs pressed his departure, she wept; at
his return she would meet him, accuse the slowness of his coming, and protest
she had perished if he had tarryed never so little longer; at every word
embracing him, and moistening her kisses with her Tears, insomuch that my
Father was so taken with her, as willingly he did see or think of nothing else.
At first she used me as if I had been her own Son, and added this as a greater
tie upon his Love; sometimes she would kiss me, and desired that I might stay
at home to play with her: This pleased me, and not suspecting what would
follow, I admired that she expressed such a Motherly Affection to me; but when
she appeared more petulant, and that her kisses grew more intemperate than
became her, her carraige exceeding the bounds of modesty; Then I began to
suspect, avoid, and repel her allurements; I omit the rest, because it would be
tedious, to tell with what ways and promises she would entice me, how she would
call me her sweetest Favorite, her Heir, and oftentimes her Soul, making a
mixture of fair Names, or any thing whereby she hoped I might be caught. In
more serious and important matters bearing her self as a Mother, but in
dalliance showing plainly she was in Love: At length this happened, upon the
day of the great solemnity, that we call the Panathineon, when the Athenians
carry a Ship in procession through the Streets in Honor of Minerva: Being then
in the prime of my Youth; after I had sung the usual Hymn to the Goddess, the
Rites ended, I returned home, yet vested in my Robe and Coronet; she had no
sooner cast her Eyes upon me, but she lost her reason, and could no longer
disguise her passion, nor cover with her Art, the violence of her Flames, but
running to me, embraced me, called me her young Hippolytus, her Theseus. Judge
you in what case I was then, that now blush to speak it: That Evening my Father
supped in the Prytaneum, and as is usual in those public Feasts and Meetings,
stayed there all Night: Now when all our House were in their first sleep, she
came to my Bod, and urged me to satisfy her unlawful desires; but I resisting
both her Threats and Flatteries, fetching a deep sigh, she left me, and that
Night plotted revenge. My Father coming home about noon next day, and finding
her a Bed, asked her how she did? She told him she was not well; but he
pressing her to speak particularly the cause of her sudden Sickness;

This good Son (she said) so full of Piety toward me; our common Child, whom I
have loved (I call the Gods to witness) more than your self, suspecting me by
some signs to be with Child, which I have concealed from you till I should be
better assured of it my self, took the occasion of your absence, and when I
advertised him of his duty, and persuaded him to Temperance, and to abst^^n
from Drinking and wanton Courses, for I knew his irregularities in that kind,
though I would not tell you so much, fearing to in^ur the suspicion of a
Stepmother: Whilst I was thus discoursing with him alone, least he should be
too much ashamed; I blush to tell you the rest, he spurned me with his Foot,
and has made me in this case as you now see.

My Father hearing this, without speaking to me, or giving me leisure to defend
my self, not believing she that had witnessed so tender an affection to me,
would now belly me; having found me in my Chamber, he set upon me, beating me
with his own hands, and causing his Servants to to scourge me with rods in his
presence: I being not able to imagine for what cause they thus abused me; but
when the first motion of his choler was past, Father (said I) yet now at least
(since before you would not suffer me) let me know the reason of your
displeasure, and what offense I have committed to deserve this cruel
Punishment. Dissembling Traitor, he replied, would thou have me to be the
Historian of thy Villainies? and turning away from me, hastened to Damoeneta; but
she (for she had not yet satisfied her Cruelty) laid a new train for me.

She had a Maid called Thisbe that played excellently well upon the Lute, a
handsome Maid; her she commands to love me, and presently she obeys her, and she
that had oftentimes before rejected my suit to her, began now to tempt me with
her looks and gestures, in such sort that my Vanity believed I was grown
Beautiful on the sudden: To conclude, I admitted her to my Bed, which she
continued to visit often; and when I warned her she should take heed lest her
Mistress should perceive her: Lord (said she) how simple you are! if you think
it such danger for me, a Slave, and bought with Money, to be taken thus; what
punishment do you judge my Mistress deserves, who boasting her self nobly Born,
and having a Bedfellow by the Laws of Matrimony; Lastly, knowing Death to be
the reward proposed for her sin, yet fears not to commit Adultry. Oh! say not
so (I replied) for I can by no means believe it. Yes if you please (said
Thisbe) I will bring you where you may take the Adulterer with her: I having
told her she should with all my Heart; I will, she answered, both for your
sake, that have been extremely injured by her, and for my own, that daily
suffer under her vain Jealousy. Therefore (if you have courage) prepare your
self to take him: I having promised her I would not fail, she presently retired
her self. The third night after, she came and waked me from my sleep, telling
me the Adulterer was within, and my Father by a sudden necessity called into
the Country, which she knowing before, had made him this appointment, and that
it was now time for my revenge, and wished me to take my Sword lest the Villain
should escape me; I did so, and carrying it naked in my hand, Thesbe going
before me with a Light, I came to the Chamber Door, which I found locked, and
saw through the crevises, the glympse of a Lamp that burned within: Transported
with impatience, I broke open the Door, and running in, cried out aloud, Where
is this Villain, the Gallant Inamorato of this Illustrious Lady, that is famed
to be so Virtuous? And then approaching with a full intent to Nay^ them both to
the Bed; I saw my Father (Oh good Gods!) who had leapt out in his Shirt, and
now was upon his knees before me; And oh Son (said he) restrain a little your
passion; take pity of your Father; spare these gray Hairs, that have given you
your breeding: We have done you wrong, it is true, but it is not of that Nature,
you should pursue us to the Death; suffer not your Fury to transport you, nor
stain your Hands in your Fathers Blood: In these, and other lamentable Words,
he pleaded; whilst I (as if struck with a Clap of Thunder) stood silenced, and
astonished; looking round about the Bed and Chamber, not knowing either what to
say or do, wondering what became of Thesbe, that I know not how, had slided away
from me. In this amaze my Swor^ ^^ll out of my Hand, and Damoeneta, ran
presently and catched it up: My Father now seeing he had escaped the danger he
apprehended, laid Hands upon me, and commanded I should be bound. Damoeneta
persisting to exasperate him against me; Did not I tell you this? that you
should take heed of this Youth, that when occasion was offered he would have
some design; I knew it by his Face, I saw into his Heart: Indeed you told me so
(he said) but I could not believe you: Then pinnion'd (as I was) he commanded
me to be taken away, and would not give me liberty to speak: Next day in the
morning, he produced me to the People in my Bonds, and casting dust upon his
head,

It was not to this Ho^e Athenian^, that I bred this Child (said he) but
promising to my self he would one day, be a support and stay to my feeble Age;
willing out of such Fortunes as the Gods bestowed upon me, to render him
accomplished in all sorts of Virtues I provided able Masters to instruct him in
the Liberal Arts; and when he had tasted the Elements of Letters, caused his
Name to be enrolled in the Register of my Family, made him a Freeman of your
Town, that Living under your Laws, he might enjoy your Privileges; and so much
I have loved him, that I have made my whole Life a trouble for his sake; but he
forgetful of all these Benefits, first did me injury in his cruel usage of this
my Lawful Wife; and lastly entered my Chamber in the night, Armed with his
Sword, and was only so far from being a Paracide, as Fortune stood between us,
a sudden Terror making his Sword fall out of his hand. I now fly to your
Justice, and have here brought him before you; for though by the Laws, with my
own ^ands I might have killed him, yet I would not; esteeming it better that he
should receive his punishment from you, than an unfortunate Father spot his
hands in the Blood of his own Son.

Speaking these words, he wept; and Damoeneta seemed to take on extremely,
calling me miserable, that should die thus; justly indeed, but yet before my
time, and that sure some Devil had possessed me, and put it into my Mind, to
attempt my Fathers Life; her Tears bearing false Witness of her Sorrow, and
confirming my accusation as Truth: And when I beseeched they would permit me to
speak, a Notary stepping in, put this strict question to me; Whether I had not
entered my Fathers Chamber in the Night, with my Sword naked? I did enter (I
replied;) but hear me, and I will tell you how; presently the People clamoured
out, and said, I ought not to be suffered to speak more; some cried stone him;
others bid the Hangman should take me, and throw me down headlong from the
Precipice: During this time of their Distractions in Opinion, I cried, oh
Stepmother! alas I dye for my Stepmother, my Stepmother condemns me without
a hearing! These words touched the Hearts of many, and made them suspect the
Truth; but yet I could not be heard; for the People were in that tumult and
trouble, as it was not possible to appease them: When they came to numbering of
the Votes, they found about One Thousand Seven Hundred that condemned me to
Death, one half whereof adjugded me to be stoned, and the other, to be cast
headlong from the Rock; there remained yet about another Thousand, that
slacking something of their Severity, out of the Suspicion they had conceived
of my Mother-in-Law, condemned me to perpetual Banishment; and it was concluded
according to their Sentence; for notwithstanding they were the minor part, both
the others being joined, yet take the first severally, and a Thousand made the
gteatest number: Thus was I exiled from my Country, and my Fathers House.

But the wicked Damoeneta did not long escape unpunished by the Gods, that hate
Impieties; how it was you shall know hereafter: Now it is time you should rest,
for the night is far spent, and you had need of a great deal of sleep: Oh now
you will add to our misery, replied Theagenes, if you leave this wicked Woman
thus: Hear then (said Knemon) since your will is so;

After my Judgment was pronounced, I went down to the Port we call Pyreum, and
lighted on a Ship that was bound for the Island of Egina, knowing I had some
Friends by my Mothers side, that lived there: When I was landed, and had found
out those I enquired for, I passed my time there a while, with indifferent good
content: I had not stayed there past Twenty Days, but walking as my custom was
upon the Haven, I perceived a Bark making in; therefore staying a little to see
from whence it was, the Planks were scarce laid down, but a Passenger came
running to me, and embraced me; it was Charias, one of my old Acquaintance: Oh
Knemon (said he) I bring you joyful News! you are revenged of your Enemy,
Damoeneta is dead: You are welcome dear Friend Charias (I replied) but why do
you pass over your good News so lightly, as if it were some ill accident?
Relate the manner I beseech you, for I fear she dyed by some unusual way, and
escaped the Death and Sh^me she deserved: Justice said Charias, has not
altogether forsaken us, as Hesiod thought; but though sometimes it conniveth at
the wickedness of men, and seems as if it slept upon their Sins, and ^or a time
deferring to punish them, yet at length it overtakes them; as it has done the
wicked Damoeneta: The Particulars whereof, came to my knowledge, out of the
Familiarity that had past betwixt my Self and Thesbe, who concealed nothing
from me; for when the decree of unjust Banishment had past against me, your
Father Penitent for his act, withdrew himself from the company of men, and
retired to his Grange House in the Country, there seating his own Heart, as the
(Poet says) he resolved to spend the remainder of his Days; but suddenly all
the Furies of Hell began to torment your Mother-in-Law; she loved you now in
your absence, more than ever, and did nothing but complain incessantly,
deploring your Fortune, but indeed lamenting for her own: No word passed from
her mouth but Knemon, her Sweetest, her Soul Knemon? In fine, her affliction
grew to that excess, all the Town took notice of it, and the Neighbors, and
Noble Ladies her Friends, that came to visit her wondered exceedingly to see a
Mother-in-Law, witness such a Motherly affection, much commending her, and
endeavoring to comfort her the best they could; but she told them her evil was
greater than to be cured by persuasions, that they knew not the cause of her
sorrows, nor what stings were in her Heart: And ever as she came to her self,
she complained of Thesbe; that she knew not how to serve her purpose; How
nimble she was (said Damoeneta) to enterprise and execute a malice! she knew
not how to make me enjoy the pleasure of my Love, but she knew how to deprive
me of my Joy; in an instant, ever I could think, ever she would give me time to
change my Mind. By these, and other words and actions, she accidently showed
the displeasure she conceived against Thesbe, and that she meant her no good:
But Thesbe (finding her indignation, and seeing she was lost in passion;
disposed by her ill Nature, to lay some train for her, and mad both with Love
and Anger) resolved to anticipate he^, and by laying a Plot for her, to
preserve her self; and coming to her, Mistress (said she) What Destiny, Enemy
to your Contentment, and my Fidelity, makes you accuse your Servant? I have
always, and even in this last Act, obeyed your will; if any thing succeeds not
to your wish, you must blame Fortune, not me; yet if you please to command me,
I shall testify a great deal of affection, and no little industry, to find out
a way to your content.

(Alas she replied) How is that possible, since he that only can content me is
so far distant, and so much Sea and Land is interposed betwixt us? the
unexpected Lenity of his Judge was my death, for had they covered him in a
Monument of Stones, they had with him buried and extinguished my Flame; ^or
when there is no more hope, there is no more care, or sense of pain: Now
methinks I still see him, methinks I still hear him object against me my unjust
deceits, and up^raid me with them, and I blush to think my self in his
presence; sometimes I think I may yet ^njoy him, and resolve to go my ^el^ and
^ind him, in what part of the World soever he remains; this sets me all on
Fire, this makes me Mad; and justly, Oh you Gods I suf^er! For why did I plot
against him, and rather not use him kindly? Why was I an Enemy, and not rather
a Suppl^ant at his Feet? had he not reason to give me one refusal? I was a
Stranger to him; he was a^raid to stain his Fathers Bed; it might be time,
acquaintance, and my expressions to him, might have won him: But I, crueller
than a wild Beast, not as if I had been a Suitor, but a Mistress, that had the
absolute Empire of his Will, thought strange he should not obey me; and in my
unhappy rigor persecuted him for despising Damoeneta, that had not Beauty
equal to his merit: But my Thesbe, what content was that you spoke of?

Madam (she replied) the World believes that Knemon has obeyed his Sentence,
and has left the Town and Territory of Athens; but I know (that ever since
that time I have been thoughtful to procure your quiet) he lies concealed at a
Friends House here in Town: You have heard of Arsinoe, the Flutenist, and her
Familiarity with him; she after his disaster, received him into her Honse,
promising to go along with him; and till she can furnish her self with
Necessaries for the Voyage, she keeps him in secret at her House. But Demoeneta
could not now re^rain to interrupt her, saying, Oh blessed Arsinoe! both in the
former Felicity thou have tasted, and that occasion offers thee the present
happiness to exile thy self with him: But what does this concern me?

Oh greatly Mistress ( replied Thesbe) for I will fain to be desperately in
Love with him, and pray Arsinoe, that is my old Acquaintance, and my fell^w
Musician, to give me one nights lodging with him in her place; this being
obtained, I will make over my right to you; you shall personate Arsinoe, and he
shall take you for her; for I will look he shall have a Cup more than ordinary
in his Head, and the Chamber shall be dark; and then I hope when your Desires
are obtained, your Torments will cease, for the end of Love is enjoying: But if
your Fire should kindle again, as I hope it will not, we must make a second
Navigation (as they say) and sit again in Council; mean time let us have a care
of our present Business.

Demaeneta approving, and praising Thesbe, conjured her to be secret, and
expeditious; she (desiring but one day to dispatch it in) went presently to
Arsinoe, and asked her if she knew not Teledemus? she said yes; pray thee (said
Thesbe) make me beholding to thee, to receive us this night into thy House^ for
I have promised him a nights Lodging; he will come first, and I will follow
as soon as ever I have got my Mistress to Bed. Arsinoe consenting, Thesbe ran
presently to meet her Master, walking solitary in his Grounds, and thus spoke
to him.

Sir, I come to you the Accuser of my self, and to receive such punishment as
you shall please to inflict upon me: I have deprived you ^f your Son, not as a
Principal, yet as an Accessory; for when I found that my Mistress lived not as
she ought, but wronged your Bed, fearing if it should be discovered by any
other but my self, I should incur the Suspicion of being her Bawd; and
especially pitying you, that so much loved and doted on her, yet had no better
recompense; not daring to speak freely to you, I resolved to unfold the truth
to my young Master^ and coming to him in the night that none might see me, I
told him my Mistress abused your Honor, and did receive an Adulterer to your
Bed; but your Son (being then as you know incensed against her) understanding
me that I said the Adulterer was with her in your Bed, carried away with rage,
caught up his Sword, and though I cried to him to stay, yet he regarded me not,
but thinking I had repented me of my Discovery, ran like a mad man to your
Chamber; the rest you know: And now you may, if you please, purge your self
before your Son, though absent; and revenge your self of her that has done
injury to you both: For I will this Night show you Damaeneta, lying with her
Adulterous Friend, in the House of a Stranger in the Suburbs.

If you do it, said Aristippus, I will reward you with your Liberty, and it may
be, when I see my Enemy punished, I may again take Comfort, and chase away the
sorrow, that in despair of my Sons repeal, has tormented my Old Age. I have
doubted this a long time, and had ever some shadow of it in my apprehension;
yet because I wanted manifest Proofs, I rested quiet; But what is to be done?

You know (said she) the Monument of the Epicureans; there do you stay for me
in the Evening: Having thus spoken, she returned to Damaeneta.

Madam (said she) dress your self presently, curl your Hair, and put on your
best Jewels; for now your desires approach to their effect.

She instantly made her self ready, and Thesbe leading her the way, when they
came near to Arsinoes House, she prayed her to stay there a little, and running
in to Arsinoe, entreated her to go over the way, and let them have the House to
themselves, for her Friend was bashful, newly initiated in the Rites of Venus,
and would blush if he did see any but her self: Arsinoe consented, and Thesbe
presently returning to her Mistress, brought her in, and having got her to Bed,
took away the Light, for fear (she said) Knemon should know of her coming to
the Island of Egina (for there he is supposed to remain) and wishing her to
content her Desires, without speaking a word, told her she would bring the
young Gentleman to her, that was but drinking with a Neighbor hard by: Then
she made have to meet her Master Aristippus, in the appointed place; and as she
came along with him, warned him to be sure to take the Adulterer.

Aristippus followed her in, and by the Light of the Moon, that shined a little
into her Chamber, with much ado he found the Bed: And have I taken thee (he
said) thou Enemy of the Gods? Whilst he was speaking, Thesbe ran to the Chamber
Door, and making a noise, cried out, Oh wretched! What ill luck have we? the
Adulterer is escaped, and therefore Master take heed you know what former
mistake was made by your Son: Fear not me, replied Aristippus, I have the
wicked Woman fast; I desire no more, and so drew her with him toward the City;
but she considering (as it is probable) the evils that encompassed her, the
frustrating of her expectation, the ignominy of her Fault, and the punishment
ordained by the Laws, for shame to be surprised, and in spite to be deluded;
when she came right against the Pit, in the Academy (where you know our
Captains (according to the custom of the Country) use to sacrifice to the
Hero's, or Demy-Gods, for the prosperity of the Town) She brake from him with
such a fury; as the Old Man feeling his strength unable to resist, was forced
to let her go; and no sooner out of his hands, but she leapt into the Pit, and
brake her Neck: A miserable end of an Impious Woman! I am revenged, said
Aristippus, without employing the succors of the Law to punish thee. The next
day your father recounted the whole matter to the People, and made all the
Friends he could to get your Banishment repealed: I know not what is yet done
in it; for before any thing was resolved, the particular necessity of my
Affairs, pressed me as you see to come into these parts: Yet you may hope the
people will consent to your return; and that your Father will imbark himself to
find you out, and bring you back.

This was the Relation Charias made me; what ^ince befell me, how I came hither,
and the Fortunes I have had, would be too long to tell you; with that he wept,
and his two Prisoners bare him company in Tears, as compassionating his misery,
and the more because his disasters made them have a livelier remembrance of
their own: Nor had they ceased from Weep^ng, if Sleep, delighting, as it were,
to Bath it self in Tears, had not closed up their Fountains.

But Thyamis (so was the Captain of these Robbers named) having rested quietly
the first part of the Night, was afterward troubled with a strange Dream, and
waking upon it, spent the rest of the Night in studying out the Meaning of it;
for about the Hour that the Cocks Crowing (whether it be as some think out of a
Natural feeling and knowledge of the Suns return to our Horizon, that moves
them by instinct to salute that Divine Light, or by a certain heat proper to
them, or by a desire to stir and seek new Nourishment) do summon Mortals to
their customary Works, about that time the Gods sent Thyamis this Apparition in
his sleep.

It seemed to his Imagination, that he was in the City of Memphis, were he was
born; and that entering the Temple of the Goddess Isis, he saw it all on Fire;
such a great number of lighted Torches were within it, and the Altars were full
of all manner of Beasts sor Sacrifice, their Blood flowing upon the Pavement,
and Entries and Galleries were so filled with People, as their noise and tumult
much amazed him; when he was come into the inner part of the Temple, he thought
the Goddess met him with Chariclea in her hand; and said these words,

Thyamis, I charge thy Fidelity with this Virgin; yet having o^ her, thou shall
not have her; but thou shall be wicked, and kill this Stranger; yet she shall
not dye. These Ambiguities exceedingly troubled his Spirit; and often
canvassing the meaning. At lengt^ he expounded it thus; thou shall have her,
and thou shall not; that is, possessing her for thy Wife, thou shall have her a
Maid no longer; thou shall Murder her; that is her Virginity; but so killed,
she shall not dye: Thus Thyamis interpreted his Dream, flattering his wishes.

When it was Morning, and the principal Thieves, according to his commandment
were assembled; he bade that the Spoils should be brought forth (for by that
specious name they called the Booty) and sending for Knemon to him, charged him
to bring thither his two Prisoners: As he was carrying them to his Captain (Oh
Gods) said they one to another, what ^ortune now attends us? and conjured
Knemon, he would be favoura^le to them to his power; which h^ promised, and
bade them animate themselves, and not su^^er fear to seize upon their Courages;
for his Captain was not a Barbarian, but Noble and full of Courtesy; and that
he well expressed by his Humanity, the Illustrious Blood of his descent; that it
was mere necessity constrained him to take such a course of Life: When they
were come into Thyamis's Island, which he had designed for that Assembly, he
ascended to a higher Ground, and commanded Knemon, who stood below with the
Prisoners to interpret to them; for Knemon had now learned the Egyptian
Language; and Thyramis did not yet well underst^nd the Greek.

My Fellow Soldiers (said Thyamis) you well know my Spirit and Affection to
you, and in what sort I have ever managed your Affairs; for being (as you know)
Son to the Chief Priest of Memphis; and unjustly deprived of the Dignity of the
Priesthood, after my Fathers Death, by the Means of my younger Brother, in this
Extremity, I fled into your Arms, and craved your Succors, to revenge my
Wrong, and recover my Honor; and you favored me so much, as by your general
Suffrage to elect me your Capta^n; since which time I have lived amongst you,
without entrenching upon your Privileges, or challenging to my ^elf any
greater part of the Prize, than the meanest of you; but if Money were to be
distributed, I only desired my share; if Prisoners to be sold, I caused the
Prize to be laid down in common, knowing he that will discharge the office of a
good Captain, must be above his Men in pains, and but their equal in Profit:
When I took Prisoners in the Field, that were Men likely to do us Service, I
have received them into the number of our Soldiers; others less serviceable, I
have made Money of: I never offered violence to any Woman; but if they were
Noble, I have put them to their Ransom, or restored them to their Liberty,
pitying their Misfortune; others of meaner Condition, and such as the Chance of
War made Captives, and were by their own natural Baseness inclined to serve, I
have given you for Slaves: But now I have a Suit to you, that for my part of
the Prey, you will please to give me this Fair Stranger; and though by my own
Authority I might retain her, yet I hold it more honorable to take her with
your Consent; for I should do very imprudently, if for gaining of one Prisoner
a Stranger, I should lose or offend my Friends and Companions; yet the Favor
you do me shall not be without a Recompense; for I will leave the Spoils to
your Dispose: And forasmuch as we of the Prophetic Race disdain to mix our
Blood with any Women that are not of our Quality, I am resolved to take this
Virgin, not for the pleasure I shall receive in the equal enjoying of her, but
for the propagation of an Issue to succeed me in my Sacred Charge; and I will
give you the Reasons that induce me: When I first saw her, I esteemed her to be
nobly born, as well for the Riches she had about her, as that her Spirits
failed not in the midst of her Calamities, but that she constantly stood the
Assaults of Fortune; her Form, Modesty and Breeding were great Arguments to me
of her Quality; for her Beauty exceeds all of our Times, and her Modesty is
such as invites her Beholders to a Continency: why therefore should not I
honor her, and judge highly of her? But what yet is more considerable, she
seems to me to be a Religious Votaress of some Goddess, since in all the
Dangers that befell her, (believing it to be an intolerable sin (she never would
pull off her Crown of Laurel, nor her Sacred Robe; what Marriage then can be
more equal, my brave Assistants, than the Son of a Prophet to match with a Maid
consecrated to the Gods.

They all approved the Match, and wished him Joy. Thyamis catching the Words, I
thank you, worthy Friends, he said, but we shall do well first to ask the Maids
consent; for if I would have used the Law of Empire, to Will had been enough
for all: but my Demands being only a lawful Marriage, the consent of two is
necessary; and turning to her, Tell us (he said) you Fair One, what you do
resolve upon our Propositions, and declare to us who, and of whence your
Parents are: But she, after she had fixed her Eyes a good while upon the
ground, as meditating what she would say, at length she raised her Head, and
looking upon Thyamis, with more Beauty than before, for her study to contrive
her Speech, had painted her Cheeks with a becoming Blush, and her Eyes with the
vehemence of her Thoughts sparkled with more than ordinary luster; Knemon
interpreting, she said,

Sir, it would better have become my Brothe^ Theagenes to have answered you
than I, silence being as commendable in Maids, as the Grace of Replying is in
Men; but since you give me liberty to speak, and that you have expressed your
Nobleness in seeking to compass just things by perswas^^n, not force, and in
regard your Speech is principally directed (...) me, I am constrained to exceed
the Bounds I have prescribed to my self, and are proper to my Sex, and to
answer the Demands of my Conqueror in the Eyes and Hearing of so many Men;

Know then, our Country is Ionia, and we are born of one of the best Families
of Ephesus: when we were come to the Age wherein the Noble men's Children of our
Country are accustomed to do Service to the Gods, I was chosen Priestess t^
Diana, and my Brother Priest to Apollo. This being an Annual Honor, when the
Year was run out, we were to make a Voyage to Delos, in our Sacred Robes, and
there to exhibit public Games, for exercise of Letters, Music and the Body;
and so according to the manner of our Ancestors, to resign our Priesthood: To
this end a Ship was made ready for us, laden with Gold, Silver, Silks, and
other Necessaries both for setting forth of the Games, and feasting of the
People: Thus we loosed out of the Haven, leaving our Father and Mother in their
House, who in regard of the feebleness of their old Age, and the dangers of the
Sea, did not dare to embark with us: many of the Citizens went the Voyage, some
in our Ship, some in Vessels of their own; and having sailed the greater part
of our way, with all favor of the Heavens, ^n a sudden the Clouds thickened,
and a fearful Tempest arose, accompanied with Lightning and Thunder, that so
masked the Skies, and plowed up the Seas, as we lost the benefit of our
Compass, and our Pilot overcome with the greatness of the Evil, was forced to
give way to the violence of the Tempest, and abandon the Government and Helm to
the disc^etion of Fortune. In fine, the Storm having (seven days and nights
together) spent the fury of its strongest gusts upon our Vessel, we were cast
upon the Shore where you took us, and beheld so great a Massacre of men,
forasmuch as we there making a Feast of Joy, and a Sacrifice to the Gods of
Thanksgiving for our Deliverance, the Saylors (with impious desire to possess
our Riches) set upon us, and resolved to put us to the Sword; but we made such
resistance, as after the loss of our Enemies and our Friends, we two, as you
saw, remained the Conquerors; and would it had pleased the Gods we had ended
our days among them, and not ^een the only miserable Relics of that B^ttel;
but since it so falls out, yet we are happy in this one respect, that some
favorable Deity has made us fall into ^our hands, and gives us, that late
expected nothing but Death, the liberty now to treat of a Marriage, which I
were indiscre^t if I should refuse: For what Felicity can be imagined greater,
than for a poor Captive to be thought worthy of her Generals Bed; add to this,
that a Maid dedicated to the Gods, shall be taken to wife by the Son of a
Prophet, that in a little while shall himself be a Prophet, which sure is not
without some secret Mystery of Providence. I only beseech one fav^ur, that
before you marry me, I may be permitted ^o go to the next great Town, or any
nearer place ^here there is an Altar or Temple of Apollo, that I may render up
the Charge of my Priesthood, and put off the Marks and En^ig^s of the God; it
would ^o b^st at Memphis, when you have recovered the Digni^y of Chief Priest;
for a Marriage joined to Victory would be celebrated with more joy, and be as a
Trophy of your glorious Actions; but whether before or after, I leave it to
your pleasure, so as you vouc^safe to let me accomplish the C^remonies usual in
my C^untrey; whereto I know you will condescend, since (a^ you ^ay) you have
been bred from a Child in the Mysteries of Religion, and are full of Reverence
toward the Gods.

Thus she ceased to speak, and began to weep: All that were present did greatly
approve her Answer, and by a general Cry assured her they were ready to see her
Desires performed; and Thyamis consented half voluntary, and half by
constraint; for his ardent longing to enjoy Chari^lea, made him think an hour
of delay an Eternity; withal he found himself to charmed with her Speech, as if
it had been a Sirens Song, that it forced him to allow of her Demands, having
also a relation to his Dream, flattering his Desires with a belief their
Nuptials should be held in Memphis: Then he broke up the Meeting, (having first
divided the Booty, whereof his Companions freely gave him the richer and the
greater part) and commanded them within ten days to be ready to sit down before
Memphis, and besiege his Brother. To the Prisoners he as^igned their old Tent,
and Knemon to attend them, not now as a Keeper, but a Companion and many times
sent for Theagenes to his Table for his Sisters sake, whom he resolved not to
visit often, for fear her sight should increase his impatient wishes to enjoy
her, and lest it should make him attempt any thing against what was publicly
consented to, and privately figured in his Dream. For these Reasons Thyamis
forbear to see her, thinking it impossible he should behold her and contain his
longings; but Knemon, after every one was retired to their Lodgings, pa^^ed the
Lake, and went a great way ^y Land to seek the Herb he had promised Theagenes
the day before.

In the mean time, Theagenes taking the advantage of his Absence wept and
lamented to himself, without speaking a word to Chariclea, but incessantly
calling upon the Gods; and she demanding whether he did sigh for their common
Misery, or that some new Disaster was befallen? Alas (said Theagenes) is there
any thing more new, or more unjust, than to falsify Faith, and violate Oaths,
and that Chariclea, without memory of me, or of my Services, should treat of a
Marriage with another?

Oh say not so ( replied Chariclea) be not you more cruel to me than my
Destiny: you have proved my Affection by many Arguments, and can you now
distrust me only for words accommodated to the time, and for the interest of
our Affairs? No, no, your self may s^oner change your Mind, than I. I can
suffer all the Calamities of the World, but know there is no violence so great,
that can separate me and Modesty; nor am I conscious of a fault that ^ay, b^t
in loving you too much, yet with an hone^t and a lawful Love; for from the
first entitling of you to my Heart, it was as to my Husband, not as to a Lover
that could not moderate his Desires, having to this hour preserved the outmost
Purity, often repelling your Impatience to consummate the Marriage which with
Vows we had contracted; think how little reason you have to conceive I would
prefer a Barbarian before a Greek, and a Thief before a man of all men the
dearest?

But what was the meaning then (replied Theagenes) of your Speech in that
famous Assembly, when you called me your Brother, methought it was a fine
invention, putting Thyamis out of jealousy of our Love, and making way that we
might freely be together, I approved your Story of the Country of Ionia, and
of a Voyage to Delos for they were things like Truths, and led the Hearers in a
pleasing Error; but to accord so freely to a Marriage, to article, and set down
the time before such multitudes of People, I neither could nor would conjecture
what it meant, but wished the Earth would open and devour me, ere I should see
my hopes and services repaid with such Ingratitude.

At these Words, Chariclea embracing Theagenes, and weeping, How well I^ take
these Fears, (said she) that torment you for my sake, since they make me know
in the extremity of our Adversities your Affection is the same it was: but
assure your self, Theagenes, if I had not carried it thus, we should not at
this time have had the freedom to confer together; for to be wilful, and to run
a contrary course to the de^ires of one more powerful than our selves, begets
but a stronger opposition, whilst yiedling words, applied to the motion of the
Will, presently appeaseth the first heat, and by the sweetness of a Promise
lays the Appetite to sleep; forasmuch as they that love after a gross rustic
way, if at the first essay they get consent, they think they have done enough,
and making sure they shall enjoy the content they wish, their Spirit is in more
repose, and goes floating in their hope. This Consideration made me yield to
Thyamis, in words only, commending the Sequel to the Gods, and the Genius that
from the beginning has taken our chaste Love into his Patronage; oftentimes a
day or two put off, has been greatly advantageous to the miserable, and
br^ught means of safety, when no humane Prudence could work it; therefore for
the present I deferred him, avoiding a Certainty for an Uncertainty; but we
must do this artificially, and conceal it, as a slight at the Weapon, from our
Enemies, even from Knemon; for though he be full of Courtesy, and has done
many Favors for us, and is as we are, a Grecian, yet he is, as we are, a
Captive; and therefore if occasion should be offered, more likely to gratify
his Conqueror, than us the Conquered; for neither the time of his Acquaintance,
nor his being our Countreyman, are sufficient Pledges to us of his Fidelity,
and therefore, if at any time he touches at our Affairs, you must deny the
Truth, for the Lie is not evil that does good to the Author, and no hurt to the
Hearer.

As Chariclea was discoursing thus, Knemon entered all in a sweat, and
manifesting a great perturbation by his countenance; Here Theagenes, take this
Herb (he said) and apply it to your Wounds^ we must prepare our selves for
greater hurts; Theagenes praying him to speak plain, The consideration of the
time (said he) will not let you hear me out; for it is to be feared the effect
will prevent my Words: but follow me you and Chariclea; and so led them both to
Thyamis, whom he found busied in furbishing an Armor, and sharpning the point
of a Javelin: This is to the purpose, said Knemon, that you have your Arms so
near you; put them on presently, and command every one to do the like, for I
have discovered such a cloud of enemies coming as I never saw before; they are
not far off; for having descried them from the top of the Hill where I was
gathering Herbs, I have brought you the News with all the speed I could, and in
traversing the Lake, I have given warning to your Men to be in a readiness for
their defense.

Thyamis hearing this, suddenly started up, and demanded where Chariclea was,
as fearing more for her than for himself, and Knemon having showed her standing
at the Door, Go (said Thyamis in his ear) take her with thee into the Cave
where we conceal our Treasure, and when thou have conveyed her down, and
covered the mouth of the Cave with the Stone that uses to lie upon it,
pr'ythee Friend return with all celerity; mean time we will give order for the
Fight: then he commanded his Page to seek him a fat Beast; that having
sacrificed to the Gods Protectors of the Place, they might join Battle. This
while, Knemon doing his Commands, led away Chariclea, that sighed and lamented,
and at every step she went, turned back her eyes toward Theagenes; at length
they came to the Cave, where Knemon immediately carried her down.

The Place was not a work of Nature, as we see many both above and under the
ground; but it was a Vault wrought out of the Rock by the industry of the
Egyptian Thieves, and imitating Nature, artificially hollowed, to contain
their Spoils; the Entry was narrow and obscure, and conveyed into a little
Cell, the Threshold Stone whereof was a Door that opened and shut easily, and
gave another passage for descent into the Cave when necessity required; within
it were cut many Trenches and Meanders, that went turning of either side,
sometimes alone, sometimes mixing together like the Roots of Trees, till they
came to the bottom, and there they end in a large and spacious Plain, whereinto
enters a little Light, by certain clefts and crannies in the Earth above:
Knemon, that by practice knew the turnings, having brought Chariclea to the
bottom, endeavored to comfort her the best he could, assuring her, he and
Theagenes would come and see her soon at Night, and that he would not suffer
him to fight, nor come within the danger: and so he left her not able to speak
one Word; but fainting, as if she had been struck to death, and deprived of her
Soul in her Theagenes: and closing up the Cave, could not himself refrain from
weeping, both that he should be forced to execute so hard a Command, and in
compassion of her Fortune, whom he had almost buried alive, and sealed up in
Night and Darkness, the perfectest Workmanship of Nature: then he made haste to
Thyamis, whom he found completely armed, and with his Oration exciting those
that were about him; for standing in the midst of them, he said,

My Companions in Arms, I do not think it needful to trouble you with many
Words; you need no admonition, War is your Trade, and now the Enemy is so near
us, he cuts off Discourse, he comes upon us to force our Trenches with his
Sword, and we must answer him in his own Language: I have nothing else to say,
but that now, you are not only to defend your Wives and Children (which has
been Motive sufficient for others to fight to the last man; though if we be
Conquerors, such small things, and many of greater moment will be in our power)
but your Lives are now at stake, for the War among Thieves was never ended by
Treaty, nor secured by League, but the Survivors must be Conquerors, and the
Conquered must die; therefore let us go to it, and let him that dies his Weapon
deepest in our Enemies Blood, be thought the bravest Man.

Having thus said, Thyamis looked about him for his Page, and often called him
by his Name Thermutis, and not seeing him appear, cursing and threatening him,
he hastened to the Boat: The Battle was now begun, and he might see the Enemy
make himself Master of the Borders of the Lake; for he had set fire upon their
Cabbins and their Boats, and so made them transport the Flame about the Fens,
that, devouring the great quantity of the Reed, dazzled the Eyes of the
Inhabitants with insufferable Light: whilst the Noise and Tumult deafned their
Ears, all Cruelties of War were seen and heard, the Lakists striving to make
good the Place, but the others falling upon them unawares, and oppressing them
with Multitudes, slew easily those they ^ound on Land, and overwhelmed those
within the Lake in their Boats and Cabbins, whence the Air was filled with
horrible Cries, both of those that defended themselves upon the Water, and
those that fought by Land, and the Lake was stained all over in the Blood of
dying persons that fell at one time, both by Fire and Water.

When Thyamis saw and heard this, he remembered his Dream, how he had seen the
Goddess Isis, and her Temple all on fire, and full of Sacrifices; and observing
his Vision was thus far brought to pass, he began to make another explication
of the rest: Having, thou shall not have her; forasmuch as she shall be
ravished from thee by the fury of this War; and that he should kill ^er, yet ^e
should not hurt her; that is, he should destroy her with his Sword, and not by
Rape. To conclude, rating the Goddess as fraudulent and injurious, charging her
that she had abused and mocked him, and not being able to endure with patience
that any other should enjoy Chariclea, he commanded his men to retire a little,
and to hold the Enemy in play a while, only with skirmishing, and some few
Sallies^ which as they were entrenched, might resist the forces of greater
multitudes, whilst he would go and find Thermutis, and offer Vows and
Sacrifices to their presidiary Gods; and so forbidding any man to follow him,
he departed as toward his Tent, but took his way to the Cave: Oh how hard it
is to turn a Barbarian from that he has once resolved in his Soul; for a^soon
as they fall to despair of their own safety, it is their custom presently to
kill their dearest Friends; either believing they shall live together after
death, or desiring to take them out of their enemies power, and to free them
from all injuries; for these Reasons Thyamis forgetting all his own Affairs,
and though he was at that present encompast with Enemy-Troops that had taken
him as in Nets, furiously transported with Love and Jealousy, he entered the
Cave, where calling as loud as he could, and speaking some Words in the
Egyptian Tongue, he heard a Wom^n answer him in Greek; and the sound of her
Voice leading him to the place where she was, he put his left hand about her
Neck, and with his right drawing his Sword, ran her through the Body under the
left Breast, wherewith the poor Woman fell down dead, breathing but one sigh,
that brake her Heartstrings.

Presently Thyamis went out, letting fall the Stone upon the Entry of the Cave,
and for her Epitaph seeming to write upon it with his tears, adding these
Words, Alas poor Maid, these are the N^ptial Gifts I present thee: And so
returning to his Men, he found their Battle quite disordered, and ready to fly,
frighted with the Enemies Approach; and on the other side, seeing Thermutis,
that brought him a Beast to imolate, he chid him, and told him he had already
of^ered the fairest Sacrifice of the world; and so entered into his Bark with
him, and onl^ one more to row; for the Boats they have here can carry no more,
being wrought out of the Body but of one thick T^ee, by their rude Shipwrights;
Theagenes and Knemon embarked together in another, and the rest in the like
manner; and when they had coasted the Island a great way, they ceased rowing,
and disposed their Boats in front of their Battalion, as attending the shock of
their Enemies; but as soon as they approached, the Herdsmen of the Island were
so far from the courage to sustain the first Assault upon the Water, that they
presently cast about and fled, not daring to endure the very sound of the
Alarm. Theagenes and Knemon retired themselves softly after the rest; but Fear
did not make them turn their backs; only Thyamis held it unworthy to give
ground, and not desiring to survive Chariclea, he pressed into the midst of his
Enemies, and as he was fighting amongst them, one cried out, This is Thyamis,
every man now look to his Charge; so immediately wheeling in a Ring about him,
they enclosed him with their Boats; but he stoutly holding out, wounded some
with his Javelin, and killed others: The Fight was worthy of admiration, in all
the multitude of his Foes no man opposed or drew a Sword against him, but every
one did his best to take him alive; he resisted a great while, but at last his
Javelin was beaten out of his hand, and then his Foes pressed in upon him,
being also at that instant deprived of the succor of his Page, that had stood
to him bravely, but at that time had newly received (as was thought) a mortal
Wound, and casting himself into the Lake, swimming with much difficulty, had
recovered Land, no one taking the pains to follow him; for having Thyamis in
their power, they esteemed it to be an absolute Victory.

Yet notwithstanding the loss of many of their Fellows, they more rejoiced to
have him alive that slew them, than they sorrowed for their Friends and
Kinsmens Deaths; so insatiable are the covetous hearts of Thieves, preferring
Gain before their Lives, and having no end in the holy Name of Friendship and
Consanguinity, but to get by them; it was the case of these Thieves, for they
were the same that before out of their fear of Thyamis and his Men, had ^led
from the Heracliotick Arm of Nilus, who stomacking to be deprived of other men's
Goods as if they were their own, had gathered together their Companions, and
called in the Neighbor Villages, offering them equal shares, and choosing them
for their Captains to conduct the Expedition.

But the Cause of their taking Thyamis, was this, he had at Memphis a Brother
named Petosiris, who having by his plots dispossessed his Brother of the
Dignity of Chief Priest, against the Laws and Institutions of the Country,
(for he was his younger Brother) and hearing that he was the Captain of these
Thieves, he feared Thyamis would take time to chase him out of his usurped
Honor, and discover his perfidiousness: also he desired to take away the ill
opinion that many had conceived of him, that he had killed his Brother, because
it appeared not where he was; therefore sending Messengers to the Villages of
the Thieves, he proposed a great Sum of Money, and so many Castles to any one
that would take him alive; so as these Thieves charmed with the hope of such a
Profit, even in the heat of Blood and War, did not forget their Promise, but
after he was discovered, took him alive, though many died for it: Being thus
seized of Thyamis, they rowed to Land, putting him in Irons, and appointing
half of their Troops to guard him, who vexing at his Fortune, upbraided them of
Cowardice, for not daring to take him with their Swords, bearing his
imprisonment with more indignation and less patience than if it had been Death
it self; the rest of them returned into the Island, in hope to find the Riches
for which they had been tempted to run this hazard. But after they had passed
over all the Island, without leaving one corner unsearched, and finding
nothing, or very little of the Prize, unless it were some Trifles that they had
neglected to put up in the Cave, they set fire upon the Cabbins, and the
Evening now approaching, and putting them in a fear to stay longer in the
Island, lest they should fall into the Trains of some of those that fled from
the Battle, and might now perhaps lie in Ambuscado for them, they returned to
their Companies.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Second Book.
THus the Island was all on fire; but Theagenes and Knemon did not perceive
that Misfortune so long as the Sun shined upon the Earth, because his Beams
lessened the appearance of Fire by Day; but after Sunset, when it grew dark,
the Flame having then no Light greater than its own, discovered it self in the
full horror, whilst they trusting to the Nights obscurity, came out of the
Reeds of the Marish, and saw clearly the whole Island almost burnt to Ashes;
and then Theagenes beating his Head, and tearing off his Hair,

Farewell to Life, (he said) This day shall make an end of all Fears, Dangers,
Cares, Hope and Love, Chariclea is dead, Theagenes is lost; in vain then,
Unfortunate that I am, have I fled from the Battle, an Action unworthy of a
man, only reserving my self, my Dearest, for your sake; but I will live no
longer, since you are depriv^d of your Life; and which heightens my Affliction,
not after the common course of Nature, nor have you rendered your Spirit in his
Arms where you did wish to breath it. Alas, ^re you consumed by Fire, and has
your Destiny prepared these Flames to be our Nuptial Tor^hes? Must that Beauty
without a Second in the World, be thus defaced, as not to leave so much Remains
as a dead Body, or any Relics of her unadulterate Charms. Oh, unexampled
Cruelty^ the most bitter Spite of Fortune, I am denied the favor of a last
Embra^e, and a poor parting Kiss^

At these Words, drawing his Sword, to r^n himself upon it, Knemon caught hold
of him, and asked what he meant? why do ye mourn for her as dead that lives?
Chariclea is in perfect health I do assure you.

This is for Children and Madmen to believe (replied Theagenes) but Knemon,
you have done me wrong to come betwixt me and a pleasing Death: But he
confirming the truth of his News with Oaths, told him all the Commands of
Thyamis, the Cave, and Nature of the Cave where he had put her, that he need
not fear the Fire could penetrate to the bottom, the violence of it being
repelled and broke with a thousand several Turnings. At this Theagenes began to
breath a little, and thought long t^ll he should come to the Island, which he
had already presented to his Thoughts, and taken up his Marriage-chamber in the
Cave, not imagining the Complaints he should make, nor the Tears he should
there shed.

Thus they rowed toward the Island, themselves playing the Watermen; for he
that rowed them the day before, at the first Alarm and Cry of the Enemy, had
^allen overboard. Now they being unpractised at the Oar, were a long time
carried up and down, having also the Wind against them, yet their impatient
desire of Landing overcame their unskilfulness.

When therefore with di^ficulty and much labor they were arrived, they hasted
with all possible speed to the Cave, where they found all wasted by the Fire,
and only knew it by the Stone that covered the Entry of the Pit; for the Wind
blowing the Flame upon the Shades, that were only made of Canes and Sedges,
mat^ed one within another, had burnt them down, and levelled all into a Plain,
elevating the Ashes in the Air, and carrying them away; the little that
remained being so well cool^d, that they might pass over them without fear of
burning; and gathering together some Reeds that were half burnt, making them
into a Torch, Knemon went before Theagenes, to light him down; and after they
were entered a little way, on the sudden Knemon cried out, O Jove! what have we
here? We are undone, Chariclea is slain: Then casting his Torch against the
Earth, he extinguished it, and fell upon his knees, weeping for her untimely
Death; but Theagenes, as if some Enemy had struck him down, fell upon her Body,
and held her in his Arms, as if they had been incorporated together: Knemon
knowing him to be lost in sorrow, and fearing lest he should kill himself, drew
his Sword out of the Scabbard, and so leaving him, ran to light his Torch again.

Mean while, Theagenes fetching deep Sighs from his afflicted Heart; Oh
insufferable Grief! (said he) Oh Misery that the incensed Gods have let fall
upon us! what insatiable Fury pursues us with such rage, banishing us from our
Country, betraying us to Shipwreck, and Pirates by Sea, and Thieves by Land,
depriving us of all our Riches! only one Comfort did remain; but, alas! it is
now taken from me; Chariclea lies here dead, she that was dearer to me than my
Life, has lost hers by the hand of a cruel Enemy, questionless in defense of
her Honor, reserving her self for me; yet here the poor unfortunate lies dead,
not having reaped the Fruits of Beauty in the Flourish of her Age; at least (my
Love) bid me farewell, speak to me, give^ me but your last Commands: Miserable
that I am, she answers not, and eternal silence has sealed her Heavenly and
Prophetic Lips that spoke with so much Music; Darkness covers now the Light
of Sacrifices; the Temple of the Gods, and their fairest Ornament is now
returned to Chaos; those Eyes have lost their Beams that enlightened the whole
world, which I assure my self the barbarous Murderer did not see. By what Name
shall I call thee? my Contracted! Alas, the Contract's broke: my Wife? Thou
never knew what Marriage was: No, no, I must call thee the sweetest of all
Names, Chariclea. Oh Chariclea, let your Spirits be appeased; you have a
faithful Friend that shall not long be absent from you; for I go now to
celebrate your Obsequies, and to sacrifice unto you in your Lovers Blood: This
Cave, a rude Tomb, shall contain us; here we may enjoy one another after death,
though living, the Gods would not permit: At these words, feeling for his
Sword, he cried out, Oh Knemon, thou have killed me now the second time, and
again wronged Chariclea, depriving her of the Friend^ Company she most desires.

Speaking this, he heard a voice out of the bottom of the C^ve, that called
Theagenes; but he, without being troubl^d at it, I come (said he) my dear Soul,
this gives me knowledge that you wander yet upon the Earth, partly because you
c^nnot leave so fair a Body, whereof the possession was untimely taken from
you, partly, because yet you have not the ^ites of Sepulture; and therefore the
Shadows that inha^it the lower Kingdoms, will not suffer you to remain among
them. In the mean time Knemon returning with his Torch relighted, the same
voice was heard again, calling Theagenes. Oh good Gods! said Knemon, is not
that Chariclea's Voice? sure it is Theagenes, and doubtless she yet lives; for
the sound that beats upon our ears comes out of the bottom of the Cave, where I
remember I did leave her.

Will you not forbear (replied Theagenes) to mock me and abuse me yet again?

Indeed I deceive you (answered Knemon) and my self, if she that lies here be
Chariclea; and presently he turned her upon her Back, for her Face lay to the
Earth; and when he had looked upon her, he cried out, Oh Gods! You Authors of
Prodigies, What Portent is this? This is the Face of Thesby: presently he stepped
back, and stood as if he had been frozen with amazement; but Theagenes, that
now began to take new Hope and Spirit, brought Knemon to himself, and entreated
him to lead him where Chariclea was; and Knemon, after a little pause, again
took view of the dead Body, and saw assuredly that it wa^ Thesby; and finding a
Sword lying beside her, he knew it to belong to Thyamis, who transported with
his wild Fury, had left it in her Wound; also he took a Letter out of her
Bosom, which he would have read; but Theagenes would not permit him, calling
upon him, and saying, first let us recover my dear Chariclea, unless now, as
before, some God or Devil take a Pleasure in deluding us, the Letter we may
read at leisure.

Knemon gave way to his desire, and closing the Letter, took up the Sword, and
hasted to Chariclea, who was creeping toward the Light upon her Hands and
Knees, and met Theagenes, who folding her Arms a^out his Neck, repeated many
times, And art thou come again Theagenes? and he, Does Chariclea live? till in
the end, they fell down upon the ground, tangled fast in their Embraces, not
able to utter any thing, but a kind of groaning; and it was hard to judge
whether they were dead or not; for many times an excessive Joy vanishes into
sorrow, and immoderate Pleasure begets Pain, which we vainly call in upon our
selves; thus they preserved beyond Hope and Opinon, were endangered, till
Knemon chafing the Rock with his Hand, and receiving in his Palm the Humor
that destil^'d by drop and drop, cast it in their Faces, and stopping their
Nostrils, recovered them out of their Swoon, who finding themselves so kindly
laid together, presently started up, and blushed that Knemon had beheld them
(especially Chariclea) entreating him t^ pardon their Exor^itances, who smiling
to himself, and turning it to Mirth; This (said he) deserves Commendations, if
I may be a Judge, or any other man that has entered the Lists with Love, been
happily conquered by him, and made acquainted with his inevitable Accidents;
But to speak truth, Theagenes, I cannot in any sort approve, and indeed I was
ashamed to see you embrace a strange woman with so much passion, and to bath so
freely with your Tears the Body of a Slave, to whom you had no Tie, so much as
of acquaintance, especially, when I told you, and protested that Chariclea was
alive and safe. I pr'y thee Knemon (said Theagenes) do not traduce me to
Chariclea, whom I lamented in the person of another, believing it was she that
was so cruelly murdered; but since some favorable God has now showed us our
Error, give me leave to put you in mind of the generous and constant Spirit
wherewith you first deplored my Misfortune, and afterward coming unexpectedly
acquainted with the dead Body (as if it had been some Devil in a Play) you ran
away armed, and your Sword drawn, from a Woman, a dead Woman; A brave Athenian
Soldier! Hereat they began to smile a little, but as if forced, not without
Tears; being engaged to Sorrow by their present Misery.

After they had a while stood silent, Chariclea touching her fair Cheek with
her hand, Blessed (said she) do I esteem her, whosoever she be, that Theagenes
has kissed and mourned for! and if you would not think me jealous, I would desire
to know that happy Woman's Name, and by what Error you mistook a Stranger for
me, and honored her Funerals with your Tears; if you know, tell me who she is.

You will wonder, replied Theage^es; for Knemon says it is Thesbe, that
Athenian Lutenist, the Inventress of the Plot that Damoeneta had upon him.

Chariclea starting at this News, How is it possible Knemon ( said she) this
Woman should in an instant be thus transported, as if she had been shot out of
an Engine, from the midst of Greece to the farthest parts of Egypt? And how
chanced it we saw her not as we came down?

I cannot answer you to that, said Knemon; but I shall tell you what I have
since understood of her.

After Damoeneta was circumvented by her Cunning, and had precipitated her self
into the Pit, my Father recited the whole business to the People, and was
presently absolved; then he solicited for my repeal from Banishment, enquired
my Abode, and resolved to embark himself, and come in person to bring me back.
Whilst he was thus employed, Thesbe made it her Vacation-time, and offering her
Service at all Feasts and Meetings, impudently prostituted both her Art and
Person: Now she was observed to be more gentile than Ar^inoe, who sung only
some loose Ayrs coldly to her Flute, whilst Thesbe curiously touching her Lute,
and marrying her voice to the soft strings, ravished her Hearers. This made
Ar^inoe conceive against her an Envy and Emulation, joined with a particular
Spleen, especially when a certain Naucratian Merchant named Nausicles began to
fall in love with her, and neglect Ar^inoe, that had late been his Mistress,
disdaining her, because when she had played upon her Flute, he observed her
Face grow red, her Cheeks swell, and hold an unhandsom competition with her
Nose, and her Eyes ready to start out of her Head: The slighted Arsinoe,
burning with Spite and Jealousy, found out the Parents of Damoeneta, and to
them discovered all the Treasons and Villainies Thesbe had practiced against her
Mistress; part whereof she but suspected, and the rest Thesbe had told her in
the height of their Familiarity. As Soon as the Friends of Damoeneta were
advertized, they assembled, and conspired against my Fathers Life, and fee'd
the prime Orators of Athens with great Sums of Money, to accus^ him; who
exclaimed unto the People that Damoeneta had perished unjustly, unconvicted,
and the crime of Adultery was only a pretext to cover her Murder; requiring he
might be brought alive or dead with whom she was pretended to have wronged my
Father: Finally, they commanded, that at l^ast he should be named; demanding
Thesbe to be delivered to them, to the end, that putting her to the Torture,
they might rack out the Truth. My Father promised to produce her, but he could
not hear his Word^ for Thesbe, preventing the danger if she should appear,
wh^lst they were taking out the Process for her, fled away, according to
agreement, with the Merchant Nausicles: this displeased the People, yet they
did not judge him to be the Murderer, but an Accessory to the Plot against
Damaeneta, and consenting to my unjust Banishment; therefore they expelled him
the City, con^iscating all his goods: these were the fruits he reaped of his
Second Marriage, and this was the reason made the wicked Thesbe sail from
Athens, who now before my Eyes receives the punishment she had deserved.

Thus much one Anticles told me in the Island of AEgina, with him I put to Sea
again, bound for Egypt, that if happily I should light of Thesbe here in the
City of Naucratia, I might carry her back to Athens, to discharge my Father of
the crime whereof he was falsely indicted, and withal to see her treacheries and
malice duly punished by the Laws; but now I am here detained a Prisoner, as you
are; at another time you shall know the cause and manner of my taing, the
fortune I have since endured, but how Thesbe came into this Cave, and who has
slain her, we need some God for an interpreter. Yet if you please, I will read
the Letter that I took out of her Bosom, which may perhaps give us further
intelligence; They entreated him to do so, and opening it, he read these words.

To her Master Knemon, Thesbe his Enemy and Revenger.
FOr my first News, know Damoeneta is Dead, by my means, for your sake; The way
I did it (if you please to receive me) I will relate unto your self; it is now
ten days that I have been in this Island, taken by one of these Thieves, that
boasts himself to be the Captains Page, and keeps me locked up, not giving me
the Liberty to walk, or look abroad: punishing me thus (as he tells me) for the
love he bears me; but (as I conjecture) it is for fear lest some body should
take me from him; yet for all this, some Angel directing me, as you passed by
yesterday, I saw and knew you, and have now secretly sent you this Letter by an
Old Woman; my Keeper charging her to present it to the fair Grecian, that is
near the Captains Person; I beseech you, Sir, free me from this Thief, and
receive your Handmaid: and if it be your pleasure, save my Life; con^idering
wherein I offended you, Necessity constrained me; but that I have revenged you
of your Enemy, was the free motion of my Soul, notwithstanding that you be so
incensed against me, as that you are resolved not to pardon me; use me as you
please, let me dye, so I may dye yours. For I esteem it much more noble, at
your hands to receive Death, and funeral Rites according to the Custom of
Greece; than to endure a Life more terrible then Death: and the love of a
Barbarian more bitter then the hatred of an Athenian. Thus Thesbe and the
Letter spoke. Oh Thesbe, Thesbe! said, Knemon, thou have received a just
Judgment, and thy self the Messenger that tells it to us, delivering us a
Letter (contains part of thy Misfortunes) after thou art Dead; by this we know
the Fury that revenged thy wickedness upon thee, whipped thee about the World,
and never held her hand, till she had brought thee before me, thy wronged
Master (though I lived in Egypt, and made me a Spectator of thy Tradegy: But
what new Stratagem had thou against me? By these Letters that Fortune took
out of thy hands, I cannot but suspect thee yet, and I much fear that Damoeneta
's Death is but a thing devised, and put into their Mouths that told me it, and
that thou art come thus far by Sea, to make me as Tragic a Spectacle now in
Egypt, as before at Athens.

Why Knemon, said Theagenes, still so valiant! will you not yet leave fearing
Spirits and Shadows, my error was but a Deceptio visus, but I am no actor in
this Scene; She is dead I warrant, never doubt it: but who is Author of this
favor to thee, and has killed her to thy Hand, I cannot imagine; nor how, or
when she came down hither. I am not able further to resolve you, (said Knemon)
but assuredly Thyamis is he that killed her: That which makes me believe it, is
his sword, we found dropped out of her Wound; for I know it to be his, by the
Ivory Pommel cut in the figure of an Eagle, which is his Crest: Cannot you tell
us said Theagenes, when, or how, or for what cause he did this Murder? How
should I know? (replied Knemon) for this Cave has not made me Prophetical,
like that of Apollo at Delphos or Triphonius his Den, from whence men come out
inspired with a divine fury: Presently Theagenes and Chariclea fell a weeping,
and cried with one voice, Oh Apollo! O Delphos! this amazed Knemon, not being
able to conceive why the names o^ Apollo and Delphos should so much trouble
them; Thus were they busied.

Now Thermutis the page of Th^amis, that was hurt in the Battle, when he had
recovered Land by Swimming, the night now growing Dark, he found a Boat
Shipwrackt by the Fen-side, and entering it, plied his Oars toward his
Captains Island to see Thesbe, whom a few days before he had taken from the
Merchant Nausicles, as he was leading her in a narrow way that lies along the
Mountain side, where Thermutis lay in Ambush to Rob Passengers; and as Thyamis
at the first noise and arrival of the Enemies, had sent him to seek a Beast to
Sacrifice to the Gods for Victory, Th^rmutis desperately in love with this
Woman, desirous to keep her out of danger of the War, and to preserve her for
himself, secretly conveyed her into the Cave, and for fear and haste left her
at the Mouth thereof, where she remained, not daring to stir; both frighted
with the Alarm and the present Dangers, and not knowing the windings of the way
that conducted to the Bottom; and thus Thyamis finding her at his entry, slew
her: believing that he killed Chariclea. Thermutis therefore having escaped the
Battle, fled to find her in the Island, where arriving, he ran with all haste
toward the Tent of Thyamis, which was now but ashes; and with much difficulty
finding the Cave by a Stone that covered the entry, he lighted a few Reeds that
were yet unconsumed and ran down, calling Thesbe (which name was all the Greek
he had) but when he saw her stretched Dead upon the Earth, he was so astonished,
as a while he had no Motion; at length hearing certains Sounds and Murmurs out
of the hollows of the Cave, (for Theagenes and Knemon were yet discoursing) he
suspected those to be the Murderers of Thesbe, this confused his thoughts, not
knowing what to resolve or do; for the natural cruelty and barbarous humor of
the Thief, his rage exasperated by this accident frustrating him of the
enjoying of his Love, incited him to run to the bottom and fall upon them he
esteemed the Authors of her Death; but wanting Arms, he was reclaimed to
Moderation against his will: he thought it his best way at first to accost them
as his Friends, but if he should chance to find supply of Weapons, then to fall
upon them as his Enemies. This being designed in his mind, he approached
Theagenes, and looked upon him with an Eye of Fury, discovering his secret
purpose.

But when they perceived a naked Man coming upon them on the sudden, hurt, and
his Face all Bloody, they were diversely affected at the sight, Chariclea ran
down as low as she could; Knemon said not a word, but retired himself some
paces, though he knew Thermutis; but seeing him come so unexpected, he feared
some Stratagem: but the Spectacle did not so much terrify, as provoke
Theagenes; who laid his hand upon his Sword, as if he would kill him, if his
rashness should make him attempt any thing. Stay (said he) or come upon thy
Death and know the reason; I have held my hand, is because I begin to know thy
Person, though I doubt thy Meaning; Thermutis entreating Pardon for his
intrusion, ^ell at the feet of Theagenes as suppliant, rather temporizing, and
for fear of Danger, than having changed his mind to be revenged of them; and
beseeching Knemon to speak for him, pleaded, they were tied to save his life
having never done them Injury, and the day before been there Companion, and now
fled to them as his Friends. This moved Knemon, and made him come in and raise
Thermutis, who was prostrated on the Earth; and many times demanded of him what
was become of Thyamis? Thermutis told all his Captains Fortune, how he had
fought in the midst of his Enemies, neither sparing theirs nor his own life,
and how by a commandment to take him alive, they forbear to hurt him though he
slew them, and so he left him environed, finding himself so wounded as he could
hardly ^wim to Land, and that for the present he was come into the cave to look
for Thesbe; they asked him how he came to know ^hesbe, or where he had got her?
He told them, how he had taken her from the Merchants, how he ^ell in love with
her, how sor a while he concealed her in his Cabin, and at the coming of the
Enemy, put her into the Cave, where he now found her slain, but by whose hands
he knew not, yet would be glad to be informed the Author and Occasion of the
Murder; Knemon desirous to free himself of the suspicion, presently told him
Thyamis was the Murderer; and to confirm it, showed him the Sword he had found
besides her: When Thermutis saw the Blade yet dropping Blood, and hot, and knew
it to be his Captain's, fetching a deep sigh, not able to imagine what should
move him to that Act, blinded and dumb with Grief, he left them, and returned
to the Body, and falling upon it, laying his head in her bosom, he cried, Oh
Thesbe! forgetting all other Words.

Th^agenes, Chariclea and Knemon being now alone, began to study what course
they were best to take, and made a show as if they would consult together; but
the multitude of past Miseries, the perplexity of present Calamities, and the
incertitude of the future yet hanging over their heads, so confused their
Spirits, that they did nothing but look one upon another, expecting who would
first begin the Overture; that Hope failing, they bowed down their Eyes, and
again lifting them up, sighed; so easing their sad Hearts: At length Knemon
stretched himself upon the Earth, Theagenes sat down upon a Stone with
Chariclea on his Kn^e; and a long time they put off Sleep, desiring by some
good Counsel to provide for their Affairs; but broke with Grief and Labor,
though unwilling, they obeyed the Law of Nature, and from the extremity of
Sorrow slided into the sweetness of a Sleep, the reasonable part of the Soul
being forced to consent to the necessity of the Body.

When Slumber had new seized upon them, and but even joined their Eyelids, and
a little lightened them of their Burden, Chariclea that lay in the Bosom of
Theagenes, dreamed that she saw an ugly man come toward her, having his Hair
all matted and Elfe-lock'd, looking like a Traitor, his Eyes sunk in his Head,
and his Hands bloody, who running at her with his Sword, struck out her right
Eye; she presently crying out, called Theagenes, and said her Eye was gone; he
presently awaked, and deplored her Misfortune, as if he had dreamed so too; but
she feeling about with her hand for the Eye she had lost in her Sleep; and soon
recollecting her self, said, I did but dream, I did but dream, Theagenes; my
Eyes are safe: do not afflict your self.

These Words gave new Life to Theagenes^ The Gods be thanked (said he) that
have preserved those Sunbeams: But what was the Matter? what Terror did invade
you? Oh, said she, a wicked and ill-favored man, not fearing your unconquered
valor, with his Sword drawn insulted over me, that had taken Sanctuary in your
Bosom^ and methought he struck out my right Eye, and would it had been Truth,
not a Dream: The Gods forbid, replied Theagenes; Why say you so? Because, said
she, it had been better for me to have lost an Eye, than to have been put in
such a fear for you; ^or I doubt this Dream portends some ill to you, who are
dearer to me than my Eyes, or Life it self. No more of that, said Knemon (for
he had heard all, awaking with the first Cry of Chariclea) To me this Dream
signifies quite another thing; tell me, Are your Parents living? Chariclea said
Yes: Then said Knemon, Believe your Father to be dead. Thus I conjecture it;
Our Parents are the Authors of our Life, and it is by their Means we see and
enjoy this Light; therefore I hold it apt to compare our Father and Mother to
our Eyes, the sense capable of Light, and whereby we discern things visible;
and this is the meaning of your Dream. A heavy Sense, replied Chariclea; yet
rather be this verified than the other. May your Tripos divine rightly, and I
prove a false Prophet. The Event will crown my Divination, replied Knemon, and
so rest you content.

But methinks we dream yet, that so much trouble our selves about imaginations,
and omit to resolve what we should do whilst this Egyptian (meaning Thermutis)
has left us for a while, to mourn for his dead Mistress: Theagenes catching
his Word, prithee Knemon, said he, since some Divine Power has joined thee to
us, and made thee our companion in Misery; first give us thy Advice, for thou
know the Country, and understandest the Language; and we, that are never
very apprehensive, are at this instant so dulled with Calamity, as we have not
understanding in our own Affairs.

Knemon pawsing a while, spoke thus;

I know not which of us have greatest share in Misfortune; I have a Burden
great enough; yet in regard you command me (as the eldest here, and most versed
in the World, to give my Opinion, this it is;

This Island as you see is laid waste and deserted, containing now no living
creatures but our selves, within this Cave is great store of Gold, Silver and
Silks (for it is hardly to be imagined what quantity of rich Spoils Thyamis
has taken both from us and others, and deposited here) but for Corn and other
Ammunition necessary to maintain Life, there is lest no more but the bare
Names; if therefore we stay here long, it is to be feared we shall perish
either by Famine, or the Enemy, that may return, or by our own Fellows, if they
make Head again; for they are not ignorant where the Treasure lies, and are
likely to come hither for supplies of Money, and then we cannot escape their
Fury; or if they should deal mildlier with us, yet we should be obnoxious to
their Petulancies, and suffer the Indignities of their barbarous humors; for
Thieves are men that naturally keep no Faith, and less now than ever, having
lost their Captain, that could by his Authority bridle their Insolences;
therefore we must leave the Island, and get away from it as out of a Net or
Prison; but first let us free our selves of ^hermutis, under pretense of
sending him to try if he can hear any News of Thyamis; and when we are none but
our selves, we shall more easily consider and resolve what we have to do: and
it much concerns us to dispatch away this inconstant, quarrel^om and ill
natured man, and that has us in suspicion for the Death of Thesbe, and will
not be at quiet in himself till he be revenged upon us if occasion be presented.

They approved his Counsel, and thought best to follow it: Then going forward
to the Entry of the Cave, they perceived it was Day; and awaking Thermutis,
whom they found in a dead Sleep; and he being a light and credulous man, they
easily persuaded him as they pleased; acquainting him (as he believed) with
their Purposes; the Body of Thesbe they laid in a little Pit, and covered it
instead of Earth, with Ashes, the Ruins of their late House, and performing
the Ceremonies that Piety owes to the dead, as fully as the time would suffer,
and for all Funeral Offerings make a Parentation of their Tea^s, they sent
Thermutis to seek Thyamis, He had gone but a little way, when suddenly he
turned back, and told them he would not go alone, nor object himself to the
danger of being a Spy, unless Knemon would be a Partner with him: Theagenes
perceiving Knemon to hang back for fear of the Egyptian, as might easily be
judged by the Character he had made of Thermutis, wherein he had pictured his
own Fear; What, said Theagenes, so strong in Counsel, and so weak in Execution!
Take heed you do not make my suspicion of your Valor prove a Truth; revive,
rouse your Spirits, Man, and at least make a show as if you were content to go
along with him, lest your refusal make him suspect our flight: Away, go with
him; there is no danger, you have your Clothes on, and a Sword by your side, why
should you fear to walk with a naked man, that has no Weapon to offend you?
And then taking your time, you may secretly forsake him, and come to us at an
appointed place, which shall be some Neighbor-town, if you know any such,
where the Inhabitants are civil men.

It Is very well advised, said Knemon; let us meet at Chemmis, a rich Town, well
Peopled, and near hand, situate upon the skirts of Nilus, below the Banks, that
defend it from the Surprises and Incursions of the Heardsmen; when you have
past the Lake, it is but a hundred Furlongs thither, and you must go directly
South^ We shall hardly reach it, said Theagenes, Chariclea has not been used
to so long Journeys; yet we will go and disguise our selves like Beggars or
poor Fortune Tellers that travel about the Country to charm an Alms from these
hard People. Oh! you will make excellent Gypsies, said Knemon; Out upon you,
what black deformed Faces you have, especially Chariclea, that has lately lost
an Eye! and yet by your Habit you will be such fine Mendicants, that sure the
Country People will think you wander about to beg Jewels, Gold, Plate, and not
a poor Alms, or a Morsel of Bread. At this they could have been content to
laugh; but their Mirth only extended to a Smile: Then taking a solemn oath
never to abandon one another, confirming what they had determined, they
disposed themselves accordingly.

Knemon and T^ermutis passing the Lake whilst it was yet early day, took their
way through an intricate thick Wood, Thermutis went before, Knemon having
entreated him, because he was skilful in the ways, that were difficult; but
indeed it was to secure his own Life, and to prepare occasion to give him the
s^ip: when they were now come into the thickest of the Wood, they met a Flock
of Sheep, and killing the Bell-weather, laid the Flesh to roast upon the Fire
which the Shepherds (that fled at sight of them) had kindled for themselves;
neither would their Bellies let them be in quiet till the Meat was enough, but
Hunger made them so fierce, as like Wolves or Tigers, they devoured it in great
Gobbets, only a little black'd with the Fire, the Blood running about their
Mouths. When thus they had satisfied their Hunger, and quenched their Thirst
with Milk provided for the Shepherds, they held on their Journey.

Now it was time ^or Knemon to show all his Cunning, for they were come to the
top of a Hill, whence Thermutis showed him a Town in the Bottom, where he
imagined Thyamis to be a Prisoner, either in the Gaol, or in his Grave; for
thither he heard that he was carried.

Whilst he spoke this, Knemon made as if his Belly aked, and told him he began
to feel the crudities of the Meat, and that he feared the Milk he drank had
curdled upon his Stomach, for he was in extreme torment; therefore he entreated
Thermutis that he would go on, and he would follow him; this he did once and
again, and the third time, as if it had been real, and that he had overtaken
him with much difficulty, insomuch as the Egyptian gave Credit to his
counterfeit Disease; and being now used to attend his coming, Knemon lengthned
his Expectation, and stayed for altogether, running counter through the
obscurest Passage of the Wood, and casting about by the Hill side, fled with
all possible speed.

Thermutis passing the Hill-top expected Knemen, and the Night under whose
favorable shadow they might pass into the Town; and learn the state of
Thyamis: often looking behind him to see if he did come, and Plotting in what
manner he should kill him; for he yet ^uspected his consent to Thesbe's Death,
and therefore meant to serve him in the same kind; and then, at his return
promising himself to Sacrifice Theagenes to his revenge. But Knemon not
appearing, and Night now growing Black, he fell asleep^ which was his last, the
Iron Sleep of Death, bitten with an A^pick; perhaps by the fatal pleasure of
the Gods, a death answerable to his life, stealing upon him as he had done upon
others.

But Knemon after he had lost sight of Thermutis, never s^aid to take his
Breath till darkness arresting his eyes, stopped his ^light, and in the same
place were the Night surpised him, he hid and covered himself all over with
leaves a great part of the Night, never shutting his eyes, ^ut Sweating, and
Fearing every noise and every breath of Wind, and every motion of the leaves to
be Thermutis. If at any time sleep pressed upon him, he dreamed that he was
Flying, and awaking, looked behind his back for him, that was not now in case
to follow: many fearful vi^ions started him and hindered his desire, and
putting him in greater terror than if Thermutis had come indeed; Finally he
grew angry with the Night, and thought it the longest that ever was since the
beginning of the World.

But when with infinite joy he perceived the first spring of Day, presently he
cut off his long Hair, which he had let grow after the fashion of the Thieves,
for fear those he should meet would either shun him, or suspect him; for the
Islanders among other courses they take to appear terrible, let their Locks at
full length hang dangling upon their Shoulders, not ignorant that long hair is
an ornament in a Lover, but a horror in a Thief; having therefore left himself
as much hair as the neater sort of People used to wear, and less then the
Heards-men, he hasted the nearest way to Chemmis, the Town Theagenes had
appointed him for meeting.

Being now near unto the river Nilus, ready to take Water for Chemmis, he saw
an Old Man walking up and down upon the Shore, as if he had been discoursing
with the Stream; his white hair he wore long in fashion of a Prophet, a great
long Picked Beard, his Cassock and his other Robes resembling a Greek Habit.
Knemon stood still a while and looked upon him, but the Old Man passing by many
times and not perceiving him, being wholly fixed upon his Meditation; Knemon
stepped in before him, and saluted him, bidding the Gods bless him. No said the
old Man, Fortune has otherwise disposed: Knemon wondering at his Answer, asked
him, Are you a Grecian, Stranger, or of whence? Neither a Grecian, nor a
Stranger, he replied; but this Countryman, an Egyptian: How come you then to
wear these Grecian Robes? (said Knemon) Calamity (answered the Old Man) has
put me in this glorious Habit, and changed my ordinary Dress; Knemon admiring
how Misery should make any Man go in richer Clothes, and desiring him to unfold
the Riddle; Oh! said the Old Man, To relate my Fortunes, would bring my self
and you into a Labyrinth, whence we should not get out, and but load you with
my burden; But, young Man, whither lies your journey? Or whence do you come? Or
how is it you speak Greek in Egypt? This is ridiculous, said Knemon, to
enquire of my Affairs, and tell me nothing of your own, and I asked the first
question. Well, I am content to bear your Jest, said the Old Man; for it
appears you are a Grecian: and I believe that in this play of Fortune you have
changed shapes as well as I; but since you seem taken with a curiosity to
understand my Estate, I will satisfy you: for know I am big with grief, and if
I had not light of you, perhaps I had expressed my self to these Reeds. But
first, let us leave this Shore and River of Nilus, for this is not a convenient
place for so long a Nar^ation, the heights of this Bank lying open and exposed
to the Noon-Day-Sun, let us Ferry over to the Town we see upon the other Side;
if happily some greater business does not call you away, there I will bid you
welcome, not in my own House, but in the House of a good Man that receives me
as a Suppliant. There I will inform you, if you please, of my affairs, and you
shall recompense me with a relation of yours; Along then said, Knemon, for I
have business to the Town; I must there expect the coming of some Friends.

Then taking Boat (many Oars lying upon the River to transport Passengers for
their Money) they passed over to the Town, and the Old Man brought Knemon to
the House where himself wa^ a Guest; they found the Master of the House from
home; only his Daughter that was now Marriageable, entertained them, and every
servant o^ the House was officious to them; both their Mistress and they
observing the Old Man as if he had been her Father; for so it is likely they
were commanded: one brushed the dust off their Clothes, brought water for their
Feet, and washed and dried them; another made their Bed^ Easy and Soft,
another kindled the Fire, some covered the Table, others brought Water and a
Towel for their Hands, others set Manchets upon the Board, and served in the
Fruits of the Season, whereof their was Variety. Knemon wondering at their
entertainment, Sure Father, said he, we are come into the House of Jupiter the
Hospitable; they do us so much observance, and show such singular alacrity:
This is no Gods House, sai^ the old Man; but it belongs to one that is a tru^
Adorer of the Gods, that worships Jupiter the Hospitable and Patron of the
Suppliants. For Child, he is a Merchant and has spent his life in Travel; seen
many Cities and Nations, and studied Me^ and Manners, and having himself been a
Pilgrim in the World, I take it to be his reason why he entertaineth others,
and among the rest, Me, that a few days sin^e was a wanderer in these parts.

How came it to pass, Father, said Knemon, that you should be compelled to
wander abroad? Being deprived (replied he) of my Children by Thieves, and
though I know the Villains well enough, yet not having power to revenge my
self, I remain here hovering about them, and complaining like the poor Bird
that has her Nest robb^d by a Serpent devouring her young before her Eyes,
whilst she fears to come near, yet has no power to fly away: for love and
grief distract her, crying, she ^lies about the Besieger, and pours the sorrow
of a Parent into the ears to which nature has taught no pity.

Oblige me ^said Knemon) with the knowledge of the circumstance and time
wherein you suffered this great confli^t in your Spirits; Anon I will inform
you, he replied; now it is time to appease our appetite and content our belly;
which drawing us away how great soever the business be we have in agitation, is
properly called pernicious by the admirable Homer. But first, following the
precepts of the Egyptian Wisdom, let us offer the first fruits of our repast
to the Gods; a custom I shall never violate, and my grief how strong soever it
is, shall never prevail with me so far as to blot out of my memory the divine
powers, and the honor I am bound to render them.

Then pouring on the Earth clear water out of a Vial, I offer he said, this
effusion to the Gods of Egypt and of Greece, to Apollo of Delphos, and to
Theagenes and Chariclea the best and noblest; therefore I think it lawful to
number them amongst the Gods: With this he wept, making a second o^fering of
his tears to sorrow.

Knemon was amazed to hear these names, and began to take a stricter veiw of
the Old Man: How say you Father, said he, are Theagenes and Chariclea your
Children? They are (replied the Old Man) my Children born without a Mother, for
the Gods have miraculously been pleased that I should get them by accident, and
be delivered of them not without the grief and passions of my Soul. My Love,
though not my Nature, was a Father to them, so they esteemed and called me; But
tell me how came you to know them? I do not only know them, answered Knemon^
but I am able to as^ure you they are in health and safe, Oh Apollo! and all
other Gods, cried the Old Man, inform me in what part of the world they live; I
will esteem thee my Preserver and the Equal of my happiest Stars; But what will
you give me said Knemon? For the present said he, my thanks, a grateful heart,
accounted the fairest present a wise man can receive; I have known some would
treasure up this gift as their best riches, but if the Gods please I shall
recover my own (as I have their promise it shall be shortly) I will reward you
nobly, make you a rich Man: Said Knemon, you promise things future and
uncertain, I look for present pay: Let me know what it is you demand, said the
Old Man, do you see any thing you would have? If it be any part of my body, I
will cut it off, and esteem my self the sounder Man. It is only this, said
Knemon, that you will truly relate to me of whence they are, their Parents and
their Fortunes: A great Donative! replied the Old Man: There is no other
comparable to it, though you had asked all the riches of the Earth and Sea, but
you shall have it only first; let us take a little repast, for it will be a
long time of employment for us, both mine to relate, and yours to hear.

When they had now filled themselves with Nuts, Figgs, new pulled Dates, and
such like Fruits, whereon the Old Man used to feed (for he never eat any thing
that had life taken from it) they drank the pure Water; but Knemon pure Wine.
After they had a while kept silence, Father you are not ignorant, said Knemon,
how good a companion Bacchus is, how much he del^ghts in Entertainments, Verse,
and Stories; he has now taken up his lodging in my Brain, and makes me
extremely covetous of the reward you promised me; and therefore, Father, it is
now time you bring these persons upon the Stage: I will, replied the Old Man:
and I wish with all my heart the honest Nau^icles had been with us, who has
often been earnest with me to discourse these passages; but I have still put
him off from time to time. Where is he? said Knemon, hearing him name
Nausicles: He is gone a hunting, said the Old Man: not to chase Beasts, but
wilder Creatures that are called Men and Heardsmen, but they are Thieves, and
not without much difficulty to be taken, the pernicious Otters live in such an
Island of invincible Earth and Water: But how have they offended him? They have
(said the Old Man) robbed him of an Athenian Gentlewoman, named Thesbe; Oh ho!
said Knemon, and took himself in the manner, and so stopped his Speech: The Old
Man asking him what was the matter? Knemon diverted him to another
consideration; I wonder said Knemon, under the assurance of what forces he
durst fall upon these Robbers! the great, King replied the Old Man, has made
Oroondates his Lieutenant of Egypt, by whose command Mitranes Captain of the
Garrisons is billeted in this town for our defense; and Nausicles with a great
sum of Money, has procured him to lead his Horse and Foot against the
Islanders, being in an extreme rage that they should take from him this
Athenian Woman; not only because she is his friend, and plays curiously upon
the Lute, but principally because, as he tells me, he was to carry her to the
King of AEthiopia to be near the Queen, to pass her time, and teach her the
fashions and the language of the Grecians; the spite to lose so great a
remuneration as he expected, makes him now use all the Engines of his wit and
power to recover her, I my self have been a Principal in persuading and
encouraging him, because so (happily) I may come to find my Children.

Enough, said Knemon, let us now leave talking of Herdsmen and Thieves,
Lieutenants, Captains and Kings; for I protest you had almost insensi^ly
stolen away my Mind to a new Matter, making a long Pre^ace nothing to my
purpose; therefore I pray you bring a^out your Orat^on to the Path you promised
me; ^or methinks I see the Pharian Pr^te^s revived in you, not that you turn
your self into as many commentitious Species, and ^lu^i^^ (...), ap^ea^ing and
vanishing, but that yo^ would trans^orm m^, and change the Mould of my
Imagination. I will recount the Truth unto you (said the old man) without
disguises, whatsoever you are pleased to think of me; but first I will make you
a ^rie^ Di^covery of my own Fortune, (...) theirs depends upon it.

The City of Mem^^is is my Country, my Fathers Name wa^ Cal^^r^^, so (...)
^ine; my present condition i^ no bett^r than a poor P^lg^^m, that was sometimes
in t^^t City ho^oure^ ^ith the Charge of the Chie^ Priest: I had a (...) by the
Institutions o^ our Town, but I lost h^^ ^y the Law of Nature: After (...) from
her mortal Body ^o ete^nal (...) I lived and felt not Mi^ery^ c^m^^r^ing my
^elf in my two Sons she had left me^ but in few years, my better Stars having
finished their prescribed Circle, the Face of my Affairs began to change, and
Saturn with an ill Aspect beheld our House, threatening the Ruin of it, which I
had wisdom to foresee, but no power to prevent; for any man may prediscover the
immutable Decrees of Fate; but no man can avoid them: only this good there is
in Foresight, that it rebates the Point, and takes off the edge of our
Disasters, which, (Child) if they fall sudden, are intolerable; but
foreseeing, we are prepared to receive them; otherwise Fear disquieting the
Soul, makes us bear them with impatience, but this Acquaintance renders them
familiar to our Reason: My first Misfortune was this;

A Thracian Woman, in the perfect Flower of her Age, the fairest, as I think,
next to Chariclea in the world, naming her self Rhodopis, I know not whence or
how, but by the adverse fate of those that were acquainted with her, was
brought to travel through Egypt, and with a petulant Confidence showed her self
at Memphis, followed with a great Train of Maids and Men that served her, her
Carriages richly laded, and her self exactly studied in all the Charms and
Allurements of a Venus; it was not possible for any man to see her, but he must
be taken; such an inevitable fascination shot from her eyes: She often came
into the Temple of the Goddess Isis (whose Priest I was) and showed great
Devotion to the Goddess, being frequent in Sacrifices, making Rich and Princely
Offerings at our Altars; I blush to speak it (yet you shall know all) her
Beauty that I had often stood the assaults of, at length conquered me, and
forced my Continency, which till then I had safely guarded all my Life: a great
while the Eyes of my Soul resisted those of my Body; but after a long fight I
was constrained to yield, the Passion of a Lover pressing upon me, and lying
heavy as a Lord of Chains; therefore I found this Woman to be the first Mover
and beginning of those Evils which hanged over me, (a long while before
discovered by my Art) understanding there was fatal necessity in it, and that
the Devil that troubled my Repose, had put on that Form and Shape to persecute
me; I resolved howsoever not dishonor my Priestly Function, wherein from a
Child I had been bred, and rather die than profane the Temples and Altars of
the Gods; at length Reason obtaining the Empire of my Soul, to satisfy for the
fatal offense I had committed, not actually (which Heaven forbid) but in
thought only, I punished my Concupiscence with voluntary Banishment, and left
my Country of my own accord, as well to obey the force of Destiny, and suffer
it to do with me what it pleased^ as also to avoid the sight of the execrable
Rhodopis: For (Friend) I was afraid lest Love laying siege to my Heart, (that
was yet defended by Reason) should at length take the Fortress, and make me
commit some foul thing: But that which principally expelled me, was, my
Children, who (as the Gods by their Mysterious Wisdom had revealed to me) were
to fight a single Combat fatally together; therefore to take from my Eyes the
sight of such a lamentable Object (which I imagine the Sun himself will not
behold, masking his Beams behind a Cloud) not to make a Father so unhappy as to
stand by and see his Children murder one another, I abandoned my Country and my
Fath^^s House, not making any one privy to the Cause o^ my Departure, nor
whither I wa^ bound; pr^tending a Journey to the great City of The^es, to see
my Elder Son, who remaine^ there with his Grandfather by the Mothers sid^^ his
Name was Thyamis.

Again ^n^mon stood wondering, as if the Nam^ of T^yam^^ had struck him, yet he
forbear t^ speak, imp^ti^nt to hear out the Discourse, which Calas^r^s thus
continued;

T^ang man, I leave out my Journey, and the Pa^sages thereof, as not pertinent
to the Story you desir^^ but having ^ften heard that in Greece there wa^ ^ City
named Delphos, particularly dedicated to Apollo, yet that there was a common
Temple, where^^ also all the Gods were ^onoured, and a kind of Fe^^lowship or
University of Wise men, separate from t^^ Tumults of the Vulgar, I esteem^d it
would be t^^ most proper and convenient retiring place for a Prophet, as a City
destined to Sacred Ceremonies; the^ lo^sing out from the Gulf of Crissaeum, and
arrivin^ at Cirrhus, I was no sooner Landed, but I hasted toward Delphos, and
coming near the Town, a Sound (doubtless Divine) presently ^eat upon my Ear.
Methought this City w^^ the sweetest place of Abode that ever I had seen, b^th
f^r its own Beauty, and in regard Nature and Art had been in stri^e to forti^ie
it; the Mountain Parnassus hangs over it, with his stre^ched sides fl^nking in
the Town, as wit^ a Bulwark.

You say true, said Knemen, and li^e a man inspired by Apollo; ^or my Father
made the same Description unto me of the situation of Delphos, when the Town of
Athens sent him thither Ambassador from the Estates o^ the Amphi^tiones.

Then you are an Athenian (said Calasiris) I am; ^our Name I pray you? Knemon,
he replied. Your Fortune? You shall know mine hereafter: But now follow your
Discour^e: Content, replied Cala^iris.

After I was come up to the Town, and that I had delighted my Eyes with the
great Plains, fair Fields, Places of Exercise, Rivers, Springs, and the
Castalian Fountain, where I purified my self, I hasted to the Temple, following
the Press of People that went thither, it being then the hour wherein the
Prophetess used to be inspired, and speak Oracles: Having entered the Temple,
adored the God, and commended my Wishes in a short Prayer, the Priestess, whom
they call Pythia, thus replied; Wandering from fruitful Nilus, thou do fly,
Poor Voluntier, thy too strong Destiny:
Stay, for black Egypt shortly I^le again
Restore thee; here till then, our Friend, remain.


When she had uttered this, I prostrated upon my Face before the Altar, humbly
praying Apollo to be propitious to me in all Affairs: All that were present
greatly praised the God for having vouchsafed me s^ gracious an Answer at my
first Arrival; and thenceforth the People honored and observed me, wondering at
my good Fortune, who they said was the only man that ever Apollo had called
Friend since one Lycurgus a Lacedemonian; and when they knew I desired to dwell
within the Cloister of the Temple, they permitted me, and decreed me a publi^^
Allowance to defray my Charges. In sum, there w^ no good thing wanting to my
content; for either I w^^ busied to enquire the Reasons of the Ceremonies, ^
the many and different Sacrifices both Strangers an^ the Inhabitants offer to
the God, or else I past (...) time in Conference and Dispute with the
Philosopher^ repairing thither in great numbers, as to a Colledg^ consecrated
to the Muses, whereof Apollo that inspires them, is the Master: at first they
moved man^ Questions to me, some of one thing, some of another^ one demanded in
what manner we Egyptians worshipped our Gods? another asked me why we ador^
Creatures, and hold them Sacred and Divine? some enquired of the form and
structure of our Pyramids? Many were curious in questioning me about the Art of
our Conduits and Waterworks; and not to particularize, they left nothing
unenquired that concerns us; f^r the Singularities of Egypt do marvellously
take the Ears ^f Greece.

Finally, some of the graver sort put Questions to me a^out Nilus, which were
his Springs, and the peculiar Nature wherein that River differed from others,
and why only those Waters increase in Summer time; I told them what I knew, and
^ad f^und written in our Sacred Books, which are not to be read nor underst^od
by an^ but our Prophets, recounting to them t^^t the Head and Source of Nilus
rises from the M^untains of AEthiopia, in the farthest parts of Ly^^^, there
where the Eastern Climate ends, and the Meridian takes beginning: It increases
in the Summer (not as some imagine because the Winds named the Etesiae, blowing
contrary to their Stream, make them regurgit and overflow; but in regard the
same Winds rising about the Summer Solstice, violently chase and drive all the
Clouds from North to South, that carried upon their swift Wings to the torrid
Zone, are there stopped, and by the incredible vehemence of the circumfused
heat, their motion is b^aten back, and the humor that before was gathered and
condensed, then thaws, and destilling in great showers, making Nilus so proud,
that he no longer endures to be a River, but passing his Limits, covers Egypt
with his inundation like a Sea, making fruitful the Country as be passes, this
is the reason his Waters are so sweet to drink, because he receives them from
Heaven, and they are fine to bath in, not hot as when they fall, yet Milk warm
as retaining part of their original; hence it comes that of all Rivers only,
this exhales no vapors: which would necessarily follow by natural reason, i^
(as certain learned Gre^ians have conceived) the ^ides had taken their increase
from Snow melting and pouring off the Mountains.

As I discoursed thus the Pri^st o^ Apollo my intimate Friend, named,
Charicles, You sp^ak said he ^xc^ll^ntly well, and I a^^ent to your opinion;
for it is the same I heard of your Priests in the Catadupes of Nilus.

Were you ever there Chari^les? said I: I was, replied he: I demand^d if he had
any business there? he answered, my adverse Fortune at home made me travel
thither, and was the cause of my felic^ty; I marvelling at his words, as
implying contradiction: You will not wonder (he said) when you hear all the
passages which I will tell you when you please: We cannot have a better time, I
said: Be it now if you think good. Then Charicles taking m^ aside, Know said
he, I have long wished to give you the relation of my Fortunes, as having need
o^ your assistance, wise Calasiris; After I was Marr^^d, I was some years
without Children: at length growing into years yet continuing earnest in my
Prayers to the Gods, they blessed me with Issue, and made me Father of a
Daughter in the declining of my Age; but with sad predictions, that her Birth
should be unfortunate: she being now grown Marriageable, many Suitors were
ambitious to be her Husband, I matched her to him that in my Judgment best
deserved her; but even upon her Marriage-Night in her Husbands Bed and Arms,
the Miserable dyed suffocated by Fire; either from Heaven, or scattered from
the hand of some too careless Person: so Mourning and Tears took place of her
Nuptial Bravery, and of the Epithalamion that was yet sung from her
Marriage-Chamber, she was carried to her Tomb; and the same Torches that were
lighted at her Wedding, served for her Funeral-Fire: nor did the divine Powers
let this Tragedy end here; but added her Mother to the Scene of Death,
Heart-broken for her Child. I having not constancy enough to ^upport these
rigours of the Gods, would not yet exile my self from Life (obeying the more
probable Doctrine of Divines) but resolved to forsake my Country, and no more
to see the solitude and sorrow of my House; for it is a great ea^e to Misery to
remove the sad Object from our Eyes: And having wandered many Countries, at
length I came into your Egypt, and traveled to the Catadupes, to see the
Cataracts and falls of Nilus: Here you have the reasons of my Journey, but I
desire you should know the Head, or rather Crown of the Narration.

As I was there walking the Streets, and buying some Rarities, whereof there
was scarcity in Greece (for now time having digested my Sorrow, I longed to
return into my Country) a venerable black Man (with a face full of Gravity,
though he were but newly s^epped out of his Youth) came to me, and saluted me;
telling me in b^oken Greek, that he desired to have some conference with me; I
obeying his desire, he carried me into a Temple hard by; and said, I saw you
buying some Indian and Ethiopian Herbs and Roots, but if you will have them
sincere and without all Sophistication, buy of me; With all my Heart said I:
Pray you show them; But take heed, said he, you be not too wary a Buyer: Look
you, said I, you be not too dear a Seller.

Then drawing out a little Ca^binet that he carried under his Arm, he opened
it; and showed me certain Gems of an inestimable value; there were Pearls of
the bigness of a Hasel-Nut, exactly round, and fair without a Flaw; Emeralds,
and Jacinths; the one showing like the green Corn in the Spring time, shining
in their Polish as if oyled, the other imitating the color of the Seashore
under a high bending Rock, dying all below it in a purple Color. In fine, of
all the Stones together, there was a mixed and various Water infinitely pleasing
and delightful to the Eye: When I had well considered them, Friend, said I, you
must seek you other kind of Chapmen than I am, for all my wealth will not be
great enough to purchase me the least of these. If you have not means to buy
them, said he, yet I hope you have power to receive them as a gift: That Is
true, I replied, I think my power were sufficient to receive them; but I cannot
imagine what should induce you thus to mock me: I mock not, he replied, but
what I do is serious: and I protest unto you by the power that is Patron of
this Temple, I will give you all these provided you will receive with this a
richer gi^t. At this I fell a laughing; and he demanding the cause, I told him
it seemed to me a ridiculous thing, that offering me such Riches, he would yet
promise a Reward for receiving of them of far richer Value; Believe me, replied
he, but let me take your Oath withal that you will nobly use this gift, and as
I shall instruct you. A while I stood in doubt, yet I did swear, won with the
hope of such a promise; but when I had taken my Oath in the form he gave it, he
took me along with him, and showed me a Maid endowed with an incomparable Form
and Grace, as he said, but seven Years old; but to me she seemed almost
marriageable; so much does the excellency of a Face add to the lowness of a
Stature. My eyes dazzling at this wonder, I stood amazed and speechless (partly
because I was ignorant of what he meant to do; bat principally out of an
insatiable desire of beholding the young Lady) till he awaked me with these
words.

Stranger, This Maid thou see, for some causes thou shall understand
hereafter, was exposed by her Mother in her swathing-Bands; and left to the
uncertainty of Fortune. I lighting by chance upon her, took her up; for I had
been Wicked and a Villain, if I had suf^ered a Soul to float in so much danger,
that h^d once entered a humane Body: for this is one o^ the Precepts o^ our
Gymnosophists, whose Scholar, though unworthy, I have been. But that which most
moved my Charity was a kind of Divinity that I saw shining in the Infants Eyes,
whilst it earnestly looked upon me; and though dumb, begged Pity sweetly: With
her was laid forth this heap o^ Precious Stones I lately showed you; and a
Silk-Mantle wherein was sewed in Gold in her Country Characters the Rel^tion of
her sad Fortune: Nature (as I think) having made her Mother furnish the Child
wi^^ these Additions, whereby one day she might be known: When I read the
Scrowl, I knew o^ whence, and who she was, and carried her from besides the
City far into the Country, and gave her to a Shepherd to be brought up,
threatening to kill him if he told how he came by her: The things that were
exposed with her, I retained, lest the Child should be made away for them; thus
at first I did conceal her.

But as she grew in Years, she grew in Beauty and Perfection; and sure a Beauty
(though hidden in the Center of the Earth will be discovered;) therefore
fearing she would be known, and both she and I dye for it, I labored to be
sent Ambassador to the Lieutenant of Egypt, and coming hither brought her
with me, desiring to settle her Estate; the Governor has sent me word I shall
have Audience to day, and he shall now hear the reasons of my Embassage.
Therefore now I recommend the Child to you, and to the Gods that have so
disposed of her, under the conditions of your Oath, being always to maintain
her Liberty, and to match her to a Man as free as you receive her from my
Hands; or to speak better, from her sad Mothers, that exposed her; I am
confident you will accomplish all your promises confirmed unto me by the
Religion of your Vow, and the Candor of your Manners; which since your being in
these parts, I have curiously observed, and know them to be worthy of a
Grecian. This is all I have to say to you for the present, my Legating Affairs
now calling me away; but to Morrow meet me in the Temple of Isis, and there I
will more plainly, and particularly inform you of the Secrets that concern the
Maid.

I was punctual in observing his Commands; and taking the Maid, I secretly
conveyed her to my lodging, where I employed the whole day to entertain her the
most honorably and respectively I could; studying to win her Heart with all
sweet ways, and rendering great thanks to the Gods for the Exchange of Children
they had pleased to make me; from that hour esteeming and naming her my
Daughter.

Next Morning early I came to the Temple of Isis, as I had promised the
Stranger; and after I had walked there a long time, he not appearing, I went to
the Governors House, and demanded if any one had seen the Ethiopian
Ambassador? Presently one told me that he departed, or rather was expelled last
Evening before Sunset, the Governor threatening he should lose his Head, if
immediately he did not q^it his Frontiers; informing me also the Cause: That
delivering his Embassage, he commanded the Egyptian to forbear to dig the
Emerald Mines, as appertaining to the King of AEthiopia; I returned to my
Lodging sad and pensive, as one that had hard Fortune, being not able to get
any knowledge of the Child, who, or of whence, or of what Parents she was born.
It is no marvel, said Knemon, interrupting him, for I my self am mightily
troubled that I can hear no more; but yet I hope I may. You shall, replied
Calasiris; but now I will follow the Discourse Charicles then made me.

After, said he, that I was returned to my Lodging, the little Maid came to
meet me, using Action for Words, having not yet learned to speak any Greek, she
saluted me by giving me her hand, and her Eyes spoke that she received
contentment in my presence. I was amazed; she would leap for Joy, look me in
the Face, and observing the Respect and Love I bare her, she paid me with the
honor and reverence of a Natural Child, I therefore resolved to stay no longer
in the Town of Catadupes, fearing some malevolent Fortune in a strange
Country, might deprive me of this other Daughter; and taking Boat, we rowed
down Nilus to the Sea, whence I sailed home; where to this instant I have kept
and cherished this Child as tenderly as if Nature, not Accident, had bestowed
her on me, giving her my own Name, and my Content depending only upon hers, so
prodigal has Heaven been of Graces to her, that she anticipated my Wishes; for
speedily she attained to the Greek Tongue, in such an instant she came to the
Spring of her Age, like a fruitful and noble Plant, blooming early, and with
wonder; in Beauty she had no Equal; but all men's Eyes, both Grecians and
Strangers were fixed on her; for in what place soever she appeared, either in
the Temples, at the Theaters, or any other public Meetings, as if she had been
the Statue of some Goddess newly made, no man could think or look upon any
thing else.

But though she is no less than I have pictured her unto you, yet she cruelly
afflicts my Heart, denouncing open War to Marriage, resolving to spend all her
Life in the state of Virginity, and as a follower of Diana, loves Hunting, and
practices her Bow and Arrows, whilst my Life grows bitter to me, being
frustrated of my Hope to match her to my Sisters Son, a civil and well-bred
Gentleman, endowed with many excellent good Qualities; but in vain we court
her, she has so hard an Opinion of Marriage, that neither by Service, Prayers,
or Promises she can be persuaded; but, which adds to my Grief, she uses my own
Weapons against me, employing the Rhethorick I have taught her, to find
Arguments to con^ute mine, and prove that she has chosen the best kind of
Life, elevating a Virgins Li^e with Divine Praises, and placing it near to the
immortal Gods, calling it pure, incorruptible, and uncontaminate, but extremely
undervaluing and detesting Love, Venus, and all Nuptial Pomps and Ceremonies:
Now this it is wherein I implore your A^^istance, and taking the offer of this
Occasion, have made you so tedious, but necessary a Discourse: Do me this
Favor, good Calasiris, to seek some m^ans out of the Secrets of your Wisdom,
be it by Incantation, Words, or Examples, to make her know her Nature, why she
was born a Woman: I know, if you please, you can easily persuade her; she has
no aversion from holding conference with Men, but has been ever bred amongst
them, and lives now in the same House with you here within the Walls and
Cloister of the Temple: Neglect not my Entreaties, I beseech you, and permit me
not without Children, Comfort or Successor, to live grieved in my old Age: By
our Apollo, and your Tutelar Gods of Egypt, I conjure you. At these Words
(Friend Knemon) I could not refrain weeping, because Charicles made this Suit
to me with Tears, the best Assistance in my power I promised him.

Whilst we were deliberating upon the Matter, one comes in running, and tells
us, the General of the AEneans was at the Temple Gates, and asked for the High
Priest, to begin the Sacrifice. I demanded of Charicles who these AEneans were,
and what the Sacrifice was they celebrated? The AEneans, he replied, are a
certain People of Thessaly, the noblest and truest Grecians of that Country,
descended from the Greek Deucalion, and inhabit along the Gulf of Melia, where
they have their Capital or Metropolitan City, named Hipata, as they will have
it, because it commends the rest; but as others esteem, it has that Name,
because it is situate under the Mount O^ta; now they send this sacred Embassage
every fourth Year, at the time when the Phthian Games were celebrated (and this
as you know is the time) wherein they do honor to Neoptolemus, the Son of
Achilles, slain traitorously at the very Altar of Apollo, by Orestes the Son of
Agamemnon; and this Embassage is at this present celebrated with more Solemnity
than in precedent times; forasmuch as their General boasts himself to be
descended of Achilles, whom my Fortune being to encounter the other day,
methought there shined in the person of that young man some peculiar Graces
worthy of a Descendant from such an Ancestor, of such a Form and Goodliness of
Stature, as it confirms him to be derived from a Goddess; but I wondering how he
being of an AEnean Family, could draw his Line from Achilles, (for the
Egyptian Homer's Poesy shows us that Achilles was a Phthiot) Charicles
answerred, This young Gentleman, and the other AEneans affirm this Heroes to
have been born in their Country, and say that Thetis went out of the Gulf of
Mela when she was matched to Peleus, and that all the Coast there was anciently
called Phthia, and that all others are Liars that challenge the Glory to have
this Demi-God their Countriman; but this General draws his Pedigree from the
AEcides another way, producing Menesthius the Son of Sperchius and of Polidora,
the Daughter of Peleus, for one of his Ancestors, that was one of the chief
Captains with Achilles in the Expedition against Troy, and for the proximity of
his Blood with Achilles, commanded the first Squadron of the Myrmidons, and to
tie himself on all parts to the Race of Achilles, he brings for an Argument
this Parentation sent to Neoptolemus, wherein (as he says) all the Thessalians
yield the first place to the AEneans, confessing thereby they are the nearest
allied unto him: I do not envy them, Charicles, said I, whether they arrogate
this Honor, or claim it as the^^ Right; but I pray you commend the Captain of
this Embassage to be admitted: for I have an incredible longing to behold him.

Charicles making the Sign, one called him in and truly methought I saw
something of Achilles in him, such a Face, such a Comportment, holding his Head
upright, his Hair combed back his Nostrils freely sucking in, and bre^thing out
the Air, a Sign of Courage, and stro^^ (...), his Eyes growing to a Brown, his
Asp^ct ^^rce, yet amiable, like a Sea new calmed.

After he had saluted us according to the Custom, and we him; he told us it was
time to offer Sacrifice to the God, that we might have day enough to finish the
Obsequies and other Funeral Pomp. Be it so, said Charicles; and rising, he told
me in my ear, This day you shall see Chariclea; for the manner is, that she,
being the Priestess of Apollo, should assist at the Procession, and Funeral
Ceremonies of Neopotolemus; but Knemon, I had seen the Maid before, for she had
often sacrificed with me, and many times made Propositions to me of things
Divine; yet I held my tongue, expecting the future: and Charicles and I went
together to the Temple; for all things appertaining to the Sacrifice were now
prepared by the Thessalians: When we approached the Altar, and the Chief Priest
had made his Prayer, and the young Gentleman begun the Sacrifice, the Priestess
of Apollo from the most holy and secret part of the Temple pronounced this
Oracle; Her Name that Gr^^e begins, and Glory ends,
And his that from a D^it^ descends,
Sings Delphians; these two shall (sailing from
My (...) to a Sunburned Climate, come,
An^ as th^^^ V^rtues Coronation, there,
(...) from black Temples shall white Garlands wear.


When the God, by the Mouth of his Religious, had spoke this Oracle, all the
Assistants were confused, not being able to interpret it; for some screwed it
to one Sense, some explicated it in ^another; and every one made a Conjecture
conformable to his own Desire; but not any could touch upon the true meaning,
Oracles and Dreams being commonly judged by the Event: So the Delphians amazed
and astonished, departed to see the Magnificent Funeral Show, neglecting to
search more curiously the Truth hidden in this Oracle.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Third Book.
BUT after the Procession was ended; I hope, Father, it is not ended yet, said
Knemon; for you have not yet made me a Spectator of the Ceremonies, but only
told me of them, and possessed me with an incredible longing, making me run to
get a sight, and then like a man that comes when the Play is done, I have
(...) the Theater open and shut in the same (...) Oh Knemon! said Calasiris, I
would not (...) from the purpose, nor trouble you with di(...) but lead you on
to the principal Subj^^^ (...) discourse, and your first demand; but (...) long
to know something by the By (a sufficient Testimony that you are an Athenian) I
will make you a brief Description of the Celebration, both for its own
Excellency, and things depending thereupon.

First, there passed along a Hecatomb, which was a Hundred Oxen led by
Slaughter-Men in a Rustic habit; they had on white Frocks gi^^ about their
wastes, their right Arms and Elbow bare to their Paps, and shaking Axes in
their han^s: all the Oxen were Cole Black, playing with their Heads a little
raised^ and their Neck^ ben^ing in the Middle, their Horns broad an^ equal, not
wr^ath^d at all; some had them gilded, some crowned with Chaplets of Flower^
their deep Dewlaps hanging down to their Knee^ they were followed with
different Troops of many other kind of Victims; every Species being separate,
and martialled in fair order, with Flute^ and Hoboys: playing the tune of a
Mystique Od^sung as an Anthem to the Sacrifice: These Troops and their Leaders
were followed with two Band^ of Thessalian Ladies, all fair, and in rich long
Robe^ their Hair hanging loose; those that were in the first Bond^ carried
little Baskets full of Fruit an^ Flowers, the others had little Boxes ^illed
with Comfits and sweet Odours, that as they past perfumed the Streets: Nor did
they use their hands to these, but carried them upon their heads, and held
hands, that they might the freelier dance and march together; these of the
first Figure, gave the Tone and Cadence to the second; for they were to sing a
Hymn, and to dance to it; and this Hymn contained nothing but the Praises of
Thetis and Peleus, of their Son Achilles, and of his Son Neoptolemus. Good
Father, said Knemon, do not offer again to deprive me of so sweet a Passage,
but let me hear this Hymn, unless you will make me a beholder of this
Solemnity, only so far as my Eyes will reach, and suffer me to receive no
pleasure by Ear. Since you are so desirous of the Song (replied Calasiris) you
shall hear it.

I Thetis, fair hair'd Thetis sing,
That did from deathless Nereus spring;
Whom Jove to Peleus matched our bright
Beamed Venus, and our watery Light.
That (Mother of our Mars) did bear
Achilles raging with his Spear;
Our Thunderbolt, to whose famed worth
Pyr^ha Neoptolemus brought forth;
Troy's Fate, the Greeks^ Peace, be to us
Propitious Neoptolemus;
Whom our blessed Pythique Soil inters,
Receive the Hymns our Zeal pref^rs;
All woe from this Town banishing,
I Thetis, fair hair'd Thetis Sing.
As far as I remember. Knemon, the Song was this; but the measure of their
Dance had such Correspondence with the Musick^ and their Feet did so beat the
Tune, as the Eye neglecting what it saw, suffered the Soul to be charmed
through the Ear; the People following the March of the Maids dance, as if they
had been attracted by their voices, till a Troop of Horse, all young Gentlemen,
but beyond all, their Captain did present a show that gave the Eye precedence
of all the Ears Delights; they were fifty Horse divided into two Troops of five
and twenty, marching five and ^ive a Breast; the Captain of the sacred
Embassage riding in the midst; they had all Purple Buskins tied with Ribbons,
and turned down to their Ankles, their Robes were white, bordered about with
azure pursles, and fastened at their Breasts with Buttons of Gold; they were
Mounted on Thessalian Horses, whose fair Shapes and Spirit witnessed the
sweetness of the Soil that pastured them, and seemed as if they scorned the
command of the Bit; making it all a foam: but yet, as if they obeyed the Riders
powerful Soul, they would come off and on, make stops and turnings as he
pleased: They had all fair Caparisons and Bridles, the one part Silver, the
other Silver gilt; so curiously wrought as it appeared they had a strife in
point of Glory.

But ( Knemon) all these Gallan^^ the Beholders eyes passed by and slighted,
being ^nly ^ixt upon their Cap^ain (my charge, Thea^^^es) that like a Lightning
did obscure all that which shined before; so did he strike our Senses, being a^
excellent Horseman, in his Armor, and shaking in ^^s hand an oaken Spear with
a point of Steel, he wore his Beaver up, discovering the perfect Beauty of his
Face; his Bases were Purple imbroidered with Gold in Figures of the Battle
betwixt the Centa^rs and the Lapiths. The Button that fastened it before was
Amber, wherein was the Image of Pallas, bearing in her Hand Medusa's Head; the
wind (that seemed to be for him) made an addition to his Grace; for it sweetly
breathing, played with the Curls of his Hair, and made his Bases flow upon the
Sides and Buttocks of his Horse; you would have thought the Horse had been
sensible of the perfections of his Rider, he did rein so proudly, raising his
Crest, and pricking his Ears, rolling his Fiery Eyes, carrying and being
carried with like Pride; when his Master slack'd the Bridle, he galloped on so
finely, as he only touched the Earth with the Tips of his Hoofs, tempering the
fierceness of his Motion, so as he did not the least disorder the Ranks, to the
astonishment of the Beholders, that gave the noblest Attribute of Form and
Spirit to the young General; the simpler Women had not so much discretion as to
couch their passions, but threw Flowers and Nosegays at him, to get the
happiness of a look, or salutation from him: for the unanimous consent of all
their Judgments, was, that no humane thing could show more Beauty then
Theagenes.

But when Rose-cheek'd Aurora did appear ( as Homer says) and that the fair and
wise Chariclea came out of the Temple of Diana, then at length we knew
Theagenes might be conquered, but so conquered, as the best native loveliness
of Women's form, compared with Man's, is the better loadstone, and exceeds it in
the power of Attraction; she rid in a Chariot drawn by two Milk-White Bulls,
wearing a long Robe of Purple to her Feet, imbroidered with Beams of Gold; she
had on a Girdle wherein the Workman had enclosed all his Art, neither ever
before, nor ever after being able to contrive the like; it was two Serpents
that seemed to have tied their Tayls in a knot at the Maids back, and had
wreathed their necks in another at her Breast, slipping their heads out of the
knot, and letting them hang on either side like Pendants; you would have said
these Serpents did not seem to creep, but did creep indeed, not with a terrible
Aspect, but as if they had languished in a slumber, desiring to rest so near
the Bosom of the Maid; the Matter they were formed of was Gold, the Color
Blew, but the Workman had enamelled it with Black, that Blue and Black mixed
with Yellow, might present the native variety of the Serpents pointed Scales,
her flaxen Hair was neither wholly platted, nor quite loose; the greater part
of it at full length hanged down upon her shoulders, her Topping and Hair
before was crowned with a wreath o^ the finest Laurel, this defending it
against the Wind, would not suffer it to be blown out of the handsome and well
becoming Order it was laid in; in her left hand she bore a Golden Bow, and over
her right Shoulder had a Quiver hanging in a Scarf; in her other hand she bore
a Torch of Virgins Wax burning, but yet her Eyes rendered a Light far greater.

The very same Theagenes and Chariclea (cried Knemon) Where are they for the
God's sake? said Calasiris, thinking Knemon had seen them; but he replied, No
Father, I do not see them: but methought I did, though they were absent; you
have described unto me so properly and directly such as I saw them: I know not
said Calasiris, if you saw them, such as Greece and the Sun that day beheld
them, so conspicuous, so blessed, as his seemed the height of Man's Felicity,
and hers of Women: no Mortal thing was esteemed to be like them, only our
Countrymen did more admire Theagenes, and the Thessalians the fair Chariclea;
for the sight of a new thing does far more ravish us than what we usually
behold; but O sweet deception! with how much joy did you transport me when I
hoped you saw, and would show me my Souls beloved Children; but you do nothing
else but mock me; for though at the beginning of my Discourse, you promised me
they would come immediately, and I should see them; and in recompense before
hand, I have made you this Narration, yet now it grows Night, and they appear
not; Let not that trouble you, said Knemon, for take my Word they will be here,
though perhaps some hindrance upon the way may intervene and make them come
later than the appointed hour; yet if they were here, you should not see them,
till I had received my whole Reward. Therefore if you hasten to their presence,
perform your promise, and lead the Discourse you have begun, to an end.

I do both shun (replied Calasiris) the discourse that may bring my sorrows
fresh into my memory, and I also doubt it that my long talking had been tedious
to you; but since you are so coveto^s of hearing, let us begin where we left:
Having first lighted a Lamp, and made our offerings to the Divinities of the
Night, and performed our usual Ceremonies to them, we may go on with our
History, without being troubled with Phantasms. Presently a Servant at his
command, brought in a Lamp burning, and he pouring out a little of the Oil upon
the Earth, made his Libation, invoking all the Gods: beseeching a Night of
Happy Dreams, conjuring them with all the Power of Prayers, that his beloved
Theagenes and Chariclea, might appear to him in his Sleep.

Now Knemon, after the Procession thus passing had gone round about the
Sepulcher of Neoptolemus, and the troop of Horse had thrice wheeled about it,
the Women began to fill the Air with funeral Cries, and the men with a wild
Howling: then the Oxen, Sheep, and Goats, (at a Signal given) were immediately
Sacrificed, as if one blow had cut all their Throats. Lastly, all these Beasts
being laid upon a great Altar, and six hundred Billets under them, they Prayed
the Priest of Apollo to begin the Sacrifice, and give Fire to the Wood;
Charicles replied, the Sacrifice did only belong to him, but the Firing of the
Altar, to the Captain of the Sacred Legation, receiving the Torch at the Hands
of the Priestess of Diana, for so it was established in the Ceremonial. This he
said, and began to make the offering, while Theagenes took the Torch from the
hand of Chariclea; sure Knemon, that the Soul is a divine thing, and allied to
the superior nature, we know by its Operations and Functions; as soon as these
two beheld each other their Souls as if acquainted at first sight, pressed to
meet their equals in worth and Beauty, at first they remained amazed and
without motion at length, though slowly, Chariclea gave, and he received the
Torch; so fixing their Eyes on one another as if they had been calling to
remembrance where they had met before, then they smiled, but so stealingly, as
could hardly be perceived, but a little in their Eyes, and as ashamed they hid
away the Motions of Joy with Blushes; and again, when Affection (as I imagine)
had engaged their Hearts, they grew pale. To conclude, in a little space, a
thousand changes wandered in their Faces, both in their Color and their Eyes,
deciphering Trouble in their Sorrows.

The Vulgar knew not this, being according to their Employment, busied and
intentive upon other matters; Charicles observed it not, being hindered with
making the accustomed Prayers and Invocations; but I (ever after the Oracle was
pronounced to Theagenes, sacrificing in the Temple) did nothing else but note
all the Actions of this young Couple, conjecturing by their Names that it was
meant of them; Chariclea signifying in your Language, Grace and Glory, and
Theagenes born of a Goddess, yet I did not hitherto exactly understand what the
later part of the Oracle intended. But after (though long first, and as it were
by force) Theagenes was parted from Chariclea, he fired the Altar, and so at
length the Pomp brake up; the Thessalians going to Feast, the rest of the
People every one departing to their Houses, and Chariclea covering her self in
her white Mantle, accompanied with some few Ladies, her Familiars, returned to
her Lodging, within the Verge of the Temple; for she dwelt not with her
supposed Father, separating her self from him, lest he should have too much
opportunity to persuade her to a Marriage.

This I had seen, and the rest that I imagined making me still more
inquisitive, I chanced to meet with Charicles; he asked me, Have thou seen the
Light of mine, and all the eyes of Delphos, Chariclea? This is not the first
time I have seen her, I replied, but often before as often as the People were
assembled in the T^mple, and that not as passing by, but she has many times
Sacrificed together with me; and when at any time she doubted of Divine or
Humane things, she has put Questions to me, and been instructed by me. But how
did she show to day? said Charicles: Did she add any ornament to the Ceremony?
Would you have me tell you how the Moon excells the Stars? said I: But some
commended the Young Thessalian, said Charicles, and gave him the second place;
yes, and the third too, I replied; but the Crown and Eye of all the Pomp was
really acknowledged to be your Daughter: this pleased Charicles at the Heart,
and I by speaking the truth, did prepare way to my Aim, being only to make the
man confident in me; who smiling, told me, he was then going to her and that if
it pleased me I should go along with him to visit her, and know if the great
press and tumult of the people had not troubled her, I was glad of the offer,
yet I seemed to neglect some other business to attend him.

When we were come to the Lodgings where she had retired her self, we entered
her Chamber, and found her languishing upon her Bed, not able to rest, Love
bathing in the Moisture of her Eyes, she embracing her Father as she was
accustomed, and he asking her how she did? she said, her Head aked; and that
she would willingly take a little rest. At this, Charicles troubled, went with
me out of the Chamber, commanding her Attendants to make no Noise; and when we
were without the Doors, Oh good Cala^iris, said he, what does this mean? What
indisposition has seized on my Child? You need not wonder, I replied, if in so
great a Multitude of People as attended the Procession, she has perhaps
attracted the Poison of some envious Eye; Charicles smiling at these words, as
in derision, do you also (said he) believe with the Vulgar, that there is any
Fascination or Bewitching by the Eye? I do believe it, I replied, as an Opinion
grounded upon truth; and thus I do conceive it, this Air circumfused on every
side about us, penetrating by our Eyes, Nostrils, Mouths and other Passages and
Pores of our Body, and bringing in with it the Exterior Qualities wherewith it
is infected, such as it flows unto us, such impression it make in us;
therefore when any one beholds a rare Creature with Envy, he presently fills
the Circumference of the Air with that infesting quality, and breaths into his
Neighboring object a Spirit full of Bitterness, which being thin and subtle,
peirceth to the Bones and Marrow; and thus has Envy been to many the cause of
a Sickness, whose proper Name is Fascination; Moreover, consider Charicles, how
many have got sore Eyes and caught the infection of the Plague, that never came
near the Diseased Persons, never lay in their Beds, nor eat or drank, or had
any thing common with them but the Air: amongst other things that might
persuade you, the Original of Love may be a special Argument proceeding and
occasioned from the object of the sight, drawing the passion through the Eyes
into the Soul; and it is consonant to reason, for the Eye being the most sharp
and servent o^ all our pores and senses, and capable of most changes, it
receives easiest all affections that are presented to it, attracting with
inflamed Spirits the flowings of Love.

But if it be required, I can produce you an Example out of our sacred Books,
where they treat of the nature of living Creatures; the little Bird they call
the Loriot, cures those that have the Jaundice: who if any one looks upon her
that is troubled with that Disease, closing her Eyes she flies away from him,
not as some say, envying to give him help, but in regard that beholding him,
she naturally calls and attracts the Fluxive disease unto her self, and
therefor she declines their ^ight as her own Heart. I doubt not but you have
heard how the Serpent named the Basilisk, only ^y her Eyes and Breath ^ries
away and poisons every obvious thing; neither is it a wonder if some do
fascinate those ^hey wish well to, and love dearest, for being by nature
envious, they do not what they would, but what their natural infirmity move
them to.

Charicles pawsing a while, In consideration of ^hese words you have said, he
dissolved this con^roversy with most wise and probable Arguments, ^ut would the
Gods were pleased this that trou^les her were Love; for then I should esteem
her to be in perfect health, not sick; and you know that to this end I have
implored your assistance: but at this present nothing less is to be feared than
an accident of affection, she shunning love, and hating as a crime the Nuptial
Bed: sure some envious Eye has bewitched her, and I doubt not but you have
power and will to break the charm: I know you love me, and I am confident your
wisdom has acquired a knowledge in all things o^ the World: I promised him I
would do my bes^ according as I found her Malady.

We thus discoursing, there came a Man to u^ in terrible haste, why Signiors
said he, how happens it you are so slow as if you were summoned to a Battle,
not invited to a Feast prepared by the noble Theagenes, in Honor of the
Demi-Deity Neoptolemeus? Away, and do not make them s^ay for you: All the other
Guests are come already: Then Charicles whispering me in the Ear^ Here is one
(said he) that invites us with a B^s^inado! What a brave fellow is Bacchus? B^t
let us go, for it is to be feared he will beat us i^ we tarry any longer. You
are a merry a Man, said I, but let us away. When we were com^ thither,
Theagenes placed Charicles next himsel^^ and did me some honor for his sake;
But why should I trouble you with the recital of the Particulars at this Feast,
the Masque of the Ladies^ the Music, the Pyrrhique Dance of the youn^
Gentleman in Armor, and other Entertainment^ wherewith Theagenes graced his
Feast that wa^ great, and the Cover often changed and new furnished with
several Services of the most Exquisite Dainties; but I will give you an account
of that will best please you to hear, and me to relate.

Theagenes put on a Face of cheerfulness, forcing himself to entertain the
Company with all humanity and free discourse; but I ^ound him presently which
way he tended, when sometimes he would roll his Eyes and lift them up,
sometimes fetch a deep Sigh upon the sudden, then sa^ly fix his Eyes upon the
Earth, and presently resume a Countenance and Show of Mirth as if he had been
guilty of an Error and corrected it, and presently fall again into new changes:
for the Spirit o^ a Man that is in Love, is like to his that is in Drink; so
Flexible, so Uncertain, both alike, Floating in a humid Passion; therefore a
Lover is apt and prone to be Drunk, and a Drunken Man to be in Love; but after
his sad promises grew more frequent, and his Looks more constantly Sad, all the
Company took notice that he was not well, insomuch as the good Charicles that
pierced no deeper than the change and trouble of his Countenance, said to me
softly in my Ear, Some envious Eye has also beheld this Gentleman. I think it
to be the same that did behold Chariclea, the very same by Isis: I replied, you
judge aright, and with great appearance of Reason; he being the fairest next to
^er in all the glorious Show; Thus we two whispered, and when the Goblets were
to go about, Theagenes drank to us although against his will, only to bid us
welcome; But when it came to me, I telling him I was his Humble Servant, and
would receive the Favor not the Wine, he looked upon me with sharp and fiery
Eyes, thinking himself slighted; which Chari^les perceiving, told him I drank
no Wine, nor eat any thing that had been a Sensitive Creature; He demanded the
cause; Charicles replied, he is an Egyptian, a Nemphian, and the Priest of
Isis: Theagenes understanding I was an Egyptian, and the Chief Priest, felt
his Soul ravished with a present joy, as they that by Fortune find a treasure
in their way; and presently setting himself upright, he called for Water, and
drinking it to me, said, at leastwise, Sir, be pleased to pledge me in this
Beveridge; you affect, and let thi^ Table be the Witness of a Tie of Friendship
made betwixt us: Be it so noblest Theagenes, I replied, it is long since
contracted on my part; and so I took the Cup and pledged him; presently they
took away, and we did rise from the Table, every one preparing to go home^ and
Theagenes embracing me with the dearest protestations of affection.

Being returned to my Lodging, I went to Bed and spent most part of the Night,
not having power to close my Eyes, but tumbling and tossing with the care I
conceived for the young Couple, and sifting out what the last part of the
Oracle should mean; it now growing Midnight, I saw Apollo and Diana, as I
thought (if I did think, and did not rather truly see them) and he delivered to
me Theagenes, she Chariclea; telling me it was time I should return into my
Country, for so the Laws of Destiny had ordained. Go therefore, said they, and
make these two thou have received thy Companions, adopting them thy Children,
and lead them out of the Land of Egypt, where and how the Gods shall please:
Having said this, they departed, making me know it was not the vision of a
Dream, but a true Apparition. I had now got out the whole meaning of the
Oracle, yet still I doubted to what People or what Country I should lead them;
But how do you know Father, said Knemon, that it was not a Dream, but a real
Vision? even so Son (he replied) as the wise Homer gives it us as in a Riddle:
though many slight Enigma's; It is a passage where he ^peaks of Neptune.

For I his Feet and Thighs together spied,
Cutting the thin Ay^, with an easy slide:
The Gods may thus be truly seen and known.
I con^ess, said Knemon, I am of the number of those many you speak of; and
happily you have cited this Verse, to see how I understand it, which is in no
deeper sense than the vulgar Interpretation made unto me when I first learned
the Signification of Words; I am altogether Ignorant what secret of Theology
may be Couched in it.

Then Calasiris considering a little, and collecting all the forces of his
Understanding, as being to speak of a high Mystery; When the Gods (said he) and
Divine Spirits please either to come to, or go from us, they take the
similitude seldom of Beasts or other Creatures; but many times they cloth
their Divinity with the form of Men, to be known to our ^ancy in the likeness
of our selves, that we may rather take it for the vision of a Dream: But though
profane Persons know them not, yet they cannot escape from a wise Man's
discovery, but may be deciphered by their Eyes, when they hold always fixed, and
never move their Eyelids, yet by their going they may be better known; for
their pace is not ^ade by s^epping or transposition of the Feet, but by a
certain a^ry violence and quick ^ven Motion, that they rather sail or ^ut, than
pass the Air. This is the reason why the AEg^ptians make the Statua's of their
Gods jo^ning their Feet, and as it were uniting them together; which Homer
knowing, as being an Egyptian, and instructed in our Sacred Doctrine,
involvedly incerted this Mystery in his Verses, leaving it for those that
could, to understand him. Of Phallas, he says, Her sharp Eyes sparkled as she
looked like Fire.


And as before of Neptune, His Feet and Thighs together I espied,
Cutting the thin Air with an ea^ie Slide.


As Sailing instead of Going, for this is the meaning of an easy Slide; not as
some wrongly interpret him, that to know the Gods was easy Divine. Sir, said
Knemon, You have ini^tiated me in a great Mystery: But having observed you many
times in this Discourse to have called Homer an AEg^ptian, not being able to
believe you; yet admiring what should be your reason, I beseech you not to pass
this ^ndiscus^ed. Though it be, Knemon, said Calasiris, a thing ^ar ^^om our
intended Subject to dispute this now, yet I will brie^ly touch it.

Many Countries chall^nge Homer, and every Country is a Wi^e Man's own, but the
truth is, he was my Countryman, an AEg^ptian, born in the hundred-gated The^es,
as himself names it; his esteemed Father was the High Priest of that City, but
his true Father Mercury; but the Priest was ^his supposed Father inasmuch as
his Wife sleeping in the Temple at the Celebration of certain Ceremonies of our
Country, the God lay with her, and got her with Child of Homer, who from his
Mother Womb brought forth a Mark of her Illegitimate Copulation; For one of his
Thighs had upon it a great q^^ntity of long Hair; and afterward in his Travels
through the World, and especially amongst the Greeks singing his Poesy, they
gave him the name of Homer; not that it was his own Name, or the Cities, or
Nations whence he was, but those that knew that privy Mark, gave him that
Surname, signifying, a Thigh: But what was his reason (Father) to conceal his
Country? (said Knemon) Because, replied Calasiris, eit^er he was a^hamed to be
known for a Fugitive, for his Father had expelled him his House, when his Name
was to be enrolled amongst the young Initiates that took Orders, because in the
search he was found to have a mark of Bastardy; or else he did this wisely,
that concealing his true City, he might challenge ^very City o^ the World for
his: This you have said shows like a Truth, said Kn^mon, when I consider his
Mystical Poems, that have a mixture for all sweetness and pleasure out of the
excellency of Nature; and sure, they would not so exc^ll all (...) if some
Divinity had not been the G^^und of such Per^ection.

But after you had known the G^ds following the mark that Homer gave you, what
was the Sequel I beseech you?

Answerable to the promise (Friend Knemon.) The rest of the night I could take
no Sleep, but lay considering and canvasing such thoughts as Night suggests. It
rejoiced me that the Gods would effect my business, which as then I thought not
of, and that I should expect to return into my Country; but it grieved me to
think that Charicles should be deprived of his Daughter, and it troubled me the
more, because I knew not what course to take, or how to steal away the two
young Lovers; I feared our flight would not be secret, but that some accident
would discover us^ Then I doubted of the way, whether we should go by Sea or
Land. Finally a storm of Cogitations tossed my Spirits, and I lay waking till
the Morning.

It was hardly day, but I heard one knocking at the Gates, and the voice of a
Page that called: One of my Servants demanded who he was that knocked so
rudely, and his Business: The Page wished him to tell his Master Theagenes, the
Thessalian would attend him; I was very glad of this News of Theagenes, and
commanded my Man to wait of him in, making account that occasion offered it
self of its own accord to deliver me of the care that troubled my thoughts, for
I persuaded my self that he having heard at the Feast that I was an Egyptian,
and a Prophet; came to me to demand my succor in his Love; being as I imagine
in the same error that many fall into, who believe the wisdom of the Egyptians
be one; and the same thing wherein they much deceive themselves; for there is
one knowledge vulgar, and as I may term it, creeping on the Earth, the servant
of Images, and busied about dead Bodies, believing in the power of Herbs and
Incantations, not tending to any good end it self, nor conducting those that
use it, But lameing most its Precepts, and implying contradictions; the effects
it produces are small and base, as to give Visions of things that are not, as
if they were, to frustate Men of their hopes; being an Art that is the
Inventress of detestable things, and the Minister of profused foul pleasures:
But Son, there is another, that is real Wisdom, and from which this Adulterate
has degenerated, and as a Bastard falsely assumed the Name; whereof, we that
are Priests, and all that descend of the Prophetic Line, do make Profession,
and are bred in; it elevates its self in contemplation of Celestial things,
converseth always with the Gods, and participates of the Divinity; searching
the Motions of the Stars, and delighting to foreknow the Future; making a Man
a stranger to terrestrial evils and vices, and conducting to the profit of
humane Society; this was it that made me leave my Country for a time, to shun
if it were possible the miseries that I presaged to my self, and not to behold
the Bloody Duel of my Sons. But I leave all to the Gods, and Destinies, in
whose power it is, whether these Misfortunes shall or shall not happen, and
that have not imposed this Banishment upon me only for the cause that I have
told you, but principally, that I should meet Chariclea; by what means you
shall know hereafter. Now let us return to Theagenes.

When he was come into my Chamber, and we had saluted, I made him sit down by
me upon my Bed, and questioned him what Necessity had brought him so early to
me? But after he had held his hand upon his Face; I am infinitely troubled (he
replied) but I blu^h to discover it, and so held his peace: Presently I
apprehended it was time for me to lie, and to divine what I already knew;
therefore looking in his Face, and smiling; Though you fear (I said) to express
your self to me, yet nothing can be concealed to the Gods, and to our Wisdom;
then raising my self a little, and counting upon my Fingers, shaking my Locks
as those that are possessed with a Prophetic Spirit, I said, My Son, you love:
He started at this Oracle; but when I had added Chariclea, then esteeming my
knowledge to be inspired, he would have fallen down and adored me; but I not
suffering him, he embraced me, and often kissed my Hand, rendering Thanks to
Heaven that he had not been deceived in his Hopes, and praying me to save his
Life that would be but short if he had not present help, so great was his
Affliction, and so violent his Flame, being the first Wound that Love had given
him, until the Beauty of Chariclea had unsouled and conquered him, and that not
in regard of any natural Strength or Weakness; but that he had never till now
seen a Woman worthy of his Love. At these words he wept, witnessing, that he
was overcome not by his own weakness, but by her inevitable Force: I comforted
him the best I could, wishing him only to take his wonted courage; and since he
had recourse to me, he should find Chariclea's Beauty had not the strength to
prevail against our Wisdom; for though, said I, she be very refractory,
despising Love, not enduring to hear Venus named, and not without much
difficulty to be drawn to submit to the Laws of Marriage; yet for your sake I
will try all ways, and you shall see Art conquer Nature; be you only confident,
and fail not to obey my necessary Commands: He promised to follow my
Directions, though I should bid him march upon the Points of Swords.

As he was thus praying and conjuring, promising me all his Estate for a
Reward, one came from Charicles, and told me his Master desired to speak with
me; he is but over the way (he said) in the Temple of Apollo, where he sings a
Hymn to the God to appease him, because he has I know not how, been troubled
in his Sleep to Night: I rose, and sending away Theagenes, made haste to the
Temple, where I found Charicles sitting in a Chair exceeding sad, and often
sighing; I demanded what Affliction made him so desolate? Alas, he replied, all
this last Night I have been troubled with fearful Dreams, and to make my Grief
the greater, I hear my Daughter is still sick, and lain waking; and it afflicts
me that her Sickness falls in an unhappy time, because to Morrow is the Day
prefixed, wherein the Priestess of Diana ought to give a Torch of Virgin-Wax to
the Champions that run Armed, and to render them the Prize of the Victory; so
that one of the two Evils must necessarily happen, that assisting at that
Ceremony, her Malady will be augmented, or that her Absence will violate the
Customs of the sacred Games: therefore if this could not be done before, at
least apply some Remedy unto her, and you shall do a most charitable Office;
which shall express your Friendship to me, and your Honor to the Gods: I know
if you please, you can easily uncharm her; for the Prophets of your Country can
perform the greatest undertakings. I confessed I had ^een a little flow, and
putting it upon him as I had done upon Theagenes, I desired only the space of a
Day, and I would in that time compose a Medicament should heal her: But let us,
said I, now go to the Virgin, and consider her more attentively, and comfort
her the best that possible we can; and Charicles, it would be convenient you
should discourse with her of me, and make me better known to her by your
Commendations, that making me more familiar, and in greater esteem with her,
she may have the greater Faith in my Receipts. Be it so, he replied.

When we were come to Chariclea (why should I use many Words?) we found her
engaged deeply to affection, the Roses and Lillies of her Cheeks were faded,
and the Water of her fair Eyes had extinguished the Fire that used to sparkle
in them; yet as soon as she perceived us, she did her best to compose her ^el^,
and endeavored to call back the accustomed Loveliness and Graces of her
Beauty; Charicles kissing and embracing her, not omitting any Ceremony that
endears Respect and Love. O Child! O Daughter! said he, can you conceal the
Evil that torments you from your Father? and being fascinated, do you make it a
Secret, as if you had done wrong, and not received an injury from the Eyes that
have so maliciously beheld you? But resume your Spirits; I have entreated the
wise Calasiris that you see here with me, to undertake your Cure, and he is
able to perform it; for he (if ever any) excels in divine Knowledge, as
being by descent a Prophet, and which is more, our especial Friend; therefore
you shall do wisely to commit your sel^ wholly to his disposing, whether he
shall pleas^ to use incantation, or heal you by any other means: But I need not
use persuasions since you naturally honor and affect the company of Learned
men. Chariclea replied not, but only bowed her head in sign of consent to her
Fathers Counsel. This done, we retired our selves; Charicles renewing his Suit
to me, that I would remember my Promise, and bethink me of a way to induce
Chariclea to a milder Construction of Men and Marriage. Thus I brought him off,
and left him joyful, giving him my Word his Desire should shortly be
accomplished.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Fourth Book.
THE next day the Pythian Games ended; but the Passion and Strife of the young
Men grew more violent under the Empire of Cupid, who was their Judge, and by
two Champions of his, intended (as I believe) to show the World his Combat is
the greatest. Thus it happened:

All Greece were lookers on, the Amphyctiones were the Judges, that is, the
Deputies of every Communalty of Greece. After all the other Contentions were
concluded with Magnificence, as Chariot-Races, Wrestling, and Quoiting of the
Sledge, at length the Herald cried, Let the Armed Men stand forth; and
presently at the further end of the Lists we saw Chariclea shining; for she was
come, if not willingly, yet to observe the Custom of the Country, or rather in
my opinion hoping to see Theagenes; in her left hand she bare a burning Torch
of Virgin-Wax, and in her other held forth a Branch of Palm^ She no sooner
appeared, but she turned all the Eyes of the Theater upon her; but I believe
not any Eye out-stripp'd that of Theagenes; for the Eye of a Lover is swift to
spy out her that is desired; and he having before heard of the Ceremony, had
all his Spirits set to watch her coming; and when he saw her, he was not able
to contain himself, but spoke softly in my Ear; for he had placed himself next
to me of purpose, That is she, it is Chariclea: I bid him hold his peace, and
be at quiet.

At the Cry of the Herald, one presented himself in light Armor, of goodly
Shape, by his Carriage appearing already as a Conqueror, and promising to
himself the Prize and Victory, as having many times been Crowned in the same
Course; and at that time having none to oppose him, as Antagonist; which caused
the Amphyctiones to return him back, the Law not permitting him to enjoy the
Crown that had not endured the Conflict: But he entreated the Herald might
demand, if any Man would run: The Judges commanded it should be so; and the
Herald made Proclamation, If any would run, he should come forth into the
Lists. Hark (said Theagenes to me) That Man calls me. I asking him what his
meaning was: It shall be so, Father, he said; for never shall any Man in my
presence, and I looking on, bare away the Reward of Victory from the hand of
Chariclea: But, said I, you do not apprehend nor weigh the Danger and Ignominy
that attends the Conquered: Why, Father, who is he (replied Theagenes) that
will so fervently contend to see and approach Chariclea, as to outstrip me? or
to whom will her Looks give wings, and make him fly in the Air like me? Do not
you know that Painters draw Love winged, signifying as in a Riddle, the agility
of those that he surprises? and if a man might boast himself, there is this day
none that can glory to have overrun me.

At these Words he suddenly rose, and stepped forth into the Lists, to make his
Name be published, and the Place of his Birth; and so being engaged for the
Course, he put on complete Armor, and stood to the Barriers, so boiling with
desire to run, that his impatience would hardly permit him to attend the Sound
of the Trumpet: The Spectale was pleasing and conspicuous; for you would have
said it had been Achilles, as Homer paints him fighting upon the Shore of the
River Scamander.

This unexpected Champion moved all Greece, and they did wish the Victory to
Theagenes, as passionately as if every one had run in his own Person; for
Beauty has a strong power to work upon the good wills of the Beholders: But
above all, Chariclea was most troubled; and having set my self to observe her,
I perceived she often changed her color; for after the Herald had pronounced
so loud as all might hear the Combatants Names, Ormenus the Arcadian, and
Theagenes the Thessalian, the Barriers were opened, and the Course began so
swiftly as men's dazzled Eyes could hardly overtake them: Every Spectator, to
whom the Event was yet in suspense, found himself full of care; but I
especially that had resolved with my self to be as careful of him as of my own
Son. No marvel, said Knemon, if those that were present found themselves
troubled; for at this hour I fear for Theagenes, and do entreat you if he had
the Victory, to keep me no longer without the knowledge. When now ( Knemon)
they had finished half their Course, he looking back, and frowning to see
Ormenus run so near him, lifting up his Buckler and his Head, and fixing his
Eyes wholly upon Chariclea, he shot to her as an Arrow to the Mark, and so far
out-stript the Arcadian, as he left him many paces behind. The Space was after
measured: so running to Chariclea of purpose, fell upon her bosom, as if it had
not been in his power to stop himself; and taking the Branch of Palm, I
perceived him kiss her hand.

I am glad with all my heart (said Knemon) that he has won the Crown and stolen
a Kiss; but I pray you what follows? How (said Calasiris) will you never be
satisfied with hearing? have you not yet a mind to sleep, being the Night is
spent so far? Is not my Discourse yet tedious? No Father (said Knemon) I could
chide Homer, who tells us we may surfeit o^ all things, even of Love; which in
my Opinion admits no Satiety, neither in the enjoying nor discourse: And who
is he, unless he have a heart of Adamant or Iron, that would not receive
Content to hear the Loves of Theagenes and Chariclea, though the Story should
last a year? therefore continue it I beseech you.

Theagenes ( Knemon) was then crowned, proclaimed the Conqueror, and conducted
with the glad Acclamations of the People; but Chariclea was then quite
vanquished, and her Heart more fettered in Affection than before; having the
second time beheld Theagines; for the interchanged ^yes of Lovers is a renewing
of their Passions, and their Looks inflame their Minds, as Fire approaching to
its Matter; the Maid returning home, had as ill or worse a Night than ever; and
I again was not able to close my Eyes, incessantly plotting how we should
conceal our Flight, and into what Country the God would bring the two young
Lovers; I conjectured we were to take our flight by Sea, gathering it out of
these Words of the Oracle, -- They two shall, sailing from
My Temple, to a Sun-burn'd Climate come.


But to what part of the Earth I understood not; and I saw no other means to
come to the knowledge of it, unless I could get the Fascia that was exposed
with Chariclea, wherein Charicles had told me he conceived the Discourse of her
Fortune to be writ; for out of these Characters I doubted not but to get out
her Country, and her Parents, which I began now to suspect, and that the Gods
would send her back to them.

Next Morning, coming to Chariclea's Chamber, I found others of her Friends
weeping, but Charicles most bitterly: I asked him, what the Matter was? O
Calasiris! said he, The Sickness of my Daughter still more and more increases,
and this Night she has rested more unquietly than before. Get you away, said
I^ and command the rest out of the Chamber, only let some one bring a little
Laurel, Fire and Incense, and let none trouble me before I call. Charicles
commanded it should be so; and it was done accordingly.

Now being alone with her, I began to play my part, as a Mountebank upon a
Stage; I put the Incense in the Fire, and made as if I muttered certain Prayers
betwixt my Lips^ I carried the Laurel up and down from the head to the foot of
Chariclea, and gaping over her like a sleepy man, at length I made an end of my
Pageantry; she often moved her Head, and smiled to her self, as if she would
tell me I was ignorant of the Cause of her Disease: Therefore sitting nearer to
her, Daughter, said I, cheer your Spirits, for yours is a common Infirmity, and
the Cure easy; no doubt but you were fascinated when you assisted at the
Procession; but especially when you gave the Palm to the Conqueror: I suspect
him that has bewitched you, to be Theagenes; for I saw he looked fixedly upon
you, and his Eyes were saucy with you. She replied, whether he charmed me so or
not, well may he do; but do you know what Countryman he is, or of what Family;
for I saw many look upon him, admiring him with a kind of an astonishment. Did
not the Herald tell you that he was a Thessalian (I replied) when he proclaimed
his Name? and he himself glories to be descended of Achilles; and doubtless he
was his Ancestor; for he has the Stature, Form and generous Comportment of
Achilles, only he is not so proud and arrogant as he; but he allays and tempers
the fierceness of his Spirits with a mixture of much sweetness; yet though he
be thus excellent, I wish him more pain than he has made you suffer by the
Witchcraft of his envious Eyes.

I thank you, Father, (she replied) that you have compassion of my Misery: but
why do you vainly wish him ill that has done us no wrong; for I am not
fascinated? sure mine is some other Sickness.

Why therefore do you conceal it (Daughter) said I, and not rather open your
Infirmity with confidence, that you may receive help with speed? Am not I your
Father in years, more in well-wishing? Am not I your Father's Friend,
professing the same Studies, which the more indears me to him? Express your
Grief, I will be faithful to you: If you will not believe my Word, you shall
have my Oath: Speak boldly, and let not your Pain gather strength by your
silence; for every Malady that is presently known, is easily remedied; but old
Wounds are almost incurable; for Secrecy is a nourishment to Diseases, whilst
those that are unconceal'd, may be sure to have some help.

At these Words she pausing a little, and by her Face assuring me of much
Confusion in her Thoughts; Give me time this day, she said, and then you shall
know it, if already you do not, since you are a Master in the Art of Prophecy.
I rose and left her; willing to give her leisure to moderate her Fears, and to
contrive in what manner to express that she was ashamed to tell me. Charicles
came running to meet me, and asked me, what I thought of his Child? O well,
well; I replied: To morrow she will be delivered of the Burden that aff^icts
her, and there will be a beginning of something that will give you great
content. In the mean time it will do no harm if you send for a Physician. This
said, I made haste away, lest he should interrogate me further.

I was gone but a little from the House when I perceived Theagenes walking in
the Cloister of the Temple, and discoursing with himself, as if he were highly
contented only to look upon the Lodging of Chariclea: I turning a little out of
the way, passed by as if I had not seen him; but he called to me; Save you
Calasiris! a Word with you; I staid for you: Presently I turning back, Lord!
said I, is the fair Theagenes here, and I not see him? How can he be fair,
replied Theagenes, that pleases not Chariclea? I making my self to frown, as if
I were angry with him, Will you never leave, said I, to disparage me and my
Art, by which she is taken and compelled to love you, desiring to have the
happiness to see you. What say you Father, he replied, would Chariclea see me?
why then do you not carry me to her? and therewith he started forward; but I
catching him by the Vest, Stay, said I, though you have the Crown for running,
this is not a business to fall upon it like a Prey; nor is it easy to be
compassed, or exposed to him that will venture for it; but it requires deep
Consultation and great Preparatives to secure the doing. Do you not know that
the Maids Father is one of the principal Men of Delphos? Do you not fear the
Law, that pronounces Death upon Offenders in this kind?

It Is no matter, he replied, Let me die so I may enjoy Chariclea; yet, if you
please, let us make Suit to her Father that he will bestow her on me for my
Wife; my Affinity will be no Disgrace to Chariclea's.

We shall never obtain it, said I; not that any thing can be reprehended or
thought defective in you; but in respect Charicles has destined her to his
Sisters Son: He shall repent it whosoever he be (said Theagenes) for no other
man shall ever make Chariclea his Bride, and I alive, having this Hand and
Sword.

Away, away (said I) there shall be no such need; only be ruled by me, and do
as I command you: for this time depart, and take heed you be not seen often in
my Company, but meet me ever alone, and without Noise: immediately he went away
something sad.

Charicles met me the next Morning, and as soon as he perceived me, ran and
caught me in his Arms, printing many Kisses on my Head, crying out, Of such
power is Wisdom, of such power is Friendship! the great Work is finished, the
impregnable is now taken, and the invincible is vanquished; Chariclea is in
Love.

Then I began to take state upon me, looking super^iliously, and walking
gravely; There was no difficulty (said I) but that she could not hold out the
first Assault; and yet ^ planted no great Engines against her: But Charicles,
how come you to know she loves?

Following your Counsel (he replied:) for having sent for our principal and
most approved Physicians, I brought them in to see her; promising them all my
Patrimony for their Fees, if they could cure her: They asked her where her Pain
held her most? but she turning from them, pronounced this Verse of Homer;
Achilles the most Valiant of the Greeks.


Then the prudent Physician Acestinus (perhaps you know the man) caught hold of
her Wrist, and felt her Pulse, judging thereby (as I imagine) the motion of her
Heart; and after he had felt the Artery a good while, taking an exact and
curious observation of her, Charicles (said he) you have sent for us in vain;
Physic can do her no good.

O Gods! I cried, what do you say? must then my Daughter perish? Is there no
hope of her Recovery?

Do not afflict your self, replied he, but hear me; and taking me aside from
Chariclea and the rest, Our Art (said he) professes the Cure of a distempered
Body, and sometimes of the Soul; but that is only when it suffers and feels the
indisposition of the Body, and that being healed, the Soul again Recovers, and
is well^ It is true, your Daughter is distempered, but not in her Body; Her
Head aches not, no Fever inflames her Blood, her Body suffers not by Sickness,
neither in any part nor in the whole. I entreating him if he understood the
Nature of her Disease, to let me know it: There is no Child, said he, but may
know it is a Passiion of the Mind, and evidently the Disease that we call Love;
do you not see that her Eyes are swelled, her Countenance discomposed, Her
Color pale; yet she complained not of any Pain in her Heart; add that her mind
wanders; what falls into her thoughts she speaks, and causeless cares do
trouble her repose. In short, Charicles you must find out the Man whom she
desires; having said this, she left me.

But I made all the haste I could, to meet you my Preserver and good Genius;
whom both she and I acknowledge to have the only power to do us good, for after
I had long entreated he^ to tell me, what it was that troubled her^ she
replied, no more but that she her self was Ignorant, only Calasiris knew a
remedy (...) her: and she Prayed me that I would send you to her, whence
principally I conjectured she was gained by the Secrets of your Wisdom; but
(said I, to him) as you tell me she Loves; can you tell me whom she Loves? No,
by Apollo, replied he: For how, or whence should I know that? But I would give
my Estate, that it were Alcamenes my Sisters Son; whom long since in my mind, I
had designed for her Husband. I wished him that he should make a Trial; Bring
the Young Man, and show him to her: he commended my Counsel, and presently went
about it.

Not long after, he came and found me, when the Exchange was full; I have (said
he) a thing to Communicate to you, that greatly troubles and afflicts me: I
fear my Daughter is out of her Wits, she has such Strange and Extraordinary
Fancies. I brought my Nephew, Alcamenes, as you wished me; and showed him to
her in his Richest Habit: But she as if she had seen Medusa's Head, or
something more formidable with a loud shrill Voice, cried out, and turned her
Face to the other side of the Chamber; putting her hands like a Cord about her
Neck, threatening and swearing she would kill her self, unless I presently would
take him away out of her Sight; but as soon as she could speak it, we retired
our selves: For what should we do, seeing such a strange Absurdity? Therefore
again, I am become a Suitor to you, that you will not suffer her to perish, nor
me to be frustrated of my Expectation; O Charicles! (said I) now you have hit
it, the Maid is Mad: For she is possessed and agitated by the Spirits that I
have put into her, which are not of the meanest sort; but a thing that was
necessarily to be done to force her Inclination, and make her to have a mind to
that which by nature and breeding she abhorred; but sure some God opposes my
Design, and countermines my Work: And therefore of Necessity, you must show me
the Man^le that was Exposed with her, which you told me you received with the
rest of her things; for I much fear, that some Enemy has poisoned it with a
Charm to make her out of Love with Love; to the end that detesting Marriage,
^he might wear out all her life time, without the Blessing to be a Mother.
Charicles approving my conjectures, presently brought me the Mantle; But I
said, he must give me a little time to be private: he did so; and as soon as he
was gone, I began without the least delay to read what was sewed in the Mantle;
being formed in Ethiopian Characters, not vulgar, or such as the Common People
use, but Royal; ^uch as are proper only to their Princes, bear^ng a resemblance
to those we Egyptians call ^he Sacred or Priestly Characters; reading it, I
^ound the Scrowl contained these Words. I Per^na, Queen of the AEthiopians,
draw this lamen^able Complaint for the last Present I can give to ^er, whom I
know not how to name, and whom I can ^all Daughter only by the pains of
Childbirth.

I was amazed ( Knemon) when I read Per^na's name, yet I persisted to read the
rest, which ^as this;

The Sun who is Author of our Blood, be my Witness; O my Child! It is not for
any Spot of Sin that I have exposed you in your Cradle, and concealed you from
your Father Hidaspes: yet if you shall escape and live, thus far Daughter, let
me excuse me to you, and to him that shall find you, if the Gods make any one
so happy; Be it also known to all sorts of People, the cause that forced your
Mothers Heart to leave you to the Mercy of Fortune; Our Ancestors of the Gods
are Sol, and Bacchus; of the Demigods, Persius and Andromeda, and after them
Memnon; those that from time to time have builded and enlarged the Palace of
the Kings of AEthiopia, have enriched it with diverse Pictures, excellent
Pieces taken from the Actions and Battles they have performed, and have put
their Statua's in the Galleries and Gardens with Tabels, presenting to the Life
the valorous performances both of the Gods and Men; and my own Chamber was
hanged about with several Pieces of the Loves of Andromeda and Perseus. I had
been ten Years married to Hydaspes, without any fruit of Wedlock, yet it
happened, that from a certain hour, I found my self with Child; all the time
till my down-lying, there were Public Feasts, and Sacrifices of Thanksgiving
to the Gods; the King hoping for a Successor to succeed him in his Throne: But
when I brought forth thee a White Child, an unusual Color to the Ethiopians; I
my self knew the cause; the Picture of Andromeda naked was before my Eyes (for
then Persius had newly brought her down from the Rock) Her Face being
Apparelled in her sweetest looks, as freed from being devoured by the
Sea Monster. A Beauty like hers in that Table, it was my hard Fortune to
conceive thee; wherefore to deliver my Dignity and Person from an Ignominious
Death, assuring my self thy color would convince me of Adultery, and no Man
believe me when I should speak the Truth of such an Accident; I resolved from
the hour of your Birth, to commit you to the uncertainty of Fortune, which I
imagined you your self would rather wish than a certain Death, or the name of
Illegitimate.

And so faining to my Husband you were born Dead, I secretly exposed you,
laying with you in your Cradle my best Jewels for a Reward to his Piety, that
should preserve you, and covering you, with this Mantle, in which I have
Printed with my Blood and Tears the Miserable Relation of your Fortune and my
own, that have been so unhappy a Mother in my first down-lying. But my sweet
Child, and that must be mine but for a little time; if you survive, remember
your great Birth, be jealous of the Honor of your Chastity, the only best
Character of a Ladies Virtue and Spirit; imitate your Ancestors, and following
their Example, make the World know the Glory of your Illustrious Blood;
particularly, remember among the Jewels I have laid forth with you, to look for
a certain Ring, and keep it to your self; your Father gave it me upon my
Wedding Day; his Arms are herein engraved, the Stone is named a Pantarbe,
consecrated in the Collet: I use this way of writing, to advertise you hereof,
since the Gods have denied us any other means to speak together; this may prove
dumb and unprofitable unto you; it may also inform you, and do you service; for
the events of Fortune are not in the compass of Man's knowledge: finally, these
Characters I have stained in this Mantle; O Daughter! Fair in pain; whose
Beauty is my unjust Accuser; if it happen to you, be preserved by these Tokens,
you will be known; if not (which Heaven keep from my knowledge) let the water
of these Gems present your Mothers Funeral Tears.

When I had read this to an end, then Knemon I knew, not without being ravished
with admiration, the Ordinance of the Gods, and my Soul felt a new Motion, that
made Tears spring srom my Eyes mixed with joy and sorrow, infinitely contented
to have found what I desired; namely, the resolution of the Oracle, but
exceeding troubled that I could have no perfect knowledge of the future;
complaining to my self of the miserable condition of Man's Fortune, nothing but
instability; whereof Characlea appeared to me a singular example. I wandered in
a maze of thoughts, considering who her true Parents were, who her supposed,
how far she was distanced from her Country; having lost her own, and b^ing only
known by a feigned Name. To conclude, I stood a great while in a dull fear,
having cause to pity and deplore her passed miseries, and not daring to say her
fortune should be happy in the future; till at length collecting my reason, I
resolved the design I had undertaken, should go on without delay; and coming to
Chariclea, I found her alone, wearied with the Fight betwixt the forces of her
Spirits, and the powers of Love, that made her fair Body the Field and Seat of
War, which her Soul striving to make good, did but the more afflict her, being
not able to resist the fnry of the assailant; then I commanded those that were
without to wait till they were called, and not to trouble me, as if I had
certain Prayers and Invocations to make for the Maids health. Now Chariclea
(said I) you have time to perform your yesterdays promise, to discover to me
what it is torments you, and no longer to conceal it from your true friend,
whom it lies not in your power to hinder of the knowledge, though you should
live and dye obstinate in your silence. At these words she taking my hand, and
kissing it many times with tears: Most wise Calasiris (she said) Oh do me the
favor to let me suffer my ill fortune without confessing it, since, as you
say, you know what troubles me; I shall esteem it some benefit to avoid an
Ignominy, by concealing that it is a shame to suffer, but more shame to speak;
and though my sickness growing upon me, puts me to great pain, it is my
greatest, that I did not at first conquer it, but yielded to that passion I had
all my life time in such horror, as only to hear it named, I thought it a stain
to the sacred title of a Virgin. Then to encourage and comfort her; Daughter,
said I, you do wisely to keep your reasons secret, for two causes; for it were
but superfluous to tell me that, which by my Art, is long since known unto me;
and you do your modesty right to spare your blushes, in revealing that ought
ever to be hidden deepest in a Maids heart; but since you now feel what Love
is, and that at first sight you were taken with the per^ections of Theagenes,
(for this I know by Revelation) know you are not alone, nor the first that has
been taken in this kind, but it is the common case of many illustrious Ladies,
and chast^ Maids; for love is the greatest of the Gods, and at times h^th had
the Victory of them all; b^t now cons^der wh^re you are, and what you ^^^e to
do: It Is true, it is a great blessing not to be in Love, but when you are once
cau^ht, it is the best of wisdom to regulate yo^^ des^res, and direct them to
some Honourab^e end.

The^e words, Knemon, put her all into Con^^sion, and I saw clearly she
delighted in them, ^^t was anxious and troubled how she might at^^in her hopes.
In fine, ashamed to be brought ^^us to her Confession, made her Cheeks die
^^eir Lilies red: And after she had a while stood ^^te; O Father, replied she,
do you speak to (...) o^ marriage, and Counsel me to take my ^wn choice, as if
my Father would consent, or ^^^t my Adversary wished it? For the young
Gentleman (said I) it is fixed; he is faster caught ^^^n you, in the same tie,
and I believe, at your (...) interview, your Souls acknowledged the ^^gnities
and performances of one another, both ^^rning in an equal Flame, which I have
in^^eas'd in him for your sake: But for him that (...) supposed to be your
Father, he provides you another Husband, an acquaintance of yours, one
^^camenes: Let him provide (said she) my Grave (...) Alcam^nes, rather than my
Bed for either; ^^^agenes shall marry me, or Death: But how ^o you know (I
beseech you) that Charicles is ^^t my supposed Father: By this (said I) and
^^owed her the Mantle: Whence had you it, ^^d how came you by it (she demanded
of me) or after Charicles had received me in Egypt ^^om the hands of him that
bred me, having ^^ought me I know not how into this Country, (...) took it from
me and kept it in a Box, to pre^^rve it from being defaced or corrupted by the
^^ury of time? How I got it (replied I) you shall know hereafter, for the
present I pray you tell me if you have read the Inscription: Confessing to me
she did not know it; I declared to her her Parents, Country and Fortunes: To
conclude, entreating me to t^ll her the particulars, I read the whole discourse
to her, and did interpret it word by word: This bringing her to the knowledge
of her self, put greater spirit in her, and transported her with a desire to
see her Parents; and asking me what was b^st to be done; I began then to
manifest my Counsel to her, discovering to her how all things went: I was once,
Daughter, (said I) in ^Ethiopia, c^rried thither with a desire to gain their
Wisdom; I was there made known to your Mother P^rs^na, for that Court
entertaineth ^earned Men, with all Humanity, and there was a great opinion of
me, for as much as I had joined the Wisdom of the Egyptians, with that of the
Ethiopian S^ges, which is m^de of great authority in that Nation. But your
Mother when she saw I prepa^'d for my departure home, recounted to me all your
Fortune: Having first obliged me to secre^^e by (...), and t^l^ing me she dur^t
not discover it to her own Priests: She prayed me to demand of the God^, if you
were preserved, and in what part of the World you lived, forasmuch as s^e could
not understand there was any such in all AEthiopia, though she had made curious
enquiry: But the Gods having revealed all to me, I told her you were alive, and
where; she then entreated me to seek you out, and bring you back into your
Country, in regard that since your birth the grief she conceived for you had
hindered conception in her; and that she was now ready, if you could be found,
to confess all that had happened to your Father, persuading herself that the
long time they had ^ived together, had sufficiently confirmed him in her Faith
by true proof; and that he would be extremely taken with unexpected joy, to
leave his Scepter in the hands of his own Child. This the Queen said to me,
conjuring me by my Vow to her, wherein I had called the Sun to witness, an Oath
it is not lawful for our Priests to violate.

This is the reason of my coming hither to accomplish my Oath, though that was
not the only motive of my Journey; yet, by the great providence of the Gods, in
traveling hither I have found a means to disengage me of my promise. You know,
since I first saw you, I ^ave been ever ready to do you service, not o^itting
the least occasion to express me yours, yet concealing my reasons till occasion
would ^erve to recover this Mantle, that it might ^onfirm your belief of my
relation: Therefore ^t were good you would take my Counsel, before you be
forced to endure, against your will, the Marriage of Alcamen^s, which Charicles
means to follow with all violence; in place whereof you may recover your
Country and Parents, and match with Theagen^s, who is prepared to follow us
into any part of the World; changing a private life in a strange Country, to
that of a Princess in your Native soil, where you shall be Crowned, and Reign
with him you love dearest, if we may have Faith in the Gods, both in other
presages, and even in the Oracle of Apollo. Then I put her in mind of the
tenor of the Oracle, and expounded the meaning. Chariclea perfectly knowing
it, as being now vulgarly sung, and every one making assay to interpret it.
This struck her silent again.

At length she said, Father, since you say, and I believe this to be the
pleasure of the Gods, what shall I do? You must make a show (said I) to
entertain the Match with Alcamenes. I^ will be a hard thing, (said she) if not
base, to prefer any one before Theagenes, though but in words; but since I have
committed my fe^^ to the power of the Gods and yours, Father, let me know what
will be the issue of this Fiction, and how it may be broke before it come to
the effect I fear. Let the event inform you, I replied, for there are certain
designs, wherewith, if Ladies be unacquainted beforehand, the^ will fear and
delay, but if they undertake them on the sudden, they will finish them with a
greater Resolution. Do you follow my advice both in other things and this, and
make no difficulty to accommodate your self to the desire of Charicles, to
match you with his Nephew, for be assured he will do nothing in it without my
consent and approbation. She promised it, and so I left her weeping. I was
hardly out of the Gate but I perceived Charicles, hanging down his Head, as
oppressed with extreme grief: This is a strange humor, worthy Charicles, (said
I) to appear in this sort afflicted, when you ought to fill your heart with
Joy, and offer Sacrifice and Thanksgiving in the Temple, the Gods having now
granted your long suit, and blessed the secrets of my knowledge and endeavors
to her, inclining her mind to a desire of Marriage: Lord, why should you weep,
I protest I cannot imagine the reason^ How can I choose, replied he, since my
beloved Daughter shall be taken out of this World, before she be subjected to
the Laws of Marriage, as you promise, if we may believe Dreams, both at other
times and (which with terror I remember yet) this night methought an Eagle,
flying from Apollo's hand, in an instant (alas!) seized my poor Child, and
ravished her from my bosom, carrying her into the farthest Region of the
habitable Earth, full of obscure Images and Shadows of black Men; and, which
grieved me most, I could not discern what became of her, an infinite space of
Earth and Air interposing it self betwixt us, so as the cruel Bird did overfly
my sight, and vanished. When he had told me this, I presently conceived which
way the presage tended; but to divert him from his Melancholy wherein he was
drowned, and to draw him as far as might be, from the suspicion of the future;
You being a Priest, (said I) and of all his Priests the most conversant in the
Mysteries of your Prophetic God, yet methinks you have not the art of
interpreting a Dream; your Dream indeed presaging to you the Marriage of your
Daughter, and by an Enigma showing to you how her Husband shall take her from
you like an Eagle, and that with the consent of Apollo, as sending him to her
from his own hand, yet you are troubled at it, and wrest your Dream to the
worst sense; therefore let us take heed our misconjectures do not provoke the
Gods, resigning our selves wholly to their wills, and employing our best
industry to conform your Daughter to your pleasure.

Then he demanding what were best to be done to win his Daughter; If happily,
said I, you have yet any Jewels or rich Embroideries, or some Ring of a great
value, let Alcamenes present them to her, as Marriage-gifts, and this will
charm her to be his; then you must make other preparations for the solemnity,
and make no delay, but conclude the Marriage, whilst yet the power of my Art is
working, and makes impression in her Soul. Doubt not, said Charicles, I shall
not omit any thing in my power; and he had scarce spoken the words, but he ran
with joy to put them in Act, and did as I entreated him, without any
procrastination, as afterward I understood, carrying to Chariclea, as Nuptial
gifts from Alcamenes, not only rich Vestures, but also the precious Jewels
P^rsina had put in her Cradle, when she was exposed.

But I went presently to Theagenes, and asked him where his Thessalians were,
that did assist at the ceremony of the Procession: He told me, the Ladies were
gone softly before, to make the easier Journeys; and how the young men burned
with so great a desire to see their Friends at home, as he hardly had power to
stay them any longer: Understanding that, I instructed him what he should say
to them, and what they should do, commanding him he should observe when I would
give the sign, and then take heed not to lose the time and occasion offered; so
I left him.

And going to the Temple of Apollo, I intended to make my Prayer to the God,
that he would please, by his Oracle, to direct me what course I would take to
convey away the two young Lovers; but the God was swifter than a thought, for
the Heavenly powers do favor such as resign their will to theirs, though not
implored; often preventing men's Petitions with their bounty; as at this time
Apollo anticipated my demand, with his reply, making me know his pleasure and
direction; for as I was hasting toward the Prophetess, troubled in my mind how
I might execute my design, a voice stayed me as I passed, saying, Do you go so
fast, and hear not how these Strangers call you? They were a company of
Merchants, that to the sound of Flutes and Hoboys, were doing Sacrifice, and
celebrating a Feast in Honor of Hercules.

I stayed when I perceived them, for I should have offended the Sacred
Mysteries of Religion, to have passed by them without respect, the Divine Voice
having invited me, after I had put Frankincense in a Thurible, and incensed the
Altar, offering a little Water, it seemed they thought me very sumptuous in my
oblations, and entreated me to take part of their Banquet; I obeyed them so
far, and when I was set down upon a Couch, which the strangers had strewn with
Myrrh and Bays, and had tasted such things as I used to eat: Noble Gentlemen,
said I, you have done me the Honor to feast me so, as I cannot desire any
greater dainties, I now only long to know your Estate and Fortunes, therefore
now it is time, if you please, to tell me who, and of what Country you are, for
it would be rude, and an Incivility in me, having sat with you at the Feast of
a Sacrifice, and imitated Friendship by you, by the Communion of a sacred
repast, if we should part without having a more particular knowledge one of the
other. Then they told me they were Ph^^nicians, of the City of Tire, by their
Trade Merchants, that were then bound for Carthage, in Africa, with a Ship
laded with rich Merchandis^s, they had brought out of India, AEthiopia, and
Phoenicia; and at the present were Sacrificing a Feast to the Tyrian Hercules;
forasmuch as that Young Man (said they, pointing to one that sat by me at the
Table) has gained the Crown and prize of the Lute, and proclaimed our City of
Tire Victorious among the Greeks. This Youth, when we had doubled the Cape of
Malea, and by adverse Winds, were forced to land in the Isle of the Cephalians,
there he prot^sted to us by this God, the Patron of our Country, that he had
foretold him in his sleep the Victory he should obtain in the Pythian games,
persuading us to turn our course, and Sail hither, where the effect has proved
the truth of his Prediction; and he that was but late a Merchant, is now
proclaimed a Conqueror, and now in gratitude to the God, makes him this Feast,
for the favor of premonstrating his succ^ss; but to morrow morning, if the
Wind serve, we intend to weigh Anchor. Is that your resolution, said I? They
told me it was: You shall have me your Companion, I replied, if you will give
me leave, for I must make a Voyage into Sicily, about my affairs, and you know
those that Sail for Africa, must pass by this Island. If you please (said they)
we shall be happy in your Company, for we shall make account, prosperity will
attend us so long as a Wise Man, a Grecian, and one beloved of the Gods, as
your experience speaks you, will go along with us. I desired (I said to them)
if you will but give me one day to prepare my self, and before I go, to give
some order for my business here: You shall have all to morrow, they replied,
provided you come a-board us soon at night, for the night is very serviceable
to us, small breaths of Wind rising from the Earth, and wafting away a Ship,
without moving of great Waves.

I promised not to fail, first taking their Faith by Oath, they should not
loose to Sea before the time appointed; and so I left them Dancing to their
Music, that played quick strains like Jiggs, which they footed in the Assyrian
garb; sometimes with little Skips capering in the Air, sometimes bending their
Knees to the Earth, and skrewing their whole Bodies, as if they had been
possessed with some prophetic Spirit. And coming to Chariclea, I found her with
the Jewels yet in her lap, that Charicles had presented her: Then I went to
Theagenes, and having advertised them both what they should do; I retired to my
Lodging, attending with impatience, the issue of my project.

The next day this happened. When Midnight drowned all the Town in Sleep: A
Troop of Young Gentlemen Armed, besieged the Lodgings of Chariclea. Theagenes
was Captain of that Amorous War, making his Young Thessalians put off their
glorious habit, and put on their Armours; who suddenly filling the Air with
cries, and terrifying those that were between sleep and wake, with the noise of
their Shields and Swords, with Torches burning in their Hands, they brake into
the House of Charicles, easily forceing the first Gate (for the Locks and Bolts
were prepared to admit them) and took away Chariclea, who was ready and
expected them, suffering them to force her with her own consent; and with the
Maid, conveyed away such portable Riches, as she pleased, and returning through
the Streets, they renewed their Warlike Clamours, and doubled the sound and
terror of their Arms, ^rightning the City almost out of their Wits; and
chooseing the dead of night to that end. Finally, they made such a noise, as
the Mountain Parnassus echoed, and replied to the clashing of their Iron: And
thus marching out of the Town, they did ride upon the Spurr, to the Mountains
of the Locrians and O^tians.

But Theagenes and Chariclea, doing as I advised them, left the Thessalians,
and came secretly where I expected them: Where falling at my Feet, they
trembling cried, Save us, Father; Father, Save us: Chariclea blushing, and
bowing her Face to the Earth, as ashamed of her new Act: But Theagenes, to his
other Supplications, added, Save O Calasiris, two Poor Strangers thy
Suppliants, exiled from their Country, deprived of their Friends: Only to
purchase thee for all; preserve two Poor Creatures, now exposed to the power of
Fortune; the C^p^i^^s of chaste Love banished, but voluntarily banished, and
with joy reposin^ in you all their hope of safety. These words, Kn^mon, so
touched me at the heart with pity, as I wept upon them with my Soul more than
with my Eyes, so as they perceived not my sorrow, yet I eased my Spirits; I did
raise and comfort them the best I could: To conclude, assuring them of a happy
Issue, and that I had auspicated this business, by the Commandment of the Gods.
I will now go, said I, and dispatch the rest: Do you expect me in his place,
taking a special regard, you be not observed by any. Then I was going away; But
Chariclea caught me by a part of my Robe and stayed me: O Father, said she,
this beginning were injustice, rather a betraying, if you should go and leave
me alone with Theagenes, not considering how unfaithful a Guard a Lover is,
having the causer of his flames in his own power. Therefore I will not leave
you, till for this present, and the time to come, you shall oblige Theagenes by
vow; not to importune me, for any favor in that kind, before I do recover my
Country and Parents. Or if Heaven be not so pleased, yet till such time as with
my consent, he shall receive me for his Wife. Admiring the virtues of the Maid,
I resolved it should be done accordingly: And making an Altar of a Table,
taking Fire from the Chimny, Theagenes made his vow, professing we had done him
wrong, to cut off, by the prevention of an Oath, the voluntary intregrity of
his Soul, and that he could not commend an Act done for fear, though of the
Gods: Yet he did swear by Apollo of Delphos, by Diana, by Venus her self and
Love, to do nothing that should displease Chariclea. Thus calling the Gods to
Witness; they accorded these, and other Articles betwixt them.

I holding on my course to Charicles, found his House full of Tears and Tumult:
Forasmuch as the Servants of Chariclea had already brought him news of the
carrying away of his Daughter, and Citizens came in from all parts of the Town,
and flocked about despairing Charicles. In sum, the ignorance of what was
done, and the want of Counsel in what was to be done, confused them all: I
therefore thundering amongst them with a loud voice; O miserable Men (said I)
how long will you stand like stupid things, mute and dull, as if you were
deprived of your Judgment with your Fortune? What will you not Arm and pursue
your Enemies? Will you not take and punish them who have done you such an
injury? But Charicles replied, it were perhaps superfluous and vain to struggle
longer with these disasters, for I am assured the Divine wrath in^licts this
punishment upon me; when coming once at a forbidden hour into the Sanctuary of
our Temple, I saw what was not lawful for Man to behold. Then the God foretold
me, for my presumption I should be deprived of that was dearest to my Eyes: yet
let not this hinder you to fight (as they say) with the Gods themselves, if we
knew whither we should go, and who has been so cruel to us: It was (said I)
even the Thessalian whom you so much admired, and would needs make me
acquainted with him; it was Theagenes and his youthful company; perhaps you may
find some of them yet in Town, for sure they cannot be all departed; therefore
rise and call a Council of the people. It was done so as I appointed, and the
Captains sent their Men to proclaim, by sound of Trumpet, that the Townsmen
should assemble: immediately the people came in, and they held a Council, by
night, upon the Theater.

Charicles stood forth into the middle, and presently set them all on weeping,
beholding him in his Mourning, his Head and Face covered with ashes; but much
more when his affliction unfolded it self in his words: Perhaps, dear
Countrymen, (said he) seeing me thus stand forth, you may esteem me come
hither to ease my heart, and to have convoked so great an assembly to be
spectators of the enormous greatness of my miseri^^^ ^ut this is not my
meaning, for though I have often sustained calamiti^s equal with Death it self,
and that my House is now deserted, laid waste from Heaven, and mu^t remain
d^solate ever hereafter, having (...), one after another, all that were dear to
me, and in whose beloved acquaintance I took the only joy of my life; yet vain
hope (an error) common to all the World, makes me resolute to ^e p^tient, and
not die, yet persuading my self my C^ild may be recovered, but that which moves
me most, is this City, which I desire and expect to see victo^ious before my
death, and revenged of those have offered her this violence, unless these
Thessalian Youths have also ravished from us our generous Spirits, and our
indignation for the abu^e to our Country, and our Gods protect us, for it would
be a grievous heart^reak to us all, if a few dancing Boys, the Ministers of the
sacred Legation, should go away with the spoils of the principal City of
Greece; having robbed in my sight, ah me, the Temple of Apollo of its most
precious treasure, my Charicl^a. O implacable and obstinate wrath of the
destinies toward me, first, as you know, they extinguished my own Daughters
life even with her Nuptial Torches, then took away her Mother from me, seized
with such a sorrow at her Death, as it cost her presently her life; soon after
they chased me from my Country, but all this methought was supportable, after I
had found Chariclea. Chariclea was all my Life, my Hope, the hope of my
Succession. Chariclea was all my Comfort, and, as I may say, my Anchor; but woe
is me, this Tempest, whencesoever it arose, has cruelly broke all my Cables.
Neither was this done simply and accidentally, but expressly to insult over us,
at such an unexpected season, taking her away from her Bed, almost her Nuptial
Bed, as you all know, for I had published to you my intention of her Marriage.

He, speaking thus, and falling from his matter into Complaints, the Provost
H^g^sias cut him off, and wished him to go home, speaking to the People in this
sort: My Lords Assistants, and the rest, Charicles shall have free liberty to
make his Complaints hereafter when he pleases; but let us not be drowned in
his sorrow, nor inconsiderately ^e carried away with his Tears, as with the
curr^nt of a River, neglecting the occasion, which in all things, and
principally in affairs of War, is of greatest importance; for if now from this
assembly we would set forward, there might be some hope we should overtake
them, whilst they march carelessly, thinking us unprovided to pursue them; but
if we stay longer to condole with Charicles, with feminine Faces, pitying his
disasters, it will only remain, that by our delay, we shall give them means to
escape, and our selves be laughed at, and by Boys, which we should have
presently taken, and nailed upon Gallowses; making some of them su^^^^ with
such ignomin^, and transferring the disparagement down upon their Families;
which would be an easy ^^ing, if we exasperate the Thessalians against these
Men, (if any of them shall escape us) by interdicting them by our Decree, to
send any more of their Nation to perform this Sacrifice; and ordaining, by
Common Council, that ^^reafter the solemn Anniver^ary of the De^i-g^d N^
p^ol^mus, shall be celebrated by ^ur (...) at the public charge. Whilst they
were commending ^i^ Sp^^ch, and p^^sing an Act against the Th^ssal^ans: Let it
be confirmed (...) your su^frage, if you please, said the Cap^^in, that the
Priestess of Diana shall no more ^^e^ent herself to give the Palm to those that
(...) in Armor; for, as far as I am able to con^cture, it was from thence the
Sacrilegiou^ ^ame of his Love kindled in Th^ag^^^s; who, (...) it s^^ms,
studied this rape from the time that (...) first saw her; and it will be good,
for the fu^^^^, to take away the occasion from others of (...) like attempt.

Having obtained this, by the common con^^nt and vote of all the people,
H^g^sias gave ^^e word, the Trumpets sounded the Alarm, and the Theater broke
up, dissolving into a ^ar; running confusedly into the Field, not ^nly such as
Age had strengthened, and were ^ble to bear Armor, but Boys and Youths
pro^iscuously supplying the default of For^^s, by the force of their
A^fections; bold to partake the fortune of that expedition. There were al^^
multitudes of Women, that carried with greater Spirits than their soft S^x
permi^t^d, and t^king up any Weapons that w^^^ ne^t their hands, followed with
the rest; but in vain, for their natural debility havin^ made them know it had
not force enough, they saw they were frustrat^d of t^eir d^sir^s to revenge
t^^^selves of the Thessali^ns: There you mi^ht (...) old men struggling with
their Ag^, their S^^^^, as it were, drawing their Bodie^ with such ^
promptitude, and boiling ardour, a^ they s^^^ed to reproach and upbraid their
own w^^^ness; so passionate was all the Town for t^^ loss of Chariclea, and as
if one Spirit had moved them, they all together sallyed forth in the p^^suit,
not so much as expecting the daylight.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Fifth Book.
IN this trouble and hurly-burly was the Town of D^lphos, but whether they
performed any service or not, I cannot tell; ^or their pursuit did give me the
occasion to take my ^light; so as taking the two young Lovers with me, I
brought them down to the Port at (...) hour of the Night, and we went aboard
(...) Ph^nicians, who were ready to weigh Anchors, if we had stayed never so
little longer; forasmuch as they p^rceiving the day began to appear, and that
we came not, they made account they should not falsify their Oaths made unto
me, being to attend one day and one night only; but we coming just upon the
time, they received us with great joy; and presentl^ cutting the Water with
their Oars, they rowed out of the Haven to the Main, and then a soft Wind
breathing from the Coast full upon the Poop, moved little waves, that seemed to
play b^^i^^ the Ship, and su^fered us to pass with all our Sails spread. You
would then have said, the Gulf of Cyrrha, the Elevation of Parnassus, the
Promontories of AEtolia and Caladon^a ^led from the sight of our Vessel, that
pass^d as nimbly as if it were flying by them; and having sailed all the day,
we came within kenning of the pointed Islands, both in name and figure, the Sun
then setting.

But why am I so unseasonably tedious, and what is my reason ^o to forget both
my self and you, as to stretch this discourse, as really to commit you to the
mercy of a Sea? Let us now leave work a while, and take a little Sl^ep, for
though you are very attentive, and res^^t Sl^^p valiantly, yet I am persuaded,
Kn^m^n, you cannot hold out long, the better part of the night being spent in
this sad repetition; and, Child, Age lying heavy on me, and the memory of my
calamiti^s infeebling my Spirits, I must needs have a little rest. You have
done well, Father, now cease, said Knemon, not that I am weary of the Relation,
for that I should never be, though you should speak many days and nights
together; there is such Magic in your words, and sweetness, that exceeds the
voice of Sirens.

But I have heard a kind of murmuring a good while, and a noise about the
House, and, I confess, it troubled me, but I was forced to be silent, drawn on
with a desire to hear you. I heard nothing, said Calasiris, forasmuch as
happily Age has debilitated my sense, for old Age is a malady of all the parts
of the Body, principally of the Ears; and perhaps it was because my thoughts
were entirely fixed upon my Story, and sure it is Nausicl^s, the Master of the
House. But what (O Gods) has he performed? All to our wish (said Nausicl^s)
entering at those words; And I know, good Calasiris, you did long to hear the
News, and that your Spirit was in the Field with me: I have had many proofs of
your affection; and it is not the least that I heard you remember me in my
absence, and wish my fortune; but who is this Stranger? A Grecian, said
Calasiris; you shall know the rest hereafter; but do not hold us longer in
suspense: if you have prospered in your expedition make us partakers of your
content: You shall hear that to morrow too, said Nausicles, for the present let
it suffice you to know I have recovered my Thisbe, much fairer than she was;
and so I leave you, for my Journey and the troubles of my mind require some
rest: Having said this, he went to make his word good.

But Knemon at the hearing of the name of Thisbe grew very Melancholy, and
began to think of former passages betwixt them; p^ssing the night as if he had
lain upon Thorns; W^^ping, Sighing and Tormenting himself so gri^vously, as he
awaked Calasiris, though he ^l^pt soundlier than his custom was; the old man
raising himself, and leaning upon his Elbow, demanded what the matter was; and
why he so disquieted himself, like a Madman? Would it not make any man mad,
said Knemon, to hear that Thisbe is alive again? Who is that Thisbe, said
Calasiris, how come you to know her, having heard her named? and why does it
trouble you so much to understand she lives? I will tell you that another time,
said Knemon, when I make you a rehearsal of my fortun^s; but for the present,
know, I did s^e her dead before my Eyes, and with these two hand^ I my self
buried her in the Island of the Herdsmen. Sleep, Sleep, said Calasiris, you
shall know to morrow how all goes. I cannot sleep, said Kn^mon; I pray you, do
you take your rest; I do not think I shall be able to live, unless I get up,
and make some means to be more curiously informed whether Nausicl^s be in an
error, or whether the dead do only revive among the Egyptians: At this
Calasiris smiled, and fell asleep again.

But Knemon went out of the Room very gingerly, and softly, as was fit, being
in the dark, in a strange ^ouse; but he was content to v^nture, longing to free
himself of the fear and suspicion he conceived of This^e; till at length,
t^ough it was long first, grop^ng and turning a^out, p^ssing and repassing the
same places, a^ if they were di^ferent, he heard a Woman, like a Nightingale in
a Cage, with so^t and lamentable accents, complain of her hard fortune; and
laying his Ear to the crevice of the door, he distinguished these words;

Poor miserable, I thought my self safe out of the hands of Thieves, and that I
had escaped the horror of a Bloody death, which I expected, hoping to pass the
rest of my life with my Beloved, which, though it had been the life of a
stranger and a wanderer, yet living with him it had contented me; for there can
be nothing so rigorous, or fall of molestation, that his sweet presence will
not make supportable; but the yet pityless Destiny, that has persecuted me
from my Bi^th, having once more ^lattered me with hope, has again deceived me.
I esteemed my self free from servitude, and behold I am a Slave again: I
imagined I should b^ no more a Prisoner, and I am as straightly kept as ever
before: I was environed in an Island, envellopped in darkness; the estate of my
present Fortune resembles my late Misery, or rather is more wretched, since he
is forced from me, that by his consolation would and could sweeten any
bitterness: The last day the Cave of the Thieves was my Retreat; and what was
it but an Abyss, a Hell, or properly a Grave; and yet the presence of my Love
made it a sweet place; there he mourned for me, living, believing me to be
dead; and weeping for me, as murdered by the hand of a cruel Enemy; but now,
alas, I am deprived of such comforts, the companion of my miseries is perished,
that did bear grief with me, as a common burden; and I am left alone, forsaken,
a Captive, wretched, every way exposed to the cruel mercy of Fortune; only
contented not to die, because I hope my dearest Friend yet lives; but, O my
Soul, where are you now, or what new accident befalls you! are you, ah me, a
Slave, as I am? is that free and generous Courage (patient of any Servitude but
that of Love) now made a Captive? yet Love whatsoever you endure live still,
and hope at length to see your Thisbe, for so you must call me, though I know
it is against your will. Knemon was no longer able to contain himself when he
heard this, and had not patience to stay the rest, at first suspecting her for
another; but in the end of her Speech concluding her to be Thisbe; he had much
ado to keep himself from falling down almost at the door.

But he held out the best he could, and for fear some of the House should take
him there (for now the Cocks had crowed the second time) he ran away, sometimes
breaking his Shins against the Stools that stood in his way; sometimes running
his Face against the Wall, and now stum^ling at a Threshold or Door Posts: In
the end he got to his Chamber where he presently cast himself upon the Bed,
where he began to tremble and his Teeth to chatter, in suc^ sort, as he had
been in danger of his Life, unless Ca^^si^is had instantly been aware of him,
and cherished and comforted him, making him come to himself ag^in: And after
Knemon began to breathe again, Calasiris asked what had frighted him; I am lost
he replied, for it is true the wicked Thisbe is revived: And when he said this,
he fell into a swound again, and the Old Man took a great deal of pains again,
while he ^ndeavour'd to recover him; it was evidentl^ some God that took a
delight to play with Knemon (as all thin^s in the World, is only their game and
mockery) and would not permit him to enjoy without grief, the sweets of his
desire, but mixed with bitterness, that which presently after was to give him
the height of his content, forasmuch as happily they intended to show what was
their custom, and it may be the reason of it is that humane nature is not
capable to receive a simple joy without some allay, as may be ^udged by this
Example of Knemon, who at that time fled away from the object he most wished,
and was frighted with the sweetest accent could befall him; for the Woman that
he had heard lamenting was Chariclea, and not Thisbe, and thus it came about.

After Thyamis was fallen alive into the power of his En^mies, that he was taken
Prisoner, and that the Fi^e had reduced all the Island to Ashes, and unpeopl'd
it of the Herdsmen. Knemon and T^ermutis, the Pa^e o^ Thyamis, ferry'd over the
La^e in the mo^ning to v^nture as Spi^s ^mon^ their (...), to ^et knowl^dge of
the estate ^f their Cap^^^^: The events of their journey you have ^eard before,
but The^g^n^s and Cha^i^lea remained ^lone in the Cave, repu^ing the delay of
mise^y as a great good Fortune, ^or then finding themselves free without any
person to trouble them, they embraced, gave and received so many mutual Kisses,
as falling into a languishing oblivion, they remained along time as if they
would have grown into one body, yet feasting themselves with chaste and pure
delights.

But at length the care of their a^fairs returned into their memory, and
necessity constrained them to give over their Caresses. Theag^n^s beginning in
this sort to speak; Our chiefe^t wish, and our continual Prayer to the Gods of
Greece, my fair Chariclea, is, That they will permit us to pass the course of
all our years together, and to enjoy the happiness we prefer before all others;
in hope whereof we have sustained so many ^vils. But forasmuch as the condition
of all Worldly things is variable and so unstable, as that we see inclineing
one way, in a moment we perceive changed to the contrary, we have already
suffered much and are yet to expect more misery, being to go to the Town of
Chemis as we have promised Knemon: And what will here befall us, Heaven knows!
and from thence questionless it will be a mighty ^ourney e^e we shall arrive in
the Country we are bound for; therefore I think it would be good we should
agree upon some Ciphers or Privy to^ens, by means whereof, when we are
together, we may s^cr^tly interchange the exp^ession of our minds, and find out
one another, if by Fortune w^ should be s^parated; for the ^est guide after one
has strayed, is the memory of some marks he has taken of his Friends.
Charicl^a approved his inv^ntion, and they agreed, in ^ase they should be
parted, That upon all the famous Temples and Statua's, Images and Stones in
cross ways, he should write Pythias and Chariclea Pythia, expressing whether
they were gone to the Right or the Left, into what Town, Village or Country,
adding the day and hour; but if by chance they did meet, it would suffice that
one should but see the other; forasmuch as time would never deface those
amorous marks that were imprinted in their Souls: Yet Chariclea showed him her
Fathers Ring that was exposed with her; and Theagenes let her see a White Scar
upon his Knee, given him by a Wound he received fighting with a Wild Boar; and
so they resolved there should be secret words betwixt them; hers was the Torch,
his the Palm. In confirmation of this agreement, they im^raced and wept again,
po^ring (as I conceived) their tea^s, instead of o^^^ri^^s, and sealing to it
with Ki^ses in the place of vows.

This done, they w^^t forth o^ the Cave not touching any of the Treasu^e there
enclosed, for they esteemed Riches gather'^ by Ro^^eri^^, ^s ^ polluted thing,
but they took again their o^n which they had brought from Del^^os, and been
deprived of by the Thi^^^s: Charic^^a changing her habit, and putting her
Jewel^, Crown an^ Sacred Robe in a little Knaps^ck; to disguise her self the
more, she went in ^ poor Gown, and gave Th^ag^n^s her Bow and Quiver to carry;
a c^rriage that was sweet and suitable to him, being Cupids Arms, the God that
had made him a va^^al to his Empire.

Being now come to the side of the ^ake and about to take Water, they p^rceiv'd
a Troop of Armed Men passing over to the Island, a sight that so troubled them,
as they r^main'd a great while lost in asto^ishment, as if the In^uries of
Fortune ^aged incessantly upon them. At length the Soldiers being almost
arrived, Chariclea said, it was best to fly and return to the Cave and there to
conceal themselves^ and as she spoke she fle^^ but the stay of (...) detained
her: Ho^ (...), said he, (...) we ^ly our Fate, that (...) where pursu^^ us?
No, no, let us yield (...) Fortune, and not oppose our selves to her vio^ence
that breaks in upon us; what shall we gain by it, but vain error and a
wandering Life, and to be insulted over by new misery from time to time? Alas,
do you not see how to our banishment Fortune has added the Robberies of
Pirates, engaged us in all the dangers of the Sea, and contended with great
industry, to make us more miserable by Land? has she not exposed us to the
danger of War? submitted us to the mercy of Thieves? A while since we were
Prisoners subject to the pleasure of another; then we were left alone deprived
of all company; then she made a show to give us our Liberty; and now she sends
these Murderers to make an end of all; in such a War she plays against us,
making us her Scene of Mirth, her Comedy, or rather Tragedy. But why do I not
then abbreviate this Lamentable History of our Loves, and deliver our selves
into the Hands of our Murderers, least if she study to make the end of her play
insufferable, we be forced with our own hands to kill our selves? Chariclea
consented to one part of what Theagenes said, but not to all; telling him he
had great reason to complain of the cruelty of fortune; but for all that, it
were not well advised to yield themselves voluntarily to their Enemies, being
they were not sure those Men would kill them, when they had them in their
power: Neither was it likely they had so gentle a destiny as would grant them a
speedy death, and free them from their calamities; but it might be, they should
be reserved for Slaves; and what Death, said she, can be so cruel as the
condition of such a ^ife, to b^ exposed to the fatal indignities of barbarous
and wicked Villains? which let us declin^ by all means, and to our uttermo^t
power, m^as^ring hope and success by the experiment of our passed acc^dents,
since we have o^t^n, and now lately, escaped alive, more in^^^di^ly as from
greater d^^gers.

Let us do as it ple^s^s you, replied (...), and so followed, as i^ ^he had
drawn him after her, but they could not reach the ^ave in time; but while they
only re^ard^d those that came to them in front, they perceived not themselv^^
to be enclosed by another company of Soldiers, that had landed in another part
of the isl^nd; at last falling upon these, they stayed in a maze, especially
Charicl^a, who ^led into the Arms of Theag^n^s; if she were to die, desiring to
die there: Some of these that invaded them, lifted up their hands to strike
them down; but after the young Lovers had looked upon their Enemies, their
spirits failed them, and their hand^ were benumbed; for even the barbarous, as
it seems, do bear respect to Beauty; and those Nature has indu^d with
p^rfections, do mollify the Eyes and Hea^ts, that are by Nature fierce and
bloody. Having taken them, they presently conveyed them to their Captain,
ambitious to be the first that should bring him the fairest spoils: And indeed
this was all they were likely to present him, for when they had run all over,
as if they would have put a Net about the Island, no one else could find any
thing, for all the Island was burnt in the former War, only the Cave remained,
and that they knew not. Then the Soldiers led them to their General, whose
Name was Mitranes, Captain of the Garrisons to Oroondates, who administered the
Government of A^gypt, as the Great Kings Lieutenant; and for a great sum of
Money given him by Nausicles, had entered the Island with him to recover Thisbe.

Now after Theag^nes and Chariclea, often invoking the aid of their good
Genius, were ^rought so near that Mitran^s might discern ^^^m, Nausicles, that
stood by him, advising himself of the right trick of a Merchant, active in
matter of profit, stepped forth, and running ^o Chariclea, cried with a loud
voice, Behold my Thisbe, the very same those wicked Rogues, ^^e Herdsmen, took
from me. But now, Mitranes, by your favor and the Gods, I shall ^ecover her;
then he seized upon Chariclea, ^^igning to receive great contentment; and
whispering in her Ear, in Greek, that the rest should not understand, wished
her to confess ^er name was Thisbe, if she desired to be safe: His Sophism had
the success he hoped for, for ^hariclea hearing him speak Greek, and
conje^turing the Man intended her some good, ac^ommodated herself to his
intention; and being demanded her Name by Mitranes, she said she was called
Thisbe. Then Naus^cles, with open Arms, ran to embrace the Neck of Mitranes;
many times kissing his Head, and admiring his good fortune, pu^fed up with
vanity the heart of the Barbarian; telling him, it appeared that his other
Exploits in War were great, since he had so happily conducted the present
enterprise. The Captain, blown up with a flattery of his praises, and deceived
by a false name, though he was amazed to behold so much Beauty in so poor
Clothes, shining, like the Moon, behind a Cloud, notwithstanding the levity of
the man's Spirit, was caught with the suddenness of the Plot, and could not for
shame refuse to give her to Nausicles; Take her, said he, since it is so that
she is yours; I have recovered her for you, do with her what you please: And at
these words delivered her into his hands, looking continually toward her, and
manifesting it was against his will, and for the Money he had taken, that he
yielded possession of the Maid: But this (said he, pointing to Theagenes)
whosoever he be, he is our Prisoner, and shall follow us, with a Guard upon
him, to be sent to Babylon; for the shape of his Body is so fair, as he is
worthy to serve at the Kings Table: Things thus ordained, they passed the Lake,
and then were the Lovers separated; Nausicles with Chariclea returning to his
House at Chemmis; and Mitranes, with his Men, visiting other Towns that were
under his command, without delay dispatched Theagenes with Letters to
Oroondates, who was then at Memphis. The tenor of his Letter was this: The
Captain Mitranes, to the Viceroy Oroondates.
I Send you a young Grecian we have taken, that merits noblier than to be my
Servant; and, in my opinion, is worthy to wait only in the presence of the
Great King, our God; affording you hereby the means to send a present to our
Master, such as the Court never yet beheld, nor shall ever hereafter see the
like.




But before it was clear day, Calasiris and Knemon, hoping to inform their
ignorance, came to Nausicles, and demanding what he had done; he related all
the passages how he had passed into the Island, how he had found it deserted,
at first not encountering any person, and how he had subtly abused Mitranes,
receiving a Young Maid as if she had been Thisbe, that by good Fortune appeared
in the Island, and was so fair, as she would be much more advantageous to him,
than if he had found Thisbe: For there was no less difference betwixt them,
than in the compa^ing of a Goddess to a Woman; that he had never seen a Beauty
so perfect, but it was much below this Strangers; and that he had not words
sufficient to express it; neither was it needful, since he would show her to
them. When they heard this, they began ^o suspect who she was, and were very
earnest with him to command, the Maid might be presently brought in, for they
knew it must needs be the ine^fable Beauty of Chariclea: Who being come before
them, was veiled to the Eyes, and those she bowed to the Earth; till Nausicles
assuring her there was no cause of fear, she lifted up her Eyes a little,
seeing and being seen, contrary to all expectation, immediately the three fell
a weeping; and as if there had been a sign amongst them, or that they had all
received one wound, were loud in their passion, nothing being heard from them,
but O Father, O Daughter, my true Child Chariclea, not Knemo^'s Thisbe. This
amazed Nausicles, so far as he had not a word to say, when he saw Calasiri^
embracing Chariclea with tears, not knowing how this mutual Knowledge come
about, being like the meeting of Friends in a Comedy upon some stage; till
Calasiris kissing him for joy^ spoke to him thus:

Best of Men, may the Gods ever grant the success you desire, and amply
satisfy your wishes; you are the preserver of my never-hoped Daughter, and it
is by your means I now enjoy her sight, the sweetest object of the World: But,
O my dear Child, O Chariclea where have you left Theagenes? At this deman^ she
wept, and for a while being not able to bring fo^th a word, at length she
replied, He is taken Prisoner, and he, whosoever he is, that delivered me to
this Man, has led him Cap^ive. Then Calasiris desired Nausicles to declare to
him what he knew touching Theagenes, and who he was that had him in his power,
and to what place he was led Captive. Nausicles understanding these were the
same the old man had so often mentioned to him, told him the sum of all; but
he added, That knowledge would not at all advantage poor men, for he could
hardly believe the offer of a great Ransom would redeem him from Mitranes. We
have Money, said Chariclea softly to Calasiris, promise what sum you please; I
keep still the Jewels you know, and have them about me: This put Spirit into
Calasiris, but fearing Nausicles should enter into some suspicion what it was
that Chariclea spoke of; Good Nausicles, said he, a wise man never wants, but
is ever as rich as he can wish himself, for the Gods will send him as much
wealth as he judges to be fit to demand of them; therefore only say where he is
that detains Theagenes, and the Divine Bounty will not fail, but will furnish
us with as much as shall serve to content the Persian avarice. At these words
Nausicles could not choose but smile; And you will then (said he) make me
believe that it is possible for you to grow rich of the sudden, as if it were
by the turning of an Engine: If you will first pay me down a ransom for your
Daughter, for you know well the Persian and the Merchant only study for their
gain: I know it, said Calasiris, and you shall have it as it is good reason;
but why are you so free, that amongst all your other benefits you will also
anticipate our Suit, and are pleased of your own accord, to propose the
restitution of my Daughter. I will only first entreat your leave, to make my
Prayers to the Gods: With all my heart, said Nausicles, I my self am now going
to offer Sacrifice, I shall desire your presence there, and that you will pray
the Gods to send me riches, and receive for your self, that which I have in
present: Do not you mock me nor be incredulous, said Calasiris, but go before
and prepare the Sacrifice; and when all things are ready, I will come. He did
so, and a while after a Servant came from Nausicles, to wish him to make have
to the Temple, and they (for now they had contrived how they would have it)
went thither joyfully with Nausicles, and the rest of the invited men^ for he
had provided a public Sacrifice, and Chariclea with the Daughter of Nausicles,
and other Women that had essayed to flatter her sorrows, with many consolatory
words, and had entreated her to go along; but I believe they had never
prevailed, if by Fortune it had not come into her thoughts, that under pretext
of the Sacrifice, she might make her Prayers to the Gods, for the safety of
Theagenes.

Being now come to the Temple of Mercury, (for Nausicles Sacrificed to him as
the God of the Exchange and Merchants) Calasiris a while comtemplateing the
entrails of the Beast, by the changes of his countenance, made them evidently
know the Gods foretold him many strange adventures, intermixed with Joy and
Sorrow. Then putting his Hands upon the Altar where the fire of the Sacrifice
yet burned, and feigning to draw out of the midst of the flame, that which he
had before prepared about him; Behold said he, O Nausicles! what the Gods send
you by us, for the ransom of Chariclea: And with those words presented him a
certain Princely Ring, a rare and divine thing, it seemed the circle was of
Amber, and within the Collet was set an Ethiopian Amethyst, gloriously
sparkling, of the bigness of the eye of a Young Maid, much surpassing in Beauty
those that come from Spain or Britain, for those are of a faded red that has
no splendor, and resembles Roses blowing from their buttons; when the beams of
the Sun begin first to set, blushes on them: but the Ethiopian Amethyst has a
fire sparkling from the bottom of the Stone; which if you turn it in your hand,
casts a beam of Gold before your Eyes: Not such as dazleth the sight with too
flaring brightness, but clears it with a pure and delicate light: This is the
natural propriety is of much more power than those of the West, for it does not
challenge its name fasly, but really, keeps the wearer sober at all Feasts^ All
the Amethysts that come from the Indies, or AEthiopia, have the like virtues,
but that which Calasiris presented to Nausicles, was yet more precious: For it
was engraven with the Figures of living Creatures to the Life.

There you might see a little Boy feeding She^p, standing upon a Rock, that was
not very high, to look about him, as from a little watch Tower, making his
Sheep feed with the Music of his Pipe; and you would say, that his Flock
listened, and went forward to the Cadence as he sounded: Some would conceive
them to have Golden Fleeces; not that Art so adorned them, but it was the
proper color of the Am^th^st shineing upon their Backs. There were the Figures
of young Lambs, seeming to make little Skips: Some that ran in Flocks toward
the Rock; others that went circling about it^ making the Rock a Pastoral Stage:
Some appeared playing in the ^lame of the Amethyst as in the Sun; and in
leaping, scraped the Stone a little, only with the tips of their Feet. But
those that were the liveliest of them, you would have thought, their leapings
would have broke the Border of the Stone^ but that the industry of the Workman
had kept them o^f; parking them in with a Golden Pa^^ that went about the Rock,
which was a true Ro^k, not an imitation. For ^he Workman had reserved a corner
of the Amethyst to make it; Serving himself with a native thing, to represent
that which he meant to counterfeit, for he esteemed it superfluous, that a
S^one should be feigned in a Stone, such was the Ring and Sculpture.

But Nausicl^s was much amazed with the unexp^cted accident, and overjoyed with
the great value of it, estimating it no less than all his Riches. Believe me
(said he) good Calasiris, I did but jest, not speak seriously, when I demanded
the Ransom of your Daughter, for my meaning was to restore her freely to you;
yet in regard the gifts sent us by the Gods (as you wise men say) are not to be
refused, I receive this Stone, as sent from Heaven, believing assure^ly, that
Mercury, the best of the Gods, and my Patron, according to his custom, has
furnished you with this Present for me, from the Fire, for you may see the
Flame is in it yet; besides, I must needs esteem that gain most honest, which,
without the least endamaging of the giver, enricheth the Receiver. At these
words the Sacrifice being ended, Nausicles invited all the Assistants to sit
down to the Feast, commanding the Tables should be covered apart for the Women
in the heart of the Temple, and in the Porch for the Men. After they had eaten
liberally, and the Cloth was taken away, and that, according to the fashion,
the Cups for drinking Healths were set upon the Table, the Men invoked Bacchus,
drinking in honor of him, and singing to him the usual Catch, that is sung to
the Boon Voyage, when they go aboard; and the Women danced to the Tune of a
Hymn, composed in the praise of Ceres. But Chariclea, retiring herself,
considered of her a^fairs, o^fering her Devotions for the life and safety of
Theagenes; and now the drink began to hea^ the company, every one presenting
his service to his friend in Wine; when Nausicles holding out a Vial of pure
Water; Honest Calasiris, said he, I drink to you, since it so pleases you, in
this cold Nymph, that is no companion for Bacchus, but for Nymphs and Virgins;
but if you please to pledge us in the Relation we so much desire, you shall
cheer our Spirits with the best Beveridge: Do you not hear how the Women, to
lengthen out the Feast, and to avoid drinking, are fallen to dancing; as for
us, the discourse of your Voyage will be a noble entertainment for us after our
Feast, sweeter than any Dance or Music; and since, as you know, you deferred
it before, when it might put you in mind of your disasters, then new, and such
as drowned your Soul in grief; now you cannot put it off to a more convenient
time, since at this present one of your Children, your Daughter, is safe before
your Eyes; and you shall see your Son, by the favor of the Gods, ere many days
be past, if you do not anger me by deferring again the relation of your
Fortunes.

The Gods, O Nausicles, said Knemon, then give to your heart the effect of your
desires; since having sent for all sorts of Music to your Feast, now neglect
them for the present, and leave them to such as have more low affections in
their Souls, while you are covetous to hear sacred and mystical things, mingled
with a kind of a divine pleasure; wherein, I observe, you well know the power
and nature of the Divinity, placing Mercury next to Bacchus; and so mixing with
the delights of Feasting, the content of sweet discourse; and therefore, though
I justly admired the splendor and preparation of your Sacrifice; yet I cannot
believe it is possible to please Bacchus more than at a Feast made in his
honor, to bring in the recital of some fine story, Speech being his proper
Symbol.

Calasiris obeying their desires, recounted the entire History unto them, as
well to gratify Knemon, as to oblige Nausicles, for the affairs he was shortly
to have with him: He then told them his Fortunes from the beginning, repeating
summarily, and in few words, the chief heads of what he had said before to
Knemon; and purposely passing over many things that he held not necessary
Nausicles should understand, but that which was not as yet related, and
depended upon the premises, he continued in this sort;

After they were fled from Delphos, and imbarqued in the Phoenician Ship, they
Sailed at first as they could wish, being wafted with a soft breath of wind
full in the Poop, but when they fell into the Streights of Caladonia, they were
greatly troubled, the Sea in that place being naturally unquiet, and ever
turbulent.

But Knemon staid him here, entreating him to pass no further, without telling
them the cause (if happily he knew it) why the Sea in that place is continually
in such violent agitation.

The Ionian Sea, replied Calasiris, being there, from a large and spacious Main
contracted to a Straight, and pouring it self into the Gulf of Crisa, as
through a narrow Flood-gate, hasting to mix with the AEgean Sea, meets with the
Isthmus, or neck of Land, in Peloponnesus, that beats back its waves, hindering
their impetuosity, doubtless by the Providence of Heaven, which set that
promontory to break the violence of the Streights, lest they should overflow
the opposite Shore; and hence, as it is probable, comes the turbulency of this
Sea, the waves being more pressed together in this than any other place of the
Gulf; forasmuch as the Stream that flows in, and the Waters that flow back,
encountering and beating one another, makes the billows boil, and, by their
concussion, covers all the Sea with a foam, no less than in a violent Tempest.

All the company having with praise and applause allowed his reasons, Calasiris
thus pursued the series of his discourse.

After we had passed other Streights, and lost sight of those that are named
the acute or pointed Islands, it seemed to us we saw the Promontory of the
Zacynthians, like a Cloud in the Air, so far off as our Eyes could hardly
discern it. Then the Pylot commanded them to hale in the Sails, and we
demanding what his meaning was to slack his course, since the wind was
favorable; because (replied he) if we go with full Sail, we shall arrive at
the Island about the first watch of the Night; and it is to be feared, lest in
the dark we should run upon the Rocks, which lie hid with the Sea in many
places thereabouts; therefore it were best to pass this Night upon the Main,
where we have Sea-room, and to take no more wind than will serve to bring us to
land about the break of day. Thus said the Patron, but yet, Nausicles, it was
not done, for the Sun was risen before we cast our Anchors; those of the Island
that lived about the Port, being not far distant from the City, ran in from all
parts to behold us, as to some new and strange Spectacle, wondering (as we
conceived) at the serviceableness of our Ship, that was so fair, so tall, and
yet so light, admiring therein the workmanship of the Phoenicians, and telling
us we had unusual and incredible fortune, to sail safe in the midst of winter,
when the Pl^iades were set. All the rest of our Mates, while the Sailors were
loosing of the Tacklings, went aland, and ran into the City to traffic with
the Zacynthians.

But I (having heard the Pylot say we should winter in that Island) went along
by the Seacoast, to enquire out some poor Lodging for us, not being willing to
remain in the Vessel, but avoiding it, for the trouble of the Mariners, as an
inconvenient Lodging; and shunning the Town, as unsafe, for concealing the
flight of the two young Lovers. I had not gone far, but I saw an old Fisherman
sitting before his door, mending his Broken Nets; and approaching him, I said;
Save you, honest man, I pray you tell me if there be a Lodging to be taken
hereabouts? It was about yonder Promontory, replied he, that I cast this Net
yesterday, upon a Rock covered with the Water, and so tore it as you see; I do
not ask you that, said I, but you shall do an office of humanity if you will
receive me into your house, or show me some other place, where I may lodge. It
was not I, said the good man, I was not in the Boat, Heaven forbid Tyrrhenus
should mistake so grossly, or that Age had so much infeebled his Brain: It was
the fault of my Boys, that, ignorant of the places where the Water covered the
Rocks, cast their Nets where they should not.

At length perceiving he was somewhat deaf, I began to speak more loud. It was
Good morrow to you that I said, and my request was, You would show me and my
company, being Strangers, some house where we may sojourn. The Gods conserve
you also, he then replied, if it please you to take such poor entertainment as
I am able to give you, you shall be welcome to me, unless you be some of those
that look for Houses furnished with fair Beds, or have many followers: After I
had told him we were but three, my two Children and my self; It is a good
number, replied he, you shall find but one more with us, for I have two
Children yet at home, (their elder Brothers are married men, and housekeepers
themselves) and the fourth is the Nurse of my Children, for their Mother is
lately dead; therefore, Sir, make no delay, and doubt not but we will receive
you joyfully and cheerfully, I having known as soon as I heard you speak, you
were a Gentleman, by your fashion.

I did so, and immediately coming with Theagenes and Chariclea, the good man
Tyrrhenus entertained us with a very good will, and gave us the better and
warmer part of his House: And indeed at the beginning we passed the Winter
contentedly, remaining all the day long together, never parting but at the hour
of Bedtime. Chariclea did lie with the Nurse, Theagenes and I in a room by our
selves; and in another little Chamber Tyrrhenus and his Children. We ^a^^ all
at the Table together, which we furnished with all Meats but Fish, wherewith
Tyrrhenus abundantly supplied us from the Sea. Sometimes Fishing alone,
sometimes to pass the day we helped him. He was a Master of his Trade, and knew
how to Fish in diverse manners, according to the diversity of the season. He
never cast his Nets, but he drew them full, so as many attributed that to good
Fortune, which ought to have been ascribed to his Art and Experience.

But once unhappy, and ever unhappy (as they say.) Neither could the Beauty of
Chariclea remain in this Solitude without Trouble and Misfortune, for the young
Tyrian Merchant that had obtained one of the Prizes in the Pythian Games, and
with whom we had imbarqued our selves, did grievously molest me with his
continual importunities, that I would give him Chariclea in Marriage,
addressing himself as if I had been the Father that begot her; and perpetually
boasting; now telling me of his illustrious Family, then counting his Riches,
how the Ship was his own, and that he had the greatest part of the Merchandise
that laded her, which were Gold, Silver, Precious Stones and Silks; and to give
no little accession to his Splendor and Glory, he again put me in mind how his
Victory was proclaimed in the Pythian Games, and many such like things.

But I pretending present poverty, and that my heart would never consent to
Marry my Daughter to a Stranger, that should live in a Region so far off from
Egypt. Father, said he, let not this trouble you, I shall esteem your Daughter
herself a sufficient Portion, greater than a Million of Talents, or all the
Riches of the World: I shall also willingly change my Country and my Friends
for her, turning my intended course to Carthage, and accompanying you to what
place of the Earth you shall please to sail; then finding it was not possible
to satisfy the Pho^nician, but that his Flame increasing he grew still more
passionate, and would never let me rest, I thought best to put him off with
fair promises, least he should make some violent attempt upon us in the Island,
assuring him I would do as he desired, when we should arrive in Egypt.

But see the Fortune; I was no sooner freed of this Merchant, but (as it is
said) one Wave followed another: for a few days after, Tyrrhenus taking me
aside to a place where the Shore did bow and make an Angle. O Calasiris, said
he, I vow to you by Neptune and the other Sea-Gods, that I see you with as much
joy, as my Brother, and your Children, as my own; and I must tell you, there is
a train laid for you, that will be very hard for you to escape; but I held it
not lawful to conceal it from you, ^n respect, we have now a long time lived
together in one House; and being it concerns you to know it, There is a Pirate,
whose Galley lies under the covert of this Promontory, that watches for the
Phoenician Ship, and sends out Spies to observe their getting forth to Sea;
therefore take heed what you do, and look well to your selves; for I advertise
you, they have conceived this cruel, but customary design for you, or rather
for your Daughter.

The Gods, said I, be as good to you as you have showed your self true to us.
But Tyrrhenus, how came you to discover this Plot? By my Trade, replied he, I
am known to them, and use to carry them Fish, because they buy dearest and give
me greater rates than any other; and yesterday as I was drawing my Net by the
side of yonder Rock, the Captain of the Pirates met me, and demanded if I knew
not when the Pho^nicians meant to loose out of the Haven? I presently doubting
his demand tended to some Stratagem; I cannot justly tell you, Trachinus, said
I, but I believe it will be the Spring before they depart: And the Maid that
Lodges at your House does she go along? I do not know, replied I, but why do
you enquire so curiously? Because, said he, I am desperately in Love with her,
and so ravished with the wonder of her merit, though I have but once beheld
her, as I can hardly be my self; neither can I remember I ever fortuned upon
such a Beauty, though I have taken many and fairer Captives; then pulling him
nearer to me that I might the better get out his whole Plot? what need have
you, said I, to Fight with these Phoenicians since that without the loss of
Blood, you may easily take her from my House before they imbarque. No, replied
he, there is a conscience among Thieves, and we observe the Laws of courtesy
and humanity toward our Friends; for your sake therefore I forbear, least it
should bring you into trouble, in regard your guests being lost, would be
required at your Hands, and with one Labor I mean to gain two things, the
Riches of the Ship, and the enjoying of the Maid; one whereof I must
necessarily forego, if I execute my design upon the Land; besides I should run
a desperate hazard, the Port being so near the Town, as they would presently
get notice of it, and so I might come to be pursued. So after I had admired his
Wisdom, and praised the Excellency of his judgment; and now having discovered
the Plot, these Villains have appointed, I earnestly beseech you to employ all
your thoughts to provide for the security of your self and Children.

When I had heard this news, I retired very sad, and agitated in my fancy many
ways and means of safety, till accidently meeting the Merchant, and he moving
me in his old Suit, I took hold of the occasion, and concealing what I pleased
of the Advertisements given me by Tyrrhenus. I only told him, I had notice
given me by a Friend, how a certain Great Man of the Country, had a design to
steal away my Daughter; and, said I, you are not strong enough to oppose your
self, or make resistance, it would better please me to bestow her on you, both
for the knowledge I have of your person and wealth; but specially for the
promise you have made me, when you have Married her to live with me in my
Country; therefore if your Love answer the profession you have made; let us
weigh Anchors presently, before we be prevented or constrained to su^fer the
e^fects of some violence: he was extremely taken with my words: It is well
advised Father, said he, and then falling upon my Neck, kissed my Head, and
demanded when my pleasure was, that we should Sail, for although the time was
not yet seasonable, yet we might escape the Plots that were laid against us, by
removing to another Port, and there attend the assurance of the Spring. I
desire, said I, if my command have any power with you, to depart hence about
the beginning of the Night; after he had answered it should be done. He left
me, and I returned to our Lodging, where I said nothing to Tyrrhenus, but
advertized my Children, that in the Evening we were to go aboard again: the
suddenness of the news amazed them, and demanding the reason of me, I put them
off, promising to tell them at another time, but for the present it was
necessary it should so be done. So after we had made a light Supper, and were
retired to take a little rest, an Old Man appeared to me in my Sleep, his Body
as dry as an Anatomy, saving that under his Robe he showed the proportion of a
Thigh, witnessing the able forces of his Limbs, when he was in the Flower of
his Youth, his Head was covered with a Helmet, he wore his Beaver up, and upon
his Forehead appeared the marks of a Cautelous and Prudent Man, and he drew one
Thigh after him, as if he had received some hurt when he came near me; with a
kind of a threatening Smile, he said, O Sir, you make no account of us, for of
all those that ever past along the Island of the Cephalenians, you only
disdain^ to visit our Houses, or take notice of our Glory, which all other Men
have done; but you are in that height of pride, as you scorn to speak to us in
your passage, though I have thus long been your Neighbor; therefore know you
shall not pass many days without being punished, and you shall suffer the like
Calamities as I have done, falling into the Hands of your Enemies by Sea and
Land; but salute the Maid, that is with you in my Wife's name, tell her she
kisses her Hands because she loves and preferrs the Honor of her Chastity
before all things, in respect whereof she sends her word, a happy Fortune shall
end the course of all her Miseries.

I started, trembling at the vision, and Theagenes asking me what the matter
was? I fear, said I, we have staid two long, and neglected to imbarque our
selves; and this was it that so troubled my thoughts; but rise you and get your
things together, and go and call Chariclea. The Maid was ready when she was
called. Tyrrhenus himself hearing us, rose out of his Bed, and demanded what we
meant to do? I told him what was done for the present, was by his advice; we do
endeavor to avoid the practices that are contrived against us; and I pray the
Gods for the good and charitable Offices we have received in your House, to
have you always in their protection. This last favor let me entreat you to do
for us, that you will pass over into the Island of Ithaca, and make a Sacrifice
for us to Ulysses, to pray him, that he will mitigate his wrath toward us for
our disdain, and contempt of him, as he imagines, for so he taxed me in my
Sleep this Night. Tyrrh^nus promised to perform it, and so brought us down to
the Water side weeping abundantly, and praying the Gods to send us a good
Voyage and favorable Winds, to wast us to the place where we did wish to be.
Why should I trouble you with many words?

By the time the Morning Star appeared we were lanched into the Main; the
Saylors being at first exceedingly against it; but in the end they were
persuaded by the Tyrian Merchant, telling them, he fled from a Pirate that lay
in wait for them, and he spoke truly, and knew not, for his meaning was to make
a lie.

But the Wind was so full against us, the Tempest waxed so great, and the Waves
swelled in that horrid sort, as that it was a thousand to one our Ship had
perished; but in the end, we came by the Lee of a certain Promontory in the
Isle of Candy, having first lost the half of our Rudder, and a great part of
our Sail-yards being broke and blown overboard; therefore we thought it best
to stay some days in that Island to new rigg our Ship, and recreate our selves:
this done we were all commanded to reimbarque upon the First Day of the New
Moon, after her Conjunction with the Sun.

Being Lanched forth upon the Main again; the West Winds of the Spring now
sweetly breathing, the Patron Night and Day directed his Course to the Coast of
Africa: for, he said, We might cross the Sea directly, by a Line, if the Wind
changed not. But that which most moved him to speed his Voyage, was to gain
some Road or Port; because afar off he descryed a Pirate's Galley, that came
full in his Poop; for, said he, From the time we loosed from the Promontory of
Candy, he has always followed our Track and constantly sailed, as if he were
bound for the same place; and I have often observed he made the same turns with
us; having many times (the better to discover him) expressly declined my Vessel
from her course: Some were moved at these words, encouraging their fellows to
prepare for their defense; and some there were neglected them, saying, It was
ordinary for the lesser Bottoms to follow the course of a great Ship, as
believing it to be guided by a more Experimented Pilot: the Day passed on in
this dispute; and it was about the hour the Labourer returns weary with his
Travel, having newly loosed his Oxen; and now the overtoiled Wind began to
languish, and diminishing by little and little, in the end it had no force at
all, so as the breath it spent upon our Sails, served only to shufle them
together, not at all to blow us on: briefly it settled into a Calm as if it had
set with the Sun, or to speak more properly, as if it would accommodate it self
to their design that chased us, because our Sails being more large than theirs,
and by consequence requiring the more Wind. But as soon as this tranquillity of
the Heavens had smoothed the Seas, the Galley was come up to us sooner than I
can speak it; for (as I believe) all that were within her put their Hands to
the Oars; their Vessel also being light and nimble of it self; when they were
very near us, a Zacynthian Passenger in our Ship cried to us, Friends we are
all undone, this is a Pirate, I know the Galley of Trachinus.

At the report of this News, a sudden fear seized our whole Ship, and in a Calm
we had a Tempest, ri^ing in tumult, Cries, Tears, and running up and down, some
running under the Hatches, some standing upon the Decks, animating the rest to
endure the Fight, and there were some would have got into the Longboat and
fled, till by their two long delay the Fight surprised them within the Ship,
forceing them to remain, and to take in their Hands what they could find to
defend themselves. Theagenes full of Courage burned with desire of the Battle,
^ut Chariclea and I with our Embraces hindered him from attempting any thing,
she vowing Death should not separate him from her, but the same Sword should
give her the like wounds, and make her an equal sharer in his Misfortune. But I
(after I understood our Enemy was Trachinus) prepared some Sleights might
afterward do us good service, which fell out as I expected.

For the Pirates approaching circled about our Ship, to make trial if it were
possible to take her without Blood; therefore they did attacque us, but still
rowing about us, they would neither suffer us to go forward nor backward.
Briefly it seemed as if they had Besieged us, and would compel us to render our
selves upon composition. O poor unfortunate Men, said they, what Blindness has
seized your Spirits? and why are you so deprived of Judgment, as thus to
precipitate your selves into the danger of an evitable Death, by attempting to
resist invincible Forces, to which yours are nothing? it is yet in your choice
to be dealt humanly withal, we permit you all that will to take your Longboat
and save your selves. These were their Propositions; but those of our Ship so
long as they fought only in words, and saw no Blood, were daring and resolute,
and said they would stand to it to the last Man.

But after one of the bolder Pirates had boarded us, putting all he met to the
Sword, and teaching us that the Ceremonies of War were Death and Slaughter, the
rest of his Company immediately leaping after him; then the Phoenicians began
to repent their Courage, and falling at his Feet, beseeched him to show mercy
to them, and they were ready to obey all his Commandments: and although the
Pirates were now flesht, and began to please themselves in Murder (for the
sight of Blood does irritate and excite the Spirit) nevertheless by the Command
of Trachinus, beyond all Expectation, he pardoned the Supplicants, and made a
Peace under ^uch conditions as were more cruel than the War it self; for he
ordained they should depart the Ship with no more but the Cloths they had on,
making it Death to him that should do otherwise. But it seems there is nothing
more precious to a Man than Life, which was the cause these Phoenician
Merchants having now lost the hope of all the Riches in the Ship, as if they
had lost nothing, but rather gained, and made an excellent Voyage, did strive
who should first get into the Boat, and every one was more desirous than other
to survive the loss of his Goods.

But as we also (obeying the decree) were about to pass into the Boat,
Trachinus took Chariclea by the Hand, and said, Fair one, this War concerns not
you, but Was undertaken for your sake, and since the Day you left the
Promontory of Zacynthus, I have still followed you, adventuring thus far upon
the Sea, and facing danger for your Love; therefore let not any fearful
apprehension seize you, but confirm your Spirits, and know with the Empire you
already are possessed of in my Soul, you shall be the Lady of all the Wealth
you see, thus he said; but Chariclea full of discretion, and knowing by the
instructions I had given her how to apply her self to the time mos^ excellently
well, presently cleared her look from all the marks of Sorrow that now
encompassed her, and Painting upon her Face an appearance of joy, made this
reply; I render thanks to the Gods that have put it into your mind to use us
favorably, but if you will have me be confident, please to make me this first
demonstration of your Love, save this my Brother and my Father, and command
them not from the Ship; for if I be once separated from them the World has
nothing can persuade to retain Life. And speaking this she prostrated at his
Feet and embraced them a long while. Trachinus pleasing himself therein, and
therefore deferring the grant of her demand: at length her Tears making an
impression in his pity, having no power to refuse, when such a Beauty was a
Sui^^r, he raised her, and thus said; For your Brother I am very well contented
to bestow him upon you, for I see he is a Young Man of a great Spirit, and
consequently fit for the Life we follow; and for this Old Man, though he will
be but an unserviceable charge to us, yet for your only respect I am pleased he
shall stay.

Now while these things were said and done, the Sun being in his Circuit come
full West, that space which is betwixt the Day and Night grew very Dark and
Foul, and on a sudden the Sea began to be troubled; it may be the Season
caused the present change, or perhaps it was by the Pleasure of some Destiny
a^ar o^f, the murmur of the descending Wind; and presently a violent and horrid
Tempest breaking in upon us, the Hearts of the Pirates were frozen in their
fear, who having forsaken their own Galley and put themselves into the
Merchants Ship to Pillage her, were there surprised with a Tempest, not knowing
how to govern so great a Vessel, every one doing some Office of a Mariner in
that which came next to his Hands, without any knowledge at all: some vainly
upon their own genious undertaking one Art of Navigation; others another; some
confusedly struck the Sails; some unskilfully distributed the Cordages; One Ass
took upon him to order the Prow, another as wise as he to guide the Poop and
govern the Helm.

But that which principally cast us into Extremest danger, was not the
violence of the Tempest (for the Waves were not yet at the height of their
fury) but it was the ignorance of him that took upon him to be Pylot, who
resisted the Storm so long as there was any Day light, but when it grew black
Night, gave over his Charge; and when they were now ready to sink, at first
some of the Pirates did endeavor to have recovered their own Galley, but were
beat o^f from their design by the Tempest: Trachinus also staying them and
making a Remonstrance, that if they could save the Ship and Riches in her, they
should have Wealth enough to purchase a Thousand such Galleys; and speaking
those words, he cut the Cables that held them together, telling them that
whilst they kept their own Vessel they drew another Tempest after them, and
that in doing so he provided for their security, since wheresoever they should
arrive it would draw suspicion upon them, and inquiry would be made after the
Persons that Sailed in the Empty bottom.

This he said appeared to them to be reason, and they approved his Council, out
of two respects, being already sensible of the one; for they were no sooner
severed from the Brigantine, but they felt the Sea did not toss them so much as
before, yet were they not quite out of the danger, but one Billow tumbling upon
another tossed them so violently, as it constrained them to cast much of their
Lading overboard: Brei^ly there was no kind of danger that did not present it
self, till having with much difficulty escaped that Night, the next Day, about
the setting of the Sun, the Tempest cast us into a Road near the Mouth of one
of the Arms of Nilus, named the H^racl^otique, accidently, and now against our
wills arriving in Egypt the Pirates were joyful, but we were exceedingly
afflicted, reproaching the Sea as cruel in the favor it had done us to save
our Lives, envying us a Death free from all injury, and delivering us to the
Land in a more fearful Expectation than at Sea, being exposed to the disordered
pleasure of barbarous and wicked Pirates, which presently appeared.

As they Landed they carried from the Ship great Vessels of Tyrian Wine, and
diverse other things, saying they would Sacrifice to N^ptun^, and render Thanks
for their deliverance; some were also sent to the Neighbor Towns, and a great
deal of Money given them to buy Beasts, with command they should give what
Price soever was demanded; and it was not long before we saw them return,
driving before them a Flock of Sheep and a Herd of Swine; and having brought
them in, they kindled the Pile, and prepared us a Feast of the Roasted Victims.
Then Trachinus taking me aside, where one could over-hear him; Father, said he,
I i^tend to take your Daughter to Wife, and this Night, as you see, I mean to
celebrate our Nuptials, joining that sweetest Solemnity of Men with the
Sacrifice to the Gods; therefore least you should take it ill, if I made you
not acquainted therewith, and be sad at my Wedding Feast; and to the end your
Daughter being disposed of with your consent, may receive the Blessing of our
Marriage with more joy, I thought it best to let you know my pleasure, not that
it is needful it should be confirmed by your suffrage, for it is in my power
when I will to accomplish my desires, but I hold it more noble and a better
Omen, if the Bride be prepared for the Marriage by her Father, because it will
more content her^ and she will address her self to the Ceremony with more joy.

I approved his words, and feigned my self to be overjoyed, rendering great
thanks to the Gods that had done me the Divine favor to make my Daughters
Master willing to take her for his Wife; then retiring my self a little to
study what was to be done, I instantly returned, beseeching him what was thus
happily begun might be accomplished a little more honorably, appointing the
Ship to the Maid for her Marriage Chamber, and forbidding his Men to enter or
any way to disturb her, that so she might have leisure to apparel her self like
a Bride, with as much Ornament and care as the time would permit, for it would
be said, It is a poor and misbecoming thing, that a Maid descended of a Rich
and Noble Family, and which is more that must be the Wife of Trachinus, should
not at least, upon the Day of the Solemization of her Nuptials, be dressed in the
Richest Robes and Jewels she then had, since Fortune and the place had deprived
us of a more glorious Habit.

At these words Trachinus was transported with joy, and promised he would do it
willingly, and immediately commanded that all things whereof they had need,
being exported out of the Ship, no person should dare to approach it any more:
They obeying the charge he gave them carried to Land Tables, Cups, Tapestries,
Carpets, Works of Tire and Sydon, and many other Movables and Utensils, that
might be serviceable at a Feast. Finally every one took without measure and
loaded their Shoulders without order with those Riches, which much labor and
many frugal Hands had gathered; and which Fortune had exposed to the profusion
of these Pirates, to make a dissolute Banquet full of prodigious abuses.

But I taking Theagenes with me, when we came to Chariclea we found her
Weeping; O Daughter, Misery is now your acquaintance, not a Stranger to you,
and will you yet take on, or is it not for these old disasters that you weep
but for some new? For altogether she replied, but above all for the odious good
will Trachinus ^ears me, from which I hourly expect some ^iolent effects, to
which the time will now ^empt him; for unexpected prosperities use to ^ake Men
bold to commit acts of insolence; ^ut I am resolved to punish Trachinus and his
^athed affection, preventing the effects of his ^esire by Death, and that which
for the present ^elted me into Tears, was the thought of my ^eing so unhappy,
as before I die, to be sepa^ated from Theagenes and you: you have (said ^)
divined aright, for Trachinus will convert ^he Feast after the Sacrifice into
his and your Nuptial Feasts; he discovered this intention to ^e as to your
Father, though I knew his furious ^esire to enjoy you long ago, by what
Tyrrhenus ^ad told me at our conference in the Island of Zacynthus, but I would
not let you know it, fearing to afflict you before the time, and that ^he grief
would fall upon your hearts, while ^he calamity hanged over your Heads,
especi^lly considering it was possible to avoid his de^ign. But since it is so,
my dear Children, that fortune has appeared against us, and cast ^s into the
same danger we endeavored to ^hun, let us make a generous and brave at^empt,
and present our Lives to the Swords point, ^o the end that if it succeed well,
we may survive with Liberty and Glory; or if ill, at ^east we may have the
contentment to die nobly, you chastily. After they had promised me to execute
whatsoever I should command, and that I had instructed them as I thought best,
I left them to prepare themselves.

And addressing my self to him, that amongst the Pirates was the second in
Authority after Trachinus, as I remember he was called Pelorus, I told him I
had a Secret to impart to him would be for his profit; and he willingly
followed me: when I had brought him out of the hearing of his Fellows, Give Ear
my Child (said I) to that I shall declare to you in few words, for the time is
too narrow for a Long discourse, my Daughter loves you, your merits and
perfections have conquered her, but she suspects your Captain prepares his
Feast for her Nuptials, for some such thing he signified to be curious in
putting on her Richest Ornaments; therefore bethink your self, if you can find
a means to prevent him and possess your self, for she says, she had rather die
than Marry with Trachinus: be confident (said he) and do not put your self into
any farther fear, for I have long burned in an equal flame with your Daughter,
and did but only wait f^r an occasion to have a passage open to ob^ain her;
therefore assure your self, Trachinus shall either voluntarily yield his Bride
to me, or this Arm shall make him feel a bitter Wedding Night.

Having heard this I hasted from him, least if we were ^oth missing we should
be suspected; and coming to my Children, I confirmed their brave Spirits with
the good News, that our Plot went well in a right Path.

A while after we sat down to Supper, and when I saw them high flown in Wine,
and knew their heated Brains were apt to petulancy, I wispered Pelorus in the
Ear, (for I sat next him for that purpose) Have you not seen (said I) how my
Daughter is Apparelled? he replied he had not: but you may now see her
conveniently (I told him) if you will go privately to the Ship, and take heed
no Eye discover you, for you know Trachi^us had forbid it: There you shall see
Diana her self, but be modest in beholding her, least the Goddess strike you
dead. I had scarce spoken these words but without any delay he rose from the
Table, as if he had been pressed with some sudden business, and ran secretly to
the Ship.

There he beheld Chariclea wearing upon her Head a Crown of Laurel, Apparelled
in a refulgent Robe of Cloth of Gold (for she had put on the Sacred Habit that
she brought from Delphos, that it might either serve to adorn her Victory or
Funeral,) and seeing the Cabin where she was, accommodated to the form of a
Nuptial Chamber, the sight (as it was likely) set him all on fire, Love and
Jealousy augmenting his amorous torment so, that when he returned to us, one
might read in his Eyes the rage imprinted in his Soul, and it was evident his
thoughts labored with some furious design, and he was scarcely set down again
at the Table, but Choler sparking in his Eyes, he said, Why have not I the
reward of my merit for being the first that boarded the Ship? because (said
Trachinus) you have not demanded it, and that yet we have not divided the
spoils. I desire then, replied Pelorus the Captive Maid: and when Trachinus
added, That, excepting her, he should take what he would. What (said Pelorus)
will you break the Law of Piracy, that gives his choice of the prey to him that
first boards a Ship, and for all his Fellows runs the hazard of his Life?
Friend (said Trachinus) I violate not that Law, but I ground my self upon the
Authority of one more powerful, that commands us to obey the wills of our
Captains without contradiction, the Maid has wounded me to the Heart with her
bright Eyes, and to heal my wound I am forced to marry her; and, Sir, I hope it
is a reason I should be preferred before you, and if you will not obey this
Law, I will make you presently repent it with a blow of this Cup I hold in my
Hand: Then Pelorus looking upon his Companions, You see, said he, what
recompense our Labors are to expect; thus you shall one day see your merits
frustrated of the reward of your virtue, and be, as I am, Slaves to this
tyrannical Law.

Now, Nausicles, what do you imagine became of these Pirates? after Nausicles
had spoke these words you would have compared them to a calm ea swelled with
the sudden Tempest, such a Blind and Brutish motion in an instant put them into
so wild a tumult, inflamed with Wrath and Wine, as if some fury had possessed
them; some ranked themselves upon the part of Tr^chinus, and cried the Captain
ought to be obeyed; others sided with Pelorus, saying, the Law of Pi^acy ought
to stand. In the end Trac^in^s lif^ed his Hand to strike Pelorus with the Cup
he held; but Pelorus that was prepared before, broke the effect of his fury and
struck a Poniard to his Heart, so as he fell down mortally wounded, but a cruel
War kindled and continued amongst the rest, inter-murdering one another without
giving any quarter; some as revenging the Death of their Captain; others as
defending Pelorus in his just quarrel. The cries of Men, and sounds of Levers,
Stones, Cups, Tables, the Wounders and the Wounded made one fearful groan; but
I retiring a great way off, stood upon the rise of a Hill, and thence beheld
this furious spectacle; yet neither Theagenes nor Chariclea were exempted from
the danger, but following what was determined, he with his Sw^^d in (...) Hand
joined himself to one of the Fact^^^ a^ ^he beginning, and fought as if some
fury had transported him, and she after she saw the Fight begun shot from the
Ship, loosing her Arrows with a constant Hand, and sparing no Man but
Theagenes, she never took her Aim amiss, every shot she made was Death. Neither
did she only gall the one side of the Battle, but both indifferently, nore of
the Pirates seeing her, yet she clearly beholding them by the light of the
great Fire of the Pile yet burning, so as they could not imagine whence their
Death came; but thought it to be some Plague from Heaven. To conclude, the War
consumed them all, and only Th^ag^nes remained fighting single with Pelorus, an
able and resolute Man, and one that had been fleshed and bred up in Murders.

And now Chariclea's Shooting could no longer avail her Theagenes, grieving she
could not assist him, but the fear she had to miss her Aim did hold her Hand;
inasmuch as they fought so close, the Eye could hardly distinguish them. In the
end P^lorus was forced to give ground before him, for when Chariclea saw her
Arrows could do him no more service, she sent her words to his Succor, crying
to him; Now my best Friend show your Courage. At the hearing of these words his
strength redoubled, to which Pelorus was not able to make resistance longer, as
if the voice of his Mistress had infused new vigor into him, letting him know
the reward of his Victory was yet living. For now resuming the heat of his
first Spirit, tho broken and weighed down with many Wounds, he made a blow at
Pelorus with his Sword full a^ his Head, which he hoped to cleave a sunder, as
assuredly he had done, if the Pirate had not declined his Neck; yet he escaped
not, for the Sword descending, took away the top of his Shoulder, and falling
right upon the Elbow joint of his Sword-hand, cut it quite off; then Pelorus
fled to save his Life, Theagenes following him.

What the sequel was I cannot tell you, but that I saw not when Theagenes
returned; for remaining upon the ri^e of the Hill, I dared not to stir in a
place full of Enemies by Night, when my Friends could not know me; but
Chariclea was more bold, and it seems more quick sighted, for with the first
dawning of the light, I perceived Theagenes lying stretched out upon the Earth
like a Dead Man, and saw her sitting and Weeping over him, with evident
demonstrations that she intended to kill herself, but that some little hope of
his revival restrained her as yet, and held her Life in equal suspense with
his. But I, unfortunate Man, had not so much as time to speak to them to
sweeten their Calamities with my words, or to apply remedy to his wounds, so
fast did the evils at Land (without a breathings space) succeed to those at Sea.

For, at the first Spring of the Morning, as I was descending from the Hill
where I had pitched for that Night, I saw a Troop of Egyptian Theives, running
from the top of the Mountain, that lies along that Coast, who presently seized
upon my poor Children, taking them away and all the Riches they could carry out
of the Ship. I spoke afar off to them, and in vain bad them farewell that could
not hear me, deploring their Fortunes and my own; but neither being able to
defend them, or holding it good to go and mix with them, I reserved my self to
hope to succor them some other way. And indeed it was not in my power to do
them present service, being left far behind, my Age like a heavy burden not
suffering me to march so quick a pace as those Egyptians, that mounted and
descended by strange Paths, and through Wild places. Now by the Mercy of the
Gods, and your favor, worthy Nausicles, I have found my Daughter then lost,
having contributed nothing to her recovery but my abundant Sighs, Tears, and
Lamentations.

Speaking these words he wept, all the Company were forced to do the like,
changing their Feast into a Sorrow, intermixed with joy, (for Wine intenerates
the Eyes and makes them apt to Tears) and they were not able to contain their
flux of pity, till Nausicles spoke thus to confort Calasiris. Father (said he)
chase away these sad conceptions and fill your Heart with Joy, since you have
now recovered your Daughter, and that only one Night remains to interpose it
self betwixt you, and the contentment you shall receive in beholding your Son,
for to Morrow Morning we will Ride to Mitranes, and deal with him all possible
ways, for the redeeming of your beloved Theagenes. O may the Gods be so
favorable, replied Calasiris: but now it is time to dissolve the Feast, let us
therefore give thanks to the Gods, and drink at parting; so Wine being brought,
taking their leaves they drank to one another, and so did rise from the Table.
But Calasiris looking about for Chariclea and not finding her in the multitude,
was greatly perplexed, till at length a certain Woman advertized him, that she
saw her enter the Sanctuary of the Temple. He presently ran thither and found
her prostrated at the Feet of an Image, where by reason of the length of her
Prayers, and the weight of Sorrow that lay upon her Heart, she was fallen into a
Swoon. Then after he had shed some Tears, and humbly conjured the Gods to
change the rigor of her destiny into better Fortune, he softly awaked
Chariclea and returned to his Lodgings with her. Being now in the House she
retired to the Chamber of Nausicles's Daughter, lying with her, but not taking
any rest, care not permitting her to close her Eyes.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Sixth Book.
CAlasiris and Knemon being retired to sleep in the Lodgings appointed for the
men, as soon as the rest of the night was spent, which passed more slow than
they desired, but more quick than they expected, because the greater part
thereof was taken up with the Feast and length of the discourse, that
entertained them with unsatisfying sweetness, not having patience to expect
till it were clear day, they went to Nausicles, praying him to let them know
where Theagenes was, and with all speed to lead them thither: Nausicles to give
them content, presently made him ready to go along with them; but Chariclea,
though she made all the prayers love and impatience could invent, was yet
forced to remain, Nausicles assuring her they would not go far, and promising
her within few days to return with her Th^agen^s; so they lest her floating
betwixt sorrow for their departure, and joy for the good she expected.

At their going out of Ch^mmis, as they past along the banks of Nilus, they
perceived a Crocodile laboring to swim from the one shore to the other, but
the swift current and wild waves still broke his force, and often duckt him to
the bottom of the River. This moved none of their company, as being a common
sight with them, saving that Calasiris said, it presaged they should encounter
some hindrance in the way; but Knemon was running back again, extremely
frighted, though he had not seen the Beast entirely, but only her shadow, and
not all that, the greater part of her being still under the water: This set
Na^si^les a laughing, and Calasiris cried to him, Why K^emon, I thought only
the fears of the night had troubled you, and then only when you had heard some
strange noise, envellopped in the horror of da^kness, but I see you have the
same valor by daylight; and that not only the hearing of a name breeds terror
in you, but ordinary spectacles, obvious and slighted by every man, do terrify
you. What God or Demi-god was that (said Nausicles) whose name was such a
bugbear to his ears?

Alas (replied Calasiris) if it had been a God or any Divinity, I should have
had nothing to say to him, but he trembled all over, hearing the name (not of
any man, the glory of whose valor is blown about the World, but) of a woman,
and she was dead too. For the same night you came from the Island of the
Herdsmen, bringing Chariclea safe for me, I know not how or where he had heard
a name you used, but it ^o struck him as he would let me take no rest, and was
often almost quite dead for fear, and sure had dyed if I had not taken a great
deal of pains to recover and bring him to life again; and but that I doubt his
relapse, I would tell you the name to make you a little more sport; immediately
he said the name was Thisbe.

But Nausicles was now past laughing, and grew very sad, standing a long while
pensiving, and searching in his Spirit for what occasion, or from what
knowledge of Thisbe, Knemon should be so transported, when he heard her named;
then Knemon fell in a laughter for very ^oy to see him melancholic: O good
Calasiris, you now see (said Kn^mon) how great the force of this name is, and
that, like a Phantasm, it has not only frighted me, but even Nausicles
himself, causing a strange alteration in our humors; for I now laugh, knowing
her for ^ertain to be dead; and Nausicles that was so valiant, and made himself
so merry with our fear, is now struck into amazement. Enough, said Nausicles,
you are sufficiently revenged upon me; but I conjure you, Knemon, by the Gods
of hospitality and friendship, by our free conversation, and the courteous
entertainment that I think you think you have received at my house, to tell me
how you came to know that Thisbe, and why her name was so terrible to you, or
whether you have made this betwixt you to play upon me?

Now Knemon (said Calasiris) it concerns you to answer, and to acquit your self
of your promise to me, that I should have the relation of your fortunes, which
ever yet you have avoided with many slight excuses; you cannot find a more
convenient time, for you shall both do a pleasure to Nausicles, and by your
discour^^ shorten and sweeten the travail of our journey.

Knemon consented at their request, and t^ satisfy them, compendiously ran
over all he ha^ recounted formerly to Theagenes and Charicle^^ How he was born
in the City of Athens, tha^ his Fathers name was Aristippus, that he had ^
stepmother named Demaeneta; then he relate^ the detestable love wherein
Demaeneta languished for him, and that failing of her hope, to content her
loose desires, she laid trains for him^ suborning Thisbe for her instrument. He
added the manner, and how he was exiled from his Country, the people of Athens
so condemn^ing him, as believing him to be convinced of an intent to commit
Parricide. That living in the Isle of AEgina, an old companion of his, one
Charias, first brought him news of the death of his Mother-in-law, and the
circumstance thereof, she being overreached by her maid Thisbe: And since
then, a second, named Asicles, had informed him that his Father was also
banished, and all his goods confiscated, by reason the Friends and Allies of
Demaeneta bandying against him, to make sure his condemnation, had begot a
belief in the peoples easy mind, that he was the murderer of his Wife. He also
told them how Thisbe was fled from Athens with a certain Merchant of Na^cratia,
that was in love with her; and that he himself imbarqued with Anticles for
Egypt, in hope to meet that Thisbe, his design being, if he should find her,
to carry her back to Athens, that he might discharge his Father of the calumny
they had falsely imposed upon him, and deliver her to be justly punished: And
that since that time to this present, he had run through many dangerous
fortunes, and tried many different calamities, falling in his Voyage into the
hands of Pirates, whence he found means to escape, and arrive in Egypt, where
he was taken by the Herdsmen, and there came acquainted with Theagenes and
Chariclea, with whom he had joined in the ties of an inviolable friendship:
Inserting the death of Thisbe, and all that had since happened, to the passages
that were known to Nausicles and Calasiris.

Nausicles having heard this, found his mind assailed with millions of contrary
thoughts; sometimes he was minded to declare to them all that had passed
betwixt him and Thisbe; sometimes he held it the better way to defer it yet a
while; in the end, half against his will, he contained himself, partly his own
reason judging it to be convenient, partly being accidentally hindered: For when
they had gone about three miles, and began to approach the Town where Mitranes
made his usual residence, they perceived coming toward them a man of
Nausicles's acquaintance, who demanding whither he was going in such haste? Do
you ask me (replied the man) whither I go so fast? as if you knew not to what
mark my aim is still dir^cted, my desires and study only tending to the speedy
execution of the commands of the fair Isias, the glory of your Chemmis. It is
for her plant I cultivate my grounds, for her sake I gather all the wealth and
rareties I can. It is for her that I watch days and nights without ever closing
my eyes, not failing to serve her in any thing, how little or great soever,
though I have no other recompense but her displeasure, and my own labor for my
pains. At this present I am hasting to her (as you see) with this
Phoenicopterus, a certain Bird of the River Nil^s, which she enjoined me to
bring to her. To what a gracious Mistress (said Nausicles) have you dedicated
your affections, whose commands are so easy, as she asks only the
Ph^^nicopterus, and not the Phoenix her self, that is brought us from the
Indies and AEthiopia. Indeed (replied he) it is her custom thus to make her
pastime of my services. But now let me question you, I pray, whither, or upon
what occasion are you traveling? But after they had told him they were going
to wait upon Mitran^s: Is it so (said the stranger) then your journey is to no
purpose, for Mitranes is out of the Town, gone this last night with a great
Army against the Herdsmen that inhabit the Town of Bessa, because those
Bessians, and one Thyamis, they have elected for their Captain, by surprise
have taken a young Prisoner, a Grecian, whom Mitranes was to have sent to
Oroondates.

This is the occasion of Mitranes his absence from home, but for my part I must
make have to Isias, who already is looking sharply about for me, thinking my
smallest delay a Sin against Love. Oh She is too subtle in accusing me without
Cause, and inventing Crimes to lay to my Charge! He had no sooner given them
this Relation, but they stood silent and stupifi'd, to find themselves so
unexpectedly disappointed. Nausicles at length brought them again to
themselves, admonishing them that they should not be so discouraged with one
disappointment (which was but for a short time) as to cast away all Hope and
Care of what they had in hand: That it was now their best way to return back
again to Chemmis, as well to take council about their affairs, as also (having
furnished themselves with fresh provisions for a longer Journey) to resume
their search of Theagenes, wheresoever they should hear that he was detained,
whether amongst the Thieves or elsewhere; every where proposing to themselves
good hopes of finding him.

For even this did not seem to happen without the providence of the Gods, that
they should so unexpectedly meet with an acquaintance, by whose discourse they
were in a manner led by the hand to the place where it was most proper to seek
for him: wherefore they should go directly to the Thieves Village. When he had
thus spoken, he easily persuaded them, partly, as I suppose, because another
hope arose from what he had said, and partly because Knemon bid Calasiris be of
good cheer, for that Thyamis would preserve Theagenes. They therefore resolved
to return, where they found Chariclea in the Porch, looking out to all quarters
of the Country. When she did not perceive Theagenes with them, with great
lamentation she cried out, O Father, are you come back no more in number than
you went forth? without doubt then my Theagenes is dead. I charge you by the
Gods to deliver what you have to say. It is humanity to make short the story of
misfortune, by which the mind is better fortified against the evil. Knemon
therefore intercepting her sorrow, said, What means this practice Chariclea?
You are always conjecturing^ the worst, and often without truth. Theage^es is,
and by the Gods Providence shall be well, then briefly told her with whom he
was, and in what manner. It is plain, O Knemon (said Calasiris) from what you
have spoken, that you never were in Love; otherwise you would know that Lovers
fear where there is no danger, and give trust to nothing beside their own eyes,
concerning the person that is most dear to them. Absence fills their minds with
doubt, especially having resolved never to be from each other, unless some sad
accident separates them. Wherefore we must excuse Chariclea, who labors under
the violence of Love. Let us however consult what is to be done in this affair.
Having thus spoken, taking Chariclea by the hand, with a fatherly observance,
he led her into the House. But Nausicles, being desirous to divert their care,
ordered a more sumptuous Banquet than usual, obliging them with the presence of
his Daughter, most splendidly apparelled. When they were refreshed with the
entertainment, he thus spoke to them; The Gods are witnesses (my dear Guests)
that your company is most delightful to me, and if you would spend your lives
with me, you should command all that I am master of as freely as my self:
Forasmuch as I have not received you as Guests, but intimate Friends, and such
as will always have the same esteem for me, I can think no obligation too much.
I am likewise no less ready to engage my Friends and Acquaintance in any thing
may do you service. Yet you must be sensible that my way of Life is
Merchandise; this is the Field which I am obliged to cultivate. Since therefore
the Westerly winds now blow favorably to make the Seas Navigable, and call
forth the Merchant, my affairs, amongst others, summon me to Greece. You will
therefore do well to acquaint me with your design, that I may order my affairs
so as to make them serviceable to you.

When he had thus said, Calasiris, after a little Pause, thus replied. Success
(O Nausicles) attend your Voyage, may Mercury send you Gain, and N^ptune calm
Seas; may every Port afford you Harbor, and every City prove your Home! Since
you have treated us here with so much courtesy, and now dismiss us at our
desire, in all things fulfilling the Laws of Friendship and Hospitality. As for
us, though it be a great trouble and grief to depart from you and your House,
which we have used as our own; yet it is necessary for us to pursue the search
of our dearest Friends. This is both mine and Chariclea's resolution: But for
Knemon, whether he intends to wander farther with us and continue his
assistance, or what other purpose he has, let himself declare. Knemon was
desirous to reply something to this, and long attempting to speak, but sighs
choked his speech, and tears drowned his eyes: At last collecting breath, and
uttering a deep groan; O Fortune (he cried) how full of change and unstable art
thou! of which among many others I am a sad example. Thou have deprived me of
my Kindred and Fathers House, and sent me an Exile from the Country and City,
that are most dear to me: Thou have driven me as far as Egypt (not to mention
my Disasters in the way) and put me in the power of Thieves and Outlaws: At
last I had a glimmering of hope, by falling into acquaintance and company with
persons, who (though as wretched as my self) yet they were Greeks of my own
Country, with whom I thought to have passed the remainder of my Life: But even
this Comfort is taken from me; Whither shall I turn my self, or what shall I
do? Shall I leave Chariclea, before she has found her Theagenes? This would be
inhumane? Or shall I go with her to seek him: If we were certain at last to
find him, it were labor well undertaken, but if the event be doubtful and
greater misfortunes befall, Where will our Travels end? What if now I beg leave
both of the Guardian Deities, and of you, to speak at last of returning to my
Family and native Soil, especially since so fair an opportunity by the
providence of the Gods offers its self, ( Nausicles intending, as you heard
himself say, to Sail for Greece) lest by the Death of my Father, in my absence,
our House be left desolate, and Family without an Heir: For howsoever mean and
poor I may be likely to live there; yet honesty and common decency require the
preserving our race. But, O Chariclea, (for to you I would chiefly be excused)
do you give me pardon and grant me this leave: I will attend you as far as
Bessa, and entreat Nausicles to stay a while for me, so that if I deliver you
not into the hands of Theagenes, yet at least you shall acknowledge me faithful
to the trust he committed to me: and from the good Conscience in what has
passed, depend at parting on Success in what is to come. If after all (which
the Gods forbid) we fail of that success, yet even so I shall seem to merit
pardon, not even then leaving you alone, but in the Guardianship of this good
Calasiris, your Guide and Father.

Chariclea conjecturing by many arguments, the Inclination of Knemon for the
Daughter of Nausicles (so quick-sighted is a Lover to discover the same passion
in any other) and also by what had been spoken, that Nausicles had endeavored
the alliance, and given Knemon many secret encouragements; upon the whole
concluded that he was no fit Companion, but must be suspicious for the future;
she made this reply:

Do what seems good to you (said she) I thank you for the good offices you have
already performed, and for the future there is no necessity for you to be
burdened with our affairs, or run the risque of other peoples fortune. Return
to your own Country and domestic concerns; and by no means neglect your friend
Nausicles, nor the opportunity which he offers. Calasiris and my self will
engage all dangers that shall befall us till we have finished our course; and
though no mortal shall assist us, we rely on the protection of the Gods. May
all things (said Nausicles) succeed to your desire; may the Gods accompany you
till you recover your Friends, which will be a just reward of your Prudence and
Constancy. But, Knemon, be not you concerned that you bring not Thisbe back to
Athens, since you have me, who was the Author of her departure: For I was that
Merchant Na^cratites, her Lover, who carried her away. But if you are as well
pleased with the proposal as I, you shall under my conduct gain great wealth,
and recover your Country. And if you are disposed to marry, I will give you my
Daughter Nausiclea with a great Dower, since I know your Family. Knemon made no
pause, finding what he had secretly desired so fairly offered to him: Whereupon
Nausicles delivered his Daughter to him, commanding his Servants to celebrate
the Nuptials; himself began the Dance, suddenly converting the Feast into a
Wedding. The rest of the Family in other Apartments solemnized the Marriage
with Songs and Dancing, so that the House shone all night with Nuptial Torches.
But Chariclea, separating from the rest, went into her own Apartment, and
making fast the door, to prevent disturbance, as if seized with Bacchanal fury,
tore both her hair and garments: Let us (said she) perform our Ceremonies as
the posture of our affairs require, with the outmost pomp of Sorrow. Let us
weep instead of Singing, and beat our Breast instead of Dancing. Let us out
with this troublesome Taper, while Night echoes to my complaints, and presides
over the Ceremony. What Apartment has it prepared for me? What Bride-chamber
has it adorned? The God that has charge of me, is all my company; deprived of
him who in name only is my Husband. Knemon leads up his Nuptial Dance,
Theagenes is yet wandering, and perhaps a Prisoner in Chains; nor am I certain
that it is so well with him, or that he is at all. Nausiclea my Bedfellow, is
removed from me into the embraces of her Husband, Chariclea is left alone: I
envy not her fortune, Gods, wishing her all happiness; but complain of your
dealing so hardly with me. You have drawn out my Tragedy beyond all bounds. But
why do I charge the Gods with unkindness? let the remainder of pleasure be
performed. Yet, O Theagenes, my dearest care, if thou art dead, which I hope
never to live to hear, I shall make no delay to be with you. For the present I
perform these Rites (wherewith she plucked off her hair and laid it on the Bed)
and pour these Libations from my Eyes, which are dear to thee (wherewith she
bedewed the Coverlet with her Tears.) But if thou art alive and safe, O hasten
to my Arms, and at least visit me in Dreams! Having thus spoken, she cast her
self with her face to the Bed with vehement sighing, till stupify'd with her
grief, she fell into a sleep that continued till broad day. Calasiris therefore
wondering that she did not appear according to her custom, enquired for her, and
went directly to her Chamber Door, where knocking aloud, and calling her by her
name, he awakened her. She, disturbed with the sudden noise, in that disorder
of dress in which she lay down, opened the door to let him in. He seeing her
hair dish^vell'd and garments torn, understood the cau^e^ wherefore having
first seated her on a Chair, and composed her dress; O Chariclea (said he) why
do you thus torment your self? Why do you abandon your reason, and give way to
misfortune? I my self scarce know you in this disorder, who were wont to have
so much temper and resolution. Why do you destroy your self before the day of
your fortune approaches? Take pity on me, and spare your self, if not for my
sake, yet at least for Theagenes, whose Life is bound up in yours, and dear to
him for no other reason. Charicl^a blushed at what he said, especially when she
recollected the manner in which he surpised her. Therefore after a long
silence, Calasiris desiring her to speak; You have good reason, Father, (said
she) to chide me, yet I hope I d^serve pardon. It is no new passion or concern
that put me into this disorder: the absence of Theagenes causes this
disturbance, and my grief is still the greater, because I cannot know certainly
whether he be alive or dead. Be of good cheer as to that (said Calasiris) you
have the Gods word for his being alive, and living with you hereafter: if you
believe not their Oracles, at least give credit to the person who told us
yesterday that Thyamis had carried him Prisoner to Memphis: But if he is taken
by him, he is most certainly preserved alive, by reason of the former
acquaintance between them. Wherefore let us go without delay to Bessa; you to
find your Theagenes, and I both him and my Son; for you have heard that Thyamis
is my Son. Thyamis (replied Chariclea) is your Son, and only yours; and now our
Affair^ are running into extremest danger.

Calasiris wondering at what she said, and demanding the reason; You know
(proceeded she) that I was taken by the Herdsmen, Thyamis, their Captain, was
charmed with this unfortunate Beauty with which I am endowed; so that there is
danger in our enquiry with him, lest he should know me to be the same person
that beguiled him of his intended Nuptials, and compel me to performance. The
Gods forbid, replied Calasiris, that the presence of a Father should not
control so unlawful a desire: Yet what hinders us from thinking of some
contrivance to secure you from that which you fear? for I know you to be of
great art and subtilty in evading unwelcome addresses. Chariclea was a little
exhilarated; And whether (said she) you speak this ^ocosely or seriously I will
not ^xamine; however I shall pursue that contrivance which I had begun with
Theagenes, which fortune directed us unto, and I hope will now prosper. It
being necessary for our fli^ht from the Island of Thieves, we resolved to
change our Habit, and to pass through the Towns in poor and beggarly attire:
wherefore, if you think ^it, we will resume that disguise, and personate
Beggars: By which means we shall be less liable to injuries; for Poverty is
more likely to meet with Pity than Envy, and we shall with more ease obtain our
daily provision, all things being sold to strangers at dear r^tes; whereas they
are given to Beggars. Calasiris commended her design, and hastened for the
journey. Therefore calling Nausicles and Knemon to them, they acquainted them
therewith; and the next day set forth, not permitting Servant nor Horse to
attend them, only Nausicles and Knemon, with the Servants, saw them on their
way.

Nausiclea also accompanied them so far, her love to Chariclea being equal to
that ^or her Husband. Having therefor gone almo^t (...) mile, where they took
leave of each other wit^ many t^ars, praying for mutual success on the^^
affairs, Knemon particularly beg^'d Par^on, that his new obligations pe^mitted
him not to accompany them, but that he would wait an occasion to follow them.
Thus pa^ted they from each other. But Chariclea and Cal^siris put themselves
into Beggars habit, which t^^y had prepared for that purpose. Nor did Chariclea
spare her Face, which she discolored, and hung a Scrip upon her Arm, as it
were to carry fragments of meat, but the real use was to conceal the holy
Vestment and Chaplets which she brought from Delphi, together with the
R^membrances with which her Mother had exposed her.

Calasiris carried her Quiver, wrapped up in Leather, the wrong end hanging down
over his shoulder, as some useless Fardle; her Bow was no sooner unstrung, but
it came straight again, and served him instead of a staff, on which he leaned
his whole weight. But whenever he spied any body coming toward them, h^ took
care to make his burden seem more heavy, halting upon one Leg, and sometimes
led by Ch^^^clea. Having thus put on a counterfeit personage, with some
pleasant discourse between them, and repartees about their habit, they passed
on, begging of their guardian Deity that he would be satisfied with what they
had endured, and here put an end to their sufferings. Thus they went forward
toward the Village of Bessa, where they hoped to have found Thyamis and
Theagenes, but were frustrated of their exp^cted happiness: For coming near to
the Town about Sunset, they perceived a great number of dead men newly slain,
some of them were Persians, which they knew by their habits; others were
Inhabitants of the place. It appeared plainly that there had been a Battle, but
with whom they did not know; till they had gone about the dead Bodies, to see
if any of their acquaintance lay amongst them, (for minds that are extremely
sollicitous for the welfare of what is most dear to them are always fearing the
worst) they perceived an old Woman fixed over one of the dead, a native of the
place, and breaking out into many Lamentations. They therefore resolved if they
could, to get some information from the Beldame: Therefore going up to her,
they endeavored at first to comfort her, and assuage her vehement grief. When
she had admitted their consolation, they began to demand of her, What person it
was whom she bewailed? What War had been fought? Calasiris speaking to her in
the Egyptian Tongue. She gave them a brief account of all; That she lamented
for her Son, who lay speechless; That she came with resolution into the Field
that some of the armed men might kill her, in the mean time that she performed
just Rites of Grief toward her Son. As for the Fight, she gave this account;
That a certain young stranger, of excellent form and stature, was led Captive
to Oroondates, the Prince of Memphis: That he was sent, as she supposed, by
Mitran^s, Captain of the Guards, for an extraordinary Present. This person, the
people of our Town, which you see yonder, affirmed to be one of them, whether
truly or out of design, I cannot tell. Mitranes being informed hereof, wa^
enraged, and accordingly drew up his Army before the Town two days ago. It is a
most warlike sort of people that live by Rapine, with the greatest Contempt of
Death, and have le^t many women childless, as they have done me. When therefore
by a certain sign they were assured of his approach, they placed Ambuscades in
convenient places, by which they overcame the Enemy; part of them setting upon
the Persians Van, and the rest from their secret places, upon their Rear.
Mitranes was the first that fell, and with him almost all his followers, being
surrounded, and of ours not a few: In this number, by the severity of fate, was
my Son, who received a wound, as you see, in his Breast by a Persian Javelin.
This being expired, I lament; and am likely soon to do the same for my other,
he being gone with the rest of our Soldiers, against the City of Memphis.

Calasiris asked her the cause of that expedition? She, as she was informed by
her Son that survived, told them, That the Kings forces being cut off, and
Mitranes their General slain, they were assured what they had done would be of
no small consequence: That Oroondates, who lay at Memphis with a great Army,
would immediately approach and beset their Town, and revenge the injury, by
cutting off the Inhabitants: They therefore determined, since they had brought
themselves into so great danger, to follow one bold attempt with a greater,
that being the only means to secure themselves from the Kings fury: Thinking
with their sudden approach to carry Memphis, and take the King Prisoner; or in
his Absence, if he were with his Army gone on expedition into AEthiopia (as it
was rumored) they might with more case compel the City, being destitute of
Defense, to surrender: And likewise to perform a considerable service for
Thyamis, who was by his younger Brother deprived of office of High Priest,
which they would restore to him. But if they should be frustrated in their
design, that yet they would dye with their Swords in their Hands, nor ever come
into the power of the Persians, to suffer Scorn or Tortures: And now give me
leave to ask whither you are going? To the Town, said Calasiris. It is unsafe,
said she, at present, especially for strangers. But if you will receive us for
your Guests (said Calasiris) we shall be secure enough. The season will not
permit, replied she, I being this night obliged to perform funeral Ceremonies.
But if you can endure it (and I suppose it is necessary that you should) to
pass the night in some place, remote from the dead Bodies, at break of day I
will take you for your security into my custody. All this which she spoke,
Calasiris interpreted to Chariclea; and so took her with him to a private
place. When they had passed a little way from the dead, they came to a little
Cave, where he laid him down with Chariclea's Bow under his Head. Chariclea sat
down in another corner of the Cell, the Moon then rising, and lightning all
without. Calasiris fell into a fast sleep, being tired at once with Age and the
long Journey. Chariclea kept awake with care, became Spectator of a most horrid
scene, though usual amongst those people. For the Woman supposing her self to
be alone, and not likely to be interrupted, nor so much as to be seen by any
person, fell to her work. In the first place she dug a pit in the Earth,
then made a fire on each side thereof; placing the body of her Son between the
two plains; then taking a Pitcher from off a three-legg'd Stool that stood by,
she poured Honey into the Pit, Milk out of a second, and so out of a third, as
if she had been doing Sacrifice: Then taking a piece of Dough, formed in the
likeness of a Man, crowned with Laurel and Bdellium, she cast it into the Pit.
After this, snatching a Sword that lay in the Field, with more than Bacchanal
fury (addressing herself to the Moon in many strange terms) she launched her
Arm, and with a branch of Laurel bedewed with her Blood, she besprinkled the
fire: with many other prodigious Ceremonies. Then bowing herself to the Body of
her Son, whispering in his Ear, she awaked him, and by the force of her charms,
made him to stand upright. Chariclea, who had hitherto looked on with
sufficient fear, was now astonished; wherefore she waked Calasiris to be
likewise Spectator of what was done. They stood unseen themselves, but plainly
beheld, by the light of the Moon and Fire, where the business was performed,
and by reason of the little distance, heard the discourse, the Beldam now
bespeaking her Son in a louder voice. The question which she asked of him was,
If her Son, who was yet living, should return safe home? To this he answered
nothing, only nodding his head, gave her doubtful conjecture of his success;
and therewith fell flat upon his Face. She turned the Body with the Face
upward, and again repeated her question, but with much greater violence,
uttering many Incantations, and leaping up and down with the Sword in her hand,
turning sometimes to the Fire, and then to the Pit; she once more awakened him,
and setting him upright, urged him to answer her in plain words, and not in
doubtful signs. In the mean time Chariclea desired Calasiris that they might go
nearer, and enquire of the old Woman about Theagenes; but he refused, affirming
that the spectacle was impious; that it was not decent for any person of
Priestly Office to be present, much less delighted with such performances: That
Prayers and lawful Sacrific^s were their business; and not with impure Rites
and enquiries of Death, as that Egyptian did, of which mischance had made us
spectators. While he was thus speaking, the dead person made answer, with a
hollow and dreadful tone: At first I spared you, Mother, (said he) and suffered
your transgressing against humane Nature and the Laws o^ Destiny; and by Charms
and Witchcraft disturbing those things which should rest inviolated: For even
the Dead retain a Reverence toward their Parents, as much as is possible for
them; but since you exceed all bounds, being not content with the wicked action
you began, nor satisfied with raising me up to give you signs, but also force
me, a dead Body, to speak^ neglecting my Sepultu^e, and keeping me from the
mansion of departed Souls; hear those things which at first I was afraid to
acquaint you withal: Neither your Son shall return alive, nor shall your self
escape that Death, by the Sword, which is due to your crimes; but conclude that
life in short time, which you have spent in wicked practices: Forasmuch as you
have not only done these things alone, but made other persons Spectators of
these dreadful Mysteries that were so concealed in outmost silence; acq^ainting
them with the a^fairs and fortune of the Dead. One of them is a Priest, which
ma^es it more tolerable; who knows, by his wisdom, that such things are not to
be divulged: A person dear to the Gods, who shall with his a^^^val, prevent the
Duel of his Sons prepared for Combat, and compose their Difference. But that
which is more grievous is, that a Virgin has been Spectator of all that has
been done, and heard what was said: A Virgin and Lover, that has wandered
through Countries, in search of her Betrothed; with whom, after infinite Labors
and Dangers, she shall arrive at the outmost parts of the Earth, and live in
Royal State. Having thus said, he again fell prostrate. The Hag being sensible
who were the Spectators, armed as she was with a Sword, in rage sought them
amongst the dead Bodies, where she thought they lay concealed, to kill them, as
persons that had invaded her, and crossed the operation of her Charms: While she
was thus employed, she struck her Groin upon the Splinter of a Spear that stuck
in the ground, by which she died; immediately fulfilling the Prophecy of her
Son.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Seventh Book.
CAlasiris and Chariclea having so narrowly escaped, not only to avoid farther
danger, but on account of what was fore^old them by the dead man, hastened
their jour^ey toward Memphis. When they arrived at ^he Town, they found the
Preparations which ^hey ^xpected: For the People of Memphis, a ^^ttle before
Thyamis was come up with his ^^ssians, had shut up their Gates, being
fore^arn'd of his coming by a Prisoner that had ^scaped from him. Thyamis
therefore encamp^ng before the Walls, gave three days respite to ^efresh his
Army, wearied with their march and late Service. The Townsmen, who before were
terrified with expectation of great numbers, when they found their Enemies were
few, drew up the Archers and Horse that were left to defend the Town, with the
rest of the Citizens, armed as the sudden chance could furnish them, prepared
forthwith to set upon the Enemy. A Person of Age and Eminency dissuaded them
from their attemyt, saying, That though Oroondates, the Deputy, were absent,
yet it was meet first to consult with Arsace, his Wife; by which means the
Soldiers who were left, would more willingly engage. They approved his
Council, and accordingly went to the Palace, where Deputies reside in the Kings
absence. Arsace, beside the Charms of her person and stature, had great
management in affairs; such as became her Royal Blood, and the Sister of a
King: Yet for Luxury and dissolute Life, deserved no little blame. Amongst
other things, she was partly the cause of Thyamis's Banishment from Memphis.
For when Calasiris, for those mischiefs which were foretold about his Sons,
was withdrawn from the City, so long, that he was supposed to be dead, Thyamis,
as his eldest Son, was immediately invested in his place of High Priest: Arsace
immediately fixed her Eyes on him in the Temple, where, beside his youth and
comely personage, he appeared more charming with the splendid habit of his
Office. She forbore not from immodest glances and signs, which Thyamis took
little notice of, being of a chaste temper. But his Brother Petisoris, who had
already envied his Dignity, and observed the allurements of Arsace, took
occasion from thence to form a snare for his Brother. Therefore privately
addressing himself to Oroondates, did not only tell him the Inclination of
Arsace, but falsely added, That Thyamis was contracted to her. He easily
believed, being already jealous of Arsace, but as yet gave her no disturbance,
having no clear proof of his surmize; as also out of respect to the Blood
Royal, his suspicion was to be suppressed and concealed: Yet he forbore not to
threaten Thyamis with Death, till he was expelled the City, and Petisoris made
Priest in his stead. These things were formerly transacted. When now the people
were thronged about the Palace, and told her the approach of the Enemy, which
she already knew, and desired her Commands on the Soldiers; she answered, That
whereas they knew not as yet the numbers of the Enemy, nor who they were, nor
for what cause they arrived, That it were expedient first to go up to the Wall
to take a view of the Enemy, and resolve as they saw o^casion. They approved
her counsel, and went immediat^ly upon the Battlements. There, when a Rich
Pavillion was placed for Arsace, and she her self richly adorned, was seated
thereon, with her Guards in Golden Armor about her; holding out her Mace, for
an Emblem of Peaceable Treaty, she commanded the chiefs of the Enemy to
approach the Walls. Thyamis and The^genes, who were elected by the Army to go
forth, placed themselves under the Walls, covered in Armor all but their
Heads. The Herald uttered these words: Arsace, Wife of Oroondates, the
Governor; and Sister to the King; demands of you, Who you are? With what
intention, or for what cause you are come hither with your Army? They relied,
That their Troops were Bessians. Of himself, Thyamis gave this account; That he
had sustained injury from his Brother, as also from Oroondates; That he was by
Treachery deprived of the Priesthood, and that the Bessians were come to
restore him: That if he were re-setled in his right, the Bessians should return
peaceably, without doing them any damage; otherwise his Cause should be decided
by the Sword.

That Arsace for her own sake should comply, and take this opportunity of
revenging herself on Petisoris, who had practiced against, and falsely accused
her to Oroondates; and on the same pretense compassed his Banishmen^ from that
City. The Memphians were much concerned when they knew Thyamis, and we^^
hitherto ignorant in the cause of his Banishment, and believed what he
affirmed. Arsac^, above all, was seized with a Tempest or Thoughts. Her Rage
being renewed with this Remembrance of her former injuries from Petisoris, she
considered which way to revenge herself upon him. One while surveying Thyamis,
and then Theagenes, she was divided in her desire, and successively had a
passion for each: For the one a former flame, and for the other a more violent,
though kindled that moment; insomuch that her concern was perceived by her
Servants. But when she came to her self, like one from a swoon; Excellent
persons (said she) what madness has possessed you, who have not only exposed all
the Bessians, but your own beautiful selves, in behalf of Robbers; for you are
not able, if we should engage, to sustain our first Onset. The Kings affairs
are not yet reduced to that distress, though the Deputy be absent, but that you
must needs be encompassed by the remainder of his Soldiers in the City. But I
see no reason why the Public should be concerned in this difference; since
therefore the quarrel is private, let the decision be so too; so that the Gods
and Right must determine the event. It therefore seems just to me, that the
Memphians and your Forces should lie still, and not engage in a needless War.
This Judgment of Arsace was applauded with the shouts of her people. They not
only suspected Petisoris of Injustice, which they desired to see punished; but
also every one rejoiced to have his own Danger laid on another persons head.
But the Be^sian Army were not so well contented with the proposal, nor were
willing to expose their General to danger, till Thyamis with tears obtained
their consent; alleging that Petisoris was weaker, and not experienced in
Arms, so that he having been versed therein, should encounter him on advantage.
Nor is it unlikely that Arsace proposed the single Combat, to obtain, without
suspicion, what she desired; it being most probable that Thyamis would
overcome. This Resolve was no sooner mentioned than put in Action. Thyamis
cheerfully s^tting on the rest of his Armor which was wanting; Theagenes
assisting, and bracing his Helmet on, adorned with a most graceful Crest and
Plume. Petisoris in the mean time was thrust out of the Town, much entreating
them that he might decline the Fight. As soo^ as Thyamis beheld him, Do you not
see, said he to T^eag^nes, how the guilty Petisoris trembles? I perceive it,
replied he: But how have you resolved in this Encounter? The Enemy with whom
you engage is your Brother. You say true, replied he; I therefore determine, by
the Gods will, to conquer, but not kill him: Providence forbid that former rage
should so far revive in me, as to make me, for wrongs that are past, to imbrue
my hands in a Brothers Blood. You speak like a Man of Honor, replied
Theagenes, and versed in the Laws of Nature. But what Commands have you for me?
There is little danger in this Encounter (replied Thyamis;) yet since all
Events are in the hands of Fortune, if I Conquer, you shall enter this City,
and live with me in full command of my fortunes; but if otherwise it shall
happen, you shall be chief over these Bessians, that highly esteem you, till
Providence shall better compose your Affairs. This being agreed on, they
embraced each other with mutual Tears and Kisses. Theagenes sat down in the
habit in which he was, to observe the Combat; thereby (though unwittingly)
affording a full view of himself to Arsace, who feasted her wanton Eyes on his
amiable Person. Thyamis made up to Petisoris, who would not abide the first
onset, but whilst he approacht, made toward the Gate, to shelter himself in the
City: But to no purpose, being again forced out by the Citizens; the persons
likewise upon the Walls giving charge that none should receive him. He
therefore ran ^ound the Walls, and at length with part of his Arms thrown away.
Theagenes followed to see ^he event, but without Weapons, to give no ^uspicion
of assisting Thyamis; having cast dow^ his Spear and Buckler in the place where
he sat ^n sight of Arsace. Thus Petisoris twice sur^ounded the City; but making
the third round, Thyamis poising his Spear, and calling to him ^o stand, unless
he would receive a scandalous ^ound in his Back: The whole City sitting
^pectators, as it were in a Theater. The Deity, o^ Fortune, that governs humane
affairs, as in some labored Tragedy, where new events arise, had not only
placed Calasiris a Spectator at the D^el o^ his Sons, but also made him one in
chase. Who although he had su^fered so many distresses, and banished himself
into remote Countries to avoid so cruel a spectacle, yet, by the power of fate,
is comp^ll'd to see what the Gods foretold to him by their Oracles. He
therefore, from a great distance, beholding the course, perceived by what had
been revealed to him, that the two Combatants were his Sons. Wherefore, with
greater sp^^d than old Age would well permit, he hastened toward them, to
prevent, if possible, their actual engagement: Approaching so near as to bear
up with them; What madness is this, O my Children, he often cried out? But they
not yet knowing their Fathers countenance, he being disguised in Beggars habit;
their whole mind being taken up with the business in hand, neglected him, as
one of the Spectators, or some person distracted. But those who were on the
Walls admired that he took no care of himself, but came between the Combatants,
while others laughed at him, as a frantic man. When therefore the old man was
sensible that he was unknown through the meanness of his Garb, he threw on his
outward poor Disguise; discovering his Sacred hair, not yet unwreath'd; the
Burden which he carried on his back, with the Bow^ being cast away, he renewed
his Prayers, and with Tears uttered these words; O Sons, (said he) behold
Calasiris, behold your Father, and desist from this fury, which, with ill fate,
you have begun; and pay just reverence to the presence of your aged Father.

At this they relented, and not only fell, but threw themselves headlong at his
Feet, embracing his Knees, they looked up to his Face, to assure themselves if
it were he, and that they were not deceived by some Spectre. As soon as they
were confirmed, they were seized with various and contrary affections. They
were overjoyed to see their Father alive, beyond their hopes or expectation,
and were no less troubled for the manner in which he apprehended them; and,
above all, were sollicitous of the event in this accident. While the persons
from the Walls were beholding this Scene, and almost astonished, through
Ignorance of the matter, so that they stood mute and motionless as Statues,
behold another turn in the Scene arose: Chariclea following the steps of
Calasiris, while from afar off she knew Theagenes (for Lovers have ^harp sight)
transported with the view, with a close Embrace, hanging on his Neck, had no
breath left to speak to him. But he, as it is likely, by her poor Dress and
Face, disdained her, thinking her some Vagabond among the Crowd of Spectators,
put her from him; and at last, when she would not desist, and vexed to be
hindered from the Scene of Calasiris, pushed her away: She, with a low voice,
cried, O Pythius, have you forgot this Taper? The^genes struck with that word,
as with a Thunderbolt, by the signs agreed on between them, knew the Torch,
and tran^ported with t^^ sight of Chariclea, her Beauty now shining out, as
through a Cloud, he threw himself upon he^ Neck. The whole Battl^ments (where
Arsace sat, who surveyed Chariclea not without Je^lousie) were surpised at
this Scene of won^erful representation. The ^ire contest betwee^ the Brothers
is taken off, and the Battle, which was expected to be of bloody consequence^
concludes in a happy Agr^^ment. The Father, who had beheld his Sons armed
against each other, insomuch that his Eyes were a^most made witnesses of his
Childrens unnatural death, is now Ar^iter of Peace ^etween them. He that could
avoid not their necessary destiny, makes now no less ad^antag^ of Fortune. The
Children recover their Paren^^ after ten years loss, and he that was the cause
o^ their bloody strife for the Priesthood, is now himself Crowned by the
Rivals, and led alon^ in the Sacred Robes. But the shining parts i^ the Comedy
were Theagenes and Chari^lea most beautiful figures; who, beyond all hopes had
now recovered each other; and above al^ the rest, drew the eyes of the City
upon them The Inhabitants issued through the Gates, an^ ^illed the Plain with
their numbers; the younger sort repairing to Theagenes, and the elder thronging
to Thyamis; the Virgins that were Marriagable, went over to Chariclea: So that
a kind of Religious Pr^cession was immediately constituted. Thyamis in the mean
time dismissing the B^ssians, with thanks for the kindness that they showed
him; he likewise divided Presents amongst them, an hundred Oxen and a thousand
Sheep, with promise of ten Drachms apiece, in little time to be sent after them.

He then put his Neck under his aged Fathers Arms to support him, languishing
with years, and at present with excess of Joy. Petisoris on the other side did
the same. Thus was the old Man carried to the Temple of Isis, surrounded with
Applause and Congratulations; Pipes and Sacred Flutes resounding all the way,
that set the younger sort a Dancing. Arsace also performed her part, following
the Pomp with he^ Train, and putting much Gold into the Temple of Isis, for an
Example to the rest of the City. In the mean time, while Theagenes led
Chariclea by the hand, officiously keeping off the press from her, he
administered no small Jealousy to Arsac^. Calasiris went into the inward part
of the Temple, where falling prostrate before the Images, he almost expired in
the adoration. But being recovered by the standers by, as soon as he could
stand upright, and had paid his Reverence to the Goddess, he took the Wreath
from his Brow and placed it on the Head of Thyamis; telling the Multitude, That
he was old, that the Ensigns of Priesthood were due to his eldest Son, who also
was qualified to sustain that Office. When the people had with shouts approved
his pleasure, he, with his two Sons and Theagenes, repaired to that part of the
Temple which is assigned to the Priesthood: The rest departed every one to his
house. Arsace likewise went away, but not without delays, and turning back
again, as it were, to perform homage to the Goddess. All the while casting her
Eyes toward Theagenes, as long as she could have sight of him. After she was
returned to the Palace, she betook her to her Apartment, where she threw
herself upon her Bed, without uttering one word. A Woman las^ivious in her
temper, but now with the surpassing beauty of Theagenes, in^lam'd to a degre^
beyond wh^^ she had yet been sensible of. She therefore continued waking all
night, turning from one side to the other, sighing deeply, sometimes rising up,
and then throwing her self down upon her Bed again. She often hastily called
her Attendants to her, then sent them away again without any Commands for them.
In fine, this passion had distracted her, but for an old Woman, Cybele by name,
the keeper of her Cabinet, and former Servant of her Love-intrigues. She
guessed the affair, and came into the Chamber, as it were a Torch, adding fire
to her flame. Madam, said she, what frenzy is this? What new passion transports
you? What Persons Aspect has disturbed my Charge? Who is so vain and hardy, as
not to be taken with that Beauty, and not account such an enjoyment the
greatest happiness? tell me, my dear Daughter; for there is none so obstinate,
as not to be vanquished by my Stratagems. You have already had good proof
thereof. These words, and many more to this purpose uttered she, embracing the
Feet of Arsace, and soothing her into Confession. O Mother, replied Arsace,
after a little pause, I have now received a deeper wound than ever; I have
often found your skill successful in these affairs, but know not now what it
can do. The War which was this day almost begun before our Wall, proved
unbloody to others, but to me the beginning of a more fatal War, wherein I am
wounded to the very Soul; in unfortunately showing me the youth that
accompanied Thyamis during the Combat. You know, Mother, whom I speak of; for
with the splendor of his Beauty he soon clouded all the rest, discovering no
mean Birth, nor Aversion to Love. This your Judgment cannot be ignorant of:
Wherefore, since you know my grief, it is high time to set all your Engines to
work; to employ all your Art and Industry if you would have your Daughter to
survive. For of what use is Life, without enjoyment of the person whom I
affect. I know the youth (replied the old Woman;) He that is full Breasted, his
Neck erect, his Eyes sparkling, and at once displaying Love and Severity; with
fair and well-ordered Hair, his Cheeks just budding with youthful down; to whom
a certain Damsel, not disagreeable, but excessive impudent, approached, and
cast her Arms about him: Is not this your Man, Lady? The very same, Mother: And
you have well brought into my mind that domestic Creature, who yet is far
happier than I, in possession of such a Lover. At this the Old Woman smiling,
replied, Be of good heart, and lay aside care, Madam; It is but for a day that
she is held beautiful by the stranger; but when I bring it about that he shall
enjoy your Beauty, that sordid Harlot shall be despised. Do so, my dear Cybele,
and you will at once ease me of a double grief, Love and Jealousy. Leave that
to my care (said she) in the mean time it is your part to compose your self
with good hopes, and not to despair of my work before I begin. Having thus
said, she went away, taking the light with her, and making fast the Door.
Arsace no sooner perceived daylight, but she called one of her Eunuchs,
together with her Woman, to whom she gave little Cakes, and sent them to do
Sacrifice at the Temple. When they came to the Gates, and told the Doorkeeper
their business, That they were come to do Sacrifice for Arsace, who had that
night been troubled in Dreams; the Officer forbad their entrance, acquainting
them, That the Temple was at present full of Sorrow: That the High Priest
Calasiris, the last evening, enlarging his Soul in cheerfulness, and after the
Banquet made long supplications to the Goddess: Then telling his Sons, That
hitherto they had seen their Father; and giving them strict Charge concerning
the two Grecian strangers, he betook himself to his Bed. After thi^, whether
his pores were too much dilated through excess of joy, or worn out with Age, or
by the fixed decree of the Gods, about Cockcrow he expired, in presence of his
Sons, who watched him. We have now sent Messengers to assemble the Priesthood
of the City, to perform those Funeral Rites, which, according to our Custom,
are due to him. You must therefore depart; for it is not lawful for any Person
to enter the Temple, or do Sacrifice for these seven days but only the Priests.
What then must become of the two strangers, said Cybele, during this time?

Our new Prelate Thyamis, (said the Officer) has commanded a Lodging to be
prepared for them without the Temple; and behold where they are now in
obedience, going forth out of the Temple. Cybele having got this lucky
opportunity, thus again bespeaks the Officer; O Friend, beloved of the Gods, it
is in your power to do this young Couple a courtesy, but a much greater to
Arsace, the Kings Sister. You know how she favors Grecians, and uses
hospitality to strangers: Tell them therefore, that by Command of Thyamis, an
apartment is provided for them in the Palace. The Officer did as she commanded,
being sensible of no harm, but thinking to do the persons a kindness, in
assisting their Reception to the Palace. Coming therefore up to Theagenes and
Chariclea, drowned in Tears; You are to blame, said he, having been commanded
to the contrary, thus to bewail the death of the High Priest, whereas our
Divine Laws enjoin us to rejoice for the consummation of his happiness.
However, you are partly to be excused, having lost (as you say) your Father and
Patron: Yet ought you not altogether to despond, since his Son Thyamis, as you
see, succeeds him in the Priesthood, and is no less your friend. He has given
charge in the first place concerning you, and ordered you a dwelling, to which
persons of the first Rank are proud to be received, and therefore well may
strangers be so, who seem of no extraordinary fortune. Follow therefore this
Lady (pointing to Cy^^l^) and obey her, as a common Parent to you both.
Theagenes did as he said, whether o^^^c^m^ by the sudden accident, that, like a
storm, f^ll upon him, or in such a state of affairs was content with any
mansion. I presume he would have taken care of himself had he suspected the
mischief which that Residence was likely to bring upon him. But the fate that
governed them after it had allowed them one days ^efreshment, immediately
followed it with misfortune; making them Prisoners to their Enemy, though under
appearance of Hospitality. When therefore they were come to the Deputies house,
where all appeared too stately for an^ p^^^ate person; with Guards, and
attending Cour^^ers; w^o all we^e surpised at this (...) (^s it seemed to
them) of the strangers. They we^e followed by Cyb^le, encouraging them to be of
good heart, and exp^^t the performance of her promise. At last, ^^inging them
into her own Apartment, the rest of the company being shut out, she sat her
self down by them, and thus expressed herself: O my Children, said she, I know
the occasion of your grief, which is conceived for the Death of Calasiris,
worthily honored by you as a Father: But it is now needful that you unfold
your selves to me: who you are, and from whence. That you are Greeks I know,
and of good Parentage, I easily conjecture by your appearance. Your generous
countenance and form assure me of your Birth; but from which Greece you come,
and for what c^^se you wandered, and arrived here, I desire to understand,
intending your good thereby; as also that I may acquaint Arsace my Lady, and
Wife to our Deputy, with the particulars of your Affairs; for she is famous for
hospitality to strangers, an^, of all Nations, an admirer of the Greeks, for
the elegance of their manners: by which means you shall come into her Presence
with Advantage. Neither shall you declare your self to a Woman that is
a^together a stranger, for I my self am a Greek, Lesbia the place of my Birth;
brought Captive hither, but to the improvement of my Fortune. I am Chief Agent
for my Lady, she breathes not without me; I am her very Soul, and bring worthy
Persons into her Acquaintance.

Theagenes comparing what was now spoken by Cybele, with what had happened the
day before, and the immodest gestures of Arsace, was about to answer, when
Chariclea said to him in his ear, be sure in your discourse to remember your
Sister. He understanding what she meant by that suggestion, said; You know,
Mother, already that we are Greeks; but I must further inform you that we are
likewise Brother and Sister: Who, in s^arch of our Parents, that were taken
away by Pirates, have our selves sustained worse fortune, by falling into the
hands of worse men^ Robbed of our Treasure, and scarce escaping with Life, we
met, by Providence, with Calasiris, with whom we designed to lead the rest of
our Life: But he being now expired, we are left desolate, and the second time
deprived of a Father. This is the po^ture of our Affai^s. But to you we return
our just Thanks for your Courteous Hospitality; however, you will yet lay a
greater obligation upon us, if you cause us to live retired and private, not
introducing us into the Court, or acquaintance with Arsace; for such
familiarities, you know, are most fitting amongst Equals. Cybele could no
longer contain, but by the cheerfulness of her countenanc^, discovered her joy
to hear they were Relations; that therefore Chariclea would be no Obstacle to
Arsac^'s Desires. O lovely Youth (said she) you will not speak this of Arsace
when you know her humor: She carries herself equally to all fortunes, and with
particular favor to dignity in distress: Being herself a Persi^n by Birth, she
naturally admires the People and Manners of Greece. Wherefore take heart, and
assure your self of all manly Offices about her, while Chariclea shall be her
Intimate and Companion. But it is necessary that you tell me your Names. Which
when she had heard, she desired them to wait her return; and so hastened to
Arsace, leaving Orders with the Doorkeeper, That none should be suffered to go
in to them, nor the Strangers to go out. Not if your own Son Achemenes come
(said the person?) Not even he, replied the other: Lock the door, and say I
have taken the Key with me. Even thus it happened; Cybele was no sooner
departed, but left opportunity to Theagenes and Chariclea to bewail their
misfortunes, which they did in almos^ (...) words. O Theagenes, said she; O
Ch^r^cl^a, h^ answered, with an equal sigh^ that fo^tune has beset us, said he!
In wha^ (...) ar^ our a^fairs, a^swer'd she! Thus (...) they t^ each, kissing
and mutually em^^acing after ^very ^entence: At last calling to ^ind Calasiris,
they broke out into a joint Comp^aint: chiefly Chariclea, as having for a
longer time been obliged to his Hospitality: O good Cal^siris, said she, how am
I in thee deprived o^ a Daughters name. The Father who begot me I never knew,
the Father that adopted me I forsook; and lastly, this that received,
cherished, and preserved me, is now a dead Corpse, to which I am not permitted
so much as to pay Funeral Rites. Yet, my Sustainer and Preserver, nay, I will
add Father; wherever I am confined, I will make just Libations with my Tears,
and pay these Offerings: Herewith she plucked off her Hair, and threw it on the
floor. Theagenes entreated her to spare her self and be pacified; yet she went
on^ with her Complaint. To what purpose should I now live, what hope is left?
My Guide in this strange Land, the Staff of my Pilgrimage, my leader to my
Native Soil; he that performed the Office of Parent; my Adviser in Distress,
the Repeller of my Misfortunes, the Anchor of my Hopes, Calasiris, is gone.
While she uttered these Lamentations, Theagenes wept apart, and restrained as
much as he could his grief, in pity to his Mistress. By this time Achemenes
arrived, and finding the Door locked, asked the Doorkeeper the reason: When he
knew 'twas by his Mothers Order, he went to the Door, where he heard Chariclea
lamenting, and looked through the chinks into the Chamber. Again he enquires of
the Doorkeeper; who said, She supposed they were two strangers brought in
thither by his Mother. He then stooped down again, to try if he could know
them. Chariclea he knew not, yet was taken with her Beauty; which he thought
how great it was when not disguised with Grief. From Admiration he falls into
Love. As for Theagenes, he could but guess at him. While he was thus intent,
Cybele returns, having told all to her Mistress concerning the young Couple;
commending that good fortune that had better crowned her desires, than the
wisest Councils could have done; to plant the person she loved in the same
house with her. Having thus enflamed Arsace with desire of seeing Theagenes,
she yet withheld her, being disordered with want of Sleep, till she had
rested, and would appear with better Advantage.

Leaving her thus satisfied, and in good expectation of the event, and resolved
on what method to take with the Strangers, she returned. What is it, Son, said
she, that you so curiously enquire after? What Strangers are those within,
(said he) and from whence? I may not inform you, said Cybele, nor must you tell
what you know, nor converse with the S^rangers. He obeyed his Mother,
suspecting The^g^n^s to be reserved for Arsace's service; but is not this the
person (said he within himself as he depa^ted) who was rescued from me by the
B^^^ians, when he was delivered to me by Mitranes, to conduct him to
Oroo^dates, who was to ^end him to our great King? In which attempt my Life was
in danger, and I only escaped of those that guarded him? Do my Eyes deceive me?
I have heard also that Thyamis is arrived, and has fought in single Duel with
his Brother for the Priesthood. It is certainly the same Person. But at present
I must conc^al the discovery, and observe Arsac^'s proceedings with the
Strangers. These were his private sentiments. Cybele in the mean time entering
in upon them, perceived what had past: For although at the opening of the Doors
they endeavored to compose themselves, yet they could not conceal their Grief
from the subtle old Lady; their Cheeks being still moist with Tears. She
therefore cried out, O my dear Children, why do you thus take on? When you
ought to rejoice, and congratulate your good fortune: The most excellent Arsace
contrives all things for your satisfaction; and has consented that to morrow
you shall be brought into her Presence: Wherefore you must put away these
Childish Lamentations; it is meet for you to compose your selves, and be
obedient to her Pleasure. The Death of Calasiris (said Theagenes) raised this
sorrow, in whom we have lost a Fathers protection. You trifle, said Cybele;
Calasiris was but your personated Father, and is expired, according to the Laws
of Age and Nature. All things are restored to you in one Person; Riches,
Pleasures; adore A^sace as your good fortune. Only be ruled by me in what
manner you are to approach her (since she has so commanded) and what measures
you must take in what she shall command. You know her Spirit is great, as being
elevated by Quality and Beauty, and such as will not bear Contempt, in any
thing that she shall enjoin.

While Theagenes stood silent, as conjecturing the flagitious meaning, the
Eunuchs entered, ^ringing in Golden Chargers, the Remains of ^he Royal Banquet,
that exceeded in Cost and Delicacy: When they had set them on the Ta^le,
saying, That their Lady, in honor to the ^trangers, had so commanded, they
departed: ^et, to omit no part of their Office, they first ^asted of every
Dish. The same was done in the Evening. The next Morning the same E^^uchs
coming to Theagenes, said, You are called ^or (O happy man) by our Lady, and we
are ^ommanded to bring you into her Presence: ^o therefore, to enjoy that
Happiness which is ^ermitted to very few, and to those very sel^om. He paused a
while, and then unwillingly rising up, Am I only commanded to go, or my Sister
here with me? Only you at present (said they) she being afterward to come by
her self. There are now certain Persian Noble^ with Arsace: It is her manner to
speak wit^ Men apart, and with Women afterward apar^ also. T^eagenes bowing,
said softly to Chariclea, These things are neither honest, nor their meaning
unsuspected by me: When she whispered to him again, That he ought not to
disobey, but seem willing to perform her Pleasure in all things, he followed
them forth. When they told him after what manner she was to be accosted; how he
ought to adore her at his entrance, he answer^d nothing. ^ut going in, and
finding her seated on a Tribunal, ^dorn'd in a Purple Robe, Embroidered with
Gold, Bracelets on her Arms, and a Rich Tiar^ on her Head, the Guards standing
round, and the Nobles seated on each s^de, his mind was not moved in the least;
but as forgetting what was agreed on between himself and Chariclea, his Spirit
was the more exalt^d against the Pride (...) this Persian Pageant. Therefore,
neither bending his Knee, no^ adoring her, with an erect countenance, he said;
Save you, Arsace, of Roya^ Blood. While those that were present were enraged,
and mu^mur'd at Theagenes's audaciou^ Entrance without the usual Adoration. You
must excuse him, (said Ars^ce smiling) as ^ stranger to our Customs; and as a
Grecian, prejudiced against them. Withal, she put off her Tiara, though much
prohibited by the Attendants; for this is the Persians way of returning respect
to them that salute them. When, by her Interpreter, (for though she understood
the Greek Tongue she could not speak it) she had bid him be of good cheer; to
demand any thing he needed; beckning to her Eunuchs, she dismissed him. He was
attended forth by the Guards, among whom, Achemenes, having here seen him
again, knew him more exactly; and suspecting the cause of the extraordinary
honor done to him, yet concealed his thoughts, resolving within himself what
to do. Arsace continued to receive the Persian Nobles and Magistrates with such
Magnificence, pretending respect to them, while the true cause of her holding
the Banquet was to have discourse with Theagenes; to whom she not only sent the
choicest Dainties, but richest Presents, Tapestrys and Carpets of diverse
Colors, wrought at Sydon and Lydia. She likewise sent Servants to attend them;
a young Maiden to Chariclea, and a Youth o^ Ionia to Theagenes: Very much
urging Cybele to finish her Design with celerity, for that she could no longer
sustain the violence of her Passion: Nor was she negligent in trying all ways
to compass Theagenes. Indeed she told him not Arsace's Desire in express words,
but with circumlocution gave him to understand; magnifying the Bounty of Arsace
toward him; setting before his Eye^ not only those Beauties which appeared in
her, but likewise those that were concealed: Then she extolled her humor, that
was affable and obliging, and the esteem that she had for Youths of noble
Expectation. In short, she made trial by all she said how he stood affected to
the Delights of Venus. Theagenes acknowledged her Bounty toward him, her love
to the Grecian customs; and on all accounts returned her Thanks and Praise. But
for the drift of her wil^s he seemed to take no noti^e. The Old Lady therefore
was stung, to think that he understood her intention, but despised and repelled
her attempts. She knew Ar^ace would bear no longer delays, but exact
performance of her promise; she therefore put her off with pretenses, sometimes
saying that the Youth was timorous, and sometimes that ill Accidents had
happened. When therefore the fifth and sixth days were past, in which Arsace
had again called Cha^iclea to her, and, to gratify Theagenes, treated her with
all imaginable courtesy, she was forced to speak more plainly with Theagenes;
to tell him her Ladies passion, assuring him of ten thousand advantages if he
assented. Why are you (said she) so averse to Love? A Youth so beautiful, in
the spring of his Age, beloved by an equal Beauty, yet esteems not the good
fortune: Especially when no danger attends, the Husband being absent, and I
(who have bred her, and know all her secrets) having the management of the
affair. On your own part, there can be no impediment, having neither Mistress
nor Wife. Though many have despised even these considerations, and thought they
did not therein wrong their Domestic concerns; but took the opportunity at
once of making their fortune, and enjoying their pleasure. Lastly, she mingled
Threats with Arguments; saying, That the most obliging Women conceive the
greatest displeasure, when disappointed, and severely revenge the neglect.
Think with your self, That this Lady is a Persian, and of Princely Blood, as
you have acknowledged; with what Power she is vested; so that at her pleasure
she may reward her Favorites with greatest Honors, and punish those that
disoblige her. For your part, you are a stranger here, deserted, and have none
to succor you. Take pity both on your self and her. She is worthy of your
Compassion, since you were Author of her pain, and it is for you she
languishes. At least, fear a Lovers Rage, and beware of that Revenge which
follows Contempt. I have known many of your temper, who have repented too late.

I have greater Experience in these matters than you: These hairs are grown
gray in the Employment; but so obstinate and incorrigible a Youth I never yet
met withal. Then turning to Chariclea (of necessity indeed she hearing all this
discourse) and do you, Daughter, (said she) advise this Brother of yours,
though I know not if he deserve that title. This business will also turn to
your advantage; you will be never the less loved by him; you shall have all
Honors conferred on you; be made as rich as you please, and advanced to a most
Honorable Marriage. These things are to be wished for by happy persons, not by
the Destitute, and Strangers. But Chariclea, looking angrily and earnestly upon
her, It were to be wished, said she, on all accounts, that Arsace suffered
under no such passion, at least that she could moderate her desires; but since
humanity is liable to such frailty, and that she is overpowered, I would my
self counsel Theagenes not to refuse, if it may be with safety; lest it come to
light, by some Accident, to her undoing, by the Deputies knowledge of it.
Cybele leapt for^^ at these words, Kissing and Embracing Chariclea; Well
spoken, Daughter, (said she) this is agreeable to Nature, that you, who are a
Woman, should pity the sufferings of a Woman, and take care for your Brothers
safety. But on this account there is no reason why you should fear, since the
Sun himself shall not be privy to it. Desist at present, said Theagenes, and
give us a little time to deliberate. Cybele immediately went out. O Theagenes,
(began Chariclea) the Gods give us such successes, as bring with them greater
Misfortune than the Happiness: Which since it is so, it is the part of Prudence
to make the best of bad Circumstances. Whether or no you resolve in your self
on this thing I know not, but if you think the proposal dishonest and unworthy,
feign a compliance, and sooth the Impati^nce of the Barbarian with expectation,
lest she determine something fatal against us. It Is probable that a little time
(if you can delay her hopes) will afford us some Remedy. But, O Theagenes, take
care l^st the Contemplation betray into a Desire. To which Theagenes answered,
with a smile, Neither have you in your distress escaped that Female Distemper,
Jealousy. But know that I cannot so much as dissemble, or make a pretense in
such an affair; to act or say, in unlawful things, is alike to generous minds.
If Arsace despair, there will be, at least, this advantage in it, that we shall
no more be troubled with her solicitations. But if I must suffer, both my past
fortune, and temper of mind, have inured me to bear what shall be put upon me.
Chariclea said no more, only desired him to take notice into what mischief they
must inevitably be brought.

While they were thus taken up, Cybele having encouraged Arsace to good hope,
for that Theagenes had expressed so much, returned to the Apartment; where
passing over that night in Civilities to Chariclea, whom also she made her
Bedfellow; next morning she again asked Theagenes, What he resolved? When he
manifestly refused her, and bid her expect no such compliance: She returned
sorrowful to Arsace. When she had told her Theagenes Cruelty, Arsace pushed her
forth headlong, and running into her Closet, threw herself on her Bed, tearing
her Clothes and Hair. Achemen^s had no sooner spied his Mother coming forth
sad and weeping, but he asked her the reason; If any Mischief had happened, and
any ill news disturbed her Lady? If Oroondates had lost the Battle? And many
more such questions. You trifle (said she) and so went on. He nevertheless
intermitted not, but taking her by the hand, begged her to acquaint her Son
with her trouble: She therefore permitting him to lead her, went into a private
part of the Garden. I would, said she, to no other person discover my Ladies
sufferings; but since her life is at stake, and I know her fury will return
upon my head, I am compelled to speak: If poss^bly you can contrive any help
for her that brought thee into the light, and nursed thee with these Breasts.
She is desperately in love with a certain Youth; her passion is invincible; and
after hopeful expectation, both she and I have found our labor frustrated.
From hence proceeded these manifold favors expressed to the Strangers. But
since the foolish Youth is intractable, I fear she will not live, and know my
own Death to be certain. This is the distressed estate of our affairs. If you
can give any relief, do it quickly; if not, prepare your Mothers Funeral. But
what Reward shall I have, Mother, said he; for it is not seasonable to tell you
at large how far I can be serviceable, whilst you are in this disorder, and
almost expiring. You shall have whatever you will desire, said Cybele: You are
already made, on my account, her Chief Cup Bearer: If there is any further
preferment which you would have, demand it: The Riches shall be without measure
which you shall have, if you preserve her. I neither ask Preferment nor Wealth,
said he; let her only give the Maid, who is called the Sister of Theagenes, for
my Wife, and all things shall succeed to her desire. I am passionately in love
with the Virgin: Wherefore our Lady laboring with the same passion, will more
readily gratify my Desires, especially for so great a Service. Doubt it not,
said Cybele; besides, I may privately prevail with the Virgin on your behalf.
But tell me, What method do you propose? I shall not tell it, said he, till my
Lady has promised me with Oath; nor do you till then attempt any thing with the
Virgin; lest by precipitance you destroy all, she being, as I perceive, of a
great Spirit.

Hereupon she returned to Arsace, and throwing herself at her Feet, desired her
to take comfort, all things shall do well, only be pleased to call my Son
Achemenes into your Presence. Let him be called, said Arsace; but take care you
do not again deceive me. Achemenes therefore entered; and when Arsace, in
express words, had sworn to him, That he should Marry the Sister of Theagenes:
Then, said he, trouble not your self, your Authority over Theagenes is
absolute, let the Slave take care how he behaves himself to his Mistress. How
mean you, said she? When she had thus asked, he told her all that had past;
That he had been ta^en, and was her Captive and Bondman, by right of War: That
Mitranes had sent him to him, to send him again to Oroondates, who was to
convey him to the King: That he was rescued from him, on the way, by the
Bessians and Thyamis: That he hardly escaped with Life: And above all, produced
before Arsace the Letters of Mitranes. If there were need of farther Arguments,
Thyamis should confirm it. Arsace hereupon was a little revived, and going from
her Apartment to the Presence Chamber; where she was wont, on her Tribunal, to
determine public affairs: She commanded Theagenes to be brought before her.
When he was brought, she asked him if he knew Achemenes, who stood by him? He
confessing it; she farther asked, If he had taken him Prisoner? Theagenes
acknowledging that also; You are therefore my Slave, said she, ^and must be at
my disposal. I betroth your Sister to Achemenes; who not only for his Mothers,
but for his own services deserves highly from me: I should only so far defer
it, till the requisite preparations for the Nuptials can be made. Theagenes was
herewith struck, as with a Thunderbolt, yet resolved not to contradict, but
cunningly decline her fury. O Madam, said he, we are obliged to the Gods, that
since we are born of noble blood, we have yet the comfort in our Misfortunes,
to become your Servants: To you, who exercise such courtesy toward Strangers.
But for my Sister, since she was not your Captive, she cannot be made to serve;
yet she has resolved in all things to obey; do therefore what you shall judge
to be right. You shall be placed, said Arsace, among the Waiters on our Table,
and learn the Art of Cup-bearing, to practice the Royal Service beforehand.

They went forth from her Presence; Theagenes with a thoughtful Countenance,
Achemenes receiving him with scoffs: Behold, said he insulting, that you, who
lately were so insolent, who thought your self the only free man, who disdained
to bow your Head, and pay reverence, what you are now come to. Arsace in the
mean time sending the rest away, said to Cybele alone, Now Cybele tell this
proud youth, that if he will submit to our pleasure, he shall have his freedom,
and live in wealth and plenty; but if he continues obstinate, I will use him
like my Slave, and impose on him the vilest Service and Punishments. Cybele
came to him with the commands of Arsace, adding also to her words what she
thought convenient. Theagenes asking a little respite, said to Chariclea apart;
O Chariclea, our affairs are at an end; every Cable, every Anchor of Hope is
cut off; our very Liberty is now taken away; we are Servants to Barbarians, and
doomed to suffer whatever they will impose. Yet even these things were
tolerable, but Arsace has promised you in Marriage to Achemenes, the Son of
Cybele; which shall either never be, or at least seen by me while I am Master
of a Sword. But what is to be done? What contrivance can be found to free me
from the detested Embrace of Arsace, and you from Achemenes? Yet methinks I
have a sudden thought, as necessity is fruitful in Invention: Then turning to
Cybele, Tell your Lady, said he, that I desire to speak with her alone, and in
private.

The Old Lady imagining Theagenes to have consented, ran to Arsace; and being
commanded to bring him after Supper, she accordingly did so: Commanding the
Attendants to leave their Lady to her Rest, and clear her Lodgings, she brought
Theagenes into her Bedchamber. The rest of the Apartments were all made dark,
her Bedchamber only had a Lamp in it.

Cybele would have withdrawn her self, but Theagenes forbad her, saying, That
she must be present; I know that she is good at keeping Secrets; and with that,
taking Arsace by the hand; O Lady, said he, I from the first deferred your
Commands only till I might with safety, obey you: But now, since Fortune, by
particular favor, has declared me your Servant, I am much more forward to obey
you in all things. Whereas therefore you have promised me many Courtesies, I
beg but one instead of all, that you would revoke the Marriage of Chariclea and
Achemenes: For, not to mention other things, it is unfit that she, being of
Noble Birth, should be wedded to a Servant. Otherwise, I Swear by the brightest
of Deities, the Sun, that I will never comply with your demands; and before I
will see any violence offered to Chariclea, I will die by my own hand. You
cannot but think me willing to gratify you in any thing (said Arsace) who am
ready to deliver up my self to you; but I have already sworn to give your
Sister to Achemenes. It is well, Madam, said he; give him my Sister if you
please, but her whom I make love to, who is my Betrothed, and indeed my Wife,
you neither will, nor can bestow upon him. How say you! Cried Arsace: The
matter answers it sel^, said he, for Chariclea is not my Sister, but my Spouse;
wherefore you are freed from your Oath: This you may also confirm, whenever
you shall be pleased to perfect the Nuptials between her and me. Arsace was
stung with Jealousy to hear that Chariclea was not his Sister, but his Spouse:
Yet be it as you will, said she, we shall make Achemenes amends by some other
Match. I shall likewise answer your desires, said Theagenes, when you have
nulled this Promise. With these words he bowed, as to kiss her hand, but she
stooping, received the salute upon her Lips: Theagenes then took leave of her.
As soon as he could, he acquainted Chariclea with what had past, (who heard him
not without some Jealousy) how all was compassed by one means; the Nuptials
with Achemenes broken, time gained to divert the solicitations of Arsace; and
what would crown all, that Achemenes would put things into Commotion, enraged
at his disappointment, and to see me preferred to him in the favor of Arsace:
That nothing would be concealed from him, his Mother giving him the
Intelligence: For I took care, for that reason, to have her present, as also
for a witness of our Conversation. It is to be expected (added he) that
Achemenes will lay snares for Arsace: a Slave by Birth (who have a natural
inveteracy against their Superiors) especially being injured, and defrauded of
her promise; seeing also others preferred before him, and being conscious to
her practices, so that there is no need of forged Inventions, there being
sufficient grounds of truth to work upon.

Having thus spoken to Chariclea, and advised her to take some hope, he was the
next day b^ought by Achemenes to minister at the Table: For this was enjoined
by Arsace; and he was clothed in the Vestment which she fent him, adorned with
Golden Wreaths, Bracelets, and Gemms. While Achem^nes offered to show him the
manner of his Office, Theagenes ran to the Side-board, where the Golden Cups
stood, and taking one up, I have no need of Teachers, said he, but I will serve
my own Lady after my own way. Fortune has well obliged you, to be skilled in
such Offices, but Nature and Occasion shall instruct me what is to be done:
Then lightly pouring forth, he bore the Cup to Arsace. This d^aught more
pleased her than usually, at once sipping of the Bowl, and fixing her Eyes on
Theagenes, drinking deeper of Love than Wine. Achem^nes was doubly wounded,
filled at once with Rage and Emulation, so that Arsace herself perceived his
frown, and heard his murmurings to the standers by. When the Banquet was done,
I have one favor to beg, said Theagenes, That you would please, Madam, to
order me always to perform my Office in this Robe. Arsace consenting, he
resumed his own dress, and went forth: A^hemenes went along with him,
upbraiding his insolence, and urging, That his Mistress excused his first
neglect, as being Ignorant, and a Stranger; but that for the future she would
not suffer it. This, says he, I tell you as a Friend, and one whose Sister, by
my Ladies promise, is to be my Wife; with many more things to this purpose. But
Theagenes, as not hearing him, went forward, with his Eyes fixed on the ground,
till Cybele met him, as she was returning to lay her Lady on her Bed in the
heat of the Day. Seeing her Son disturbed, she demanded the reason. This young
Stranger, said he, is preferred before me, for the Beauty of his Person, and
officiates in my stead; and this not without contempt of us that formerly had
the Honor.

But these matters we shall at another time have leisure to discourse; in the
mean time, Mother, I desire to solace my Grief by Marriage with Chariclea. What
Marriage, Son, said Cybele? You seem to me concerned for light troubles, and
yet neglect greater: You shall not now have Chariclea for your Wife. What say
you? answered he, am I not worthy to marry my fellow Servant? For what reason,
Mother? For my sake, said she, and my too much service to Arsace: For after my
preferring her to my own safety, and serving her pleasure, this Stranger at his
first admission into her Chamber, was so much regarded, that he immediately
prevailed with her to break her Oath to you; and to consent that Chariclea
should be wedded to him, and not with you; she not being his Sister, but his
Mistress. Has she promised him, Mother? She has, my Son, in my presence and
hearing; and will accordingly celebrate their Nuptials in few days: but for you
she designs another Match. Achemenes at this sighing deeply, and wringing his
hands, said, I shall render the Marriage fatal to them all; only do you assist
me, by delaying the Nuptials for a time: and if any enquiry be made after me,
say that I remain sick in the Country. The Stranger calls his Sister his Spouse
only to break off the Marriage with me: though if he should Embrace, Kiss her,
or Sleep with her, I shall never believe but she ^s his Sister. This business
belongs to my Care, and to the Gods, whose Honor is violated.

Thus spoke he, being at once incensed with Jealousy, Love and Disappointment,
(which things are sufficient to make a person troublesome, that were not
barbarous) not weighing his Resolves by Reason, but taking the first heat, he
mounted an Armenian Courser, that belonged to the Deputy, and posted away to
Oroondates, then mustering a great Army at Thebes, against the AEthiopians;
collecting all manner of Strength for the Enterprise, and ^ow ready to March.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Eighth Book.
FOR when the King of AEthiopia had by Stratagem defeated Oroondates, and
obtained the half of what they contended for, making himself Master of Philae;
he at last reduced him to those shifts, that he was forced to retreat by
stealth, and in disorder. The City Philae is situate on the Nile, a little
above the Cataracts; and distant from Siene and Elephantina about twelve miles
and a half. This City being formerly taken, and possessed by Egyptian Outlaws,
drew on a contest for the same between the Egyptians and AEthiops. The
AEthiops pretending the Borders of AEthiopia to stretch as far as the
Cataracts^ and the Egyptians lay claim to it, on account of their Outlaws
inhabiting there. This City was successively in the power of the one o^ other,
according as they could soonest attack it; but at this time it had a Garrison
of Egyptians and Persians. The Ethiopian King, by Embassy, demanded Phile of
Oroondates, and the Precious Mines of Smaragdus: Which being denied, he
commanded his Legates to go a few days journey before him, saying, That he
would follow after, when he had made preparations, but acquainted none whither
he intended. When he supposed the Legates to be arrived at Philae, where they
were to lull the Inhabitants into security, under pretense o^ coming to make a
Peace with them, he himself came suddenly upon the City, and beat out the
Guards, who were not able to hold out against the Number of the Enemy, and
Engines, with which they battered the Walls, with no damage at all to the
Townsmen.

Achemenes finding Oroondates troubled on these accounts, gave him yet farther
disturbance, by his sudden and uncommanded Arrival. Asking therefore if any
thing were amis^ with Arsace, or his Family; he answered, Tha^ there was, but
he would tell him in private When the Company were dismissed, he unfolded all;
How Theagenes, taken Prisoner by Mitranes, and sent to him, to be again
conveyed to the King their Master, being a handsome Youth, and fit for Court
Service, was rescued by the Besians, who also had killed Mit^anes: He then
proceeded to the a^fairs of Thyamis, and in the last place told the Love of
Arsace for Theagenes; his Residence in the Palace, and Honors conferred upon
him; but that as yet perhaps there was nothing unlawful committed, the Youth
being averse to her Desires. However, it was ^o be feared, that he would be won
in time, ^nless he sent speedily to bring him to Memphis, and wholly cut o^f
the Intrigue of Arsace. That for this very reason he hastened and came secretly
to him, out of respect; not being able ^o conceal his Injury from him.

As with this discourse he en^^am'd Oroon^^tes with Jealousy and Revenge, so
on the ^ther side he filled him with Love of Chari^^^a, of whom he next
informed him; extol^ng her Beauty with Divine Praises; That never was her Equal
seen, nor ever should be; That ^ll his Concubines were nothing in comparison of
her, not only those he left at Memphis, but also they that followed his Camp.
Many more things he added, thinking, That though Oroondates should enjoy
Chariclea, yet, after some time, he should, for this discovery, receive her for
his Wife. Thus was the Deputy thrown at once into the Toils of Rage and Love.
Wherefore without delay, calling Bagoas, one of his Eunuchs, to him, (of great
authority and trust) with fifty Horse to accompany him, he sent him to Memphis,
to bring Theagenes and Chariclea, as soon as he could find them.

He also sent Letters: One to Arsace, of these Contents.

Oroondates to Arsace.
THeagenes and Chariclea, the two Captive Kindred and Royal Servants, you must
send to me, to transmit them to the King; send them willingly, for otherwise
they shall by force be taken away, for I give Credit to Achemenes.


To Euphrates, the Chief Eunuch at Memphis, he wrote thus: OF your Negligence
in my affairs at home you shall hereafter give an account; at present deliver
the two Grecian Strangers to Bagoas, whether Arsace be willing or not.
Otherwise I have sent Orders that you be brought bound to me, and discharged
from your Office.




Begoas therefore, according to Command, went with the Letters signed with the
Deputies own Seal, that at Memphis they might give him the better Credit, and
more easily deliver the Strangers to him. Oroondates in the mean time set
forward against AEthiopia, commanding Achemenes to follow him; who knew (though
no mention was made thereof) that he was kept in Custody till the truth of what
he had informed were known. These things passed at Memphis. In the mean time
Thyamis (while Achemenes was upon his way to Oroondates) having in full power
received the Office of High Priesthood, an Office of first Rank in the City,
and performed all Rites belonging to the Funeral of Calasiris, to the outmost
terms of the constituted time, he then called to mind Theagenes and Chariclea:
for now it was permitted to him, by the Pontificial Law, to converse with
Strangers. Therefore, upon enquiry, finding that they were carried to the
Deputies Palace, he forthwith demanded them of Arsace, alleging that they
belonged to him upon many accounts; That his Father Calasiris, on his
Deathbed, committed them to his care: Giving her thanks that she so
courteously treated the Strangers, during his Confinement to the Temple: But
however, that he was obliged to remand the Pledges left to his Trust. I wonder,
replied Arsace, that while you acknowledge my Humanity, you condemn me at the
same time of Inhospitality, in supposing me not able or willing to provide for
the Strangers. Not so, said Thyamis, I know they may live here in greater
plenty than with me, provided they are so contented. But since they are of
Noble Race, and have run through changes of Fortune, and still are wanderers,
nothing can be so desirable to them as to recover their Kindred and Country. In
which, that I might be assisting to them, my Father left me his charge, beside
many other obligations of Friendship between us.

You do well, said Arsace, to urge your Right, by which you will sooner prevail
with me, than by force. Have you then dominion over them, said Thyamis? By what
means? By right of War, replied she, which made them my Captives, and
consequently my Slaves. When therefore Thyamis understood that she spoke of
Mitranes; O Arsace, said he, it is not now War but Peace; as that brings into
bondage, this should set at liberty: Besides, War and Peace should be judged
not by the Name, but Reason and Constitution. How can it be Creditable or
Profitable to you to detain the Strangers?

Arsace could no longer contain; but that happened to her which is usual for
Lovers, while they think their sentiments concealed, they have Modesty; but
when discovered, they lose all sense of shame. She therefore suspecting that
Thyamis perceived her passion, made no account of his Priestly Dignity, but
casting off the Modesty of her Sex, told him, That what he had done against
Mitranes should not pass unpunished; for the time should come when Oroondates
would call his Murderers to account. For the present I will not dismiss my
Vassals, though in little time they shall be sent to the King my Brother.
Wherefore leave your idle reasonings of Right or Wrong, with them that have
Authority, and depart willingly from our Palace, lest you be compelled by
force. Thyamis therefore went forth, calling the Gods to witness, and affirming
that these things could come to no good issue; resolving to acquaint the City
herewith, and call in their assistance. Arsace retired to her Chamber, calling
Cybele to her, to take counsel of what was to be done. She had now some
suspicion of Achemenes his absence; and when she asked Cybele about it, she
framed diverse excuses, affirming any thing rather than own his departure to
Oroondates. Yet she did not altogether impose upon her, the length of time
creating mistrust. What shall we do, Cybele, said she? Or how shall we work
our-selves out from the streights that encompass us? My desire is not lessened
but increased by denial. The Youth grows more obstinate and intractable than
ever. He has hitherto framed delays, but now he flatly denies me. And that
which more troubles me, is lest he should likewise apprehend what I suspect of
Achemenes. For Achemenes much disturbs me, being gone to Oroondates, to
persuade him of what he knows or conjectures; if I could but see Oroondates,
one tender Word or Tear from me would overcome him. But I am afraid, lest
before I enjoy Theagenes, or can see Oroondates, he should determine concerning
me. Wherefore, Cybele, turn every Stone, try all your Art with the young man,
since you see our affairs are brought to the last exigence: For you must
imagine that when I despair for my self, I shall spare no other person.
Therefore take advantage of your Sons endeavors, for I cannot conceive how you
can be ignorant thereof. As for my Son, Madam, or my fidelity to you, you shall
find that you censure falsely. Wherefore, since you so negligently pursue your
Love, you must not lay the blame on others: For you exercise not the Authority
of a Mistress with him, but the submission of a Slave. Which method perhaps was
discreet at first, but since he is obstinate, you should make him feel your
power, and constrain him, by Torments, to obey your pleasure. It is the manner
of Youths to despise when they are Courted, but to submit on Compulsion:
Wherefore, he will do that by Punishment, which he refused on Entreaties. You
seem to speak rightly, said Arsace, but how can I endure to see him chastised.
You are too tender, replied Cybele, as though he would not by light
chastisement be made to embrace Pleasure; and for your part of the suffering,
you will be rewarded with your outmost Wishes; but if you cannot bear the
spectacle, deliver him to Euphrates, to be scourged as for some fault, which
you may hear though not see; and if you find him change his mind, you may at
pleasure put an end to his Chastisement.

Arsace suffered her self to be persuaded; for Love, when despised, spares not
the Object, but turns Kindness into Revenge. Calling therefore the Chief Eunuch
to her, she gave him Orders accordingly. He being by Nature envious, and
possessed with inveteracy against Theagenes, for what he had seen and suspected,
immediately threw him into Bonds, and afflicted him with Stripes and Hunger.
The place was dark where he kept him, and though he knew the cause, he
dissembled, often asking Theagenes the reason; who gave him no answer;
wherefore he daily renewed his Punishment, and more severely than Arsace
intended. Tormenting, and suffering none to come to him beside Cybele, who
perpetually visited him, pretending to commiserate his condition, on account of
their former acquaintance, but indeed to find if he were to be wrought upon by
the Tortures. He showed himself more a Man, more resolute than ever, yielding
his Body to punishment, triumphing in his Misfortune, that gave proof of his
Love to Chariclea, and saying, That all was well with him if she did but know
his Constancy; continually calling her his Light, his Life, and Soul. When
Cybele perceived this, (contrary to the will of Arsace) she gave command to
have his torments increased. Neither thus did she hope for success, but last
means were to be tried when affairs were desperate; she expected that
Oroondates, when he should hear of it, would take Revenge on Achemenes. She
feared lest Arsace, when her passion was discovered, would lay violent hands on
her self, and that consequently it were impossible for her to escape;
wherefore, if things came to the worst, she resolved to involve all together in
the same fate.

Returning therefore to Arsace, We lose our labor, Madam, said she, he is
still more resolute and obstinate, having always Chariclea in his Mouth, and
solacing his sufferings with her Name. Let us therefore cast forth our last
Anchor, and remove this Obstacle to our Endeavors: If he shall once know that
she is dead, he will of course admit your kindness, despairing of his former
Love.

Arsace caught at what she said, being before enraged with Jealousy; you
advise well, said she, I will take care to have her dispatched: But whom shall
we get to perform this? For though the power be in your own hands, yet the
Persian Laws forbid to put any to Death without the Judgment of the
Magistrates. You must therefore contrive to lay some Crime to her Charge: Yet
if you think fitting (for I would run any hazard for your sake) I will attempt
her Life by Poison. Arsace approved hereof, and commanded her to do it. She
therefore immediately went about it; and finding Chariclea in Tears and
Lamentations, no^ only so, but contriving some means to dispatch her self, (for
she now understood what Theagenes suffered, though Cyb^le had long kept her in
Ignorance, framing diverse excuses for his so long Absence) Fond Maid, said she,
will you never give over afflicting your self without Reason? Theagenes is
well, and shall come to you this Ev^ning: My Lady was angry for some mistake
that he committed in his Office, and caused him to be shut up, but this day he
will be released, which I also entreated of her; for to day she is to celebrate
a certain Festival, after the manner of her Country. Rise therefore, compose
your self, and now take some Repast with me. What reason have I to believe you,
said Chariclea? For it has been your continual practice to deceive me. I swear
by the Gods, answered Cybele, that this day all things shall be well with you,
and you shall be freed from all your Cares: only do not before destroy your
self having now fasted for so many days: Taste therefore of what is now set
before you. Chariclea obey^d her, though not without suspicion; but partly
assenting to her Oath, and partly for Joy of what was told her: For the mind
easily believes what it earnestly desires. She therefore sat down to eat. While
the Attendant filled the Wine, Cybele beckoned to her first to give the Cup to
Chariclea and after to her self. But the Old Lady, before she had drank to the
bottom, spilling the rest, began to storm, and looking sternly upon the Waiter,
was immediately enflamed, and seized with Convulsions.

Chariclea was filled with horror, and endeavored to lift her up; she
likewise called the assistance of them that were present; for the mischief
seemed swifter than an Arrow, the Poison being of so strong a Tincture, as to
destroy the youngest and strongest Constitution; but in a feeble and old Body
it dispersed it self in a minute through all the Vitals. The Convulsions now
remitting, she lay motionless, a blackness overspreading her Skin. Though, I
suppose, her Rage, for being deceived, gave no small help to the ferment. For
even now, breathing her last, she did not intermit her frauds, but partly with
signs, partly with broken words, persuaded them that Chariclea had Poisoned
her. At the same minute that she gave up the Ghost, Chariclea was brought bound
to Arsace. She therefore demanding whether she had procured the Poison, and
affirming that if she denied, Tortures should force her into Confession,
Chariclea became an unwonted spectacle to the Beholders. For without any
meanness of Spirit, or concern in her Face, she entered smiling into her
Presence, partly out of Con^cience of her Innocence, and partly for Joy that
she should not survive Theagenes, if he were dead; and also because the Death
which she designed to perpetrate on her self, was now to be performed by other
hands. O Princess, said she, if my Theagenes live, I am guiltless of this
Action; but if he be dead, there is no need of calling Council, or inflicting
Tortures, you may spare your self that trouble: You have me here who destroyed
the person that bred you up, kill me therefore without delay. You can do
nothing more grateful to Theagenes, who has resisted your impious
solicitations.

Arsace was enraged hereat, and commanded her to be struck: Carry, said she,
this Victim, bound as she is, to let her Lover see how gloriously she returns
his Constancy; command Euphrates to load her all over with Chains, and leave
them together, till the Persian Magistracy shall be assembled to morrow for her
Condemnation. By this time the Maid that served the Wine was brought in: She
was an Ionian Slave, and the same that by Arsace was appointed to wait on
Chariclea. Whether therefore she was moved with kindness to her, or by Divine
Impulsion, she sighed and wept most bitterly. O wretched Creature, said she,
and void of all Crime! The standers-by being in wonder hereat, and urging her
to speak plainly, she confessed that she her self gave the Poison to Cybele,
having received it first from her, to administer it to Chariclea: That, whether
it was through concern at so unwonted a Practice, or whether mistaking the
Signs of Cybele, ordering to minister first to Chariclea, she changed the Cups,
and gave the Poison to the Old Lady. She was therefore led to Arsace, as
thinking she should please her in clearing Chariclea. But when she had given
her this account, Arsace commanded her also to be taken into Custody, as an
Accomplice in the fact, and to be kept for the next days Session. She also
summoned the Persian Magistrates, by Messengers, to be ready. When therefore
they were sat, early in the morning, Arsace gave in her Accusation, telling all
that had past, condoling also with Tears, the loss of the person that bred her,
who was dearer to her than her life; appealing to the Judges with how much
courtesy ^he had treated the stranger, who in return had done her such Injury.
Chariclea answered nothing to the Charge, but confessed the Crime, affirming that
she gave the Poison, adding also that she would likewise have taken off Arsace,
had she not been prevented. For having told her resolutions overnight to
Theagenes, and conferred with him, she resolved to undergo any manner of Death,
to depart from a life so full of trouble, of implacable Fortune, and endless
Wanderings; she there bid him her last farewell. The Bracelet and Jewels, with
the rest that were exposed with her, which she always secretly preserved, she
now placed next to her Body, carrying, as it were, with her the Rites of her
Funeral^ She therefore owned every Crime that was alleged, and more than were
charged. For which reason the Judges hardly forbore from in^licting the outmost
Tortures, after the Persian manner; yet moved with her Youth and Beauty, they
only sentenced her to die by Fire. She was therefore seized by the Guards, and
hurr^'d forth beyond the Walls, the Beadle conti^u^lly crying out, That it was
for Poison that she su^fer'd; a vast multitude from the City following them.
Some of them had seen her led to Trial, others, by reason of the rumor spread
all over the City, came to have a view of her. Arsace was also present, and sat
a Spectator on the Wall: For it would have troubled her not to have beheld
Chariclea suffer. When therefore the Officers had raised a great Pile, and set
Fire thereunto, Chariclea begged ^espite from those that led her, saying, That
she would of her own accord ascend the Pile. O Sun and Earth (she cried out) O
powers above, and you that below take Vengeance on wicked Souls, you are
witnesses that I am Innocent of all that is laid to my Charge. But that I my
self willingly submit to Death, for the intolerable troubles which I sustain.
Receive me therefore with favor. However, take venge^nce of this Arsace, for
whose crimes I suffer; she ^s an Adultress, and does this to deprive me of my
Husband. When she had thus spoken, the people shouted, some saying, That she
should be reserved for another Trial, others endeavoring to rescue her; in the
mean time she ascended the File, where for a long while she stood unhurt, the
Fire rather circling about, than approaching her, serving only to make her
Beauty more conspicuous, and adorning the Pile, as it were a Nuptial Bed. She
passed from one part to another, admiring at what happened, and tempting Death,
but in vain, ^or the flame still turned off from her. The Offic^rs, in the mean
time, omi^ted nothing on their part; Ars^ce also b^^kning to them from the Wall
to do t^eir duty; wh^^^fore they heaped on mo^e com^^^tible m^tter. Neither
could they thus prev^il. The Citizen^ we^^ troubled, thinking there was some
Divine Assistance, and cried out, That she was innocent. Several approaching to
the Pile took off the Torturers, Thyamis beginning, and ^ncouraging the people
th^reunto, (for the clamor had now brought him abroad.) Being therefore
desirous to deliver Charicl^a, they durst not themselves approach the Fire, but
called to her to come out; for that there could be no danger for her to leave
the Fir^, who had continued therein without hurt. She h^aring this, and judging
herself to ^e preser^'d by Divine Providence, would not be ^ng^^teful, and
refuse ^^^ir favor: She ther^^o^e le^p^ down from (...) Pile. As the Multitude
for Joy and Amaze^^nt shouted out, Arsace, not able to bear it^ (...) ^own from
the Walls through a little Gate^ and with a strong Guard of Persians laid hands
on Chariclea. Then looking sternly upon the People, Are you not ashamed, said
she, to rescue from punishment a Woman that is a Witch and Poysoner by her own
Confession? While you give her aid, you do violence to the Persian Laws; to the
Judges, Deputy, and King himself. You are mistaken, in imputing her delivery to
the Gods: Will you not come to your senses, and find that this is the effect of
her Witchcraft, in which she has such command, as even to restrain the power of
Fire. Assemble therefore to morrow in Common Council, and you shall not only
hear her Confession, but also those of her Accomplices, whom I have in Custody.

Herewithal she led her away, herself going next to her, and commanding the
Guards to keep off the Crowd. But the People were enraged, part of them had
thoughts of resistance, part of them having still some suspicion of her
Witchcraft, and the rest fearing the Power of Arsace. Chariclea therefore is
once more delivered to Euphrates, and loaded with more Irons; reserved for a
second Sentence and Execution: But still blessing her fortune, in seeing
Theagenes, and conferring with him about what had passed. For Arsace had so
ordered it, out of Malice, that the young pair might behold each others misery,
and be mutually afflicted with each others sufferings: For she knew that the
torment of the person beloved, more affected the Lover than the party that
suffered. But it was by them esteemed as an Advantage, to see each others
Constancy. It was some relief to converse together, and comfort one another
with the consideration, that what they endured was upon the account of Truth
and Virtue.

After they had till midnight discoursed, in such a manner as was proper for
Lovers that were never more to talk together; they at last talked of the
Miracle that happened about the Fire. Theagenes imputed it to the kindness of
the Gods, who showed their Indignation against the unjust Decree of Arsace; but
Chariclea was doubtful. That Accident, said she, seems to have come by Divine
Providence, but to be reserved only for greater Misfortunes, cannot proceed
from the Gods, unless they have secretly decreed to give relief at the greatest
Extremity.

Theagenes advised her to think more honorably of the Divine Powers: Be
propitious to us, O ye Deities, said he! Was it a Dream or Reality, which now
comes into my mind? it happened the last night but one; I know not how I came
to forget it, but it now returns to my Memory. The Dream was a Verse which
Calasiris seemed to expound. The words were these: Thee from the Flame
Pantarbe's Power shall guard
Strange Force! but nothing to the Gods is hard.


Theagen^s now seemed inspired, and leaped ^orth as far as his Chains would
permit, crying, Be merciful to us, ye Gods. For I further remember another
Oracle delivered to me by a like Prophet (whether it were Calasiris, or some
God in his form) containing these Words: You with the Nymph shall AEthiop
reach, and be
To morrow from Arsace's Bondage free.


That which concerns me herein, I under^tand; for those Mansions of the Dead
underground, seem proper to the Land of AEthiopia: By the Maid, I suppose,
Pros^rpine is meant, ^ith whom I shall inhabit; and my freedom from Chains, my
departure from this Body. But what can the Rhyme contain concerning ^ou, which
consists of Contradictions? for whereas Pantarbe signifies fearing all things,
yet (...) commands not to fear the Flame. Then, said ^hariclea, continuance of
calamities, my Thea^^nes, makes persons hope the worst in all things; for
people usually accommodate their Minds to their Fortune: But I have better
^opes of this Prophecy than you. What if I ^m the Nymph with whom you are to
arrive unto AEthiopia, after you have escaped from the Bonds of Arsace? But how
that shall be, is neither manifest nor credible to us, but to the Gods it may
be possible: Let them take care of that who gave the Prophecy. That part which
related to me you have already seen accomplished in my wonderful preservation.
And though at that time I knew not that I carried my safeguard about me, yet I
now understand that I did. Those precious things that were exposed with me in
my Infancy, I have always accustomed to carry concealed about me, to supply our
necessities when brought to the last difficulty; but if Death should overtake
me, to answer the Charge of my Funeral. Amongst these, Theagenes, there are
Bracelets of great value, with Indian and Ethiopian Stones, with a certain
Ring given by my Father to my Mother, in which is the Stone called Pantarbe,
set in a Square, with Sacred Letters about it. It seems to have some Divine
Virtue in it, by which it repelled the power of the Flames, preserving those
that carry it, from any hurt. I conjecture, and know so much, by what was
suggested by the Divine Calasiris, who told me, That the same was expressed in
the Writings that were found with me. This seems probable, said Theagenes, by
the Deliverance that you have had; but what Pantarbe shall defend us from to
morrows danger? For though it should still defend from the Fire, it cannot give
Immortality; and Arsace's Malice will contrive some more violent means to
destroy us. And would to Heaven that the same sort of Death, and in the same
hour, would dispatch us both! I should think this Death but a Release from all
our suf^erings. Take heart, said Chariclea, we have another Pantarbe promised
in the Oracle.

While they were employed in these Considerations, each affirming, That the
others misery more afflicted them than their own: obliging themselves, by
mutual Oaths, to preserve their Loves and Virtue to Death. It being now in the
very dead of night, Bagoas, with his fifty Horse, arrived at M^mphis. When they
had wakened the Sentinels, and had given account of themselves, they were
immediately received into the Deputies Palace. Bagoas left his Company without,
to guard the House, to be ready for his Defense, if any Resistance were made.
He himself, in the mean time, went a private way, easily forcing the Doors, and
commanding Silence, to the place where Euphrates was, the Moon not being yet
quite set; finding him therefore in Bed, he awakened him, who in disorder cried
out, Who are you? It is I, said Bagoas, command a light to be brought in. He
therefore ordered the Boy that waited on him, to bring in a Taper, so as to
disturb none of the rest. When this was done, and the Boy departed, What
Mischief, said Euphrates, has occasioned this untimely and unexpected Arrival?
There needs not many words, said Bagoas, read these Letters, but before take
notice of the Seal, and know that Oroondates sent them; and that it is as much
as your Life is worth, not to perform what they import.

When Euphrates had run over the Letters; As for Arsace, said he, she will be
sorry, having yesterday fallen into a Fever, which still continues so violent,
that there is small hope of her Life. But for my part, I would not deliver
these Letters to her, though she herself asked for them; for I know she would
destroy both her self and us, before she would send away the young Pair. Know
however, that you are come in good time to take them away, and must therein use
your utmost endeavor. Take compassion on them, they having suffered a hundred
Tortures, unwillingly inflicted by me, but enjoined by Arsace. They seem
however of Noble Birth, and for the Experience that I have had of them, of
Virtuous Conversation. Having said this, he brought him to the Prison, where
Bagoas no sooner beheld them, though wasted with Watchings and Torture, yet he
was astonished at their Stature and Beauty. But they supposing that Bagoas was
come at that silent time of the Night, to lead them to a Clandestine Execution,
were a little troubled. But soon recovering a cheerful countenance, they made
it appear how little they were concerned. Euphrates now coming up, and knocking
out the Wooden Peg with which their Irons were joined, Take your Sacrifice,
Arsace, he cried out: She thinks in night and darkness to conceal her horrid
Crime, but the Eye of Justice is sharp in discovering and bringing to Light the
Deeds of Darkness. Do you execute what you are commanded, and whether Fire,
Sword, or Water is determined against us, let us only have the same Death.
Chariclea desired the same. The Eunuchs weeping, led them forth in their
Chains. When they were come out of the Deputies house, Euphrates staid there.
But Bagoas, with his fifty Horse, having taken off their Bond^, and le^t only
what might secure, but not burden them; mounting them on several Horses, and
putting them in the middle of the Guards, made toward Thebes as fast as he
could. When they had traveled all the rest of the night, and till nine the
next morning, without any stop, the Sun then growing hot, they could proceed no
farther, being spent also for want of Sleep, Chariclea especially; they
determined therefore to take up somewhere to rest themselves, and refresh their
Horses. There was a certain Valley at the foot of a Promontory of the Nile,
almost surrounded with the Water, which made an Eddy: There was much Grass and
Herbage on the place, as being always well Watered, every where shaded with
Sycamore Trees, and such others as grow on the Banks of the Nile: There Bagoas,
with his Company, took up, using the Trees for a Tent, he sat down with the
rest to feed, compelling also Theagenes and (...) to do the same. They thought
it need(...)sons that were presently to die; but he persuaded them there was no
such thing intended; That they carried them not to Death, but to Oroondates.
But now the Heat of the day decreasing, the Sun being no longer over their
Heads, but fallen Westward, and beating on their sides, while Bagoas was going to
take Horse again, a certain Horseman in a sweat, and out of breath with hard
Riding, came up, and took him aside to speak with him: He fixing his Eyes upon
the ground, as it were, full of thought concerning what had been told him: Take
Comfort, Strangers, said he, your Enemy Arsace is dead by her own hand,
understanding that you were taken away, preventing a necessary, by a voluntary
Fate: For she would never have escaped punishment from Oroondates, or the King;
and if she had not been put to Death, at least must have led the remainder of
her Life in Disgrace. Euphrates sends me this Intelligence. Wherefore be of
good Hope, for I am well assured that you have done no body wrong, and she that
injured you is Dead. Thus spoke Bagoas in imperfect Greek; adding also, That he
himself was glad, having suffered under the Tyranny of Arsace: Wherefore he the
more encouraged his Prisoners: For he hoped that Oroondates would be pleased
with his service, if he carried them safe to him; the Youth being likely to
grace his Retinue, and the Virgin, of matchless Beauty, would probably be made
his Wife, since Arsace was dead. Theagenes and Charicle^ r^^oyced at the News,
highly praising the Justice of ^he Gods; nor did they think they could
afterward be much distressed, whatsoever Fortune should befall them, since
their most inveterate Enemy was gone. When now the Evening drew on, with a cool
breeze, inviting them to set forward, they mounted again, and rode all that
night and part of the next morning, if possible, to overtake Oroondates, before
he went from Thebes. But they met with a Soldier from the Army, who told them
Oroondates was gone from thence, having sent him to draw out all the Garrisons,
and hasten with them to Sy^ne, all things being in disorder, and fearing lest
the City should be taken. For the Deputy coming too late, the AEthiopians had
marched their Army thither with such speed, that prevented the news of their
approach: Bagoas therefore turned off from his intended Journey, and took the
next Road to Syene. But approaching to the Town, they happened upon a Party of
AEthiopians, who were sent as Spies to secure the Passes for the Army.

But by reason of the night, and their unacquaintance with the Country, (for
they were ordered to plant an Ambuscade in every place which they found
convenient) they posted themselves amongst certain Bushes by the Riverside,
partly for safeguard, and partly for concealment from their Enemies: And here
they stood upon their Watch. Therefore at break of day, when they perceived
Bagoas, with his Horsemen to pass by them, and were assured there were no more
to follow, they issued from their Covert, with loud shouts. Bagoas therefore,
and his company, surprised with the noise, knowing them, by their color, to be
AEthiopians, and seeing their number too great to be encountered, (for there
were in all a thousand sent out for Scouts) he fled, without once looking them
in the face; yet not so fast at first as he could have done, but so as to
preserve his Order. The others pursued, sending out two hundred of their
Troglodytae.

The Troglodytae are a people of AEthiop addicted to Pastures, and Borderers on
Arabia, who have wonderful swiftness both by Nature and Exercise from their
Childhood. They are not used to heavy Arms, they therefore use Slings in fight
to wound the Enemy at distance, and trust to their heels when they find
themselves overpowered. They know it is impossible for the Enemy to overtake
them, till they can hide themselves in Rocks and Caves. These therefore pursued
on foot, discharging their Slings, but not being able to stand against the
Horse, returned to their own Party. But by fresh numbers issuing out upon them,
the Persians are scattered, Bagoas himself thrown from his Horse, and taken.
Th^agen^s and Chariclea partly thinking it unworthy not to assist Bagoas, (who
^ad used Civility to them, and to whom they were likely to have been farther
obliged) leapt ^own to succor him, but to no purpose, not ^^ing Armed. This is
my Dream, said Thea^^nes to Chariclea, and these the AEthiops, into those
Country I was to be carried. I there^^re hold it better to submit our selves to
them, ^^ther than experience a doubtful fortune with ^roondates. Chariclea
understood the rest, the Accident now leading her, as it were, by the Hand,
judging them rather to be Friends than Enemies. Yet she told not her sentiments
to Theagenes, only said that she was contented to do so. When therefore the
AEthiopians came ^p, and knew Bagoas, by his Face, to be an Eunuch, and the
Persons that were unarmed, of most beautiful frame, they asked them, Who they
were, both by an Egyptian and Persian, ^s not doubting but that they
understood the one or other Language. Wherefore Theagenes, who had Egyptian
enough to answer short Questions, told them, They were chief Servants to the
Persian Deputy, but themselves Grecians, taken Prisoners by the Persians, but
now, they hoped with better fortune, put into the hands of AEthiopians. They
therefore resolved to spare them, and carry them Captive to their King, as the
first Booty of the War, and the most eminent Ornaments of the Persian Court.
For the Eunuchs are the Eyes and Ears of the Persian Court, as having neither
Children nor Kindred, on whom to place their Affection, and are therefore
wholly devoted to the Interest of their Master, on whom they depend. But for
the young Pair, they reckoned that they would be no small Grace to their Kings
Palace. They therefore ^et them all upon Horses, Bagoas being disabled, by his
Wound, from walking, Theagenes and Chariclea wearied with their Chains.

This seemed the beginning of an Interlude, in which the persons that were now
in expectation of sudden Death, were no longer Captives, and those that had
them in Custody, themselves made Prisoners.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Ninth Book.
S Y^ne was now almost surrounded in Siege, as it were in a Net, by the
Ethiopian numbers. For Oroondates hearing of the Enemies approach, left
Cataractae, and went with his Forces to Syene, which he entered, shutting up
the Gates, and planting Slings and Engines on the Walls, conjecturing that
which afterward happened. While therefore the Ethiopian King, at some
distance, was informed by his Spies that Oroondates was making to the Town, he
hastened his March to prevent him, but however came too late. He then planted
his Army round the City, and so without any Engagement, sat as it had been in a
Theater. He brought with him six hundred thousand men, and Cattle, with which
he covered all the ground about Syene. The Spies finding him there, brought
their Captives before him. He was not only delighted with their Beauty, but
with the good Omen of having Prisoners in Chains set before him. Behold! said
he, the Gods at our first Arrival send us Slaves in Bonds. These p^rson^
therefore being the first fruits of our War, shall be kept in Custody till our
return, then to be o^fer'd to our Gods in our Triumphal Sacrific^s, according
to the Ancient Laws of our Country. Having therefore rewarded the Spies, he
gave the Prisoners into the close custody of persons that could speak their
Language; giving them great Charge to treat them with Respect and Care; to
supply them with the best Provision, and above all, to preserve them from all
Contamination, because they were reserved for Victims: Lastly, That their Bonds
of Iron should be taken off, and Fetters of Gold put upon them: For Gold
amongst the AEthiopians is made use of for all things that Iron is amongst
other Nations.

This was done as he commanded. When therefore the former were taken off, and
the Golden Chains put on, Theagenes smiling, said, What means this splendid
Change? Fortune flatters us, in rendering us rich by our Captivity, since we are
only Captives of greater Price: Chariclea also smiled, and desired him to
conceive better hopes of what the Gods foretold. Hydaspes now attacking the
City, and thinking to carry it at first onset, found himself deceived, the
Besieged so manfully resisting his Forces, and beating them off; adding also
Scoffs and Contumelies. He was therefore enraged that they so much as offered
to resist, and did not surrender themselves on the first Attack: He resolved to
lose no time, or make such a Siege, whereby some might be taken, and some
escape; but at once to overthrow the whole City by an inevitable Destruction.

He thus ordered the Work: He made a Ditch about the Ground that lay next to
the Walls, (yet at such distance that the Slings and Arrows from the Town could
not reach it) appointing ten Men to every ten Yards, to be dug of a sufficient
breadth and depth; some therefore broke the Earth, while others received the
Mold, which they piled up on that side of the Trench that was next his Camp,
which served as a Counter-Fortress to the Town: None from thence offered to
molest the Work, not daring to sally forth against such Numbers; and their
Slings not throwing so far, as the distant space reached between the two Walls.
Having presently finished this affair, by multitude of hands, he began another
Project. When this Round Ditch was completed, he left part of it without
casting up a Bank, and from thence made another Trench, that turned off to the
River Nile, (which Trench he banked up on both sides) when therefore he had
joined the foresaid Banks to those of the River, breaking down the Fence, as it
were, by opening a Sluice, he let the Stream into his Tr^nch, which by the
descent from the River to that lower Channel, made such a dreadful noise, that
it was heard at a vast distance. When the Citizens heard and saw into what
distress they were brought by this Inundation, which presently overran the
Plain between the Walls, and the Enemy, preventing their Escape, and that it
was equally dangerous to tarry, they s^t themselves to do all that was possible
for persons in such exigence. In the first place, as the Wood-work of their
Gates began to give way, they stopped up the Chinks with Straw and Pitch, setting
props and weights against them; they also ran up Buttresses to support their
Wall. One brought Earth, another Ston^s, a third Straw, and whatever they could
get together; no Hands were unemploy'd, Women, Children, and Old Age set
themselves to the work: for so general and pressing a Calamity excused none.
But to the more Youth^ul, Orders were given to make a subterranean Passage to
the Enemies Bulwark.

The Work was performed after this manner. They first sunk a Pit, five yards
deep perpendicular, then by the help of Torches, they dug strait before them, a
passage to the Enemies Banks; those that were behind still in order receiving
the Earth from them that were before; which was conveyed into the City-Garden,
and there laid on a heap. This they did, with design that when the Water should
fall into this Cavern, it should force it self a passage out another way. But
they were prevented, for the Nile fell so plentifully into the Upper Channel,
that the space between the two Walls was now a standing Lake, so that Syene, an
inland Town, was now turned into an Island, quite surrounded with Water. The
Wall sustained the weight thereof for one whole day, but when it was swelled
higher, and also had sunk underneath the foundation, the ground being soft and
spungy, it then in several places began to yield, and threaten a Deluge on the
City.

The next Evening, a Part that was between two Towers, fell down; yet not so as
to lie below the Flood, but so as presently to threaten an Inundation: Upon
which a great Cry was set up amongst the Inhabitants, that reached to the
Enemies Camp; and with hands lift up toward Heaven, beseech'd the assistance
of the Gods. They besought Oroondates to send Messengers to beg Peace with
Hydaspes. He was forced to submit, but being shut in with the Waters, no
Messengers could pass: He therefore fastened Petitionary Letters to Stones,
which he threw from Slings, but to no purpose, for the distance proved too
great to permi^ their coming home; he then tried by way of Ar^rows, while the
Archers and Slingers vyed with each other, but still in vain: In the last
place, they stretched forth their hands toward the Enemie^ Bulwark in
suppliant manner, to signify wha^ they intended by their shootings; and
some^times put them behind their Backs, to show that they were willing to
receive their Chairs^ Hydaspes understood their Signals, and was in^clin'd to
Acceptance: For the submission of a^ Enemy commands Clemency from generou^
Minds. But he first thought fit to make t^ya^ of what they meant, in ord^r
whereunto he se^lected ten Boats, which fell down to his Bank^ side, from the
breach of the Nile; into these he put Archers and armed men, with Com^mands, as
he thought fit, and sent them ove^ to the Persians. They therefore told them
That if they had any Hope or Confidence lef^ they should prepare for Fight. It
was a ne^ Spectacle on an inland Soil, to see Boats row^ing from Wall to Wall,
over cultivated Grounds^ It was yet a greater wonder to see a Naval Ar^my
storming a Town, and Land Soldiers con^tending with them. They therefore that
were in the Town, seeing Ships, with Armed Men^ approaching that part of their
Wall which wa^ broken down, were seized with terror, (a^ people in great
distress and extremity are alway^ suspicious.) They hurled Stones from the
Walls^ and shot Arrows into the Boats, that came for their preservation. Thus
Men that despair of Life, yet reckon it as an advantage, for a while to delay
their Fate. Yet they so ordered their business, as not to wound, but only to
keep them off. The AEthiopians likewise discharged their Arrows, not knowing
the intentions of the Persians; by which means several of the wounded fell down
headlong from the Wall into the Water. The War therefore grew hot, till a
certain Illustrious Person of Syene coming between, intercepted those that were
on the Wall, by speaking on this manner: O frantic Men, said he, and grown
stupid with Calamity, do we repel those persons whose Aid we so lately begged,
and make War with them at the instant of their coming to relieve us, beyond our
expectation? If they come with a friendly mind, declaring matter of Peace, they
are our Preservers; if with hostile intentions, you will easily vanquish them,
though they were arrived to the very Wall. But to what purpose (if we regard
our safety) should we destroy these, when we are environed with such a Sea, and
vast numbers behind? Why do we not therefore receive them, and know for what
purpose they are sent? His Judgment was approved by all, the Deputy himself
applauding it; they then separated themselves, and ceased from any further
Action.

When the passage for the Ship-men was clear, and the Townsmen, by White Flags,
signifying that they should have free Landing; the AEthiopians went nearer, and
from their Vessels, as it were so many Pulpits in a Theater, they spoke in this
manner; O Persians, and Inhabitants of Syene, know that Hydaspes, King of the
Eastern and Western AEthiopia, and at present also yours; as he knows how to
Conquer, he likewise understands how to show Mercy: That is the part of
Courage, but this of Humanity. The one he acco^nts the Virtue of a Soldier,
the other peculiar only to himself. Whereas therefore he has your Lives in his
power, either to give, or take them away; but since you are suppliant, he
offers you deliverance, without the ruin of War. Moreover, he does not impose
the terms of freedom upon you, but leaves you your selves to choose them: For
he governs not the Fortunes of Men by Tyranny, but Clemency. To this Message
the Syeneans answered, That they would deliver Themselves, Wives and Children,
into his Power, to deal with them as he pleased: That they would likewise
deliver the City into his hands, if they survived, which in that extremity was
uncertain, unless their Destruction was prevented by Hydaspes. Oroondates
offered to surrender Philae and the Smaragdan Mines, which were the occasion of
the War, but desired that he would exact no more from him, nor require him to
resign up himself or his Soldiers. But if Hydaspes were pleased indeed to
exercise Humanity, That he would suffer those that made no resistance to depart
to Elephantina; for that it were the same thing for him to die now, as to be
afterward put to death, by his King, for giving up his Army: Nay, it would be
much worse, since the present would be only a single, and usual sort of Death,
but the other with the severest kind of Torments.

When the Legates heard this, they turned their Prows, and related all to
Hydaspes. He smiling, and much reproving the folly of Oroon^ates, to insist
upon Terms, who yet depended on another persons pleasure, whether he should
^ive or die: Yet, said he, it is not just, for the offense of one man, to
suffer so populous a City to be destroyed. Wherefore he permitted those that
were with Oroondates to depart, though ^hey scarce forbore from Resistance. He
therefor ordered some of his own Men to damm up the breach in the Bank of
Nile, and to others to break down part of what he raised. That by means of the
Inlet of Nile being stopped, and passage made for the Water that was taken in,
^o go away, Syene might be the sooner made dry. They therefore setting close to
the work, finished it by the next day.

Nor did they that were within the Town spare their pains, not despairing of
preservation, though beyond hope. They therefore made Suffs under ground, to
receive and carry off the Water. Others brought props to the Walls^ which they
easily did, heaping the Stones which from the ruins fell into the Town. But
after they thought themselves safe enough on this account, yet they were not
without Apprehension; in the middle of the night, a certain part of the
Bulwark, which the AEthiopians in the Evening had begun to dig down, (whether
it were that that part was more loosely heaped up, so as to let Water sink into
the Foundation, or whether it broke the sides, being almost dug through, when
the Workmen were gone, or whether it happened by Divine Will) beyond all
expectation, it fell down, with so great a noise, that both Armies were
astonished, both Ethiopian and Syeneans concluding the Town-walls to be
tumbled down at once: But these being secure, continued in their Tents,
remaining satisfied to know what it should be, when daylight was returned. But
the Citizens ran every where to their Walls, and as every one saw his own part
entire, concluded the ruin was on some other side; till the breaking day
dispelled their fears, when they saw where the Breach was, and that the Waters
we^e passed away. But now the AEthiopians diverted the Flood, making Cataracts,
which they propt with Timber, lining them also with Mud and Straw, which the
multitude of hands easily brought together. Thus the Waters passed away
entirely, yet was there no passage to each other, for the depth of Mud which
remained, which, though it seemed dry and crusted above, yet it continued moist
at bottom, so that neither Men nor Horse could pass, without being foundred
therein.

Thus the time passed for two or three days; The Townsmen, by setting open
their Gates, and the AEthiopians, by laying down their Arms, mutually declaring
Peace. This Truce was more remarkable, because it was without Conference of the
Parties, and neither of them set any Watch. They that were in Town gave
themselves to Pastimes, for it happened then to be the Festival of Nile, which
is accounted the greatest of any among the Egyptians; which is celebrated at
the entrance of the Summer Solstice, when the River first begins to swell; and
for that reason this Solemnity is held by them in greatest Honor. The
Egyptians suppose Nilus to be a God, and the most Supreme, his Stream vying
with the Celestial River, because it waters their Fields without Rain, or
Assistance from Heaven; it self supplying the want of showers with its yearly
overflow. These are Vulgar Traditions. But a likelier reason of giving him this
Divine Honor, is their reckoning the Copulation of hot and moist, the cause
not of generation, but preservation of Man; and that the Nile supplies the
Moist, and their Earth the Dry. Yet these are also Vulgar Conceptions: But the
most skilful in Mysteries, say that Isis signifies the Earth, and Osyris the
Nile, changing the names for the things. That therefore the Goddess burns with
Desire of him, and always rejoices at his return; and he being retired, laments
again, as struck with blasting Lightning. This fiction their Divines have
framed, as I suppose, because they would not have their Mysteries pryed into by
profane persons.

Let this suffice for the present; for out of Reverence we also forbear to
mention their deeper Mysteries. We will therefore return to the Transactions of
Syene. This Festival Day being risen, the Natives applied themselves to the
killing of Sacrifices; though their Bodies were over-labour'd with their
Distresses, yet their Minds were never the less active for the service of their
God. But Oroondates watching his opportunity, in the dead of the Night, when
the Townsmen, after their Banquets, were buried in Sleep, by stealth led out
his Army, having an hour before given the charge of that Gate, through which he
meant to pass, to Persian Centries. Command was given to the Officers to leave
all their Horses behind them, that they might be no encumbrance, nor by their
Noise discover what was done; but every man to take his Armor, and a Board or
Plank along with them.

After they were thus assembled at the Gate, they cast down the Planks which
each had brought, placing them along in such Order that the one touched the
other, the last still handing them to those that went before; by which means,
as with a Bridge, they passed safely over the Slime. Coming to dry ground, (the
AEthiopians suspecting no such thing, nor keeping any Watch) they marched with
all possible speed by them, toward Elephantina. And without any obstacle, were
received into the Town, by reason of two Persians, that (as it was agreed
between them) sat upon the Walls, to expect their coming at that time of the
night, who accordingly set open the Gates for their Entrance. At the break of
Day, the people of Syene perceived the Persians were fled, every one missing
him that lodged in his House: They were further informed by conferring
together, and lastly, by the Bridge of Boards, which they found laid over the
Ooze. Once more therefore they were seized with Terror and Consternation, that
they showed so little Faith to Hydaspes, after having so much experienced his
Clemency, in permitting the Persians to escape. They therefore resolved with
one Voice, to go out of the City, and surrender themselves to the AEthiopians,
with Oaths of their Ignorance, if possibly they might obtain Mercy. Being
therefore all gathered together, of both Sex, and all Ages, with Boughs in
their hands, and lighted Tapers, to show their submission, bearing the Images
of their Gods before them. When they had passed the Bridge, they fell on their
knees, at distance, before the AEthiopians, and, as it were, at a Signal given,
set up a general and lamentable Cry, deprecating Punishment by their humble
Posture. Lastly, to move the greater Compassion, they set down their Children
before them, permitting them to go which way they would, mollifying the Rage of
the AEthiopians, by that Age, free from all suspicion of Deceit. The Infants
therefore, with Consternation, through Ignorance of what was done, and frighted
with the foresaid Lamentation, ran away from their Parents, toward the
AEthiopians; others, not of growth to follow, fell on their faces, and lay
crying on the Ground; Fortune even in them, showing the posture of Suppliants,
begging Mercy.

Hydaspes seeing this, and supposing that they came only in a more humble and
earnest manner to supplicate, sent Messengers to ^now the meaning; and why they
came without the Persians? They informed him of all, the flight of the
Persians, their Innocence, the Festival, and how, after the Banquet, being
possessed with Sleep, the Persians escaped; whom yet they could not have
hindered, had they known thereof. Hydaspes believing what was told to him,
suspecting what afterward happened, the Treachery of Oroondates, calling only
their Priests (...) him, with the Gods, which they brought for the greater
solemnity, conjured them thereby to tell if they knew any thing of the Persians
Designs; Whither they were gone, or in what they placed their greatest Trust?
They answered, They knew not for certain, but conjectured that they were gone
to Elephantina, where the greatest Party of their Army were gathered together:
Oroondates putting his greatest Trust in his Bard Horse.

When they had thus supplicated, Hydaspes did not think fit to enter the City,
but sent two Companies to search if there were any Treachery in the business,
and if they found none, to continue there as a Garrison. Having therefore
dismissed the Townsmen with gracious Promises, he drew forth his Army in Battle
array, to receive the Persians, if they came out against him; and if not, to set
upon them. Nor had he put them into a readiness before he was informed that the
Persians were o^ their way toward ^im. Oroondates having drawn the greatest
part of his Forces to Elephantina, was forced himself with a few to take into
Syene, as we have already shown, where he received Mercy of Hydaspes; yet was
he so full of guile, as to withdraw to his foresaid Army, placing all his hopes
in Celerity, and thinking to come upon Hydaspes unprovided.

When the two Armies were now in sight of each other, the Persian Pride was
shown, dazzling the whole Field with Golden and Silver Arms, for the Sun then
rising f^ll upon the Persians, reflected from them, like Lightning, to a great
distance. The Medes and Persians made up the Right Wing, their Armed Men going
before, and the Archers bringing up the Rear, that being eased from the
Encumbrance of Armor, they might more dexterously shoot their Arrows, protected
by the Armed Body. He placed his Egyptian and African Companies on the Left
Wing, adding also Archers and Slingers, whom he commanded to make Excursions,
and gall the Enemies Flank. He himself came with the Main Body, splendidly
seated on a Chariot, with Guards on each side for his security, his Bard Horse
being ranked before him, in which he put his greatest trust; in this posture he
adventured to begin the Battle. For this Party was most Warlike, and like a
Wall or Bulwark, planted before the rest of his Army.

The manner in which they were Armed was thus: A chosen person, of great
Strength and Stature, put on a Helmet, with a Face made to it, exactly
resembling that of a Man. This covered the Head all down to the Shoulders,
places only being left open for the Eyes: His Right Hand held a Weapon bigger
than a Spear, while their Left was free to manage the Reins; a Sword hanging by
his side; not only his Breast, but his whole Body was covered with Armor,
joined with Scales of Iron and Brass, in form of a quadrangle; one being laid
waving over the other; which thus by degrees went to their extremity, the
Plates being firmly riveted together, yet framed so as to sit without any
Encumbrance to the Body, and every where plying to it: Every joint thereof
turning on Wire, and extending or contracting with the motion of the Person.
Thus was it wrought from the Head to the Knee, a vacancy being only left for
the inside of their Thighs, that ^ar next to their Horse. Such is the Fabric
thereof, that it repels all manner of Darts or Spears. From the Foot there was
an Iron Boot, that at the Knee joined curiously with the Armor. In the same
manner they also Armed their Horses, securing their Legs, while their Head to
their Crest is entirely Armed, a Covering of Iron Plates thrown over his Back,
falling down on each side to his Flank, yet so loose as not to incumber his
going, while it gave him protection. The Man being thus equipped, and, as it
were, cast in Armor, is lifted up upon his Horse, not being able, by reason of
the weight, to mount himself. When the Fight is begun, giving the Reins to his
Horse, and clapping Spurs to them, he rusheth upon the Enemy, as it were a
Tempest.

The Pike, near to the part where a long Steel Blade comes out, is fastened to
the Horses Neck, by which means it is supported; it is also hung at the other
end by Thongs to the Horses Shoulder, in such manner as not to hinder, but
assist the Hand of the Person that directs it: So that by the Horses motion,
the force is increased; by which means two or three at a time are often born
upon the Point.

The Deputy being thus provided, and his Forces drawn up in this manner, left
the River on his Back, being much less in number than the Enemy, which served
him for a Wall, to keep him from being surrounded. Hydaspes, on the other side
thus ordered his Battle: Against the Persians and Medes, in the Right Wing, he
placed his Soldiers from Meroe, skilful in standing Fight; as also the
Troglodytae, with those of the Neighboring Country, from which Cinnamon is
brought, in light Arms, and swift of foot, to engage the Adversaries Left Wing.
But understanding the Persians middle Ranks to be their chief strength, he
opposed to them himself, with Elephants bearing Towers, joining to them the
Blemmii and Seri, with Instructions what to do when they were engaged.

When Signals on both sides were given, by the Persians with Trumpets, by the
AEthiopians with Hammers and Kettle-drums. Oroondates encouraging his Party,
led them on. Hydasp^s commanded his Men to advance slowly at first, that the
Elephants might keep up with them, and also that the Persian Horse in the
middle might be disordered, before the whole Bodies were joined. When they were
now within the Cast of a Dart, and the Blemmi perceived the Bard Horse of the
Enemy to come on fiercely, they observed what had been commanded by Hydaspes,
the Seri being left to guard the Elephants, they made up speedily before the
rest, against the Bard Horse, who thought them distracted, being so few in
number, to set upon a Party so well Armed. The Persians likewise spurred up
faster, to take advantage of their rashness, not doubting to dispatch them at
the first Encounter.

Then the Blemmi, when they were come hand to hand, as it were at one sign,
sunk down all together, setting one Knee to the ground, and putting their Heads
and Backs under the Horses Bellies, received no harm, but from their treading
sometimes upon them. But they performed what was beyond all expectation,
stabbing the Bard Horse up into their Bellies, which part alone was unarmed:
Wherefore not a few were cast off by their Horses, enraged with their wounds,
whom the Blemmi stabbed (as they lay on the ground) on the inside of their
Thighs. For the Persian Cataphract is so encumbered with Armor, that he cannot
stir, when once dismounted. Those that kept their Saddles were carried directly
upon the Seri, who on their approach, retreated behind their Elephants, whose
vast Bodies served them for a Bulwark. By this means there was great Slaughter
made of the Horse, insomuch that they were almost utterly cut o^f: For the
Horses frightened with the sight of the Elephants, leaped and started, some
flying out one way, and some another, putting their own party into disorder.
They that sat upon the Elephants (six Archers being allotted to each Tower,
whereof each Beast carried two) shot so fast from thence, that their Arrows
seemed a Cloud, and so exactly aimed, that they generally wounded the Persians
in the Eyes, who accordingly ran confusedly one amongst another. All that were
born forward against their wills by the mettle of their Steeds, came directly
upon the Elephants.

They were therefore thus consumed, being partly trodden down by the Elephants,
partly cut down by the S^^i, making Excursions from behind their Elephants, as
it were from an Ambuscade. The few that escaped, went o^^ without any memorable
performance, and not the least hurt done to the Elephants. Those Beasts are
clad in Iron when they go to War, beside the natural hardness of their Skin,
overgrown with a tough Scurf or Scale, too firm for any Spear to pierce.

All being at length put to Rout, the Deputy himself fled at last most
shamefully on a Nysaean Horse, leaving his Chariot behind him. However, those
that were of his Left Wing were yet ignorant hereof, and stood stoutly to their
work, though receiving more Wounds than they gave; sustaining all difficulties:
For the Troops from the Cinnamon Region, with whom they encountered, pressed
them very hard, and reduced them to the last Distress; flying off whenever
the others came on, far out-stripping them; yet shooting back, and wounding as
they fled: But as the others Retreated, came furiously again upon them, galling
their Flanks with Slings and little Darts, all which were notwithstanding
Mortal, the Piles being dipped in Serpents Blood. They bear a round Cover on
their Heads, stuck through with Arrows, the shaft end whereof is placed next
their Heads, the Pile, even to the Feathers, coming out above. Thus every one
marches clattering to fight, exposing a naked Body to the Foe: Crowned, as it
were, with Arrows, which have no Iron on their Points, nor have any need of it:
By reason that they are made of a Dragons Backbone, an ell in length, the
natural hardness whereof being sharpened at one end, serves for a point, from
whence the Greeks call such kind of Arrows, Bones. The Egyptians
notwithstanding stood a long time to it, joining their Shields together, and
sustaining showers of Darts, though they were impatient of War, yet now either
glorying in contempt of Death, or fearing the punishment of Revolters.

But when they knew the Cataphracts, the chief hope and strength of their
Battle, were fled, the very Persians, and Deputy himself, withdrawn without any
signal performance (save some small damage done to the Meroenses) but much more
received, even they at last gave over the Conflict, and turned their Backs.

Hydaspes beholding the Victory from a Tower, raised high on an Elephant, sent
after the Chasers, to bid them abstain from slaughter, but to take as many
alive as they could, especially Oroondat^s. For the AEth^opians stretching
their Wings in circular form, took in so vast a compass, as wholly to enclose
the P^rsians; leaving only one passage open for them, and that was toward the
River: Into which a great number of them, being forced by the Horsemen,
Scyth-Chariots, and others pressing upon them, found that the Stratagem which
the Deputy had laid against the Enemy, was unreasonable, and foolish:
Forasmuch, as while he kept the Nile on his Back, for fear of being surrounded,
he was not aware that he cut off from himself all possibility of flight. He
therefore was taken Prisoner amongst the rest.

Achemenes, the Son of Cybele, finding how affairs stood, endeavored
treacherously to kil^ him, (for he now repented himself of the discovery he had
made touching Arsace) since the Arguments by which he was to prove it, were
taken away) but disappointed of his expectation, the Wound which he gave
Oroondates wa^ not mortal. For which attempt however he received punishment,
being run through by a certain Egyptian, who knew the Deputy, and would have
kept him alive, according to the Command of his Master.

The Deputy therefore was brought to Hydaspes by the person that took him: He
therefore seeing him ^ainting, caused his Blood to be stanch'd, determining, if
he could, to preserve him, also confirming his purpose with these words: That
you are preserved by my good will, is just and fit; for it is the business of
generou^ Enemies, to overcome an Enemy that resists with Courage; and when
fallen, to support them with Mercy: But what reason was there to make you so
perfidious? To you indeed per^idious, replied Oroondates, but true to my
Master. Hydaspes farther asked him, Since he was overcome, what punishment he
determined upon himself? Such, answered he, as my Master would inflict on one
of your Commanders, that had been faithful to you. Certainly, said Hydaspes, he
would praise, and send him back with Rewards, if he be a true King, and no
Tyrant; and one that would be a Pattern for Princ^s. You say you have acted
faithfully, but if not foolishly too, in exposing the Lives of so many
Thousands, do you your self judge. It was not imprudent, replied he,
considering the temper of my King, who is much freer of his Punishment to the
Cowardly, than Rewards to his Valiant Servants. I therefore resolved on the
danger of the Field, where I might either perform something that was beyond
expectation, as many opportunities happen in a Fight skilfully managed, (the
event of War it self being always uncertain) or, at least, if I escaped with
life, to have excuse left, nothing that was in my Power having been omitted.

Hydaspes hereupon commended him, and sent him to Syene, with charge to the
Physicians to use their best endeavor for his Cure.

He also went himself, with the chief of his Army, the people from the Town, of
all Ages and Qualities, meeting him on the way, scattering Flowers amongst his
Soldiers, applauding his Virtue, and congratulating his Victory. When he was
carried on his Elephant, into the Town, he immediately bent his mind to Divine
Worship, and rendering Thanks to the Gods. He d^manded the Origin of the Nile,
and is there was any thing in the City worth Sigh^ or Admiration? They showed
him a Well, like to that which is at M^mphis, made of Polished Stone, on which
are drawn Lines, at an Ell distance, the one above the other: Into this Cistern
the River Water being let, by Subterranean Passage, shows the Inhabitants the
Increase or Decrease of the Nile, rising or falling below such or such a Mark
on the Stone. They likewise showed him Gnomons of Horoscopes, that at midday
give no shadow. The Sun being at the Solstice, perpendicular over Syene,
insomuch that their deepest Wells are then illuminated. Hydaspes was not much
surprised at this, the same being also ^ound at Meroe in AEthiopia. They then
told him of the Nile, extolling it with their praises, calling him the Son and
Author of Plenty, the Preserver of Upper Egypt, the Patron and Till^r of the
Lower: Every year rolling down fertile Slime, from whence he is called Nile, by
the Greeks; that is, the Distinguisher of Seasons; his Flow showing the Summer,
his Ebb the Autumn, the Spring with Flowers; that the Nile indeed was nothing
but the Year it self: The Letters of whose Numbers being computed, according to
the Figures which they represent, making three hundred sixty five Unities,
according to the Days in a Year. When they had farther spoken of the Nature and
Properties of certain Plants, Flowers and Animals: These are not so much
Egyptian Relations (said Hydaspes) as Ethiopian. But whether this River be
indeed a God, as you esteem him, and brings other Rivers along with him from
AEthiop, he is duly worshipped by you. We both adore him for other reasons
(answered the Priests) and particularly for the present favor of sending you
to us, our God and Preserver.

Hydaspes warned them to be moderate in their Praises of him; and spent the
rest of the day in diversion, entering Banquet with the Ethiopian Nobles, and
Priests of Syene; and permitting all the rest to do the same. The Syeneans,
partly selling, and partly bestowing on the Army vast Herds and Flocks, with
Plenty of Wine.

The next day, sitting on a Tribunal, he distributed the Booty of the War
amongst his Army, to every one according to his performance. When the person
that took Oroondates came before him, Demand what you will, said Hydaspes:
There is no need (answered he) of my demanding any thing more, if what I have
already taken from Oroondates (whom I preserved, according to your Order) be
adjudg'd to me by you. He therewith showed Oroondates Dagger, studded with
precious Stones of vast price, and worth many Talents of Gold; insomuch that
the standers-by cried out, That the fortune was too great for a private Man,
and ^itting only for the Kings Treasur^. What therefore is more Kingly, said
Hydasp^s, than for me to preserve that greatness of mind, as not to cover so
great a Prize. The spoil of a Captives Body by right belongs to him that takes
him Prisoner. Wherefore let him so depart, who perhaps had not granted us the
same favor, though we would never have received it.

Next came the persons who took Theagenes and Chariclea: O King, said they, our
Spoils are neither Gold nor Gems, which are of little price in AEthiopia, and
pave the Royal Palaces; but whereas we have brought you a Grecian Youth and
Virgin, of incomparable Stature and Beauty, excelling all Mankind in Person,
your self exc^pted; we beg also to be partakers of your Munificence and Bounty.
You say well, answered Hydaspes, and I remember such Persons, though I had but
a transeant sight of them: Wherefore bring them with the rest, to our Presence.
When the Messengers came for them, they asked, Whither they were to be carried?
Before Hydasp^s, answered they. Hydaspes! O ye Gu^rdia^ Angels, said they; for
as yet they were un^^^tain who was the Conqueror. Theagen^s therefore said
softly to Chariclea, Unfold the State of our A^fairs to the King, since
Hydasp^s Reigns, whom you have often told me was your Father. O Dearest, said
she, great affairs need great preparations, for where the Gods have given
intricate Beginnings, the Conclusion must be leisurely unravel^'d: especially,
the first Rise and Foundation of this Intrigue (I mean my Mother Persina) being
absent, whom yet, by the Gods favor, we hear to be alive. But there is danger
of our being Sacrifi^'d before that time, said Th^ag^n^s. None at all, answered
she, for I have often heard our Keepers say, we were reserved for S^crifices to
the Gods of Meroe: Wherefore there is no fear of our being Slain, or sent away
to another Country, being already, by Vow, given to the Gods, which cannot be
violated by any Pious Monarch. However, though we should flatter our selves
with these hopes, we shall imperfectly make out our Account, when the Persons
are not present, that can acknowledge and justify and Authorities which we
produce. Wherefore there is danger, lest through his Ignorance in the
Evidences, we should exasperate our Judge; who will think scorn, that Captives
destined for Sacrifice, should presume to call themselves Child^^n to the King.
But your Testimonials, replied Theagenes, which you have carefully preserved,
will show that it is no Forgery. The Credentials, said Chariclea, are
Credentials to them that exposed them, but to them that know them not, or at
least not all of them, they are no more than common Jewels and Bracelets; which
also may bring with them suspicion of Theft. Or, supposing that Hydaspes
acknowledge them, who is there to persuade him that Persina gave them or was
Mother to the Child?

By this time they were come in sight of the King, Bagoas also was brought
along with them. Hydaspes seeing them raised himself a little from his Throne;
and crying out to the Gods to be propitious, sat down again. His Attendants
asking what happened to him, and occasioned that Start; This morning I imagined
just such a Daughter to be born to me, and in a days time grown to her full
Stature: And whereas I am no regarder of Dreams, I forgot it, but now on sight
of her likeness it returns to my Mind.

They persuading him, that there were certain Images often formed in the fancy,
that betoken future realities; he nevertheless neglected the Vision, and asked
them who, and what they were. Chariclea being silent, and Theagenes answering,
That they were Greeks, and Kindred: Hail Greece, said he, that furnishes us
with such Noble Sacrifices for our Triumph. Then smiling to his Attendants
aside, Why had I not a Son likewise born to me in my Dream, (said he) if Dreams
are, as you say, Pictures of things to come? Then turning to Chariclea, and
speaking to her in the Greek Tongue, (which is of high esteem amongst the
Gymnosophists of AEthiopia,) But why, Virgin, are you silent, said he, and
Answer to no Interrogations? At the Altar of the Gods, answered she, to whom we
are destined Sacrifices, you shall know both me and my Parents. Hydaspes again
asked her, Of what Country? They are partly present, said she, and shall be
altogether so at that time. Hydaspes then smiled, and said, Certainly this
Daughter of Vision, dreams her self, in imagining to find her Grecian Parents
in Meroe. Let them therefore be taken care of, to be made Ornaments of our
Sacrifices. But who is this that stands next them, and seems to be an Eunuch?
The Servants answered, That he was indeed an Eunuch, and named Bagoas. Let him
follow them, said he, not to be himself a Victim, but to take care of another
Victim, this Virgin, that she be preserved Immaculate for the Ceremony. Eunuchs
are the best Guards, for being deprived themselves of enjoying, they out of
envy take care that no body else shall.

He then surveyed the remainder of Captives, and disposed of them, giving some
for Servants, whose condition was formerly such; but Persons that were of free
Birth, he restored to Liberty. Ten Youths and as many Virgins of flourishing
Beauty and fairest Stature, he appointed to atte^d Theagenes and Chariclea in
their Destiny. Answers being also given to all others that brought any Claim.
In the last place, Oroondates was set before him; to whom Hydaspes expressed
himself, That since he gained the points for which he made War, he was not
affected like most Monarchs; that he would not abuse the kindness of Fortune,
to covet more than others; nor extend his Empire by his victory; that he was
contented with the bounds which nature from the beginning had set, dividing
AEthiopia from Egypt by Cataracts. Wherefore having obtained what I came down
for, I return an adorer of Equity. As for you, if you survive, continue in your
Office of Deputy; and tell the King of Persia, that his Brother Hydaspes has
overcome, but restores you to your Dignity, being desirous of Amity; but
pr^par'd to renew the War if provoked thereunto: But enjoin that exemption from
Tribute, for ten years be given to the Syeneans.

Having thus spoken, both the Citizens and Soldiers applauded him with Shouts,
that were heard at great distance. Oroondates with his Hands stretched out, the
Right interchangeably over the Left, bowed his Body forward with Adoration;
which by the Persians is given only to their own King. Let me not be thought
said he to the standers by, to violate the Customs of my Country, adoring my
Restorer, who had both Power and Provocation to Kill me. The Dignity that
belongs to himself by right of Conquest, he confers on me: For which, if I
survive, I shall always be an instrument of Peace, between the AEthiopians and
Syeneans; but if I dye of these Wounds, let the Gods return this Kindness of
Hydaspes, both on himself and his Posterity.

THE ETHIOPIAN HISTORY. The Tenth Book.
THus have we given account of what was transacted about Syene, which after
such extremity, was restored by the Justice and Clemency of the Conqueror.
Hydaspes now sending the greatest part of his Army before him, returns into
AEthiopia: Both Persians and Syeneans following him with Congratulations and
Prayers for his safety. He therefore took his journey by the Banks of Nile, and
through the adjacent Countries. But being come to Cataractae, after Sacrifices
to Nile and the Tutelar Gods of the Borders, he turned off through the Midland
Regions. When he was arrived at Philae, he rested two days for Refreshment of
his Soldiers; therefore once more sending the multitude before him, he himself
tarried in the Town, to repair the Wall^ and settle a Garrison. Then choosing
out two Messengers with orders to change their Horses, for dispatch on the
Road, he sent them with Letters to inform his Friends at M^roe of his Victory.

To the Wise Men called Gymnosophists, who were of his Council Royal, he wrote
thus: Hydaspes to the Divine Assembly.
TH^se are to acquaint you with o^r Victory, not boasting of our Success or
Manag^ment (since ev^nts of War are at the disposal of Providence) but to
^xpress our respect for you, requesting you to meet at the appointed place, and
to grace our Sacrifices for our success with your pres^nc^.


To his Wife Persina he wrote as follows.
KNow that we are Conquerours, and what most concerns you, safe in our Person.
Wherefore make preparation for Triumph, and Sacrifices of Thanks, and come with
our Gymnosophists into the Field before the City, which is dedicated to the
Gods of our Country; the Sun, Moon, and Bacchus.




Having read these Letters, this is the Sense of my Vision (said Persina) for
last night in my Sleep, I fancied my self delivered of a Daughter of full blown
Beauty and Stature: The Pains signifying the troubles of the War and the fair
O^^spring, the complete Victory. By this time the City was filled with the
news; the Messengers Riding through the principal Streets on white Hor^es and
in white Vestments, being Crowned with the Plants of Nile, and bearing Branches
of Palm in their Hands, by their v^ry Habits and Gesture declaring their
Message. The City being thus filled with joy, they performed Sacrifices Night
and Day in their distinct Tribes, Streets and Families, crowding the Temples;
not so much for sake of the Victory, as for the safety of Hydasp^s: Whom for
his Clemency and Justice, they looked upon as their Common Parent, as well as
their King.

Persina therefor having sent vast Herds and Flocks, with all manner of Beasts
and Fowl into the Sacred Field; partly to make Hecatombs therewith, and partly
for Provision, in the public Feast, went to the Grove consecrated to Pan, the
Residence of the Gymnosophists, to whom she gave the Letters from Hydaspes,
desiring them to obey his Orders, and grace the Solemnities with their
Presence. They entreated her to stay a while without, while they went into the
Oratory, to consult the Gods Pleasure. From whence returning, after a small
stay, Sysimathres, the Provost, the rest keeping silence, spoke thus: We shall
attend you, said he, for so the Gods command: But withal, they foreshow some
tumult and disorder that will happen in the Ceremonies, which yet shall have a
happy Conclusion, forasmuch as a Member of your Body, which h^s long been lost,
shall now be restored ^nso^^ht. Whatever misfortune shall happ^n, replied
P^rsina, all things will do better for your P^es^nc^. As soon as Hydaspes
arrives, I shall info^m you. There is no n^^d of that, said Sys^mathr^s, for
his Letters will tell us that he will to morrow be here. Accordingly it
h^ppen'd; for before she was returned to her Palace, a Messenger overtook her
with the same tidings. The pu^lick Officers therefore hasten the prep^rations
for the Sacrifices, permitting only Male Persons to be present: for the Worship
b^longing to the Sun and Moon, the m^st pure and chaste Deities, they excluded
Women from the Devotion, lest any Polluti^n should happ^n therein. The
Priest^ss of the Moon was only p^rmitt^d, which Office P^rsina herself
sus^ai^'d; as Hydaspes, the King, was High Priest to the Sun, by the ancient
Rites of the Country. Charicl^a was likewise to be present, though not as
Priestess, but Victim. The people therefore were too impatient to wait till the
day was (...), but the Evening before came over the River of Astabora, some by
the Bridge; those that li^ed at distance, in Boats, which was easily done, by
reason that each containing not above two or three at once, was made by
splitting of a Cane Trunk into two parts, each half, without further labor,
serving for a Boat.

The City Meroe is a Triangular Island, made by the Confluence of the Nil^, the
Astabora and Alasobus: This inland Spot being miles in length, in Breadth, is
furnished with Animals of vast bulk, the Elephants being bred there: And as it
bears some Plants naturally, is by Improvement supplied with others: For
besides Palm Trees of prodigious Tallness, it also bears Corn of such height,
that a Man on Horseback, and sometimes on Camels, is hid in passing through:
It is withal so fertile, that the Grain which is sown comes up three hundred
fold.

The people being thus transported over the respective Rivers, they all met,
and joined Congratulations to H^daspes, as it were to some Deity; but these
however at a distance: The Gymnosophists were admitted nearest to him, so as to
join Hands, and salute him, before the Sacred ground. After them stood Persina,
in the Entrance to the Temple. After they had here finished Adorations and
Praise, they turned off to the Public Sacrifices, placing themselves in
Tabernacles that were before prepared. These were composed of four Canes, newly
cut down, each Cane being cut four square, served for a Pillar; the Covering
was made of several Boughs, the fairest being Branches of the Palm Tree. In
another Tabernacle was placed the Images of their Gods, with Pictures of famous
Persons, of Memnon, P^rs^us, and Androm^da; supposed, by them, the Authors of
their Royal Line. In Seats b^low s^t the Gymnosophists, with the Images of
their Gods li^ewise ov^r their Heads: Before them Bands of Soldiers, with
Shields, to keep o^f the Press of the people, and preserve room for the
Solemniti^s. Hydaspes, in few words, told the company his Service performed for
the Commonwealth, and commanded the Sacrifices to begin. Three Altars were
erected, two of them appertaining to the Sun and Moon, the third to Bacchus,
set at distance, to whom they o^fered all m^nner of living Cre^tures. Upon the
Suns Altar were Sacrificed young Hors^s: A yoke of Ox^n to the Moon, as b^ing
s^r^i^^able in Husbandry. In the mean time there was a voice heard among the
Crowd, Let the usual Sacrifice of the Country, for our common safety, ^e first
made; and after that, the first fruits of the War be offered. Hydaspis
unders^^nding them to mean humane Sac^i^^c^^, as was usual of Captives taken in
Foreign Wars, signed to them with his hand, that they should instantly have
their Desire: Withal commanding the appointed Prisoners to be brought forth:
Among them came Theagenes and ^hariclea, guarded, but not boun^. The rest were
pensive, only these smiled with cheerful Countenance: Chariclea looking
constantly on Persina, so that she was concerned thereat, and said, O Sir, What
a Virgin have you commanded to be Sacrificed? I never saw so great Beauty and
Resolution. Her Age and Form extremely move me; if our Daughter had lived, she
would have been now of her years: I wish to the Gods you could find some means
for her Delivery. I should be pleased to have her an Attendant at my Table.
Perhaps the unhappy Creature is a Grecian, for never was there such a Beauty in
Egypt. She is a Greek, answered he, by Father and Mother, whom she promised to
produce in this presence, but how that can be possible, I do not imagine: But
that she should be delivered from this Sacrifice, I am sure is absolutely
impossible, though I my self could wish it, and am touched with Compassion for
her. Our Laws exact a Man to be Sacrificed to the Sun, and a Virgin to the
Moon; and she being first taken, the people will not otherwise be satisfied:
One help only remains, which is, if she prove not a pure Virgin, for such the
Sacrifice requires; and if so, she is incapable of your Reception. Let her be
so found, said Persina, rather than Die; nor can she be much blamed, after such
Exile and Travels, especially having Beauty, that could scarce escape Force and
Rape. Hydaspes then commanded Fire to be brought, by the Priests, from the
Temple, on which the Captives were to tred. Bars of Gold were heated over this
Fire, and had this Virtue, That every unchaste or perjured person were burned
with treading on them, but such as were otherwise, received no harm. The
Corrupted Persons they appointed to Bacchus, and other Gods. After Theagenes
had trod thereon, and was found Chaste, which was with wonder beheld, he being
of such Youth and Vigor; wherefore he was set apart, to be offered to the Sun.
Then, said he to Chariclea aside, is Death the Reward of Chastity in AEthiopia?
But wherefore do you not now discover your self? What other time do you expect?
or will you stay till the Knife has pierced our Throats? Therefore declare your
self: When you are known, it is possible I may be saved for your sake; at least
you will be safe your self, which will be my satisfaction in Death.

She told him her Time was now at hand; and so, without command, put on her
holy Vestment, which she brought with her from Delphi, wrought with Gold, and
set with Jewels; then with her hair dishevelled, and, as it were, inspired with
Divine fury, she leaped upon the Coals, where she stood a long time without
hurt, the Fire only giving addition to her Beauty; so that in that Holy Attire,
she seems to the Beholders rather a Goddess than Mortal Woman: So that the most
Superstitious amongst them heartily wished her Deliverance. Persina, above all
others, was troubled, and said to Hydaspes, How unhappy is this wretch that
boasts of a Chastity that is so fatal to her! What is there to be done for her
Relief? You trouble me in vain, said Hydaspes; your pity is foolish on one that
cannot be saved; and seems from the Beginning, for her Excellence, to be
reserved for the Gods. Then turning to the Gymnosophists, he asked them, Why
they did not begin? The Gods forbid, (answered Sysimathres, in Greek, that the
people might not understand him) for we have too much profaned our Eyes and
Ears with what is already done. As for our parts, we will retire into the
Temple, being of opinion that these humane Sacrifices are abomination to the
Gods; we could also wish no Blood of any other Creature to be shed on such
account, as knowing that Prayers and bloodless Offerings are most grateful to
the Divine Powers. However, your presence, Sir, is necessary, since the
customs of the Country exact it, and your people will not otherwise be
satisfied. Yet you may be sensible that there can be no good event, because the
Gods, as you s^^, protect the Strangers, by keeping the Fire from harming them.
Having thus said, he, with the rest of his Brotherhood, went away. Then
Chari^lea leaping from the Fire, ran to Sysimathres, as he was going, and
falling at his feet, (in spite of the Officers that would have hindered her, as
supposing she begged of him to ^pare her Life) saying, Stay a while, most wise
of Men, for I have a Cause to plead before the King and Queen, and know that
the Sentence on persons of my Birth, can only be given by you: They gladly
heard her thus Speak, and Informed the King thereof. Hydaspes smiled, and asked
what Judgment that could be? Or how he could come in any Danger from her? What
she shall deliver may inform you, said Sysimathres. But take heed, said he, you
do not wrong our Majesty, in making a King to Plead with a Prisoner: Equity and
Justice, answered Sysimathres, are without distinction of persons: The Law
permits you, replied Hydaspes, to determine Controversies, between the King and
his Subjects, but not with Strangers. Wise and Just Men, returned Sysimathres,
are impartial in destribution of Equity. Well, quoth Hydaspes, Let her Speak
since Sysimathres desires it; though it be certain She will say nothing to
purpose, only some devised matter, as people in her Extremity are apt to do.
Chariclea was the more encouraged when She heard Sysimathr^s Name, he being the
Person that had first taken her; and Ten years before, had given her to
Charicles, when he went Ambassador to Oroondates, and even then the Chief of
the Gymnosophists. Chariclea knew him not by sight, as being separated from him
so young; yet She remembered his Name: Wherefore She hoped that he would now be
her Advocate. Therefore lifting up her Hands to Heaven, She said aloud that all
might hear; O Sun, thou Founder of my Pedigree, and all ye other Deities and
Glorious Spirits: Bear Witness that I shall deliver nothing but Truth. Then
(turning toward the King) Do you command, Sir, Strangers or People of this
Country to be offered? Strang^rs said he? Then is it time for you to to provide
other Vi^tims; for I am of this Country, and Born your Subject. He admired
hereat and s^id, She spo^e ^alsly: You wonder at small things answered
Chariclea; I have yet greater to d^liver, ^eing not only of this Country, (...)
the Blood Royal. Hydasp^s at this turned aside with Scorn: She th^n proceeded
saying, O Fat^e^ do not thus despise and deny your own D^ugh^er: The King th^n
fell into Indignation and said, Sysimathres, how long will you abuse our
Patience? Is She not distracted, or of insu^^^rable B^l^ness, thus to Claim
Kindred with us, to save her Life? You your selves know, that I was never so
Fortunate as to have a Child. Wh^r^fore take her away. No Man answered she must
carry me away, without Command of my Judges: You your self are now judged:
Perhaps O King the Law of this Country suffers you to Kill Strangers; but
neither that nor the Law of Nature to Kill your own Children; for that you are
my Father the Gods shall prove this Day. All Controversies in Law, consist in
Two Points; that is Writings, and Confirmation by Witnesses. I have both these
to prove my self your Daughter: For a Witness I will produce, no meaner a
person than the Judge himself; I will likewise lay Writings before you, that
shall fully express my State. Having thus said, She unfolded her Fascia, and
gave it to Persina: She no sooner fixed her Eyes thereon, but She was struck
with terror, and disabled from Speaking, at once trembling and glad for what
She saw; especially with the suddenness of the Chance. Yet was She afraid to
expose it, least Hydaspes should give no credit thereunto; and consequently
would in^^ict Punishment on her. He perceiving her so much concerned, asked the
meaning. Does ought in that Writing trouble you? My Lord, King and Husband,
said She, I have nothing to say; take and peruse it your self, which will
sufficiently inform you: Having given it to him, She sat down again pensive.

When Hydaspes had ran it over with the Gymnosophists, he marvelled extremely,
and the more to find Sysimathres, much concerned and aba^hed: Wherefore a
Thousand thoughts ro^e in his mind, he looking often upon the Fascia and often
upon the Maid: Having thoroughly perused it, and found both her Exposition in
her Infancy, with the Reason of it: I know, said he, that I once had a
Daughter, but was told, and by Persina her self, that She was Dead, but now
perceive that She was exposed in her Infancy. But who was the Person that found
her, took her up, and bred her, I am yet to seek; or who it was that carried
her into Egypt. How may I be assured that this is She? And whether the Infant
that was exposed be not Dead, while he that found her, took advantage of his
good Fortune; to impose on our desire of having a Child, by proposing a
Changeling instead; and Coloring the Che^t with this Fascia.

Your first doubt I can clear, answered Sysimathres: I was the Person that
found the exposed Child, bred her for some time, and carried her with me to
Egypt; when on Embassy you sent me thither. You know well, that our order dare
not speak untruth: I likewise know the Fascia to be the same by the Royal
Characters, and impossible to be counterf^i^ed; even you your self may know
Persina's Handwriting therein: But there were other Testimonals found with
this, and by me delivered to the Person to whom I gave her, the Man a Greek,
and of seeming Honesty. They are also preserved, said Charicl^a, and produced
the Bracelets. Persina was now more astonished: Hydaspes asking her if she knew
them? She answered she did? And that this Examination would more properly be
made at Home; and not in so public an Audience. Then was Hydaspes more anxious
than before: Then said Chariclea, these Signals were my Mothers, but this, Sir,
is properly your own; giving him the Ring with the Pantarbe-Stone. Hydaspes
knew it, it being the same he gave to Persina, on his Contract with her. I know
these tokens, said he to Chariclea; but not that you came by them, as being my
Daughter; for not to insist on other Doubts, your Color is strange and never
seen in AEthiopia. The Infant was also white which I carried away (said
Sysimathres) besides the time of her Age agrees, it being now Seventeen Years
since she was exposed. Beside I perceive the same Luster of her Eyes, the same
Fair Lineaments, Complexion, and unparrallell'd Beauty. You speak well, said
Hydaspes, and rather like a Patron, than Judge of her Cause; but take heed,
least in favoring her, you bring question of Scandal upon my Wife: It being
impossible, that we being both AEthiops, should have a Fair Child. We call him
the best Judge answered Sysimathres, who is a Patron of Equity: But how do we
seem more, to Patronize the Maid than you? For your Censure we are not
concerned, whose business is more to approve our selves to the Gods than to
Men: So that is enough for us to satisfy our own Consciences. As to your Doubt
concerning her Color, the Fascia it self answers it: That Persina conceived a
Daughter of this Complexion; by looking on the Picture of Andromeda, in your
Bedchamber: If you doubt the likeness, the Picture is here at hand, compare
them together, you will see no difference between the Living and Painted Virgin.

When they were set together, the Beholders were surpised at the Resemblance,
which raised a great noise; those who stood nearer, informing them that were at
more distance: So that Hydaspes himself could no longer doubt, but stood
Speec^less with Joy and Admiration. At last there is one thing yet wanting: O
Sysimathres, said he, the^e was a certain Speck or Mole above my Daughters
Right Elbow: which was found also on Charicl^a.

P^rsina could no longer contain her self, but leaping from the Throne, threw
her Arms about her Neck, weeping for Joy, and almost ready to faint away. The
same Parental Affection seized Hydaspes, though with more manly Government, yet
he also embraced her, and not without Tears. After this, waving his Hand, he
silenced the buzzing amongst the Crowd. O you that are present, said he, you
have seen and heard me this day proved a Father beyond all expectation. Yet
such is my regard to you, that waving the care of Succession and Paternal Joy,
I am for your sakes ready to deliver her up to the Gods in Sacrifice: For
thoug^ I see you also concerned for the Misfortune of so fair a Virgin, yet
whether you will or no, I must perform the Custom of our Country, and prefer
the public Interest to private Affection.

Having thus spoken, he took Chariclea by the Hand, as to lead her to the
Altar; at which the whole multitude set up a Cry, not su^fering him to lead her
one step forward, but calling out save the Maid, save her whom the Gods would
have preserved: We return you our thanks, our Laws are satisfied. We
ac^nowledge you our King, do you acknowledge your self a Father. There is no
man that will lay Hands on her; you that are Father of your Country, be Father
of your own House: These and many more such Expressions were uttered; downright
resisting his Proposal, and saying, the Gods would be satisfied with other
O^ferings. Hydaspes su^fer'd himself to be overcome, and took pleasure in the
Violence.

Standing therefore next to Chariclea, dearest, said he, that you are our
Daughter, the proofs are sufficient; but who is this Youth, who was taken
Prisoner with you, and is now set before the Altar? or how could you call him
Brother, when you were together brought into my Presence at Syene? For how
shall he be found our Son? For Persina has but once been delivered, and that
only of your self. Charicl^a blushing and casting her Eyes on the ground, I
feigned him indeed to be my Brother in that Exigence, but who he is, he himself
will better inform you. Do you therefore take place by your Mother on the
Tribunal; filling her with greater joy, than when she first Bore you; entertain
her with the History of your Affairs, while I take care for the Sacrifices, and
choose some Virgin to be made a Victim in your stead, with the Gr^cian Youth.

Chariclea could scarce forbear crying out at the mention hereof, but governing
her Affection, once more attempted him in these words:

O Sir, there is no need to seek for another of my Sex, since the people have
excused me: But if you must, there must also another Youth be found, or if that
be not done, no other Maid, for I my self must also die: For the Gods have
determined me to Live and Die with him.

Hydaspes not yet understanding her, said, I commend this Humanity in you
Daughter, toward a Grecian and Stranger, the Companion of your Exile; but it
is impossible to exempt him from Sacrifice without Violation of our Religion,
neither will the people dispense therewith. O King, answered she, if I may not
call you Father, if the Mercy of the Gods has spared my Body, the same Clemency
will spare my Soul: But if the Destinies must have it so, that this Youth must
needs adorn the Ceremonies, grant me yet one Request, that he may be killed by
my Hand.

What Contradictions are these (said Hydaspes) the Person whom but now as a
Friend you endeavored to save, you now beg leave to Kill with your own Hand as
an Enemy. I see, but grant it might, you may not be permit^ed, it being only
lawful for the Priests of the Sun and Moon, and amongst them only the High
Priest, that has a Wife and Priestess, who has a Husband. All this can be no
hinderance replied Chariclea.

Hydaspes considering her late proof of Virgin Estate by enduring the Fire,
thought her discompos^d in her S^nses, and desired his Wi^e to discourse with
her apart, to bring her to her self. In the mean time, I will give Audience to
the Ambassadors that wait to congratulate our Victory; and till another Vi^gin
be Elected in her stead. Having thu^ spok^n, he ascended a Chair of State not
far distant from the Tabernacle, commanding the Embass^dours to come before him
with their Presents. The Master of Ceremoni^^ Harmonious, asked if all should
be admitted together, or if they should come distinctly, according to the
Dignity of their respective Na^ions: In order, said Hydaspes. Shall Merabus
your Brothers Son come first, said the Officer? Stupid Man, said Hydaspes, why
did you not instant^y inform me of his Arrival, whom you know to be no Legate
but a King, Son to my Brother, Heir to his Throne, and my own adopted
Successor? As soon therefore as Merabus came near his Presence, a Manly Youth
and tall of Stature surpassing all about him, the Ethiopian Guards with
respect, made way for him.

Hydaspes came down from his Throne to meet him, embracing him with paternal
Courtesy, and saying; you come in good time, my Son, to assist our Triumphant
Rites, and also your own Nuptial Ceremonies: Since the Gods, who were Authors
of our Love, have, beyond all expectation, produced a Daughter for us, and for
you a Bride. Of this affair more at leisure; at present, if you have any thing
to mention on behalf of your Country, declare it. Meraebus at mention of a
Wife, blushed so as to have it perceived through the duskiness of his
Complexion. After a little pause, Other persons, said he, will present you with
the best Rareties of their Country to adorn your Triumph, but I, with what I
judged most suitable to your Martial Temper, for a Present offer you a
Swordman, inured to Blood, and exercised in Arms, so that none dare oppose him;
in Wrestling, Whirl-bat, or any other Warlike Exercise, of such Skill and
Strength, that none are able to contend with him. Accordingly he beckoned to
have him brought in presence.

He therefore came forward, and was of that stature, that when he stooped to
salute Hydaspes Knees, he still seemed tall as any of the rest. Immediately,
without waiting for Command, he stripped himself before all the company,
challenging any person to single Combat. When none appeared, though the King
often summoned, by the Herald; You shall receive, said Hydaspes to him, a
Present fit for your Courage and Bulk; withal commanding an Elephant, of vast
Magnitude, to be brought forth for him: He willingly received it. The people,
when the Beast appeared, laughed extremely at the pleasant Humor of the King.
With this Derision taking Revenge on him whom they did not dare to encounter.
After Meraebus, were admitted the Ambassadors from the Seri, bringing two
Vestments, made by Insects of their Country, the one of Tyrian Dye, the other
Snowy White. Having tendered their presents, they were rewarded by the King,
with Release of certain Prisoners in his custody.

The Arabian Legates came next, with Spices and Perfumes, the product of their
Country, in such quantities, that they perfumed all the Air around. After them,
the Trogloditae, with Gold, and Griffins with Golden Bridles. Then the Blemmi,
with Arrows made of Dragons Bones, and made up in circular form: And these, O
King, said they, we present you with less costly than others Offerings, but of
Service to you against the Persians on the Rivers Bank. They are more esteemed
by us, said Hydaspes, than so many Talents of Gold, withal inviting them to
make what Demands they pleased. When they requested abatement of Tribute, he
released it to them for ten years successively.

When these had thus made their Complements (most of them being r^munerated by
the King with richer gifts than what they brought) in the last place came the
Axiomati, who indeed paid no Tribute, but were in League with him. They also
brought Presents; amongst others, an Animal of strange Form and Nature, of the
size of a Camel, but of spotted Skin, and covered with Scales. His hinder parts
and Belly like a Lion, his fore Legs and Shoulders exceeding other Members; a
long Neck, and waxing very slender, from so large a Body: His Head resembling a
Camel, in bigness twice exceeding the Lybian Ostrich, horribly rolling his
Eyes, that seemed as if enflamed with Red Lead. His Gate was still more
strange, being like no other Animals, but moving the two Legs on his Right Side
together, and then those on his Left, carrying forward first the one Side of
his Body and then the other. Of temper so tame and gentle b^ use, that his
master led him up and down, with a small Cord in his Hand. When this Creature
appeared, the multitude were amazed, and gave him from his Various Shape, the
name of Camelopardalis. He was the occasion of a great Disorder which thus
happened.

There were a Yoke of Bulls placed before the Altar of the Moon, four White
Horses at the Altar of the Sun, ready for the Sacrifice. The Horses spying this
strange Monster, were so terrified that two of them broke out of their hands
that held them, as also one of the Bulls, and ran out wild. They could not
however break through the press, the Soldiers joining in a Ring, and with
their Shields obstructing their passage. They were at once the occasion of
great Laughter and Terror; the persons at distance shouting to see others born
down, and trodden by them: All things were overturned that stood in their way.
The Clamor was so great, that Persina and Chariclea, opened the Curtain to
look out. At this time Theagenes, whether out of his Natural Vigor, or
Inspiration from the Gods, seeing his Keepers dispersed with the fright,
started up from the Altar where he kneeled, and snatching from thence a cleft
stick, leaped on the Back of one of the Horses that were left, and using his
Main for a Bridle, forced him on, and turned the Bull that had broke loose. The
Spectators at first thought that he intended to make his escape, and set up a
cry that they should not suffer him to pass. But they soon perceived he had no
such intention: For pursuing the Bull, and catching hold of his Tail, he drove
him before him, dexterously avoiding his short Turns. With this management he so
brake his Mettle, that he now suffered him to ride side by side to him,
insomuch that the Sweat of each Beast mingled with the other.

They ran with their Heads so even together, that the people, at distance, took
the Horse and Bull for one Creature, and applauded Theag^nes as the Author of a
Miracle. Thus were all the Multitude employed. Chariclea in the mean time
looked on with horror, not knowing what he intended and feared more for his
danger than for her own Life when lately at Stake. Persina perceived her
concern, and said to her, You are troubled, Daughter, for this Stranger; I
confess I cannot my self help pitying his Youth, but yet I hope he will escape
this hazard, and be preserved safe for the Sacrifice. How absurd is it
(answered Chariclea) to wish him to escape Death, that he may Dye! But, Oh
Mother, if you can save his Life, you will do a thing most grateful to me!
Persina partly suspecting her passion, said, Though it be impossible for me to
preserve him, yet take Courage to acquaint me with your concern with this
Stranger; if it has not been altogether ve^tuous, yet a Mothers kindness knows
how to indulge the frailty of a Child. Chariclea then wept bitterly, and cried
out, It Is the extremity of my Misfortune to speak to understanding persons, yet
not be understood; but must be forced to an open and gross Confession.

As she was now going to reveal the whole matter, she was once more hindered by
a new shout amongst the people. Theagenes having now fronted the Bull, quitted
his Horse, leaped on the Bulls Neck, and clasping his Arms round the roots of
his Horns, his Hands fastened in his Forehead Tassock, his Face lying between
the Horns, the rest of his Body hanging with all its weight, down over the
Beasts right Shoulder, insomuch that he was often trod upon; yet he so
encumbered his passage by this means, and tired him, that directly over against
the place where Hydaspes sat, he tumbled down on his Head, but so that his
Hoofs were turned uppermost, and his Horns struck into the Sand, so that his
Head seemed fast rooted to the Earth; his Legs all the while sprawling in the
Air. Th^agenes also still held him down with his Left Hand, his Right lifted up
toward Heaven; and thus with generous Countenance surveyed Hydaspes and the
Company; provoking them to Laughter with the spectacle; the Bull all the while
with Bellowing, like a Martial Trumpe^, sounding his Conquest: The people
answered with shouts, and promiscuously gabbling, extolled him to the Skies.
The Kings Servants, therefore, as they were ordered, some led Theagen^s to the
King, others fastening Ropes to the Bulls Head, led him with the Horses once
more to the Alar. Hydaspes beginning some discourse with Theagenes, the people
who were pleased with his Person from the first minute they saw him, but now
stupisy'd at his Strength and Courage, in the last place envying the Honor
given to Meraebus his Ethiopian Wrestler, with one Cry, demanded that he who
had received the Elephant, should engage in single Combat with him that
conquered the Bull. When they had long pressed for it, Hydaspes at last
consented. The AEthiop was immediately put into the middle of the Circle,
sternly and proudly surveying all around him, stretching himself, and taking
lofty vast steps, compassing an Ell at every stride.

When he was come up before the Council, Hydaspes spoke to Theagenes in Greek;
It is the p^oples desire that you undertake this Combat: Let it be so, said
Th^agenes, But after what manner? Wrestling, said Hydaspes: Why not rather with
Swords, said Theagenes, by which some Honor might be gained; at least, with my
Death, content Chariclea, who, I find conceals our affairs, and forsakes me at
the last. What you mean by mentioning Chariclea, said Hyd^sp^s, I know not; but
you must Wrestle, and not fight with Swords; for we may not suffer any Blood to
be shed before that of Sacrifice. He understanding Hydaspes's meaning, that he
feared lest he should be killed before he died in Sacrifice; You do well, said
he, to reserve me for the Gods. With these words he put himself in posture:
fixing his Feet firmly to the ground, his whole Body put in the best order:
Thus he impatiently waited the assault of his Adversary.

The AEthiop seeing this, with a look of Derision and Indignation mixed
together, ran furiously upon him, hitting Theagenes on the Neck with his Elbow,
as heavily as if he had struck him with a Leaver; then drawing back, laughed
out aloud at his own performance.

Theagenes, who was versed from his Childhood in Exercises, knew that such
robustuous Strength, was not directly to be engaged, but deluded by Art,
exposed the other side of his Neck for a second blow, which the Barbarian
repeated, and then withdrew as before: He therefore now despising him, and
coming on the third time more carelessly, Theagen^s slipping under his Elbow,
and clasping his Arms round his wast, which he was scarce able to embrace, cast
him quite over his Shoulders, and pitched him all on a Heap, with his Head first
to the ground, to the hazard of his Neck. The people now Shouted louder than
before; nor could Hydaspes longer contain himself, but leaping down from his
Throne, cried; O hard necessity of Law, what a Noble Youth are we compelled to
destroy. Then calling him to him, said, it only now remains, that thou be
Crowned for the Sacrifice. This Famous though unserviceable Victory, deserves a
Crown: That I should set you free is not in my Power, but as much as I can do
in favor of you, I will; so that if you have any request to make to me before
you Die, propose it. With these words, he put a Golden wreath on his Head,
beset with Diamonds. Grant me therefore, said Theagenes, what I shall request,
since you have promised it. If I may not escape being sacrificed, at le^st let
me be Killed, by the Hand of your new found Daughter.

Hydaspes was stung at this motion, reflecting on Chariclea's request, which
was like this, yet thought it not worth his while, nicely to search the matter:
Those things, O Stranger, said he, which were in my Power, I commanded you to
ask, and promised that I would grant: The Law exacts, That the Slayer of the
Sacrifice, be a Wife and no Virgin. But she has a Husband, answered Theagenes:
You rave, said Hydaspes, and these are words of a person under Consternation of
Death. The Fire has proved her free from Man: Unless you call Meraebus here her
Husband, nor can I guess how you could come to surmize so much, neither is he
yet her Husband, but in Intention only: Neither shall he ever ^e, said
Theagenes, if I know any thing of Chariclea's mind; or as Divine Sacrifice, can
fore-shew any future event. But Sacrifices, said Meraebus, can give no
Divination till they are Slain, and their Intrals laid open. Wherefore, O
Father, you have rightly Spoken, that the Stranger raves with apprehension of
Death. Therefore if you please, let some body take him to the Altar. Theagenes
was accordingly led away: But Chariclea, who was a little relieved at his
Victory, and conceived better hopes; when she saw him led again to the Altar,
relapsed into Sorrow. Persina comforted her, saying, it was yet possible for
him to be rescued, if she would plainly and fully declare, what she demanded to
know. Chariclea found there was no longer time for delay, and therefore freely
began, to tell the principal parts of her Story. Hydaspes in the mean time,
asked by his Officers, if there were any of the Ambassadors yet unanswered?
Only the Syeneans, answered Harmonias, who wait with Letters from Oroondates.
They are newly arrived, and bring matters of some moment: Let them also appear,
said Hydaspes.

Accordingly they were brought, presenting the Letters which Hydaspes read, of
these Contents: To the Merciful and Fortunate King of the AEthiopians,
Oroondates, Deputy to the Great King.
SInce after Conquest over me in Field, you again overcame me in Clemency,
restoring me to my Office, it will not seem strange, if you farther grant me a
small request: A certain Virgin, as she was led along, became your Prisoner of
War; that she was by you sent into AEthiopia, I am informed: Her I entreat you
to restore to me, not only for her own sake, but her Fathers, for whom I would
preserve her. He has traveled far in search of her, and was taken Prisoner
during the War by my Garrison at Elephantina: He has therefore desired me to
recommend him to your Clemency. You have him therefore amongst other Legates,
such a Person as by his Aspect may be known to be Noble, and deserve what he
shall beg at your hands. S^nd him therefore back to me pleased, and rejoice the
heart of a disconsolate Father.




When Hydaspes had read this, he asked which was the Person amongst the
Legates, who was mentioned in the Letters, who is in search of his Daughter:
When they showed him the Old man, O Stranger, said Hydaspes, I will do all that
Oroondates has desired: Ten Virgin Captives only we brought away, and whereas
one of them is known not to be her, do you survey the other Nine; and if you
find her, take her. The Old Man fell down to embrace his feet, and surveying
the Virgins, as they were brought before him, found not her amongst them;
therefore he sorrowfully said, None of these, O King, is she. I was ready to
gratify you, said Hydaspes, you must blame your fortune if you cannot find her;
for you are free to satisfy your self that none other came with our Camp.

When the Old Man had bent his brows, and wept a while, he lifted up his Eyes,
surveying the Company around, and of a sudden ran forth as if he had been mad.
When he was come up to the Altar, taking off his Cloak, and twisting it like a
Rope, he cast it about Theagenes his Neck, and cried out in all their hearing,
I have found thee, O my Enemy, I have gotten thee, thou mischievous and
accursed Man! The Officers would have taken him off, but he would not quit his
hold, till he had leave to bring him before Hydaspes and the Council; to whom
he addressed himself in this manner, O King, said he, this Man is the Robber that
has taken away my Daughter even from the Temple of Apollo, and now, like a
pious person, he kneels before the Altar. All were astonished at what he said,
not understanding the Words, but surpised with the Action and Manner.

Hydaspes commanding him to speak more plainly, Charicles (for he was the Old
Man) concealed the Truth concerning Chariclea, fearing lest if she were dead by
the way, he should be troubled by her true Parent^. But he thus briefly uttered
what could li^^l^ harm him. I had a Daughter, O King, if (...) had seen how
beautiful and surpassing in Wisdom, you would not blame my Sorrow. She led her
Life in Virginity, and was Priestess to Diana, which is worshipped at Delphos.
That Maid, this bold Thessalian, has stolen out of the Temple of Apollo, while
officiating a Holy Embassage to that City; during the Celebration of our
Festival. He must therefore be censured, to have offended your God the Sun (who
is all one with our Apollo, and done Sacrilege on his Temple. A false Priest of
Memphis, was also his Companion in this heinous Fact. I went to Memphis in
search of them, which I supposed to be the place, whither Calasiris would go:
When I arrived there, I found that he was Dead, and was informed by his Son
Thyamis, of all that had befaln to my Daughter; wherefore you shall well
perform the part of a King, in accepting the Deputies request on my behalf.
Here he held his peace, and wept most bitterly. What say you to this, said
Hydaspes, turning to Theagenes? All that he has laid to my Charge (answered
Theagenes) is true: As to him, I am a Robber, but to you, I have performed good
Service. Restore therefore, (said Hydaspes) what is not your own, to become a
pure Sacrifice to the Gods. Not he that did the wrong (said Theagenes) ought to
make restitution; but he that has the benefit: Seeing therefore you have her,
do you restore her, Chariclea is the Person, whom he also will own to be your
Daughter. No man could longer contain himself: Sysimathres kept silence along
time, notwithstanding he knew the whole Mystery, till it were bolted out by
little and little: Then coming forth, he Embraced Charicles, and said, your
Adoptive Daughter, whom I once delivered to you, is well, found, and proved to
be Daughter to the King, which you your self, also well know. Chariclea also
ran forth from the Tabernacle, like one distracted, without regard to her
quality, or years, and falling at Charicles his Feet, said, O Father, no less
dear to me, than my natural Parent, take what revenge you please upon me,
notwithstanding, all the excuse that I have of the Gods, Commands for what I
did.

Persina also turning to Hydaspes, said, assure your self, Sir, that it is so,
This young Grecian is your Daughters Husband. The people were overjoyed at the
Discovery, though they imperfectly, understood it, or rather were Divinely
inspired, with the knowledge thereof. Contraries were reconciled to attend this
Wonder; Sorrow being joined with Mirth, and Tears with Smiles: The cruel
Slaughter, which was every moment expected, turned into a Holy and Bloodless
Sacrifice.

O Wisest of Men, said Hydaspes to Sysimathres, instruct us what we are to do?
to decline the Sacrifice of the Gods, is Sacrilege, and to Kill the Innocent,
and such as they favor, Impious.

Then Sysimathres (not in the Grecian Language as before) but in Ethiopian, to
be understood of all, thus expressed himself. O King, said he, Darkness is
sometimes thrown over the most descerning Understandings, to produce the
greater joy. You ought long since, to have been sensible, That the Gods would
not permit this Sacrifice, resolving to make your Daughter Chariclea, happy in
all her desires; accordingly they have hither brought her Foster-father, from
the midst of Greece: They have likewise sent Frights and Disorder to disturb
the Sacrifices, as signifying, that more agreeable O^ferings should be made:
They have lastly shown you, a Bridegroom for your Daughter; this Grecian Youth,
whom they have with Miracles delivered. Wherefore let us obey their pleasure,
and no more offend them with humane Victims, whose best Sacrifices, are Prayers
and Obedience.

Sysimathres having said this with an audible voice, Hydaspes took Theagenes
and Charicle^ by the Hand, saying, you who are present, and see that these
things are come to pass, by the direction of the Divine Powers, whose will it
is impossible to resist, since you also seem to approve their Choice, bear
Witness to the Nuptials, which I here ratify; which we will farther confirm by
Holy Rites, and so let us fall to Worshipping our Gods. The whole Army, with
redoubled Shouts and Clapping their Hands, expressed their consent to the match.

Hydaspes then approached the Altars, and ready to begin the Solemnities, said,
O Sun our Lord, and Moon our Patroness: Since Theagenes and Chariclea, are by
your good Will, declared Husband and Wife, I doubt not, but you will accept
their O^ferings, and suffer them to do Sacrifice in our Steads. Having thus
said, he took the Mitres, the Ensigns of Priesthood, from his own and Persina's
Head, placing them on Theagenes and Chariclea. When this was done, Charicles
called to mind, the Oracle delivered to him at Delphi, was now completed,
which foretold concerning this Young Pair, that they should arrive at a Soil
parched with Heat; Where their proved Virtue, just rewards should wear,
And Snowy Wreaths from Sunburned Temples bear.


Being thus Crowned with Mitres, and vested with Priesthood by Hydaspes, the
Ceremonies being now finished with lighted Torches by their sides, they were
Born in Chariots, with Consorts of Flutes and other In^truments: Theagenes with
Hydaspes, Sysimathres in another Chariot with Charicles, Persina in another
with Chariclea: With Music and Congratulations toward the City: Where the
more retired Ceremonies appertaining to the Nuptials were to be performed.

FINIS.

