AN EXACT SURVEY OF THE AFFAIRS Of the United NETHERLANDS.

Comprehending more fully than any thing yet extant, all the Particulars of
that Subject.

In Twelve HEADS, mentioned in the Address to the READER.

Ictus Piscator sapit.

LONDON, Printed by Tho^ Mabb, for Thomas Johnson, at the Golden Key in
Cannon-Alley, over against the great North-door of Saint Paul's Church, Anno
1665.

The Preface to the READER.
THese discourses now in hand, are published with no further care of their
reception and entertainment, than the consequence of them may deserve; (whereof
the Readers not the Publishers must be Judges.)

And we need not be moved with the common Passions of such as make Epistles and
Prefaces, conceiving our trust very well discharged, when we have given the
Reader the useful Contents of the Book; which contains

I. An exact History of the Dutch, since they inhabited that Country, An. 700,
to this present year 1665, with a continued and close succession, p. 1.

II. A very particular account of their Revolt from the King of Spain's
subjection, and their being declared a Free State at the Hague 1608, and
confirmed so at Munster 1648.

III. An impartial view of the assistances by Councils, countenance, 60000 men,
and 3 m^llions of Money afforded by Q Elizabeth, K. James, K. Charles the
first, of Famous memory, upon their humble Petition when the Distressed States,
that they might live under our Protection.

IV. A faithful Narration of such affronts and injuries as they have offered us
in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America; particularlarly in Amboyna.

V. A complete Recapitulation of the seven Advantages they make of our Fishing,
and Royal favors of his most Sacred Majesty; 1. In their shipping. and their
Mariners. 2. In Trade. 3. In Towns and Fortifications. 4. In their Power
abroad. 5. In public Revenue. 6. In private wealth. 7. In all manner of
Provisions, and store of things necessary, amounting to 24 Millions yearly, by
His Majesty's gracious permission at home and abroad.

VI. How unable they are, in that and 16 other respects to engage with England;
and that point made out.

VII. In a very punctual relation of the last Dutch War, from its rise when it
began, 1650, 1651, throughout its whole management, to the years 1652, 1653,
when it was ended; with the virtues of that Peace.

VIII. A prudential survey of the present State of the united Netherlands, in
regard of the S^i^uation of their Country, and in respect of their Neighbors.

IX. A satisfactory consideration of their present State, in point of Interest
throughout the World, and their dealings with every Prince particularly.

X. Very curious reflections on their present State in point of Government, and
that not only in the States. General, but in every one of the 7 Provinces, and
the Towns belonging to them apart.

XI. Choice Observations on the present state of the Dutch, 1. In point of
Government* 2. In matters of Religion. 3. In the particulars of their strength
by Sea and Land.

XII. An exact account of the state of the present* Controversy between
England and the United Netherlands in the three great points; 1. Of Trade. 2.
Of Fshing. 3. Of Pretensions, Claims, affronts, and Wrongs.

And all this directed to no other end, than the framing of right, and clear
Apprehensio^s touching the present affairs in those men's minds [who are very
many] that are therein concerned in point of Interest; or in those [who are
almost all] who concern themselves therein in point of Discourse,
Consideration, and Observation; for whose accommodation these Discourses are
contrived Close, and not Tedious; Real, and not Wordy; justly entered in the
List of those Writings that express more than they promise, and Intimate more,
than they do Express.

Books lately Printed.
A Disswasive from Popery: By the Right Revereud Father in God, Jeremy Tailor,
L. Bishop of Down and ^onner.

A Vindication of the Lords Prayer, as a formal Prayer, to be used by
Christians as a Prayer: By Meric Casaubon, D. D.

The History of the French Academie, erected at Paris: By Card* Richleiu,
consisting of the most refined Wits of that Nation.

The lives of the two most Illustrious Princes, Henry Duke of Gloucester, and
Mary, Princess of Orange.

Sir Walter Raleigh's Maxims and Aphorisms of State; published by John Milton
Esquire.

The Mystery and Iniquity of Non-coaformity; -- In an Historical account of the
Designs and Practices of the Non-conformists against Church and State.

Instructions for Jurymen on the Commission of Sewers: Delivered in threee
several Charges, at several ^essions of Sewers, at Spalding in Lincolnshire.

A Treatise of Spiritual Infatuations, the Present visible distemper of the
English Nation: By Dr. William Stamp.

Trigonometr^, or the Doctrine of Triangles; -- ^y the Famous Mr. William
Oughtred, both in Latin and English, either with the Tables of Logarithms, or
without.

And there is now in the Press ready to be published, ^n ingenuous Discourse^,
written by a Pers^^ of quality, Entitled,

Europae Modernae Speculum: Or a view of the Empires, Kingdoms, Principalities,
Seigniories, and ^ommon wealths of EUROPE; in their Present State, their
Government, Policy, different Interest, and mutual Aspect one toward another,
from the Treaty at Munster, Anno 1648. to this present 1665.

All to be sold by Thomas Johnson at the Golden* Key in Cannon-Alley, over
against the great North door of Saint Paul's Church.

The Original, and whole History of the Hollanders: In an exact Succession,
from the year 700, to this present year 1665.
CHAP. I.
SECT. 1.
THE Hollanders being a People that seemed born to fill the last Age of the
World with Disturbance, and this with Noise. I was as restless as they are,
till I could find the Original of those Bustlers Power, whereof, as old as I
am, I am likely to see an end.

The men are the old Hirmodures, that were lodged by Nature in no more benign
an Habitation, than the dreadful distance between the Hercy^ian-Forest, and
S^ythia; and they retain this of their Wilderness, that they would have still
all things in Common; whence upon a quarrel about the Salt Pits of Sala, (as
unreasonable as that since about the salt waters of the Ocean) the Caths,
Cerusie^s, and Ligiens chased those troublesome Neighbors to Cat senel boggen,
a Port of Fessen (an Earldom which the House of Nassau claims, but that of
Fessen enjoys,) and thence Battus, and Zelandus, the two Principals of the
Nation falling out, (...) came with his Train to Holland, called from him
Batavia, and Zealand to Zealand, called so from him; (Holland and Zealand it
seems were divided in their Founders,) the one building Bata v^durum, or
Wychterduyrstede, a famous Town 800 years ago, of three miles compass, some
three Leagues from Vtrecht, now a small Village, and the other Arm Viden and
Gumpuere; but both subject to the Gauls or French, who thereupon have a Right
to Holland.

. 2. For Charles the bald King of France 863, at a general Assembly of his
Princes and Barons at Bladell in Brabant, of Champeigni, upon some Lords
motion, bestowed upon Thierry Duke of Aquitain, Holland, and that part of
East-Friezland from Dockum to La^vin, to defend and protect them from the
Invasions and Devastations of the Danes and Normans, who notwithstanding their
general opposition at his entrance (for they were then impatient of Government)
their joint Conspiracy against him six years after his settlement, when the
Pope intimating how he should govern them, by cutting the top of his
Garden-Plants, as he walked there with his Ambassadors, bestowed that Country
upon him a second time by a breve; as Lewis of Germany did Zealand, by a Royal
constitution, left it to his son Thierry the Second, who subdued the Frizons
after two rebellions in behalf of their Liberties, granted them as they
pretended, by Charti magni, to entire obedience in such sort, as he constrained
them to make their doors and entries so low, that they must bend their backs,
and stoop very much in sign of humility before they could enter, and committed
them upon his death to his second Son Arnold, as he did Holland and Zealand to
his eldest Son Egbert: having entered to a Monestery at Triars, by whom a Revolt
was made from his bounden duty to the French to a submission to the Empire; of
whom he would needs hold his Earldom in Fee, which lost him his life in a
Battle against the Friezlanders, who opposed that dishonorable submission, and
with the assistance of the French, and the conduct of their Protestat, or
Governor, defeated him in open field; whose Son and Successor, Thiery the 3d,
dissembling the affront a while, until ^he had conquered the stout Bishop of
Vtrecht, who would needs maintain that Holland belonged to his Bishopric (his
Vtrecht being in old time as he urged, what with his Army, and what with his
Reason, the Capital City of Holland:) and relieved the German Auxilianies,
revenged his Fathers death, and settled the Country on his younger son Floris;
who his elder Brother Thiery being slain at a Tournament at Liege say some
1048, or as others, by the Marquess of Bradenburgh's Forces, who came to
revenge the Germans disgrace at that Tournament as far as Dort, which by
Treason, or a Popular Tumult he surprised and kept, till Earl Floris hearing of
the League between the Marquess of Bradenburgh, Count Albert of Lovain,
Wickard Advocate General of Gelders, and Hermar Earl of Curike, gathered the
whole Country to Dort to make Ditches, and Pit-falls along South-Holland,
wherein the Enemies fell in heaps, submitting at last to his mercy, whose
Family yet he leaving, an Infant behind him was dispoyled of the Earldom of
Holland by the Bishop of Dort's application to the Emperor H. 4, who resenting
the late Onslaught of the Germans, gave the Reverend Father his claimed
Earldom, which he colluted on Godfrey the 9th Earl thereof; who yet lost it to
Thierry the 5th, whom the Friezlanders helped to his Predecessors honor in
Holland, as he did afterward himself, when they would neither acknolwedge him,
nor obey the Bishop to be Seigneory over them, as his Heir Thoris the Second
and the Earl did, when they would needs bid him Battle, to try, as they said,
for their Liberties; to whose Son and Successor Thierry the 6th, Lothiar the
Emperor restored Oastergoe, and Westergoe in Friezland, formerly given 1080.
by H. 4: to Conrade Bishop of Vtrecht, notwithstanding the rebellious attempts
of the Frizons against it, and the fatal Divisions made by that unhappy people
between him and his Brother; whom at last, after six bloody Battles, the
Emperor reconciled, settling Friezland and Holland anew upon his Son Floris
the 3d, who married Ada, Daughter to the King of Scotland, and had the Isle of
Wal^^rin, where they built Dur by accord, with Philip Earl of Flanders, for the
Land of Waes; in whose Reign the Hollanders set up the first Herring-fishing in
the Mase, and the Brittish-Seas along the Coast of Holland, Zealand, and
Friezland, in small Barks called Subards, those of Zerexes being the first
that did fish and pack them up in Barrels.

Those of Bieruliel, a small Isle on the Coast of Flanders, the better to
preserve them, being salted, invented the way to Gill them, and pull out the
Garbage.

Thierry the 7th his Son succeeded him, and brought the Flemmings to an accord
about Trade, and the Frizons to Reason, when they were in the mood to
acknowledge no Sovereign but the Emperor; and being reconciled to the Earl of
Gelders, joined with him against the troublesome Bishop of Vtrech; and his
Brother William, Earl of Friezland succeeded him likewise, deposing his
Daughter from Holland, and reducing the Zealanders; both which Provinces he
left to his Son Floris the 4th, whose Daughter Margaret Countess of Hennebergh,
had 365 Children at a Birth, that is to say, for so many days in the year.

After him was William the Second Earl of Holland of that name, and King of the
Romans, who enlarged his Earldom toward ^landers, in a Quarrel with Margaret
Coun^^ss of Flanders, who in vain sought the Pope and St. Lewis of France his
aid, while Earl William was alive, who died unfortunately in Ice, in an onset
upon his restless Subjects of Friezland, which was reduced by Flori^ 5th; who
after the allaying of the Factions raised in Holland during his minority, built
four Castles that utterly subdued that Country, made a League with Flanders,
that brought within his Earldom Amstel and Worden, threatened a War with
Scotland, in right of his Grandmother Ada, that with King Edward of England
mediation was accorded, in a marriage between his son John, and Elizabeth the
Daughter of that Kingdom; whence arose a great friendship between England,
Scotland, and Holland: And the Flemings suddenly breaking their League, by a
Surprise of Zealand, by the Isle of Welchrin, he subdued them so far, with the
loss of so many Knights, that he made 40 to possess and maintain his Conquests;
which yet prospered not, when he for deflouring Count Gerund's Lady, was
murdered in a Ditch, and the Frizons sent to the King of Denmark to be their
Protector; especially when upon Count John's absence in England (Floris his
son, and now the 20th Earl of Holland reigning) the Government of Holland was
divided between the Faction of Count Hedier of Clevis, who governed
North-Holland; of Guy, the Earl of Henaul's Brother, who possessed
South-Holland; and of Berfold, Surrogate to Zirich, Bishop of Vtrich, who
revived the old Quarrel about Holland, till King John with a mighty Fleet of
his Father in Laws, the King of Englands 1297, defeated the Frizons twice with
the Bishop, that had preached a 1000 years Pardon to every Person, that could
kill a Hollander, rased Mour Mount, and settled the Faction at Dort: But dying
suddenly 1300, and leaving his Wife childless, who returned to England, and
married the Earl of Oxford, Gillis Brecht of Amstel seized and fortified
Amsherdam: The Factions of Scheirlingen, and Ven Coopen brake out in*
Friezland, and both maintained their Franckises and Liberties against the
Emperors Lieutenant, Albert, D. of Saxony, who came to compose their
differences, and in the Inter regnum to settle their Government, the Male Line
of Thierry of Aquitane failing in Floris the fifth's son John, the Government
fell to John Earl of Henaut, Nephew to William King of the Romans, and Earl of
Holland by Alix his Sister; who now the 2 d Earl of Holland gave to his Brother
Guy the Seigniories of Amsterdam, upon which he conferred many Freedoms,
Rights, and Privileges, with design to reduce Seignior Rhenez of Zealand to
Reason with its assistance and (this is the first time that Amsterdam gave Law
to Zealand;) who presumed upon the Flemish and Imperial assistance so far, as
to overrun Holland; till William the 22th, Earl of Holland, John of Henault's
son, with the Lord of Humpstead's assistance reduced them, and with 320 Ships
of France, confined Guy of Flanders to his own Bruges.

This good Earl William, as they called him, having married Charles de valois
his Daughters Niece, to Philip the Fair of France, settled his Brother John of
Beaumont in Goud and Schoonborn, and strengthened his Uncle Guy Bishop of
Vtrech, by a Fort he raised at Skellingwerf, to bridle the unquiet Frizons;
adding to Holland the Seigniories of Amstel and Woerden (while Charles the Fair
of France was bu^ie with the Flemish, and the Emperor Lewis of Bavaria as
busy with the Pope) which he left to his son William the 23th Earl of Holland
and Zealand; who being allied to Edward the 3d King of England, troubled
France, and brought the troublesome West-Frizons 1345 to Reason; and dying
without lawful Issue, returned his Government to his Sister Margaret, then
Empress and Wife to Lewis of ^avaria; who being confirmed in the Earldom by her
Husband, in a full Diet solemnly taking the Earldoms Homage, depute her son
William under her Governor of Holland; who being defeated by the Bishop of
Vtrech, and instigated by the Holland Faction of Cabillaux and Hoecks, falls
out with his Mother, who (her Husband being dead) returned to the Government;
and after various successes in four Battles with her son, gave it him, upon
condition he should reduce Vtrech and its Bishopric, which had troubled
Holland with its pretensions for 260 years together as he did; but dying
childless, left all to his Brother Albert of Bavaria, who put the Towns and
Castles in good hands, reduced Delf and Gelders, built Gildenburgh-Castle to
secure the Sluices: Weakened the Frizons, reduced Vtrech, defeated the Frizons
again, brought the Groeningeois to do Homage and Fealty: Forced the rebellious
Lord of Arleche to an accord, married his 3d Daughter Margaret, to John Duke of
Burgundy, Earl of Flanders and Artois, by whom she had Philip, the good Duke of
Burgundy, Earl of Holland and Flanders; and among many other children, Joane,
Duchess of Austria, by whom came these Earldoms to the Emperor and the King
of Spain

After his death, William af Bavaria his son, and the 27th Earl of Holland and
Zealand succeeded, who was much troubled with the Lords of Arguel father and
son, and the Duke of Gelders, to whom they had resigned their Interest, until
the Lord of Arguel being taken, discovered all the Conspirators, and
particularly Count Egmond, who thereupon yielded up his strong Fort Iselstein,
and retired, till Jaqueline of Bavaria succeeded her father Albert, the
Factions called home Egmond, contrived to displace Jaqueline, and put in John
of Bavaria, and Bishop of Liege in her place, till the Pope dispensing with it,
she is married to John Duke of Brabant; by whose assistance she recovereth
Gornchom of Count Egmond, persuades the Hollanders and Zealanders to refuse
John of Bavaria, and his pretended Grant from the (Emperor; (insomuch that he
was glad to come to terms with her Husband, to hold some Lordships in Fee, and
quit all his Titles and Pretensions;) who after his death, is declared Earl of
Holland, in right of his Wife; in whose right he subdueth the old Faction of
Cabillans and Hoeckins, strengthens Harlem, takes Schoonhooen, and brings the
unhappy woman (who had married now four times) to declare Philip Duke of
Burgundy Governor of Holland; and after her death Earl; which Earldom she
resigned to him in her life time, to ransom her 5th well-beloved Husband, the
Lord of Borselle from his hand.

Philip the first, Duke of Burgundy, and 20th Earl of Holland, succeeding as
right Heir by father and mother to the Government of Holland, helped the
Hollanders and Zealanders to chase the Easterlings, now Lords at Sea; in sign
whereof they bear to this day, a little Besom atop of their Mainmast, to show
they had swept the Sea of all competitors 1431; and with much ado, composed
the Tumults raised in Amsterdam, Harlem, and Leyden, upon an intolerable
imposition, by the Faction of the Hooks and Cabellans, whom at last he
reconciled and awed, by the institution of a first President (the Earl of
Nassau,) by promoting his Bastard David to the Bishopric of Vtrech, by
suppressing the factious Family of Brederode: By his League with the English,
and seasonable Resignation of his Government to his discontented son, the Earl
of Charolois, during his sickness, who subdued the Ligeois, razed Dirvant,
succeeded his Father and Margaret, Sister to Edward the 4th, King of England
(in whose time printing was first invented at Harlem:) and as he had the name
of warlike, so he goes on, bringing the tumultuous Ganthois to his mercy, the
mutinous Town of Macklyn to a Ransom, the Leigeoix to a submission,
notwithstanding that it was the French Kings Ambassador that had incited them
to rebel, upon a promise of 30000 men at a mouths warning; for which
neighbourly part, he was even with that King, by assisting the Duke of Britain
against him, and taking him Prisoner.

He resolves to ruin the House of Brederode, to which purpose he brings many
of them to the Rack: He makes the sullen Frizons bring him white Paper, wherein
he should write his own terms: He refuses to answer King Lewis the 11th of
France his Citation, 1470 to Paris: He brings that King to a Truce gets the
Dukedom of Gelders resigned to him, defies the Emperor Sigismond at Nevis, and
brought him to an advantageous Peace, prospering in all his undertaking; but
that against the pitiful Swi^^^, whose whole Country he said, was not worth
the Bits of his Bridle, nor the spurs of his Army.

After which he was slain at Nantes, leaving all his Dukedoms, Earldoms, and
Lordships to his Daughter Mary, who, the King of France neglecting the marriage
of the Dalphin to her, was Contracted according to former Treaties in her
Fathers life time to Maximilian of Austria, the Emperor Frederick's Son; by
whom she had Phillip, Archduke of Austria; who undertaking the Government in
her Right, after an Assembly held at Bruges reduced the revolted Gelders,
settled such Governors in Harlem, Rotterdam, Leyden, and elsewhere, as might
overawe Egmond, and the ancient Factions of Hoecks and Cabillaux, subdued
Vtrech; and the trajectings as Guardian to his son, Philip of Austria; with
whom he goes, being chosen King of the Romans to Hungary 1411; leaving
Engelbert Earl of Nassau, 4th Governor of the Netherlands, whom the Emperor
assists in the settlement of the Government, the Pope seconding his Temporal
Power, with his own Spiritual; who being hired by the distractions between
Holland and Flanders about the Sea, resigned his Charge to Albert Duke of
Saxony; who with his Master Maximilian, the K. of the Romans went into Holland,
settling the Towns as they passed, making a Peace between them and the Flemins,
and punishing the Mutiniers at Harlem, and Al^mar,: Ruining the Factions by
their own fears and jealousies, keeping under the Frizons and Gelders by a new
Protestate, sent thither by the Emperor Maximilian, until Philip the 2d
Archduke of Austria, was by his Father Maximilian possessed of the Netherlands
1494, under whom the Duke of Saxony defeated the Factions of Friezland by
pretended kindnesses; whereby he set them one against the other, while both
delivered to him their strong Holds, which he made so good use of, that they
appeal from him and his Son George, to the Emperor; who yet stood by his
Governor, who in return for his Masters kindness, brought them of Friezland
(after some redress of grievances, by their Commissioners) to pay his Master
the 21th penny of all their Estates, putting 6 men to govern there, while he
reduced the Groningois, notwithstanding the Protection of the Earl of Embden,
and the followers of Col. Vyll (about which time a child spoke in Holland in
the Mothers belly) and Philip of Austria being now King of Castile, dyed, and
left Charles the 2d of that name the 35th Earl of Holland and Zealand, Lord of
Friezland, Duke of Burgundy and Lemburgh Luxemburgh, Shiia, Corinthia, Earl of
Flanders, Artois, with many other Marquisates and Principalities; to which he
added Millain, Overyssel, Gruningen, Cambray, and Cambresis: his Grandfather
Maximilian, the Emperor being his Guardian, and his Aunt Margaret Dowager of
Savoy his Governess; under whom Ann of Burgundy, that had recovered and walled
in many lost Islands in Zealand dying; Budwyen was taken, and razed, the
Geldrois, Groeningois, with the Earl of Embden, are conquered: Prince Charles
taking the Netherlands into his own hands from the Duchess of Savoy, and the
Duke of Saxony, by the assistance of the Lord of Iselsteen; under whom he
constituted 7 Governors of Justice in Friezland, when he went to Spain for
that Crown upon Ferdinand, of Arragon his Grandfather, by his Mother side
death, and to Germany, for that Empire upon his Grandfather Maximilian^s
decease; settling Margaret of Austria, Widow of Castile, and Dowager of Savoy
the 37th Governess of the Low Countries; whose H^rring-busses being seized by
the Danes, they mutiny; seize Newport distract Friezland, pretend Religion, and
fly to the Duke of Gelders, until the Imperial Forces came down and awed them;
insomuch that Groningen yields to the Emperor, as did Dam, Weddra, Coeuoelden,
Huttem; Megen, Vtrecht, and most other places, the Gelders being not able to
hold out against the Power of Spain and Germany.

Upon the Dowager of Savoy's death, Mary, Dowager of Hungary, and Sister to
Charles the 5th, is the 40th Governess of the Low Countries; under whom the new
Chanel was made between Brussels and Antwerp: the Anabaptists were discovered
and banished; the War betwixt the Lubeckers and the Hollanders was managed by
Vander-burch van Comper; and the new Haven at Middleburgh was begun 1536; and
the notable surprise upon the French ships was acted in this manner:

There being a War between the Hollanders and the French, some French ships rid
along their shore, snapping up their Vessels, and themselves sometimes in bed;
whereupon 50 tall Dutchmen well Armed, hearing of these ships, went in a Hoy,
lying under Hatches, and covered with Sacks of Wool out of the Mase toward
them, who boarded it; but when they were busy about the Sacks of Wool, they
were entertained so rudely by those 50 men, with Fireworks and Grenades, that
they all fled, and left 6 ships Prizes to one Hoy, to be carried to Delph and
sold.

Now likewise the Emperor brought the Geldrois to a muteny, that dismantled
their Towns, razed their Forts, and laid the Faction open to their Sovereigns
Power; who spoiled the Abetters Abe^ters of their Conspiracies, the French at
Sea, and brought this unquiet People that rebelled every year for 527 years
together to so good a temper, that they presented him at Genoa with 15000
Florens of Gold a Province, and quietly submitted to the Resignation he made of
those Provinces to his Son at Brussels; who now by the name of Philip the 2d of
Spain, and Lord of Austria, by Emanuel Philibert, Duke of Savoy his Viceroy,
demanded of the Netherlands Supplies, for the payment of his Fathers debts; who
would allow him none, unless forsooth he allowed a Convocation of their general
States; and then but a moiety neither of what he demanded, and was necessary
for his settlement.

And not only so, but notwithstanding that he honored their chief Nobility;
as the Lord Horn, William of Nassau, the Earl of Egmont, with the order of the
Golden Fleece at Brussels, they created such fears and jealousies between the
King and the Noblemen, that it was reported who were upon the refusal of the
Tax designed for the Block, who for the Rack, and who for perpetual
Imprisonment; insomuch as that there was a perpetual Feud between the Court and
the Nobility, till the Government was dissolved, all things being represented
to the worst; especially the Earls of Egmont, and Lornes carriage at the Truce
between France and Spain, at Bruges, and at the Treaty between the same two
Crowns at Cambray

Their King was yet so intent upon obliging them, that he appointed them a
Council of State for matters of importance, as Peace, War, and Treaties with
foreign Princes: A Privy Council for Laws, Pardons, Justice, etc. and a third
Council for the Treasury; of which Councils they themselves were the major
part, their most eminent Nobility being advanced, as the Earl of Egmo^^,
Governor of Flanders, and Artois: The Prince of Orange, Governor of Holland
Zealand, Vtrech; and afterward of Burgundy, Jo. de ligni Earl of Arenbergh,
Governor of Friezland, Overyssel, Groaning, and Leagen; Charles de Bunen,
Governor of Gelderland; and Zuphten the M^^morencies, and Horns of their
respective Provinces; all subject to Margaret of Austria, Duchess of Parma,
and Sister to the King of Spain; when the very first instance of the ungrateful
men's Power, is a Petition to their Sovereign a Spaniard, himself to remove all
Spaniards from the Netherlands.

A Petition the good King easily granted, though to the displeasure of many of
his Courtiers, that had quitted their whole fortunes for employments, there
diverting his very Army, which should have kept them in better obedience to his
War in Barbary.

And when they had prevailed in that, they give out that the Spanish Courtiers
would be revenged of them, and that the chief Nobility of the Netherlands, the
Subscribers to that Petition, were designed to ruin a Counse^lor of Spain (it
should seem a Pensioner of Holland) coming in great have to the Earl of Egmont,
the Lord Horn, and others at Chest in Gaunt, with news, that all those that
consented to the Petition, for the removal of the Spaniard, the great Patron of
the peoples Liberty, should be put to Death; when yet his Majesty parted from
them friendly, 26 Aug. 1357. recommending to them the maintenance of Religion,
that general stay of Government; the finishing of the new River from Antwerp to
Brussels, for the convenience of Trade; the erection of Doway University, for
the propagation of Orthodox Learning; and the impression of the Complutensian
Bible, for the ^dvancement of Religion; four excellent Designs; but so far
envyed by these undutiful people, that they suspected* the last as a Plot (as
if the Printing of the Bible were a stratagem against Religion,) and cried out
against the third, as a breach of their Liberties.

CHAP. II.
The Revolt of the Hollanders from their natural Allegiance 1564, and the
management of that Revolt, till they became a Free State.
FOr you must know, that about this time these good People weary of their
ancient Government, began to search for their old Charters, Privileges, Bulls
of favor, Customs; of which they pretended one was, That no Popish Seminaries,
such as Doway was, should be built upon their Frontiers; another, That they
should suffer no violence, forsooth their Kings must wear a Sword in vain; a
third, That no persons should be admitted to Office, unless he swore to be
faithful to the Prince and people; and a fourth, That they might meet and act
without their King, but he could do nothing without them; and that if he
presumed to do any thing otherwise, they were discharged of their Alleigance.

These, and other Moth-eaten Liberties belonging to the Duchy of ^rabant, if
to any at all since the Contract with Maximilian, May 16. An. 1488, together
with the jealousies about Religion, and the murmurings about the tenth Penny,
when their King was only intent upon the settling of their Government by that
Tax, and the prevention of Anabaptistical outrages, such as that in Munster, by
his Proclamation against turbulent Innovaters, were alleged first against the
Inquisition, which yet Mary, Dowager of Hungary, lately regent graciously
suspended upon their Petition at Antwerp, That she should not spoil their
Trade, by her overmuch zeal for Religion.

And now they had got that surmize of the Inquisition into the multitudes
heads, every thing the King did, was termed the introducing it; for his Majesty
no sooner (observing that the four Bishops of Cambrey, Arras, Tournay, and
Vtrecht were unable to oversee effectually the 17 large Provinces of Belgium:)
set up 14 new Bishops by the Pope (Paul the Fourth's) Order, and Cardinal
Granvill's solicitations, than they declaim against them as so many new
Inquisitors, and their respective Prebends, as so many assistants in
Persecutions; insomuch that the Earl of Egmont their Admiral, finds out another
Charter, wherein it was declared, That the Ecclesiastical estate could not be
enlarged without their consent, and dispatcheth some Burgemasters, with
complaints against dead Trade, and new Bishops to Spain; where observing the
Kings resolution to assert his Government against these popular surmizes, they
remonstrate that his Majesty did ill to act without the concurrence of the
Lords, the States; and at their return home raised such Tumults and
discontents, as might give opportunity to the Lords to meet; an opportunity
they embraced, wherein they unanimously agreed to a manifesto of the state of
the Country, to be delivered to Margaret Duchess of Parma their Governess,
containing first, That the King was misled by ill Counselors. Secondly, That
Cardinal Granvill the principal Person the King relied on, should be removed;
as their Declarations sent by Montigni and others, Aug. 16. 1562. March 11.
1563. into Spain: out of their Assemblies, which the Tumults made necessary for
the good Governess to call too frequently; out of which some Lords, to palliate
their Ambition, desired to be dismissed; to which his Majesty returns gracious
Answers, whereat they pretended dutiful submission, while they made their
combination effectual; which they had no sooner done, than they tire the
Governess with her Assistant the Cardinal, with their debates and divisions in
all Meetings, that he retyres to Spain; and they raise Tumults at Harlem, stop
the Courts of Justice at Antwerp, make a breach with England 1564, that made to
the great prejudice of their poor people, who improved the Commotions, for a
whole year together.

In a word, such was the apprehensions and fears that were wrought in the
people, that Groningen, Leeur-warden, Duenter, and Ruremond, do violence to
their Bishops and Clergy; Ourwexgen Abbey is robbed; all the Clergies Power and
Jurisdiction is questioned; matters are aggravated on both sides to dangerous
debates, notwithstanding the gracious Answer his Majesty vouchsafed Count
Egmont, Count Horn, the Lord of Brederode, and others upon their respective
addresses to the Court of Spain, in behalf of that unquiet people.

Whereupon his Majesty thought good to settle Religion, as he did by his own
and the Duchess of Parmaes Letters; which the Grandees opposed, with the bare
consideration of the present Commotions, though all the World knew they were
the Authors of those Commotions; as appeared upon the very first publication of
the Kings Letters, touching the Council of Trent; when there were Libels (the
forerunners of Sedition) contrived by a great Lord, containing Complaints and
Exhortations, in the name of the people to the Noblemen, about their
Privilege; and the Kings breach of promise scattered up and down in three or
four streets of Antwerp. wherein (amongst other things) they directed the
Grandees, to cite the King to the Imperial Chamber about breach of Promise, and
the infringement of their Liberties.

This bold Libel, and other false reports (of which this one, to incense and
injealous the Nobility was most malicious, viz.: That the King of Spain should
say, that it was but folly to busy themselves with Frogs, they must first fish
for the great Salmos; meaning Horn and Egmont) brought the Netherlanders to an
expostulation with their Sovereign, why he should decree any thing concerning
them, without their consent.

And a popular Tumult against these four Points, The Inquisition, The new
Bishops, The entertainment of the Council of Trent, and The decay of Trade:
Insomuch that most of the chief Noblemen, the Prince of Orange, the Marquess of
Bergen, the Earls of Egmont, Horn, Hockstrate, the Lord of Brederode, met
with the Malcontent Princes of France and Germany, under the pretense of an
entertainment at Breda and Hockstrate, where they heightened one another
animosities to that degree of discontent, as produced a private League among
themselves, and a Public Manifesto of the state of the Provinces, by Francis
Baldwyn an Outlawed, but cunning Person; they sent for (and consulted) out of
France: wherein, among other matters, it was expressed,

1. That the Mind could not be forced, and that the Conscience should be free.

2. That Religion consisted not in outward Ceremony, but in the inward
Persuasion.

3. That the King should hear every man's persuasion, and endeavor to convince
them.

4. That the Scripture should decide Controversies.

5. That every peaceable man should be allowed free exercise of Religion,
whatsoever might be his persuasion; because all the World could not hinder a
Religion that is of God.

6. That several abuses in the Church, whereat the people were offended, should
be reformed.

7. That the King should think none could be true to him, that was not faithful
to God.

8. That the Masters of the most useful Trades, and most large Stocks in the
Nation, would desert it upon the first settlement of the Ecclesiastical
Government, to enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences; and go to Embden,
France, and England, with whom likewise ^the best Soldiers and Gentlemen would
take this occasion to withdraw.

9. That the strength of Kings, is the love of their Subjects; whereof the most
considerable are they of the Religion, for Birth, Interest, Parts, Estates,
Prudence, and Learning.

10. That it is no new thing to tolerate diverse Religions, the danger of a
Country proceeding not from private Opinions, but from secret Passions and
Interests; which together with the noise made of trouble and War, which they
pretended most to fear, who most promoted them, put the discontented Nobility
assembled at the Prince of Parmai's marriage at Brussels: And afterward at St.
Tradon, after a Declaration how much pity it was, that so populous a Country
should be ruined by evil Counselors, upon a resolution to Petition his
Majesty, in the name of the people, for their ancient Rights and Liberties, and
for the further prosecution of the affairs; to enter to mutual Oaths, to stand
by one another, that what wrong was done to any one, should be done unto all; a
Confederacy that gratified the Hopes of many, improved the Fears of more, and
disturbed the Minds of all men, altering the very Face of the Government, the
King and Church being awaked to a resolution and Rigor on the one hand, and
the People to a Fury and Madness on the other; it being among other matters
bruited abroad, that the Duke of Brunswich should Levy 10000 German Horse, to
reduce them to subjection; which, together with the French suggestion of their
approaching desolation, and the German Princes aggravation of their Slavery,
when all their neighbor Countries were free, and they were themselves Members
of the Empire, and so should enjoy the privileges of the Pacification at
Passau; adding, that their Kingdom was Elective, and that upon six such
Articles as their King had broken: That by the Feodau Law, that King, their
Lord, had forfeited his Right to his Fee, by fellonious actings on their goods
and lives, and many more unseemly allegations in Private discourse, and Public
Pasquils, encouraged the Contrivers of this disturbance, to Commissionate
Agents to remonstrate the case of the Provinces in the Imperial Diet, then at
Ausburch, before Maximilian the Emperor; and when the Governess had offered so
much reasonable moderation, as prevailed with the more modest part of the
Knights of the Order, and other Noblemen; interceding likewise very zealously
with his Majesty of Spain, for the confirmation of it, the People are taught to
protest against their Governors proceedings, as to compliance with the
Governess and his Majesty, in their four seditious Petitions to the King and
State* which were no more than so many saucy Menaces what would follow, if they
were not gratified in their Propositions, that were not so much vouchsafed the
honor of a perusal; as were not the other unmannerly Remonstrances of Gaunt,
Bruges, Ypre, Hondschoon, about the decay of Trades and Handicrafts; and those
of Flanders about Liberty of Religion, carried on in a most Tumultuous and
Riotous manner, by a Rabble of Geux or Beggars, as my Lord Barlement called
them; upon which appellation they coined Meddals with the Kings Picture, on the
one hand a Wallet, and a Dish on the other, with this Inscription, Faithful to
God and the King, even to bear the Wallet; and presented a rebellious Petition
by the Lord of Brederode, to which the unquiet people would take no answer, but
an allowance for all their factious Assemblies for the time past, and a full
Liberty to their Consciences for the time to come; with ^ecurity that all
matters should be hereafter trans^cted, with the consent of the Estates. Yea,
and notwithstanding as can did and satisfactory a return as could be expected;
the Gentlemen of the Confederacy, as they were called, fearful of the
consequences of their Seditions and Mutinies, exasperated the people with
strange Letters, bearing Date An. 1615, which they discovered; threatening them
and their Adherents with extremities, intimating the mighty Sea and Land
preparations; which enflamed the Country into a general sedition and
combustion, that provoked the Government to Rigor on the one hand, and
incensed the Populacy to Tumults on the other: The chief Conspirators judge the
humor so high, that they might work upon it; and to that purpose order an
Assembly amongst themselves for the Government: An Assembly, I know not whether
more rediculous, as wherein some were attired in Friars Gray, others carried
Foxes-tailes in their Hats, others carried Dishes and goods like Beggars, their
servants crying God save the Beggars: Or more dreadful, all being rude and
unruly; which yet the Princess invited civilly to Arschor and Duffel, the one 6
Leagues, the other 3 from Antwerp; where a daring Petition is delivered to the
Earl of Egmont and other Grandees; who under pretense of acting for the
Governess, betrayed her, insisting on the very same things in their H^rang^es,
that the Rabble did in their Petitions; yea and enrolling underhand formidable
Levies, under pretense of their securities about Villevoord, while Antwerp was
in a Combustion, by the Faction of Brederode; who raised Forces for the Liberty
of the Subject, on the one hand, as the Earls of Megen and Arembergh drew up
Forces for the Kings Prerogative on the other: The Prince of Orange taking this
opportunity to seize the Government of the Place, as Seditious Preachers did to
usurp the Pulpits of it; the Magistrates being jealous and distrustful of the
Populacy, and the Populacy of the Magistracy; and all afraid of the 1200 newly
levied there.

Which general distemper, being not a little improved, by the approaches of the
Duke of Brunswick's Army to the Borders; they rescue some Prisoners in a
Mutiny, and create such fears and jealousies touching the Confederate Gentlemen
(as they were termed,) that they insist upon Assurance and Security:

The Ministers dissen^ions and disputes come to Tumults, the Sectaries (under
which name all discontents were shrouded) preach and hear in Arms, upon
pretense of Letters intercepted, that the Droissard had 3000 men enrolled, with
Cartloads of Arms, to Massacre all those of the Reformation, upon the Ringing
of a Bell: A suggestion that enraged the Multitude to cast off the Princes and
the Earl of Egmont's Government (who indeed underhand encouraged them) to break
Images, and all Church Utensils to counterfeit, and act the Preachers; to
disturb all Church-meetings with their Tumultuous cry Vive le Gueux; which so
lighted the Governess to deal plainly with his Majesty, That the Prince of
Orange, the Earls of Egmont, Horn, and Hoochstrate, had betrayed the
Government, which nothing but his Presence, and an Army could settle: Though in
the mean time she was so much a woman, as to dissemble her fears, and enter to
a ^^^emn promise of Protection of the Con^ederates; which had accorded the
differences for the present, but that the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligni, and
other noble Protestants of France interposed their jealousies of that accord,
with fair overtures of assistance: Whereupon the Seditious keep in, and engage
some of the Kings Forces; whom the Earl of Egmont sent on purpose to widen the
difference to an irreconcilableness, to provoke them upon pretense of secret
Instructions, they said were given to the Kings Officers, to murder them at
the League, and turn the Provinces to an absolute Monarchy, in two most bitter
Letters of Francisco de Allanas the Spanish Agent in the Court of France, to
the Lady Governess; directing the cutting off of the Kings leaders of the
Sedition; meaning Orange, Egmont, etc. one by one very privately, and so
examplarily, that the Rebellion it self may be odious to all Christendom: And
concluding that the Riot could not be without the Intelligence and Supports of
some Great men, and namely of those three that carries so good a show, meaning
Orange, Egmont, and Horn.

Passages da ed Aug. 1566; which with the intimation of seizing the Marquess of
Berghes, and the Baron of Montigny in Spain, of choosing De Alva Governor; and
many more sent to Egmont from his Brother Montigny then in Spain, amazed the
Nobility into an Assembly Oct. 3. at Duremond, where the Resolutions were so
high for a Defensive War, and the natural way of opposing Force with Force,
that they break up in discontent, Arm themselves, seize several strong Holds,
and upon assurance of the Warlike Preparations in Spain, Alarm the excellent
Governess to Arms.

CHAP. III
The Hollanders War against their own Sovereign begins.
VAlenciens of Henault, a place very Zealous for the free exercise of Religion,
Cambresa, Haysel, Mastricht, and many other Towns, refused the Kings Garrisons;
till forced by a greater Power, after the Decollation of the Herlins Father and
Son, with other Ringleaders of the Revolt, the reducing whereof, staggered the
Faction to humble supplications to his Majesty; who by the mediation of some
Princes of Germany for liberty of Conscience, for which, fears and jealousies
upon their late defeats having divided their Leaders they offered three
Millions of Florens, an ostentation of their riches, as the Spanish Council
judged it, rather than an Argument of their submission: But in vain, the
Duchess forbidding the Confederates any approach to her Court, and attaching
all Passes, Forts, strong Holds, while the Reformers spend 6 Months in
Petitions, Remonstrances, Replies, and Protestations, watching a fair
opportunity to appear; (especially against the new Oath upon that occasion
introduced) which they had upon the Edict; That the Confederates, and all their
Adherents, should appear before the Governess within ^0 days, upon pain of
being declared Rebels: when those that fled not to England, took the Field in
Troops, now desperate, under the Seigniour of Toulouse, who hovered about
Antwerp; but disowned by the Prince of Orange, till he was surprised at
Austerweel; where 1590 were slain, and excluded the Town of Antwerp, being it
self in an uproar for two days; but with so* little success, that the
Confederacy seemed to be broken; the Lord of Brederode and his followers, being
commanded 5 miles out of Amsterdam, with a severe injunction to behave himself
there so, as to give the Governess or his Majesty no further cause of
discontent; an injunction the Burgemasters of Amsterdam took so ill, that they
guarded their dear Lord by Hundreds, protested against the present proceedings;
especially when the Prince of Orange, with a formidable retinue of Gentlemen,
retired in discontent; first to besiege his Town of Breda, and then to his
County of Nassau, advertising the confederate Gentlemen, to prepare themselves
for ^light or resistance; and leaving this with the Earl of Egmont, who met him
to take his leave at Willebrouke; viz: That seeing he would not resolve with
him and others, to stop the entry of the Duke of Alva into the Netherlands, as
it had been propounded in their Assembly at Druremond, he should be the Bridge
whereon the Spaniards would first march, to plant their Tyranny in these parts.

With which words, Brederode, whose word was, God save my soul and my Honor,
with the other Confederates retired into foreign Parts, save that a Party made
Head at Vianen two or three days; where they, and all their Confederates were
defeated, Antwerp, Amsterdam, and all other places yielding to Mansfield and
his Walloons, who Levelled their Gates, and reduced them to an absolute
subjection to the King of Spain, and Ferdinando de Alvarez, Duke of Alva; not a
Confederate appearing, but either in Prison, on the Scaffold, or in Beggars
habit, truly Geux now: so dreadful a thing it is to meddle with them that are
given to change, for sudden is the ru^ne of them both.

He that is of a rebellious spirit, a cruel Messenger shall be sent to him: And
such was the Duke of Alva, with 8638 Foot, and 1200 Horse, mustered June 2.
1567, at a place called Rhethees in Piemont, between Germany, France, and
Spain, and Marched in three Squadrons into Holland; where the report of them no
sooner arrived, than the French, the Switz, and the Genevians, were by the
Confederates allarmed to a dreadful posture of defense: Especially considering
that the Duke advanced his Power and his March both together, improving his
8000 to 32000 men and as the Confederates gave out, looked sternly on all, even
moderate Persons, saying (upon the approach of Egmont) as they reported, Behold
that great Lutheran: A word that was laid hold of to enjealous the whole
Nation, quartering his Soldiers round about him, as one that designed that
disorder: a fair occasion to make the Netherlands an absolute Monarchy: setting
up a Council of Twelve, instead of the Council of State, and acting with a full
power to dispose of all places, Civil, and Military; to judge of all Cases,
Public, or Private; no respect being had to the Privileges, Customs, Laws,
Jurisdictions, or Appeals of that Country in former times; which he managed so
severely, that Executions and Banishments swept away half the Country; the
Keys of most Towns were taken, the Gates of several Cities were taken down, the
Earls of Egmont and Horn (the most eminent subscribers of the late undutiful
Petition) were Imprisoned, Count Charles of Mansfield, and many others escaped,
the former Garrisons were displaced.

New Citadels were built, whereof the most eminent at Antwerp, on the one side
of the Suburb called Kiel, along the River, compassed in with five mighty
Bulwarks, and every one defended by a Cavalier or Mount; and all things were
settled so well, that there was a Monument set up for the Duke with this
Inscription, Ferdinando Alvarez de Toledo, Albae Duci Philippi ^di, Hispan
regis apud Belgas Praefecto, quod extincta seditione, rebellibus pulsis,
Religione procurata, justitia culta, Provincias pace firmavit, Regis optimi
fidelissimo ministro politum -- Iongelingi opus ex aere Captivo.

That the Duke spared half his Forces under the Earl of Aremberge, for the
Guises assistance against the Reformers, that ^e seized the Prince of Orange,
his eldest son; the Earl of Herren at LoLovain; whence he was sent to Spain,
till 1575.

He cited the Prince himself, who answered his Citation at large.

He sentenced the Netherlands in the Inquisition for seditious Heresies 1568,
and had his Sentence confirmed in Spain the same year he razed the place of
Culenberge, where the Council of State used to meet; setting up a Pillar in the
midst of the Ruin with this Inscription, Regnante Philippo 2do, Cath. Hisp.
Rege in his suis inferioribus Germaniae regionibus, Gubernanti Vero Ferdinando
Alvar. de Toledo Albae Duce, etc. Florenti, de Palant quondam domum solo
aequaris, sancitum est, ob execrandam memoriam repetitae, in ea conjurationis
adversus Religionem Eccl* Cath. Romans regiam Majestatem, and ipsas regiones Anno
1568. 5. Call. Junii.

He proceeded in the Process against the Prince of Orange; in the midst of
which great actions, some fugitive Gentlemen that had taken refuge in
Cloisters, designed with some Horse and Foot, they corresponded with, to
surprise the Duke at his devotion, between Brussels, and the Cloister of
Groenendale in Somen wood: The Prince of Orange Prints his Justification
against Slanderers, The Earl of Hoochstraten produced Five Articles, drawn out
of the Privileges of Brabant, either belonging to the Goldenfleece, or
contained in the Joyous entry, to impeach the proceedings against him and the
Prince of Orange.

The Elector Palatine of the Rhine stops the Duke of Alvarez's money, under
pretense, that the Merchants that conveyed it, paid not the accustomed duties.

The Emperor and the Princes interpose in the behalf of Orange a Prince of the
Empire.

That Prince, and his Brother, Lodowick of Nassau, arm with this Motto,
Recuperari aut mori; resolving to distract the Duke de Alva, with several
attempts upon many places at once; but unsuccesfully; the Lord of Villers, with
his 3000 French Protestants being defeated in their design upon Ruremond in
Gelderland, upon the Mase, as Seigneour Coquevil with his 1100 Fugitives was at
St Valiers, in the mouth of the River Some; only Count Lodowick vanquished,
Count Aremberge, with the overthrow of 3000 men, May 24, 1568, whom the
Governor revenged on the best Gentlemen of the Revolt that came to his hands,
not sparing the Earls of Horn and Egmont; who after a due Process against them,
were beheaded June 5th, 1568.

The Barons, Montigni and Berghen, who died in Spain, attainted for their lives
and goods in the Netherlands; a severity imparallel'd, yet not able to repress
the Insolences of the Factious Dutch, who now pretend themselves desparate,
and cry, No man was safe, and so madly join with Count Lodowick of Nassau's,
Germans, (till they were becalmed with the Imperial Interdict) to besiege
Groningen; whence De Alva quickly forced them, with their shattered Colors: in
some of whom, they carried Pelicanes, in others, the Roses of England; from
whose Queen they looked for all their succor: In others this device, Pro Lege,
Rege, and Grege, along the Mase; about which they took in some small Garrisons,
and might have taken more; yea, and overthrown Don Fred. the Dukes sons, 4000
Harquebu^iers, had not the Landtskneghts (as before) when they should fight
cried Ghelt, Ghelt: till the Duke himself (who was strongly entrenched every
night) pursued them by day into France; where (the French King promises
failing, and the Rebels mutyning among themselves; now they were already weary
of the war) they resolve for Germany now out of order too; the discontented
French Nobility joining with them, and the Prince of Orange, declaring, That
such undutiful persons as set on any Designs, save the Liberty of the Country,
and their Consciences, of what persuasion soever they were, should be enrolled
among his mortal Enemies.

In Germany they lodge themselves, till the Queen of England being disobliged
by the Duke of Alva, about money she had taken of some Merchants (though the
Duke pretended it his,) for her private use upon Interest, interdicted all
trade with Holland, making Hamburgh the Staple for Cloth; when the Prince of
Orange, with his unquiet followers, assisted the French Protestants, as De Alva
(with his well disciplined Regiments) did the French King; both Parties so
translating the Wars out of their own Country: The Garrison at Valencianes
mutiny against the Earl of Lodron, an Italian; but being drawn out by fair
words and pay, are cut off by two Regiments of Spanish Horse, that surrounded
them at their Muster in Bourgethout near Antwerp.

Such as could not escape out of the Netherlands, drew together in the Woods by
Land; and those that did, took to Pyracies at Sea: Both these took Briel a
convenient Harbor on the Hollanders side, and agreed for Dover, as fit a place
on the English, and improved themselves incredibly upon the discontents in the
Country, at the New-floud on All Saints day 1570, that swept away their Towns:
And the new Taxes (the 10th, 20th, and 100th penny levied by Soldiers upon the
very Clergy themselves) that carried away their Estates, especially at Vtrecht,
where many Orders, Answers, Replies, Duplies, and Writings passed; but all
decided by a Garrison of Veteranes, sent thither, that made a shift to persuade
the troublesome Town, that they had forfeited all their Estates, by their
connivance at the Image-breakers, with other Incendiaries and their Adherents;
and at Brussels, where neither Bakers, nor Brewers would either bake or brew
upon the new Impost; insomuch, that all Hollanders turning Pirates under Will.
Earl vander Alarch, and forbidden Harbor on the English Coast, with 40 Sail,
most Fly-boats, sailed from Dover toward North-Holland:

In their way whither, they took 2 rich Ships, the one of Antwerp, the other of
Biscay; and spoiled other men of War before Amsterd. Enchuesen, and in the
Mase; drowning Boslules Forces before the Briel, who came to encounter them:
they deal underhand with the Flushingers, inhabiting the next Sea Town to Briel
(notwithstanding the Dukes Agents cunning, who made a Breach in their Wall,
under pretense of fortifying it, cloyed their Cannon, opened their Sluices, and
counterfeited their Keys) to keep out the Spaniards, as they did with the
Villages of Coukirke, the Inhabitants of Daventer; and that not unsuccesfully,
since Zealand prospered in its Pyracies so well, that their Captain Worst, with
seven ships, had beaten the Spaniards with 30; and being assisted from England
and France, entered Lavere, chased 7 Spanish ships thence to Tergoes, and with
one ship, kept 6 Middleburgh Boyers (or little ships) in their Harbor; Count
Lodowick of Oraney prospering no less with his French Malcontents by Land,
surprising many in Henault (in this manner: Twelve of his men as Merchants
lodging in Town, and finding that the Porter would open the Gates for money at
any time of Night, went out at 1. a Clock in the Morning, killed the Porter,
seized the Keys, let the Prince (who attended without) into Town, crying out
Liberty, liberty is given you by the P. of Orange, to free you from the 10th
penny, and from all the D of Alva's exactions;) shutting up Middleburgh; taking
30 Boats at Broome-Creek; forcing the Island Zuytbeacland; attempting most of
the great Towns of Flanders; seizing all ships whatever: Especially the Duke of
Medina Celie's great Navy, wherein he came to assist and succeed the Duke De
Alva, working upon the humors of the Seafaring men of Enchuese (a
wellpeopled, and a conveniently situated Town, belonging to West-Friezland
upon the South Sea) to withstand the Spaniards, and defend their Town by their
own Burgers; where Johnson and Peterson were so stubborn and troublesome, that
they said it should cost them their black heads, before any Spaniard (there
become a hated name) should enter there with his Ten penny Order; and one
Bieriche a Brewer did the feat, beating a Drum so long in the King of Spain's
name, that they had got strength enough to exclude him, the pretense of
opposing Spanish Garrisons, took in the Towns of Al^mor, Horn, Edam, and
Medembly, and in a manner all Holland possessed by the Earl of March, Dotkom,
Dousburgh, and all Zuphten, by the Earl of Sheerenbergh, with Hard^rwicke,
Elbruch, and Hattem in Gelders, Goot, Oldeel, and Campen in Overysel, Speuke,
Bolswort, and Franeker in Friezland; and the jealouses raised between De Alva,
and the Duke of Medina Coeli weakened all undertakings, only the Government had
this advantage, that the Seditious were raw and undisciplined, the Multitude
fickle and unsettled, the French succors heady and in controllable, Mons, and
other places were untenable; wherefore notwithstanding the Prince of Orange his
plausible Declaration for the natural necessity of self-defence, in the
preservation of their Religion and Liberty.

His Army mouldereth away in discontent. 1200 Landtskneghts, 500 Reisters, 2500
Burgers only resolving to stand by him, in the defense of Mechlin, the Prince
being afraid every minute of being delivered up by his Followers.

Mons yields upon Articles, Maklyn is sacked, and ransomed, as was Zuphten,
Nairden, Parendam, and Harlem; all deserted by the Confederates, now amazed,
and retyring to Germany and other places, upon the Duke D' Alvae's success at
Mons, and his severity in other places; only at Sea they did great mischief,
burning ships in Middleburgh, and most other Havens, and blocking up the
Spanish Power within their Land; his Sea-Forces being so battered, that he was
forced to lie at Anchor before Antwerp most part of the year 1573, and look on
his undutiful Subjects, Lording no less at Sea, than he himself at Land;
spoiling many passages with sunk Boats full of Stones; building strong Holds
upon the Mear of Harlem; whereabout sailed an 100 sail of ships, borrowed by
the Prince of Orange from England, France, Sweden, and Holland, to three and
thirty men of War; and three Galliasses, the Amsterdam men had equipped for the
King of Spain: Which going to strengthen Middleburgh, were sorely battered
between the Ramkins and Flushing, at the same time that the Zealanders made
1300 men to surprise and burn the Castle of S^abergh, between Flushing and
Middleburgh, with the Island and Town of Tolon, by the intelligence conveyed by
two ^ame Pigeons: A success that las^ed not long, the Princes mixed Fleet being
defeated the 28th of May, with the loss of one and twenty ships; and the Sluice,
Mase, Harlem, Mere* and all the Coast being so entirely subject to the Spanish
Navy, that it gave Law to all English, French, and Dutch ships on that Coast.

Till free Trade being Proclaimed by the Prince of Orange, for French, English,
Scottish, Germans, and Easterling Merchants; and the Flushingers being told
that they must fetch their pay out of the Spanish Prizes in the Road of
Armuyden, several Biscay ships and Convoys between Amsterdam and Vtrech were
seized; the Artillery on the Dike of Ramekins was surprised; and the Dike it
self between Flushing and Ramekins (being of great convenience) was fortified;
while alas Ramekins likewise being taken, in the (...) time the Prince his
long-promised (...) are (...), and the Harlo^^, after 31 weeks hardship, yield
to the mercy of their Besiegers; against whom, these Watermen were most
fortunate at Sea, being better acquainted with those untoward Coasts than their
Enemies; and likewise more vigilant, active, and industrious, and much assisted
from Germany, France, and England, and the Merchants of Holland; whence the
Proverb, That the Duke of Alva, during his Government, had made the Merchants
and Mariners of Holland Soldiers; The Neatheards of Spain, Hidalgos, i. e.
Gentlemen; The German Soldiers, Bribers; The Walloons Thieves; (who were wont
to be good men) Gentlewomen, and honest Virgins, Strumpets, and Whores; and
Bawds, Ladies and Gentlewomen.

Insomuch, that refusing the Emperors mediation for peace, they surprised
Geertruydenbergh, Rally the ships of West-Friezland, Enchuysen, Monykindam, and
the Waterlands; to defeat the thirty ships of Amsterdam, and lodge some French
and English* between Delph, ^otterdam, the Hague, and Leyden, to succor those
places and the Maseland sluice; to countenance the erection of a Fort at the
Head of the Chanel of Middleburgh, and take in Komerswael.

Which Particulars, with the Mutinies (begot by the Hollanders, the best at it
in the World) in his Army, forced the D. Alva and his Son to Spain; Do^ Lewis
de Requiescens succeeding in his charge and misfortunes: and seeing Middleburgh
and the great Fleet appointed to relieve it, vanquished before his eyes; being
then upon the great Dike of Berghen, by the miscarriage of his Letters and
directions; which yet was recompensed with the overthrow of Count Lodowick of
Nassau, and his motley Troops of English, French, and German malcontents;
among whom was Christopher the Elector Palatine's Son at Monkerbeyd, after they
had raised the Siege of Leyden.

Which was no sooner over, than Champigni, with some other Dutchmen, raised a
muteny among the Spaniards, which neither Priests nor Jesuits could pacify;
they crying, as the Landtskneghts used to do, That they would have Ghelt,
Ghelt, and no Preachment upon the Electors Interest; and Todo, Todo Dineros, y
non Pulabras, That is, Money (they meant their Arrears for the dead and living)
and no words.

And Dineros Todo, i. e. Money, and at a Mutiny, that cost Antwerp 400000
Gilders; while the Zealanders took 15 men of War before their very faces, while
the Spaniards were intent upon the two Forts they designed upon either Bank of
the River Mase, beneath Gorrechom; and lost in the Watery and Marsh-Countrey,
about After, Delf, Wormer, Ryp, Graft, Purmerend, and Vlpendam in
West-Friezland, and Waterland; insomuch that the Spaniards seemed very
inclinable to a peace; as seemed by their overtures to the Prince of Orange.

Which yet the States refused, as appears by their saucy Petition, becoming
Subjects that submitted only with their swords in their hands; and their
cutting the Dike, and raising all the Sluices, saying that they had rather have
a spoiled Country, than have lost one, to prevent the taking of Leyden; after
which, many other Towns had followed, with their resolution to live and die
with the Prince of Orange.

With which resolution, they kept Leyden (in so great extremity, as to coin
Paper-money; upon which was inscribed, Haec Libertatis ergo) for 11 months,
defeating the Spaniards ships about Leyde^ with stratagems and wiles, and
keeping the Passages open for Supplies, till Octob^ 3d.

It was after a months famine strangely relieved, and quitted by the Spanirds;
and the Prince coming thither himself to see it fortified, charitably recruited
it by the Neighbors collections, as a place that had cost the Hollanders a
Million of Gold, the Prince of Orange's two Brothers, and a Cousin, all three
Princes of the Empire.

Whereupon their Sovereign offered (with the intercession of the Emperor
Maximilian) very gracious Propositions of peace, which could not be accepted;
in regard (as the Earl of Switzenburgh observed at Breda where they traded) the
Rebls could not trust their Sovereign; as indeed no security can satisfy men
guilty of Treason against their Prince; and therefore he that draws his sword
against his Prince, must throw away the scabbard, and never be reconciled to
him; it being reasonable that a disloyal Person, should not think his Sovereign
would be true to him, when he has been so per^idious to his Sovereign.

But the Treaty at Breda 1575, was not a little reputation to the men of the
Revolt; who being hitherto esteemed but turbulent Boulfeus, are now respected
as just Enemies; in which capacity, to preserve their Lives, Wives, Children,
Goods, and what was dearer than all these, their Religion (they are their own
words;) they bethink themselves of a Protector, and

1. They propound the Empire, which they laid aside as too much divided in it
self.

2. France, which yet they waved as perfidious to them of the Religion, in the
Massacre at Paris, and exhausted by their own civil Wars.

In this extremity the distressed States by five Commissioners humbly submit
themselves unto the Q of Englands Protection: Or if necessity so required, to
acknowledge her for their Princess and Sovereign; issued from the Earls of
Holland and Zealand, by the Lady Philippa, Daughter to William the third of
that name, Earl of Henault and Holland, etc.

Which the wise Queen entertained not immediately, to prevent the jealousies of
Neighbor Princes; but

1. Received their Exiles to her Harbor and Country.

2. Mediated for peace, with a Protestation, that upon refusal she would
succor them.

3. Gave them leave to leavy men, and buy Ammunition in England. And

4. Supplied them with money upon security, while the Spaniards mutiny for want
of it.

The King of Spain breaks in the Merchants debts 14 Millions of Ducats, the
Pope dispensing with, and nulling all his Bonds and Obligations.

The chief Commander, Don Lewis, with his Marshal Vitells, dye.

All the Country is up against the King of Spains intolerable Impositions
surprising the Council of State, he erected upon his Governors death, the
hatred of the Spaniards being by the Dutch Artifices become universal, and all
places petitioning against strangers, meaning Spaniards.

The Queen of England being somewhat cold and indifferent, the Provinces invite
the Duke of Anjou, the King of France his only Brother to their Protection; who
dealing in the late mentioned Mutinies, surprised the Citadel of Cambray; and
upon Don John of Austria, the next Governors unpleasing carriage, made up of
st^atagems and threats, joined Braba^t in a strict League with Holland and
Zealand against the Spaniards and their Tyranny; joining his Interest with the
Prince of Orange for leavies in Germany, and assistance from England.

From the last of which, upon their promise to maintain their Religion and
Allegiance, they are assured of men and money by their Orator the Lord of
Swevenghen, and Captain Horsley (it being her Interest rather to engage the
Papists there, than in her own Dominions;) with whom Secretary Wilson, and Mr
Wendebank went and paid the money, receiving the States Obligation, with the
security of Brussels Gaunt, Bruges, Dunkirk, Newport, and Middleburgh; where
(with free passages were made by raising the Sluices according to the Queens
direction, in several places of the Country, for fear the Spaniards might
prevail at Sea.

And the union was effected (upon the Mutinies of Groninghen and Zuphten)
between the States, for the expulsion of Spaniards; with an acknowledgment of
their Allegiance to the King of Spain:

By virtue of which, Colonel Bal^our, and his English, having brushed the
Spaniards, the States capitulated with Don of Austria; whose vain conceits of
Conquering England, lost the Netherland, and would have agreed with him, could
they have had any assurances for performance of Articles, at the great
conferences between his Deputies and the Prince of Orange at Gertrudenbergh May
22, 1577; which failing, his practices were discovered in setting the Provinces
at variance among themselves, that he might govern them all; by his Letters to
Spain intercepted, and his vain attempt upon Antwerp.

Which made all the Provinces revolt from Don John, some to the States General
at Brussels, that declared only for Liberty and Privileges, and others to the
Prince of Orange, with the States of Holland and Friezland, that declared also
for Religion.

CHAP. IV.
How the English assisted the Hollanders, and made them a Free State.
ESpecially, when her Majesty the Queen of England, the only succor of the
distressed States, declared for them by Mr Wilkes; whereupon Leeuwarden
mutined, and yielded to them: Antwerp is dismantled, Germany sends in Aides,
^reda is delivered up, Groninghen is Tumultuous, the Prince of Orange is
invited to be Rovard, or Governor of Flanders, Don John of Austria is declared
Enemy to the States, notwithstanding his Army of 16000 Foot, and 2000 Horse.

The Nobility revolt, Amsterdam asserts its Liberty, the pacification at Gaunt
so much insisted on by the Queen, is confirmed, the Duke of Anjou offers his
assistance, and marches to distress Henault.

The case of the afflicted Netherlands, is taken into consideration, upon St.
Aldegon's motion, at the Imperial Assembly at Worms, whence the Duke of Anjou
had 12000 men toward his relief of the Low Countries, under the notion of the
Defenders of the Liberty of the Provinces against the Spaniards and their
Adherents.

Colonel Norris, Stuart; Captain Bingham, and Candish, saved the States whole
Army, by a brave Retreat they maintained for four miles, with three Regiments
in their shirts, by Rymenant: The Queen seasonably assisted them with 30000l,
when their Army was so likely to moulder away for want of pay, that she thought
fit to intercede for the distressed States with his Majesty of Spain and Don
John, by the Lord Cobham, and Sir Fracis Walsingham; and when that failed, a
Religious Peace (as they called it) which the States General consented to, was
settled; which bred great jealousies in the Provinces; where many were still
stiff for Popery, especially at Gaunt, till the Queen of England declared
against them, and promised notwithstanding that Duke Casimer, and the D. of
Anjou retired in discontent, to stand by the Protestant States to the utmost,
as she did effectually; having brought the Estates first to stricter Union and
Alliance at Vtrech 1579, than that before at Gaunt; and afterward to erect a
Council of State, for the management of affairs: whose very first debate, was a
Consultation about the alteration of Government, to shorten the War, and engage
some Person in their defense.

The next, was the taking and demolishing of several strong Holds, that had
been too serviceable to the King of Spain

But their affairs not prospering, they resolve upon the Duke of Anjou as their
Sovereign, upon 27 Articles signed on both sides, with Medals coined, whereon
were these devices; Leonem loris mus li erat: Liber revinciri Leo pernegat: Pro
Christo grege and lege: Religione and justitia reduce vocato ex Gullia pacata
duce Andegariensi, ^elgiae Libertatis vindice vos terra ^go excubo ponto 1580:
Si non nobis saltem posteris.

And that being dispatched, they agree upon Martial Discipline, and relieve
Steenwich, under the conduct of Sir John Norris; who victualled it, and raised
the Siege; having given notice of it in Letters, which he shot in his Bullets:
The States General in the mean time answering the King of Spain's Proscription
against the Prince of Orange, and providing against the insolences of the
Papists, by a restraint upon the exercise of their Religion at Brussels and
Antwerp declare thus,

The States General of the United Provinces, Guelders, Holland, Zealand,
Zuphten, Friezland, Overysel, and ^roeninghen, having declared Prince Philip of
Austria, second of that name, King of Spain, fallen from the Sig^io^y of the
said Provinces, by reason of his extraordinary and too violent Government
against their Freedom and Privileges solemnly sworn by him; having by the way
of Right and Arms taken upon us the Government of the public State, and of
the Religion in the said Provinces, An 1581; having by an Edict renounced the
Government of the K. of Spain, breaking his Seals, Counter-seals,
Privy-signets, for new ones made by them in their stead; and entertaining the
Duke of Anjou, nobly attended from England by the Lord Willoughby, Sheffield,
Windsor, Sir Philip Sidney, Shirley, Parrat, Drury, and the Lord Howard's son,
and recommended by the Queen; who avowed, That what service was done him, she
esteemed as done to her self, and commended to him this one good Rule, to be
sure of the hearts of the People, who invested him Duke of Brabant, and Earl of
Flanders; wherein Dunkirke did import him much to keep a Passage open from
Flanders into France, as the refusal his Brother made of succor, and his
entertainment of French Nobility, to the discouragement of the Netherlands did
him much harm; especially since most of his Followers were either men of Spoil,
or secret Pensioners to the King of Spain, and he by their advice, lost himself
in his Enterprise upon Antwerp so far, that had not her Majesty's Authority
reconciled them, the States and he had broken irrecoverably; though indeed they
never after peiced.

For the Duke thereupon delivers all the Towns he had taken to the States,
retyring himself to Dunkirke, while the Ganthoes, and other troublesome men of
the Innovation declared against him, and for Duke Casimir

And all the Estates humbly beseeched the Queen of England, by General Norris,
to have mercy upon them in this woeful juncture; especially when the wise Prince
of Orange was murdered (by a fellow recommended to him by Count Mansfield, and
serving him three years to await this opportunity,) having time to say no more,
but Lord have mercy upon my soul, and this poor People. And the Spaniards,
during the States differences, and the youth of Grave Maurice of Nassau, who
succeeded his Father, carrying all before them; insomuch that the King of
France was so afraid to take the Netherlands into his Protection, that he sent
Ambassadors to the Duke of Parma, to remove the very suspicion of it.

Especially when the Guisian League brake out upon him, and the poor States had
now none to trust to but the Queen of England; who during their Treaty with
France, had made them gracious promises by Secretary Davison by whom, by the
Respective Deputies of their Provinces, June 9. 1585, they absolutely resigned
the Government to her Majesty; who upon sundry great considerations of State,
refused that; yet graciously sent them 4000 men under General Norris 184600
Guilders, upon the security of either Ostend, or Sluice, and promised 5000 Foot,
and 4000 Horse, under a General and other Officers of her own with pay:

For which the States stood bound, giving Flushing, Ramekins, Briel, and the
two Sconces thereunto belonging, into her hand for security, and taking in her
Commander in chief, with two persons of Quality more of her Subjects, by her
appointment into their Council of State.

According to which Contract, Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, is made
Governor of the Low Countries for the High and Mighty Princess Elizabeth,
Queen of England; to whom the whole Country did Homage, receiving him as their
absolute Governor (though the Queen disavowed that, as being likely to engage
her too far in the Quarrel, and the States humbly submitted to her ple^sure)
in which capacity he set out Edicts for Discipline, for the Treaty, and
Traffic: which these troublesome people, upon pretense of Liberty and
Privilege, mutinied against, to the great hinderance of the Earls proceedings;
insomuch that after he had born up their Interest as his entrance into the
Government, just ready to sink; and taken Daventer, Zuphten, and other places;
he resigned his Government to the Council of State, leaving a Meddal behind him
on the one side whereof was engraven his Picture with these words, Robertus
^omes Leicestriae, and in Belgia Gubernator, 1587.

And on the other side, a flock of sheep scattered, and before them an English
Dog, with these words; Non gregem, sed Ingratos invitus desero.

Whereupon Deputies of Estates attended him with a Present, a Cup as big as a
Man, and an humble supplication to the Queens most Excellent Majesty, not to
forsake them now in their low Estate, so low, that the King of Denmark thought
fit to intercede for them to their own Liege, the King of Spain; while they in
extremity devolve their affairs upon young Grave Maurice: and declaring against
the Earl of Leicesser's proceedings, incensed the Queen so far, that she called
home General Norr is; though yet Sluice had been lost, had not Sr William Russel
supplied it with Provision, when all the seven Provinces could not do it.

Being now intent upon the settlement of their State-General, out of the
Particular Deputies of the several Provinces; the Earl of Leicester being
called home, and they hearing of a Spanish Armado, knowing not what to do, but
to importune her Majesty of England, that she should make no peace without them.

Now she was in treaty with the Prince of Parma, which she waves, though
privately willing enough to reconcile their private differences, which was the
greatest Motive she had to abandon them: It being not likely they should do any
good themselves, especially since there was such jealousies and mistrusts among
their chief Officers, who could never have been united, but by the vast Armado
of the common Enemy; which awed both sides to so much moderation, that they
settle the Government in the States, reduce all Parties into one Oath and
submission, reconcile Vtrech to Holland, pay their Soldiers very punctually,
establish Prince Maurice in the Admiralty, and Prince William in the Government
of Friezland.

They defeat the Marquess of Varumbon with Sir Francis Vere's assistance, take
the Antwerp Convoy, raise jealousies between the Inhabitants of Groening and
their Governor, maintain Liberty of Conscience, nourish the French
differences, get 125 26l. a month of the Queen of England.

They surprise Breda, engage the Electors, and get the Prince of Parma off to
the siege of Paris: Blackinbergh, Collenbergh, the Fort before Zuphten, Holt,
Nymighen, Grumbergh, Geertrudenbergh, Seenwye, and other places are recovered
by the Valor and Conduct of the English; particularly, Sir John Norris, Sir
Roger Williams, and Sir Henry Vere.

An Edict is made concerning Printing, a War is contrived between France and
Spain, the United Provinces and the Estates under the King of Spain treat for
peace.

Philip William, eldest son to William Prince of Orange, is released from his
35 years Imprisonment; whereto he was confined since he was taken in Leyden, as
we have formerly intimated.

Prince Maurice, and Sir Francis Vere Sir Robert Sidney's overthrow, Cardinal
Albertus his Army, Wan. 1577; whereupon Ambassadors are sent to the States
from the Empire from Peland, and from other parts, whom they remitted to the
Queen of England, as being able to do nothing without her.

In the mean time, they prevailing under her protection, set up the India
trade, assisting their Merchants with Artillery and Ammunition so as four ships
were set forth to destroy the Country, and bring away some Inhabitants against
another Voyage; where 8 ships ventured that way from Amsterdam, as did many
more from other places in the East and West Indies, to Guine, besides others to
Syria and Greece, 1578.

But the poor States being left out of the peace between France and Spain, are
at a loss; till the Queen of England sends to them, that if they resolved for a
War, they should inform her what provisions they had toward it, and rest
assured of her utmost assistance.

So they forbade Traffic with Spain, and entertained some overture afresh in
order to an offensive war; toward which, she sent 2000 soldiers more under Sr
Th. Knowles, besides 6000 men she procured from the Circles of the Empire;
several Forts are set up by her directio^s, the Contributions are mitigated in
Zealand, now ready to mutiny; by her Order the offensive War in Flanders began
by her intimation; 2800 sail of ships Rendesvouzed in the the Sea-towns of
Holland, Zealand, and Friezland; Grave, Oastend, and Newport are besieged, and
the Archdukes Army is defeated; Chimney-money and Excise is imposed; the
United States, and the States General Treat:

In the mean time the Arch Duke Albertus his Forces mutiny, and are entertained
by the United Provinces.

The Hollanders and the English engage the Spaniards at Sea, the King of
England that succeeded the Queen, March 24. 1603. promising them fair in
general terms; whereupon Oastend and Sluice are taken, and the States refuse
all intercessions for peace; especially since they defeated Spinola by Land,
and the Spanish Galleys by Sea.

After which, the Archduke Albert, and his Wife Isabella, in the name of the
King of Spain, declared them Free-states, and in that capacity offered to Treat
with them upon peace; all the Princes of Christendom offering their Mediation,
only the King of Spain's Aggreation (as they call it) was not clear, and the
62 Articles containing their Privileges, were not moderate enough to be the
ground either of a Treaty of peace, or a Truce.

In fine, These people being very intent upon the preservation of their
Liberties, and most prone to jealousy, motion, and surprises, being agitated
by others passion and their own, for those two great Dianaes, Privileges, and
Liberty of Conscience, high-flown upon the Battle of Newport, gotten by Sir
Francis Vere, refused Reason.

Notwithstanding the peace at Verven, between the King of France and Spain,
which cut off half their assistance; the difference between Embden and the
Governor of Friezland, that disturbed their Union; the taking of Oastend,
Rhainbergh Grelen, after three years siege, and Sir Francis Vere's great
endeavors to preserve it; that weakened their Interest; being grown great with
the private Alliance of France, and that more open of England; their Trade to
the Indies, and their Piracies upon Spain, until Spinola humbled; John May the
Provincial of the Franciscans persuaded; and what is more then all this, the
King of Englands inclination to a good understanding with Spain, frighted them
into a twelve years Truce, in a Treaty begun at Antwerp, 1607.

No sooner are they at peace without, but having recovered the Cautionary Towns
from the English, by old Barnavel's cunning, who (as King Henry the 4th said)
was the ablest Statesman in Europe as far as his money went; but their humors
began to work among themselves (Rebels are as troublesome to themselves, when
they have defeated their Sovereign, as they were to him before;) their
Predestination Points, and the nicities of Privileges engaging them, to the
great danger of the whole Government; had not King James by his Ambassador,
Sir Ralph Wenwood very effectually interposed.

The King of Spain finding the observation of a great Lord upon the Truce true,
That as soon as the common Enemy was over, they would fall by themselves; set
the Archduke upon offering them the confirmation of the Truce into a Peace, in
case they would accept of his Sovereignty.

An overture they scorned so far, that the Ambassador in his way through Delph
was almost stoned by the dregs of the people; and as soon as the Truce was over,
utterly denying the prolongation of it, they besieged Gulicke, spoiled Brabant,
invited Mantsfield into East-Friezland, and shrouded themselves in a League
against the house of Austria, with France, England, and Denmark, etc. (making
the Interest of Europe their security) in defense of the lower Circle of the
Empire, took the Plate-fleet, and what promised Wonders, (there being men in it
that could dive under water, and fly in the Air) the Fleet of Shallops, 1631.

And now Gustavus Adolphus held the house of Austria in play, and Cardinal
Richlieu set all Europe together by the ears; especially engaged Spain their
Enemy, with the power of France.

Now Catalonia and Portugal begin to revolt, and the French fall into Flanders;
notwithstanding the loss of Crun and Schenke: and their defeat of Hulst being
healed by the taking of Breda, and the success at Lentz, never hearkened to
peace, till they were acknowledged a Free State at Munster, 1648, where the
peace was concluded, Jan 8. which was confirmed at the Hague, March 26, and
published throughout this Republic, June 5. 1648.

CHAP. V.
Their dealings toward the English.
BUt as soon as these ungrateful people had made an end of their War, by the
Truce 1607, and Commenced their Sovereignty, they forgot their Protectors, and
did so much wrong to the English in the Indies (where yet they had never
traded, had not we assisted them against the power of Spain (then Lord of that
Country in right of the first Discoverers of it) amounted in the estimate of
English Parliament 1606, to 1500000l. sterling) and had drawn out King James
his sword; which they painted nailed to a scabbard, and provoke that
Parliaments Resolve and Vote for a War or a Reprizal, had not the High and
Mighty humbled themselves, and by all their Allies begged a Treaty, that began
to no other purpose, but to busle and elude us at London, 1613, ending a year
after to as little purpose, as it was begun; had not their humble Petition
renewed it 1615 at Lond^n, 1616 at the Hague, 1619 at London; where it was
concluded with a general amnesty, upon equal balance of allowance for what was
past, and an exact Method of Trade for the time to come.

But how sincerely they observed either these Terms, or their former
Obligations to us, is too evident from their Hostile attempts on Lantore,
Polleroon, and other places in our possession, by accord which they took,
razing our Forts there, and behaving themselves Barbarously toward our people
there, both living and dead; over whom they usurped Authority in all
Controversies, which they exercised most cruelly, in Whipping, Fining,
Imprisoning, Sequestring, and torturing them: Besides that, they forced them in
Partnerships, to be contented with their Accounts; laying to their Bills, what
had been disbursed upon their private occasions; it being indeed their business
(while we as the Subjects of a Noble Monarck, contented with his own Dominions,
traded fairly there) to invade Islands, take and build Forts, acquire Dominion,
and exclude all Partners.

Especially at Amboyna, an Island forty Leagues round, near Surat; where we
traded for Cloves, maintaining five Factors.

But these people setting up there four Forts, with four Bulwarks belonging to
each Fort, and six great pieces of Ordinances mounted upon each Bulwark,
guarded by Dutch ships, in the Sea round it did what they pleased a great
while; and at last torturing the poor Natives, to allure the English of a
pretended Plot, and the English to charge the Natives; (where its not probable
either would attempt so strong a place and people) insomuch that --

CHAP. VI.
Their Cruelty at Amboyna, and the Judgment of God upon it.
FIrst, The Tortures at Amboyna.
They hoysed them up by the hands with Cords over a large Door made fast with
two Staples of Iron, at the top of the Door-posts, as wide as they could
stretch; as they did their Legs too: then binding a cloth about their necks,
and faces so close, that little or no water could go by, they poured the water
softly on their heads, till the cloth was full to the mouth and nostrils:
Insomuch that in drawing their breath, they must of necessity suck in the
water; which with long continuance, forced all their inward parts out of their
Nose, Ears, and Eyes, till they were almost stifled and choked; then would
they take them down till they vomited the water, and hoyse them up again, till
their bodies swelled, to double their own proportion, their eyes stand out of
their heads, setting burning Candles in the bottom of there Feet, while they
thus hung, till many times the fat dropped out the Candles; as also under their
Elbows, in the palms of their Hands, and under their Armpits, till their very
Inwards might be seen; making the English believe the Japouers had accused
them, and the Japoners, that the English had testified against them; the poor
Heathens crying, O English, where did we see you? The English answered, Why
then did you accuse us? And they replied, If a Stone were thus burnt, would it
not change its Nature? How much more we, who are but flesh and blood

A cruelty unparalleld among Christians, or indeed among men; which therefore
the God of both pursued with vengeance.

1. In that King James and King Charles excepted the murders from the
Indemnities that passed in their time between us and the Hollanders.

2. In that a sudden Hurricano almost destroyed the Dutch ships in the Haven of
Ambayna, at the very hour of this ^orrid execution.

3. In that the first Informer against the English, fell down dead upon the
very place where these men are buried, rising again distr^cted; in which
condition he continued to his dying day.

4. In that An. 1630, 18 Dutchmen (whereof three were guilty of the Massacre at
Amboyna) supping at Frankford, in their way to Strasburgh, boasted how they
served our Nation in this place (glorying in their shame;) which one in the
Company noting, and relating to two English Captains, then in the Germane Wars,
whose Kindred had suffered there: These two way-laying the Hollanders in a
Wood, with a Troop of Horse, bid them stand, willing them to prepare for death,
for they must dye.

The Dutch answered, They hoped not so, for all their money was at their
dispose.

We seek not your money said the Captains, but your lives, for our Country men
and Allies you murdered at Amboyna: And so hanging up Johnson, the chief
Amboynist, and giving the rest leave to throw Dice which of them should escape
to bring the news of this to Holland; they trussed up all but Jobs Messenger,
the odd man sent home to tell his Contrymen, that Doubtless there is a God
that judges in the Earth.

Cruelty not to be paralleld among the Barbarous, much less among Christians;
and especially between the Netherlanders and the English: who when newly
recovered from Popery, and unsettled, when engaged in Ireland and the Countries
about, when governed by a Woman; when threatened from Spain, relieved the
distressed Estates, espoused their quarrel, spent their lives and fortunes in
their behalf.

So dear were those poor people to us, that they seemed to be one Nation with
us, and their Cause and quarrel the same with ours; being entertained by us
with the affection of Brethren, the love of Friends, and the respects of
Neighbors and Allies.

For which, though they promised it before the year 1625, they never made any
suitable satisfaction, nor returned to us any of those Islands of Spices that
they had taken from us; but added to their Insolences there, their strict
Orders against all free Trade to Flanders, which they Monopolized to
themselves, even during their War in that Country; and indeed, where ever they
have seen any advantage, as by Cunning, Force, or Fraud they have been able, no
consideration of Right, Friendship, Leagues, Humanity, or Religion have held
them from endeavoring the accomplishing of the same.

CHAP. VII.
Their Perfidiousness to all Nations.
FOr they are observed by all Nations to be a wretched sort of people, not to
be trusted in any Leagues or Treaties; they being the sad souls that entered
into a League Offensive, and Defensive with Lewis the 13th of France, 1630;
upon condition he made no peace with Spain without them: notwithstanding which,
they endeavored a Peace or Truce with Spain, without either his advice or
consent; as appeared by several passages of under hand deal^ngs of the Dutch
with the Spaniards, in a complaint made by the French Ambassador to the States.

Yea, when another League Offensive and Defensive was concluded, Feb. 8. 1635
between France and Holland, and a War with Spain commenced thereupon, these
Posterity of Judas (that will sell their God for three pieces of Silver,
denying their Religion as familiarly in Heathen Countrey^ for Trade, as they do
their words in their own for Interest;) went so far underhand in their
overtures of Peace with the Spaniards, that their Attorney General Musch was
dispatched to Don Martine Axpe the King of Spain, Secretary about them, though
they denied it to the King of France, who told my Lord Paw their Ambassador,
that these secret proceedings did contradict their solemn Treaty, and differed
much from the justice his Majesty had used toward them.

The same League being continued from 1636, to 1642, in the year 1640, they
treat again with the Spaniard against the French Declaration; that intimated
their Non-ability to Treat with pain, without the concurence of his Majesty of
France

Yea, a peace was negotiated by several Letters intercepted, to the Cond
Pinneranda, and showed the States by the French Ambassador at the Hague, at
the very same time, when 12000 French ventured their lives and fortunes for
them against Dunkirk and Flanders: which peace was concluded at Munster, though
confessed by Her van Nederhurst, one of the Plenipotentiaries there, to be
contrary to the agreement between France and them, and declared so by a
Manifesto of the King of France.

They that durst deal thus with the French deal worse with the Portugals; with
whom, when they revolted from Spain, as they had done before; they entered into
a firm League at Lisbone, and the Hague 1640, with mutual clearness (as to
outward appearance) on both sides.

But see the craft of these people! They insert in their Articles of peace,
that it should not begin beyond the Line, till a year after: In the mean time,
adsing their men at Brazile and elsewhere, to take all they could get from the
Portugoze, as they did A^gola, Mallacca, and Brazile.

Ambassadors were sent from Portugal to demand these places: the Hollanders
produced the said clause of the Truce, which was all the Portugez could get of
the Hollander; for said they, There is no wrong done, in regard that in that
clause its said, That each side should hold and keep what he can take, and in
such a time.

Whereupou the Portugal Ambassador said to them very well, That that must be
understood Bonafide, viz: That which should be taken, without having any
knowledge of the Truce.

Neither have they been more faithful to the ^wede, whom they engaged to assist
them against the Dane; and in the midst of that service deserted him, making
conditions of peace for themselves, and retyring.

Not much unlike their dealing with the King of Great Britain, 1664, whose aid
they craved against the Algier men; which was no sooner granted, Sr John Lawson
attending their service, and the Interest of Christendom; then they diserted
him, without any notice of their departure, and made as fast as they can to
Guinny, to fight against His Majesty's Subjects there, while His Subjects
assisted them in the Streights.

CHAP. VIII.
How unable they are to deal with us.
A Man would think that these Hogens had a vast Power, that durst indulge
themselves these practices against great Monarchies and Kingdoms; when alas, if
we consider their humors, how mutinous are they, and uncertain! If we reflect
upon their Country, A little Marsh, consisting of 7 Provinces, viz: The Duchy
of Gelderland, the Countries of Holland and Zealand, the Lordships of Vtrecht,
Friezland, Overystel, and Groninghen, threatened every day from Germany
Eastward, alarmed by the ea Northward, and watched by Brabant, Flanders, and
the other 10 Provinces Southward.

If we regard the Situation of it, it may be drowned by 2000 men (as Count
Mansfield offered) in a wet Winter; so easy a thing it is to overthrow their
Earth, Ramports, and Banks, which are but 25 Else broad, and 10 long, in the
most remarkable places, and yields very often to the strength of the Sea it
self; it may be overrun by 6000 men in a frosty Winter, the great frost, 1607,
being the great reason they would hearken to a Truce that year.

If we look upon their Rivers: 1. The Mase, running from Lorrain to Bred^. 2
The Sheld flowing from Picardy, a little above Antwerp. And the Rhine, arising
in the Alps, and falling to Amsterdam, also easily blocked up, and so usually
frozen.

If we observe their Taxes upon every thing that a man eats, drinks, or
enjoys, so burthensom to the Commonalty.

If we weigh their Interest abroad, which through their ungratefulness,
infidelity with Spain, Portugal, France, Germany, and Sweden, and usurpations,
is so inconsiderable.

If we respect their people, so diminished by a sad Plague, that they are not
able to inhabit and people their Country.

If we cast our eye on their Trade, all Nations having learned their Methods
and Inventions now dead.

If we mind their shipping, upon their misunderstanding with the Northern
Kingdoms that supplied them with Timber and Cordage now decayed.

If we anim^dvert the condition of Eriel, Flushing, and other Port Towns, that
command the passage to Delph, Rotterdam, Dort, Gertenburgh, and the capacious
Bay of the Texel, now weak.

If we survey their Government (their Stat-holder mistrusting them, and they
him, the Provinces being all absolute and Independent, one drawing one way, and
another another, and every one forgetting the Public good in pursuit of a
Private Interest; Holland being ambitious over the rest and the rest envious at
it: Their Military Power invested in the Prince of Orange, being disobliged by
the Civil; and their Civil Power afraid of the Military:) now much shattered,
nothing more unseasonable than a War with England; especially if we add to all
this their Fortune in the last War: Viz:

Holland was united by its own Interest and His Majesty's, and England was
nothing else but the poor remainders of a Civil War and a Faction; when the
Dutch were flush with a Ten years free Trade, and we spent with as many years
Rebellion; when we were the ^dium of Mankind, and they at least (upon the
account of that Quarrel) the Darlings of Europe, a handful of our mean^st and
most inconsiderable of our People durst Vote, That no Goods should be I^ported,
or Exported into, or out of England, but in English Bottoms: And when the Lords
States forsooth took that in Dudgeon, our bold fellows (the King, Lords, and
Commons standing by and not concerned) Vote their Embassado^r the Lord Joachim
away out of England, October 6. 1650, within a month at his peril; at whose
return, the High and Mighty draw in their Money, sink their Bank, mistrust one
another, break all to pieces, raise Fortifications, cast Ordinances, provide
new Artilleries, Yards, Rendezvous Militiaes, and withdraw 200 Families at
least to Hamburgh, and the other Hans-Towns of Germany.

Yet so much Courage they had left, as to scorn the pretended Ambassadors our
Mock-Governours sent thither; insomuch that one Dorisla by name, lost his life
there, and another Strickland was weary of it; and strike to his Majesty's
concerns, as he was King of Great Britain, in most of their Treaties with
France, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, etc. though yet in their General Meetings,
Jan. 20. 1651. they Voted our Tom Thombs a free State forsooth, and
Commonwealth, and that they would transact with their new-coyn'd Honors about
a Truce, and that too by old Joachim, who was sent packing (but two Months
before) the Province of Holland, having cast the charges of a War; and
considered that half the money might advance it to a Seignory over its Sister
Provinces.

And all the Provinces being amazed at the Tempest that broke the two Dikes,
St. Anthonies, and the Harlem-Dike, to the ruin almost of Gelders, Zuphten,
Overystel, Friezland, and Holland.

Upon the least suspicion of War, up came Chimney-money, Poll-money, Excise on
Salt, Beer, Vinegar, Wines, Butter, Oil, Candles; all Grains, Seeds, Turff,
Coals, Lead, Brick, Stone, Wood, Linen and Woollen, Clothes, Silks, Silver,
Gilt; Wagons, Coaches, Ships, and other Vessels; Lands, Pastures, Gardens,
Nurseries; Houses, Servants, Immovable Goods, all Seals.

They forbid all affronts to their Lordships forsooth, Strickland and St. John

They drink (and that was a great Argument of the High and Mighty States good
affection) in continuationem and prosperitatem Reip: Angliae.

Notwithstanding all which compliance, the paltery thing called Our Parliament,
stayed a Fleet of theirs in the Downs forsooth, till further Pleasure; because
there was Cordage, Powder, and Ammunition in them under the Corn. Whereupon His
Majesty prospering in Scotland, and a Peace being made with France, the Mighty
make bold to tell Sir John, That they cannot answer his Proposition, touching a
League Offensive and Defensive, under four Months; for that they must send to
all the Provinces for their advise and consent in a business of so high a
concernment; and our High and Mighties take snuff, and call their Messengers
home, to the no little trouble of their Breth^en, who beseech and entreat their
stay; but to no purpose, the young Usurpers being intolerable, when ever
entreated to be kind; and when that would not do, pass this Vote:

The States General of the Netherlands, having heard the Report of their
Commissioners, having had a Conference the day before with the Lords
Ambassadors of the Commonwealth of England, do Declare, That for their better
satisfaction, they do wholly and fully condescend and agree unto the 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, and 11 Propositions of the Lords Ambassadors; as also to the 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 8 Articles of the year 1575, made between H. 7th, and Philip Duke of
Burgundy: Therefore the States do expect in the same manner as full and clear
an Answer from the Lords Ambassadors, upon the 36 Articles delivered by their
Commissioners, 24th of June, 1651.

And not only so, But they nominate the Here Bever of Dort, and the Here Vell
of Zealand, with old Joachimi for Agents to the Commonwealth (forsooth) of
England remembering the old Motto in Queen Elizabeth's time, Si Col^idimur
frangimur.

Especially when the men at Westminster gave Letters of Mart to several
Merchants, to make themselves satisfaction for the losses they had suffered by
Pickeroons, belonging to the Netherlands.

Whereupon they filled up their Embassy with min Here Schaep, delaying the
matter till the Kings Majesty's business was decided.

Their 11 East India ships worth a Million, were put to sale; an 160 sail
arrived from Bourdeaux; Mounsier Borreel could not prevail in France; and the
bold ones at Westminster make an Act (as they called it) for Increase of
shipping, the improvement of Trade, the encouragement of Fishing and
Navigation, so prejudicial to the Cities of the Rine; which together with the
surprise of so many Amsterdamers, awaked them so far, that Van Tromp with 36
sail in three Squadrons, was ordered to Sea, first to the Straights, and then
to the Downs, to secure their Monopoly of Wine and Currants, and Agents
dispatched to Denmark, Sweden, Portugal and France, to strengthen the War in
behalf of it, altering their Ambassadors for England; whither they send the
cunning Head-pieces, mine Here Catz, and min Here Scaep; the last whereof in
the mean time treats with France about Dunkirk, and with Sweden about
Neutrality.

The English men discourse of 100000 for Amboyna, the Herring-fishing, free
passage through the Sheell, and the cautionary Towns frighting them to a
resolution with 152 sail, to commence a War; eight Dutch ships being taken by
the English, as they came from New foundland; and the Swedish Ambassador
Speering, dealing underhand with the English; insomuch that they forbid any
ship to stir from either the Mase or Texel; and Amsterdam offers an no sail,
as Zealand does 40, on condition its Petition be granted about Letters of Mart,
the States fortifying Briel and Flushing, prohibiting the Exportation of any
Warlike Provisions, and making a stay of all English ships.

In the mean time a certain Faction crept in, that disturbed their Public
Peace at Middleburgh and Dort, because they mentioned not the Prince of Orange
in levying Soldiers; till Trump departed in July, with resolution to find out
the English: Yet espying Sir George Aiscue in the Downs with a Squadron, was
not able to bear up with him, because of a Calm; wherefore he addresseth
himself against Blake in the North, attending some Indian Vessels, and taking
the Dutch Herring-Busses; from whom a Tempest parted him to his loss, as the
night did De Ruyter from Aiscue; only he met with Captain Badileyes 4 ships in
the Straights, and took the Phaenix, which was re-gained by Captain Cox in
Portologn, upon a Dutch festival night; when during the heat of the Holland
Carouses, he stole upon it in a Boat, in the habit of a Dutchman; which success
was indeed allayed by Captain Appleton's weighing Anchor out of Legorn Mole
sooner than he should, and so falling into the hands of 22 Dutchmen of War,
before Captain Badiley could come at him.

A while after, General Blake discovered the Dutch Fleet on the backside of
Godwyn-sands, being about 60 men of War, under Vice Admiral Witti Wittison;
against whom (Captain Young, Reynolds, and Chapman having humbled the Legorn
Merchants, and their Convoy) he bore up, and notwithstanding he was on a
dangerous Sand, called Kentish Knock, where the water was not three fathoms
deep, assuring his Soldiers vast encouragements, he staid by the Dutch Fleet
till night parted them.

And next day, though the wind was low bore North and by West up to them, being
then two ^eagues North-east of the English; who coming with much ado within
shot of them, made them so afraid they should get within them, that they run
for it, 10 Frigates chasing them till 6 a clock at night, June 18; excusing
themselves to Captain Bourn, that cross Winds had blown them upon our Coasts
against their wills.

Yet having with fair words collogued with our Dons so far, that they laid up
half their Fleet in Harbor, upon the loss of their Plate-Fleet, which they
pretended was the King of Spains, but really was theirs, they appear before
Dover with 70 men of War, and 10 Fireships, forcing Blake with but 42 men of
War, and them ill manned, and worse commanded, to engage to an unavoidable loss.

Which yet was quickly recompensed, when withdrawing to the Harbor, and in
spite of the Hollanders industry to hinder all Nations from bringing any Tar,
Pitch, or Masts into England; equipping 80 sail against the 18th day of Feb.
1653; upon which day, the Dutch Fleet, in number about 80 sail, with an 150
Merchant ships from Rovan, Nants, and Bourdeaux were discovered between the
Isle of Wight and Portland, and about 8 in the morning, the Headmost of the
Enlish Fleet came up and engaged them, I mean the Triumph (wherein Blake and
Dean were) with 3 or 4 more (the rest not being able to get up) holding 30
Dutch ships in play till two a clock in the afternoon, when half the Fleet came
up and fought the Hollanders till night.

And next morning Feb. 17, chased them to the Leeward, having 60 Merchants, and
9 men of War in our hands, and 2000 men dead on the shore; insomuch that the
Hogens entreat a Peace by a new Ambassador, the Lord Paw, and their Merchants
are forced the long and perilous Voyage round the North by Ireland and
Scotland, and before Norway; as did the Rochel and East India Fleet, that
belonged to the Baltic Sea, not daring else to stir out of the Fly.

For though the Spanish, the Italian, the Levant and Indian Merchants, 145 sail
in number, attended by 90 men of War for their Convoy; yet the English Fleet,
consisting only of 65 men of War, being at Anchor on the South side of the
Gober, discovering them about two Leagues to Leeward, being about 100 sail
together, weighed, and bore sail to them, with so furious a charge that night
and next morning, that they tore quite away as fast as they could, only the
wind freshing Westward.

The English bore in so hard among them, that 12 of our men of War sunk 6 of
theirs; and had done the whole Fleet, had not night surprised them, so near the
Godwyn-sands, where the Dutch decoyed them, that they were forced to weigh
Anchor, while the shattered Dutch got into the Texel, the Wieling, and the
Fly; the English resolving to pursue them to their own Coast as near as they
durst, where they took Prizes in a manner every day, and as it were blocked
them up.

Till beating up Drums first in their own name, and (when the people fell to a
Tumult at Enchuysen because it was not in the Princes name) in the young Prince
of Orange his name, they reinforced another Fleet pro aris and for is, to
relieve their Coasts and themselves, both imprisoned by an English Power,
quartering a great Body of Horse in the mean time for fear they should land,
and sending four Commissioners to England, with most humble Propositions of
Peace.

During which Treaty, July 27, the English Scouts discovered a Dutch Fleet from
the Wi^lings, of about 75 men of War:

Upon notice whereof, the English Fleet made what sail they could after them;
which the Dutch discerning, stood away; yet by five a clock that evening, were
Engaged by 30 English Frigates so resolutely, that they sent away some torn
ships in the night, and stole themselves too undiscerned by the English, into a
designed conjunction with 25 sail of stout men they expected out of the Texel;
with whom they fell furiously on the English next morning.

When after some success against the Garland, the Triumph, and the Andrew by
their Fire ships, they observing the declining of their fortune, bore away
toward the Texel, whither the English durst not follow them, for fear a cross
wind should meet with them at that shore; where they saw the Dutch led to
Harbor, having lost their Admiral Va^ Tromp, thirty men of War, and 6000 men.

A defeat, that set the Hague, Alchmuer, and many other places in Holland in an
up roar; and being added to their loss of seven Braziel ships on Calice Road,
taken by Captain Reynolds, Moullon, and Cran^ley, and of Braziel it self
recovered, during this War, by the Portugez.

The taking of 9 ships upon the coast of France, by Captain Pack, Wright, and
Jordan, in spite of the French Protection.

The jealousies between Van Tromp and De Wit, since the first knock on the
Godwyn-sands, after their ranting in one Pamphlet of their Lion and his Prey;
in another, of Englands being possessed with a Devil; and in a third, That
Hollanders are Angels (a Dutch man in his double Jugg proportion, with a box of
Butter in the one hand, and a pickled Herring in the other, is a Pretty
Cherubim) and English men Devils.

Notwithstanding their Threats of combining with the World against us, that
brought them on their knees in reiterated Messages of Peace, not scrupling the
perliminary Points of satisfaction formerly so much boggled at in former
Treaties.

And shall these unhappy people, that were baffled by a poor Remnant of a
Rebellion, undertake the Generous, Honest^, and full Power of a Monarchy? That
they, who withstood not the distracted ambition of a few Out-lawes, that were
almost lost in the pursuit of other men's Estates and Powers, presume against
the settled authority of a Prince, whose only business is to preserve his own;
who frights none, and is afraid of none; having no Enemies, because owning no
undoing thought against any, but such, for whose ruin a true and satisfactory
Reason may be given to the World.

In vain do they vapor against a Nation, whose Government is fixed; since they
fell before it, when it was loose; alteration of Interests was their Hope, then
the sixedness of it must be their Fear now: Then they had to do with many
Factions, now with one Interest: Then with a Power that mistrusted it self,
whence they knew how to ^^jole the Council of State against a Parliament, as
they called it, and a General with his Army against both; now the Military
Power is all one with the Civil, the Council with the Parliament, the Lords
with the Commons, the Temporality with the Spirituality, because all influenced
by one Head, and acted by one Interest, the Honor of His Majestly, the freedom
of Trade, together with the R^ghts and Privileges of three great Nations, to
be generously asse^ed against all Usurpations whatsoever.

Did they stoop to a self-seeking Rabble, and dare they look in the face of a
Publick-spirited Prince? Did they yield to oppressed and cross Crest-fallen,
and will they engage a Freeborn and Magnanimous People? Did they submit to a
dissolute Faction, and will they contest with a well-regulated Power? Will they
Conquer us, fighting against our Freedoms and Liberties, when they were
Conquered by us in fighting for them? Were they humbled when the Vote of the
most and best of the Nation was for them, and do they now swell, when the
Universal Vote is against them? And we can scarce agree so well in the
acknowledgment of a God, as in an inclination to a Dutch War; the only Point
to which there are no Non conformists.

Its to little purpose to attempt a Nation restored to its Virtues, Severities,
Orders, and Laws, since they failed against it, when sunk in Licentiousness
and Barbarisms; will they venture a War that is the Peoples own act and choice,
after that unsuccesful one, which was but their necessity and Fate?

Were the English so valliant in serving others Lusts, and will they be less in
carrying on their own Interest?

Did they Wonders when ruined with ten years woeful War, and can they do less
when refreshed with five years blessed Peace?

Did the English prosper when they engaged for other men's Ambition, and will
they not succeed, when obliged by their own Country?

Did they Conquer when they dreaded their Victory, as likely to be overcome
themselves, as soon as they overcame their Enemies; and can they be Conquered,
when they passionately wish it, as the security of their livelihood and and
liberty, and where Defeats raise not Despair, Tumults, and Riots, as in
pretended Free-States, where the people think their Governors are accountable
to them, but just resentments and resolutions, as in Monarchies, where Princes
are accountable only to their Reason and Honor.

The Dutch would do well to consider that they have not to do now with the
confusion of Levellers, but the Order of Government; not with the Raw
undertakings of Mechanics, but with the staid and sage Experience of
Statesmen; nor with the Tumultuous Discontents and Divisions surviving a Civil
War; but the calm sedateness, and tranquillity attending a well settled Peace:
Not with those Free State jealousies that made it dangerous for any man to be
Eminent, but with those Royal magnificent confidences, that make it shameful to
be mean.

England is not now a Wilderness of wild, unconstant, and ungrateful
Creatures, but a Kingdom of Sober men.

The Advantages that the Dutch^ make, by Fishing on the Coasts of Great
Britain, which by the War they are like to lose.
THe British Seas, especially toward our own Coasts, are so exceedingly
productive of Multitudes, or great sholes of good, substantial, and useful
Fish, as Ling, ^od, Herrings, Pilchers, etc as that it would seem incredible,
should I relate what vast quantities of them are yearly taken by the Dutch, and
sometimes with what ease and speed: But the continual experience and testimony
of Eyewitnesses, is ground sufficient to confirm the truth thereof.

And hereby they not only supply themselves with the greatest part of their
subsistence and food, but reap such other General and National advantages, as
are equal to the Revenue of a Crown; and may Rationally be assigned as the
chief and principal Cause (next to the favor and assistance of the English in
their Infancy) of their present strength and Mightiness

Which the better to evince, I shall both use the Authority, and follow the
Method of that knowing and curious Observer, Sir John Buroughs; who in a small
Tract of his, written 1633, has judiciously disposed those foresaid
Advantages into seven Heads or Particulars; viz:

1. Increase of Shipping and Seamen. 2. Traffic. 3. Strong Holds, and
Fortifications. 4. Power abroad. 5. Public Revenue. 6. Private, or particular
Estates. 7. Provisions, and store of all things conducing either to their
Subsistence or Greatness.

1. Increase of hipping and Seamen
ANd here this ingenious Gentleman has by clear evidence demonstrated, That
Holland, which is not above 28 Dutch miles long, and three broad (nothing so
large as one single County of England;) a Country, that has of its own
growth, and within it self nothing considerable, either of Materials, Victuals,
or Merchandise; for setting forth of ships, does yearly employ and maintain by
Fishing upon our Coasts (besides 3000 Vessels employed in fishing on their own
Coasts) 7 or 8 thousand ships, Herringbusses, and other Fishing-boats, wherein
are set at work above 140000 Fishermen and Mariners; who are hereby bred and
inured to the Sea, and fitted for manning and sailing their other shipping into
remote Parts, and other services; besides the many thousands of Tradesmen,
Women, and Children, which have their dependence on, and subsistence from this
Trade: and all this by the indulgence, favor, and sufferance of the English.

2. The increase of Trade.
The Dutch being by this Fishingtrade (as it were) born and bred upon the Sea,
cannot (or hardly do) live elsewhere; but disperse themselves in trading
Voyages throughout the whole World: And our Fish, especially our Herring, being
approved, and of general use for food throughout Europe, is the only Commodity
whereby they furnish themselves with the richest Merchandises (yea and Coin to
boot) of all other Countries. Nay it is no small sum of money that they yearly
carry out of England it self, for this its own Commodity; a thing shameful to
the English Nation, and not to be excu^ed. That when God and Nature has
offered them so great a Treasure, even at their own door, they notwithstanding,
for want of Industry (to say no worse) neglect the benefit thereof; and by
paying money to strangers for the Fish of their own Seas, impoverish themselves
to make them rich, and so the more dangerous Neighbors.

3. Strong Holds and Fortifications.
By this their greatness of Trade, and the dependency of the whole people upon
that only, their Cities and Towns (which are for the most part Maritine, and
conveniently seated for Commerce) are by a continual Concourse exceedingly
populated, and (which is consequent) much enlarged, and beautified in their
Buildings, and (as all great moneyed men's houses) strongly fortifyed, for the
defense of themselves, and substance from the violence of Neighbors. This we
find confirmed by the late enlargment of Leyden, Middleburgh, and Amsterdam, by
the Strength, Convenience, and Costliness of their Ports and Havens, by the
strong and regular Fortifications of all their Towns; but especially by the
late Magnificent and Sumptuous Piles at Amsterdam.

4. Increase of Power abroad.
Nor is it only at home that they thus streng hen themselves, but being by
their largness of Traffic (as it were) Citizens of the World, and having so
great number both of Ships and Mariners, they Plant and strongly Fortify
themselves in other more remote parts of the World. Nay they have by this means
extended their Power so far in the East Indies, as that in many places they
keep both King and People at their devotion: And it is by some conceived, that
they are in that part of the World as considerable as they are at home, both
for their own defense, and for offending their Enemies.

5. Publich Revenue.
What enlargement of the Public Revenue by their Fishing trade, may easily be
calculated, by the quantity of the Fish by them taken: and it appears upon
Records for that end kept, that they have taken in one year between 40 and 50
thousand last of Herrings only, (besides Ling, ^od, and other Fish;) which
after the usual Rate they are sold at, comes to 10000000l. the Custom and other
Duties arising from them to the State in their Exportations, amounting to
between 500 and 600 Thousand pounds; besides the Revenue arising from the
Merchandises Imported in exchange of these Fish.

6. Private Estates.
And it must necessarily follow, That where the Trade is so large, and the
Commodity of so certain sale and general use (necessity I may say to some
Countries) and purchased at so easy Rates, and Private men, or the people in
general exercise this Trade, those Private men so trading, must (I say) needs
grow rich and wealthy, and we know they are so: Whereunto I shall add the great
benefit arising from the Employment this Trade affords to all sorts of
Tradesmen and Artificers, with their Families, that have any relation to
shipping, or the Sea; which comprehends almost all Trades whatever.

And equal to this do I esteem the commendable advantage of setting all sorts
of poor people at work; not only the strong and healthy, but even the most
impotent, the Lame and the Blind, Old and the Young; insomuch that it is a rare
thing to see a Beggar in Holland.

7. Store of Provisions.
And Lastly, We find by Experience, that though the Hollander be but little
beholding to their own Country for the production of any thing considerable
for their support; yet do they in return for their Fish, furnish themselves
(even to abundance) with all sorts of Provisions necessary for life, conducing
to Luxury and Appetite, or requifite for War and Defen^e.

The Premises considered, I cannot understand the sullen perverseness of that
People, in provoking and quarrelling with the King of Great Britain; in whose
Power it is, if not wholly to damm and choke up this the Fountain, yet strongly
to interrupt the Steams and Current; not only of their Greatness, but of their
very Being.

But if for their ingratitude to their best friends, who made them what they
are, their Treachery and False-heartedness to all their Consederates and
Allies, without any regard to their solemn Engagements; their Barbarous and
inhumane Cruelties to all (both Friends and Enemies) where they have gotten
Advantage; Divine Justice think it time to call them to account. -- Jupiter
quos vult perdere dementat prius.

The present state of the United Provinces.
Country Gentleman.
SIR, I can find little or no satisfaction in the Pamphlets you sent me
concerning the present condition of Holland and England; shall I entreat your
Observations concerning both, where the one boasts Your ^irth, the other Your
Education.

Traveller. The Pamphlets I sent, pretended not your satisfaction, but your
Pleasure; as designed rather with their variety to Entertain, than with their
exactness to Inform you.

And I am as heartily glad we have in the retirements of our Country, such
exact Judgments, as rest not in superficial Accounts of things, as sorry I am
not in this particular more able to answer their expectation or yours.

However being (as your Worship knows by many instances) more willing to betray
a Weakness, then an Vndutifulness: your Curiosity shall not sully to that
particular on these two Subjects, wherein my Observations shall not attend it.


Gent. The first particular that offers it self to consideration, is the Their
condition in regard of Situation.
present condition of Holland, in regard of its Situation.


Trav. And that very Rationally, the Interest of all Countries depending on
their Position, and their Estate arising from the mutual aspect of their
Neighbors toward them, and theirs toward their Neighbors; wherein to proceed
with a clearness agreeable to my Temper and Subject.

I need not inform you, That of 17 Provinces formerly belonging to the House of
Burgundy, and in Right of that House, to the House of Austria; there are seven
united in a free State among themselves, under the notion of the united
Netherlands; the Situation of each whereof in particular, will resolve your
first Question.

1. Holland the chief of them, and the Province that designs the enslaving of
the rest, ever since it enjoyed freedom; for it self is awed on the N and W
with the German-Sea, and whosoever is Master of it: On the E. bounded with
Vtrecht, on the South, lying over to Brabant, the Mase only parting them


Gent. It must needs be sad with that Country, when so mighty a Prince by Sea
threatens it on the one hand, as the King of Great Britain is in the
German-Sea; and such a Neighbor watches it, as the King of Spain is in
Brabant; unless they are wonderfully fortified on all sides.


Trav. Three places there are, upon which depend the Fate of Holland:

1. Encheusen, on the very point of Zuider-zee, standing most conveniently to
command the Posts of Amsterdam.

2. Edam, upon the very same Gulf, their great Cha^tam or Arsenal of ships; and

3. Briell, in the Island Voorn, formerly one of the Cautionary Towns, chosen
by the English; in regard of the great command it has upon the passage to
Gertrudenburgh, and the rest of Brabant; as also to Delph, Dort, Rotterdam, the
greatest Towns of trade in South Holland.


Gent. Since we unhappily parted with this Town, such are the Dikes and
Channels round it, Hoorn, and most of their strong Holds, that it is impossible
to possess our selves of them.


Trav. When you remember how ordinarily they were bought, sold, and surprised
in the Spanish War, you will not despair of them: Besides that, the whole
Country lies so low, that it is but dispatching a few Pick-axes against the
Mud-wall, Banks, Ramparts, and Dikes; whereby, with much ado, they confine the
Sea, and the Rivers, and the whole Country shall lie in Pickle, as their
Herrings do.


Gent. Its the greatest Bogg of Europe, and Quagmire of Christendom, that's
flat, of which it was formerly more strane, than it will be upon this War true;
That having no Corn of their own, they had the Granary of Europe; no Wine they
drank, more than any Country besides; no Wool or Flax they made more Cloth of
both sorts, than any people, besides the French and English; and no Timber, yet
spending more than any Nation.


Trav. 1. A Power that confines them at home, starves them; and one years stop
on their Trade overthrows them.


Gent. I look upon the Dutch in this Quarrel with England, like the Belly in
its Controversy with the Members which fed them; or like the Rebellion of
Paris, which (says the Historian) was starved, rather than Conquered. But Sir
the next Province.


Trav. 2. Zealand (consisting of 7 Islands, the remainder of 18) has no more
to secure it from Flanders, than the left Branch of the River Scheld, or Hont;
or from Brabant Eastward, but the right Branch of the said River; nor on the
West from England, but the Sea; whereof the whole World knows who is Master.

A Province that is so ill provided with Wood, that without a supply of Coals
from New Castle; and Scotland has no other remedy now, but to digg Turffs out
of the Banks, too much weakened already thereby in the late English War; and
that is to be drowned, for fear of being starved; whose Fate depends upon
^lushing (another cautionary Town, formerly a poor one, since, the very Key of
the Netherlands; without whose License, no ship could pass formerly, either to
or from Antwerp:) and the most capacious Haven Ram, or Armynygden.


Gent. 3. West Friezland Sir.


Trav. West-Friezland, That has no Fire but Cow Dung, no Air but foggy, no
water, but Marshy; lies Eastward obnoxious to Westphalen in High-Germany, N.
and W. to the main Ocean.


Gent. Where lies the strength of that place?


Trav. 1. In the strong Castles, that over-looks Harlingen-Haven, and Staveren,
in that part of it called Westergoe. 2. Leuwarden, in that called Oastergoe: --
The rest of the Country being the seven Forests, called Seven-Wolden: -- In
an Isle whereof called Schelink, to divert you, you may observe the taking of
Dogfish in this manner:

The men of the Island attire themselves with Beasts-skins, and then fall to
dancing; with which sport the fish being much delighted, makes out of the
waters toward them, Nets being pitched presently between them and the water;
which done, the men put off their disguises, and the frighted fish hastening
toward the Sea, are caught in their Toils.


Gent. But if it please you, the Situation of Vtrecht.


Trav. 4. Vtrecht lies safe enough, being surrounded by Holland and
Gelderland; East, West, North, and South, as does

5. Overyssel; only West phalen casts a scurvey Aspect toward it Eastward.


Gent. Where lies the advantage against this Country?


Trav. In several parts of the Isle, which is secured only by Daventer and
Campen, as they are only by the adjoining Marshes; which yet are rendered
utterly unserviceable in one month of Frost; as appears An. 1527, when the
Imperialists were let into both these Provinces.


Gent. Please you Sir to go on.


Trav. 6. Gelderland, which bred a Bull 1570, that weighed 3200 pound, must
watch the Elector of Bradenburgh Eastward, whereon its bounded with Cleveland;
whereof the States have got half into their hands, and the Brabanters, who shut
it up Southward.


Gent. Where lie the passages into this Country?


Trav. At the confluence of the Mase and the Wael, where Duke Albert erected,
and the States maintain the Fort St. Andrews to command that Passage; and
Gelders, the only place in the Province, that would never submit to the States.


Gent. Zuphten Sir.


Trav. 6. Zuphten, lies at the mercy of Westphalen on the East, and Cleveland
on the South.


Gent. Where is this place usually attached?


Trav. Over the old Yssel, from Westphalen, only Zuphten, Groll, and Doesburgh
secure it; which yet every year of the last War shifered their Masters, so
liable they were both to surprise and Corruption.

7. To which I may add Groaning, enclosed by the Friezlands on all sides, save
the North, that lies open to the main Ocean; succored only by Old Haven and
Groaning.


Gent. But have the States no holding in Flanders or Prabant?


Trav Yes, they have the Sluyes, the Isle of Castandt in Flanders, with such
plaees of Importance in Bra^ant, as may tempt their watchful Neighbors to
improve this juncture of their breach with England, to recover all the World;
knowing that when they are so mightily engaged by Sea, they will have but a
very poor defense by Land; and it being obvious to themselves (but that Fate
infatuates them it would punish) that a breach with England may lose what amity
with it has gotten them.


Gent. I pray how bigg may this United State be?


Trav. Its Circuit is some 300 miles, its walled Towns 71; whereof 23 belong to
Holland, 8 to Zealand, 11 to West-Friezland, 5 to Vtrecht, 11 to Overyssel, 16
to Geld^rland, 8 to Zuphten: -- And its Villages, 1560; whereof 400 are in
Holland, and 300 in Zealand, ^45 in West-Friezland, 70 in Vtrecht, an 100 in
Over^sse^, 300 in Gelderland, 145 in Groaning, besides the Towns in Brabant,
^landers, and Cleveland.


Gent. I pray how stand all these Neighbors affected toward their United
Province?


Trav. Westphaliae, and the Bishop of Munster is disobliged about the
Eyler-Sconce; the Elector of Bradenburgh is not well pleased with some Passages
in Cleveland; the Emperor and Spain strenthen themselves in Flanders: neither
is the King of France without preparations in Picarty and Artois, and all this
while the King of Great Britain has made the most dreadful preparations
against them that any Age can remember.


Gent. This is so sad, that it must needs sink any other people but the Dutch,
who are so much given to hope, that like St Clemens, though drowned, they have
an Anchor about their necks.


Trav. Yet this is not all, for the Hollanders, under pretense of Liberty of
Trade, which the Duke of Rhoan says is their Interest; having engrossed a
Monopoly of it, which all the World decrees as their Usurpation.

The industrious Portugeze, whom they have wormed almost out of all their
discoveries in Asia and Africa upon the least Truce with Spain, would set up
Repriz^ls, as well for their Trade, as their Goods on either side of the Line.

The incensed Swede is ready to revenge Modern affronts, and former
unkindnesses; besides his design for free Trade in the Balticc-sea.

The concerned Dane must secure his Sound, or quit his Kingdom.

The generous French meditate a free Trade, and an Universal Commerce, equally
suitable to the inclinations and necessities of Mankind; in order whereunto,
(as Sir George Downing observes) he has permitted his Subjects the recovery of
some places in the Dutch hands with Honor, the loss whereof his Predecessors
connived at, not without some disgrace.

What the Duke of Muscovy may do when disabused, is obvious to discerning men;
who know that those Northern (and indeed all rude) people are never more
implacable, than when imposed upon; never knowing upon what ground to trust,
when once deceived.

Neither is Christendom only offended by this unhappy people, who when put on
by an Heathen Prince that forbad Christians Trade, to the sad choi^e, to
renounce either their Trade, or their Religion, made this untoward Answer; That
they were not Christians, but Hollanders: But even the Pagan World near hand
here in Africa, and further off in Asia and America, watches the first fair
opportunity to rid their Ports, as the Ghinois; their Islands as the Indians,
and their Coasts, as the Negroes of Guinee of their insulting Usurpers, that
know as little how to command moderately abroad, as how to obey dutifully at
home; out-doing Barbarism it self in uncivility, and Heathenisme in cruelty;
both which are ashamed of themselves as acted by Dutchmen.


Gent. Yet they are very strong (they say) in the Indies, and at Guinee.


Trav. Its very true, and no more than needs, that they who have a peculiar
unhappiness of disobliging all man^ind, should have a considerable Power to awe
them, and that the miserable people that are not loved, should be feared.

Yet when what they have gained in Trade, by their adventure to Guinee, is
compared with what they have lost in Reputation, the great support of
Government by the surprise of it (unworthily assaulting a Christian Prince
there, when he was engaged in their assistance against an Infidel elsewhere)
when Nova Battavia is weighed with Amboyna; when Surat and the Coast of China
ballanceth the Mollacco Islands; when the unexpressable losses of their
West India Company by miscarriages, repulses, surprises, shipwracks, strike
tallies with the advantages of the East India; when they have reckoned as well
what they can bring home, as what they have there, they will have as little
reason to boast of their Interest on the other side of the Line a year hence,
as they have to do so on this side of it now.


Gent. I doubt you are now a little partial, therefore waving all reflections,
I pray give me an exact account of their state in those remote parts.


Trav. Although the Improsperous Netherlanders have done themselves so much
wrong, that to relate their condition, looks as if it were to reflect upon
them; and bare Narratives that concern them, seem little less than Invectives;
yet with the impartiality you always expect, in the freedom of our private
Discourses, take their state in Asia, Africa, and America in this clear
Account.


SECT. 1.
An account of the Hollanders state, in Asia, Africa, and America.
1. IN Asia, 1. The Sultan of Persia (since the assistance we afforded him in
removing the Trade of Ormuz to Lar) has had so great a respect for the English
Nation, that their Agent, who resideth at Gambroon, takes Custom of all
Strangers that Traffic thither; and the Dutch are as much at our mercy in
those Coasts, as they should and may be in good time on our own.

Neither are they more subject to us about Ormuz, then they are to the
Muscovites (I suppose our very good friends) upon Mare de Bochu in Hircania;
from whom they must take all their Silks at second hand every year, during the
season of Trade, i. e. from March, when they go thither, to July, when they
return.

And to say no more, They that have traveled the large Coast of Persia know,
That as the Portuguez. (none of the Dutch ^est friends) manage the Trade of the
Southern Ocean, so the Muscovite likely, upon a Trepan upon him, to be none of
their mildest Foes, has Engrossed the Comerce of the Caspian Sea.

In Tartary, 1. Capha, that flourishing Empory, and capacious Haven, not far
from the Straight Stretto de Cuffu, sivi Germanum, never allowed the Hollanders
any Trade, but what they must be beholding for to the Genoese their Competitors
(who commanded that Trade, and indeed all upon the Euxine) or the Turk^ their
Enemies; who under Mahomet the Great 1475, give Law to that place: Nor

2. Tanus, without the favor of those Nations, bordering on the Euxine Coast;
and what entertainment they have among the Circastians, whose capacious Bays,
and commodious Havens Synda Brata, etc. are most fitly seated for Trade and
Merchandise, this last years Gazet has informed us; wherein 18 ships are said
to be lost to the fury of the insenced Inhabitants, as they had done 11 a
little before, not far from Bolgar, on the River Volga: Nor

3. Cathay, where they are forced to take their Rye, Hemp, Ruburb, Silk, and
Musk on the second hand of the Chinois: Nor

4. Cascur, on the N W. of China, in whose Royal City Hiachum they pay toll for
their Merchandise: Nor

5. Cainu, where they must accept of the Women's Veil, the great Commodities of
those Ports from the Dantzikers: Nor

6. Theby Musche, without Custom to the English.

3. Of the fifteen Provinces of China, 6 the most open and rich for Trade, in
Wheat, Barley, Rye, Wool, Cotton, Olives, Vines, Flax, Silks, Metals, Fruits,
Sugar, Honey, Ruburb, Camphire, Ginger, Musk, all Spices* China-dishes, and
Manufactures, will as soon trade with a Dutchman, as they would with a Tartar;
the difference they say between them being this, viz: That the Tartars are
Hollanders without, and the Hollanders Tartars within.

4. What frequent irruptions are made by the Indians upon their Trade into
those places; where they having nothing but what they have usurped from the
Portuguez, who first by Vasques de Gama 1477; and then by Alphonso de Pagua,
Bartholomew Diaz after discovered the way of Commerce with this Country, by
the new way of the Cape de bua^ Sperance; what surprises in their passages to
and fro upon the River Labor; what a check from Diw the strong Portuguez
Garrison; what a stop from Goa, where lives a Portuguez Viceroy; what
discouragements from the Portugueze Sea-Towns in Canara; wh^t frights are they
put to by the Citadel of Cononor; what Tributes do they pay the King of
Calicute; and yet how suspected by him? What interruption from the Portugals in
the great Haven of Chochee; what changes have they been subject to in Bengula;
what overtures there have been made by the Inhabitants to K. J. to undermine
them; what hard meats they are held to by the Portuguez at Colmuchi; what
subjection to the English (who are very much beloved there) at Bantham, the
chief English Factory in that Country? What Losses they have suffered since
they have engrossed the whole trade of the Moluccoes? What Customs they pay the
Portuguez at Japan, the Empory of the Chinois, who unwilling to trade in their
own Countries, bring their Traffic thither? To say no more, how unwelcom they
are in the Isles where the Slaves were set free, on condition they could cut
them off, and bring in the English; who are more acceptable for their honesty
and civility than these haughty men, who curbed the Natives some years with
three Forts, the people of Lantora voluntarily submitting themselves to the
Protection of K. James, and to his use giving possession of their Country to
Capt, Hage, Nov. 24. 1620. as the Inhabitants of Warn and Rosengen did a
little after.

Gent. But is it not possible for these Dutch, notwithstanding the prejudice
they now seem to lie under to tack about, and make an Interest yet in the
divisions of Europe?


Trav. Its possible, but very improbable, since they have lost their
Reputation, which is the bottom of their Interest, and you will fide none will
heartily close with them; because none can really trust them.


Gent. Potentates without Integrity, are the same thing with Tradesmen without
Credit, for suspicion is irreconcilable; and its said of Rome, that Favendo
piet ati fideique ad tantum fastigii per venerit: And if you can make this
good, the Low Countries have seen their best days.


Trav. I wish them no more harm, than that your inference be not as fatally
just, as the premises are irrefragably true; and easily evidenced to be so, by
as notorious an Induction, as is this day Registered in Europe.


Gent. As how?


Trav. 1. In reference to Spain.

Then they petition against strangers, declare for Liberty and Religion, when
they had newly taken the Oath of Allegiance, made their Sovereign a Present of
120000l. and insinuated their chief Demagogues to the places of greatest Honor
and Trust in the Country: Then they surprise Mecklenburgh, Enchusen, etc. when
they treated at Brussels: Then they subscribed themselves Vassals to Fran^e,
when they had senta Petition to Spain: In a word, Whatever was the ground of
these men's revolt from that Kingdom, their conduct in it had nothing of Honor
or clearness, as wholly suiting a Popular and Plebeian humor.

2. In reference to France.

Not to mention the affront they put upon Mounsier, 1578; when they entertained
him for Protector, yet obliged themselves to; whence upon his exclusion Q. Eliz
from Amsterd. the Hierogliphick that represented them, was a Cow, fed by Q.
Eliz. stroaked by the Prince of Orauge, and held by the tail by D. Francis,
till it bewrayed him, or any other sleights before they came to a consistency
which may be reckoned as their necessity, rather then their fault.

1627. When they were High and Mighty, a strictly mutual Consederacy and
Alkance Defensive and Offensive for 17 years, with a mutual Engagement not to
treat with Spain on either side, without consent was agreed on Aug. 28. between
L^wis 13th of France, and the States of the United Provinces, ratified June.
30, 1630, and pursued on the French side, with a Million of Lieurs, i. e.
100000l. sterling, besides 10000 Foot, and 1500 Horse fallen into Artois and
Henault; notwithstanding all which particulars, they endeavored a Truce with
Spain and the States of Flanders, without the advice or consent of France; as
appears by several underhand dealing^s of the Dutch with the Spaniards, couched
in the French Ambassadors memorial to the States 1634.

With whom I mean Mounsier de Charness by name (when their ^reaties with Spain
proved fruitless) Feb 8. 1635. they renewed the former League upon the very
same terms of No peace with Spain, without mutual consent, and in pursuit of
it, fell with joint forces upon Tienen, Loven, Skinchen-Schons; yet (the
Province of Holland suspecting France no less than Spain, in the very heat of
this War, wherein the French were engaged on their account (so good are these
Watermen at Rowing one way, and Looking another) their Attorney General Musch
is secretly dispatched to Don Martin Axpe, Secretary to the King of ^pain about
a Treaty; which the States solemnly denied to Carnasse; and yet their
Ambassador Paw (when the French King told him, That these secret proceedings,
did contradict their solemn Treaty; and how much it differed from the justice
his Majesty used toward them, said they had communicated it to Charnesse 1641,
1642, 1643.

Yea, though Anno 1635, 1636, 1637, 1638, there were notwithstanding these
underminding several ratifications passed of these Treaties; and 1644 a League
Guarantin entered into: Yet as Mounsier de la Thuiller^es averred to their
Faces, not a Month in these years passed without overtures between them and the
Spaniards; which brought on the Treaty at Munster without, and against the
French Kings consent, even when he was in the field on their behalf, at
Dunkirk, Stechen, Loqueren, etc at the rate of 18 or 20000 Foot, and four or
5000 Horse to no purpose, the Dutch slurring him in most undertakings; as
particularly at Antwerp, which did as good as offer up it self to their Army.

Nay (which was more) the intercepted Letters of Count de Pennerand^^ made it
evident, That The peace (at Munster) was agreed on without any regard to the
French Interest; which was not so much as named by the Dutch: And though the
other Provinces were against it, yet because Holland was for it, they would
soon bring the other Provinces to a complian^e: Only honest Here van Nederhurst
refused to sign so perfldious a Treaty, against not only the Honor, but the
very Interest of his Country; of which I may say as the Greek Orators of
Sparta, No League, no subsistence; no Faith no League.

3. Should I re-capitulate their strange dealings with England, how they
solicited our Queen, and yet dealt with the French King: How they promised us
free Trade, yet stopped our ships: How they borrowed our money, to buy a peace
with Spain: How they admitted our Ambassadors to their supreme Senate, yet
because he should not understand all Debates, they presently set up a secret
Council: How they entreated the Q. to send over the Earl of Leicester, yet
abused him so far, that he left behind him a Meddal, whereon there was engraven
a Dog and a flock of Sheep, with this Inscription; Non Oves sed Ingratos:

How they depended on our Field. Officers, and yet enjealousied them one
against the other. How they delivered us the Caution. Towns we had taken, yet
were never quiet till they had trucked for them: How they owned King James
their Protector, yet set up a blasphemous Reader (I mean Vorstius) in
competition with him: What earnestness they used to dissuade him from. Alliance
with Spain, when they had a correspondent there! How they complemented King
Charles the first (of blessed memory) when they disputed his Right to his own
Seas: How they protest their Obligations to him, yet cheat us of the Impost
upon their Herring fishing, and presume to fight with Oquendo the Spanish
Admiral, in our very Havens: How they had their Agents here, during our Civil
War, under pretense of mediating our Peace, observing the advantages they might
make of our War: How affectionately they there embraced the Kings Interest, and
yet how suspiciously their Ambassador faultered about his death: How zealously
they espoused his Majesty's Interest that now is, while hopeful 1649, 1650,
1651, 1652, (for a pretense to hide their design of quitting the Homage they
owed to England, and engrossing its Trade) and when that was done, how like
themselves (that is Cunningly) they deserted it, from 1653, to 1660: How eager
they were to entertain His Majesty, (though not till they had assurance of his
Restoration) and yet how unkind to his Excellent Sister and her Son: How
instant for Peace at White Hall, and yet how unreasonable in their Usurpations,
Pyracies, Depredations, and Surprises in Africa and America?

How ready to deliver the Pepper Islands, and what pretenses from year to year
to keep it: How earnest in soliciting a War with the Turks in Algiers, yet how
treacherous in deserting it: How importunate in their addresses for peace, yet
how diligent in their preparations for War! How ready to make satisfaction for
old injur^es, when the mean time they offer new ones: How respectful of His
Majesly in their Embassies, yet how abusive of his Person, Government, and
Relations in their licensed Libels and Pictures: What Civility, what Kindness
pretended! yet how barbarous to our Prisoners at home! How severe to our
Merchants abroad!

Should I (I say) recollect more particularly their several Transactions with
England, from the year 1665, to the year 1665, that is for an Hundred years
together, it might be interpreted my Spleen, rather than my History; and the
gratification of my own Interest, than the information of your Judgment.

4. With Denmark they made a League, wherein among other things it was
provided, they should pay a Rose-Noble for every ship that passed the Sound;
which yet they paid or denied (as the King of Denmark Remonstrated) only
according as their Convoys were either weak or strong, sometimes ^^^p^ting his
very Dominion in the (...) and threatening the ^rade of the Baltick-Sea.

5. Yet when Swedeland upon their instance 1640, 1643, 1644, 1645 entered into a
League Guarantine, and in pursuance thereof began a War in Denmark, the very
same point of time they sent 50 ships to the Sound, and three Ambassadors to
Copenhagen, representing the formid able Power of the Swedes in the East-Sea,
and entering into a League Defensive with the Dane, not only without the Queen
of wedens consent, but with a promise of 4000 men against her; yea and an
Article, wherein she is obliged to pay Toll to the Dutch for the Sound; they
having hired it during some years for 140000 Pattacoons, or Dollars per annum:
Of which matters the Swedish Ministers have made loud Remonstrances to the
States General, and to the World.

6. Neither have they any more Credit with the Portuguez, with whom they
ordered a Cessation of Hostility, upon the alteration there 1640, conducing so
much to the Spaniards weakening, and their own establishment; yet cunningly
inserting this Clause, viz: That the Truce should not begin in the East Indies,
till within a year; nor in Braziel, till within half a year after the
ratification thereof; and as cunningly by virtue thereof, giving order to their
men, to take what they could in the mean time; as they did at Angola, Marinsan,
and St. Thome; which they surprised, being admitted by the innocent Portuguez
to them, under the color of that League and Truce the Mighty States making
this unworthy Allegation to the Portuguez Ambassador, in behalf of that
action, viz: That there was no wrong done, in regard that in that Clause its
said, That each side should hold and keep what it can take in such a time.

Whereunto the Ambassador generously replied; That That must be understood
Bonafide, viz: That which should be taken, without having any knowledge of the
Truce.

7. Nay, in the 11th Article of the Union at Vtrecht, An. 1579. its promised,
That no Member thereof should be neglected in fu^ure Treaties; and proceedings
yet, how Antwerp, Gaunt, and Brussels, though involved therein, were deserted
in the Truce 1607, and the peace 1648, as well as in the War 1625, when the
Prince having taken the Castle of Teemche, and the French Dunkirk, Antwerp
might have been easily rescued, is as well known to the World, as the Reason of
it; viz: because Antwerp being reduced, would have drawn to it self its ancient
and great Trade, which Holland and Zealand enjoyed as long as Antwerp, and the
Shilds were dammed up.


Gent. These passages with 1. The Amboyna action, within two years after a
solemn Treaty begun at London 1613, continued at the Hague 1617, and finished
at London 1619.

2. The 20 ships lent against their ancient friends, the French Protestants,
1625.

3. The little satisfaction we have for our losses at Amboyna, notwithstanding
the special promise of Reparation before the year 1625, together with the 326
particular injuries done our Merchants and Country within these 145 years,
amounting to 958646l. where its not unknown to the World, nor to themselves,
though they would willingly forget it, what their condition was, when England
first undertook their Protection; what kindness Blood, and Treasure from
England set them up in Queen Elizabeth's days; what Power and interposition from
Great Britain had them declared a free State in King James his time; what
Indulgence and condescension to let them pass, trade, and fish on our Seas,
upon the civil condition only of striking sail to our ships and Castles, in
acknowledgment of our Sovereignty, have satisfied me, That the Dutch having
been so careless of that Grand thing Reparation, that they are as unlikely to
make an Interest in Europe for the future, as they are unable for the present:
And now they are to stand upon their own bottom; will you vouchsafe to show me
their Strength, and that first in point of Money, the Sinnews of War?


The Dutch present Condition in reference to Money and Treasure.
Trav. HAving of late years Engrossed most of the Trade in the Baltic sea, i.
e. the East-land Trade, the Trade of Sweden, liefland, Prusia, Poland,
Pomerania, Silesia, for Masts, Pitch, Cables, Iron, Copper, Brass, Clapboard,
Tar, etc. the Sound being let them 1651, at so low a rate, as 140000 Pattacoons
or Dollars: Monopolixed the Spice, Gold, Pearl, and other Trades in the East
and South, so that all the World traded upon second-hand from Holland; then the
Emporium of it passed, and fished without control upon our Coast these 30
years.

Its not unlikely but that they have amassed a considerable Treasure; but now
the French King, and all Europe pursue so vigorously the design of free Trade;
now the King of Denmark prepares so considerably for the maintenance of the
Sound; now the Swedes have a mighty Navy to restore their Northern Trade; now
the Portuguez devolve their Interest upon the King of Great Britain; and that
mighty Prince checks their Usurpations and Monopolies abroad, and forbids their
Trade and Fishing at home: that Bank must sink, and their great Charge and
little Trade, must eat out the principal Stock, beyond all recruit amongst
themselves; whose 7 Provinces, not so big as 7 of our Shires, (the great
Quagmire of the South) cannot maintain the 7th part of their Inhabitants at the
rate of a Chelsey-Prisoner; who lived always upon Neighbors, eat their Bread,
wear their Cloth, grow rich on their pay, and sterve at their displeasure.


Gent. I but they have infinite Methods of Imposts and Taxes.


Trav. They have more ways indeed to raise Money, than to earn it: But in
their Taxes, there are two things that portend their Ruin.


Gent. I pray what are they?


Trav. The first is, That the very grounds of their Taxes fail them.

The second is, That the Measure of them, breaks their People.


Gent. As how?


Trav. Thus: Their Taxes are either

Those by Sea,

or

Those by Land.

1. Those by Sea must needs fall to the ground in this manner, -- 400000l. a
year, besides the tenth fish, and the wastage of what was spent in Holland, or
transported to any other Country; which, together with the benefit of allaying
the Coin taken in those Countries, amounted to an infinite Treasure for
Herring, and other salt-fish now forbidden them on our Coasts, is lost, or at
least much diminished.

2. Licenses, Pasports, Customs; since Trade is much deaded by their late
Sickness, and more by their present War; wherein their Merchants lose their
Principal, and therefore Rationally they cannot expect their Interest.

3. Their Prizes and Auxiliary Aides, reckoned in the Spanish War, a part of
their revenue fall within a narrow compass.

4. Their Imposts upon French Wines, Vinegar, Coals, will be very short, till
they have cleared the Coast between Bordeaux and New castle; and the like
Judgment is to be made of their Tribute. 1. Of assurance of Westlebank and
Factorien in this great stop of Trade.

2. Those by Land, if it be possible to raise them in these Islands without
free trade at Sea, are so grievous, that the third part of them cost the King
of Spain his Dominion; and these (with the least defeat to improve the
discontent of the people) may cost the States the Republic.

Hear them, and bless God heartily that you are an Englishman born. --

1. Polt-money, i. e. 4s. for every Head, called by them Hooft-ghelt.

2. Chimney-money, called Scoorsteen-ghelt, 1s. 6d. a Chimney.

3. De twee Honderste Penningh, i. e. The 200l. penny of every man's Estate.

4. Sout-ghelt, or the Tribute for Salt, 6d. a Bushel.

5. Tribute on Ale and Beer, 3s. a Barrel strong Beer, and 12s. small.

6. Tribute on Victuallers, a half penny a Meal.

7. Tribute of Butter and Candles, 1d. a Pound.

8. Den Impost van de ronde Maeten, or an Impost on whatever is measured with a
round Measure.

9. The Impost on Turffs, Wood, Cloths sowed, Grounds, Wagons, Boats, Houses,
Pictures, Books, Ships, and all immovable Goods.

10. Four shillings for every Manservant, and Maid servant; with many more
that would tire the patience of a better humoured people.


Gent. Indeed when I consider that the two Supports of that Country are 1.
Merchandise. 2. Manufacture. And withal reflect what little freedom there is
for the trade of the one, and how little vent for the Workmanship the other; I
am very apt to believe their Counsel of the Treasury have, as in that for Trad:
though I admire not so much their buses are so low now, as that ever they could
be so high.


Trav. Indeed, 1. The Situation of their Rivers, running through each part of
their Country, and conveying thither the Wealth of the German, the British,
and the Meditaranian-Sea.

2. Their Excise rising with their charge; the most idle, sloathful, and
improvident Soldier, that sells his blood for drink, and his flesh for
bread, serves at his own charge; for every payday he pays his Father, and he
the Common purse.

3. The Coin of Nations hoarded in their Banks for their Commodities, which, as
the Carriars of Christendom, they convey from one Nation to the other.

4. Their trading every where upon the freest Conditions.

5. Their encouraging of Merchants and Artists, 1. By freedom from Imposts. 2.
By due limits of every one in his own way; as the Hamburgh and Dansick
Merchants in their way, the East-Indians in theirs, and the West Indians in
theirs. 3. By their Respects toward them, and the Privileges allowed them. 4.
By taking care that neither Merchant nor Artizan, that is expert in the secrets
and Mysteries of his Profession, go out of their Dominions.

6. The concernment of each Person in the state of the Public.

7. Their prudence in committing all Accounts to Merchant -- -Commissioners.

8. Their fundamental constitution for a yearly estimate of all Estates and
Persons.

9. The very necessity of being industrious in a Country, where Nature can do
nothing without Art.

10. The Peoples humor to maintain their Liberty, which cannot be without
Arms, as Arms cannot be supported without Stipends, nor Stipends without
Impositions; which are the easier raised, the more lively apprehensions those
people have of Danger; and the easier paid, because they appoint 40 days to
every Soldiers month.


Gent. Besides, there is a world of money raised, under pretense of Repairing
the Public Banks, and maintaining the common Cause, called Quota insensibly
from this free State: But are you able to make out how much their Treasure
falls short by reason of this War?


Trav. Besides the forementioned Argument on that Subject, I shall add another
by way of Instance in particul^^ Provinces.

1. Holland (which ballanceth the rest of the Provinces in Expenses and
Counsels) depends in its Revenue on 1. Weaving and making of Cloth; as at
Harlem and Leyden, which a restraint on Spanish and English Wool (besides our
skill therein) stops. 2. on Merchandise and Navigation; as at Amsterdam and
Rotterdam, which this War baffleth. 3. In the vent of Cheese, Butter,
French-Wines, and Beer; as at Delph and Dort, which this Quarrel forbids. 4.
The sale of Salt and Salt-fish throughout the Country, which they owed to our
Indulgence.

2. Zealand on the Wines of France, the Wines and Alum of Spain, the Spices
and Gold of India, hitherto with our leave only carried to Prusia, Liefland,
Denmark, and other Northern Ports.

3. Friezland on Horses, Bulls, Turff, and Onions; commodities sold among
themselves, not likely to support so vast a charge as a War with Great Britain
and Ireland may amount; only Embden Port must not expect its usual confluence
of English, Danish, Nind, Norway ships, nor its wonted vent for Milk, Barley,
and Beans to Cermany. -- To say no more, A War with a potent Nation at Sea,
does what they complained of in Spain; Imprison them in a poor home, that has
only Air (and that none of the best) to breath in.


The Dutch present Condition in respect of Government.
Gent I Am very well satisfied with respect to the present state of affairs,
together with the strict Acts of State in most Kingdoms, against the
Exportation of Coin and Bullion; in what condition our Neighbors are in point
of Treasure, will you be pleased to proceed to the point of Government?


Trav. Their Government, to use a Fellow-Travellors words, is a Democracy (and
there had need be many to rule such a Rabble of rude ones; tell them of a King
in jest, and they will cut your throat in earnest; the very name carries in it
more Odium than Image to a Jew, Old Age to a Woman, or a Surplice to a Non-con
or mist) made up of these parts, viz:

1. A Stadt-holder, or General, whose Power is not to decree any thing, but to
Advise; not to order any matter, though of the least moment, but see their
Orders executed.

2. The States General, called Hoegh Moeghend, or High and Mighty; consisting
1. Of Delegates chosen by the seven Provinces sometimes for three years,
sometimes for more, never for life. 2. Of a President changed every eighth day.
3. Secretaries removed every three years, all paid by their respective
Provinces, a constant stipend; and when sworn not to regard so much the
Interest of their particular Provinces, as of the Union trusted, 1. With the
choice of Cenerals, not so much to Command, as Oversee. 2. With the Oaths and
other Disciplines of War by Sea and Land. 3. With the answering of
Ambassadors. 4. With the Accounts of the resective Governors and States of
Prov^nces, and all other affairs: They may be at leisure, for 5. Only all
these affairs must be offered first to the States of every Province, and thence
imparted to the States General; by the major part of whom all things are
ratified, unless in case of Taxes, War, Peace, etc. And such things as concern
the Constitution of the Republic.

3. A Council of State, called by them Den Raet van Staten, out of the
States General; whose care is the Discipline and Provision, of the Militia,
with the Execution of such Orders of the States General as concern the Union,
and the whole Commonwealth.

4. Upon Extraordinary occasions, a General Assembly of the States, called De
general vergadering, made up of more Delegates than ordinary, are convented to
treat of Offensive and Defensive Wars of Truce, Leagues, unaccustomed Taxes,
etc. Affairs so managed with such unanimous consent, that they cannot proceed,
till the dissenting Provinces be by Delegates sent to that purpose from the
Assembly satisfied.

5. The Council of the Admiralty, consisting of Merchants and Seamen;
whereunto their Maritine Revenue is brought, with their Deputies changed every
year; whereof there are three appointed to reside in Holland, the first at
Amsterdam, the second at Rotterdam, and the the third at Hoorn: One in Zealand,
and that at Middleburgh; and one in Friezland, and that at Harlem; consisting
of seven Senators, one Secretary, and one Treasurer, of the Navy.

6. The Council of the Treasury, or the Committee of all Accounts, new every 2
years, (to which all their taxes are paid in) consisting of Merchants and
Usurers.


Gent. I do not clearly apprehend what judgment to make of their present state
from their Government; the least light in this particular, will be a very great
favor.


Trav. Briefly thus:

1. While a Monarch acts, these great Councils debate; while he is at their
door they demur, either the quarrel, as Vtrecht and its Deputies, or the
Method, as Zealand; or the charge, as Friezland; or the Command and Conduct, as
Holland.

2. Each State and Province pretending to an equal Power; they are so long in
persuading dissenters by Delegates to Reason, that they lose both their Votes,
and the very designs of them.

3. Particular Piques and Animosities shall hazard a Public Interest, and some
great ones will choose to betray the State, rather than gratify an Adversary.

4. Nay, such are the disorders of a Commonwealth, that when they should fight
an Enemy, they are scuffling among themselves; and when the people expect
effectual Orders in their Defense, they are throwing Ink-horns at one another
heads.

5. The Deputies of each Provinces are engaged to particular Interests, when
the whole lies at stake; and the Question is, Whether Zealand shall yield to
Holland, at that very instant, when its a question too, Whether both are not
swallowed by the first Invader.

6. The temporary Grandees of a free State have a private fortune, and a
Posterity to provide for upon the Public Stock, when the Hereditary Princes of
a Kingdom are secured for both; and De Wit shall design only the erection of a
Family, when King Alphonso the 4th aims at the free Trade of EVROPE.

7. And a Pension shall buy the best Vote in the Senate, where is a man but
would rather be a Duke under a Sovereign, than Burgemaster among the Rabble.

8. Besides that, a sudden advancement of a Boor from his shop, to the Senate;
not for his Wit, God knows, but for his Money, is as much to seek in the
affairs of War and Peace, as mine Here vander Mere; who would needs make his son
Admiral, because he had one day ventured in a Caper from the Weiling to
Bordeaux.

9. Among which ignorant and unskilful multitude to be Eminent, is to be
dangerous; and to deserve well of the Government and Country, looks like a
design to surprise it; an instance whereof is old Barnevelt, who after 40 years
incomparable services, was allowed no other Recompense than the loss of that
head for out-witting his Country men, which had so often overreached their
Enemies, as likely to betray that State which he had so often supported.

10. Neither is this the only inconvenience of their backwardness and bangling
in State-matters (though its very sad that excellent persons dare not oblige
their Country, and its safer there to miscarry, than go through an
Enterprise;) for besides this, they are forced to keep so many Foreigners in
Pension during life, as well when they have occasion to use them, as when not
(lest they should be surprised in their ignorance or weakness) as put them to
the charge of a War in the calmest and best settled peace.

11. What a peevish thing a Free State is, when the people want Trade or Work;
and those people are many in a narrow compass, where they with much ease and
privacy Meet, Debate, Complain, Contrive, yea and Remonstrate too, is upon no
Ground better known, than in Holland and the United Provinces.

12. And when all this is done, they are so much puzzled about the choice of
Officers and Commanders, that to pitch upon a Commander (when all cannot enjoy
what every one desires) in Chief, is to hazard a Revolt; and to decide a
Competition, is to lose a Province; where however the rejected Party will be
able to undo in Private, whatever his Competitor may undertake in Public; not
heeding the Quarrel, so much as the men that man^ge it.

13. Neither is this all the mischief of that Government, the nicities of
Privileges and Liberty, Propriety and the Fundamental shall buzze the people
in the greatest dangers to Mutinies against any trespassers against these
sacred Rules, that are within either their Malice or Revenge.

14. Nay, to see the ambitious Heads, that aim at Power and Advantage, by the
disorders of the Public affairs; engaging 1. The simple and the sloathful. 2.
The I, and no men, and Blanks. 3. The Contrivers and Speakers. 4. The Sticklers
and Dividers by Menaces, Flattery, Pretenses, Money, or Preferment, to move, to
press, to quit, divert, and put off Debates in such season and order as may
best comport with their Design and Advantage; what fair dresses, and cleanly
couching of Pro^ects; what suitable ways of working they have, upon the humors
of their Fellow- Burgemasters; as their Fear, their Anger, their ^loath, their
Neglect, their Formality, Vanity, Caution, Inclinations, Profit, or Pleasure,
to connive the pinch of Disputes; to scruple nothing; to divert, or neglect the
best Vote in nature: What care to oblige the Rabble with Nods, Smiles, and what
they most esteem a redress of Grievances, which yet the very Patriots
themselves it may be contrived themselves, they being a people that will
^ontrive things a miss, rather than want something that they may mend.

What generous entertainments to cashiered Officers, broken Merchants,
discontented Counselors and Advocates I What sullen Retirements from the
State, with untoward Looks, Garb, and Language! How cunningly the Factious
relieve the present necessities, with lasting inconvenience! How sliely they
engross the Public Treasure, into Private Hoards!

What correspondents they keep in the Admiralties and Treasuries! What
Advocates and Dependants in the particular States and Councils! What irregular
and wi^d Resolves! I say, To reflect on these, and other Particulars of that
Government, cannot choose but convince a man how deplorable a thing it is to be
governed by a Rabble, that are more addicted to Appearances, than capable of
comprehending the Reasons of Things; among whom, in all cases determinable by
Plurality of Voices, the greater number of Fools, weighs down the more
prudential Councils of fewer Wisemen.

Nay, which is most ridiculous and miserable, (but that in popular suffrages it
must be so) his Vote many times casts a Kingdom, that has not brains enough to
rule his private Family; deciding the Question, without understanding the
Debate.


Gent. Indeed when I consider how slow their Debates must be, when managed by
so many divided Heads; and how low their Treasure, when passed through so many
private hands; when I reflect on the several obstructions in their many
Admiralties, and the indirect proceedings in their numerou^ Councils for the
Treasury; I wonder much how they maintain a War, more how they conduct it: But
Sir I observe Religion was their great friend in former Wars.


SECT. 3.
Their present state in point of Religion.
Trav. IT was so indeed, when Queen Elizabeth pitied, the French Protestants
relieved, and the German Princes assisted them upon the bare account of their
being Professors of the Gospel; besides that, that Notion extraordinarily
inspired their Populacy, nothing rendering men more daring in this World than
their Engagements for another; when that which restrains and moderates Passions
inflames them.

I. But 1. Since the Dutch have never been esteemed really devout, and now
think it not worth their while to pretend it; and are only Jews of the
New Testament, that have changed only the Law for the Gospel, since they are so
much Christians as to tolerate Jews, and banish Catholics; and so much
Protestants, as to silence Arminians, and indulge twelve sorts of Anabaptists;
the common saying being, that A man may be what Devil he will there, so he
pusheth not against the States.

II. Since the Quarrel is not Religion, so much as Trade, so much their Faith,
as their Interest; and they can clap a League with the Turk that they may
invade an Ally, and the best Protestant Prince in the World.

III. Since the very variety of their Religions endanger their Countrymen with
seditions, than any Enemy yet has done by Invasions; to instance no further
than the Remonstrant and Anti-remonstrant controversy, which if not seasonably
allayed, by the grave Councils, and potent Engagement of King James of blessed
memory, 1617, 1618, 1619. had taken away their very Place and Nation: Every
ambitious or discontented Person, having the opportunity of making himself the
Head, or at least of a dissenting Party; into whose Consciences, by the
fundamental constitution of the Government, no man dares look, until they grow
so prevalent that none can control their Practices, Schism being established
there by a Law, and their Government made precarious and contemptible, as
exposed to the restless Importunity of every Sect and Opinion; yea, and of
every single Person who shall presume to dissent from the Public, who finding
that by being troublesome to the Government, that they can arrive to an
indulgence, will, as their numbers increase, be more troublesome; that so at
length they may arrive to a general toleration, and at last cry for an
establishment; besides that the variety of Religions, when openly indulged,
does directly distinguish men into Parties, and withal gives them opportunities
to count their numbers; which considering the animosities that out of a
Religious Pride will be kept on foot by the several Factions, does tend
directly and inevitably to open disturbance, when there is no security that
either the Doctrine or the Worship of the ^everal Parties, who are all governed
by a several Rule, shall be consistent with the peace of the State, -- whereof
there are these four degrees; Ministers, Doctors, Elders, and Deacons.

IV. Since the Ministers cannot at all in this, or any other case assist the
Government, being 1. Poor, and stipendiary, being allowed seldom above 50l. a
year. 2. Chosen and settled with the consent of the people (about which matter,
there are not there a few Blastings and Factions -- about 1. The Right of
Presentation. 2. The Examination of the person presented. 3. The Contract
between him and his Patron. 4. The time of Presentation. 5. The Orthodoxness
and Piety of the man Presented. 6. The Churches Right of refusing their
Presented Minister, or to turn him out, etc.) 3. Unlearned, there being no
encouragement to be Excellent; the Pedant and the Doctor sitting together at
the Ordinary, right at the rate of an Equal Commonwealth, after they have
performed their Sermon and Commonplace, and with Prayer and fasting are sent
abroad, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbitery, and the lifting up
of the hands of the people.

V. Since they have such clashings among their Ruling Elders, and such ado with
their 1. National Synod. 2. Their Ecclesiastical Senate. 3. Their Provincial
Conventions twice a year. And 4. Their Ecclesiastical Conventicles, whereof 16.
in a Province once a month.

VI. Since a man knows Sunday amongst them by no other Token than by their
Playing and Mustring; since God may be more safely offended there than the
States General; their Republic, being to them more than Heaven: Liberty is
their God, War their Heaven, Peace their Hell, the Spaniard their Devil,
Custom their Law, and their Wills their Reason: -- Since when they must in
Heathen Kingdoms part with their trade or Religion, they will say they are no
Christians, but Hollanders.

VII. Since its the Protestant States and Princes that they have most
disobliged, I mean Sweden, Denmark, and England.

VIII. Since they have so little regard to Religion, that when the Christian
Ministers in Turkey were sent for to consult about Moses his Body, the Dutch
Merchants said they had none.

These Particulars being warily put together, I may conclude that they have
lost their Interest in point of Religion.


Gent. Nay, when they pretend to no more Religion there, than 1. To Pray. 2.
Read. 3. Preach. 4. Expound. 5. Catechize. 6. Baptize. 7. Receive the Communion
the first Sundays in April, July, October, and January, after 18. days
warning. 8. To marry a Widow within six months, a Maid at 14, with an
Exhortation. 9. To make a sick man's Will. 10. To go before a dead body, without
either Prayer, Sermon, or so much as the tinkling of a Bell. 11. To admonish,
suspend, excommunicate, 1. By praying for the guilty person. 1. On Sunday,
without naming either him or his fault. The 2d. Naming him. The 3d. Naming him
and his fault, for which he is excluded, till he confesses it before the
Congregation, and the Pulpit: -- And all these things with that indifferency,
that if men will, they may use them, and submit to them; if not, they may let
them alone: Insomuch as there is not a more ridiculous Meeting in the World,
than their Parochial Sunday meetings; where they do what they please indeed for
an hour or two, and the people do what they please all the Week: -- I think we
may wave that Point, and see what is --


Their present Condition in point of Landforces.
Trav. VVH^n 1. They are ^orced to maintain so many thousands in time of Peace,
on purpose that they may be ready against a War.

2. When their Weesvaders for the Orphans of their soldiers, when their
Easthuysen for maimed soldiers, when their Aelmoestiniers for old servants and
Officers, when their Die huyse sitten, de Armen, and other Wase-houses,
Guest-houses, Du houses, and most prudent provisions for those persons that
fail in their service, stand them in 364547l. 16s. 4d. Amsterdam alone
maintaining 113764. with weekly accommodations.

3. When at their last year Estimates (as the custom is) of States and Persons,
they sunk almost half in half; besides that so many served foreign Princes
without leave against the fundamental constitution of their Government,

4. When in the greatest danger of the Country, they will stand upon this
Punctillio, of their Magna Charta; that none should be forced to serve out of
his own Province.

5. When so many excellent persons, especially almost all their Commanders,
must either quit their service, or their own Allegiance.

6. When the Coin of each Nation, is by strict Laws kept there, and the States
must spend upon the common stock.

7. When the Lord of the Sea in Right and Power forbids the Importation of any
Bullets, Match, Powder, Arms, Ammunition, or any other Contraband Goods from
any part of the World into Holland, upon pain of forfeiting the Goods and
Vessels too.

8. When the gross Inhabitants are so unweildy, that they can do nothing but
sit on their Breeches in a ship.

9. When they are as much at a loss for Men to their Arms, as they may be for
Arms to their Men, in a very short compass of time should a mighty Prince, who
is Lord of the Sea in Power, as well as Right, continue that severe Edict
whereby all Nations are advertised, That what Powder, Ammunition, or other
Contraband Goods soever, they shall Import to the Lands, Territories,
Plantations, or strong Holds, belonging to the Estates of the United
Netherlands, shall be judged Prizegoods and forseited accordingly.

And consequently the Dutch stores being likely to supply at least 40000 men by
Sea and Land, without any hoped recruit, the Country must needs be lost, as
Amsterdam was once for want of Ammunition.

Besides that, they will be as much to seek for Provision, as for Men; the
Pestilence preceding their War not more fatally, sweeping away ^the one, (a
third part being missed in Holland) than the Famine following it cuts off the
other (the Market is already improved a moiety;) and when the Baltick-sea is
commanded by Sweden and Denmark, the Mediterranian awed by the Turk, and
French, and the Brittish-coasts overruled by their Sovereign, Holland will not
be said so properly to be overcome, as to be starved; it being not likely that
the King of England should be guilty of the King of Spain's oversight; (Princes
seldom err twice) which cost him those Provinces (and as much money as would
have bought as much Land thrice over,) and rendered them as considerable, as it
made him despicable; that is, ly pelting at their impregnable Towns, when he
may swallow their whole Commonwealth, and take that pedling Country quickly by
the Wholesale, that cost others so much by the Retail.

Its true, their Towns are strong, but Factious; driving at their particular
Interests, to the prejudice of the general States, and ready to submit to any
new Masters, rather than Truck under Amsterdam Antwerp chose rather trade under
Spain, than Liberty under the free States: each Governor pursuing his own
design as vigorously as the High and Mighty do theirs: Neither is there a
Garrison there, wherein the Governor is not engaged against the Burgemasters,
and they inveterate against him; wherein the Townsmen would not betray the
Soldiers, or the Soldiers sell away the Townsmen.

Besides, as an Agent (who does there more service than an Army) may order the
affair, such may the misunderstanding be between the respective Provinces, that
they had rather (as the Duke De Alva observed) be ruined by themselves, than
saved by one another; though indeed as they are hardly attempted, by reason of
the narrowness of their ways, and frequency of their Dikes, so they are more
hardly relieved; a 1000 well-encamped men, being not to be attempted there by
10000; to which may be added, That as strong soever their Towns may be by Land,
they lie open by Sea, and so no longer tenable against us, then their Masters
are Lords of the Brittish-coasts.

But suppose their Forces by Land most considerable, yet you must suppose
withal Commanders to those Forces; who being of necessity Foreigners, men of
fortune, and it may be persons of various apprehensions, never likely to close
in a common Quarrel or Action unanimously or honestly. Yea let me tell you,
their very strong Holds are their weakness; as to which they trust so much,
that they could never yet look an Enemy in the face in the Field, nor perform
any thing resolute or honorable.

Not to mention their pay, which must as duly be paid, as the Usurers
Mortgage-money, in the very time and place, or else the Country may be
overrun while they lay down their Arms, and cry Ghelt, ghelt; as they did in
the very first action of the Prince of Orange toward their freedom, to the
loss of 5000 men, and three Counts of the Empire at Steinbocke.

Neither is it the least consideration, That the Scene of a Land-war, must be
the very bowels of their own Country; they not daring to look beyond their
Cantons by Land, for fear of their friends, nor by Sea, for fear of their
enemies.

Not to aggravate the affair with this unhappy reflection, That 2000 Horse eats
up their Country in Summer, and must be eat up themselves, for want of Butter
and Cheese in Winter: Yet the worst is to come, viz: an untoward Oath was put
upon so many expert, valiant, and deserving Scots and Eng., which not only
forfeits them these excellent Persons service, in the instant they could worst
spare them, but likewise assists us with such Experience and Interests in their
own Country, as these Gentlemen cannot choose but communicate, to the great
prejudice of their Cause and Government.

Nor needed they have been so Prodigal of the few Gentlemen they had from
foreign parts, who have scarce any of their own; for among them a brave
Courtly, Gentile, and Noble Person, is like Merlin in the field among Crows
after Michaelmas; which they wonder at, envy, but can neither use nor respect.

Their spirits are sunk as low as their Country, -- and their blood runs as
thick as their water: -- Not an Order passing without a French Secretary, nor a
Muster without an English Commander, nor an Embassy managed without an Italian
Gentleman.

Men are like Wine, not good, before the Lees of Clownishness be settled; nor
when its too windy, and will fly out of the Bottle; nor when its too austere
and sour: In a midling clarity and quickness it is best.


Gent. Indeed I look for little good in a Land-service, from gross and
unweil-Dutchmen: But I hope they are considerable at Sea.


Trav. Indeed there is not so Potent a piece of ground for the bigness of it in
the World, as Holland at Sea: If

1. Their Timber were answerable at Land, to their ships at Sea; and they must
not fight for their shipping, as well as their trade, being beholden to
Swedeland, Denmark, and England for the very strength wherewith they must
engage them. If

2. They had either ships that (according to the Automatical proposal made
there last year) could manage themselves, and they were not as much to seek, to
let the world see they can furnish an 100 sail, as they have been hitherto in
persuading it they can build them; it being one thing in Holland to set out
1000 Merchantmen, and another 160 men of War; their Plantations abroad having
swept away those men that would maintain them at home; they, and their old
Masters of Spain lying under one misprision and oversight, viz: That they
enlarge the borders of their Dominions at the charge of the strength of them. If

3. They could recruit their ships, as well as man them, and one Battle well
followed without mercy or Quarter, overthrew them not beyond recovery. Holland,
as well as Spain, were it not for want of men and bread, would do wonders. If

4. Their people would fight, as well as debate, and maintain a Quarrel, as
well as scan it; and they were not the unhappy Commonwealth, where not a man
will strike longer than he sees a Reason for it; every fat Seaman out-staring
his Master with a bold Cui ^ono, to what end all this. If

5. They were not so inured to slavery at home, that they will yield in
extremity to a lasting captivity, rather than expire in a bold resistance;
laughing in such cases at the English spirit, that prefers an honorable death
to a thralled life; -- when at best Hollanders are but Prisoners at large. If

6. Their constant dependence upon, and late Bangs by the English, has not
insinuated to them a Panick fear, that nothing can inspirit but Brandy, and
impressed such a disorder upon their spirits, that nothing rallieth them but
Rhenish; so dreadful are their apprehensions of England, that when they would
express a Momo, they paint a grim Britton rouzing with-these words, I am
coming, I am coming. If

7. It were not the humor of most pot pular States, as most common people (of
which sort they consist) not to hold out beyond one event, to give all over for
lost after the first misfortune, while the generous Members of a Monarchy take
courage from defeats, raise a resolution from Despair, adding after an
Overthrow, the heat of a brave Revenge to that of a common Enmity; -- their
Anger quickening their Hatred, and their Shame their Anger. If

8. Their Losses did not impede their Successes, and every Seaman almost went
out with this sad Exclamation for the Herring-fishing, the English Commerce,
the Mediterranian and Baltick-trade; Well I am 40l. a year the worse for this
foolish War: Those men will do little service against a Prince, that has their
Money in his Purse, their Meat in his own Stores, their Corn in his own Ground,
their very Livelihood in his own Sea, and their Estates at his Mercy. If

9. Their Privateers did not overrule the Public, and while every man would
set up for himself, all failed not. If

10. Their Provinces could agree at Sea, any better than they do at Land; and
did not justle for Precedence when the question is their being. If

11. They durst trust their Commanders with full Commission, and they were
neither restrained from their own defense without Order, nor defeated of the
best Advantages for want of Authority. If

12. The proceedings of the several Courts of Admiralties, and their respective
Debates; with their Particular States, and the States General spent not that
time upon the very Method of Action, till their Adversaries have cut off the
very possibility of it. If

13. They were secure in any neighboring Harbor, or in their own since the
last are so dangerous, and the first are either shut up: by neutens, or blocked
by Enemies. If

14. Antwerp were further off or stopped up; and the blemings dad not an
Amsterdam as well as the Dutch. If

15. Holland were as able to subsist of it self as England, and Dutchmen had
homes to go to, when they have lost their Navy: Did a stop of trade put them
only to want Spice for Sauce, as in England, and not Meat; Wines, only, and
not Bread, Silks, Laces, and not Cloth; Curiosities in fine, and not
Necessaries. If

16. Their Schuttery (as they call them) I mean their Train-bands of
Burgemasters, were as good for service, as they are for show. If

17. They had a Yeomandry to mantain their Seamen in War, as well as they
Enrich them in Peace. In a word, If

18. They could be at once Valiant and sober, and it were not a sad necessity
that a Dutchman must be either drunk or fearful, there being no remedy for
Cowardice there, but Madness.


The State of every Province.
Gent. GVicciardine, Buxhornius, Adrian Junius, and Emmeius, the first in this
Italique description of Belgium the second and third in their Dutch Theater of
Holland, and the last in his large account of Friezland, say, That Holland
alone is more powerful at Sea, than all the Princes of Europe put together:
What is it then in Conjunction with the rest against one King?


Trav. 1. As to Holland, particularly so called, when I consider the
differences that are between the Delegates of its Nobility, the Die Ridder
scap, end Edelen as they call them, and those of its Cities, called Die Steden
in most transactions. 2. The Disorders among its Senators, called Vroedt
schappen, in most Cities consisting of 20, 30, or 40. 3. The private pikes
among its Burgemasters, the popular prejucice against its Schepenen or Judges,
and their Raet-Pensionarous, or Advocate. 4. The Factions in their
Gecomitteerde Raeden, or the Commissioners at the Hague. 5. The great
difficulties in settling the De vergaederinge van de Staeten van Hollandt, end
West-Friezland, and the respective Delegates of it. 6. The vast charge that is
laid upon the Kamer van Reekeninge, or the two Chambers of Accounts, that
overlook their Estates and Tributes. 7. The vast loss upon the stoppage of free
Trade and Herring-fishing, and the Blocking up of their Navigable Rivers. 8.
The inclinations of the persons that command their strong Holds of Sluice,
Berghen op Zoom, Breda, Gertruden^ergh

I say, when I put these particulars together, with the invidious Aspect cast
upon this growing Province by the rest of its Neighbors, I expect not it
should be able to perform now, what it did under a happier Government in a more
useful League and Consederacy in Guicciardine's time.

2. First so much given to Tumults are the fierce and rough, Inhabtants of
Zealand. 12. So full of awls and Contentions are their Hoosden, or the merry
monthly meetings designed to promote friendship and good Neighborhood. 3. So
Lawless and Pyratically given are their Seamen and Mariners. 4. So deceitful,
and apt to betray their confederates for an Interest. 5. So sottish, whorish,
and licentious. 6. So Impatient of Order, I awes, Rules, or Government. 7. Such
the clashing between their Admiral, and the Admiral of the States General. 8.
So little account can their Treasurers at Middleburgh give, of their ancient
Revenue by French Wines, Salt, Oils, or Eastern Trades. 9. So weak are their
Banks and Rampires, though painfully made, and chargably maintained, being at
best but 7. Else in height, and 17. in breadth at bottom made of the hardest
Clay that can be gotten, in the inside stuffed with Wood and Stone, on the
outside covered with Matts; a weak defense God knows, against a stroug Enemy,
and a stronger Stream. 10. So visible is the decay of the trade of Middleburgh,
upon the opening of that of Antwerp. 11. So obnoxious is that, Flushing, the
Ramekins, the chargable Islands Romerswal, Schowen, and Doveland to any
Adversaries, that the Zealanders now they cannot Fish, upon which employment
depends their chief trade) are more likely to perplex the State General, than
to assist them.

3. Considering 1. That but half Gelderland is under the States General, lying
open in the other half to none of their best friends. 2. That their Governor
and Chancellor are of late so much disobliged. 3. That the proceedings of
their Province, are so dilatory, as depending so much on its particular Cities,
as Zuphten, etc. which could never since the Revolt grow toward a settlement;
so many irregular hands and heads being concerned in each Vote. 4. That it has
so ill a Neighbor as Brabant, Cleveland, and Bradenburgh; that Province at
this juncture in my Opinion, only makes up a number: Notwithstanding it was
once so fruitful, that a Gelderland Bull was sold at Antwerp 1570, that weighed
3000 pound weight; and pretendedly so strong, that it boasts of 16 walled
Towns; though those upon the Eure and Mase lie very open to the Lord of the Sea.

4. Zuphten is so ill befriended by Westphalia, and the Bishop of Munster on
the East of it, and by Cleveland on the South; so suspicious is the present
Governor of Zuphten, so hardly came the Vote for Subsities out of their 12
Senators, that I may neglect it as much, as Duke Alva did 1573.

5. The maritine Friezlanders have 1. so little use of their Nets; The Inland
Countrymen or Husbandmen judge themselves 2. So little concerned in the
Quarrel. 3. So intent they are upon the peaceful arts of Pasturage, and
Tillage. 4. So much do they please themselves with their very fancy of Liberty
and Privileges. 5. So hardly will they part with their Money. 6. So Modest,
Meek, and Quiet they are, and given to hunting and Hawking. 7. So jealous are
the Protestants of West-Friezland, who are under the States of the Catholics
of West-Friezland, who are under an Earl of their own, that the Frizons are
neither very able, nor willing to dance after the East and West India Companies
Pipes in Holland; and the rather, because though surrounded with water, yet not
so liable to an Invasion, as the States insinuate (who would make use of their
fears, to begin a War; which only their Valor can prosecute) because of the
many and cross Dykes, that forbid any marching throughout the Coast by either
Horse or Foot.

6. The Inhabitants of Groaning are so delicate, lazy, and proud; its Council
of 12 called Naetsluyden, and 24, called Geswoeren Raden; their Wacht Meesters
are so stubborn, refusing at this present affair, both a consederacy with,
contribution to, or commands from the United Provinces; being so safe in their
rich and strong Groaning, and so contented with their own Domestick-trade,
prohibiting all Foreigners upon pain of Confiscation of Goods and Vessels,
that they neither know nor fear any Enemy.

7. Neither is Groynland so secure as Overyssel that low Marsh is fearful;
Daventer and Swoll, its two chief Towns having still impressions of the English
Valor, since the fierce assaults made upon them 1576, under the Earl of
Leicester, then Governor of the Low Countries; as likewise has the
troublesome Bishopric of Vtrecht, which has been so inured to seditions at
home, that it understands not what means a War abroad.

Besides, some modern disgusts taken by the President, Senators, and the
Treasurer at the proceedings, upon some appeals at the Hague, make them
unwilling to hazard the Rhine to any ordinary undertaker.


Gent. It seems then re^lly, that the whole affair of this present War, is
against the Interest of this Country.


Trav. I leave th^^ to you, when you have reflected on these Particulars, which
the Duke of Rhoan (writing of the Interest of the States of Europe) makes the
peculiar concerns of the United Provinces, viz:

1. A firm League with England for trade, and a Confederacy against Spain the
ancient Sovereign.

2. A good correspondence with such Princes as are potent in the Mediterranian
or the Baltic Sea.

3. A quiet and easy Government; free from Tumults and Seditions, or the
occasions of them, want of Trade, and Impositions.

4. Free trade.

5. A care that no one City or Province grows either so Rich or Potent, that
the rest should envy or suspect it.

6. A quickness to observe, and readiness to buy off all pretensions or
allegations of Neighbour-Princes as soon as they are made.


Gent. (...) remember very well that there were 5 things for which Cardinal
Bent^voglio presaged the downfall of this Republic, and they are,

1. That Liberty would come to Licentiousness.

2. That there would such inequality arise from their pretended equality, as
would bring them as it did the Romans, from many Masters, under one Sovereign.

3. That they must in time trust too much to general Officers, especially their
Admiral and General.

4. That their Expenses must be intolerable.

5. That Holland would enjealous the rest of the Provinces, or surprise them;
all which are now their confessed case.


Their Case in a War with us, made out from the Causes moving the Queen of
England to give And to the defense of the people Afflicted and Oppressed in the
Low Countries.
1. THe Natural S^ituation of the Realm ^f England and the Low Countries, one
directl^ opposite to the other; and by reason of the ready crossing of the
Seas, and multitude of large and Commodious ^avens an our side; a constant Ira
^^ck and Commerce between the people of England, and the Low Countries,
continued in all ancient times, when the several Provinces were under their
respective Lords.

2. Such has been the devend^nce of these poor people upon England, that their
Prelates, Noblemen, Citizens, Burgesses, and other Commonalties of their
Port-towns, entered into Obligations and Stipul^tions under their particular
Seals from time to time, to the good people of England for ^avours, Affections,
and friendly Offices showed toward them.

3. Such was the necessity of Commerce between these two People, that they have
remonstrated to their Governors at several times, That they could not subsist
without a Commerce with England; ^s to Philip Duke of Burgundy, in H* the 6th.
his time, to his Son Duke Charles, and Archduke Philip, in H. H. 7th. his
time, and to Charles the 5th. in King H. the 8th. his time.

4. Upon the often and continual Lamentable Requests made by the Universal
States of the Countries of Holland, Zealand, Gelders, and other Provinces, for
Succors in their Extreamityes, we thought at to Aid those poor and
distres-People.

Gent. How is it then things being so, that they have been able to do so well
hitherto as they have done?


SECT. 4.
The things that formerly advanced the Netherlands.
Trav. 1. EVrope has been ever s^n^e a most Const^^^ly emb^^^^ed. 2. They have
had a Regular w^y by themselves of ^ax, I m^an their Excise; whereby the more
they p^y, ^he more they receive; ^or what the soldiers receive in p^y, they
pay in ^rink^; the^r very Enemies, though they hate the States, yet love their
L^q^or, and pay Excise: -- Yea, the most ^dle, sloathfull, and improvident,
that sells his blood for drink, and his flesh for bread, serves at his own
charge; for every pay day he reckons with his Father, and he with the common
Purse. 3. Pyracies, whereby they have those Commodities in time of War in
Gross, which they have only in time of Peace by Retail. 4. They have formerly
checked the Austrian power which is now low. 5. They go out with less charge
than other Nations, their ships requiring fewer men, and those men all sharing
in the Design, are contented with courser far^; flesh among them being kept hot
more days, than a Pigg in Pye-corner; it being their own case, they go through
all difficulties with patience, so they husband all Expenses with thrift. 6.
They eugrossed the Coin of Europe, carrying the Commodities of one Country
into another. 7. They have been hitherto allowed in England, Denmark, and
Musco^y, to trade upon the best and sreest conditions. 8. They kept in with
England, and its Protestant Allies. 9. They have employed all the poor that
could work, and provided for those that could not. 10. They have had formerly
Lombards, or Loan houses, where the poor have money upon any Pawn for a
Reasonable Rate, viz: 6. in the 100. with Reasonable time of payment. 11. Their
Diet was course, and of every man's own providing. 12. They spent money
formerly, but now their time in drinking. 13. They Trafficked for others
superfluities, but not their own. 14. Their Apparel was plain, and their
Ambition only upon Realities and Solidities. 14. Their Laws were strictly
executed, and no forfeitures left to the corrupt disposals of an Officer, but
all bestowed upon the Public. 15. Usury was a stranger to them, every man
laying out his Estate upon the Publick-traffick. 16. No idleness there, and
therefore no thievery; a fault more effectually restrained there by Whipping,
than here by Hanging. 17. If any man gained there extraordinarily by money, the
tenth of his gain was the Commonwealths; Usurers escaping not there as here.
18. One undone by casuality, they set up; one cast to Prison, the Creditor
maintains; one troubled with a shifting Adversary, a quick trial relieves. 19.
All men debated, and all contributed to the Public affairs, as concerned both
by advice and purse. 20. Their Resolutions were secret and sudden. 21. Their
Industry has been great, and their Expenses small; they maintaining it for a
Maxim, That a thing lasts longer mended than new. 22. Their Recreation has
been Warlick^, and they have been to be soldiers before they were men. 23.
They have been a hardy and a headstrong people, and you might sooner convert a
Jew to Christianity, turn an old Puritan, than convince a Dutchman of Reason.
24. Not a man of them but might have been a Statesman, for they have all this
gift, not to be too nice-conscienced. 25. They were seldom deceived, for they
trusted no body, though every body must trust them. 26. They love none but
those they profit by. 27. Complement is an idleness those brutish people were
never skilled in; they are half marred being Saylors, and being Soldiers they
are quite spoiled; for there (says my Author) they would let a Jew build a
City, where Harlem-Mear is, and after that cousen them of it. 28. They have had
a Religion, and a Liberty, of both which they were very zealous formerly, and
are as careless now. 29. They have enjoyed the Easterlings trade in the North,
and ours in the East. 30. Their watches were seldom of a Nation, so that they
could seldom concur to deliver up one Town. 31. They were very strict upon
Musters, the list and the pole seldom disagreeing. 32. Their soldiers are well
Clothed, Armed, Disciplined, and paid; the soldiers seldom any where
committing fewer insolences upon the people, or the Officers fewer deceits
upon the soldiers. 33. Their General could not betray them, his Army being
composed of many several Nations; his Officers not at his own, but at the
States disposal; and his Commission never Implicitly left to his discretion,
but by reason their Country has no great bounds, he receives daily commands
what to do. 34. Discipline was thus, Their Military Rules and Orders.
1. THat no man shall swear or blaspheme, upon pain of 5s. the first offense,
five days imprisonment the second, and a disbanding the third. 2. That they
shall pray prayers twice a week. 3. That they play not at either Cards or Dice,
upon pain of two days imprisonment. 4. That no Women follow the Soldiers, but
Wives, Nurses, and Landresses, upon pain of Whipping. 5. That none lay violent
hands on Women with child, Virgins, Babes, or old Persons without Order. 6.
That Drunkards shall be discharged. 7. Concealers of Treasons shall be racked.
8. Correspondents with Enemies shall dye. 9. None shall leave his Rank or File
without leave upon pain of death. 10. He that sleeps at a Watch, or bewrays
the watchword, must dye. 11. Mutineers, and unlawful Assemblers shall dye. 12.
None shall Quarrel with a Soldier, or lift up a sword against an Officer on
pain of death. 13. He that leaves his Post and Breach dies. 14. He that
deserts his Captain, or serves under two, shall be imprisoned during pleasure.
15. He that imbezleth his Armor, Provision, or Furniture, is discharged. 16.
He that steals any Soldiers Furniture, fore-stalls any Victuals, Exacts on the
people, abus^th Tradesmen, shall dye. 17. He that resist; a Proclamation,
assists any M^lefactor, disturbs any Quarters, sets on fire any Building within
the Camp or without, makes any false Alarms knavishly shall dye. 18. No man
shall neglect an Alarm, entertain a stranger, converse with Trumpeters or
Messengers of the other side, loyter with the Carriages, or Forage abroad
without leave, upon pain of suffering what the Marshal or chief Commander
pleases. 19 No Captain shall undertake any Enterprise, or be absent from the
Watch without Order from the General. 20. Neither Soldier, nor Captain shall
dismiss, sell, or ransom any Prisoner or Booty, before he has presented him or
it unto his immediate Officer. 21. Every Soldier shall stand by his Ensign day
and night, till ordered to depart; and observe and learn the sound of Drums,
Fifes, and Trumpets. 22. No Beast shall be garbaged, no Easement made but at a
distance appointed from the Camp. 23. Whosoever delivers any place left to
his charge or keeping, flies to the Enemy, or passes any other way, either in
Town or Camp, but at the ordinary Gates without Order, shall dye. 24. No man
shall (as they March) make any cry at all at the putting up of any hair, etc.
All other offenses that may tend to disorders (not comprimised in the foresaid
Rules) shall be punished as the chief Commander shall think fit.


These are the several Particulars, whereby they rose to this Grandeur and
opulency, whereof some have failed, and the rest are not able to bear up that
Government, which they altogether erected.


Gent It being so obvious from these reflections, to conclude their weakness;
it were necessary their present Case and Controversy should be favorably
sta^ed to their Neighbors, for compassion or assistance.


Trav. They are more unhappy in the ground of this present Quarrel, than in any
of the forementioned particulars.


Gent. As how Sir?


Trav. Why first, In reference to trade and Fishing in the narrow Seas.


The present state and Controversy between us and the Dutch.
ALl the world know that we have Right to the Narrow-Seas, for the Seas that
surround our Island, whither the Scottish, the British, the Irish or German
were possessed and secured by the Britains; who fished so much upon them, that
they furnished the Hilts of their Swords with such fishes teeth as they took,
and traded so considerably; that none came amongst them but Merchants.

Those Seas were by them transmitt^d with their countries to the Romans upon
the Conquest; who, as they managed the Government of the Land by Presidents, so
they did that at the Sea by an Archigubernacy, or chief Governor and Admiral;
who se^ured Commerce, took Prizes, looked on the Coasts of Spain, Italy, and
Africa it self. After the Romans, the Saxons succeeded to this Right and
Dominion, and comm^nded the Sea under a Count of the Saxon shore; i. e.
(whatever Pava ollus says to the contrary) the Seashore, Octa and Ebista
under Vortigerne and Hergist commanding these Seas; the Saxons and Danes
keeping a numerous Navy to that purpose, by such Tributes and Duties as they
imposed upon their Vassals, particularly Daneghelt for the Guard of the Sea;
Edgar and Canutus styling themselves Sovereigns of the Sea.

The Right and Dominion of the Seas passed with this Nation to the Normans, as
appears 1. From their Government, the custody of the Seas being under an
Admiral, by Commissions from the several Kings maintained by Tributes, paid in
consideration of the said custody. 2. From their Right in all the Islands,
lying on the Sea before the French shore. 3. From leave asked always and
granted to Foreigners by the English, to pass th^se ^ea^. And those that asked
leave were the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, the Hans Towns in Quern Elizabeth's
time; Hollanders and Zeala^^ers themselves, not daring to fish before they
asked leave of Scarborough and King James proclaiming May 6. 1610. That none
fish upon the English or the Irish Sea, without leave obtained and every year
at least renewed, from the Commissioners appointed for this purpose at London.
But 4. Our Right to the Sea, appears from the Limits we set to such Foreigners
(as Moderators of the Sea) as (...) at enmity with one another, and at amity
with the English. 5. From the Public Records, wherein the Dominion of the Sea
is ascribed to the Kings of England by the King himself, and the Estates of
Parliament, with very great deliberation; and in such express words as these;
"Lords of the English Sea on every side, all people accounted us Sovereigns of
the Seas: That our Sovereign Lord the King, and his Illustrious Progenitors
being Lords of the Seas, would impose a Tribute upon all strangers: the Kings
of England have by right of their Dominions been Lords of the Sea (these are
the words of all Europe^, by their Commissioners at Paris;) and made Laws,
Statutes, and Restraints: of Arms upon them, together with Admirals, that they
should preserve their Superiority over the same. 6. From the Laws and most
received Customs of England that make the Seas the Patrimony of Eng. and the
King by the old custom of Engl. Lord of the Narrow-^eas, and his Sovereignty
there so ancient; that they make the four Seas to be equivalent with those
words within or without the Kingdom; De mer Apourtenant au R^^d' Angleterre:
The Sea belonging to the King of England 7. From the Coin, called Rose-nobles,
of which its said, four things our Nobles shows to our King; Ship, Sword,
power of the Sea. 8. From the custom of striking sail on our Coast time out of
mind. 9. From the Licenses granted upon their humble supplications to the
French and Flemings, with limited number of Boats to fish upon our Coast^. 10.
From the Prerogative, whereby all wrecks and Royal fishes, as Whales, Sturgeons
etc taken in our Seas, are due to the King of England only, or unto such, to
whom by special Charter he grants the same; Stat. Edw 3. 17.

The state of the Controversies in point of Injuries and Affronts with the
United Netherlands.
Trav HOw they forced us to trade at second hand, 1. In Ternata, under their
Fort Tabuche. 3 In Motir. 3. In Tidore. 4. In ^alvan, Hillo, Amboyn. 5. At
Bunda 6. Poleway 7. The Coast of Cormandel, near their Arsenal at Jacatra 8.
Their chief places Bantham, Japan, Jamby; though we directed them to all these
places. How they represented us as Pirates there, and when they had done any
mischief, said they were Englishmen; until for our safety we were fain to
distinguish our selves from them, by the solemnity of November. 17. and 5.

How they contrived to blow up our Warehouses, forbad us all Commerce upon
Queen Eliz. her death, made all Christians so odious, that the first Question
asked in those parts, was Are you Flemmings?

How they seized our Yards, Wharfs, etc. giving order to kill every Englishman
that would not swear fealty to them, upon the erecting of their Fort at Banna;
intending to put all English in an old ship, and blow it up. -- How they
search, and stop our ships; give out, that they are under a King. -- Make us
pay them Custom at Bantham

How they seized our ships at Po^eway, though the Island was given our King;
leading our men about streets, with Halters about their necks, and an Hour
glass before them; intimating, that after that ran out, they should be hanged.
How (though the Mogul would not look on them, till Sir Tho. Roe assured him
they were our Friends; they seized our Poleroon 1617, suborning the Slaves to
burn our ships; loading our men with Irons, dismembring some, setting others in
their wounds in hard Grates; wherein their Legs swelling so, that they could go
neither in nor out without a Carpenter; pissing over their heads in Dungeons
every morning, and allowing them but a halfpenny loaf, and a pint of water a
day. -- How it was proved at Jacatra, that the States were seven years a
plotting a War between the English and the Dutch at the Indi^s; threatening
likewise to land 60000 men in 24000 Flat-boats in England. How they carried us
in Cages from Port to Port, boasting that our King was their Vassal.

How though between 1577, when we assisted them first in their Indian trade,
and 1625, they got, 1500 Tuns of Gold in Private hands; besides 400 in Common,
they used us in Amboyna. They disputed our Right to the Sea, stopped our
entrance to, and Trade at Bantham, Scanderoo^, Guinee, Angola, etc. burned ^^ur
Factories at Jambee.

How they surprised us at Guinee, abused us in the restoring of the Island
Polaroon, which they have promised from time to time since 1622.

How they gave us Law in the New Netherlands, a spot of ground they held of us
by courtesy.

How they put our men in nasty Dungeons at Castledelmina, to lie in their own
Excrements, having not bread and water enough to sustain Nature; leaving the
living and the dead (after exquisite tortures) to lie together. Injuries, these
(with Infinite more of the like nature (to the value of 600000l. in goods)
being aggravated, with their preparations for War, to maintain them, even when
His Majesty for three years together solicited them to justice and peace) that
make it evident to the World, that War (which is defined, The state of two
Parties contending by public force about right and wrong) is become necessary
to us, since equity is denied; and that we must put our affairs to the order of
force, when they dare not come to the Test of the Law.

Insomuch that I conclude, That as few will pity this ill-natured and unhappy
People at the end of the War, as encourage them in the beginning of it.


FINIS.

