A Brief Enquiry Into the true Nature of SCHISM: Or a Persuasive to Christian
Love and Charity.

Humbly submitted to better Judgments; By M. H.

Psalm 120. l. (...) I Peace.

Licensed Jan. 8. 1689/90.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns, in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1690.

Concerning SCHISM.
THere has scarce been any one thing that has been bandi'd to and fro in the
Christian world with more Heat and Noise among the several Dividing Parties
than the charge of Schism. This has involved the disputing part of the Church
in the most violent Engagements above 1200 years. Schism is so deformed a Brat,
that no body has been willing to own it; a Crime so very black, that each
Party has been studiously industrious to clear it self from the charge. To
this Indictment all have pleaded Not Guilty, and we find none that have
justified. But here is the Misery, such notions of it have been entertained,
that it has been almost impossible to deny, without recriminating. And perhaps
the most guilty have been most hot in charging others. Athaliah the greatest
Traitor is most loud in crying, Treason, Treason.

We are all agreed that Schism is an Arch-Rebel in Christ's Kingdom, but in
sending out the Hue and Cry after it, the Difficulty is, how to describe it;
several Attempts have been made; would it be in vain to try one more? Waveing
all Enquiries into the several Definitions and Descriptions which have been
given of it, let us have recourse to the Law and to the Testimony, for
whosoever speak in the things of God (as they certainly do who speak of Sin and
Duty) if they speak not according to that Rule, it is because there is no Light
in them.

Therefore I only premise this one Postulatum, That nothing is to be accounted
sin, but that which is made so by the Word of God: Tekel is to be written upon
nothing but that which has been carefully weighed in the Balances of the
Sanctuary.

In our Enquiry what is Sin, let these Books be opened which must be opened at
the great day. If Sinners must be judged by those Books shortly, let sin be
judged by them now, and let not any Man or Company of men in the world assume a
power to declare that to be sin which the Sovereign Rector of the world has
not declared to be so lest in so doing they be found stepping into the Throne
of God who is a Jealous God, and will not give this Branch of his Glory to
another.

Let us therefore see what the Scripture says concerning Schism, not
concerning the Evil of it, we are all convinced of that, but concerning the
Nature and formalis ratio of it.

The Old Testament will not help us so much in this enquiry as the New, for as
to the binding of the Jews to worship only in one place, at Jerusalem, and to
offer only upon that Altar, it was a Precept purely Ceremonial, and to us
Christians is vacated by that Gospel rule which wills us to pray every where,
and their Synagogues then (not their Temple) were the Patterns of Christian
Assemblies.

Only one Scripture occurs in the Old Testament, which perhaps will help-to
rectify some mistake about Schism. It is the instance of Eldad and Medad who
prophesi'd in the Camp, Numb. 11. 26, etc. The case in short is this: Eldad and
Medad were persons upon whom the Spirit rested, i. e. Who were by the
extraordinary working of the Spirit endued with gifts equal to the rest of the
seventy Elders, and were written, i. e. Had a call to the work, but they went
not out unto the Tabernacle as the rest did, though God himself had appointed
that they should, v. 16. And they prophesi'd in the Camp, i. e. Exercised their
gifts in private among their Neighbors, in some common Tent. Upon what
inducements they did this, does not appear, but it is evident that it was their
weakness and infirmity thus to separate from the rest of their Brethren. If any
think they prophesied by a necessitating, and irresistible Impulse, they may
remember, that the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor.
14. 32.

Now if some of the Schismaticating Doctors that the Church has known had but
had the censuring of Eldad and Medad we should soon have had a Judgment given
against them much more severe than would have been awarded to him that gathered
Sticks on the Sabbath day.

And it is confessed, all the circumstances considered it looks like a very
great Irregularity, especially as an infringement of the Authority of Moses,
which they that prophesi'd in the Tabernacle under his Presidency manifestly
owned and submitted to.

Well, an Information was presently brought in against them, v. 27. Eldad and
Medad Prophecy in the Camp, that is, to speak in the invidious language of the
times there is a Conventicle at such a place, and Eldad and Medad are holding
forth at it.

Joshua in his zeal for that which he fancied to be the Churches Unity, and out
of a concern for the authority of Moses brings in a Bill to silence them, for
as hot as he was he would not have them fined and laid in the Jail for this
disorder neither; only, My Lord Moses, forbid them; not, compel them to come to
the Tabernacle, if they be not satisfied to come, only for the future prohibit
their Schismatical Preaching in the Camp. This seemed a very good motion.

But hold Joshua, thou know not what manner of Spirit thou art of.
Discerning Moses sees him acted by a Spirit of envy, and does not only deny,
but severely reprove the motion, v. 29. Enviest thou for my sake? Would God
that all the Lords People were Prophets, provided the Lord will but put his
Spirit upon them. He is so far from looking upon it as Schism, that he does not
only tolerate but encourage it. And O that all those who sit in Moses Chair,
were but clothed with this Spirit of Moses.

This Instance is full to show that all is not Schism which even wise and good
men are apt to think is so.

But our special enquiry must be in the New Testament, and forasmuch as Words
are the significations of things let us see what the Scripture means by this
word, Schism.

The Critics observe, that the Greek word (...) is used 8 times in the New
Testament.

1. In a literal sense, for a rent in a Garment, Matthew. 9. 16. Mark 2. 21.
(...), the rent is made worse. In the same sense (...) is used, Joh. 19. 24.
Luke 5. 36. As also of the rending of the Vail, Mat. 27. 41. the cleaving of
the Rocks, Mat. 27. 51. the breaking of the Net, Joh. 21. 11. the cleaving of
the Heavens, Mar. 1. 10. But this makes little to our purpose.

2. It is used figuratively for a Division; and that twofold.

1. A Division in apprehension; so (...) is used, Joh. 7. 43. Joh. 9. 16. 10.
19. in which places it signifies the different thoughts and apprehensions that
the people or their Rulers had concerning Christ some thinking well of him,
others not. Some accusing him, others excusing him.

In this sense (...) is used, Acts 23. 7. For the different sentiments the
people had concerning Paul.

Now this diversity of opinion, judgment or apprehension cannot be called or
looked upon in its self a thing Criminal: inasmuch as there are many things
which either because they are dark and obscure, and so not capable of
Demonstration, or because they are trivial and of light moment, and so not
worth a demonstration, it is no matter what opinion men are of concerning them.

Only where the matter is weighty, and touches the Fundamentals of
Christianity, there an error is Criminal, and if stubbornly persisted in,
Heresy.

But the evil of it lies not in the diversity, but in the erroneousness and
danger of the opinion.

I cannot believe that the greatest worshipers of the Diana of their own
opinions, will be so sottish as to brand those for Schismatics who in every
punctilio of Opinion are not exactly of the same Standard with themselves.

If there be any so strangely rigid, Let not my Soul come into their secret,
for I despair to see even all the Saints of a mind in every thing till they
come to Heaven.

It does therefore evidence too great a strangeness to the Spirit of the
Gospel, to condemn all those who differ from us only in their apprehensions
about little things. John's Disciples were hugely displeased because Christ's
Disciples did not fast so often as they did, and quarreled with Christ himself
about it, Mat. 9. 14. And the answer of the meek and holy Jesus is worthy
remark, that he gives a good reason why his disciples did not fast, viz.
Because the bridge groom, was yet with them. and yet does not condemn John's
Disciples that fasted often, which teaches us not to make our own Opinions and
Practices (like Procrustes's Bed) the Standard by which to measure all other,
and that in such cases we are to think it sufficient only to acquit our selves,
first to our own consciences, and then if need be to the world, without
condemning others who think and practice otherwise in such little things, and
perhaps have as much reason for their Thoughts and Practices as we have for
our's.

2. A Division in Affection; and in this sense it is used three times in the
first Epistle to the Corinthians, and no where else in all the New Testament.

We must particularly examine each place, that thence we may be furnished with
a true notion of Schism; and in plain terms the case is whether a diversity (or
if you will call it so, a separation) of Communion be the formalis ratio of
Schism.

1. I find the word, and with it no doubt the thing, 1 Cor. 1. 10. I beseech
you brethren -- that there be no divisions ((...)) no Schisms among you; so
reads the margin of our Bibles.

Now to find out what this Schism is, let us enquire,

1. Into the Exegetical exhortations that accompany it.

(1.) That ye all speak the same thing; viz. In the fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, for in little things it can never be made a duty to be of the
same opinion, since it is morally impossible; but (as Estius seems to
understand it) not to break Christian Charity in your disputes about them.

Observe, He does not oblige us to think the same thing, but though your
thoughts be diverse, yet speak the same thing; i. e. In your preaching and
converse, speak of those things only wherein you are agreed, and for those
things wherein you differ, do not fall out and fight about them, but love one
another notwithstanding.

(2.) That ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same
Judgment. Which must be understood of a serious endeavor after it, for
otherwise a perfect Conjunction must be reserved for a world of everlasting
perfection.

But the meaning of the Exhortation seems to be that all their little heats and
animosities should be swallowed up in an unanimous zeal for the great Gospel
Truths wherein they were all agreed.

2. We must enquire into the Corinthians miscarriage which occasioned this
caution, which you have, v. 11, 12. there were contentions among them, v. 11.
(...) So that Schisms and Contentions are one and the same thing, and it is worth
nothing that Clemens Romanus in that famous Epistle of his to the Corinthians,
still calls Schisms, (...), contentions.

Now the contention was about their Ministers; I am of Paul, says one, I am of
Apollos, says another, etc. Now he that was of Apollos was as much a
Schismatic as he that was of Paul, because they quarreled and fell out about
so small and indifferent a matter.

Observe, It was not so much being of Paul, and being of Apollos that made the
Schism, for Paul and Apollos and Cephas were all their's, Chap. 3. 22. But
saying, I am of Paul, that is, crying him up as the only man for them, so as to
despise others. If one went to hear Paul, and another went to hear Apollos,
that did not make a Schism, no nor if one communicated with Paul, and another
with Apollos, for why might not each go where he could be most edified? but the
Schism was, that they sacrificed Christian Love and Charity to this difference
of Apprehension. This is evident in that those who said, I am of Christ, so as
to despise and censure, and quarrel with them that said, I am of Paul etc. are
reproved equally with the rest.

Now the way of curing this Schism was not to silence Apollos and Cephas, that
whether they would or no they might all be of Paul; nay it is well worth the
observing, that in the same Epistle we find Paul very earnest with Apollos to
go to Corinth 16. 12. As touching Apollos, I greatly desired him to come to
you. Which he would never have done if he had not preferred the common Interest
of Soul's Salvation before his own credit.

But the way to cure this was to convince them of the folly of their quarrels,
how senseless and irrational they were, and to persuade them to lay aside their
enmities and heart-burnings, and to love one another, and to walk hand in hand
in the same way, though they traced different paths, which they might well do
when the paths lay so very near together.

By this instance it appears that narrowspiritedness which confines Religion
and the Church to our way and party, whatever it is, to the condemning of
others that differ from us in little things is the great Schismaticating
principle which has been so much the bane of the Christian Church, hinc
illae-lachrymae.

2. We find the word used, 1 Cor. 11. 18. I hear there be (...), Divisions
among you.

It is undeniably evident that it cannot be meant of any breach of Communion,
for it is said expressly, v. 20. That they came together into one place, and
that into the Church too, i. e. The place of meeting.

But the Schisms were Quarrels and Contentions about some little things
relating to the circumstances of public Worship, and the quarrel seems to have
been about the time of beginning their worship, especially when they were to
join in the Lords Supper, or their Lovefeasts, it see as they did not come
exactly at the time, therefore the Apostle bids them tarry one for another, v.
33. Those that came early quarreled with those that came late, for coming no
sooner, and those that came late quarreled with the other, for beginning before
they came.

Some quarrels of this kind were the Schisms here spoken of.

3. The word is used, 1 Cor. 12. 25. That there be no Schism in the Body. The
Apostle is there carrying on a Metaphor betwixt the Natural Body, and the
Church, and this clause clearly relates to the Natural Body, for he does not
come to the Reddition of the comparison till v. 27.

Now what he means by the Schism in the body is plain from the Antithesis in
the following words -- but that the members should have the same care one for
another, So that when the members care not one for another, when the Eye says
to the hand, I have no need of thee, v. 21. When there is not a sympathy and
fellow-feeling among Christians v. 26. here is Schism.

That Is Schism which breaks or slackens the bond by which the members are knit
together.

Now that Bond is not an Act of Uniformity in point of Communion in the same
Modes and Ceremonies, but true Love and Charity, in point of affection, It Is
Charity that is the bond of perfectness, Col. 3. 14. It Is the Unity of the
Spirit that is the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. And Schism is that which breaks
this Bond.

Now from all this laid together, I draw out this description of Schism, which
according to my present apprehensions is the true Scripture notion of it.

Schism is an uncharitable Distance, Division, or Alienation of Affections
among those who are called Christians, and agree in the Fundamentals of
Religion, occasioned by their different apprehensions about little things. This
is the Schism which the Scripture makes to be a sin, and by Scripture Rules it
must be judged. Schism (as indeed the Root of all other sin) we see lies in the
Heart and Affections: But the Tree is known by his fruits; this bitter root
bears Gall and Wormwood: Let us therefore take a short view of those practices,
which according to this Description are Schismatical practices.

1. Judging, censuring, and condemning those that differ from us in little
things is a Schismatical practice, as it evidenceth a great alienation, if not
enmity of the Affections. Charity thinks no evil, 1 Cor. 13. 5. (...), does
not reason evil, does not study to make sins, but cover them; and if they be
made, yet not to make the worst of them; it puts the best construction upon
words and actions.

Now to pass a censorious Judgment upon others, and to put the worst
construction upon what they say and do, is certainly uncharitable, that is,
Schismatical. It is a practice often condemned in holy Writ, Mat. 7. 1. Judge
not, that ye be not judged: it is construed a judging of the Law, Jam. 4. 11, 12.

It Is especially condemned with reference to the present case, of different
apprehensions about little things, in that famous Scripture, Romans 14. 4, 5,
etc. a Scripture, which if well studi'd and lived up to, would heal us all.
Judging the Heart, is in my Eye, one of the most uncharitable species of
Judging. Censuring the Principles and ends of an action, which are secret:
charging those that differ from us with Hypocrisy, which is a heart-sin. If
the shows be good, and the outside justifiable, when we conclude Hypocrisy is
in the heart, we step into the Throne of God.

2. Laying a greater stress upon small matters of difference than they will
bear, and widening the breach about them. As on the one hand, to censure all
Prayers by a Form, or by this Form in particular, assuperstition, will worship,
formality, and the like: on the other hand, to censure all Extempore praying as
babbling, caning, froth and noise, as if God had not accepted his own People in
the one as well as in the other. The fastening of a Censure, and passing of a
Judgment upon a whole party and way, if it be not very clear and well-grounded
indeed, will be likely to split us upon the Rock of Schism and Uncharitableness.

3. Concluding hardly as to the spiritual state and condition of those that
differ from us, excluding them out of the Church, and from Salvation, because
they are not just of our mind in every punctilio.

Witness that notion which excludes out of the Church, and consequently out of
Heaven all those (how orthodox and serious soever they are otherwise) who are
not in Prelatical Communion; if no Diocesan Bishops, then no Ministers, no
Sacraments, no Church, no Salvation. Which is certainly the most Schismatical
notion that ever was broached in the Christian world.

4. Reproaching, reviling, and railing at those who differ from us in little
things, is another Schismatical practice: fastening such nicknames upon them,
and loading them with such reproaches as carry in them all the odium that
malice can infuse into them; dressing them up in Bears-Skins and then baiting
them, doing what we can by calumnies, and misrepresentations to alienate the
affections of others from them.

5. Making, consenting to, approving or executing of Penal Laws against those
who differ from us in little things, to punish them for such difference in
their Persons, Estates or Liberties is another uncharitable or Schismatical
practice.

This is contention with a witness -- which aims at no less than the ruin of
the person contended with in the dearest of his secular interests, to beat out
his brains, because his head is not exactly of our size.

6. Separation from Communion with those that we have joined our selves to,
without cause; give me leave to call it Separation for Separation sake, without
any regard had to any thing amiss in the Church we separate from, or any thing
better in that we join our selves to, this is an evidence of an uncharitable
alienation of affection, and is consequently Schismatical. When we quite cast
off Communion with our brethren, out of ambition, animosity ot their persons,
affectation of Novelty and Singularity, or the like.

This was manifestly the case of the Donatists, the infamous Schismatics of
the Primitive Church. Their Principles were, that the Church of Christ was to
be found no where but in their Sect, and all other Churches were no Churches
that true Baptism was not administered but among them, and a great many
barbarous outrages they committed in the heat of their separation.

7. An affected strangeness or distance in Communion or Conversation from those
who thus differ from us upon the account of such difference, avoiding converse
and familiarity with them, carrying it strangely toward them, only because
they do not wear the dividing name of our party.

This evidenceth an uncharitable alienation of affection prevailing in the
heart, and is consequently Schismatical.

Many such like practices might easily be mentioned, if it were needful -- but
they are obvious enough, especially if we look into the Laws of Charity set
down, 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. And remember that all transgression of those laws
is uncharitableness, and when that is found in the things of Religion, it is
Schism. The corollary from the whole is this, that whoever they be that allow
themselves in these or the like practices and affections toward their brethren
that differ from them in little things, whether they be Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent or by what name or title soever they are
self-dignify'd and distinguished, they are so far Schismatical, inasmuch as
they break the great Law of Christian Charity.

Let us try what further Inference may be drawn from this Scripture notion of
Schism.

1. If this be Schism, then it is not within the line of any Humane Power to
make that separation to be Schismatical which was not so in itself. By the
description given of Schism it does appear to be a thing, malum in se, which
was not so before, an attempt of that kind would sink with its own weight. And
therefore it is well worthy observation, that when the Parliament made a Law
against Conventicles, (which are the great Schismatical Eye-sores) they called
it an Act to prevent and suppress Seditious Conventicles, knowing it to be
within their line to declare a thing to be Sedition, but not Schismatical
Conventicles, for that was a thing in which they could not concern themselves.

2. If this be Schism then the guilt of it is to be looked for in particular
persons, and is not to be charged by whole sale upon parties of any
denomination whatsoever, as among us at this day, in the prelatical party there
are some Schismatical, and others not, and the same is to be said of the
separating party, nay who is there that can say, I have made my heart clean, I
am pure from this sin. Have we not all need to pray, From Envy, Hatred and
Malice, and all uncharitableness (which are the Ingredients of Schism) Good
Lord deliver us, both from the Guilt, and from the power of it? It is not so
much our differences themselves, as the mismanagement of our differences that
is the bane of the Church burning up Christian love with the fire of our
contentions.

Whence come these Wars and Fightings? come they not hence, even from our
lusts? Jam. 4. 1. And those that say they are perfectly free from these
warfaring, Schismaticating lusts must give me leave to say, I doubt they
deceive themselves, and the truth is not in them.

3. If this be Schism, then there may be Schism, where there is no separation of
Communion, that is plain from the instance of the Corinthians who came together
into one place and yet are blamed for being Schismatical; bringing people to
one place will never cure a Schism, till they are brought to be of one accord.

You may bind the Leopard and lay him down by the Lamb, and yet the enmity
remain as great as ever, except there be an inward change.

A quarrel about little things may likewise be Schismatical on one side, and
yet not on 'tother; Jeremiah was a man of strife and contention, Jer. 15. 10.
i. e. A man striven and contended with, and yet no Schismatic, though
ordinarily (as it is commonly said of domestic differences) there is fault more
or less on both sides.

4. If this be Schism then there may be Separation of Communion where there is
no Schism. For thus we all agree that there may be difference of apprehension,
and yet no Schism, provided it do not eat out Christian love, but be managed
amicably, as betwixt the Arminians and Calvinists in the Church of England, and
diverse the like.

Now if this difference of apprehension relate to Worship, or Communion, and
the Modes or Terms thereof, these cannot but be a strong inclination to
separate in whole or in part according as the difference of apprehension is,
for do what we can as long as we are rational creatures the understanding will
have the directing of the will.

Now surely this separation, (if we must call it so, or rather) this variety
and diversity of Worship and Communion may be managed without Schism, provided
Christian Love and Charity be kept entire notwithstanding.

For can any imagine that a difference of apprehension in regard of Worship and
Discipline should be more Schismatical than difference of apprehension in
Doctrine, since of the two Doctrinal Truths seem more Essential to Christianity.

But to come a little closer. The meetings of the Dissenters (though now
blessed be God permitted and allowed by the Law of the Land, yet) are commonly
charged with being Schismatical, the great outcry is, that we leave the Church
and the unthinking mobile who are so well taught as to know no other Churches
but the public places of worship, are easily induced to believe it, as if
'twere Schism to worship God any where else, let the worship there be what it
will.

Those who will a low themselves the liberty of an unprejudiced thought, cannot
but see the difference so small, that as long as we believe the same Christian
Faith, and agree in the same Protestant abhorrence of Papal Delusions, we may
easily be looked upon as one and the same Church, as well as two several Parish
Churches may, especially being united under the Care and Protection of one
Protestant King, and members of the same Protestant Common wealth.

Now 1. I do from the bottom of my Soul detest and abhor all Separation from
the Parish Churches to Atheism, Irreligion, and Sensuality, Jude 19. Who
separate themselves, sensual -- who forsake the Church to go to the Alehouse
or Tavern, or to their secular business, or to their slothfulness and laziness,
to separate unto that shame, Hos. 9. 10. And if this separation had been more
animadverted upon than it has been of late, probably the cure of Schism would
have been sooner effected thereby than by severities that have been used
against Conscientious Separatists.

2. I do likewise abhor all Schismatical, that is, Uncharitable, Proud,
Censorious, rigid separation, such separation as theirs who condemn the Parish
Churches as no parts of the visible Church, who rail at the Ministers as
Babylonish, and Antichristian; this is a horrid breach of the Law of Christian
Love, and that which every good heart cannot but rise at the thoughts of.

And yet I cannot but say, and am satisfied in it, that there may be a lawful
and justifiable separation (though I would rather call it a diversity of
Communion) from the Parish Churches which I shall endeavor to clear in three
cases.

1. If my own Conscience be not satisfied in the lawfulness of any terms of
Communion imposed, as far as I fall under that imposition, I may justify a
separation from them, and a joining with other Churches where I may be freed
from that Imposition, provided that this be not done Schismatically, i. e. With
heat and bitterness, and an alienation of Christian affection; and I hope none
that have the law of Christ written in their hearts will say that it is
impossible truly to love those with whom I am not satisfied to join in all the
Ordinances for the sake of some Ceremonies, with which after all my Study,
Prayer, and Converse I cannot be satisfied

So, if I be a Minister, and as such obliged to Preach the Gospel, yet kept out
from the public exercise of my Ministry by such Terms and Conditions, Oaths
and Subscriptions as I judge sinful, in such a case surely it is lawful for me
with Eldad and Medad to prophesy in the Camp, since in my Judgment the door of
the Tabernacle is made straiter than my Master has appointed it to be made.
What should hinder but that as a Minister of Christ I may administer all the
Ordinances according to Christ's Institution to those who are willing to join
with me, and put themselves under my Conduct (such as it is) in those
administrations. If God have given though but one talent, it must be traded
with, or else there will be an uncomfortable reckoning shortly, especially when
we look abroad and consider how the apparent necessities of precious Souls call
for our utmost diligence in our Masters work, and indeed there is work enough
for us all if God would give us hearts to be serious and unanimous in it.

In this also it is always provided, that my agency in a Ministerial Station be
not made Schismatical by my Heat, Passion, and Bitterness, but that I live in
true Love and Charity with those whom by reason of the Impositions I cannot
salva conscientia join with in Communion.

2. Though I be satisfied in the lawfulness of the Terms of Communion required,
and so when purer administrations are not to be had may rather than live in the
total want of the Ordinances comply with them, yet when I have an opportunity
of enjoying those Ordinances in a way which I judge more pure and Scriptural,
or which I think more lively and edifying, and more likely to attain the great
end of all Ordinances, and that contribute more to my Comfort and Holiness, and
Communion with God, in such a case I cannot see but that I may lawfully have
recourse to such administrations though thereby I may seem to separate from
another Church, wherein before I had joined, and for which I still retain a
very charitable opinion and affection. If the Magistrate should be so
unreasonable as to impose upon me an unskilful Physician to be alone made use
of in case of sickness, I might take him rather than none. But if there be
another who I am sure has more Skill and Will to help me, I think I should be
accessory to the ruin of my health and life if I should not make use of him,
notwithstanding such an Inhibition.

And is not the life and health and salvation of my immortal Sonl dearer to me
than any other concern? Is not Communion with God the sweetest and most
precious of all my delights? Is it not the Life of my Soul, and the Crown of
all my joys? and are not those administrations most desirable in which I find
my self most edifyed? Must I then be such an enemy to my own comfort and
happiness as to throw away all the opportunities which I might have of that
kind only in a complement? Amicus Socrates, Amicus Plato, sed magis amica
veritas. The Bishops are my Friends, and the Ministers my Friends, and I have a
true Love for them, but Charity begins at home, especially when my precious
Soul more worth than all the world lies at stake.

This case is somewhat the clearer in those Parishes where the public
Ministers are either Ignorant, Profane or Malignant.

3. Nay, suppose I am so well satistisfy'd in Communion with the Parish
Churches in all administrations, as not to desire better, or not to expect
better in the Dissenters meetings, yet I cannot see what Schism, i. e. what
breach of Christian Love and Charity there is in it for me to be present
sometimes in the Congregations of the sober Dissenters, and to join with them
who worship the same God, in the name of the same Mediator, read and preach the
same Word, and live in hopes of the same Inheritance, and differ from me only
in some little things which I think not worth contending for, scarce worth the
mentioning, hereby to evidence my universal Love and Catholic Charity, and
that I am not of narrow, Schismatical, dividing Principles, nor one that will
Sacrifice Christian love to the petty trifling Fancies and Interests of a party.

The sober Dissenters are such as I have reason to hope have Communion with God
in what they do, and therefore why should not I now and then have Communion
with them? In every Nation be that fears God, and works righteousness, is
accepted of him; and why should he not be accepted of me, why may not I have
fellowship with them that have fellowship with the Father and with his Son
Jesus Christ? 1 John. 1. 3. To fancy Schism, i. e. Uncharitable contention and
a breach of Christian Love in this is very absurd.

Obj. But hereby I encourage a Schism, and countenance them in their Separation
from that which in my eye is lawful and good, and does not give just cause for
such a Separation.

Answ. There must be grains of allowance for difference of apprehension:
Different Capacities, Constitutions, and Inclinations, Custom and especially
Education must be put into the scale, and while I walk according to the light
which God has given me, I must charitably believe that others do so too.

Whether the Dissenters Meetings be as to the constitution and (...) esse of
them (looking upon them only as diversities of Communion) Schismatical, has
been considered already, and found otherwise, by Scripture Light.

The common outcry is that it is the setting up of Altar against Altar, which
is not so, for at the most it is but Altar by Altar, and though I have often
read of one Body, and one Spirit, and one Hope, and one Lord, and one Faith,
and one Baptism, and one God and Father, Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6. Yet I could never
find a word in all the New Testament of one Altar, except Jesus Christ, Heb.
13. 10. The Altar that sanctifies every Gift, in whom we all center. And if
there be any of the Dissenters who are Schismatical, i. e. Contentious, Bitter,
and Uncharitable in their Separation, let them bear their own burden, but by
my presence with them I encourage that in them no more than I do too much of a
like Spirit in too many of those who are called the Church of England men, by
my adherence to them.

To conclude, By all this it is evident that Unity of Affection is the thing to
be labored after more than Uniformity in Modes and Ceremonies. We have been
long enough trying to root Schism out of the Church, vi and armi^, by
Impositions, Fines and Penalties, choking our brethren because their Throats
have not been so wide as ours. And it has been found ineffectual, even in the
judgment of our Great Sanhedrim, who have declared that giving ease to
scrupulous consciences is the likeliest way to unite their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects in Interest and Affection; what if we should now try another Method
and turn the Stream of our endeavors into another Channel? Hitherto we have
been as it were striving which should hate one another most, what if we should
now strive which should love one another best, and be most ready to do all
Offices of true Charity and Kindness, and bury all our little Feuds and
Animosities in that blessed grave of Christian Love and Charity?

What if we should every one of us of each party (as we have been too often
called) set our selves by our Preaching to promote and propagate the Gospel of
Peace, and by our prayers to prevail with God for a more plentiful pouring out
of the Spirit of Peace, that the dividing names of Baalim may be taken out of
our mouths, and that however it goes with Uniformity of Ceremony, we may keep
the Unity of the Spirit; and then I doubt not but we should soon see our
English Jerusalem Established a praise in the midst of the Earth.

And yet I am afraid even Saints will be men, there will be remainders even of
those corruptions which are the seed of Schism, in the best, till we all come
to the perfect man.

And that is the comfort of my Soul that if we can but once get to Heaven we
shall be for ever out of the noise and hurry of this quarrelsom, contentious,
dividing world, and the Church Triumphant shall be no more Militant, but that
happy World of Everlasting Light will be a World of Everlasting Love.

FINIS.

