HERACLITUS.
Heraclitus weeps, well he may, Since ffate
Has chained poor Man to such a mournful State,
Where Crosses Crowd to fill his life with pain,
And all prevention he can use* is Vain.
I. Oliver. Sculp.



Heraclitus Christianus: OR, THE MAN OF Sorrow: BEING A REFLECTION ON ALL
States and Conditions OF HUMAN LIFE.

In Three Books.

Summum hominis bonum, bonus ex hac vita exitus. LONDON, Printed by A. M. and
R. R. for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons, over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil, 1677.

TO THE READER.
FOR an Author to court the Reader by an Epistle into good humor, is as
customary, and every whit as essential a concomitant of writing, as shadows to
Bodies, or Envy to Virtue. For I am not insensible, that by the exposing of
this Book, I shall expose myself too, to the censure of those who take measure
of every thing by their petulant humors, and have no other way to set off
their own barren inventions, but by perpetual invectives against the multitude
of Books which appear every day in the world; whereas indeed the mischiefs
which they complain of, have proceeded not from their number, but quality.

For should every man write an exact Narrative of the various experiences and
circumstances of his Life, comprehending as well his Vices as Virtues, and them
with simplicity related, how useful would this prove to the Public, though it
would much increase the number? But this so impartial an account may rather be
wished for, than expected; since men have ever preferred, their own private
Reputation before the real good of themselves and others.

The Book here offered to perusal, though it be none of those before-named in
particular, yet is it a true Representation of Man in General; and having found
no less Profit than Pleasure in the Reading of it my self, I could not be
detained by a thousand imperfections which I am sensible it labors under (as
well in words as matter) from offering it to those who are willing to make the
improvement which might be made, by a Prospect of Humane Misery.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the strange Humor of Timon, and many others, in their Resentments
of Humane Misery. Page 1 CHAP. II. That Man in respect of many natural
advantages, is inferior to the Beasts and Inanimate Creatures. 10 CHAP. III.
The Beasts and Irrational Creatures advantages over us, further considered in
respect of those many Diseases wherewith Man is Afflicted, partly by Nature,
and partly by his own Intemperance. 13 CHAP. IV. The advantages of Beasts, and
other Animals, over us, in respect of natural instinct; whereby they have
recourse to proper Remedies, for their particular infirmities and distempers.
19 CHAP. V. That Man has been instructed in several useful Arts and
Inventions, as also in sundry points of Morality and Philosophy, by Birds
Beasts and Fishes. 22 CHAP. VI. That Man is more miserable than other Animals,
by reason of his repugnancy to the Laws of his Creator; in obedience to which,
lives all other Creaturs. 37
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF Man's Misery, in his Conception in the Womb. 41 CHAP. II. Of Man's
miserable Birth, and entrance into the World. 45 CHAP. III. Man's misery
considered in the Nurture of his Infancy. 48 CHAP. IV. Man's misery further
considered, in the course and Education of his Youth. 58 CHAP. V. Of the misery
attending the State of Manhood. 63 CHAP. VI. Man's misery more particularly
considered, and first of the miserable life of Mariners. 65 CHAP. VII. Of the
misery attending the life of Husbandmen. 67 CHAP. VIII. The miserable life of
Merchants considered. 69 CHAP. IX. Of the miserable life of the Soldier. 73
CHAP. X. The miseries of Courtiers considered. 79 CHAP. XI. Of the miseries
attending the life of Kings and Emperors. 84 CHAP. XII. The miseries incident
to Popes and Prelates. 92 CHAP. XIII. Of the miseries which attend them who
Administer in Public Affairs. 95 CHAP. XIV. Of the miseries of Marriage. 100
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. OF the misery arising to Man from the Diversity of Religions. 109
CHAP. II. Of diverse Plagues wherewith men have been afflicted. 113 CHAP. III.
Of the miseries which Mankind have suffered by Famine and many other Plagues.
119 CHAP. IV. Of diverse other Distempers and Phrensies wherewith men have been
affected. 129 CHAP. V. Of Poisons. 132 CHAP. VI. Of the great Calamities which
Men have suffered by the overflowing of Water. 135 CHAP. VII. Of Fire, and the
mischiefs which Men have received by it. 137 CHAP. VIII. Of Earthquakes. 139
CHAP. IX. Of Avarice. 146 CHAP. X. Of Envy. 151 CHAP. XI. Of Love. 155 CHAP.
XII. Of the misery of Old Age. 165 CHAP. XIII. Of Death. 167 CHAP XIV. Of the
Final Judgment. 171
Licensed and Entered according to Order.

Heraclitus Christianus: OR, THE MAN OF SORROW. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the strange Humor of Timon, and many others, in their Resentments
of Human Misery.
MANY of the Ancient Philosophers, upon exact consideration, and curious
inquisition into the Nature and Manner of Living of all Creatures whatsoever,
have jointly cried out, That amongst all those which breathe upon the face of
the Earth, there is none more Miserable than Man. Others more rigorous censurers
of the works of Nature, have began to Blaspheme against her, calling her a
Step-dame rather than a tender and indulgent Mother. Some there have been, that
have deplored all their lifetime* the Calamities whereunto we are subject: And
such a one was Heraclitus, who persuaded himself, that whatsoever we could
contemplate under the Cope of Heaven, was nothing else but a real Theater of
Sorrow and Misery, and worthy of nothing but continued Lamentation and Pity.
Others there have been, who have testified their passion by an excessive
Laughing: And such a one was Democritus, who should he come again upon the
Earth, and should behold the disorders and confusions wherein lies our
Christian World, he would have just cause to heighten and redouble his
Laughter. There has been another kind also of Philosophers, but of a humor more
strange than the former, who were not contented to murmur against Nature and
her effects but by a particular hatred and animosity, have set themselves
against Man, their fellow Creature, imagining that Nature had set him as a mark
against which she would let fly all her Arrows of rage and fury: Amongst which
was Timon the Athenian Philosopher, who has been the most affectionate
Patriarch of his Sect, and who declared himself an open and Capital Enemy of
all Men, and witnessed the same in the presence of every one, and in all places
wherever he came; and indeed effectually confirmed it; for he would not be
conversant with any man, but dwelt all his life time with brute Beasts in a
Desert: neither did it suffice him to have men in hatred and detestation, and
to avoid their company, but as if they were some wild and furious Beasts, he
sought all means that might destroy them: and for that purpose he caused
several Gallows and Gibbets to be made and set up, that all possessed with
despair and weariness of Living, might hang themselves thereon; till having at
last occasion to accomodate himself, and to enlarge and alter his dwelling, he
was constrained to pull them down for the conveniences of his building: but
before he does so; he hastneth with all possible expedition to Athens, where
with piteous and lamentable complaints, Herald-wise, he gathers the people, who
hearing the hoarse and barbarous Voice of this prodigious Monster, and knowing
of a great while his accustomed humor, ran to him with the greatest eagerness
imaginable to hear what now was the matter with him: who harangued to them
after this, or the like manner: O ye Citizens of Athens! If any of you have a
desire to hang himself, let him have quickly and use no delays, for I am
necessitated to cut down (sore against my will and inclination) my Gallows and
Gibbets. And having in such like terms as these expressed his Charity to them,
he returned to his Desert, where he spent all his days to the last, without
changing his humor; and ceased not to Philosophize and ruminate upon Human
Miseries all the rest of his life time, even to the time of his expiration; and
then detesting our Humanity, ordained expressly, that he should be Buried as
much as could be out of the sight of any one: and to that end no place would
serve him but the edg of the Sea, that by the fury and repercussion of its
Waves and Billows, all Persons might be hindered from coming near him: And
caused this Epitaph recited by Plutarch to be Engraven on his Tombstone:

Having my life in misery consumed,
I here in boistrous waves do lie entombed;
And he that would dire Timons Corpse remove,
Ten thousand Plagues confound him from above.
Here you may behold this poor Philosopher through too much consideration of
Human Misery, vehemently desiring not to have been at all, rather than to have
been what he was; and rather to have been a brute, or Irrational Creature, than
a Man. But let us leave the Philosopher Timon making his complaints, and
enjoying his Humor: And let us hearken to the just Sentiments of that great
and no less Philosopher than Emperor Marc. Aurelius, who profoundly weighing
and considering the frailties and miseries with which we are encompassed and
besieged, cried out, that the battle of this Life is so perilous, the issue so
terrible and affrightful, that I do assure my self, says he, that should some
Ancient man come from the dead, and should relate all the passages of his life
since the hour he came from his Mothers Womb, until the day of his Dissolution;
and should recount in a continued Series of Discourse, all Pains and Sorrows
which he has suffered: there can certainly be none but would stand astonished
with horror and amazement at the hearing of so deplorable a relation. That
which I have experienced and made trial of in my self, says this great and
most worthy Emperor, I will freely and ingenuously confess, though it may be,
that so doing may turn to my disgrace and infamy; but perhaps to the profit and
advantage of future Ages. I have lived fifty years, and have tried what delight
and satisfaction is to be had in vice and wickedness: and truly says he, upon
a full experience I have found, That the more I eat, the more I hunger: the
more I drink, the more I thirst; the more I sleep, the more I am desirous of
sleeping; the more I repose, the more I am wearied; the more I have, the more I
covet; the more I seek, the less I find: and finally, I never had any thing in
my possession with which I was fully contented and satisfied, and desired not
presently to have another as passionately as the former; which the great Docter
St. Chrysostom observing, has much admired; after he had bewailed the
Calamities of this Life, and the hideous obscurities wherein we are involved,
wished that he had such a voice that might be heard of every one, that he might
inculcate that of the Royal Prophet David, O ye Sons of men! How long will ye
love vanity! how long will you harden your hearts to go on in pursuit of false
and killing pleasures! For whosoever shall consider the state and manner of the
World, the Frauds, Fallacies, Rapes, Incests and Adulteries, Violences, and
Oppressions, Ambition and Covetousness, Hatred and Animosity, which are
contained therein, he may well say that we draw nigh to the time of which
speaks the Prophet Isaiah with so great earnestness and lamentation, when he
says, Your iniquities has made a separation betwixt you and your God, and
your sins have hid his face from you, that he may not hear you; for your hands
are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity, your lips have uttered
lies, and your tongues deceit; no one loves Justice; there is none that does
according to Equity. St. Bernard in a complaint and lamentation that he made
concerning the Misery of this Life, teaches man to know his infirmity and
weakness, without drawing him from himself; so that by the consideration of
himself, he might be moved to detest his vileness and infelicity. O man! says
he, Who art blind and naked, composed of human flesh, and a reasonable soul,
have in mind thy miserable state and condition; wherefore forgettest thou, and
remembrest not thy self, and that which so nearly concerns thee? wherefore do
thou fondling-like dote on external, short, and deceitful pleasures; and do
not consider, that the more near thou approachest to the delights of this
world, the farther thou estrangest thy self from the Joys of the next: the more
thou think to gain from without, the more thou losest from within; the more
thou art desirous of temporal things, the more indigent thou art of spiritual
things? thou orderest and disposest of other matters so well, and do thou
contemn and neglect thy self? There Is no Creature whatsoeve but thou can tame
and master, and can thou not rule and govern thy self; thou art vigilant and
watchful in other men's affairs, and art drowzy in those which are properly
thine own; thy heart boileth within thee with desire of those low things, and
divine and Heavenly concerns lie altogether neglected `and despised by thee:
the nearer thou approachest to death, the farther thou removest thy self from
thy Salvation; thou take so much pains, and art at so much cost to nourish
and adorn this body which is but a vessel of filth, and a Sepulcher of worms
and rottenness, and leavest thy poor soul, which is the Image of God, and Idea
of Eternal Wisdom, altogether neglected.

These are the complaints which this holy man made in his retirements against
the Ingratitude and wickedness of this World; all which things deduced by him
and others, tend to no other end, than to stir up Man to the consideration and
knowledge of himself, and to show him how vile a Creature he is, that he may at
all times learn to consider that he is in the hands of God, as the clay and
earthen vessel is in the hands of the Potter; which he may make, unmake, form,
break, repair, and destroy even as it pleases him, without any injury, or
suspicion of injustice; which needs but one push, and falls immediately and is
broken; and yet let what misery soever light upon him, he knows not, nor
humbles himself under the Yoke of his Almighty Creator.

CHAP. II. That Man in respect of many natural advantages, is inferior to the
Beasts and Inanimate Creatures.
SO now, having considered Man's Estate universally, it is requisite to Discourse
more largely of this matter, and to contemplate and consider him more nearly.
And because that amongst all Ethnicks, Pliny has best Philosophiz'd on our
Subject, we shall produce his Testimony, That Christians to their great
confusion and infamy, may receive their Instruction from a Pagan, without God,
without Law, without any Ways being illuminated with the light Evangelical: Let
us consider, says he, a little, how that man is forced to cover his body at
the expense and charge of other Creatures, who being favored with the
Liberality of Nature, bring from the womb of their Mothers, the one Feathers,
the other Hair and Hides, -- the grace and favor of whom reaches even to the
Trees and Plants, the latter of which are provided with barks and rinds, as
sheilds or covers to defend them against the violence of the cold, and injury
of the heat: and moreover, to show in what great contempt and disesteem she has
Man in, she has brought him forth naked upon the Earth, out of disdain as it
were, as an abortive Fruit and Production: and at the day of his birth, made
over and assigned cries and tears for his Portion, which are the presages of
his future Calamities and Miseries. Here you may behold the chief and principal
works of Nature, for whom all other Creatures are Created; who is so frail and
weak of himself, that if he be abandoned of the help and succors of others, he
would certainly perish. Behold him when he comes out from his Mothers womb,
and you will see him bound and tied, sprawling and graveling on the Earth: him who
is alone born to Pride and Insolency, that begins his life with pain and
sorrow: How long is it before he has the use of his speech? When the use of
his feet, to how many Maladies and Distempers is he subject; other Creatures
know their natures and abilities, but Man knows nothing, except he learn and is
taught it, and understands nothing naturally but to weep and lament: Amongst
all living Creatures, he is most subject to Pain, Ambition, Avarice, boundless
desire of living: he alone is born to Superstition, to fears and anxiety, in
respect of future events: In short, he is subject to Anger and Enmity: other
Creatures live in peace, and Amity with those of their own kind: but Man alone
is enemy to Man: moreover that other Creatures might be accomodated, Nature has
provided them with houses and habitations, to defend them from the injuries and
extremities of the weather. As for Beasts she has helped them to Caves and
Dens. And to Birds and Fowls, the Trees and Bushes. As for the Tortois and
Snail, she has so well accommodated them; that wherever they go, they carry
their houses with them. For the Herbs and Plants, she has done all for their
advantage that can be done, and so innumerable others. But Man, he has nothing,
except he seek it with the sweat of his brows, and insupportable labor.

CHAP. III. The Beasts and Irrational Creatures advantages over us, further
considered in respect of those many Diseases wherewith Man is Afflicted, partly
by Nature, and partly by his own Intemperance.
FUrthermore, if we compare the health and strength of other Creatures with our
own, we shall find that they have a mavelous advantage over us; for nature
has endued us with a temperament so weak and infirm, and subject to so many
kinds of Maladies, that scarcely we are ever perfectly freed from them: She
has also charged Man with such an unsatiable Appetite of eating, that he
cease not continually to seek for novelties; and having found to his taste and
relish, he cannot, without great reluctance, abstain from taking in so much as
may turn to his prejudice; whence proceeds Rhumes, and Catarrhs, and
innumerable company of Distempers: But as to other Animals, they content
themselves with that which Nature has prepared for them, without violating
their natures, that they may please their Appetite: Moreover, she has given
them a temperament of body so exactly regular, that they seldom or never take
more than what is requisite for their nourishment and subsistence, either as to
eating or drinking: But as to Man, all the Fruits of the Earth, all sorts of
Herbs, Plants and Roots, the Fishes of the Sea, and the Birds of the Air do not
suffice him, but he must disguise, vary, and sophisticate, change the substance
into accident, that by such irritations as these, Nature might be provoked, and
as it were necessitated. The Stomach being overcharged and filled, makes all
the senses so confused and troubled, that there is not one of them that can
exercise their office; and I am ashamed that I must say, that the exceeding
great Luxury which reigns at present amongst Christians, causes many that they
stick not to abandon their members to all manner of villainy and wickedness,
though never fo vile and abominable; and it is a wonder to me that many men's
Bellies are not corrupted and putrified, by reason of their excess and Luxury!
and in the mean time poor Lazarus lies in the Streets, and at Doors, being
ready to perish and dye with hunger, and cannot have the crumbs, though he
never so much need them that fall from the rich Man's Table. And such Gormands
as these, are well called by the Prophet bruit Beasts; for their souls and
spirits, which are the better part of them, being so perfumed and inebriated
with delight and luxury, are retained captive as in a dark Dungeon; and their
Senses and Faculties, which are the instruments they ought to make use of, are
buried and intombed as in the intrails of some brutish Animals: And against
such Gluttons as these, who make their Belly their god and only deity,
exclaimeth the Prophet; Woe to you that rise early to follow drunkenness unto
the even, that you may stupifie your senses with wine. Which Vice is so common
and familiar amongst men, that there is scarcely any Nation or Province, who
are not infected with it, and who glory and vaunt not in their boundless and
unmeasurable drinking. The Tartars and Persians, as also the Greeks, have
celebrated Drunkenness amongst their greatest Pomps and Triumphs, and
constrained either to Drink, and do as they did, or depart and leave their
company. The Macedons were instructed and taught by their Emperor Alexander, to
Drink without measure. But above all Nations, Italy has preceeded and gained
the prize, from all Countries and Regions whatever; and that in Pliny's time,
who writes of Drunkenness, That it was so much in vogue and fashion in his
days, that they usually drank, and poured it down, till they threw it up again.
Paul Diacre in his History of the Lumbards, relates a Story which seems little
less than prodigious. Of Four Ancient Men, who made a Banquet, or Assignation,
at which they defied and callenged one another to Drink, one against one,
reckoning the time of each one's years, and he that drank against his opposite
Companion, must be enforced to drink as often, and as many times as he had lived
years; and the youngest was more than Fifty five, the Second Sixty three, the
Third, Eighty seven, and the Fourth Ninety two; after which manner, it is
unknown what they drank at this meeting: But it is certain that he that drank
least, drank Fifty five Cups of Wine, the others following, and consequently as
many as they had years; so that one of them drank Ninety two Cups. It is not
without cause therefore, that the great Philosopher Plato knowing the prejudice
that Men receive by Wine, said, that the gods had given it to them for their
torment and punishment, that they might take vengeance of their sins and
offenses; making them after they are therewith infatuated, murder one another.
Which Cyneas Ambassador of King Pyrrhus, considering the excessive height of
their Vines in Egypt, said, that with great reason such a Mother was hanged so
high, feeing that she bore such a dangerous offspring as Wine: Wherefore
Androcides advertised this great Monarch Alexander, That wine was the blood of
the earth, and that he ought to have an especial care in the use of it; which
having not observed, through his intemperance, killed Clitus, burned the City
of Persepolis, put to death his Physician, and and committed many other
infamous enormities.

And it is not only of our time, that these guzlers have begun to lay the
foundation of their Drunkenness and Luxury; but they began to do so, as soon as
they began to be at all: The Luxury of our first Parents, was the cause why the
Gates of Paradise were shut up and barred against us; Esau sold his birthright:
The great Prophet St. John Baptist, after the Banqueting of wicked Herod, was
cruelly slain. Dives was damned: For it is said expressly in the Text, That he
fed himself deliciously, for which he was cast into hell. Noah being overcome
with Wine, showed the subject of his shame, and was mocked by his own Children.
Lot deflowred his own Daughters. It plainly appears then, how much nature has
favored other Creatures more than us, in that they can so well bound and
regulate their appetites, that they take in but just what is necessary and
expedient for the conservation of their health: So that they are not vexed with
an infinite of Maladies and distempers, as we are; and when at any time they
are so, Nature has taught them their proper Remedies, without need or recourse
to Physicians; who under pretense of a Recipe, change R into D and make it
Decipe; and we must pay very dear for the assistance of him that takes away our
lives: For the most part of their Lapative Medicines, are nothing else but so
many Hammers, wherewith they knock men on the head, and destroy them.

CHAP. IV. The advantages of Beasts, and other Animals, over us, in respect of
natural instinct; whereby they have recourse to proper Remedies, for their
particular infirmities and distempers.
WHen it comes to pass, that other Creatures are sick, Nature has made and
taught them Remedies; as Stockdoves, Jays, Partridges, etc. who purge their
superfluities with the Leaves of the Laurel. The Pigeons, Turtles, and Pullets,
with the herb Helixine. The Dogs and Cats, by eating of Grass. When the Heart is
wounded, he has recourse to his Dictamum. When the Weasel would combat with the
Rat, she prepares, and fortifieth her self with Rue, that she may more
vigorously set upon her enemy. The Boors Physic themselves with Ivy, The Bears
with Mandragoras. The Eagles knowing the impediments which they have in their
Productions, by reason of their streightness, seek every where for the Stone
called Aetites, otherwise Eaglestone, which they bring into their Nests for
that purpose; which is at this time made use of by several of the Italian
Women, for the easing their Travel. When the Swallows perceive that by the
Smoke of the Chimnies their young ones are offended, they help them with the
herb Gelidon. The Snakes and other Serpents in the Spring of the year, that
they may cast off their skin more easily, and feeling that their sight fails
them, eat Fennel in order to their restoration. The Pelican lets himself
Blood, to heal the wounds received of the Serpent. The Stork (as Naturalists
report) has taught Apothecaries the use of Clysters, putting Moss in their
seats, when they find themselves oppressed with stoppages. And Plutarch, as
though ravished with admiration at the favors which Nature has bestowed on
other Animals, has assured us, That they are not ignorant of the Three kinds
of Medicines; for after he has proved that they know the virtue of several
Herbs and Simples, as we have before noted; adds, That they know also the
second part, which we call diet: For when they feel themselves over-filed, they
moderate their feeding, and use abstinence; as Wolves and Lions, who perceiving
the incommodiousness arising to them by their fatness, abstain from flesh, and
couch themselves, till they have all digested. And as to the Third part, which
is Surgery, it is held for certain, That the Elephants have skill in it; for
they draw out the Darts and Arrows out of the Bodies of them which are hurt
with them, and that with no small dexterity.

CHAP. V. That Man has been instructed in several useful Arts and Inventions,
as also in sundery points of Morality and Philosophy, by Birds, Beasts and
Fishes.
AN Ancient Greek Philosopher named Herophilus, he with many Lamentations
bewailed the miserable condition of Man, who though elevated above all other
Creatures, yet in many things was he to learn of them; witness the Swallow, who
has taught him building; for when they are near the time of their breeding,
they take strong twigs, and lay them for the foundation of their Nests, and
soft ones on the top; and when by reason of the heat they cannot get dirt, which
they use instead of Lime or Mortar in their Edifices, they fly to some River,
and therein bathe themselves tell they are well wetted, and then take dust,
which they mingle with water, and so plaster their Nests, stop and fill up the
holes and crannies, and build their little habitations in form of a Spire round
and exact, not foursquare; knowing that to be more proper and convenient for to
preserve their young from the attempts of those that would hurt them: But who
wonders not when he sees and considers the admirable work of the Spider; the
Scholars of whom are our Women, who learn of them to make the Linen, and the
Fishermen their Nets: They are excellent in their labor, and exceeding
advantageous in the industry, for there is no knots in their work, or
superfluous cost, for all proceeds from their little bodies; and they gently
part and divide their labor betwixt them; for the Female she spins and makes
the Web, and the other he goes out upon the chase for their living, and is
lying in ambushcade that he might entrap the prey, and make him fall into his
Nets; and though their bodies be no bigger than a Pea, yet nevertheless they
have so much vivacity and industry, that they take the greatest flies, and
sometimes the little Lizard in their Nests: and observe so well the season of
hunting, that they seem to have skill in Astrology; contrary to us, who stay
for the fair weather: for the time of their hunting is when the Sky is cloudy,
which is to us a presage of rain, as writes Aristotle in his History of
Animals. The Story of Plutarch concerning the Crow, which he says was seen by
him in Asia, is not a little wonderful: Who being urged with thirst and want of
water, he perceived a narrow vessel which had some small quantity in it, but by
reason of its depth and straightness could not reach it, and therefore cast in
stones that by that means it might rise up, that he might the better sip of it.
But who taught this Animal this secret of Philosophy? that heavy things tend
downward, and those things that are lighter ascend upward and give place? If we
would consider the wisdom and prudence of men, we shall find little Beasts that
are continually trodden under feet, in many things to excel and surpass man,
and seem to have some natural virtue in every property, in Prudence, Force,
Clemency, Rigor, Discipline and Erudition; for they know one another, they
distinguish amongst themselves, they desire those things that are profitable,
and avoid the contrary; shun danger, and oftentimes cozen and overreach men:
provide for the future, heap up what is necessary, as well for the time to
come, as that which is present; which being attentively considered by many
Ancient Philosophers, who were not ashamed to dispute and call in question,
whether the Bruits were not, with us, participators of Reason? To lay aside
Medicine, Chyrurgery, and Architecture, and other Melancholy Disciplines, in
which, we have proved the Animals to have no small infight, and sometimes to
have been the Tutors of Men:

Let us search into some more sprightly Sciences, such as is Music and
Harmony; For who is in the World, that is so stupid and blockish, dull and
senseless, who is not astonished with inexpressible delectation, in hearkening
to the melodious harmony of the diverting Nightingale? and that a voice of so
high a strain, and so pleasing a sound, should be heard from so little a
creature? Moreover that he should continue so obstinate in his chant, that his
Life should rather leave him than his voice! So that it seems that he has
been instructed by some exquisite Master in Music: Sometimes he counterfeits
the Bace, sometimes the Treble, and sometimes the Tennor; and when he is weary
of his warbling, he counterfeits his voice, and sings like another Bird that is
accustomed but to one single note; and then anon all of a sudden, he
penetrateth so high, that he passionates swounds, and is as it were in a
trance, with an infinite variety of division, which elevates the soul to
Heaven, not only of men, but other little Birds, whom he charmeth and stops
with his Notes, and invites them by his melifluous Song to hearken to him, and
imitate him; and not only contented with this, you will see him sometimes
instructing his young, and provoking them to the same harmony, learning to
observe the tone, and carry them on at one breath, some in length, aspirating
the others sometimes to curb entire notes, and duly to change and divide them
into Minimes and Crotchets; sometimes to quaver his voice, and sometimes to run
by division, that no humane artifice could ever yet counterfeit: Although
Aristophanes in his Comedy of the singing Birds, has employed all the force of
his wit, in thinking to imitate them: Which did not a little affect Democritus
with wonder and astonishment, who publicly maintained, That the Swans and
Nightingales had taught men Music; and that all those spritely Airs wherewith
we are so much delighted, are nothing else, but the Petty Larcinies which we
stand guilty of to the Birds: Wherefore it was, that wise Solomon, well knowing
in how many things we are surpassed and excelled, even by the very Beasts;
sends us to their Schools and Universities, when he says in his Proverbs, That
there are Four little creatures on the earth, who are wiser than the wisest.
The Ants who are a feeble people, and yet nevertheless, they provide and lay up
in the Summer, their provision and sustenance for the Winter. The Conies who
are a kind not strong, nevertheless make their houses in Stone. The
Grasshoppers who have no King, and yet go out in Bands. The Spider weaveth
snares with his Fingers, and is in the Palaces of Kings.

It is a thing almost beyond belief, when we consider, and behold the little
Ants bearing their heavy burdens with so great and excessive a diligence, and
so exact an order amongst them, biting the tops of the Corn, which they carry
into their little holes, for fear they should bud and putrify, parting them by
the middle, that they may carry them more easily into their Storehouses; and if
they are damped or wetted, lay them into the Sun, that it may dry them. But
with what art and industry are their little lodgings composed with! The
entrance and going in of which, is not foreright and straight; but is crooked
and wandering, and full of circuits and turnings; to prevent the surprising
entrance of any other creatures; they are not also without their different
apartments and distinctions; they have one Chamber in which sits their
Parliaments and Assemblies, another in which they store up their yearly
sustenance and provision. The third, as says Plutarch, is their Coemitry or
burying place, wherein they interr their dead Brethren: For it is most certain,
that they are great and strict observers of Funeral-Rites and Solemnities. The
Philosophy of Solomon therefore is not at all unprofitable, who admonishes us
by an example and Simile, drawn from the industry and diligence of these little
creatures, To fly and avoid, as much as may be, all inclinations to sloth and
idleness. The Primitive Church commanded, that each one should live by his
pains and labor, without licensing and permitting idle persons to consume and
waste the goods of the earth; which manner, as Cicero relates, was observed by
the Romans with such great exactness and severity, That no Roman in times past,
durst walk about the City without a Badg or Mark, by which he might show the
Trade and occupation wherewith he got his living; that all men might know that
he lived by his labor, and not by the sweat and pains of other men: for which
Reason the Consul had born before him his Rods and Axes, the Priest a Hat or
Chaplet, in manner of a Coif, the Tribune a Mace, the Gladiator a Sword, the
Tailor his Shears, the Smith a Hammer, the Orator and Rhetorician a Book; they
suffering not, that those that were Masters of the Sciences, should be the
Disciples and Scholars of vices: So that Mar. Aurel. making mention of the
ancient diligence and industry of the Romans, writes, That they set themselves
with so great earnestness to their labor, that a person in all Rome could not
be found so much at leisure, as to carry Letters two or three days journey,
though of never so great importance. Which considered, may not a little reflect
upon those which make profession of Christianity; for if all the idle and
useless persons were chased and banished out of our Cities; the remainder would
be a very small and inconsiderable number.

And if we would consider all things whatsoever which God has created, we
shall find no one but Man who remains in idleness: For by how much the more
the things that are created are excellent and perfect, the more is there given
to them of labor and travel; you see the Sun, how it is never free from
continual and perpetual motion; as also the Moon, how greatly unacquainted with
stops and stayings! The fire can never be without some kind of operation; the
Air flies continually, whirling from one side to the other* the Waters,
Fountains and Rivers flow, and are in perpetual agitation; the earth is never
at rest, but is always busied in producing one thing or other: wherefore laying
all things before our consideration, we shall find that nature never cease
her operation. Finally, there is no plague more pernicious to the public than
idleness, for its inventions and broodings, are scarce any thing else than vice
and wickedness; so that we ought to esteem idle persons far worse than the
bruit Beasts, whose hides serves us for Shoes, their flesh for Meat, their
force and strength to cultivate the earth; but the idle person serves for
nothing, but to offend God, and scandalize the innocent, and eat the bread
which other men have sweated for: We may therefore apprehend by what has been
forementioned, how liberally nature has favored other creatures, and has
been, as it were, prodigal in their behalf; so that men are constrained, when
they consider the indulgences of nature to other Animals in their regular way
of living, to follow, and imitate them in many things. But what Murderer can
there be, though never so great an affronter of Nature, and desirous of human
Blood, that will not moderate his desire of mischief and malevolency, when he
considers, that there is no Animal, though never so fierce and furious, that
will kill his own Kind? What Child can there be so ungrateful toward his
Parents, who will not be moved to gratitude, when he sees the little Storks
feeding their ancient and decrepit Parents, in acknowledgment of the benefits
that they have received from them? Aelian reports a matter not a little
admirable: That their Young are so tender of them, that if provision is not at
hand to relieve them; then they strain and enforce themselves to vomit, and
cast up that which they had eaten the day before, lest they should perish with
hunger; and with this they sustain them, till they have gotten supplies from
abroad. Where is the Father, who is so cruel and unnatural, or the Mother so
estranged from humanity, that dares to murder their offspring, or be guilty of
the least unkindness, if they call to mind the Dolphins zeal for the
preservation of their young, who if it come to pass, that any of them are taken
by Fishers, follow them continually, even to the very last extremity; and will
rather suffer themselves to be taken? The which is not only peculiar to the
Dolphin, but also to another Fish called Glaucus; who though not so sociable
and familiar with men as the other, nevertheless he has such great affection
for his young, that whenever he sees any that may seem affrightful, he
takes them up into his mouth, swallowing them down alive; and when the peril
and fear is over, he disgorges them whole into the water; which is indeed a
thing almost incredible, that his love should be so great to his young, that he
should force his Nature, and endure any pain, rather than they should be
prejudiced. Who is he that will not bear contentedly the irksomness of poverty,
if he considers the nature of a Fish called Polypus; who feeling himself urged
with hunger, and seeing that food is wanting to him, eats the ends of his
Finns and Curtails, knowing in time that they will grow again? Where is the Man
so pusillanimous and fearful, who is not in some measure comforted against the
fear of Death when it presents it self to him, when he has considered the
sweet singing of Swans, and that when their end approaches, though they are
without hopes or thought of living again? There is no Father can be so cruel,
barbarous or unnatural, to defraud some of his Children to advantage the
others, if he has taken notice of the order which the little Swallow observes
in the nourishing of his brood; who, as says Aelian in his Greek History of
Animals, keeps exactly to the rules of distributive justice; and because she
cannot bring all at once, she goes diverse times to her feeding, and violateth
not in the leastwise the right of Primogeniture; for he that is first born, is
first fed; the Second, the second rank; and so consequently the others: which
was the cause that an Indian Philosopher named Diphilus, after having
contemplated the manner and order of this little Bird and others, cried out,
That Nature had engraven in them, as it were, certain laws and formularies, for
the assistance of men in the conduct of their lives. Is there any Man so stupid
and blockish, that increases not his knowledge, by considering the prudence of
the despised Cuckoo, who being sensible by instinct of Nature, of his infirmity
and excessive frigidity, so that he cannot hatch his eggs, watches, and at
last spieth an occasion, that he may lay them in other Birds Nests, first
breaking theirs that were there before? Which manner of the Cuckoo, Eulgentius
observing, said, That he was not unworthy in some things to be imitated by
those Fathers who have many Children, and by reason of their poverty cannot
bring them up themselves; they would do well to place them out in others
Houses, whereby they may get an honest subsistence. What Servant is there so
dull and sloathful, that is not a little moved, when he considers the noble
generosity of the Warrhorse, who is so courageous, that he had rather dye than
leave his Master in danger; so that he has such a brisk kind of
sprightfulness, that is beyond expression, with which we see him, sometimes
like thunder and lightning, strike through the Armed Soldiers, murdering and
trampling under his feet those who would hinder his passage; surmounting those
difficult streights; and finally, cease not till the Victory is gotten by him
that commands him? And if Man may learn fidelity by the example of a Horse, yet
is all that but little, in comparison of what we have experienced in our Dogs,
who knowing their Masters, flatter, and ingeniously insinuate, accompanying
them throughout all the World, and acknowledging them only for their masters
that keep them; and are so faithful guardians of their goods, that they will
rather dye than suffer them to be robbed: For the confirmation of which, shall
only one instance be produced out of Plutarch, which* may be sufficient to
terrify all bloody murderers, and others, who so little set by men's lives:
which vice our great Creator has in so much detestation, that he permits
the bruit Beasts to be executors of his justice; as it is evidently manifest by
the History which follows. The Ancients who have written of the nature of
Animals, make mention of a King called Pyrrhus, who marching one day with his
Army, he came to a place, where a Dog kept his Master who lay dead in the
highway; and having looked upon this pitious spectacle, he was given to
understand by some Peasants, that it was the third day since the poor creature
had not stirred from the place without meat or drink: wherefore the King caused
the corpse to be interred, and that the Dog should be kept for his fidelity,
causing inquisition to be made sometime after concerning the murder; yet
nevertheless without success in his enquiries and discovery of the Murderers:
but it happened a while after, that the King mustering his Soldiers, and
causing them all to pass before him, that he might see their equipage; the Dog
aforementioned, always kept near to the King, sad, mute and heavy, till those
that had killed his Master passed by; then with a furious impetuosity, he run
and set upon them, and would have torn them in pieces, turning and frisking up
and down with such barkings and howlings, such strange kind of fury and
vehemence, that it was taken notice of by every one, sometimes running toward
Pyrrhus, and looking on him so attentively, as if he demanded, and waited for
justice; by reason of which, the King immediately* suspecting them to be guilty
of the murder, they were examined, convicted, and punished for their fault as
they deserved. A thing certainly miraculous! and plainly showing our God to be
so just in his judgments, and that his hatred is so great against Murderers,
that he sometimes permits the bruit Beasts to accuse them.

CHAP. VI. That man is more miserable than other Animals, by reason of his
repugnancy to the Laws of his Creator; in obedience to which, lives all other
creatures.
IT is evidently certain, That a harmony of Philosophy may be found in the
contemplation of Animals, as well Natural as Moral; for in considering the
manners and actions of them, so well ordered according to the usage of nature,
their justice, temperance, fortitude, and economy in their administration in
their little Republics, their continency in their works of nature, and some
other parts of virtue that they exercise, by the consideration of which, Man
may make a reflection on himself to great purposes: Wherefore our Lord calls
(in St. Matthew) the Scribes and Pharisees, children of Vipers. And Isaiah
reproaching the Israelites of their ingratitude toward God, proposes for
their example the Ox and Ass who knew their Master; But Israel, says he, has
not known me their Creator: And so are we tacitly admonished by the history of
the Swine (who, by the permission of God, was vexed by the Devil) That those
that spend and waste their lives in idleness and delicacies, shall become one
day the Devils prey; for seeing that they will not be the Temple of God, and
habitation of the holy spirit, they must of necessity be the habitations of
Devils: Such Swine are those in these our days, who make this world their
Paradise, wallowing in all manner of sensuality and voluptuousness, living like
the Beast that perishes, and irrational creatures which are void of
understanding, not at all raising up their souls unto the consideration of the
excellency and dignity of their natures; not remembering, or rather not
believing those solid and never-ending joys, which are the rewards of virtue
and true generosity; for he that shall behold the incogitancy and sloathful
security* wherein men spend their days, must needs think, that they do not
believe that which they profess, nor give credence to that which they call
their Religion: For is it possible for any believing an eternal state of misery
and torment hereafter, to do those things which will certainly bring them
thither? As for the Law of Jesus Christ, it is too sharp and rigorous, too
severe and melancholy, they will not drink of his cup, it is too bitter and
unpleasant a draught for their taste; they like not the severe austerities of
St. John Baptist, nor the poverty and meanness of the Disciples; but are far
better pleased with the grandeur and splendour of the Courts of Princes, and
relish nothing but worldly pomp and greatness, and are of nothing more
solicitous, than how they may live at their ease, not caring, or valuing what
wickedness or impieties they are guilty of, so it be done with secrecy, and
hidden from the knowledge of men; and because they see not God, nor indeed can
they with mortal eyes, therefore are they so foolish to think that he cannot
see them; not considering that they must one day lay aside their Masks and
disguises, and appear before the tribunal of the great Omniscient Judge, who
shall render to every one according to his works, and who has told us plainly
beforehand, That whatsoever a Man sows, that shall he reap. It will be in
vain then to skulk and hide our selves, as the Royal Prophet David has well
expressed, when he says, Whither shall I fly from thy presence? if I do ascend
up into heaven, thou art there; If I descend down to hell, thy hand shall there
find me; if I take the wings of the morning, and fly from east to west, thou
can easily reach and overtake me; if I would cover my self with the night, as
with a garment, and hide my self in the darkness thereof; the day is unto thee
as the night, and the night as the day: For he that has created the ear, shall
he not hear? and he that has made the eye, shall he not see? For conclusion
then, is it not horridly abominable, That man who is no more than a miserable
worm of the earth, should dare, he alone, to oppose and contradict the Law and
order of Nature, in obedience to which lives all other creatures? And that he
should be so bold an effronte, to lift himself up against God, who is able in a
moment to cast him down into the horrid abyss of sorrow and misery? Who cannot
but admire at the audacious confidence of Man in the resistance of his Lord, to
whom all other creatures, Heaven, Earth, Sea, Stars, Planets, all the Elements,
Beasts, Angels, Devils obey.

The end of the First Book.
Heraclitus Christianus: OR, THE MAN OF SORROW. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP* I. Of Man's misery, in his conception in the Womb.
WE have compared Man in this our first Book, with those creatures whom we call
irrational, and therein showed, That he ought to be so far from glorying in,
and exalting himself, in respect of his excellency and dignity, that he has
the greatest arguments imaginable, (every thing considered) to the contrary.
Having therefore laid this slight foundation, and drawn some rude lines of
human misery, it remains now to go on forward in the continuation of our
tragical discourse of Man's life. First, Insisting on his generation and
production, and so proceeding, till we have at last brought him to his Grave,
which is the end and period of all things. In the first place considering the
matter of his generation, which, what is it but corruption and putrefaction? as
also the place of his birth, which is nothing else, but a vile and loathsome
Prison. How long is he in the womb of his Mother, without form or resemblance
to any thing, save an insensible mass of flesh? For when the Matrix has taken
in, and retained the two seeds, and warmed them by its natural heat, there is
concreted a little thin skin, like unto that which we see is on the top of an
Egg; and after some days the spirit and blood mingling together, they begin to
boil, so that there rises up Three little Bladders, as the bubbles which rise
up in a troubled water, which are the places, where are formed the three most
noble parts of thi^ lofty Animal, the Liver, the Heart and the Brain, which is
the most excellent part of the work, it being the seat of all the functions,
the true fountain of sense, and magnificent palace of understanding and memory,
the true arch and support, as it were, of Reason. Most wonderful also will it
appear to us, if we consider likewise, particularly, the creation of all the
other parts, the manner and fashion of their formation, and how the Infant
being in the womb of its Mother, begins to Urine through the passage of the
Navel, the Urine running in a little membrance separate from the Child,
ordained by nature to this office, having not as yet the ejections by the
fundament, by reason that it receives not its nourishment by the mouth; the
ventricle or stomach also not as yet performing its office; so that not any
thing is transported to the entrails, being for Six days as Milk, the Nine
following Blood, the other Twelve Flesh, and the Eighteen following the spirit
of Life and Motion is infused. There Is scarce any heart, though never so hard
and stony, which is not moved and ravished as it were with great admiration and
astonishment, considering a thing so strange and wonderful. But what we have
now said, is but little in comparison of those things which follow. For who
marvelleth not, considering the manner of the Infants being nourished in the
womb, seeing he receives nothing by his mouth? his nature is also so frail and
tender, that if the Mother has but the least shock or disaster, or scenteth
but the snuff of a Candle, her fruit dies immediately.

CHAP. II. Of Man's miserable birth, and entrance into the World.
AFter having been long nourished as before mentioned, and being now formed and
grown bigger, and having need of greater sustenance, he sets himself with
great impetuosity to search for more; which is the cause he so moves himself,
that he breaks the Fibers wherewith he has been all this while retained; so
that the Matrix feeling it self concerned, will no longer sustain him, but
forces it self to put him out; wherefore it opens, and by that opening, the
Child feeling the Air enter, pursues it, and draws more and more to the
Orifice of the Matrix, and enters into the light of this World, not without
great and violent dolours, and hurt to his tender body; but during the Nine
months time, how much pain and sorrow does he cause to his Mother that bears
him! not to take notice of some, who whilst they are big with Child lose their
appetite, and are desirous to eat of human flesh; so that we read in History,
That their poor Husbands have been constrained to fly, and absent themselves;
others have desired to eat Ashes, burning Coals, or other things like
thereunto, according to the corrupt and depraved humors abounding in their
bodies; moreover, what anguish and sorrow have their Mothers to bring them into
the World! in what danger are they when they are in Travel? Some their Arms
come out first of all, some the Feet, others the Knees, some double; but that
which is most cruel, and which we cannot apprehend without horror, They are
forced sometimes instead of the Midwives to call the Surgeon to dismember the
infant and tear it in pieces; sometimes the Mother must be cut open alive, and
anatomized, that they may come at the Child. Some Children are born so
prodigious and deformed, that they resemble not Men but Monsters; some are born
with Two Heads, some with Four Legs, as has been known in Paris, and at the
time when I was making this Book. Polydorus writes, That before Marcellus was
chased by Hannibal, that a Woman brought forth a Child, having the Head of an
Elephant; another having four feet as a Beast: The modern Histories make
mention of a Roman Courtizan, that was brought to Bed of a Child, who was half
a Dog. They who have writ the Histories of the Indies, do assure us, That even
at this present, there are found them there, who are half men and half Beasts,
occasioned by the execrable bruitishness of their Parents; others are born
blind, others deaf, others mute, others more infirm and defective in their
members; for which their Friends are sorry, their Mothers infamous, and their
Fathers shamed; so that if we consider attentively all the misery of our
Nativity, we shall find the ancient saying true: That we are conceived in
uncleanness, born and brought into the World with pain and sorrow, and
nourished and brought up with anguish and labor.

CHAP. III. Man's misery considered in the nurture of his Infancy.
HEre then is the first Act of the Tragedy of human Life, during the time of
his imprisonment in his Mothers Womb; and being now got out of his maternal
dungeon, let us contemplate a little what he is being on the Earth: And what is
he else, but like to a poor worm creeping thereon? With what Garment is he
covered, making his magnificent entrance into the Palace of this World, but
Blood, wherewith he is all over besmeared? which is no other than the
representation of sin, which in the Scripture is signified unto us by Blood. O
grievous necessity! O cruel and miserable condition! That before this creature
has sinned, he is the bondsman and servant of sin; it is the bitter grape, of
which speaks the Prophet Jeremiah, that the fathers have eaten of, and the
childrens teeth are set on edg. What is the first Song which Man sings
entering into this World, what are his chants, but weeping, wailing, and
groaning, which are the messengers and augures of his future Calamities, which
because he cannot express by words, he testifies by cries and tears: and this
is the beginning of Monarchs, Kings, Princes and Emperors, and others who make
such a bustle in the world.

The worm, though he be so little, as soon as Nature has brought him forth, he
begins to crawl on the earth, to seek his pasture and sustenance: The little
Chicken as soon as it is out of the shell is clean, and needs not to be washed
as man; runs after its Mother when she calls it, sets to pecking,
fears the Kite, without ever having made trial of his malice; and avoideth
the danger by the sole guidance and instinct of Nature.

But behold man, as soon as ever he is on the earth, he is as a hideous
monster, and mass of flesh, who lets himself be eaten by other Animals, and
knows not in the least how to sustain himself, being ignorant of the ways of
his nourishment, and would soon starve and perish with want and hunger, was he
not relieved by others: But leave we him in his little nest, where he is
covered with his own dung, being so impotent that he cannot cast out his
excrements, which the little Birds and other Animals easily do; and let us
remember that these are the perfumes wherewith Nature has adorned Man, who
calls himself Master and Lord of all others.

Now this wretched creature being plunged in this gulf of misery, must be
brought up, and has need of nourishment to support the infirmity of his
nature, which office is assigned to Mothers, in consideration of which they
have given them paps, which are as little bottles proper for that effect: But
how many Mothers are there at this day, or to speak better, cruel Steptdames
rather, who think it abundantly sufficient that they have brought them into the
world, reserring their nursery to others, whom perhaps they never saw in their
life's before, and who it may be change them, putting others in their stead; and
some of them are less ashamed for to hold little Dogs in their arms, than their
own Children born of their bodies? which manner is not practiced by the brute
Beasts, though never so brutish; for they do not commit their little ones to
the keeping of others, though the number which Nature has given them be never
so many, but nourish them themselves, and are so zealous protectors of them,
that they scarce ever have them out of their arms; and that which is most
wonderful, there is begotten a jealousy betwixt the Male and Female, who shall
be their Guardian, and which is sometimes to them a matter of no small strife
and dissension, especially to the Apes, and not only to them, but also to the
Beasts who are of a Nature so fierce and cruel, and yet have they their lettle
ones in so great affection, that they are not only contented to nourish them
with their Milk, but as soon as they are brought forth, having scarcely any
form, they lick and pollish them that they may render them more perfect: And
not only they, but the Birds too; who although that they have oftentimes 5 or 6
under their wing, and have neither milk nor grain, nor any thing else to
sustain them; nevertheless they spare no pains nor diligence whereby they may
bring up their little ones, which is a true testimony of Human Misery;
forasmuch as man is deprived betimes of that which is his due by the strict
right of Nature, being forced to suck the milk of a stranger, and very often of
her who hireth her self the cheapest, whatever corruption or deformity she is
possessor of, which many times is so contagious to the Child, that it had been
better for him perhaps to have been nursed up by some brute Beasts in a Desert,
than to stand at the mercy of such Nurses; for not only the bodies are
concerned and spoiled, as was Experienced in Titus Son of Vespasian, and many
others (whom as writes Lampridus) was all the time of his life subject to a
multitude of maladies and distempers, by reason of his being delivered to be
Nursed by a woman troubled with diverse sicknesses and infirmities; but the
worst is, that there remains an impression in the mind and temper, by reason
of this vicious Nutrition, as Dion intimates in his 2 Book of the Caesar's,
when he takes notice of Caligula the 4th Emperor of Rome, the cruel inhumanity
of whom was not imputed to Father or Mother, but to her who Nursed and suckled
him; who moreover as she was cruel and barbarous of her self, yet
notwithstanding rubbed and chafed the end of her paps with human blood, and
then caused him to suck them; which he practiced so well afterward, that he
was not only contented to commit an infinite of Murders, but sucked the blood
which was wont to be on his Sword or Dagger, and licked it with his tongue; and
wished that all the World had but one head, that he with one blow might cut it
off, and he himself reign alone on the earth. The Child then had not suffered
vexations enough in the womb of his Mother, and had not been enough afflicted,
unless that making his entrance in the world, there had been prepared new ones
by the ingratitude of those Mothers who are so nice and delicate, that they
think it too burdensome a thing for them to take it upon themselves, and
therefore make them suck them whose milk is oftentimes corrupt and putrified,
from whence follows many distempers, as the Pox, Leprosy, and innumerable
others, (as Physicians have observed) to the great damage of their poor
Children, and eternal infamy of the Mothers: for it is most certain, that if
the Nurse be squint-eyed, or given to ebriety, and subject to maladies, or
corrupt manners, the Child shall be squint, not by her milk, but by often and
frequent intuition and observation of his Nurse: If she be a Drunkard, she
prepares the infant for Convulsions and weaknesses, as we read in the Life of
the Emperor Tyberius: Who was excessively addicted to that Vice, by reason of
his Nurse who suckled him; who her self was an excessive and unmeasurable
drinker; accustoming the Child also to the eating of Toasts soaked in Wine;
where we may observe how great an influence the manners and temperament of the
Nurse has over the Child, so that if she be sick, she will render him infirm;
if she be stupid, she will make him so too: but leaving him in the Govenrment
and Tuition of his Nurse,

Let us consider how many perils and dangers he is environed with, during the
time of his bringing up: what pain and vexation have they, who have the charge
of him? Some do even tear and burst themselves with crying and howling, so that
there needs no larum-bell to rouse them in the night that have the charge of
him: Others are continually running and dashing themselves against one thing or
other, and there is scarce any thing else for the most part but wounds and
bruises to be seen in their poor little bodies; without reckoning many
Hereditary diseases which they bring from the corruptions of their Parents. --
But who stands not astonished, to think that so miserable a creature, one so
overwhelmed with poverty and malediction, so vile and mean an Object; yet in a
little while should become so proud and haughty. If then the great Prophet
Jeremiah, with vehement compassion has deplored the state of Captive Babylon:
If the Consul Marcellus has lamented the City of Syracuse, when he saw it
burning: And Saluste the corruptions of Rome; we may with them well deplore the
miserable state of Man entering this World; his Progression and Perilous
Conversation therein, and his sorrowful and woeful exit; which made Job grieve
and lament that he was not stifled in the womb of his Mother, and murmured that
her knees had sustained him; and complaining of the breast that had gave him
suck: And Jeremiah moved by the like passion, considering that man is formed of
the dust, conceived in sin, and born in sorrow; and at last made the prey of
Worms and Serpents: wished that the womb of his Mother had become his
Sepulcher, and the Matrix his Tomb: And the same Job again says, That man born
of a woman lives but a short time here on earth, who comes up as a flower and
flees as it were a shadow, and never continues in one stay: What could be
more forcibly and efficaciously set forth, than this Description which this
holy man makes of human Calamity? In comparison of which, all the Sentences and
Treatises of the Ethnicks are but as dreams and smoke. When the Spirit of God
would induce man to humble and know himself, he calls him son of a woman; and
has he done it without cause? for amongst all the Creatures which God has
Created, there is none more subject to weaknesses and infirmities than a woman,
especially them who are big with child; for scarce have they one month in a
year which is not spent in fear and trembling: Then afterward he says, Living
a short time, and indeed what is more short than the life of man? when it is but
stopping his nose or mouth, and his life is ended: For his life is naught else
but a blast which is enclosed therein, by reason of which, Theophrastus and
many other Ancients, murmured against Nature, that she had endued the Heart and
Crow and many other Animals with such a long life, and that to no purpose:
whereas to man, it is quite otherwise; his life being so short and of so little
durance, that though he has occasions enough to employ it, yet nevertheless is
it retrenched and abreviated, and that by so many ways; as sleep, dreams,
anger, and all manner of misfortunes: So that if we would reckon every thing,
there remains less than nothing of that which we may call life; seeing that
the Prophet compares man to a shadow, what other thing then is a shadow, but
that which deceives the sight? A phantasm, a deceitful figure without
substance; which sometimes appears to be great, sometimes little; the very
same is it of man, sometimes he seems to be great, when indeed he is but
little, or rather nothing at all; for when he is most highly lifted up, and
when he is on the greatest and most elevated degree of honor; he then
perishes suddenly, and we know not what is become of him, no more than of a
shadow when the night is come: I saw the wicked, faith David, mighty and
flourishing as the green Laurel tree; but I passed by, and I saw suddenly he
was not; I sought for him, but he was no where to be found.

CHAP. IV. Man's Misery further considered, in the course and Education of his
Youth.
WE have showed through how many perils and dangers man comes out of his first
labyrinth of infancy: Let us now consider him a little more advanced in age;
let us see whether there is any end of his miseries; and if we would be
equitable judges, we shall find that he is so far from ending of them, that he
precipitateth and rusheth himself farther into them; for that is the time
wherein Nature has provided for him a most furious combat: the blood begins
to boil, the flesh excites and summ^^s him to voluptuosness, sensuality guides
him, the world flatters him, the Devil tempts him, youth invites him, and it is
almost impossible that being beset with so many vicious allurements; that he is
not at the last vanquished and cast down: for to him that has riches, youth,
liberty and delicacies, all the Vices of the world (says Marc. Aurel.) lay
siege to, and easily overcome him, and that many times through fault of his
Parents, who teach him not, either by Example or Precept, the ways of Virtue
and Piety, but leave him to the fury of his wicked inclinations: And if Ely was
so grievously punished for not correcting his Children, what can those Fathers
likely expect, who instead of being their correctors, have been their
corruptors? -- Such Parents may well be compared to the Ape, who so huggeth her
young ones, that she kills them; and are oftentimes the caus^ of their
shameful and untimely end: The Ancient Romans had the Fathers which chastised
not their Children, in so great contempt and abhorrency, that they made a Law
which they called Falcidia, by which it was ordered, that for the first fault,
the party offending should be admonished, for the second he should be
chastised, for the third he should be hanged, and the Father banished; the not
correcting his Son being imputed to him, as if participator in the Crime. --
But I would now willingly ask, what the Ancient Romans would do if they beheld
the present pitiful state of many of our Republiques? what fines, what
punishment, what penalty would they lay upon those Fathers, who instead of
establishing a rule and government in their houses, and showing them a good
pattern for there imitation, corrupt and deprave them by their vicious and
wicked Example: for the first Precept and Rule of good living they receive from
them, is to Curse and Blaspheme, to be Intemperate in their eating and
drinking, and to dissipate their substance in Whoring, Gaming, and all manner
of debauchery? there being not also a few Mothers in the world, who do as
Herodias, learning their Daughters to dance, paint, plaster, patch and
disguise their Faces; to load themselves with Rings and Jewels, that they may
tell every one that meets them, how inwardly barren they are of all true worth
and value: But it will be with them in the end, as it was with David, the Sin
of whom was punished by his Children; who were so irregular, that one of them
violated his own natural Sister, Tamar, and conspired the death of his own
Father, and drove him out of his Kingdom. For the Rule of the ancient
Philosophers has always proved true, that man commits many faults in this
world, the punishment of which, God reserveth in the other: but this sin of not
well Educating our Children, he usually punishes in this; for the Father in
begetting his Sons, gives them nothing but mortality and weakness; but by good
Education, Fame and everlasting Renown: We will conclude then, that if the
Children have been in great peril and misery oftentimes by the corrupt milk of
their Nurses; yet nevertheless the danger is double, in respect of them who
ought to instruct them; for as much as that the nutriment of the body is of far
less consequence, than that of the mind. But seeing that we have not as yet
mentioned Plato, who has Divinely Philosophiz'd on Human Calamities, and so
lively represented the miseries of this life, that many of his Disciples
reading his Books, have cast themselves down headlong from the tops of Rocks
and Mountains into Rivers, that so cutting the thread of their Calamitous life,
they might have the enjoyments of the next: This great Philosopher Plato, in a
Dialogue that he has made concerning Death, and contempt of this life,
introduces Socrates, who deduceth by an admirable Eloquence the miseries and
frailties of Human condition, as follows: Know thou not (says He) that
Human life is nothing but a peregrination, which the wise perform and pass in
joy, singing with gladness, when that by necessity they approach unto the end
of it? Do thou not well know that man consists of spirit, which is enclosed
in his body as in a Tabernacle; which Nature has bestowed upon him, not without
great vexation; and though she does bequeath some small benefits to us, yet are
they nevertheless hid, and of a short durance, and consumed in sorrow and
trouble; by reason of which the soul resenting the dolor, comes to desire the
Celestial Habitation, and wishes for the Fruition of heavenly pleasures.
Consider that the going out of this world is no other thing than a mutation and
exchange of evil for good; and what evil (says He) and misery does not man
endure from his birth to his Sepulcher? What*kind of sorrow is there that he
has not experienced, be it of heat, of cold, of torments in his body, as also
of his mind? What other messenger, or more certain forerunner can he have of
his misery, than his tears, sighings and groanings? But after he has born so
many evils, and come to the 7th year of his age, he must have Guardians and
Tutors for his instruction in Learning; moreover growing and coming into his
youth, he had need of Correctors, who with rigor must observe his actions, to
tame and accustom him to labor.

CHAP. V. Of the Misery attending the state of Manhood.
HIS youth being past over, hair begins to cover his chin, and then he grows
man, and then is the time that he enters into greater anxiety and vexation of
spirit; he must then frequent public places, keep up a conversation in
company; if he be of a Noble and Illustrious Extraction, he is forced to
undertake a thousand warlike stratagems and enterprises, and expose himself to
an infinite of perils; and hazard his life, and spill his blood, that he may
dye in the bed of honor, or else he shall be looked on as of a cowardly, mean
and dastardly spirit: If he be of a low condition and ordinary Fortune, and be
called to the exercise of mechanic Arts, that hinders him not from enduring a
thousand vexations, infinite labor and travel, as well of body as mind; he
must work night and day, must sweat blood and water, for to get that which is
necessary for the maintenance and suppor of his life; and what labor or
diligence soever he uses, he can scarcely procure himself that which is
necessary. It is not therefore without cause that Marc. Aurel. considering the
miserable condition of Human life, was accustomed to say, I thought in my self
whether there could be found any State, any Age, any Land, any Kingdom in which
there could be found a man, who durst vaunt, that he never tasted in his life
what was adverse Fortune; this would be such a monster, that both the living
and dead would have desire to see him: and then he concludes in the end, I have
found my reckoning, says he, that he that was yesterday rich, is to day poor;
he that was yesterday whole, is to day sick; he that laughed yesterday, to day
I saw cry; he that I saw yesterday in prosperity, I saw to day in adversity; he
that I saw yesterday amongst the living, I see him now amongst the dead.

CHAP. IV. Man's Misery more particularly considered, and first of the miserable
life of Mariners.
REturn we then to our Subject, deducing things in particular: and who is he
among men, who has betaken himself to any State or Trade, and way of living,
that has not at last complained, and been weary of it? And that this may more
evidently appear, consider we the principal states in particular. Begin we then
at them who swim on the water, and who gain their livings on the Sea; and in
how many perils are they night and day? What is their habitation, but a nasty
and stinking prison? the same is their diet. What are their garments, but as it
were a Sponge of water? They are always as vagabonds, and in continual exile,
without any rest; agitated by the Winds, Rain, Hail, Snow, at the mercy of
Pirates and Rovers, Rocks and Tempests, in continual hazard of being entombed in
the bellies of fishes: Wherefore Byas that Sage Grecian Philosopher knew not
whether he should reckon these sort of people amongst the Terrestrial creatures
or Aquatils, and doubted whether he ought to number them amongst the living or
the dead. And another called Anacharsis, said, That they were no farther
distant from the dead, than the breadth of two or three fingers, as much as the
timber contained in thickness upon which they swam.

CHAP. VII. Of the Misery attending the life of Husbandmen.
AND if the manner of living of Mariners seems terrible to us, what greater
sweetness think we to find in Agriculture and Rustical labor? which at first
look seems sweet, happy, quiet, simple and innocent; and that which many
Patriarchs and Prophets have chosen, as that in which there was the least of
fraud and cousenage, and that for which many Roman Emperors have forsaken
their Palaces, Theaters, and other Pompous and Resplendant Edifices, that they
may retire themselves into the fields, and cultivate their Lands with their
hands, and enjoy that innocent pleasure which they imagined might be found in a
Country life; but to them who would consider every thing more exactly, it will
appear that these Roses are not without their thorns and prickles. God having
driven man out of Paradise, he sent him as an exile or banished man, and
declared to him that the earth should be accursed for his sake, and that in the
sweat of his brows he should eat of the Fruits of it, for it should produce
thorns and thistles until he returned to the earth from whence he came. And
indeed who is it that has had fuller experience of this malediction than the
poor Husbandman, who many times after he has labored, sowed and dunged the
earth, and all the day long spent himself with pain and trouble, and endured
the parching heat of the Sun, and the rigorous severity of the cold; and
sometimes the biting of Serpents, and sweated and tired themselves all the year
round in expectation of the Fruits of their labor, and straight there comes
tempestuous and unseasonable weather, and cuts him off from all his longing
expectations, and he receives the unwelcome news of the death of his Cattle:
another, the Soldiers whilst he has been occupied in the fields, have
pillaged his house and carried away whatsoever he has there, so that when he
returns from his labor, instead of being comforted and receiving rest and
consolation, is met by his Wife and Children with lamentable relations of the
spoil of his substance: in short, the rustic occupation cannot be more fitly
compared than to a continual runningsore or ulcer, having a perpetual cause of
sorrow, sometimes of one thing, sometimes of another, sometimes of too much
Rain, some times of too much Drought.

CHAP. VIII. The Miserable life of Merchants considered.
BUT leaving the poor Husbandmen making their complaints: Let us seek farther
and inquire into the business of Merchants, which at first view seems exempt
and void of Miseries, promising some repose upon the account of the Riches
wherewith it abounds: which employment many wise men, as Solon, Thales,
Hippocrates and others have exercised, which is a great cause of the Amity and
Friendship which we have with Foreign Princes, transporting to one City what
abounds in another; but we cannot so well disguise the matter, but that at
first sight almost we may discern with how great disquiet the lives of
Merchants are accompanied; to how many dangers are they subject, and that
continually, as well by Sea as Land? without reckoning, that for the most part
of time they are as Fugitives and Vagabonds out of their Towns and Countries,
and are unlike in nothing to banished men, but only that their banishment is
voluntary, because that they would steal, ransack and ravish, burn and spoil
every thing, as well by Sea as Land, and all for that they might satisfy their
covetous desire of gain; and are contented to be deprived of the rest and
comfort that they might receive from their Wives and Children, Lands and
Possessions, and be every minute in hazard of their lives, and all for an
unsatiable avarice, which torments them, without taking notice that the first
Sanctuary of their Confraternity, is no other thing than to swear, forswear,
cheat, and deceive their Neighbor; so that scarce any one Trafficking, can
enrich himself but by fraud and cousenage: and they have a common Proverb
amongst them, That there needs but only turning their backs toward God for two
or three years, and a little straining their Consciences, for to enrich
themselves and make up their Fortunes: With which also we may reckon many evils
and vexations which belong thereunto; when they bring Merchandise from other
Countries, which are not any ways necessary to the life of man, hut only for
the amusement of women and children, as if our nature of it self was not enough
infirm and inclinable to dote on fopperies, but we must by such fooleries as
these whet and stir it up, whilst that there is neither Kingdom nor Province
which they cheat not by these novelties; and the worst is, having received an
impression of strange manners, they communicate them to us with their
Merchandise: and that is not all neither; for under pretense and color of
Traffic, they hold Intelligence and Correspondency with Foreign Princes,
discover our secrets, lend them Money, and in the end sell and betray their
Country; which has been experienced in France, to the great detriment and
desolation of many people: But letting pass thousands of their frauds which
they use, as Sophisticating and disguising their Drugs, though men's lives are
concerned in them, yet nevertheless their art depends so much upon it, that they
instruct their Factors and Servants in their Minority, and to them who can with
most cunning falsify, forswear, lie, aequivocate, counterfeit the Genuoise,
Florentine, Venetian, they will give greater wages. And the matter is brought
now to that pass, that you durst scarcely go out of a Shop, after having bid
money for a Commodity, but returning presently, you shall find it changed and
another offered to you as the same by these youngsters, who make it no matter
to engage their souls to the Devil, that they may enrich their Masters.

There is another sort also of Merchants, whom we have not as yet taken notice
of, who set forth their Shops with other men's estates, and borrow of one and
the other, and after that they have by such artifices as these amassed great
sums of money, turn Bankrupts, and fly far enough from their Creditors finding
them, where they live at their ease on that which they have cheated and
defrauded, leaving their Creditors oftentimes in such poverty, that there has
been them so desperate as to hang themselves, seeing that they are frustrated
of that which they thought as sure, as in their own possession: Which things
being seriously considered by the Athenians, they would not permit that
Merchants should dwell with other Citizens, but ordered them certain places
apart, where they exercised their Merchandise: There has been many Ancient
Commonwealths where the Merchants were not received into Dignities and public
Offices, nor admitted to the Council of the Citizens.

CHAP. IX. Of the Miserable life of the Soldier.
NEXT let us consider the Tragical Life of them which serve in the Wars, which
is so severe and rigorous, that even the brute beasts would have it in horror,
who lie close and hid in the night in their Holes and Caves: but the Soldier he
watches always, and lodges himself at the Sign of the Moon; indureth the Rain,
Wind, Hail, Snow, suffers hunger, heat and cold; and when he hears the
sorrowful sign of Battle, he must resolve with himself, either to receive
present Death, or else to Murder his Neighbor: and offers himself to be
killed for five-pence a day. But would thou know how piteous and deplorable
a Spectacle War is? Have you ever seen the Conflict of the Bear with the Lion,
or other like furious Beasts? what roaring, what rage, what cruelty they use in
tearing and dismembring one another? But how much greater cruelty is it when we
see Man against Man, transformed as it were into brute Beasts, exercising their
passionate humors against their fellow Creature? But not to take notice of an
infinite of evils which thereon depend. -- It is the poor people who have Built
so many Famous Towns and Cities, and who by their pains and labor have
enriched them, Fortified and maintained them; but they see them demolished,
wasted and spoiled; their Cattle driven away, their Corn burnt up and
destroyed, and many times their selves*murdered; always in fear and perpetual
anxiety. There Is no Family that lamenteth not: The Arts and ingenious Sciences
are neglected, and lie altogether disregarded; the poor people hindered, and are
forced to starve and perish with hunger, or fly and betake themselves to
unlawful ways, that they may sustain their poor and miserable lives. -- The
Virgins they are Violated, the Chaste Matrons are Forced and Ravished, the Laws
are Silenced, Humanity and Affability are Extinguished, Equity is Suppressed,
Religion is Contaminated, Holy Places Profaned, the Ancient Men carried away
Captive, and see oftentimes their Childrens brains dashed out before their
Faces, -- Women made Widows; Children, Orphans; and an infinite of evils and
Calamities too long to be recounted. The Kings, Princes and Monarchs envied for
the Subsidies which they Levy from the people; there is scarce any thing save
murmurings, hatred, cursings and imprecations. -- Strangers must be courted and
entertained into service; great sums of Money must be disbursed for the
carrying on the design, whether by Sea or Land. -- Must Fortify Bulwarks,
Ramparts, set up Tents, Train Machins, Cannons, Armed Chariots, clear Ditche,
set Watches and Sentinels, and the like exercises of War. But alas, Is it not
sufficient that Nature has created Man so miserable and abject a Creature, and
subject to so many evils, but that over and above, he must be plagued with the
miseries of War! a pest so strange and pernicious, that it comprehends and
surmounteth all other kind of evils: So cruel and contagious, that it flicteth
not only the wicked, but many times the harmless and innocent. Moreover, If
that our rage exerted it self only against the Stranger, or Barbarian, the
Victory over whom being gained, might bring some contentment to the Victor. --
But good God! Would we know what are the Glories and Trophies of the Wars
amongst Christian Princes? Their saftey and conservation is the ruin of their
Neighbors, their riches are the poverty and spoils of others, their joy is the
lamentation and tears of others; and for the most part, their Victories are not
so Fortunate, but that the Victor and Vanquished do lament both together: for
there was never any Battle so happy, but the Conqueror himself repented, if
touched with the least Humanity. Some Heathens there have been that have freely
confessed it, as the great Emperor Marc Aurelius, who after many glorious
Victories obtained of his Enemies; as he was received in Triumph in Rome,
resenting in his soul the injury which he had done his fellow Creatures, begun
to cry out as he was drawn in his Triumphant Chariot: What greater foolery or
vanity can a Roman Emperor be guilty of, because that he has forced many Towns
and Cities, altered and disturbed their Pacifick Government, destroyed and
raised their Forteresses and Castles, robbed the poor, and enriched the
Tyrants, made an infinite of Widows and Orphans, and for the amends of all this
waste and damage, we are received with Triumph and Magnificence? Many are dead,
many have labored, and one alone has the glory; To which he adjoyns, By the
immortal gods (says he) when they conducted me to Rome in such Triumph, and I
saw the poor Captives led in Chains, and heard the lamentation of the Widows, I
remembered the dead, and beheld an infinite Treasure ill gotten; if I rejoiced
in public, I wept and lamented in private; and began to exclaim against Rome,
saying, Wherefore do thou rejoice at others Misfortunes? Art thou more
Ancient than Babylon, Fairer than Hely, Richer than Carthage, Stronger than
Troy, more Peopled than Thebes, more surrounded with Ships than Corinth, more
Delicious than Tire, more Fortunate than Numance, which are all ruined and
decayed, though guarded with so many Virtuous? and do thou think to abide
continually, that art stuffed up with so many Vicious? ^elieve it as a thing
certain, that that glory which now is with thee, was formerly with them; and
the destruction which is now with them, will certainly be with thee also. --
Are we not afraid and ashamed, we who are brought up in a better School, and
Illuminated with the Divine Spirit, That this Pagan shall rise up in judgment
against us, who set at so low a rate man's lives, seeing that War already has
so many years disturbed Christendom, that you scarce find a Country in Europe
which is not tainted with Humane Slaughter?

Halaricus King of the Goths having Sacked Rome, (as recounteth Paul. Orosius)
made Proclamation, That there should be no violence or hurt done to them who
had betaken themselves for refuge to the Churches; but the matter is come to
that pass in our days, that there is no security in the Temples and Holy
Places, in which Virgins and Matrons have been Deflowred and Violated, and the
Sheep of Jesus Christ Slaughtered: so much have men exceeded the bounds of
Justice and Piety, who without favor or respect to Age, Sects, or Dignity,
Massacre all, and seem to fight and ruin Nature it self: But how come we so
inclinable and ready to destroy and ruin them, for whose conservation the Lord
has died? Why are we so prodigal of their lives and blood, for whom Jesus
Christ has shed his? Why have we not as muc^^ compassion of our Brethren and
Fellow Creatures, as the brute Beasts have one of another? who exert not their
rage, nor shew*forth their cruelty against them of their own kind; or if that
it happen that they fight and combat, it is then when they are pressed with
hunger, or for the defense of their young, and t^^^ defend themselves with
those arms which Nature has bestowed on them, without joining Thunders and
Machines invented by the Devils; there being nothing on earth which is not
quelled and vanquished by the force and fury of the Cannon: so that this
Invention is not only more dangerous and mischievous than all other Arms, but
is also more pernicious than venom or poison.

CHAP. X. The Miseries of Courtiers considered.
WE have before discoursed on the business of War, and the gain and advantage
which accrues to men thereby: Let us look now into the Palaces of Princes, and
see what is the Felicity of the Courtier: and to him who looks that way, can
there seem to be any greater happiness than to be favored by his Prince? have
always his ear ready? -- Be caressed, honored, and sought to by every one? but
you shall find them there who are crafty as the Fisherman, who as soon as ever
his Net is filled, up he draws, and is gone with all: and others who play at
put-out; some stay till they are full as Sponges, and in the end are squeezed
themselves out of all they have: Others do nothing else but invent Subsidies,
and seek means whereby they may fill the Treasury of their Kings, and enrich
themselves with the spoils of the poor people: and the Princes sometimes deal
with them as we do with our Hogs, letting them fat themselves, that we may eat
and devour them, and then preferring new ones in their places. Behold how these
poor miserable Courtiers sell their liberty to enrich themselves. They must
obey all commands, whether just or unjust; forcing themselves to laugh when
their Prince laugheth, and cry when he cries; to approve what he approves, to
condemn what he condemns; must subject his humor to every ones, alter and
wholly change his nature: be severe with those that are severe, sad with the
sorrowful, and transform himself almost into the nature of them whom he would
please: If the Prince be incontinent, he must be so too; if he be cruel, he
must take delight in effusion of blood: In short, he must sympathize with the
humor of the Prince whom he serves, though oftentimes a small offense wipes
out all the services which he has done in all his life before. Which they who
served the Emperor Adrian experienced, who after having been by him raised up
to the highest Estates and Dignities, by the means and reports of some
flatterers, were not only divested of that honor which was given them, but
were also declared his Capital Enemies: Which Plato having considered and
foresaw in the Court of the Athenians, left them their delicacies, yet
howsoever could not so well rule himself, but that he returned to Denis, Tyrant
of Sicily, who in the end sold him to Pirates; and worse fared it with Zeno the
Sage Ancient Philosopher, whom Phalaris for satisfaction of his Services, put
cruelly to Death: In the like manner did the King of Cyprus to Anacreon, and
the Noble Philosopher Anaxagoras, and Nero to his Master Seneca, and Alexander
to Calistenus, because he would not adore him, cutting off his feet, ears and
hands, and plucked out his eyes, leaving him to the mercy of an austere Prison,
where he miserably ended his days: and this has been oftentimes the reward of
many Learned men, who not willing to obey the unreasonable desires of their
Princes, lost their lives for the recompense of their Services and wholesome
Counsels. Not to take notice of many other evils which do ordinarily follow
them which haunt the Court, where the most part of things are carried on
corruptly; many at the Court seeing thee, take off their Hats to thee, who
would willingly take off thy Head; he bows his knee to thee, that would
willingly break his Leg that he might carry thee to thy Grave: Such a one is
there called Worshipful, who better deserves the name of Hangman: If you would
be an Adulterer at the Court, you shall not want associates; if you have
Quarrels with any one, you shall there find assistants for carrying them on; if
you would Lie, you shall find them that will swear to it; if you would Steal,
they will learn you a thousand subtilties and Inventions; if you would Game,
you shall there find more cheats than at Gaming-Ordinaries; if you would
Forswear and bear false witness, you shall be hired and paid for it: In short,
if you would give your self over to all sorts of wickedness and villainy, you
shall find there true Examples and Formularies: and this is the Life of a great
number of Courtiers, and this is that wherein they employ their youth, which is
not youth but a transitory death: as for old men, know you what they get,
Gray-heads, their Feet full of Gouty humors, their Mouth Tooth-less, their
Reins full of Gravel, their Hearts full of Pensiveness, and their Souls full of
Sin: In short, Of the Court there is little to write, but much to murmur and
complain of; but to him that desires more of that Subject, let him read the
Book of De Guevara Bishop of Mondovent, and Chronicler to the Emperor: And
Aeneas Silvius, who have composed Two most Excellent Treatises on that Matter;
where they have so perfectly set forth the Courtier, that they have cut off all
hope from them who will write after them, of adding any thing.

CHAP. XI. Of the Miseries attending the Life of Kings and Emperors.
BUT leave we the Courtiers with their restless and miserable Life: And let us
now consider the Life of Monarchs and Emperors, for whom it seems as it were
that Felicity was created: for if you would set before you every thing which
may make the Life of Man happy, joyful and content, you shall find, that
Fortune, amongst all other mortals, has been abundantly Munificent to them:
What makes man more admirable than plenty of Riches, Dignities, Kingdoms and
Empires? License and Power to do either good or evil, without Contradiction or
Correction? means to exercise Liberality, all forts of Voluptuosness and
Pleasures, as well of the mind as the body? all that may be wished for, or any
ways conducible to the delight of man, whether it be in respect of eating or
drinking? as also in their Magnificent Services, Utensils and Vestments, which
may tickle the Senses, and cajole Humane Concupiscence? all which are prepared
from the Cradle, that they might lead their lives with greater Content and
Felicity: Which Discourse if we will only consider externally, there is none but
would confess that they Triumph alone in that which all others languish after;
but if we would consider things a little more near, and weigh them in a just
balance, we shall find that those very things which we think degrees whereby to
reach Felicity, are the true instruments of Vice and Misery. What signifies
their costly Robes, their Honorable Attendance, and delicate Meats, when that
they are in continual fear of being poisoned, and betrayed by those that Serve
them? Have we not had experience of this in our time? Does not Platinus write
of a certain Pope who was poisoned by his Servants that presented him with
paper coming off from his stool: Others with the smoke of Flambo's and Torches.
'I is a thing horribly strange, that humane malice is so much increased; there
having been found them that have mingled poison with the Sacred Host, as did a
certain Sienois, who caused the death of many persons; and effected in this
manner the death of the Emperor Hen. 7th, as may be seen in Fuschius in the
1st Book of his Composition of Medicaments. Histories make mention of certain
Emperors, who durst not repose themselves at night on their Beds, till there
had been search made in all the parts of their Chambers for fear of being
Murdered whilst they slept: others would never permit that Barbers should ever
touch their Faces, lest that taking off their Hair, they should take away their
lives; and are moreover so fearful, that they dare not put the meat which they
have before them in their mouths, till essay be made whether it be poison. Were
it not better, says Julius Caesar, to dye once, than to live always in such a
continual fear? And what felicity can he have, though chief of all, having so
many under his protection, who must watch for them all, and hear all their
complaints, and the particular grievances of every one, endeavoring the safety
of every individual: inviting some by liberality to do well, others by fear and
terror. -- He must not be less solicitous for maintaining peace amongst his
people, than to defend them from the Incursions and Invasions of Foreigners.
Pogge Florentin has made a particular Treatise concerning the Infelicity of
Princes (he means wicked ones), where he says, That usually three sorts of
people are to them most agreeable and familiar: the flatterers hold the first
rank, who are the Capital enemies of truth, empoysoning their souls with so
pestiferous a venom, that it is contagious to all the world; their rashness
and foolishness they term wisdom and prudence; their cruelty, justice; their
luxury and lascivousness, gayeties and pastimes; if they are covetous, they
call them thrifty and frugal; if prodigal, free and liberal: so that there can
be no Vice with which their Prince is not infected, but they will disguise and
palliate it under pretense of some Virtue. The second are the inventors and
contrivers of new Subsidies, who rest never a night, but that in the morning
they bring some new project to the Prince, how he may draw Money from his poor
people; causing new Laws to be composed, abrogate, form, reform, diminish,
adjoyn, demand confiscations and proscriptions: so that their whole study is
nothing else but to increase the calamities and miseries of the Subject. There
are also another kind, who under pretense of honesty, and love of virtue and
goodness, have always their eyes on the lives and manners of others; espying
and watching their miscarriages, that they may give notice of them to their
Prince, that they may get their Estates, and build up their own Fortunes upon
the ruins of other men, and care not if they make them lose their lives, so
that they may go away with what they have. -- Wherefore the Ancients (as
writes Heroditas) if that their Kings and Princes were born away by injustice
in public administrations, they condemned them for Devils after their death:
assembling themselves with their Priests in their Temples, and publicly prayed
their gods that they would not receive them into happiness, recommending them
to the Infernal furies, that they might condignly torment them. Which has not
been only observed of the Ancients, but also of the Moderns of our time, who
have used such like imprecations, as recounteth Don Antonine de Guevara,
Chronicler to the Emperor, in his Epistle, where he says, That to the Viceroy
of Sicily, for vengeance of the Tyrannies that he exercised toward his
Subjects, they put after his death on his Sepulcher the Epitaph which follows:

Qui propter nos homines,
Et propter nostram salutem,
Descendit ad inferos.
Who for us men,
And for our salvation,
Descended into Hell.
These then are some of the miseries which accompany the Scepter; the Thorns
which they have for counterpoise of their Royal Dignity, which ought to be as a
Lamp to light all the world; but when it is obscured with Vice, it is more
signally reproachful than in any private person: for they sin only (as writes
Plato) through the fault that they commit, but these by the ill example which
they give. If it be hard then and difficult to be good (as writes Hesiod), yet
is it harder and more difficult for Kings to be so: For the great Honor and
Deliciousness which they see themselves possessors of, are as so many
inducements to evil. What was Saul before he was chosen King? how greatly was
his Virtue celebrated in holy Writ, whom the Lord himself had chosen? yet
nevertheless was it soon eclipsed. How admirable was the beginning of the Reign
of Solomon? but being plunged in Kingly delights, he gave himself wholly a prey
to women. Of twenty two Kings of Judah, there was but five or six found who
persisted in virtue and goodness. As for the Kings of Israel, if you would
search into their Lives, from Jeroboam Son of Nebat, even to the last, they
being nineteen in number, have all of them ill governed and managed the affairs
of their Kingdoms. If you consider the Estate of the Assyrians, Persians,
Greeks and Egyptians, they will present more bad than good. What have been the
Kings and Roman Emperors, who have governed one of the most flourishing
Empires of the world? have they not been devoted to all kind of vice and
cruelty? so that we cannot read their scandalous Lives in History without
horror and detestation. What was the State of the Roman Republic, before that
Sylla and Marius maimed it, before Cataline and Catullus troubled it, before
Julius Caesar and Pompey confounded it, before that Augustus and M. Anthony
destroyed it, before Tyberius and Caligula defamed it, before that Domitian and
Nero corrupted it? for although they enriched it with many Countries and
Kingdoms, yet nevertheless the Vices that they brought with them, are greater
than the Kingdoms that they Conquered: for the riches thereof are lost, but the
Vices continue. What remains are there now of the memory of Romulus, to whom
the Roman City owns its Foundation? of Numa Pompilus, who erected so high the
Capitol? of Ancus Marcius, who environed it with walls? of Brutus, who
delivered it from Tyrants? of Camillus, who drove out the French? Do they not
yield us the knowledge, how little felicity there is in Principality, which is
more subject to the assaults of Fortune, than any thing else in the world; for
oftentimes the thread of their lives come to break in the hour that they hope
most; and the infamy of their actions is set down in Historical Record: which
Kings and Princes, and others constituted in Authority, ought a thousand times
more to fear, than the slanderous tongue that can defame only the living; but
writing makes ignominious those that are dead: Which things being exactly
weighed by Dioclesian and other Princes, they abandoned their Scepters and
Empires, and betook themselves to solitary retirements; and were contented with
little, rather than luxuriously to enjoy the volatile pleasures of the world.

CHAP. XII. The Miseries incident to Popes and Prelates.
BUT leave we Kings and Emperors: And let us come to the Ecclesiastics,
beginning at their chiefs, which are the Popes and Prelates: And are they not
happy and fortunate in this world? Their Dignities being the Supreme of all,
and acquired without pain and labor; without Wars, Weapons, and effusion of
blood, and conserved without perils; they command and control all: Monarchs
reverence and honor them; being rich and impaled with Honor and Dignities.
But if you will consider the end of the Tragedy, you will be so far from
judging them happy, or envy their high Estates, that you would rather pity
them. For if they would well govern the Ship of St. Peter, according to the
Command of God, they must become as a public Vassal, whose life is exposed for
the common good: they watch alone whilst others sleep, being as it were the
Sentinels of the people, without relief or repose, all the minutes of their
lives being employed for the public safety, lest any of their Flock be seduced
and led away by Satan. -- For if it be so as St. Chrysostom observes,
(treating on the First of the Hebrews) that he that is regent of one Church
only, may hardly be saved, so great a charge has he: In what danger then shall
we say are the Popes, who are Guardians and Protectors of so many Churches?
which Pope Adrian (being a man of a good life) was accustomed to say with tears
to his private Friends, That amongst all the States in the world, there seemed
none to him more miserable than that of the Papacy and Prelacy: For although
the Throne where he sits be richly adorned, yet was it beset with Thorns and
Prickles: the costly Robes with which they were covered being so weighty, that
it wearied the shoulders of the most strong and vigorous; and as for the
Diaper'd Mitre which they wore on their heads, it was a real flame, which
burned to the inmost recesses of their souls. And certainly so great is their
charge, so great and strict is their account which they must render to the
Great Shepherd of the Fold, that it would make a man tremble with horror to
think of it: and yet notwithstanding all this, and the particular and positive
Prohibition of the Church to the contrary; yet how many are there that heap up
Parsonage upon Parsonage, and ioyn Living to Living, and are more solicitous
for the increase of their Benefices, than they are for the Souls of their
people? committing them to their Curates, and to them oftentimes that will be
hired the cheapest; who as they serve God by their Procurator, will if the Lord
prevent not, be damned in their own proper Persons. I know and am fully
persuaded that there are some, who as they are called to greater Offices and
Dignities in the Church than others, so likewise they have need of greater
Revenues than others to support them: I mean our Reverend and Sacred Hierarchy;
but with the others it is not so, the case being quite otherwise.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Miseries which attend them who Administer in Public
Affairs.
BUT leaving the Popes and Prelates: Let us come to consider the Lives of those
who Administer in Public Affairs, as the Judges and Statesmen; and we shall
find them too, as little free from misery as the others: and if there seem to
arise any pleasantness from the honor of the Employ, yet is it transitory and
inconstant; their actions also passing before the eyes of the vulgar, who
although they cannot perfectly understand the reasons of things, yet will they
censure and defame them whose doings are ahove their capacities: And therefore
Plato well compared them to a Monster with many heads, Fraudulent, Mutable and
Uncertain; prone to Anger, to Praise, Dispraise, Esteem, Vilify, without
Judgment or Discretion, Inflexible, Unlearned; and the Lives forsooth of them
who are the Rulers, must be conformable to their Opinion: for as they Judge in
public, so will they judge them in private; and not only concerning matters of
Importance, but of those which are of little consequence (and as Plutarch has
well taken notice of), they will always have something which will be the matter
of their contradiction. The Athenians murmured against Symonides, because he
spoke too loud. The Thebans accused Paniculus for his often spitting. The
Lacedaemonians noted their Lycurgus, because he went with his head stooping. The
Romans found great fault in Scipio, by reason of his snoring in sleeping. The
Vticenses defamed good Cato, because that in eating he chewed on both sides of
his mouth. Pompey seemed to them uncivil, because he scratched himself only
with one finger. The Carthaginians blamed Hannibal because he went unbuttoned.
Others reprehended Julius Caesar, because forsooth he wore his girdle
carelessly. Yet is all this but little in respect of what they have done to
other Famous Worthies; Banishing and putting them to Death for the good Service
which they have done them. The great Grecian Orator Demosthenes, who was so
Loyal a protector of the Athenian Republic, was Banished by them as a person
guilty of some notable crime. Socrates was likewise poisoned. Hannibal was so
ill treated by his own, that he was forced to wander up and down miserably
through the world. The Romans handled Camillus after the same manner. The
Grecians served far worse Lycurgus and Solon, one of whom was stoned, the other
having his eyes pulled out, was as a murderer drove into exile. And as we have
set before us the faults and miseries which arise from the peoples part, so
likewise must we put in counterpoize the errors and corruptions which abound in
wicked Judges; some of whom are overaw'd by fear, lest they should displease
some great Personage, and therefore violate Justice, and are as Pilate who
condemned Jesus Christ for the fear which he had of displeasing the Emperor
Tyberius: Other Magistrates are corrupted by affection, as Herod the Tetrarch,
who that he might foolishly comply with the love which he bore to the dancing
Girl, adjudged to death St. John the Baptist, notwithstanding his being
sensible of his Virtue and Innocence. Some are withheld from the doing of
Justice through hatred and particular animosities, some by gifts and presents,
as were the Sons of the Prophet and High Priest Samuel: They love gifts, says
the Prophet, and seek after retribution; they do not justice to the Orphans and
Fatherless, and hear not the cause of the Widow: and in another place, Cursed
be all ye who are led away by money and entreaties, by love or hatred, that
judge evil good, and good evil; making light darkness, and darkness light:
Cursed be ye who have respect not to the merit of the Cause, but the Person;
who have not regard to the equity of the matter brought before ye, but the
Gifts and Presents; who mind not what reason suggests, but only affection. You
are diligent in the causes of the rich, but put away them of the poor; you are
to them austere and rigorous, but to the rich affable and tractable; the poor
cries out, but no one regards; the rich speaks, and all the world
hearkeneth, extolling his words to the heavens: and yet this is not enough, for
when they are in the height of honor, they have another worm that gnaws them,
like the Mother of Zebedee, that their Children might be placed in their
honors and dignities, although they be never so ignorant and incapable. They
are exalted and enriched, says the Prophet Jeremiah, They are become fat, they
have had no regard to the Father less, and have not executed judgment for the
poor: Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? shall I not take
vengeance on such a people? you have condemned and put to death the innocent,
says St. James, you have lived in delights on the earth, taken your ease,
filled your hearts: And now says the Lord of Hosts, Weep and howl in you
misery: Your riches are corrupted, your costly and sumptuous garments are full
of moths, your gold and silver is everspread with rust, and the rust of it
shall witness against you, and shall eat your flesh as fire: For the tears of
the Widows have pierced even unto my Throne. These are the complaints which the
Prophets and Apostles poured out against mercenary Judges; these are the
censures which the Lord has thundered against them.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Miseries of Marriage.
LET us now consider the happy or unhappy state of Marriage: and it is most
certain, that if we would forge in our minds the Idea of an excellent and
accomplished Marriage on every side, as Plato has made in his Republic, and
St. Austin in his City of God; There Is nothing in this world which may equal
that state in delight: it being the consummation and real comfort of all our
hopes and desires, and the end of all our travel: That this is true, will more
certainly appear, if we consider every thing: their Fortunes as well prosperous
as adverse, are common; the bed common, the children common; and which is more,
there is so great commonality of body and union of souls, that they seem as two
transformed into one: and if the pleasure seems great to us, of conferring
our affairs and secrets to our Friends and those that are nearest us, how much
greater is the delight which we receive from the opening of our hearts to her,
who is linked to us in such bonds of love and duty, who is even as our selves,
and to whom we discover the most intimate recesses of our souls? What greater
testimony can there be of vehement and indissoluible amity, than to abandon and
forsake Father, Mother, and all Relations, and to be as it were an enemy to
ones self, for to follow a Husband whom she wholly cleaves to; and having all
other things in meprision, depends alone on him? If he be rich, she keeps his
wealth; if poor, she employeth all the artifice which nature has given her to
share with him in his adversity; if he be in prosperity, his felieity is
doubled in her, seeing her participate in it; if he be in adversity, he bears
but half of the evil; and moreover he is comforted and assisted by her; if he
would dwell retired and solitary at home, he has one that will bear him
company, who will comfort him and make him digest more easily the
incommodiousness of solitude; if he will go into the Country, she conducteth
him with her eye as far as the sight of it can reach; she desires and wishes
for him being abfent, sigheth and complains, lamenting as if he was always
near her; being returned, he is welcomed and received into her embraces: so
that it seems to speak the truth, that the Woman is a Celestial gift
bestowed upon man, as well for the refreshment and contentment of his Youth, as
the repose and solace of his old Age. Nature can give us but one Father and one
Mother, but Marriage represents many to us in our children, who reverence and
honor us, and have us more dear unto them than their own lives; being young
and little, they toy and prattle about us, and prepare us an infinite of
pleasures: so that they seem as it were amusements and play-things which nature
has given us to deceive and pass away part of our miserable life. Are we
besieged with old Age (a thing forced and common to all), they mitigate the
irksomness of it, close our eyes, and take care of our decent burial; they
being our flesh and blood, in seeing them we behold our selves; so that the
Father seeing his Children, sees himself as it were young again in them, who
immortalize him in procreating of others after him.

I would not for fear of being accused of inconstancy, despise that which I
have so much exalted; but because my Subject which treats of all States of
Life, requires that I should not excuse this no more than others: I shall
therefore in short, recapitulate that which I have read in many Authors, who
confess with me that there is much of sweetness and deliciousness in Marriage;
but if one did well consider and weigh in a just balance the great and
insupportable vexations which are found in it, it will appear to be replenished
no less with miseries than others. The Athenians, a people famous for their
wisdom and prudence, observing that the wives could not well accord with their
Husbands by reason of an infinite of strifes and dissentions which arose
ordinarily betwixt them, were constrained to establish in their Republic
certain Magistrates, whom they called Reconcilers of those that were Married,
the office and only business of whom was to reduce them to concord by all ways
and means that were possible. The Spartans in their Republic had likewise
ordered certain Magistrates, whose charge it was to correct the insolences of
women, repress their arrogance, and curb their audaciousness toward their
Husbands. The Romans would not ordain Magistrates (thinking with themselves
(perhaps) that men were not able to bridle the unbridled temerity of women) but
they would have their refuge to their gods, and to that purpose they
Consecrated a Temple to the goddess whom they called Viriplaca, where they in
the end made up their Domestic and private quarrels: But who can patiently
endure the charges of Marriage, the insolency and arrogance of women, the yoke
of so imperfect a Sex? Who can furnish and satisfy their lustful appetite,
their insatiable pomp? Says not the Ancient Proverb, That Women and Ships are
never so well fitted, but that one shall find some thing or other that lacks
mending. If thou take her being poor, she will be despised, and thy self less
esteemed; if rich and wealthy, thou make thy self her slave and servant; for
thinking to espouse an equal companion, thou shall betroth thy self to an
insupportable Mistress; if thou take her deformed, thou can not love her;
if comely and handsome, she will be as a bush at thy door to draw in company;
beauty is a Tower which is besieged and assaulted by all the world: and indeed
that thing is difficult to keep and preserve, of which every one pretends to
have the Key. Behold the hazard, says De la Perriere, of thy roundheads being
made forked, which indeed were a fearful Metamorphosis if it were visible and
apparent: The conclusion then is, That riches makes a woman proud; beauty,
suspicious; deformity, odious, etc. Wherefore Diponates having experimented the
torments of Marriage, said, That there was but two good days in it, one the
wedding day, and the other in the which the wife died; the one whereon they
were Married and in which they feasted and made good cheer; the other day
(which he said was good) was that on which the woman died, by the death of whom
the Husband was freed and delivered from servitude. History makes mention of a
Noble Roman, who the next morning after he had lain with his Wife, was very sad
and pensive; and being questioned by some of his Friends and familiars of the
reason of his sadness, seeing that his wife was comely, rich, and of a Noble
Extraction: showing them his foot, he says, Friends, my Shoe is new, neat,
and well made, but you know not what part of my foot it rings me in. Philemon
was wont to say, That a woman was a necessary evil: that there was nothing more
scarcer in the world than a good woman: Following the ancient Proverb, That a
good Woman, a good Mule, and a good Goat, were three wicked Beasts. Is any
thing, says Plutarch, nimbler than the tongue of an unbridled woman? any thing
more sharp than her outrages? more rash than her audaciousness? more execrable
than her malignity? more dangerous than her fury? and more dissimulative than
her tears? not to take notice of every thing which he reckons up, that is more
vexatious in a Conjugal state; where oftentimes one is forced to bring up
children of other men's getting; or if our own, we are in danger of their being
wicked, and they are oftentimes the dishonor and destruction of their Family,
and a reproach to all their Generation. The Emperor Augustus was fully sensible
of this, when he wished that his Wife had been Barren, and oftentimes called
her and his Niece two blood-suckers.

Marc. Aurelius knowing well the advantages of Marriage; as he was importuned
by some to marry his Daughter, Trouble me no more, faith he, with that matter,
for if all the consultations and advices of all the wise men in the World were
met in one, yet would they not suffice in the business of Marriage; and do you
think that I can do it alone, and that so suddenly. It is six years since,
says he, that Antonius Pius chose me for his Son-in-law, and gave me the
Empire for a Dowry with his Daughter; and yet notwithstanding both of us herein
deceived, I in taking his Daughter for my Wife, and he in taking me for his
Son. He was called Pius, by reason of his mildness and Clemency to every one;
but to me, says he, he has been hard and cruel, for in little flesh he has
given me a great many bones, which are as Gall and Aloes, which we find mingled
in the sweets of Marriage; which (to speak the truth) we cannot so well mask or
disguise with artificial words, but that we shall be constrained to confess,
that if we would put in counterpoize the Eclipses and misfortunes, (especially
in second Marriages) with the pleasures and delights thereof, that the one will
weigh down and far surpass the other; and indeed he that has Children by his
first wife, and has thoughts of a second Marriage, ought above all things to
consider (if so be his Children are beloved by him, and does desire that they
should so continue), that he now betroths himself to one whose ends and designs
run in a channel quite contrary to his; and should we suppose her to be a woman
of an even and pious temper, and one who in almost all things else would steer
by the rules of impartial justice and good nature, yet in this case would she
cry out with Julius Caesar, In aliis pietatem colam, and with Rebecca, That the
Son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my Son, how well soever outwardly
she may pretend to the contrary.

The end of the Second Book.
Heraclitus Christianus: OR, THE MAN OF SORROW. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of the misery arising to Men from the Diversity of Religions.
BUT leaving the miseries of Marriages, whether first or second, they being
enough to fill up whole Volumes: let us betake our selves to the consideration
of other matters, which help to complete man's misery; and as if it were not
enough that all other things were full of sorrow and anguish, and yielded us
nothing but thorns and thistles, yet we must add and create to our selves more
misery, and which indeed is the greatest and comparatively the only misery of
all, I mean, the dissentions and differences in Religion; for, seeing there is
but one Verity amongst so many variety of Opinions; and but one way to
Happiness, though people have fancied thousands: what do the poor ignorant sort
then think, what straits and fears are they in, when they behold wiser than
themselves crumbled into as many Sects as Men? nay every little pretender to
have gotten the keys of Heaven, and they therefore must come over to them if
ever they think to get in there: and upon that account it is we see them flock
(poor wretches, being willing to be happy) to these Mountebancks, who assure no
less, than to make them so, and indeed it would make a man think no less, by
their saucy communions which they pretend to have with the Divinity* making as
if they were as privy to the inmost Counsels of Heaven, and knew its decrees as
perfectly as their own dissimulations; and have power to censure, if not to
damn all that oppose them, though they tell them nothing but that which they
will at last certainly find true; that it is not words, nor looks that will make
a man a favorite of Heaven, but a virtuous and pious temper; neither can any
man judge of his Relation to God, but by his unwearied diligence in making
himself like him: and though men of corrupt minds and various interests cry up
Religion to be another matter, yet the foundation of God stands sure, and
will do, against all the restless underminings of its adversaries, who for the
vainglorious Epithetes of Guide and Leader, and the keeping up their
reputation amongst the seduced Rabble, will continue to lead them on
(notwithstanding the dictates of Piety and Reason) into remediless and endless
destruction; who were they really virtuous, and as much lovers of God as they
are of their own private humors, the mischiefs arising from the diversity of
Opinions, would be for the most part, if not altogether extinguished. How easy
were it for men, did they love themselves and others, in a real religious
respect, to center altogether in union and concord in this World, and in
endless repose and happiness in the next? But alas, men love to be miserable
and humoursom, and will prefer the Butterfly of their own private fancy, before
the quiet and preservation of the whole race of Mankind; would men spend half
that zeal and emulation in endeavors after Humility, and Charity, and contempt
of the World, as they do in opposing Government and Order: Would men be as
ready and as willing to gratify and meet Truth, as they are ready to cry out
they are so: Would they be as willing and as ready to hearken to its
suggestions, as they are to those of pride and conceitedness: we should then
have no cause to complain of Humame miseries upon this account, nor indeed upon
any other.

CHAP. II. Of diverse Plagues wherewith men have been afflicted.
THE City of Constantinople has been afflicted with so great and such an
unheard of Pestilence, that they that were struck with it, imagined that their
approaching deaths were not occasioned by the maladies they groaned under, but
that they were killed by others, and died furiously with these apprehensions.
In the time of Heraclee, there sprung up such a contagion in Italy, that in a
little time it swept away thousands; and the violence of the distemper was so
great, that many through impatiency in their sickness, precipitated themselves
into the River Tiber that they might obtain some refreshment in that extreme
heat which inwardly parched them. Thucidides a Greek Author writes, That in
his time the Air was so corrupted in Greece, that there died an infinite number
of people, without finding the least remedy. Moreover, he adds a thing more
strange, That those who returned to their former health, lost their memory and
knowledge so far, that they knew not one another: the Father not knowing his own
Son. Marc. Aurelius, an Author worthy of Credit, assures us, That in his time
there was such a Mortality in Italy, that the Historians who wrote of those
times, found less difficulty in counting the small number of those that were
alive, than in counting the great number of those that were dead. The Soldiers
of Vidius Cassius being in Selucia a City of Babylon, entered the great Temple
of Apollo, where they found a Cabinet, which having opened, and hoping therein
to find a great and inestimable Treasure; there came out such an infectious
air, that it corrupted first all Babylon, afterward Greece, and then Rome,
where it excited so many Pestilences, that it destroyed almost the third part
of the World. But leaving the Ancient Histories, let us descend to them which
have past under our own age, as it were; that we who are Christians may learn
by these great miseries and afflictions which God sends us, to know the great
weakness and infirmity of our Humane Condition. For when his anger is inflamed
against our sins, he makes us feel the smart of his Justice so rigorously, that
there is no kind of torment and vexation with which he does not afflict and
persecute his Creatures: What experience have we had of this in the Year 1528,
that when the Pest invaded the French Camp during the Siege of Naples, the
violence of the Distemper was so sharp and sudden, that one was sooner dead,
than thought to be so. And this unhappy Disease afflicted not only the Vulgar
(who were by it almost extinguished) but also the Nobility and Commanders, the
Lords of Lautrec, of Vaudemont, De la val, De Moleac, the Chateignary,
Grandmont, and other notable personages, the memory of whom cannot be rehearsed
without sorrow; which happened also to the English when they had taken Boulon.
In which City was engendered so great a Pestilence, that the living could scarce
bury the dead: so that the King of England could not find in his Country any
that would go and inhabit it: and was necessicated to carry them thither by
force, bound and Manicl'd, for the more they carried, the more they died: so
that the Cantons of the City were corrupted and putrified, through the
Exhalations and Vapors that proceeded from the dead Carcasses.

The Year after that the defunct French King espoused Queen Elenor, Germany was
assaulted with a new kind of Malady, of which the Infected died in less than 24
hours in a pestilential Sweat; and this distemper having taken its original
from the Ocean, spread in an instant throughout all Germany, as a sudden
conflagration which wastes and consumes every thing; for before there could
be found a Remedy, there died so many thousands of men, that many Provinces
became as Deserts and waste places through the putrefaction of the Air that
consumed all that did touch it; and that the Air was so much infected, that
their Garments were stained as it were with a red Cross. Joachim Scilerus
writes, That when the Pestilence so vehemently tormented England for so long
time, the vigor of the Poison was so strong, that not only Men were suffocated
and extinguished by it, but also ^he Birds left their Eggs, Nests, and little
ones; the Beasts their Dens and Caverns, the Serpents and Moles appeared in
Troops upon the Earth, leaving their proper abodes for vexation of the venomous
Vapor contained in the Earth, so that they were found dead under the Trees in
the Fields, with Pustules and Sores on their little members.

In the Year five hundred forty six, the last day of May, arose a Plague which
lasted nine Months, so great and terrible in Aix, a City of Province, that the
people died at their Victuals, so that the Churchyards were so full of dead
Corpses, that scarce any place was to be found for the interring of those that
were brought thither: the most part of the sick, the second day fell into a
Frenzy, and cast themselves into Wells: Others threw themselves out at
Windows; Others were troubled with a Flux of Blood at the Nose, which ran down
night and day like a Flood, and with this effusion of Blood they ended their
lives: nay, the matter came to that extremity and desolation, that the Women
with Child miscarried in four days time, they and the Children which they went
withal perishing, who were found afterward changed to a Violet and Azure
color, as if the blood was scattered through the whole Body. In short, the
affliction was so great, that the Father regarded not his Son, nor the Husband
his Wife, and with Gold and Silver in their hands oftentimes died through
hunger and thirst: and if it happened at any time that they had wherewith to
satisfy Nature, the Distemper was so severe and violent, that oftentimes they
were found dead with the meat in their mouths; and the fury of the Malady was
so enflamed, that scarcely could there be found a person free from it. And
indeed, people were by one single look infected, a thing wonderfully strange;
and their breath was so venomous, that thence immediately arose pestilential
Buboes. That which a Phisician has left us in writing, is a thing wonderful
and monstrous in Nature, who being deputed by them of the City for to help and
succor the sick, recounteth, That this Distemper was so cruel and malign, that
notwithstanding all Medicines, it ceased not to destroy all them that were
therewith surprised, having no other hope of easement in their pains than by
death; and were so opiniated and resolute in this, that as soon as they found
themselves therewith seized, they themselves put an end to their miserable
lives. Which the same Physician asserts, as having seen and experimented it in
many, especially in a Woman whom be called at a Window, in order that she might
take some Remedies, whom he perceived through the same, sowing up her self in
her Winding sheet: so that those that interred the infected, entering into her
house a little while after, found her dead, and stretched in the middle of it
with her Winding Sheet half sewed about her.

CHAP. III. Of the Miseries which Mankind have suffered by Famine and many
other Plagues.
WHEN our God is angry with us for our sins, he usually punishes us in this
World, with Sickness, Wars, Fires and Famines: all which, the last excepted, we
have to our sorrow, I wish I could say to our amendment, in these our days
experimented: and that so severely, that former Ages cannot parallel it; Let us
fear therefore, and not only so, but deprecate and avert Gods anger by our
Repentance, lest that we feel likewise the effects of those menaces which he by
his Prophets in Holy Writ has threatened us: When he says, That he will make
the Heavens as Brass, and the Earth as Iron: that is to say, barren and
fruitless. And for this cause, our Lord declaring to his Disciples the evils
that should come to pass; after having foretold, That Nation should rise up
against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: He immediately adds (as if one
depended on the other) That there should be great Pestilences and Famines
throughout the Regions of the Earth.

After Totillus had besieged Rome, they of the City fell into such scarcity and
want of Provision, that having nothing left them, they began to eat all sorts
of Animals: as Horses, Dogs, Cats, Rats and Mice, and all other manner of
Vermin, and in the end one another. A thing certainly most dreadful, that when
the Justice of God presses us, we are reduced to such necessity, that we spare
not our own Kind, nor the Mothers their own Children, which happened likewise
in the ruin of Jerusalem, as Eusebius notes in his Ecclesiastical History.
When Grand Scipio besieged the great City of Numantia, having taken from them
all means of provision, they were reduced to such Extremity, that they went
every day to chase after the Romans as the Hunter does after the prey, and eat
the Flesh, and drunk the Blood of those they took, as ordinarily then as at
other times a quarter of Veal or Mutton, and so spared none; for as soon as
ever he was taken, he was killed, skinned, pulled in pieces and sold in the
Shambles; so that he was worth more being dead, than living and Ransomed. There
is mentioned in the Holy Scripture a Famine which was in Samaria, in the time
of Elisha, which I think surpassed the precedent; for, there was so great a
dearth and scarcity of provision, that the head of an Ass was sold for four
score pieces of Silver; and the fourth part of the measure of Pigeons dung,
five pieces: and when all was consumed, the Mothers eat their own Children; so
that a poor Woman of that City formed her Complaint to the King of Israel
(seeing him on the Wall) That her Neighbor would not observe the Contract and
Agreement betwixt them; For we have, says she, dressed and eaten my Son, and
she hides and conceals hers. And when the King heard this which the Woman had
said, his heart had like to burst and split with sorrow, and he began to rent
his Garments, and cloathe himself with Sackcloth.

Josephus in 3d chapter 7 Book of the Wars of the Jews, relates a story like the
precedent, where he says, That there was a Rich and noble Woman when Jerusalem
was besieged, who had g^t together the rest of the great Riches which she had
in a certain house of the City, and lived frugally on that little which she had
left; but the Soldiers in a short time took all from her: so that as soon as
ever she had begged a morsel of meat for her sustenance, they devoured it: so
that in the end, she finding her self pressed with hunger, and bereaven of
Victuals and Counsel, she began to arm her self contrary to the Laws of Nature;
and looking on her little Child which she suckled, and held in her Arms, she
thus cried out, O unhappy Infant, and more unhappy Mother! what shall I now do
with thee? it is come to that pass, that if I should save thy life, thou will
remain in the perpetual servitude of the Romans: Come then my Child, be thou as
food unto thy Mother, and terror to the Soldiers who have left me nothing, and
to the Ages to come a memorial of horror and pity; and after she had spoke
these words, she killed it, and put it on the Spit and roasted it, eating the
half of it, and setting up the rest. Immediately after she had acted this
deplorable Tragedy, the Soldiers returned again to her, who smelling the savor
of the roasted meat, began to threaten her with death if she showed them not
where her food was; but she being resolute in her rage, and seeking nothing but
how she might accompany her Son in death, without being the least astonished,
said to them, Hold your peace, my Friends, I have not been unjust to you,
having saved you exactly your part: and ending these words, she produced the
Child on the Table; at which the Soldiers were so amazed and confounded, that
they stood as mute and vanquished: but she on the contrary with a furious and
undaunted look, said, What, my Friends, it is my Child, it is my doing, why feed
you not? I am glutted already: Are you more scrupulous than the Mother that
bore it? Disdain you the meats which I have used before you, and will now show
you by eating the same, the great distress you have drove me to? But they who
could not suffer or endure so piteous a spectacle, fled away and left her alone
with the other part of her Child, which was in short all the remainder which
they had left her. See the History of Josephus, the very place; which I have
the rather transcribed Verbatim, for what was contained in it. But because
there are some who are never moved by reading Histories and ancient Examples,
unless they experience it in their own Age, and see it with their Eyes, and
touch it as it were with their Fingers: I would therefore now show that our God
spares us no more than the Ancients, when he is angry with us for our sins, as
shall be amply manifest by the History which follows, written by Paradin, a man
of great Industry, in that which concerns History; in his Treatise of the
memorable matters of our time, where he says, That the Kingdom of France was
so greatly afficted, that it was thought that all was reduced to the last end
and period: For during the space of five whole years, which began in 1528, the
Season was in such indisposition and disorder, that the four Elements left
their natural courses, and showed themselves confused, perverted and
preposterous: the Spring beginning in Autumn; that in the Spring; the Summer in
Winter, the Winter in Summer; but above all, the Summer had the dominion over
the rest, and quite against its nature; so that in the heart of Winter (viz.)
in December, January and February, when the Earth expected its repose and
ripening by Frost and cold, there was so great and vehement a heat, and the
Earth was so scorched, that in five Years there happened no Frost that dured
above a day or two: that which did, was so weak, that it could not freeze the
water; and by this great and unaccustomed heat, was maintained and nourished
the Vermin of the Earth: as Snails and Caterpillars, and them in such quantity,
that the young and tender bud of the stalk coming out into the blade, it was
immediately gnawed and devoured by them, which was the cause that the Corn
which should have multiplied and spread, withered and shrunk up, all into one
and the same stalk, and produced only one or two blades, and they steril and
blasted; in so much, that when they came to thrash it, they found only their
seed, and scarce that. And this Famine dured five years without ceasing, which
was the cause that an Horse-load of Corn was sold in Lions, Foret, Auvergne,
Burgundy, Savoy and Dauphin, and many other Countries, at the value of 14, 16,
17, 18 French Pistols: and the poor people who lived competently enough before,
were then constrained to abandon and forske their dwellings, going up and down
begging their bread for Gods sake. And the number of the poor Mendicants
increased after such a manner, that it was dreadful to behold them in such
crowds, and imposible to relieve them, there issuing out also of their bodies
great stinks and infectious vapors, occasioned by their filling their bellies
with all sorts of Herbs good and bad, wholesome and venomous; so that there were
no Herbs in the Gardens, even to the very roots, which they devoured not; and
when there were no more left to take thence, they had recourse to those that
grew by the highway side; boiling great Chaldrons of Maloes and Thistles,
mingling therewith sometimes a little Bran, and so stuffed themselves like
Swine, making bread of Acorns and any corrupted root; so much were they
constrained by eagerness of Appetite: and remembering that the Hogs loved
Fern-roots, they gathered of them to make bread to feed themselves, defrauding
the Swine of their proper food: whereupon ensued an infinite number of
Maladies: the richest of the people fell into great fear and trouble seeing
such troops of men and women, young and old trembling in the streets, having
their skins swollen as if they had the Dropsy; others being half dead, on the
ground drew their last gasps, and with such people were the stables and
outhouses filled; others were so faint, that they could scarce tell their
necessities, and had hardly breath left in their bodies, staggering up and down
more like ghosts and shadows than men: After all this, that which was more to
be lamented than the rest, was to see great number of poor Mothers surrounded
with many little Children, who for want of Victuals cried and howled to them,
and that after such a manner, that it would have melted the most obdurate heart
into pity. The aforesaid Paradin writes, that he himself has seen in Burgundy
a poor woman who by a great purchase and importunity had obtained a morsel of
bread, the which was suddenly snatched away by her little child which she
suckled in her arms; who did eat the hard and dry bread with so strong an
appetite, that it surpassed imagination; and the Mother being willing to gather
up the little crumbs which fell from the mouth of the child, the said infant
set it self as it were to debate and cry out of despite to see its Mother
gather up the remainders, being afraid of not having enough. The same Author
recites moreover, that in a Village thereabout were found two women, who
finding nothing to assuage their hunger, fed on a venomous Herb called Scyla,
much like the Leek, knowing not the property or virtue of the said Herb, they
therewith poisoned themselves, so that their feet and hands became as green as
Lizards, and there ran such a venom from under their Nails, that
notwithstanding all the help that was administered to them, they died suddenly:
So much were all creatures animated and busied in the execution of Gods anger:
finally, this misery and calamity of the Season, being of long and intolerable
duration, the Country people whose livings lay all in Lands, were constrained
to have recourse to rich Merchants (some of whom had amassed great quantities
of Corn) that they might buy of them as long as their money would last; and
when that was gone, the poor people were fain to Mortgage their Lands and
Livings, some selling them outright, at a very low Rate, that they might have
wherewithal to satisfy their hunger.

CHAP. IV. Of diverse other Distempers and Phrensies wherewith men have been
affected.
PLiny, and very many other Physicians, Greeks and Arabians, have written, That
since two thousand years, there has been discovered more than three hundred
several sorts of Diseases to which men are subject: Not to reckon those new
ones which appear every day on the stage, I leave the common ones, wherewith
many times those that are troubled, are enforced to suffer the burning and
Cauterizing of their bodies, Sawing their bones, the taking out of splinters,
raking in their sculls, drawing out the very bowels out of their bodies, as if
they were to be Anatomized alive. Others have been tied up to so strict a diet,
and small quantity of food, by reason of the violence of their Distempers, that
they have been constrained to drink their own Urine to quench their thirst, and
eat their Plasters, that they might moderate their hunger. Others there have
been, who have persuaded themselves that they have swallowed Serpents, the cure
of whom could not be any ways wrought, but by putting in Serpents into the
Basin in which they vomited, making them believe that they came out of their
bodies, as Alexander Tralianus relates of a Damosel whom he healed after this
manner, who thought she had swallowed a Serpent in her sleep. Others have been
so strangely affected, that they thought themselves transformed into irrational
Creatures, as he of whom Galen makes mention, who thought himself really
transformed into a Cock, and conversed ordinarily with them of that kind, he
imagined himself to be one; and when he heard them crow, he began to
counterfeit and crow with them; and as they clapped their wings against their
breasts, so did he his arms. Others have thought themselves to be transformed
into Wolves, and ceased not all night to run up and down on Mountains and
Deserts, following the howlings and other gestures of the Wolves: The Greeks
call this kind of Malady Lycanthropia, which may seem fabulous to them who are
not acquainted with ancient Histories, or the holy Writings, wherein we have
the Story of Nebuchadnezzar, who was changed into the shape of an Ox for the
space of seven years. Others, says Galen, have thought themselves transformed
into earthen Vessels, and stirred not out of the Fields lest they should be
dashed in pieces. Others have been full three years without sleeping or closing
their eye lids, as it happened to good Maecenas. Some have been so distempered,
that they have knocked their own heads against the wall, as did a Learned man
of our time called Ange Politian. Some have been constrained in their sickness
to eat Serpents, as do those who are infected with the Leprosy. From the
bodies of others have issued out great number of Serpents, as did out of the
body of the Philosopher Pherecides. Some there have been in whose bodies have
been engendered such great quantity of Lice, that they have been eaten up with
them.

CHAP. VI. Of Poisons.
NEither are these evils enough, but Man has invented of himself more, to set
forward his own death as well as his Neighbors; as if those which Nature had
prepared for him, and were born with him, were not sufficient to crush him.
Such are the poisons which men make nowadays, and that so dexterously, that
there can be no preservation from them, unless men should shun all Society, and
betake themselves to Deserts with the brute Beasts, in the company of whom he
is more certain of safety than with men. Some Ancient Authors, as Orpheus,
Orus, Medesius, Heliodorus, and Aratus, have taught the Composition of five
hundred sorts of Poisons; and some others have since augmented the number; but
if they were now alive, they would be reputed as dull and insiped; so much is
humane malice increased. In former Ages they made use of certain Drugs which
are of their nature so venomous, that a Grain weight of them would kill a man
immediately, and was sold at an hundred Crowns an Ounce; so great a Tribute
paid he that used them: yet nevertheless they had this consideration, that they
made him Swear who bought them, that he should not use it in their Province,
nor against their Friends and Allies, but only against strangers: but men are
grown in these our times so ingeniously industrious to do evil, that they have
found out ways to poison men by scent only, as did a certain Sienois to his
Corrival, presenting him with a Nosegay of Flowers, the smell of which struck
him dead immediately. Another* a Florentine Cavalier, having taken off his
Headpiece that he might refresh himself, was espied by his Enemy, who rubbed
on the inside of it so deadly a poison, that as soon as ever he put it on his
head, made him give up the Ghost immediately. They spare not in Italy so much
as their Flamboies and Torches, but corrupt and sophisticate them, and that so
artificially, that the smoke of them poysoneth; so that you dare scarcely light
your Torches for your conduct in the night, if you have suspicion of an Enemy.
It Is a small matter to apply poison to meats and drinks, as in time past: for
men have found out means nowadays to poison the very Horssaddles, Boots and
Spurs; and that which seems more pernicious, is, that some have lost their
lives by shaking hands with them, whose pretense was Friendship. Some have been
poisoned by Letters and Papers sent them, which when opened, there flies out
such a poisonous vapor, which rising upward, penetrateth to the brain: And so
artificial are they in these Compositions, that the venom kills according to
the intention of the Murderer: for if he pleases, the party shall live three
months, six month, a year, or longer; so that death shall answer the time of
the design of the Composition: Moreover, if they please they can so order the
effects of the poison, that it shall hurt but one member at a time. An
experiment not much unlike to this we now speak of, has been found too true,
to their cost, who drank of a poisoned Fountain on this-side the Rhine, which
caused their teeth to fall out of their heads who tasted of it: but men's malice
has extended farther yet, and has given greater testimony of their execrable
wickedness, in that they have not stuck to mingle poison with the blessed
Sacrament.

CHAP. VI. Of the great Calamities which Men have suffered by the overflowing
of Water.
WHAT remains more for the perfecting of Man's Misery, seeing the very
Elements rise up against him, and are as Witnesses and Ministers of Gods
vengeance for his sins? what is there more necessary to Humane Life than Water,
seeing that neither Man, Beast, nor Herb can subsist without it? (not to reckon
the Ornament and Beauty which it brings to the Universe) it is the most
ancient and mightiest of all the Elements, as says Pliny and Isidore. It
ruineth and lays low the Mountains, predominateth and governs the Earth;
puts out the Fire, turns it self into Vapors, surpasses the Region of the
Air, from whence afterward it descends to engender and produce all things on
the Earth: and yet nevertheless, what Chastisements has Antiquity experimented
from the vigor of this Element, when the Deluge of Water overflowed and covered
the whole Earth? when the Veins of the Heavens were opened, that the Waters
surpassed the highest Mountain by fifteen Cubits, as Moses describes it in
Genesis? How many times has Egypt been drowned by the overflowing of the River
Nilus? How many thousands of men have lost their Lives and been buried in the
bellies of Fishes? How sensible has Greece been of the fury of the Waters, when
the greatest part of Thessaly was drowned, all the Inhabitants expecting
nothing but the entire ruin of mankind by the violence of this Element? What
mischief received the Romans by the overflowing of the River Tiber, which
swelled after such a manner, that the waters mounted above the highest Towers
and Pinacles of the City? the Bridges were broken down: their Gold, Silver,
Corn, Wine, Cloth, Silk, Stuff, Oiles, Wool and other Goods, to the value (as
was computed) of two or three Millions of Gold, lost and consumed; above 3000
Men, Women and Children were destroyed by the violence of the Flood. Jasper
Contaren writes in his Book of the four Elements, That in our time, Valence a
City of Spain, lacked but little of being drowned with all its Inhabitants by
the violence, and before unknown eruption of Water: so that if it had not been
speedily succored with Ramparts, they had all undoubtedly perished.

CHAP. VII. Of Fire, and the Mischiefs which Men have received by it.
WHAT is there more admirable in Nature than the Fire, by the benefit of which
all our Meats are seasoned, the Lives of many preserved, the Metals Calcinated
and made flexible, the Iron softened, macerated and vanquished; the Stones which
we use in the structure of our Buildings, baked and hardened in the belly of
the Earth by its aid and assistance? and yet nevertheless, how many famous
Cities have been burned and reduced to Ashes? the most ancient Testimony of
this is in the Sacred Writings concerning Sodom and Gomorrah, upon which the
Lord rained Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. The last Conflagration and
Universal ruin of the Earth must be executed by the fury of this Element, as is
written by the Prophets and Apostles. In the time of Lucius Marcus, and Sextus
Julius, Consuls, there broke out such a great Flame from two Mountains, that
all the Cities, Towns and Hills thereabouts, with their Inhabitants, were
consumed by the violence thereof, which issued out with unconceivable
vehemence. I could likewise make mention of Thunders and Lightnings, and how
many Noble Personages have been destroyed by this sudden and violent Death, as
Joroastus, King of the Bactrians, Captain in the Thehan Wars. Ajax, after the
destruction of Troy. Anastasius, Emperor, after the 27th Year of his Empire.
Carius also, and many other Kings and Emperors, who have come to an untimely
end by this kind of Death.

CHAP. VIII. Of Earth quakes.
THE Air is so requisite for the Conservation of Man, that there is no Creature
can live without it; and yet nevertheless it is so pernicious to mankind when it
is corrupt and putrified, that the most part of the forementioned Pestilences
take their first original from it. The Earth, which is the most sweet and
tractable of the Elements, being the common Mother and receptacle of us all;
being born, it nourishes and sustains us, and at last takes us into her
entrails as in our Couch, and keeps us until our God shall call us to appear
before his Tribunal: and yet nevertheless she produces all the venom and
poison with which our poor life is continually assaulted; and sometimes by her
quakings and agitations, many Towns have been demolished, and many thousands of
Men swallowed down into the depth of her Abyss. In the Reign of Mithridates the
Earth began to be moved with such an impetuosity, that there was not only many
Cities ruined, but there was above a hundred thousand people swallowed up in
it. In the Reign of Constantine, there was such a great number of Cities and
their Citizens ruined in Asia, that with great difficulty could the Historians
number them: In the time of Isocrates and Plato, the Earth so opened in Europe,
that two great Cities with all their Inhabitants, were in an instant overthrown
and ruined. There was never since the memory of man read of a more terrible
Earthquake than that which was in the time of Tiberius Caesar, by which in the
space of a night, twelve great Cities were swallowed with all their
Inhabitants: amongst which was Rollonia, Ephesus, Caesarea, Philadelphia, and
many others. Marc. Varro, one of the most worthy Authors that have written in
Latin, says, That in Spain there was a great Town situated in a Sandy-placc,
which was so hollowed and dug by the Connies* that finally the Inhabitants
for sook it for fear of being buried in its Ruins. The same Author writes, That
there was a City in France, which was rendered uninhabitable by reason of the
great number of Frogs: The same happened in Africa, by means of the
Grasshoppers. Theophrastus makes mention of a certain Province made desolate by
innumerable companies of Worms. Pliny makes mention of a Province that borders
on the limits of Ethiopia, where the Ants and Scorpions and other Vermin, have
drove into exile the Men that inhabited there. The Flies drove away the
Magarenses in Greece. The Wasps chased the Ephesians. Anthenor writes, That
great swarms of Bees drove from a City its Inhabitants, and made their Nests in
their Houses. What testimony have we here of Humane frailty? what a School and
Discipline to learn Man to know himself in? what evidence of the Power of God
over his Creatures, whose Judgments are so terrible and affrightful, that as
soon as ever Man begins to glory and raise himself against his God, he
knows well how to depress him: and therefore he sends him Heralds and
forerunners of his Anger, War, Famine and Plagues: But moreover, there is no
Element nor living Creature though never so contemptible, which seeks and
works not his ruin, and who are not as Ministers and Executors of the Divine
Justice, as is manifest not only by the testimony of Ethnicks, but also by the
Sacred Writings, when the Frogs and Grasshoppers abandoned their proper
Elements, to ascend up even to the Chamber and Bed of obstinate Pharaoh.

We have hitherto deduced a strange Philosophy of the misery of Man; for if he
were of Iron or Steel, or harder than a Diamond, it would be notwithstanding
miraculously wonderful how he could last the one half part of his lifetime
without being shattered and broken, seeing the pain, anguish, travel and
Martyrdom which he must every minute endure: and yet notwithstanding the many
misfortunes wherewith he is continually afflicted, he humbles not himself
under the Almighty hand of his Creator; which thing being not well understood
by Plato and Pliny, seeing this great Gulf of misery in which Man is plunged
from his Birth even to his Sepulcher, they have called Nature, Step-dame and
cruel Extortioner, who causes Man to pay so much for his Excellency and
Dignity; But both the one and the other have under the name of Nature
unreasonably accused God of cruelty and injustice: for all these evils, and
this Sea of Misery wherewith Man is overwhelmed, comes not from the hatred of
God, but from the malice and corruption of Man; for he equalling himself with
his Maker, declined and fell from his pristine Nobility, defacing in himself
the Image of God, and imprinting instead thereof the Image of the Devil.
Arrogance and Audaciousness is the cause of all the wounds and maledictions
which he receives: for, had it not been for Ambition and desire of being
great, we had been as the Angels; we had remained and been now what we shall be
in the Resurrection, crowned with Glory and Honor. Neither is this all, but
what is worse, and far more vexatious, are the distempers of our minds, they
being far more dangerous than those of our bodies: for they of the Body show
themselves by signs, either by the bad color of the Visage, or by the unequal
beating of the Pulse, or some other intemperature, or signs of disorder; and
having known them, the Remedy is presently sought after: but he that is
distempered in mind, is rendered incapable of judging of his own Condition; so
that the Patient knowing not his distemper, seeks not after Remedies; and yet
is there also a greater abuse of them which have their bodies afflicted, for we
call them by the names of the Diseases wherewith they are tormented: as them
who are troubled with Frenzy, we call them Phrenetick; them who are vexed
with the Palsy, we call them Paralytick; them who labor under Joint-evil, we
call Gouty. But we do quite otherwise in the maladies of the Mind: for those
who are angry and Choleric, burning in their Passion, murdering one another,
we call them Valiant and Magnanimous, and look on them as persons having their
Honor in great Recommendation; Those who seduce Women and Maidens, immersing
themselves in Lust and lasciviousness, we term them Lovers, and persons endued
with Kindness, Hmility and sweetness of Disposition: Those who are Ambitious,
and do endeavor by all illicite means to make themselves Great and Honorable,
we call them Noble, Gallant, and Persons of* Noble and active Spirits: Them who
are Covetous, and make themselves Rich in a short time, circumventing their
Neighbors by a thousand Subtilties and Inventions, we call them thristy and
good Husbands, who manage well their affairs: and so of all the others, calling
those things Virtues, which are really Vices; making those things worthy of
Honor which merit naught else but blame and misprision. And now if we would in
order pursue the infinite Maldies with which the minds of Men are for the most
part at this day tormented, as we have done those of the Body; What Eloquence,
what Words are there that can reach it? What Majestic Sentences can comprehend
it? seeing the Age wherein we are, is for the most part involved in so many
Vices, that it seems, as if all the Vices of the precedent Age were met
together in this.

CHAP. IX. Of Avarice.
LET us begin at Avarice; and whoever saw any thing more rooted and settled in
the Earth than this is now? for what are all the Cities, Republics, Provinces
and Kingdoms of this World (if we could rightly consider them) but mere Shops
and Magazines of Covetousness? This is the time of which the Prophet Isaiah
speaks, The Earth is full of Gold and Silver, there is no end of their
Treasure: they join House to House, Field to Field, as if they alone would
inhabit in the middle of the Earth. And out of this pestilent root of
Covetousness, proceeds (as from a Fountain) all the Evils which are disgorged
on the whole World: from thence is the original of the most part of the War and
effusion of Blood wherewith the Earth is bathed: From thence spring Murders,
Treasons, Sacriledges, Pillages, Usuries, Frauds and Perjuries, corruption of
Judges, and perversion of Witnesses: from thence proceed Poisonings,
prolongation of Lawsuits, with which the Christian Courts are replenished: and
yet nevertheless, this Vice is so frequent and common amongst men, that you can
scarcely tell any state or condition that is not therewith tainted. Judas and
Simon Magus planted the first Root, which has since so well increased, that
there is scarcely a Province in Christendom which can be said to be free from
it. In the time when the Gospel was first planted in the World, and its
Professors were harassed by a continued and uninterrupted persecution, then
were the indigencies of poor distressed people, taken care of, and provided
for; but now in these last and worst times wherein men have fallen into
formality and hypocrisy, their wants are so far from being relieved, that they
only serve for Objects whereon to exercise our scorn. I am almost ashamed to
relate a monstrous History of the Avarice of an Italian Prelate, named Angelot,
who was exalted to the dignity of a Cardinal, and was so poisoned with this
unhappy venom of Covetousness, that when the Groom had at night given Oats to
his Horses, he came down by a false Door into the Stable alone without light,
and being there, robbed his own Horses of their Provender, and continued so to
do, and that for so Iong a time, that at last the Groom perceiving them grow
leaner and leaner, hid himself one night in the Stable, where catching his
Gentleman in the very act, gave him so many blows with the Fork, that he was
fain to be carried into his Chamber, receiving this Treatment as a worthy
recompense of his base and greedy Humor; which story would seem fabulous, had
not Phil^lphe, and Jovian Pontanus, in his Book concerning Liberality, and many
other Authors, made mention of it. These are the fruits, this the profit of
these unhappy Riches, which are gotten and obtained with so much pain and
labor, and kept and preserved with so much Solicitude, and parted from with
such groans and Exclamations. The ancient Romans, when their Republic was
governed by poor people, had all the prosperity desirable; but through great
Riches and Victories obtained by their Predecessors, as the destruction of
Corinth, Achaia, Antioch, France, Italy, Egypt and Spain, their Empire began to
decline: for their Victories, Prey and Plunder, were the corruption of their
Manners and of their ancient Government and Discipline, and the occasion and
original of cruel War: for they which could not be brought down and subdued by
force of Arms, were vanquished and overcome by softness and luxury, so that
their Riches have taken vengeance on themselves: and it has been with them as
it is with Cloth which corrupts and engenders Moths; and as it is with Corn,
which breeds worms that eat it; which the great King Solomon experimented in
himself, when he had amassed such great Treasures, that his Riches surpassed
the Glory of all other Kings of the Earth: and who has made a full experiment
of the delights which arise from the enjoyment of the goods of this world, and
leaves us his advice and judgment, as follows: I made me, says he, great
Works, I builded me Houses, I planted me Gardens and Orchards, I set Trees of
all sorts of fruit; I made me Cisterns of Water for the refreshing the Forests
of green Trees: I got me Men servants and Maidservants, great herds of Cattle,
greater than any before me in Jerusalem; I amassed great quantity of Gold and
Silver; I got me Men-singers, and Women-singers, and all the delights of the
sons of Men; I made my self great, yea, greater than was any yet before me, I
denied my self nothing, and had all which my heart desired: and after all this,
I began to contemplate all the works which my hands had made, and all the
labor which I had taken under the Sun: and I considered and saw all that I had
made, and behold it was nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit, and that
there is nothing lasting under the Sun. Let us hearken a little to the Prophet
Baruch, whom we shall find to be a more sharper reprover of those who are so
affectionately given over to their delights and pleasures: Where, says he, are
the Princes, and such as rule and have dominion over the Beasts on the Earth?
they that have their pastime with the Fowls of the air, and they that hoarded
up Silver and Gold wherein men trust, and made no end of there gettings? are
they not vanished and gone down to the grave, and others come up in their
steads? they have seen light and dwelt on the Earth, but the way of knowledge
have they not known.

But let us leave these Idolaters and their treasures, with Aristophanes
Patroclus, Virgil's Pigmalion, the Polymnestor of Propertius and Horace's
Midas, with the cruel Rich Man mentioned in the Gospel: seeing that the spirits
of men (which are of a Celestial and Divine Nature) have nothing to do with
Gold and Silver, which is nothing else, but but a real excrement of the Earth.

CHAP. X. Of Envy.
BUT let us come to another Vice, which they call Envy; which (as Aristippus
assures us) is of as near kin to the precedent, as is the Mother to the
Daughter, for one begets the other: How many are there afflicted with this
Evil? the season is come that the World is nothing else than a Family of
envious Persons: it is the most ancient and eldest of all, yet nevertheless is
it the most practiced in our age, and seems to return to its first insancy.
The Ancients have had experience of it in Adam and the Serpent, in Abel and
Cain, in Jacob and Esau, in Joseph and his Brethren, in Saul and David, in
Ahcitophel and Cush, who persecuted one another: not so much for the Riches
which either of them possessed, but for Envy and Hatred which they had one
toward another: but this is little in respect of what we experience every day
amongst Christians: for our age is come to that pass, that if there could be
one found amongst us who had the beauty of Absalom, the strength of Sampson,
the wisdom of Solomon, the Agility of Azael, the Riches of Cresus, the
Liberality of Alexander, the Vigor and dexterity of Hector, the Eloquence of
Homer, the Fortune of Augustus, the Justice of Trajan, the zeal of Cicero: yet
let him be certain of this, that the number of his Virtues shall not be greater
than the number of those who will envy him; and this cursed Vice seizes not
only on them who are of a moderate Fortune, but those who are of a higher
Condition; for when they are on the top of the Wheel, and think themselves in a
peaceable possession of the favors of Kings and Princes: some one or other
through Envy gives them a cast down from their height and greatness. Wherefore
the Sage Emperor Marc. Aurelius was wont to say, That Envy was such a venomous
Serpent, that there was scarce ever any Mortal but has been bitten with her
teeth, and scratched with her claws, and trampled on with her feet, and
poisoned with her venom. I have read, says he, many Books, and conversed with
many knowing men, in order to the finding out a Remedy against Envy; And after
much debate and consultation, I have found no other means of privation, than
for one to banish himself from a prosperous Fortune; the reason is, because
that we are the sons of Envy, born with Envy; and he that shall leave the most
goods behind him, shall leave the most of Envy. And for this cause the Ancients
counseled the Rich, that they should not dwell near the Poor, and the Poor
that they should not dwell near the Rich; for from the Riches of the Rich
sprung the seed of the envy of the Poor.

Consider we now the Ambition and Pride which reigns this day amongst us:
for, whoever saw such excessive Pomp in all Estates as we see now? so that we
may well call our time the age of Satin, Plush, Purple and Silk, wherein is
such care and solicitude taken to adorn and set out this Carcass: and in the
mean time think not upon, nor make no reckoning of our poor Soul, which is full
of ulcerous sores and wounds, and torn and shattered with a great number of
sins and enormities with which it is beset and surrounded: but let us have a
care, that after all these things there comes not that upon us which the
Prophet threatened the Women of Jerusalem with; who after having reproached them
of their proud Gate and D^marche, their impudent and lascivious Looks, the
motions of their Eyes, their Head-dressings, their Chains, Bracelets, Rings,
Girdles, Pendants, and other their gaudy pompous Dress: He tells them
plainly, That instead of Perfumes and sweet Smells, they should have stinking
and noisome Odours; instead of Girdles, Cords; instead of Curled locks,
baldness; and that their comliest men should pass on the edg of the Sword, and
the strong and valiant should be slain in the War.

CHAP. XI. Of Love.
ADD we now to the preceding Miseries, another Malady and affliction of spirit,
which they call Love; but so contagious, that all States in the World are
therewith tainted: an Evil so pestilentially venomous, that it mingles and
plunges promiscuously with all Ages, like the Devils who are in all the
Elements, without sparing any person either old or young, wise or foolish, weak
or strong: and the great danger of this Distemper is, that they become in the
end frantic and transported from their Senses, if they are not well looked to,
and diverted. Wherefore Paul Aeginetain, in his third Book, prescribes to them
who are affected with this Malady, the same Physic and Rules of living as he
does to Fools, Idiots and Madmen: which Empiricles (following the counsel of
Plato) ordained also: who defined two sorts of madness: one of which he calls
Erotakin, which signifies in English, Love; I have seen some person anatomized
who died of this Distemper, having their entrails shrivled and shrunk up, their
Hearts burned, their Liver smoaked, their Lungs, roasted, all the ventricles of
their Brain damnified: their spirits exhausted and dried up by the excessive
heat which they endured when the Fever of Love had surprised them; and as the
cure of this Malady is hard and difficult, so also is the original doubtful
amongst them who have writ of it. The Thysicians say, That this fury of Love
which rages so vehemently, and which so entangleth the whole World, proceeds
from the correspondent quality of the blood, and that the affection engenders
this Distemper. The Astrologers would be a party, and have also put their
Sickle in the Harvest of Lovers, saying, That Love proceeds when two meet,
having the same ascendant, or when they conform in some Constellation: for then
they are constrained to love each other. Philosophers say, That when we come to
cast our eyes on the thing which we desire, suddenly the spirits which are
engendered of the subtilest and most perfect part of the Blood, part from the
heart of the thing which we love, and suddenly ascend and mount up to the Eyes,
and afterward burst themselves into invisible vapors, and so enter into our
Eyes, which are disposed to represent them just as a spot on a Looking-glass,
which being looked on, from thence penetrateth even to the heart, and by little
and little dilateth it self every where: the miserable Lover being drawn by
these new spirits which desire continually to join themselves and approach to
their principal and natural abode, and is constrained to grieve and lament his
lost liherty. Others after a thousand conceits and guesses, were fain to give
over their Enquiries, as not being able to find out the source and original of
so furious a Malady; saying, That Love was I know not what, and came I know not
how: was enflamed after an unknown manner: A thing perhaps not untrue. For
whosoever shall consider the gestures, countenances, and behavior of these
poor passionate wretches, he will confess that he never saw a more strange
Metamorphosis, nor a more ridiculous Spectacle. Sometimes you shall see them
altogether melted into Tears, making the air sound with their shreekings and
lamentations, murmurings and imprecations. Sometimes you see them frozen,
benumbed, pale, despairing, sliding up and down like-Larves and Phantasms.
Other times, when they have received some comfortable Speeches, good and
favorable Looks, and kind reception from them whom they love; you shall see
them gay, jocund and airy, in so much that you will think they are changed into
some other shape: Sometimes they love private and solitary places, that they
may talk alone, reason, design and dispute with themselves. Sometimes you will see
them pass five or six times in a day through the same street, to espy and watch
that they may have a favorable look from them whom they Love: and the poor
Varlets have their Skins broken with running, their Arms wearied and aching with
serubbing, rubbing, dressing and adorning their Master, and if there happens to
them any sparks of Jealousy, then they mount up to the highest degree of fury,
and are then in inexpressible peril and danger, there being no sensible part
about them which is not ulcerated, becoming rash, bold and ventursom; there
being no Art, Invention or Machine which they produce not; becoming
Lycanthropes, and running up and down in the Nights like howling Wolves: and
although the Malady be of it self fantastical enough, yet according to the
humor which it meets withal, it works strange and wonderful effects: For if
the Lover be poor, there shall be no office of Humanity which he employeth not,
even to the sacrificing and cutting himself in pieces, if need be: If he be
Rich, His Purse (as say the Greeks) is tied and fastened by a hair; If he be
Covetous, he becomes immediately prodigal and open-handed, which moved Plautus
to say, That Love must be the first Invention of the Wallet. If the Person
affected be a man of Letters, and has any measure of Spirit and Fancy, you
shall then see him feigning a Sea of Tears, a Lake of Miseries, redoubling his
Cries, accusing the Heavens, anatomizing his Heart, freezing the Summer,
burning the Winter, adoring, idolizing, admiring, feigning of Paradises,
forging of Hells, making himself a Sisiphus, Tantalus, Titius; and if it happen
that he would extol that which he loves, then her Hair is nothing but fine
Gold, her Eyelids, Arches and Vaults of Ivory; her Eyes stars, her Looks
Lightning, her Mouth Coral, her Teeth Eastern Pearls, her Breath Balm, Amber
and Musk, her Throat Snow, her Breasts Alabaster; and generally, all the rest
of her Body is nothing else but the prodigality and Treasure of Heaven and of
Nature, who had reserved her as a choice Vessel, wherein she would pour in
those eminent and incomparable perfections, for which he loves and adores her;
and thus this cruel Malady of Love torments those who are therewith affected:
and yet nevertheless there is so many People, Nations and Provinces troubled
with these furious assaults, that were there an Army to be raised of all the
Lovers which are in the World, there is no Emperor, Monarch or Potentate
whatsoever, but would tremble at the sight of so many fools in a Company; and
this Pestilent evil (by custom and habit) has gained and prevailed so far on
mankind, that there cannot be found any Remedy, although that many Greek and
Arabian Physicians have employed all their most excellent Medicines to deliver
them from their Martyrdom. Samocrasius, Cigidus and Ovid, have written many
great Tomes and Volumes of the remedy of Love, in which they show Remedies for
others; but the mischief on it is, that they could not find any for themselves,
they all three dying, pursued and destroyed, not for the hurt or ill which they
did at Rome, but for the Amors which they invented at Capua. The Emperor
Marc. Aurelius, knowing that Faustina his wife was enamoured with a Fencer, and
that so ardently, that she was ready to die and pine away for the love of him,
assembled together a great number of Learned men in all Faculties and Sciences
for to advise with, and counsel him how he might put out that Fire wherewith
his Wife was enflamed; but after many consultations, some Empericks counseled
him, That he should cause him on whom she so much doted, to be killed, and the
blood of him to be secretly given her to drink, which was speedily executed.
This indeed was a great Remedy, for her affection was cooled; but yet was it
not of so great efficacy (as writes Capitolin) but that Anton. Com. whom they
begot afterward, was bloody and cruel, and more resembled the Fencer than his
Father, and conversed ordinarily with those sort of people, and delighted more
in their, than in any other Company: so that the passion of the Mother seemed
to be translated into the Child. But yet is all this but little in respect of
what I have read in many Histories: the matter coming to that pass, that when
this foolish Frenzy seizes and takes hold on our spirits, it makes us
brutish and senseless, as is evidently and manifestly shown in a Youth of one of
the richest Families in Athens, and well known by all the Inhabitants of that
City; who having oftentimes contemplated an excellently well-made Statue of
Marble, which was fixed in a public place in Athens: He was so exceedingly
taken with it, that he could not part from the sight of it, as if it had been
endued with Life and motion; and was so greatly affected, that when he was out
of the sight of it, he cried and lamented with so great passion that 'twould
have moved the most hardened to pity; and in the end this passion gained so
much upon him, that he was reduced to such extremity, that he desired the
Senate to sell it him at what prize they pleased, that he might carry it about
with him, and have it at home, and all places wherever he went: Which they
would not agree to, because it was belonging to the Public, and that their
power extended not so far. At which being much troubled, He caused a Crown of
Gold, with other rich and sumptuous Ornaments to be made, and went toward the
Statue, putting the Crown on its Head, and adorning it with rich Vestments: and
then began to contemplate and adore it with such obstinacy and
pertinaciousness, that the Vulgar being scandalized with his foolish and
ridiculous Amors, he was at last deterred by the Magistrates from coming near
it. At which he was so grievously cast down and troubled, that at the end he
killed himself. For the operations of this passion is so great, that since it
has made entrance into the hearts of Men, it walks incurable through all
the vital and sensible parts of the Body: and being in full possession of us,
causes an infinite of trouble and sorrow, and that so sharply, that it many
times puts an end and period to our lives: which the great Philosopher A
Pollonice Thiance confirmed to the King of Babylon, who with importunate
Entreaties desired him that he would tell him which was the most cruel and
painful of all Torments which could be invented by all the secrets of
Philosophy, that therewith he might punish and chastise a young Gentleman whom
he had found in Bed with a beautiful Damosel whom he affected; The greatest
Torment, says the Philosopher, which can be invented for to punish him, is, To
let let him live; For you shall see, says he, That by little and little the
vehement Fire of Love will gain so much on him (as it has already begun, that
the pain which he will endure will be so great, that it cannot be conceived and
imagined; for he shall find such Emotions within his Soul, that he shall burn
and consume in this Flame, as does the Fly in a Candle: so that his life shall
be no more life, but a real Death, and that more cruel than if passed through
the hands of all the Tyrants and Hangmen in the World.

I have been somewhat tedious in treating on this Subject; but indeed the thing
requires it, being the entire Corruption and ruin of the most part of the Youth
of our Age: for when they have never so little wetted their feet in the
delights of this World, it is the hardest thing in nature for them to retrieve
themselves; Youth, Liberty, and Riches, being the greatest Pimps and Bawds in
the World.

CHAP. XII. Of the Misery of Old Age.
AND then when we should sing a Requiem from all our Troubles, comes upon us
Old Age with its infirmities, and then our sorrows are renewed and grown young
again, and we must then pay a rigorous Interest for all the faults and excesses
of our Youth; the Heart, that is miserable, sad and heavy by the gloomy
reflections of a misspent Life; the Spirit, that is languishing; the Breath,
that is stinking and loathsome; the Face so furrowed and wrinkled, and generally
the Body so curbed, that it seems to be some lump of Lead or Iron, rather
than a Man; the Nose has lost its faculty of smelling, the Eyes of seeing, the
Hair falls off, the Teeth falls out of the Head by stink and rottenness: in
short, he resembles some dry Anatomy, or the picture of death, rather than the
Man he was; and this is only of the Body; but alas, the mind of aged people is
as much out of order, or rather more; for they are then continually disposed to
anger, hard to be appeased, light of belief, and long a forgetting injuries;
praise the Ancients and former Ages, and despise and contemn the Modern, are
sad, languishing, malancholy, covetous, hard and suspicious: In brief, it is the
retreat and rendezvous of all the Vices and incommodiousness of our nature;
which being considered by the Emperor Augustus, he was wont to say, That when
men had lived fifty years, they ought to dye, and desire to be killed, for
as much as to that time they felt none of the grievances of old Age, which is
unavoidably past over in sorrow and misery, and in insupportable pains and
sickness, death of Children, loss of Goods, Law Suits, paying Debts, and an
infinite of other troubles, which it were better with eyes shut, wait for at
the Sepulcher, than to experiment them with open eyes in this frail and
sorrowful life. Which the Prophet apprehending, cried out unto the Lord,
saying, Withdraw not thy self from me when I am in years, nor for sake me when
assailed with old age.

CHAP. XIII. Of DEATH.
AFTER Man has groaned and sighed under the insupportable burden, and heavy
weight of his miserable Life; he is forced to live always in the fearful
expectation of the division of the Soul and Body, which is for the most part
accompanied with inconceivable and inexpresible torments: Which St. Austin
considering and bewailing, breaks out into this querulous Lamentation: O Lord
God, says he, how miserable a creature is man, who after having sustained so
many vexatious evils, yet must endure the terrible assaults of Death; which
oftentimes comes so violently, that it burns and tares all in pieces, and has
more ways to destroy us, than can be related, or thought of. Sometimes
oppressing by Fevers, sometimes by Hunger, sometimes by Thirst, sometimes by
Fire, another by Water; one with the Sword, another with Poison, some are torn
in pieces with the teeth of Wild-Beasts, some are made meat for Fishes, some of
Worms; and yet nevertheless man knows not the end; and when he thinks
himself permanent and lasting, he falls and perishes. What an affrightful
Spectacle is it to behold a man on his bed of Sickness, pressed with the
agonies of Death? what trembling! what horror! what alteration and change in
all the bands of Nature! the Feet become cold and benumbed, the Face waxes
pale, the Eyes hollow, the Lips and Mouth draw themselves inward, the Pulse
diminishes, the Tongue grows black, the Teeth shut, and press one against
another, the Breath fails, and a cold sweat appears over the whole Body;
which is a certain sign and demonstration that Nature is overcome and vanished:
And when it comes to the sorrowful departure of the Soul from its ancient
Habitation, all the vessels and ligaments of Nature are broken; then the
Hellish Host, as so many Vultures, surround the Sick-mans Bed; for there is no
invention or subtilty which they practice not, to induce us to settle our
thoughts and hopes on our good Living, on false Opinions, and destructive
Presumptions, or else setting before us such an infinite number of our sins and
offenses (with such horrid aggravations), that the consideration of them might
drive us into rage and despair, and blasphemous defiances of Heavenly Justice:
then is the hour, then is the moment, then is the point, in the which the Devil
with all the powers of darkness attacks us, and that so much the more fiercely,
because he well knows then we shall escape out of his claws, or for ever remain
in them: And so now when our bodies lie inanimate and senseless, and an eternal
night of darkness sits brooding on our Forheads: Where are all our officious
friends and attendants, who in our lifetime did so honor and reverence us, and
were so passionately disirous of our company? -- Do they not all forsake us,
and abhor and detest the sight of us? do they not all leave us to the cold
earth, to be made a prey to Worms and Serpents? and thus it is with all men;
thus fares it with his Holiness, his Majesty, his Grace, his Excellency, his
Honor, and his Worship too: they all receive the same usage with the poorest
mortal that grovels on the earth: And what will it then signify to them that
they have been esteemed for their Birth, for their Riches, for their Beauty, or
for their Wit, or for any thing else, save Virtue and true Goodness? For as for
all other things, they are passed away as a Shadow, and as an Arrow drawn from
a Bow, and as the smoke scattered with the wind, or as a Ship that passes ever
the waves of the water, which when it is gone, the trace thereof cannot be
found: or as a Bird which flies through the air, there being no sign left of
her way which she has made, but the light air being beaten with the stroke of
her wings, and parted with the violent noise and motion of them, she flies
through, and there is afterward no mark to be found where she went.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Final Judgment.
HOW comparatively happy would Men be, could they here end their Misery? might
their Souls moulder away as their Bodies, and both one and the other return
into their Primitive nothing? But alas! they both must unite and appear before
the Great Tribunal of an Allknowing and Impartial Judge, Who will render to
every man according to his works, and they that have done good shall go into
everlasting life, and those that have done evil into everlasting destruction.
What horror and confusion will this Day strike into the heart of the most
resolute sinner? When the Sun shall be turned into dark ness, and the Moon into
blood: when the Stars shall no more produce their light, nor be any more seen
shining in the Heavens: when the Elements shall melt with servent heat, and the
Earth be burnt up with fire. And as it was in the time of Noah, so shall it be
then, for there shall be eating and drinking, Marrying and giving in Marriage,
and immediately the Trumpet shall sound to call them to Judgment; then shall
the People and Nations of the earth, howl and lament, and hide themselves in
the holes and caves of the earth, and shall call upon the mountains to fall
down upon them, and cover them from the face of him that sits on the Throne.
Sound the Trumpet, and cry a loud (says the Prophet Joel) and let all the
Inhabitants of the earth tremble, for the day of the Lord draws nigh, the day
of darkness and obscurity, the day of clouds and trouble, when all the
Inhabitants of the earth shall be burned, the fire shall devour before his
face, and flames of fire shall follow him. And after this Execution of the
Divine Justice, the dead which are in their Graves, having heard his voice,
shall arise and come forth. The bones and other parts shall seek for their
joints in order to their union with the body; all those that the Beasts and
Birds have devoured; all them whom the Sea has swallowed; all that is
evaporated into Air; all that the fire has consumed, shall be reduced into its
essence and pristine state; all the blood which the Robbers, and Pirates,
Murderers, Tyrants, and Mercenary Judges have unjustly shed, shall be then
found without the diminution of a drop of it. And if it was a cruel spectacle
to behold the Beasts leave the earth (which is their proper Element), following
the anger of God, and entering into the Ark with Noah, and as it were imploring
his aid and succor; how much more dreadful will it be to them who have lived
unjustly, to appear before the great and dreadful Judge? When the Books shall be
opened, that is to say, the Sins and Enormities of our poor ulcerated
Conscience, shall be at that time manifested and laid open to the sight of Men,
Angels, and Devils. If the Vail of the Temple was rent, if the Earth trembled,
and the Sun was darkened and obscured for the injury which was done to our
Savior on the Cross, although he had in nothing offended; with what
countenance can poor sinners look, who have offended and blasphemed so many
times? If that the Vision of an Angel is so terrible to us, that we cannot
endure it, as testified St. John, who was not able to behold such splendour and
brightness, but fell to the earth for dead. And the Children of Israel had such
terror, that they earnestly desired Moses to speak unto them himself, saying,
We will hearken to thee when thou speak; but we cannot bear this voice
coming from Heaven, which causes us even to give up the ghost (although that
the Angel spoke favorable): How will the poor sinner then endure the Voice and
Splendour of the Majesty of God, being in his Throne of Glory? When he shall
say, as speaks the Prophet Isaiah, Now is the hour wherein I will avenge my
self on my enemies, and my anger shall be accomplished; and they shall know
that I am the Lord, who have so often admonished, wooed, beseeched and
entreated them; for I will stand before them as a Bear, who is robbed of her
whelps: I have been still for a long time and kept silent, but now I will cry
out as she that is in labor, I will scatter, I will swallow up all together: I
will reduce the Mountains to Deserts: I will cause the Herbs to wither, the
Rivers and Floods to be dried up, and hinder the course of the Spring, and turn
the darkness into light. I have called them, but they have refused; I have
stretched out my hand, but they have not regarded: They have rejected my
counsel, and would not hearken to my reproof; therefore will I laugh at their
calamity, and mock when their fear comes; and when their torment and anguish
draws near to them, they shall call, but I will not answer; they shall seek
me, but I will not be found; and if the Heavens are unclean in his sight, and
if he has found fault in his Angels, what will he find in us, who are houses
of clay, and whose foundations are in the dust?

How shall we be able to stand before him, whose countenance is as Lightning,
and before whom there goes a consuming Fire? and yet stand we must, and give
an account of all the various circumstances and cases of our Life; then we must
come to a reckoning concerning the good we have received, and the good which we
our selves have done; then it is that we must give an account of the improvement
which we have made of all those wholesome instructions, and Fatherly
chastisements wherewith we have been corrected; then will it be exacted of us
how we have entertained those good motions and suggestions which the Divine
Spirit has put into our hearts; how we have withstood the suggestions of
Satan, and the temptations of the world, and our own carnal inclinations; then
shall we be examined how we have employed all the faculties of our souls, and
members of our bodies; then shall we give an account not only of all our wicked
words and actions, but also of our impure thoughts and filthy imaginations,
which shall all be laid open to the sight of Men and Angels; then must we give
an account of all filthy and nasty speeches, profane writings, and unsavory
jests, nay of every idle word; so strict a trial shall we then be put upon.

Lastly, Of sins of omission and commission, of the time which we have spent in
Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Revelling, Dancing, Gaming, in haunting Taverns,
Play Houses and Brothel-houses: then must we give an account of the spending of
our Youth, and of our seasoning of those tender years with Profaneness and
Debauchery, and offering the first and best of our time unto the Devil, which
should be dedicated unto God and his Service.

Then must we give an account of the employing of our Manhood, and whether
that has been grounded and settled in Piety and Devotion, or passed over in
resolved enjoyments of sensual and worldly Pleasures.

Then also must we give an account of our demeanor in old Age, and whether or
no, then drawing nearer the time of our departure out of this world, we have
quietly and willingly resigned up our souls into the hands of our God, as unto
a Faithful Creator.

The world has not been unfitly resembled to a Stage or Theater, on which every
man has his different part as an Actor, the one that of a Prince, the other
that of a Beggar: now he that acts his part well, though it be but that of a
Peasant, gains as much applause, and deserves as great commendation, as that
other that acts that of the most dignified Personage.

So that then it is that every man must give an account of his behavior in his
particular Calling.

It Is the hour wherein the Mariner must give an account of the advantages which
has been put into his hand, of his being extraordinary Religious, by going down
into great waters, and seeing the wonders of the Lord in the deep.

It Is the hour in which the Husbandman must give an account of the Pious
improvements which he might have made, by a continual Observation of Gods
blessings springing out of the Earth.

It Is the hour wherein the Merchant and Tradesman must give an account of the
justness and honesty of their dealings.

It Is the hour wherein the Soldier must give an account of his Cruelty and
Rapine, of his insulting*violence over the conquered Enemy.

It Is the hour wherein the griping Usurer must himself pay the rigorous
Interest of his unjust acquisitions.

It Is the hour wherein the Physician must give an account of his willingness
and readiness to administer his Skill to the poor and mean, as well as to the
rich.

It Is the hour wherein the Lawyer must give an account of his Pleading the
Cause of the Fatherless and Widow, of his obstructing of Justice by an Eloquent
and Mercenary Tongue.

It Is the hour wherein the Divine must give an account of his Flock and of his
Doctrine, and whether he himself has lived as he Taught others.

It Is the hour wherein the Judges and Magistrates must themselves be judged
concerning their partial administration of Justice.

It Is the hour wherein Kings and Princes shall give an account to the King of
Kings, how they have Governed themselves and their Subjects, and of their
Sacrificing men's lives to an ambitious desire of enlarging their Territories.

It Is the hour wherein many poor and despicable Beggars shall be preferred to
Kings and Princes.

It Is the hour, says St. Hierome, wherein many dumb persons shall be made more
happy than the Fluent and Eloquent, and many Plow-men and Shepherds shall be
preferred before Philosophers.

It Is the hour wherein both Soul and Body shall in a blessed union pass over
into endless and unspeakable Felicity, into the sweet and glorious fellowship
of Saints and Angels, or else for ever be cast down into the horrid Regions of
woe and misery; and seeing that one of these will be the end and certain portion
of every man, Let us not be solicitous for Honors, for Beauty, for Riches, for
Strength, or the rest of those things which we falsely call Good, seeing that
they will not deliver in the day of wrath and eternal vengeance, nor at
leastwise mitigate our then ensuing wretchedness; but let us be contented with
a mean and low Fortune, to be despised and rejected of men, to be esteemed as
Unlearned, Deformed, Ignoble, as Fools or Madmen, rather than Worldly-wise, or
Learned. Let us consider now what Opinion we shall have then of those things
which are at present the Object of our so passionate wishes and endeavors, and
whether or no the acquisition and past enjoyments of them will make amends for
the sorrow and anguish which we shall then go to be for ever possessors of; let
us therefore now whilst we have time and space, break off our sins by
Repentance, and not rest a moment longer in our present security and
indifferency; but let us by our sighs and tears penetrate Heaven, and put out
the flames of Hell; and by our earnest and constant entreaties, move the Judge
to pity and compassion, to a willingness to pardon and pass by all our former
miscarriages, and to give us again such a measure of his Grace, that by it, and
the concurrence of our own earnest and uninterrupted resolutions, we may so
live now as to avoid the great and only misery; in comparison of which, all
humane miseries by me related, are easy and supportable: the misery which I
mean, is the effect of the Sentence made mention of by St. Matthew, Go ye
cursed into everlasting burnings, to remain for ever with the Devil and his
Angels.

FINIS.

