A PROPOSAL To Make Good the Coin of this Kingdom, Without Diminishing the
Species thereof.
WHEREAS the great Difficulty that appears in bringing this Matter to bare,
proceeds from the Consideration, That the Calling in all the Clipped Money,
(being so general) will occasion a great stop in Trade, the Market thereby not
able to be Supplied, besides the many further Inconveniences that may Naturally
arise: YET the Necessity for our Moneys to be Regulated is such, That it were
much more Eligible to be subject to the hazard of such mischiefs, than not put
a stop to that growing evil: Both which to prevent, it is Humbly Proposed as an
expedient to render it easy and practicable, as follows:

THAT a FUND (being made for a Lottery of a Million, or more, if thought fit,
to be Advanced by such Persons only as shall purchase their Interest by
bringing in Plate; forthwith to be Coined before the Clipped Money be called in)
would certainly Answer in lieu of Ballion, to give an immediate Supply to the
Market, keep our Money circulating, and remove all Objections.

THE Quantity of the Superfluous Plate in this Kingdom is so considerable.
which, together with the Useless Plate in Public Houses, being Prohibited,
it is not to be doubted, but One Million, at least, would be soon Advanced.

ESPECIALLY when we consider the Price that Plate now bares, and how desirous
the People are of coming into another Lottery, as plainly appears by the Prizes
and Blanks in the Million Adventure, when once past the hopes of another
Lottery, this Sessions Advanced from Six Years Purchase to Seven and an half.

THE Way and Method for all such Persons as intend to be Proprietors in this
Adventure is Proposed, that they carry their Plate to the Mint, there to
receive Tickets according to the Value, Accounting so many Ounces as shall be
proportioned to a Ticket, and for every odd Sum that shall happen over and
above, to receive a Note for the same, Payable at a certain time, after Coming.

BUT if if it shall be thought fit to have such Plate brought into the Bank, on
the same Conditions as above, thence to be Transmitted to the Mint, to return
in Coin; the Mint will be greatly eased, considering the Work upon their hands,
and the Money made much more Defusive.

FOR the Bank thereby being enabled to answer the Defficiency of the Mint, all
Persons of Worth and Credit, that shall bring their Money to be Coined, will
readily take Notes upon the Bank, for what shall fall short, which being for
their ease; and having a free Credit, the Million in Specie will remain in the
Bank to supply the Poorer sort of People, that can afford no Credit, having no
more than bare Subsistence.

SO consequently, The Bank will supply the Mint, and the Mint be able to supply
the Bank before Occasion: Therefore no possibility of Stoppage in Commerce, or
want of Current Money.

BY these means, not only the present Occasion is answered, by Facilitating the
Coynage of all the Clipped Money, but a Million in Specie is created more;
without which, it is directly linking a Million from what was in the Nation
before, which is conceived can hardly be spared at this time.

THE Proposer craves leave further to Observe, that considering the Honorable
the House of Commons has so far proceeded in Relation to the Regulating this
intolerable Abuse, if not effectually Rem^dy'd this Sessions, it has given
such an Alarm, that, before the next Sessions, it will be, in a
mann^^i^^^ssible to preserve any one piece of Money, that is now of Good Value,
from receiving the same Injury: And how far this will add to the Misfortune of
the Nation, is Humbly submitted to their Great Wisdom.

By T. H.

