AN ESSAY FOR The Discovery and Discouraging of the new sprung Schism, raised
and maintained by Mr SIMON HENDEN of Bennenden in Kent.

Exhibited in some Passages of Writing which have gone between Mr JOHN ELMESTON
of Cranebroke, and the same M. Henden.

Love the Truth and Peace,

Zech. 8. 19. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which cause divisions and
offenses contrary to the doctrine that ye have learned, and avoid them,

Romans 16. 17. Haereses inimicus invenit and Schismata, quibus subverteret
fidem, veritatem corrumperet, scinderet unitatem.

Cyprian. de Unitate Ecclesiae. The enemy the devil has invented Heresies and
Schisms, by which he might subvert the Faith, corrupt the Truth, and rend Unity
asunder. An esse sibi cum Christo videtur qui adversus Christi sacerdotes
facit? Qui se a cleri ejus e^plebis societate secernit?

Idem. ibid. Does he seem to himself to be with Christ who sets himself against
the Ministers of Christ? Who does separate himself from the society of the
Ministry and people of Christ? Published according to Order.

London, Printed for C. Meredith at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

TO THE READER.
Gentle Reader,
IT is like thou have heard the Story of the Trojan-Horse, which the Grecians
built by the council of Pallas, and by subtle Sinons persuasion procured to be
received into Troy, but to the ruin of that ancient and famous City: For in
the next night issued out of it a warlike troop of the most valiant Greekish
Captains couched secretly therein, which invaded the City, and laid it waste
with fire and sword. Much like unto this Trojan-horse has been set on foot
here in England, an Universal Toleration for all ways, and consciences in
Religion. No doubt it was by Satan's craft, and by the insinuation of some
cunning Sinons. It is like to redound to the great prejudice, if not ruin of
our Troy, I mean, of the Church of God in this Land, and the Gospel of Christ.
For out of it have come forth, not some small Bands, but numerous Armies of
ungodly Blasphemies, Heresies, Errors, Sects and Schisms; some whereof oppose
the Fundamental Truths of the Gospel; some disturb the Peace and Unity of the
Churches: All this to the great Joy of Satan and Grief of the Godly,
exceedingly hinders the thriving and progress of the Gospel. Out of this Womb
have broken forth that execrable crew of Ranters, which speak horrid
Blasphemies of God, of Christ, of the Scriptures: See John Hollands Paper of
the Ranters.
of the Arians, Secinians and Antiscripturists, who, by their cursed Doctrines
break down some main Pillars of our Christian Faith. Out of this Womb also are
broken forth another sort of erroneous Persons, not so pernicious as these
former, though very dangerous, whose Doctrines are, I doubt, like unto those
waters into which the Wormwood-star sell, and are become so bitter, that whosoever
drinks thereof is in danger to die: And of this rank are our Arminians,
Antinomians, Soul-Mort lists, Antisabbatarians, Seekers, and such like. Out of
this Womb also are come forth another brood, not so dangerous for their Errors
(though some be gross and absurd;) as grievous for the Rents and Divisions
which they make, and delight to maintain: Among which our Anabaptists are the
^^ading men; After whom come up close all those other Separatists and
Dissenters from us, who have embraced such a Truth and Gospel, as in their
sense about it, will admit of no Unity with us of the Presbyterian-way, in
Church, nay scarce in Christian Communion, and seem so strangely to be affected
toward us, as if they would not willingly allow us a place in Heaven with them,
nor they willingly be in the same Heaven with us. It is an ancient and approved
Axiom: Quae convenient in eodem tertio, ea quoque inter se convenient,
Whatsoever things agree in some one third thing, they also agree between
themselves. What a sad thing is this then that Christians, and Saints of God,
meeting in the one and only corner Stone Jesus Christ, upon whom they
endeavor to build the whole frame of their Doctrine, Worship and Discipline,
should so ill agree in their mutual Conversation each with other? so far
disagree in the joint-Worship of the Lord, that they seem to be possessed with
as bitter a spirit of discord as the two Brethren the Poets fable of, Eteocles
and Polynices, whose hatred was so unreconcilable, that after Death the flame
of the fire wherein their bodies were jointly burnt would not close, but did
divide asunder. And if that good man (Linaker) were now alive, and should see
this implacable division between the Professors of the same Gospel, would he
not, and that justly, break out with indignation against us, into that his
passionate Speech: Surely either these men profess not the right Gospel of
Christ, or are not right Professors of his Gospel? This is a Lamentation, and
this shall be for a Lamentation. O God, who art the Father of Peace, O Christ,
who art the Prince of Peace, O Holy Ghost, who art the Spirit of Peace, work it
in the Hearts and Affections of thy Children, Disciples and Saints, that they
may love and live in peace. But to come to mine intended matter.

From hence also has arisen this new forged Sect of M. Hendens, of the which
these following Papers will give thee a slight view; and with the which I am at
unawares more deeply engaged then at first I meant. The brief Story whereof is
this, M. Henden has been a man of good Note these many years, for Profession
of Religion; no despiser of Learning, but rather a lover of it. By his private
Industry he has added to his Grammar-School-learning, some Knowledge of the
Original Tongues. Studious also he has been of the Scriptures; (unto which his
retired life, partly upon some bodily infirmity, partly (as some have thought)
upon some worldly Discontents, gave him an opportunity) and especially of the
dark Prophecies of Ezekiel, Daniel and the Apocalypse. In the which his vein
has been to vary from the stream of other Interpreters, and to produce some
unusual notion of his own with no small confidence of its truth. This man was
heretofore a great Antagonist of the old Separatists called Brownists, and with
much zeal did, against them, maintain our Churches in England, and our
Ministry then, as the true Churches and Ministry of Christ. But now of late,
I know not how, on the sudden it was noised abroad, that he was changed in his
Principles, fallen from our Communion, and had erected a new uncouth way by
himself, and much purer then any other. And truly hereupon there was much
flocking to him of unstable souls: Much like as the Poet describes the flocking
of people after Bacchus Pardon the simile, the man is unlike.
his Orgia when they were first brought in at Thebes,

Turba ruit, mistaeque vi^is matresque nurusque,
Et vulgus proceresque ignota ad sacra feruntur. Ovid. Meta. 3.

The rout rung headlong and all mixed together,
Mives, husbands, and their Daughters each with other:
The common people, and the noble Peer
After this unknown worship run carier.
This noise caused me, who had some Acquaintance with him, to write to him the
first Letter in this Paper, not with a purpose to make any Controversy of it,
but to be informed from himself what his way was. Hereunto in convenient time
he returned kindly unto me an Answer, as among these Papers you may see. I was
therewith satisfied, minding only to seek into the truth of his way for mine
own satisfaction without further meddling. But lee I found that I had meddled
with a nest of Wasps which would not let me so go off. For it was by and by
noised and given out by his Party amongst us, that M. Henden had sent me a
Writing in which he had utterly blown up our Churches, Ordinances and Ministry
from the very foundation, and such an one as I could not answer. What should I
do here? If I had replied nothing, there would have been no end of their
triumph which was already loud enough. Will I, nill I, therefore I was fain to
take up the Bucklers, and return somewhat in reply to M. Henden. I had a
purpose only a little to come aboard their Ship, and take a view of their
Commodities what they were, but by the contentious humors of fellow-venturers,
I am forced thus to fall into some earnest grapple about the goodness of their
Wares. Take these as some slighter beginnings of the business between us: Some
larger and more serious Discourse is in time like to follow: If M. Henden will
be drawn to make his last Writing more public, which I desire. Read these, if
thou can spare so much time as to take notice of this no trifling
Controversy. And in reading take to thy self a free and full Liberty to judge
of the cause according to evidence of Arguments on both sides. And know that at
length the Word of God must and will both judge of it, and thy judgment about
it.

August. 18. 1651. Thine in the Lord Christ to learn of thee or any godly
Christian how in the best way to know and serve Christ Jo. Elmeston.

Good M. HENDEN,
I Have heard partly by common fame, but more certainly from M. Williamson (who
lately had some conference with you) that you are deviated of late from many of
those principles and practices, wherein heretofore you did concur with us.
Indeed there is now adays great talk of much new light broke forth, and
shining, to latter Professors, and those many, but young men, above that which
elder Protestants and Professors have been or are acquainted with. Which boast
occasioneth me to mind a Story which I have met with among ancient Authors, of
one Nauplius a King, who to revenge upon the Greeks the death of his son
Palamedes, by them, as he conceived, wrongfully put to death, upon their return
from Troy, did set up in the night a great light on the top of the hill
Caphareus; which they, in their course and sailing espying, and supposing it to
be a friendly light to show them the way to some safe harbor to anchor in,
directed their course thither, and so fell upon many dangerous Rocks and
Whirlpools, whereof that sea was full, to the woeful casting away of many ships
and men. Pardon me now if I think that Satan the Prince of darkness indeed, who
yet can transform himself into an Angel of light, has a great hand in kindling
and setting up much of this new light out of malice to the salvation of
mankind. This is certain and manifest enough, that too many, while they steer
their course after and toward these lights, some make shipwreck of the faith
upon the Rock of dangerous errors; others of peace and unity upon the Rock of
rash and unjustifiable Separation from our public, though well reformed
Assemblies; others of Christian meekness, and moderation, and charity, upon the
Rock of a bitter spirit, and base virulent railing. The more careful had you
need to be that you give not countenance too hastily to these new lights, nor
forsake your old good way to walk after them who are not like to go astray
alone, but to carry many along with you into errors. But notwithstanding all
this which I have said, I do acknowledge Gods rich grace to us in these times,
in vouchsafing much fuller and clearer light to us in many things then in
former days. And that opinion have I with many Christians hereabouts, of you
and your judicious piety, that you are like as soon to discern of old errors,
and find out some of those truths which have newly appeared, as some others,
whose study has been long and much bent to dive into dark and hard Prophecies,
and to search out their mysteries, to take notice of the Church-controversies
of our times, and to settle your self and others about them. The errand of
these lines therefore is not to expostulate with you about your change; But to
request you in writing briesly to impart to me those new Points you have
pitched upon, and what your opinion is about our public Ministry, the
Presbytery and our Church Assemblies. Let me entreat you to set down plainly
the Positions you hold about these, and to annex your reasons thereunto. I am
willing to learn what I know not, and shall account myself much beholding to
you or any other who shall fight me from the least error in Divine matter, or
discover unto me any truth of Gods Word to me yet unknown, the least whereof I
esteem above all Indian Pearls and Rubies. It is a saying of Cato, though out
of a young School-boyes-book and Author, yet very worthy to be remembered,

Ne pude at quae nescieris te velle doc^ri:
Scire aliquid laus est, ^udor est nil discere velle.
Be not ashamed willing thy self to show
Such things to be taught as thou do not know.
To know some thing it is a commendation,
To nill to learn ought is a shameful fashion.
Wherewith I conclude, and am

Your much well-wishing friend and brother in Christ, J. E.
December. 11. 1649.
Most worthy Sir,
Whom I highly esteem for Piety, and reverence for Gravity and learning: Your
Letter I have received, containing a friendly admonition to beware of old
errors intruded under the specious show of new lights. It is true, Satan's
subtilty was deep and deceivable in all ages; but the main strength of his Art
and Policy was combined in making up the Man of Sin. All deceivablenesse of
unrighteousness, the whole Mystery of iniquity is in him contracted; who,
being now by the glorious beams of truth more clearly discovered in the
Romanist, Episcopacy, etc. to be a false Christ in the wilderness, has since
entered into his secret Chambers, where he seemingly puts on a more curious
dress of Holiness and Purity nearly resembling the wedding garment of the
Primitive Church, that by his glittering array he might, if it were possible,
deceive the very elect. Hereupon the Spirit reckons it for a principal point of
wisdom to know the full number of the Beast. Truly Sir, I do with you confess,
that I have searched the Scripture from my childehood, neglecting no part of
the Old and New Testaments, and that I have much enquired into those mysteries
couched under the Visions of the Prophets; but especially those showed by
Christ himself to John in his Apocalypse, as that contracting the rest belonging
to his and after times into a methodical Abridgement. My ground for it was
this, Because I found a peculiar blessing attributed to those who read, hear
and keep the words of this Prophecy, as that containing the whole testimony of
Jesus, being so full as nothing can be added to or detracted from it, without a
dreadful curse, Revel. 13. and 19. 10. and 22. 18, 19. and from hence
concluded, That there was a divine Treasure of heavenly wisdom enclosed in this
precious Cabinet, and being a Prophecy of all Gospel Times, that the several
dispensations of God proper to every period with Satan's opposite works, was
here included, which no plain Text of Scripture so fully evidences; and that
the knowledge thereof would be as a pillar of Cloud to direct us in every age
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes through his several administrations,
and a true light to discover those Rocks of error, which men running against
hazard the wracking of their souls; and that this being veiled from the sight
of the world under dark Types, that so Antichrist fore-prophesied of, might
have closer and freer entrance, requires the more industry to draw it out,
Neither was the highest reach of my capacity able to dive so far into these
secrets, as to discover the Beast farther then the Pope and Bishops, till the
Spirit who only knows the deep things of God, removed farther from mine eyes
that veil cast upon the eyes of all Nations, Isa. 25. 7. and revealed unto me,
That the foundation of Antichrist consisted in an usurped power of
Church Discipline footed upon man and his will without the Call of God. And
that the call of God in our times is only for separation and rewarding; being
during the vials pouring, but in our journey toward Sion visibly separated, and
having but in part put off our Babylonish Garments, Revel. 18 4, 6. and 15. 8.
And that the time for visible marriage is not till all enemies are down by the
vials, and God only reigns, Revel. 19. 7, 8, 9. Isa. 62. 5. And that all
visible Church-marriage from the Apostasy till this reign is out of Gods time
(whose Prerogative it is only to ordain the times and seasons) and so being
founded only on the Will, Call, Name and Power of man, and not on Gods Call,
must be beastial. And that the breathing of the Spirit in these both Officers
and Ordinances in the Primitive Age, the life and soul of both, was since
restrained, being as a carcass without a soul, Ezekiel. 1. 4. Act. 2. 2. 1
Timoth. 4. 14. Revel. 7. 1. And then at the brightness of Christ's coming the
same Spirit of pouring and breathing returned, Isa. 32. 15. Ezekiel. 37 9. Matthew.
24. 27, 28. Psalm. 97. 4. Now least any mistake me, as though I subverted all
Gospel. Ordinances, we conceive that Ordinances are of two sorts,

1. Such as are founded more immediately on our spiritual union, and the
Covenant of Grace, as Ministry, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Prayer, Profession
etc.

2. Such as are footed upon Church-stating, and appertain to Officials, as
Ordination, Confirmation, Excommunication, Admission, Absolution, etc. The
first of these we say, The gates of hell never prevailed against them, but they
were born up by the Spirit of Prophecy through the whole time of this deep
Apostasy. As teaching and Baptism was overlasting, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. Isa. 55.
13. and 56. 5. Revel. 7. So the bread and wine hold forth his death till he
come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. Also Prayer was always, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Revel. 8. 34. and
9. 13. Likewise Profession continued, Rev. 11. 3.

The second sort, to wit, The Keys deemed essential to Officials, were not
always truly used. Though the name was fore prophesied to be everlasting, yet
(...) jad, the Hand or the Keys held forth by the Hand, interpreted Place, is
not so specified This in Mr Henden was quoted Isa. 66. for 56. which error I
not finding out, said nothing in this writing to that place.
Isa. 66. 5. But was wholly resolved in the Pope, to whom another Key was given
with other Smoke and Officers, the Locusts, Revel. 9. Neither was there any
other face of Officials, but amongst the Papists in Luthers time, who himself
was a Monk. Nay the visible Church, the foundation of these failed; only a
sealed elect number remainod, Revel. 7. 3. to 9. and 9. 4, We destroy not these
Ordinances, but hold that they have a being in the Scripture of truth, and in
the mind and desire of the faithful. And now in our return from Babylon, we
do as the Israelites of old, carry these vessels of the Lord along with us in
this our journey of separation, Isal. 52. 11. but dare not officiate in them in
the Territories of Babylon, in which we are till we have passed by the sixth
vial over the River Euphrates, Revel. 16. 12. These with many other Discoveries
I have received; the full explanation whereof with all their Scriptures and
Reasons would require a volume; which neither the strength of my body, or my
time, being now precious, will permit me largely to delineate with my Pen. You
shall command any thing which with convenience I am able to perform: And
therefore, Sir, let me beseech you to come unto me, who am not able to visit
you, with what friends you shall make choice of, and you shall be really
welcome, where I will (as God shall enable me) grant your request by a living
voice, and freely hear your Answers and Objections against what I shall speak.
For I desire to have it brought to the Touchstone of Truth, and there to be
tried to the utmost. And if by our confeerence we cannot be united in our
Judgment, ye I shall desire to be joined with you in my Affection, as highly
prizing my union with all the godly. With this Proviso of Aristotle, Amicus
Socrates, amicus Plato, sed magis amica Veritas, Socrates is my friend, Plato
my friend, but truth is my more special friend. The Truths of God are to be
valued above the nearest Relations. Thus with my best respect remembered, I rest
and remain,

Your very loving Friend Simon Henden.
Bennenden Jan. 2. 1649.
AN ESSAY FOR The Discovery and Discouraging of the newsprung Schism raised and
maintained by Mr Simon Henden of Bennenden in Kent.
Good Mr Henden,
I Thank you very much for your taking in good part my writing to you, for your
pains taken to answer me, and your free imparting to me your Principles on
which you go in this new way, and embrace all this as no small testimony of
your good opinion of, and good affections toward me. But having with some
deliberation perused your Letter, I must needs profess that your Principles do
not appear so clear and solid unto me as that I ean close with them. In which
respect for a fuller debate and clearing of them, I have thought meet to
propound to you in writing my doubts about them, since I can hardly find
leisure from my School-imploiments, nor since my weakness am hardly strong
enough to come over to you in presence to confer about them.

First then, for what you glance at out of Matthew. 24, 26. concerning the Man of
Sin, as being discovered int he Romanist and Episcopacy to be a false Christ
in the wilderness, and now retired into his Secret Chambers, in a curious
dress of holiness and purity the more effectually to deceive: it cannot be
made good by you that that place of Matthew is particularly meant of the Roman
Antichrist, it is meant of those who should take on them to be Christ in their
own Person, or to show unto men Christ in Person. Some such of old did arise
among the Jews, as he in the time of the Emperor Adrian, that called himself
Ben Cochab, the son of the Star, viz. that star prophesied of by Balaam,
Numb. 24 17. whom afterward the Jews having discovered him for an impostour,
called Ben^coshan, the son of a lie: Some such of latter years have been in
England, viz. Hacket with his companions in Queen Elizabeth's days, and some
not long ago amongst us in these so fertile in seducers and seducements. And if
it may be extended unto other seducers by way of allusion, who preach false
doctrine in the name of Christ, with a show and pretense to discover Christ
unto men in a more clear and perfect way then others do, this cannot very fitly
be applied, much less be appropriated to the Roman Antichrist, who has not
acted his part in a wilderness or desert, as it is taken in Matthew according
to the proper sense of the word, viz, for a place not at all, or slenderly
inhabited by some poor cottagers, But has set as God in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4. And ruled over Kingdoms, Nations and Contries in much pomp and
magnificence. Revel 17. 15. Indeed John, Revel. 17. 3. was carried into the
wilderness that he might take the better view of the Whore, i. e. this great
Antichrist, but she was presented to him as riding on a Beast of seven heads
and ten horns, and sitting on many waters, Revel. 17. 13. as reigning in the
great and stately City of Rome, and ruling over multitudes of people, Revel.
17. 9, 10. 15. so far was she she from flying into the wilderness, or hiding
her self therein: Nor did the Beast nor the Frogs coming out of his mouth ever
heretofore, or now more invite men into Chambers under a color and pretense to
show them Christ, as not to be seen in the public Profession of the times,
more then other heretics may and have done, nay not more then the most
orthodox Christians may do and have done in some sad times of darkness and
persecution. Finally, I wish you to consider, whether this calling men into
Chambers in these days from public Assemblies to see Christ, do not fully
reflect upon the practice of Brownists, Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, and
the like, who leave our public Assemblies and Ordinances, as if Christ were
not there to be seen and enjoyed, and call men into houses, parlours and
chambers, with a specious pretext of more then ordinary holiness, and exact
serving of God, and keeping themselves and others from the pollution of public
worship, and bringing men to nearer and fuller Communion with Christ then can
be enjoyed in public Ordinances. I may say then touching this, as the Poet
does of a witty fable he had told, and after does apply to one who thought
himself little concerned in it,

-- Mutato nomine, de te
Fabula narratur --
Change but the name, if I may make so bold,
Of your own self, the story may be told.
Secondly, The diligent search you do make or have made to understand the
visions of the Prophets, and in special the mysteries of the Apocalypse, is
worthy commendation. But this I must add, that you had need to be conversant
in that search with much humility and self-denying, as not having any such
conceit of your self that you are endued with a more excellent spirit of
revelation and understanding in those mysteries then other learned and godly
men that have with much pains and prayer studied that Book, and published their
meditations on it, but rather mistrusting your own conceptions, in which you go
alone, and differ from the stream of most Writers and Interpreters, Qui
opinione blandiente gravidi sunt, nihil serium pariunt, tumidi tantumutres,
says one, Whosoever they be which travel big with child of some pleasing
conceit of their own, or vain opinion of themselves, never bring forth any
serious matter, being only big-swoln bottles. And if you hold forth any new
conceit beyond or against them, judicious Christians will advise upon it, and
not hastily receive it, unless you can make it appear, that you have Daniels
spirit of wisdom and revelation for interpretation of dreams and visions given
you, or can prove your interpretation by irrefragable arguments. For in such a
case may it not be said to you, as Paul said to the Corinthians puffed up with
some singular conceit of their knowledge above other Churches, Came the word of
God out from you? or came it to you only? 1 Cor. 14. 26. Came the Spirit of
wisdom or knowledge unto you only? or came it from you to all others? Besides,
if we desire to know Christ in the whole mystery of our salvation, viz. the
doctrine of his Person, Offices, and the means to apply him to our selves, the
ways of his Worship; the Nature of the Church, and the Ordinances belonging to
it, and then what be the most dangerous errors in Faith or Worship: Such
things are better learned out of the doctrinal books of Scripture then out of
the Apocalypse. That does hold forth a prophetical story concerning the enemies
of the Church, who they should be, and where; how they should oppress the
Church, and at length be destroyed, and of the Churches estate before these
enemies rising, under their power, its deliverance and glorious estate in the
end; but it does not doctrinally discourse of points of faith, worship and good
works. Those matters in other Books are purposely handled, largely and fully
discoursed; in the Revelation are but touched on by the way, in other parts of
Scripture they are plainly propounded, that common Christians may conceive and
come to the knowledge of them; but the Revelation is veiled with such mystical
visions and allegorical phrases that very learned and most able Christians
cannot uncover the veil clearly, and see to the end of them; much less are
they such as can be apprehended by Christians of the lower sort, and weaker
capacity. As the pillar of fire and cloud were such things as were open to the
view of all the Israelites; so those Books of Scripture (though I exclude none)
which are plainest and most obvious to the understanding of all Christians, are
specially to be accounted as our pillar of cloud and fire to direct us how and
where in all ages we should follow the Lamb.

Thirdly, It is strange to me that you should affirm, That the foundation of
the Beast does consist in an usurped power of Church Discipline footed on man's
will without Gods call. It is true, that what Discipline is exercised only on
man's will without Gods call, is bestial, as you term it, and Antichristian; As

1. That which for the thing it self was wholly invented by Antichrist not
being once mentioned in the Gospel, such was amongst others the Popes
interdicting of whole Realms for having any service of God used in them upon
their offending against his commands and Ordinances.

2. And if for the matter it self it were Christ's Discipline, yet it was
managed not by the hands of Christ's Officers, but of Antichrist, and against
Christ's faithful servants; such was Excommunication exercised by the Pope,
papal Bishops, Commissaries, and the like. Notwithstanding Discipline, nor the
usurped power of it cannot be the foundation of the Beast. There are three
things in Christian, and so in Antichristian Religion, Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline; and these so answer one another, that look what place any one of
them has in the one, the same it has in the other Religion. Now none ever did
or can affirm Discipline to be the foundation of Christian Religion; it is but
as the roof, or at best but as the walls of it, and serves to beautify or to
guard and preserve it; It is sound Doctrine in the principles of faith that is
the foundation of Christian Religion, 1 Cor, 3. 11. So it is the false Doctrine
of the Roman Church that is the foundation of the Beast and Antichristian
Religion. And this the Apostle S. John does teach, 1 John, 4. 23. Every one that
confesses Christ to be come in the flesh, is of God; but every one that
denies Christ to be come in the flesh is not of God; this is the spirit of
Antichrist. It is in effect as much as if he had said: Sound Doctrine
concerning Christ his Nature, Person and Offices, is the main ground and mark
of Christian Religion; and false doctrine touching these things the principal
note and ground of Antichristian Religion. Besides the Popes extravagant
exercise of Discipline in excommunicating, suspending, etc. not only single
persons, but whole Nations, and disposing all Church-dignities, etc. was
founded on that false Doctrine which was first laid, That the Pope was an
Universal Bishop, Vicar of Christ, and the visible Head of the Church. Doctrine
then is the foundation of the Beast, and not the usurped power of
Church Discipline. Lastly, None can comply with the Beast in the foundation of
his estate without loss of his salvation, as who does lie and rely on some
other besides the only foundation of salvation, which is Jesus Christ, and
worshippeth the Beast in acknowledging him for the Vicar of Christ in the
Church and supreme Head under him, and submits to his Decrees and new Articles
of faith; But many may and have too much complied with the Beast in the
exercise of Discipline, viz. Excommunication, Suspension, Ordination, etc,
managing it in a Popish manner, whom yet we have just cause to acknowledge (and
should deal most uncharitably not to acknowledge) for the main to have been
godly Christians, and out of doubt saved, Such as were those Diocesan Bishops
in Queen Mary's days, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper, etc. and Grindal, Jewel and
others in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

Fourthly, It is a new conceit not heard of before among Interpreters of the
Apocalypse, and which I cannot embrace, That in these our times we are called
only to separating from Babylon, and rewarding her, so that upon separating
from her, if Gods people go further, as to set up reformed Churches, and gather
themselves into Church Order, it is in your opinion against, or at least
without Gods command. But

First, This is a course flat contrary to that which the Lord has followed and
prescribed to his people in former times, whose separation from Idolaters and
profane Nations was still accompanied with a present setting up of a
Church-society for Gods service and mutual edification. No sooner did God call
Abraham out of his idolatrous Country, but he set up a visible Church in his
Family, teaching him to call on God and set up alturs for his Worship, Genesis 12.
8, and furnishing him with some power of Discipline, Genes. 17. 14. and 18. 19.
So when the Lord brought the Israelites out of Egypt, he brought them not out
to wander up and down as a confused multitude, but within short time formed
them into a Church, and within a year or thereabouts gave them the Law,
furnished them with a Tabernacle, Sacrifices, Ministry and Ordinances of all
sorts. This did the Jews also upon their return out of Babylon take to be their
duty in a Church Way to set up Gods worship, in building the Temple, providing
Sacrifices, restoring the Ministry, and ordering means for them. And when the
Jews slacked their hand this way upon a pretense that the due time to build the
house of God was not yet come (much like as you now say, it is not yet time to
set up visible Churches or Church Discipline) they were reproved for the
slacknesse and vain pretense by the Prophet Haggai, Hag. 1. 3, 5. And did not
the Apostles the like also at the first preaching of the Gospel, so call men
from Paganism and Judaism, as those that did separate from them, and embrace
the Gospel, were with all convenient speed gathered and formed into Christian
Churches to exercise Gods Worship and Discipline among themselves? And what
sound reason can be given, why the separation Gods people are called to, Revel.
18. 4. should not be thus presently followed, with joining together in visible
Churches, to serve God aright, and enjoy all his Ordinances, but that they must
remain a separated people without any Church Order among themselves, until all
the vials be poured out, that is none knows how long?

Secondly, This is against a common rule for interpretation of Scripture; Among
which rules this is an approved one, That what Scripture does command the
avoiding any thing as evil, the same does virtually command the pursuing of the
contrary good. Hence commonly those two commands go together, Flee evil and
follow good, Psalm. 34. 14. Isa. 16. 17. Romans 12. 9. and in many other places.
The reason whereof is plain, because as the perfection of a good tree is not in
wanting bad fruit, but in bearing good: so the true goodness of a Christian is
not in forbearing evil, but in doing good. This then is certain, that the voice
from Heaven which calls Gods people to depart from Babylon, as idolatrous, and
to keep themselves from her sins, does virtually call upon them to seek our
Sion, and to join with her in society for the worship of God; which Sion if it
were not then extant or to be enjoyed, the command were vain, and their
endeavor would be to no purpose.

Thirdly, This conceit and course does cast a foul blot of gross ignorance or
rash presumption upon all reformed Churches; which upon their breaking off from
Rome have not contented themselves with a bare separation, but did also set up
evangelical Churches opposite to the Roman for Doctrine, Worship and
Discipline, some less, and some more pure and perfect. So has all Reformation
been practiced in Germany, France, Netherland, Scotland, Old and New England of
late. And what man is he, or who be they, unless they can prove themselves new
Apostles or Prophets, or have the pregnant word of God for it, and build not
only upon their own conjectural interpretation of prophetical mysteries, about
which other godly learned are at a stand, who will presume to tax and blemish
so many famous Churches, and so many godly and learned Divines which were their
guides and leaders? Surely it is not piety to condemn the generation of the
righteous, Psalm 73. 15. nor humility to slight the consent of so many Churches
of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

Fourthly, It is well worth the while to scan the time when this call for
separation Revel. 18. 4. was given; And if all circumstances be well weighed,
this call was not proclaimed until God had put it into the heart of some Kings
and States to join to invade and destroy Rome itself, which preparation is
intimated before, Chap. 17. 16. and was surely about the pouring out of the
last, or some of the last vials. And now being ready to give the onset on
Rome, by this voice they are called on to plague her thoroughly, Revel. 18. 6. At
which time this call is directed to such of Gods people as might then be hidden
in that idolatrous City, or the adjoining Territories by a personal flight to
forsake her and those places of danger, and provide for their safety. Which
things considered, it is not clear that the time of this call is yet come,
since we see small preparation made as yet or intended by Christian States or
Princes against Rome, the Throne of the Beast, or Italy his Nest and Fortress.
And how long it will be ere this be effected only the Lord knows. I am sure
that most accounts that learned men have hitherto made of these things, have
missed, and they are in a mist about the three or four last vials, not being
able certainly to unfold them. So that if you have no other ground for your
separation then that call (as you produce none other) you are in danger to
prevent the due time of separation, and to do all you do in it merely upon your
own will without Gods call. As for the spiritual separation made by Protestant
Princes, and Churches, from Rome, in Doctrine and Worship, as they had a
warrant for it from this call, the reasons whereof being such as belong to all
times and persons, not to partake in Romes sins, do sufficiently enforce it; so
had they pregnant grounds for it also from other general commands to flee
Idolatry, and set up Gods Worship. I may last ask, Why you and your company go
farther in your practice then bare separation? For if by separation Revel. 18.
4. you understand a separation merely negative to be meant (as you needs must
to make it serve your turn) by what warrant do you on the Lord's Day celebrate
holy Assemblies, and exercise the main parts of Gods Worship by your selves,
and in opposition to our public Assemblies, which you account bestial? For
this kind of separation allows no such practice, but confines it self to an
abstaining from all communion in the public Worship if corrupt, and so far
as it is corrupt. But if it be a positive separation that the godly are called
to (as your practice does interpret it) then nothing lets, but others also may
set up Churches for the enjoying of all Ordinances as well as you for some. And
surely when the Apostle did urge such a call for separation unto the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 6. 17. out of Isa. 52. 11. he did conceive that the
Christians of Corinth were not only called barely to separate from Paganish
Idolatry, but also to join together in the true worship of God.

Fifthly, Here follow some things which I apprehend to be some reasons of this
your Assertion touching this point of separation.

1. We are yet, you say, but in our journey to Sion, visibly separated, and not
arrived thither, and so may not take on us to set up Sion-like Churches.

Answ. But why are we but on our journey unto Sion? visibly separated? when as
the Apostle describes this to be the estate of all embracing the Gospel, that
they are come to Mount Sion and the celestial Jerusalem, and the same not
merely invisible, but visibly separated from the impious world, Heb. 12. 22.

2. St John saw many thousands Revel. 14. 1. walking with the Lamb on Mount
Sion, and the same visible as seen by John during the time of the great
Apostasy, and before the time of this more public departure and Reformation.
And why may not our late reformed Christians be ranged among those thousands,
and admitted to the same Mount Sion with them, since in their Reformation they
have endeavored to conform unto them, 1. In bearing their Fathers name in
their forehead by an open profession of Religion; 2, In restoring an orderly
performance of Gods Worship by the Ministry and Church Assemblies, as they
praised God before the four Beasts and the Elders; 3. In ascribing their
redemption only to God, and praising him for it, which is meant by the new Song
those hundred forty four thousand did sing; 4. By cleansing themselves from
Popish Idolatry, as those kept themselves virgins and undefiled; 5. By holding
forth the practice of holiness, as in the mouths of the other there was no
guile.

3. Admit that we be but in our way to this Sion, what lets but that we may set
up and use all Gods Ordinances as well as some, in this our journey? The
Israelites whenas they were but in their way to Canaan had all Gods Ordinances
set up amongst them, and made use of them more or less, as their unsettled
estate, and sudden occasions of removing would give leave. What you seem
elsewhere to conclude to this purpose from the Jews bringing along the
Temple-vessels with them from Babylon, but not officiating with them in their
way, shall in its place be considered. About these matters you refer me to
Revel. 15. 8. where we read that the Temple was filled with smoke from the
glory of God, etc. that none could enter into it until the seven plagues of
the seven Angels were fulfilled. From whence it seems you would conclude, that
we are not yet come to Sion.

Answ. I wish you had made the argument your self, opened the place in your
sense, and applied it to the purpose: For my part I find a Temple even under
the Apostasy measured out, and an Altar, and some worshipping in it Revel. 11.
1. Yea, I find Angels, i. e. Magistrates, Ministers, and other persons of
note, whom the Lord would use to execute his judgments upon the Antichristian
world, Revel. 14. 15, 17, 18. conversant in it, and the four Beasts abiding in
it, Revel. 15. 7. The Temple then which was before the seven last plagues
fulfilled, was not so shut but some did enter into it and served God therein:
Yea that John during this time saw it opened in heaven, Revel. 11. 19. and 15.
6. And if Sion and the Temple in your opinion be one and the same thing, and
both note the state of a true visible Church (as you seem to think) it is plain
that before and under the vials there are acknowledged in the Apocalypse visible
Churches, and the same true and right unto which Christians had access, and in
which they were conversant. You must pardon me then if herein I do not concur
with you, that none could enter into the Temple, or arrive at Sion, i. e. that
no visible Church could be found into which men might have entrance and
admission, until all the vials were poured out. I do rather agree with other
godly Interpreters, who do understand it of those people, who yet for their
whole body are clean out of the Church, viz. the Jews and Pagans, but chiefly
the Jews, of which, it seems, no full harvest sufficient to make up a Church or
Churches shall or can come in, until the vials be fully poured out to Romes
utter destruction. It does not exclude those who were already admitted and
entered into the Temple, as were the reformed Churches of the western world.

The second thing which you add is, That we have not yet wholly put off our
Babylonish Garments. Touching which I shall not say much, because you express
not what you mean by these Babylonish Garments, nor wherein they are not put
off. Only two things I do reply, 1. That the retaining of some rags of the
Babylonish Garments, though it be a deformity to a Church, can no more keep a
Christian company or person out of Sion, then sacrificing unto God in high
places, somewhat after an Heathenish manner, could or did put the Church of the
Jews out of Sion, or Polygamy not warranted by the Lords first Institution of
Marriage, put Abraham, Jacob or other holy men out of the Catalogue of the
ancient and godly Patriarchs; or the remainder of some sinful infirmity in a
man regenerate, bar him of Communion with Christ. 2. Those seven Angels which
had the last seven Plagues, as they came out of the Temple; so also they were
clothed with white and pure linen, and were girded about the breasts with
golden girdles, Revel. 15 6. Now what are those Angels but types of those
instruments which the Lord would use in executing those seven last Plagues? And
what is the meaning of their coming out of the Temple, but that they were
persons belonging to some of the Protestant reformed Churches? Now surely as
the habit of the members was, such was the habit of the Churches to which they
did belong: For how could they come so purely clothed out of Churches utterly
impure? These Churches therefore which are our reformed Churches of these
days, had cast off their Babylonish Garments, and were clad with fine linen,
which is the righteousness of the Saints.

The third thing, you say, is, That the time for visible marriage is not yet
come, until all enemies be brought down, and God only reign; and that
therefore all visible Church-marriage since the Apostasic taken up before the
time, being only founded on the will, name and power of man without Gods call,
must needs be bestial.

Answ. Concerning this, I say first, That it is much the Jews excuse Hag. 1. 2.
saying, That the time was not yet come that the house of the Lord should be
built: Whenas the time for building it was seasonable enough, and nothing
let but their greater care to build their own houses then the Lords house:
So say you, The time is not yet come that visible Churches should be gathered
and married unto Christ in visible manner, whe^as the time is seasonable
enough, but that many have more mind to disturb the work by venting fancies of
their own, then to contribute their endeavors toward the work.

Secondly, This is to make Christ to have been a Widower, as it were, or a
Bridegroom without a known or visible Bride, an Head without a visible Body, a
King without a visible Kingdom for more then these thousand years; and how long
he is like so to continue none can determine. For what is Christ's visible
Spouse, Body, Kingdom, but a visible Church? and none such has been, according
to your opinion, right and true, all this time of the Apostasy, nor yet is or
shall be until all the vials be poured out.

Thirdly, This is to make all the reformed Churches, which since their breaking
off from Rome, have been erected, or are now in Germany, France, Netherland,
Scotland, Old and New England, to be Antichristian and bestial, which in all
moderate and understanding men's judgment, will be thought a rash, uncharitable
and audacious Assertion.

Fourthly, It may as well be said by you, That there is no visible Marriage
between Christ and particular Christians before the time, as that there is none
between Churches and Christ. For no particular Christian can be a meet Bride
for Christ, who is not clothed with pure fine and shining linen, viz. The
righteousness of the Saints. And if no Churches shall be found before that
time fitly thus arrayed for their Marriage with Christ, what sound reason can
be yielded, why any single Christians can be so clothed, when as commonly they
receive their spiritual birth, being, clothing, and all in visible Churches
where they live? Now nihil dat quod non hab^t, None can give that which they
have not; And if no visible Churches can be found thus arrayed, it is not easy
to imagine how single Christians should obtain it. If private Christians may be
so clothed before that time, and so fitted for visible marriage with Christ;
so also may whole Churches, whenas Churches are made up of particular
Christians, and particular Christians are thus clothed, among other ends, that
they may be fitted for members of visible Churches. But to make this good, you
refer us to Revel. 19. 7. which, how that is understood not of reformed
Churches in general, but of the Church of the Jews, when that Nation shall be
converted to the Faith, by the most learned Interpreters of the Apocalypse, I
know you well know. And for my part, though I will not say as he did, Malo cum
Platone errare, quam cum aliis vera sentire, yet I cannot but say, That it is
far safer to follow so many godly, learned and judicious Divines, who have
bent themselves to find out the mysteries of that Book, then any one man,
though he would be held as singular in this mystical Divinity, as Plato was in
Philosophy. And that which you point unto farther out of Isa. 62. 5. if they
both concern one thing and time, as you seem to intimate, does much confirm
this Interpretation. For it directly and expressly speaks of Sion, and its
restoring, as appears by the beginning of the Chapter, and what follows; which
if it had not its full accomplishment in the Jews Deliverance out of Babylon,
and their Church and Commonwealth restoration thereupon, it cannot well be
applied otherwise, then to the last conversion of the Jewish Nation, and to
that excellent Church-condition whereunto they shall then be brought.

Secondly, Touching this allegation, and all other of the same kind much used
by you, I wish that that notable saying of Irenaeus so much approved by learned
Divines, were known to, or regarded by you, Omnis Prophetia priusquam habeat
efficaciam* anigmata and ambiguitas sunt hominibus: Cum autem venerit tempus
and evenit quod Prophetatum est, ^um Prophetiae habent liquidam and certam
expositionem. All Prophecy before it be accomplished presents nothing but
Riddles and matters of doubt unto men: but when the time is come, and that is
fulfilled which was prophesied, then Prophecies have a clear and certain
exposition. According to which most right sentence, I say, that the mystical
Prophecies of the Apocalypse or other Scripture which are but in part fulfilled,
but specially such as yet are wholly to be fulfilled, and so subject to various
Interpretations, are too too weak grounds to build such lofty opinions and
assertions upon, as befool all learned Divines, over-turn all right and orderly
Ministry, and turn all latter Christian Churches into Antichristian: For who is
he that can infallibly say, What is meant by the vials poured out on Euphrates
or on the Air; by the Marriage of the Lamb, and of his Bride, and sundry other
things in the following Chapters, as he ought to be able to do, that will
infer and make good such high and destructive Paradoxes, as are
abovementioned. There are many Prophecies in that Book already in part
fulfilled, as many things about the two Witnesses, the distinction of the first
and second Beast, the vial poured out on the Sun, with diverse things Chap. 14
and 16. about which the learned which have searched into those Mysteries do so
differ that a man cannot find from them any sure ground to rest upon. It is
doubtless lawful and profitable, as you and others do, to search into the
Mysteries of that Book. But for a clear and full Interpretation of some things
already fulfilled, much more of things to be fulfilled, we must wait the Lords
time (to which somewhat does accord that proverbial Speech, That Veritas est
temporis filia) and his Revelation of them by clear and indubitable events. But
by these mistakes and differences of learned men, as diligent and understanding
searchers as our selves, we should learn to be moderate and wary, how we did
peremptorily determine matters so abstruse; and upon such our private
determinations lay the weight of such notable Paradoxes and strange strains;
which to do is rather rash presumption and self-confidence then true knowledge
and wisdom.

Sixthly, Now follows your fourth Assertion, viz. That the breathing of the
Spirit both in Officers and Ordinances which acted in them in the Primitive
times, is now restrained, and (as seems to be your meaning) has been
restrained ever since the Apostasy, so that they were all that while, and now
are but as a carcass without a soul.

Answ. If this be so, What means have there been all this while for men's
conversion and salvation? For which the Lord out of his goodness cannot but
ever make due provision. From whence has proceeded the conversion of
thousands, which have been wrought on since the Apostasy, if not from the
Officers and Ordinances that have succeeded the Primitive times, and in some
measure continued under the corrupt state of the Church, and the spirits
breathing in and working by them? St John saw, and that under the Apostasy, a
hundred forty four thousand waiting upon the Lamb in Mount Sion, Revel. 14. 1.
Whence now had these their conversion but from the Spirit in those times
breathing in, and by the Officers and O^dinances that then were? Again, S. John
saw (it seems) after this on Mount Sion, upon the declining of Antichrist a
great number standing by a glassie-sea mingled with fire which had gotten the
victory over the Beast, his Image, his Mark, and the number of his Name,
singing a new Song, and praising God for their deliverance, Rev. 15. 2, 3.
Whence had these their conversion? They were not, I ween, Aborigenes, a people
sprung out of the earth, or let down out of the Heavens, but surely had their
spiritual birth and being from the Spirit breathing in the Officers and
Ordinances of those times. Lastly, Have not thousands in these latter times in
the reformed Churches (and so are many, the Lord be praised unto this day) been
converted to the faith by the preaching of the Ministers in them? And what more
ample testimony can there be then this, that their ministry is not a carcass
without a soul, but that the Spirit does breathe in the Ordinance of pteaching
and Sacraments administered by them? It may here by you be suggested perhaps,
that in all these Ages, and so now, they preached but as gifted men, and in
that way the Spirit went along with them Not as Ministers by Office.

Answ. This is but said, and not proved, and so may as easily be denied, as it
is affirmed.

2. They in all Ages former and latter stood and acted as Ministers by Office,
were so acknowledged and received by the Churches, yea and also Christians
converted (until of late that they have been taught a new ungrateful lesson)
who felt the power of the Spirit working on them by their preaching, did look
on their conversion as a fruit of their true official Ministry, and a seal
thereof.

3, The Apostle Paul does produce the conversion of the Corinthians by his
preaching, not so much for a proof that he was a man sufficiently gifted for
the work of the Ministry, but as a seal of his Apostleship, and as a divine
testimony, that as he acted as an Apostle in his Preaching, so indeed he was,
and so they were to acknowledge him, 2 Cor. 3. 2. 2 Cor. 9. 1, 2. If therefore
the conversion of the Corinthians were proof sufficient for Paul, that he was
an Apostle, that is, an official Minister, though extraordinary, surely the
work of conversion formerly and now wrought by them, does suffice to make good,
That the Ministers of the reformed Churches have been, and are right Ministers
of Christ, and rightly in office under him.

Lastly, For that of Revel. 7. 1. which you point to, of the four Angels
holding the four winds, that they should not blow on the earth, nor on the
sea, etc. If it be certainly to be understood of the withholding of the Spirit
from breathing in the Ordinances (for others carry it fairly enough to another
sense.)

1. There is nothing said in that place for the continuance, how long the
restraint should last, much less is it showed, that it should last during the
Apostasy.

2. It may well be meant of a more sparing breathing in comparison of Primitive
times, not of an utter restraint.

3. If it be understood of an utter restraint, take notice, I pray, that the
restraint is general, and cannot by any circumstance of the Text be confined
only to official preaching and Preachers, as you speak, but as fully reach any
Preachers, even your gifted men as well as them, and so does conclude an utter
ceasing of the Spirit, to breathe now or then in or by any means, Ordinances or
Preachers whatsoever, which is grossly false, and to affirm it were exceeding
derogatory to the Lords free grace and man's salvation.

Seventhly, In the next place it follows that we take a view of your
distinction of Ordinances, and your opinion about them. Touching which, you
say, some are founded more immediately on our spiritual Union (with Christ I
conceive you mean) and the Covanant of Grace and Ministry, Baptism, the Lords
Supper, Prayer, Profession, etc. 2. Such as are footed on Church-stating, such
as appertain to officials, yea deemed essential to them, as Ordination,
Confirmation, Excommunication, Admission, Absolution, etc. The first of these
have been kept up, you say, through all the time of the deepest Apostasy, and
are now used rightly, and to be used. The second have not been always rightly
used, but (it seems to you) have been, and are so lost, that as yet there is no
due time or place for their exercise. This I take to be your meaning about this
point of Ordinances. If I mistake, it is because the matter is set down
somewhat intricately by you.

Now touching this point we have many things to reply;

First, I would know, What Ministry you mean has always been kept up? Whether
a Ministry exercised only by virtue of Gifts enabling men unto it, or such as
is exercised by virtue of an Office also, and right calling thereunto. If the
first be meant, it is a matter in much question, Whether such a standing
Ministry were ever allowed by Christ? and it must be proved before we can
receive it. Surely if such a Ministry be current and sufficiently authorized
for ministering Word and Sacraments, there was no need of an official Ministry;
and Christ, it seems, therein ordained a superfluous Ordinance, according to
that common Axiom, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. It is
a vain thing, and not beseeming a wise man, to use many ways to do that which
may be done by a few. If the latter be meant, why are official Ministers by you
questioned?

Secondly, It may be asked, Why you put Profession and Prayer in general in the
rank of Ordinances. There is a wide difference between Ordinances and Duties.
As to believe in Christ is a Duty, not an Ordinance; so to make Profession of
the Christian faith is also a Duty which appertains to particular Christians in
their own person, so to whole Churches in their Society. So likewise is Prayer
as it belongs to particular men, of which Paul speaks specially, Colos. 4. 2.
Only public Prayer as it is performed by the Minister in public Assemblies
for Gods Worship, may come under the notion of an Ordinance. Ordinances, to
speak properly of them, are those solemn means which Christ has appointed in
his Church according to his sovereign power and good will to communicate his
grace unto us, and to perform our solemn Worship unto him, as the public
preaching of the Word, celebration of the Sacraments, public prayer, public
thanksgivings, fastings; or to provide for the right performance of these
things, as combination of Christians into Church-societies, the election and
ordination of Ministers, and exercises of Church Discipline. Now profession and
prayer are such duties as flow from that natural relation which is between God
the Creator and the creature, and were owing unto God without any special
institution.

Thirdly, You say, That the last kind of Ordinances are essential to
Officials, an improper, yea false assertion, unless you mean no more then what
you said elsewhere, that they appertain to Officers: For nothing is essential to
a Church Officer, or any other thing, but the Matter and Form thereof, which
does constitute them. The Matter of an Officer are Gifts enabling him to
perform it; the Form an orderly putting him into that Office by such as have
Authority, and giving him a right to execute it. The Exercise of some thing may
properly and only belong to Officers (as preaching the Word and administering
the Sacraments to Pastors and Teachers rightly called) which yet are not
essential to them. Nothing can subsist or have a being in nature wanting its
essentials. A Pastor or Teacher may be such an one in Office, and yet let by
sickness or some other ways, that for many weeks together he neither preach
nor administer the Sacraments.

Fourthly, It is not truly said, That some Ordinances are more immediately
founded in our Union with Christ. For no Ordinances can be said to be founded
on our Union with Christ. Such things only can rightly be said to be founded
on that Union, which as the proper fruit and effects thereof do flow from it to
our salvation; as Calling, Justification, Sanctification, etc. It may be
granted, that an holy right to these Ordinances, and the blessed fruit of them
comes and proceeds from our Union with Christ, but not the Ordinances
themselves, of which many partake which have not, nor ever shall have Union
with Christ. Indeed they tend either to bring men to that blessed Union, or to
nourish and stablish them in it: To which purpose in their place serve those
latter kind of Ordinances, yea Excommunication it self, which is specially
ordained for the good of the Elect to heal and recover them if they fall
scandalously, by cutting them off, to the end they may repent and be restored,
or to prevent their infection by putting scandalous and infectious persons out
of their Society. But for the foundation of these and all Ordinances, it is in
the Institution of our Lord Jesus Christ, consisting partly in a command for
the use of them, and partly in the promise of a blessing on the right use of
them, as for Teaching and Baptism is to be seen, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. and for the
Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 24.

Fifthly, It may be granted you, That these Ordinances are some way founded on
the Covenant of Grace, if by founded you only mean, that they are some effects
of it. For as God by that Covenant does oblige himself to give grace and
salvation to his Elect: so by consequence to provide for them all means outward
and inward, that should conduce to make them partakers of the Covenant and
benefits of it, causing them to embrace it, and stablishing them in it. But
then this is not a thing peculiar to the first kind of Ordinances, but belongs
also to the latter, which have their use both in admitting men into fellowship
with Christ and his Church, and maintaining them in it.

Sixthly, You grant, That these first Ordinances have never been lost, but
continued all the time of the Apostasy. But what does this grant avail for any
benefit to Gods people all that while, or now; when you did before affirm, that
they are but dead Ordinances, and have not the Spirit breathing in, or by them,
nor shall have, until the brightness of Christ's coming?

Seventhly, How does it appear that those latter Ordinances have been lost, as
you seem to imply, during the Apostasy, more then the former?

1. The use of them was held up all that while in the Antichristian Church,
where was Ordination, Excommunication, Absolution, etc. and that as Ordinances
of Christ, as well as Teaching, Baptism, the Lords Supper, etc. and since the
Reformation have more or less been taken up, and used in the reformed Churches.

2. To that you say, they were not always rightly used, nor always in right
hands: I answer, That if that abolish them, upon the same grounds those former
Ordinances may as well be said to have been lost, as having been in many things
corrupted and usurped by those who had little right to meddle with them.

3. What reasons soever are, or can be alleged for the continuance of the
first sort, are as strong for the continuance of this latter kind, 1. There is
for these Christ's Institution as well as for those. 2. They were instituted not
only for a time, but to be continued until the last day, Ephesians. ^* 11, 12, 13.
In the 11 verse there is the Institution of an Ecclesiastical and Official
Ministry distinct one from another, as some to be such, and others to be such,
So that they that were Apostles, Evangelists, etc. were not properly Pastors
nor Teachers, Nor they which were properly Pastors and Teachers, were not
Apostles nor Prophets, etc. If they were all the same in office and power, what
should need such an enumeration of so many kinds distinct one from the other?
verse 12. is specified the end for which they were given, namely the perfect
Knitting together of the Saints, the work of the Ministry, the edification of
the body of Christ. If that then during the Apostasy Christ had any Saints
among men to be joined together, any work of the Ministry to be done, any
mystical body to be edified (as doubtless he had) all these things were to be
performed by the official Ministry which Christ gave for that end. But these
things could not be all that while performed by Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, and therefore were done by other Officials, Pastors and Teachers,
which Christ gave for that end, and in some sort continued all those corrupt
times. In the 13. verse is set down how long this Ministry was to continue,
even until we all meet in the unity of the faith, and attain to a perfect man
in Christ, which will not be until the last day of the restoring and
consummation of all things, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 10. Now if Christ did ordain such a
Ministry, and for such a time, he has surely for the substance maintained and
continued it hitherto, and so will to the end. And if he have not, or shall not
do so, it is either for want of power in him to do it, or of love and care for
his Churches good: either of which to charge upon Christ were sinful. And if
this continuance have not been in a successive order of Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists (which long ago have ceased) it has been continued in an Official
Ministry of Pastors and Teachers, such as Christ first gave and ordained. 3.
There is a solemn Commandment for the exercise and keeping up of Discipline
until the coming of Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 13, 14. There is a straight charge laid
upon Timethy to keep that course of Discipline which he had prescribed him in
that Epistle, Until the appearing of Christ, Now this command cannot concern
Timothy only, who was not to survive so long, or to that day: But belongs to
the Ministers and Church Officers, who in after times were to succeed him in
the care and rule of the Church. And if Pray continually which you allege from
1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. to prove that prayer as a Church-ordinance has been always
continued, it being but a command for the continual use of it, and that rather
of private prayer by Christians in their common course of life, then of public
in Church Assemblies, be valid enough to prove your purpose: this command of
Paul unto Timothy for the exercise of Discipline by him, prescribed to be
continued unto Christ's coming, does necessarily prove the continuance of it in
the Church.

Lastly, What you allege out of Matthew. 28. 19, 20. for the perp tuity of
teaching and Baptism, makes as much for the like continued use of Discipline.
For as the Apostles there are bid to teach and Baptize: So likewise are they
commanded To teach the Nations, to observe all things that he had commanded.
Among which the exercise of Discipline was certainly one: For the maintenance
of which, his promise is to be present with his Ministers to the end of the
world, as well as for the continuance of the other Ordinances. Now there are
many other Scriptures which you point at for proof of this and your other
points, touching which I wish that you had showed how the Scriptures pointed at
conclude your points. For my Logic does not suffice to conclude the one from
the other.

Eighthly, There ensue some reasons (as I conceive) of them, why this second
sort of Ordinances are lost: First, This Key of Discipline was wholly resolved
into the Pope; I take it that you mean, that it was wholly seized on by the
Pope, and no Discipline was exercised but under and from him.

Answ. So was it with Teaching, Baptism and the Lords Supper, and other
Ordinances you speak of, they were so got into the Popes hands, that they were
administered and managed by none but those that were authorized by the Pope, or
by such as under him did confer authority for the same: And if that did not
null or abolish Teaching, Baptism, etc. why should it null or abolish
Discipline, or any part thereof, though engrossed by the Pope, and abused by
him. It was the policy of Satan and that great Impostour under him (the Pope)
to seize into his hands all the Ordinances of Christ, that by the show and
pretense of them he might get the credit of Religion, and upholding the
Christian faith, and so the more closely and effectually deceive the Christian
world, which he could not have done if he had wholly rejected and abolished
them, and set up only his own superstitions and inventions in the room of
them: Christ's Ordinances may and do still remain Christ's Ordinances for matter
and substance, though in wrong hands and abused: As the great Seal of the
Kingdom is still the right and true Seal, though in the hands of an usurping
Lord Keeper, and employed to wrongful ends.

Obj. But the Pope had another Key given him, and other Officers, as Locusts,
Revel. 9.

Answ. Let it be so, that another Key was given to the Pope, viz. when he
claimed to be an Universal Bishop, Christ's Vicar, and the Head of the Church
under him, and so usurped an illimitted power in businesses secular and
spiritual, and that he had with all other Officers called Locusts, viz. Monks,
Friars, Priests, Abbats, Cardinals, and the whole Popish Clergy; yet with all
subtilty he did retain the Key of Christ's Discipline in Ordination,
Excommunication, Suspension, etc. and made use of it to promote his own
Kingdom, yea and had for substance some of the Officers ordained by Christ,
such as were Preachers and Administrers of holy things in particular
Congregations though under other names, as Parsons and Vicars, and not, without
some corruption in their admission and administration. Notwithstanding as
amongst all the corruptions under Popery, Baptism for the substance remained
true and right, in as much as such as were baptized, were baptized In the Name
of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, according to the form by Christ appointed.
Neither have any taught or affirmed, That Baptism under Popery was or is null,
and to be repealed; So for the substance, a true and right Ministry might be,
and was there found, viz. such a one, as by which men were called and set aside
to preach the Word, and minister the holy things of God.

Object. There was no other face of Officials among Papists, but of these
Locusts in Luthers time, who himself was a Monk.

Answ. There was among Papists in and before Luthers time, Officials (as you
style them) which are not to be reckoned among these Locusts, but such as the
holy Ghost in the Apocalypse does honor and account of, as true and worthy
Ministers of Christ, though what outward calling they had, was from Popish
Bishops and Presbyters, and themselves were Monks and Friars, or of some such
Popish order. It cannot be denied, that many of those which during the
Apostasy for twelve hundred and sixty years, did stand up by Writing and
Preaching to witness Truth against Popery, were Bishops, Priests, Monks or
Friars, as in our England, Bishop Grosted, John Wickliff a Priest; in other
Countries Taulerus a Preacher, John Hus and Jerome of Prague Priests, Savaralona
a Monk, and one Sylvester a Friar, with many other the like. All which
notwithstanding that their Ordination was according to the times from Popish
Bishops, and their order superstitious, yet the holy Ghost does reckon of them
as Christ's faithful Witnesses, and so his true and lawful Ministers, and not
any of those Locusts which came out of the smoke of the bottomless pit; So
Chap 1^* 6, 8, 9. there are three Angels which in course follow one another
preaching the Gospel, and declaiming against Babylon and the Beast: Who are
these now? Not proper Angels coming from heaven, but rather according to the
current of Interpreters, a series and rank of Ministers, which were raised up
by the Lord, by their preaching to make way for the ruin of the Pope, and
restoring the Church, such as by some learned men are named in particular, viz.
Ockam, John of Gaunt, Dantes, our John Wickliff, John Hus, Jerome of Prague,
Luther, men that lived in the Church of Rome, had their external calling from
that Church, were of some of their Popish orders, and yet are acknowledged to
be Angels, as well as those of the seven Churches of Asia, that is true
Ministers of Christ, raised, sent, and authorized by him. It does not then
derogate from the truth of an official Ministry, if he be a sound Preacher of
the Gospel, that a man has been ordained thereunto by a Bishop Popish, not
only in regard of the Office, but in Doctrine also; But this acknowledgment of
such for Angels does approve such Ordination good for substance; though in some
things it be corrupt and defective, as before I said of baptizing. It is then a
frivolous cavil, and which by this sentence of the holy Ghost is put to
silence, that men make against our English Ministers as Antichristian, because
ordained by Bishops, when such so ordained are called Angels, and their
Ordination is conferted on them by Bishops which were sound in the profession
of the Gospel, Presbyters and Preachers of the Gospel, and in the work did
join other Presbyters with them.

Object. But the visible Church it self failed, which is the foundation of
these Officials and latter Ordinances, and so these must needs fail.

Answ. This is somewhat indeed: Nay so much as will carry the cause if it be
made good. It is not true, as is before showed, That the visible Church is the
foundation of these Officials or latter Ordinances; but Christ's Institution and
promise: but the visible Church is invested with a power and right to use them,
and that only, and not any other civil or heretical Society, and for the
Churches good and service, they were by Christ appointed; So that if there were
in those times of the Apostasy, no visible Church, it may be granted that they
failed since there was no Church which had power to use them, or for whose
service they were to be used: But me thinks for you to say, That the visible
Church has failed, is much one as if you should affirm, That the pillars of
the earth were broken down and overthrown. For the visible Church stands on
as firm a foundation, as they, that is, Gods Ordinance, Power and Faithfulness.
Concerning which point, by a visible Church may be meant a company of
Christians with their seed joined together in one place, and settled in a right
and complete order for the worship of God, and exercise of all Gods Ordinances.
Now that there has been such a visible Church all along the Apostasy in any
one place, or in many places successively, cannot, I think, easily be showed,
nor is it needful for this matter to be proved. Next, by a visible Church may
be meant a company of persons professing the true Religion, abstaining from
false worship, and worshipping God in a pure way, though for the most dispersed
in sundry places and meetings for Gods worship, but in small companies: Such a
Church of God certainly has been and shall be perpetual; Such a Church of God
there was in Israel under their great Apostasy, viz. A company that did not
bow the knee to Baal, 1 King. 18. 19. and did in solemn times meet for the main
parts of Gods worship, as hearing of his Word and Prayer, 2 Kings 4. 23. though
not for Sacrifice, which ordinarily was only to be offered at the Temple. Such
a one was there under the Babylonish Captivity, in which state the Jews could
not assemble, as in their own Land to the Temple, to perform all Gods service,
but as they were scattered into several Cities and Towns, could only where
they were, make open profession of their Religion, and in smaller companies
meet together for the Word and prayer, and such main parts of Gods worship. And
such a one also has continued under the Popish defection.

To speak to which Point somewhat more largely, I affirm, First, That there
never was, nor ever will be an utter failing of Christ's visible Church. It is
prophesied of Christ, That he shall sit upon the Throne of David, and his
Kingdom, to order and stablish it with judgment and justice, from henceforth
even for ever, Isa. 9. And what is this Throne and Kingdom of David, but
Christ's visible Church, in which Christ is to sit and reign visibly, as David
did in his Kingdom, and that for ever? It is written, Dan. 2. 44, That the God
of heaven should set up a Kingdom which should never be destroyed: And what can
this be meant of, but of Gods visible Church, set up in the view of the world,
as those earthly Kingdoms were, which it should break and destroy, but it self
stand for ever; But if this Church have at any time wholly failed, it has not
stood, nor does stand for ever, but has been destroyed.

3. Christ is set up by God his Father with power, and a command given him, To
rule in the midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110. 2. which how should he do, if his
enemies should so far prevail, as to abolish his visible Church in which he
is to reign? Besides, these are Relatives, and depend one upon another, a King
and Kingdom, an Head and Body, Husband and Spouse. And what is Christ's Kingdom,
Body, Spouse here in the world (as we have aforesaid) but his visible Church?
So that it failing, Christ should cease to be a King, Head or Husband in the
view of men, or be a King without a Kingdom, a Head without a Body, an Husband
without a Wife, or as it were a forlorn Widower.

Lastly, Christ is the same yesterday, to day, and so for ever, Heb. 13. 8. As
therefore of old he has had a visible Church, so ought he to have in these
latter times, now and for ever. If at any time he were, or be without it, he is
not the same, but undergoeth a notable alteration in respect of this estate and
relation. It will not salve the matter to say, That his invisible Church never
failed; and so that his Kingdom, Headship, etc. did and does ever continue, for
they are visible things, whereby the relation between him and his Church are
deciphered, and so in all reason point out the visible state of the Church. 2.
The Church invisible as so, is unknown and wholly unseen to men, and Christ's
invisible Rule and Government over them, cannot by men be discerned. And what
honor were this then to Christ in the world to rule only invisibly, of which
men can take no knowledge. 3. Wheresoever Christ has an invisible Church,
there will a visible Church appear; for where true faith is, it will not be
hid, but manifest it self to the world by open profession, and so those that
are members of the invisible Church will become visible to the world.

Secondly, I affirm, That Christ's visible Church never wholly failed under
Antichrists Apostasy. It was sometimes less for the Territories it occupied,
then at some other time, sometime more hid and less conspicuous for its show
unto the world, but it was ever extant, and so extant that it appeared unto men
both in particular members, and in companies belonging thereto, by their
profession of the true faith, witnessing against errors, worshipping God and
suffering for the Gospel, though not so acknowledged by the Antichristian
rabble.

1. There were two Witnesses of Christ all the time of Antichrists Reign. Revel
11. 3. and what were they but a company of Preachers and Professors, which all
that time successively witnessed for Christ's truth against Popery? whose
profession as it was open and manifest; so did it declare to the world, that
Christ had a company which professed his truth, and that they did belong
thereunto.

2. There were Saints so manifesting themselves by life and profession, so
discovered by the Beast and Whore by their opposition which they made to their
ways, against which the Beast made war, and overcame them, Revel. 13. 7. And
with whose blood the Whore was drunken, Revel. 17. 6. Yet so that all Christ's
Saints were not destroyed, but some being slain, others arose in their rooms,
or continued other where so still to uphold the profession of the Gospel. Now
where visible Saints are (as we do see here were under Antichrist) that
profess true religion and worship; there is a visible Church.

3. There was by S. John during the Apostasy seen on Mount Sion with the Lamb
a hundred forty four thousand, Revel, 14. 1. whose description is such, as
shows that Christ in them, during that time, had a visible Church. For, 1.
They had their fathers, i. e. Gods name written in their fore heads, verse. 1.
that is, they made open profession of his true Religion. 2. They did exercise
themselves in singing before the Throne, the Elders and the Beasts, verse. 3.
And what is that but that they worshipped God together in holy Assemblies? 3.
They were not desiled with women, ver. 4. but were virgins, that is, they kept
themselves from being polluted with the spiritual whoredom, I mean, the
Idolatry of the times: And now tell me, Are not such companies as openly
profess true Religion, worship God in holy meetings, and preserve themselves
from common Idolatry, visible Churches? what else can you make of them? Surely
they are neither Synagogues of Satan, nor confusions of Babylon. Lastly, There
was a Temple during the time of the Apostasy, in which also there was a
company that did worship, Revel. 11. 1. And what was this but the true Church
of Christ, and the same visible: For it was measured: Now measurement is of
things visible, not invisible. Again, while the Apostasy lasted, Saint John
saw a Temple in which Angels were conversant, and with them (no doubt) other
worshippers, Revel 14. 15, 17, 18. Yea he saw this Temple opened, Chap. 15. 5.
in heaven before the seven last plagues were fulfilled: It seems that for the
greatest part of the Apostasy this Temple was somewhat secret and hidden, yet
not so, but that it was visible also in some that worshipped in it, and some
open Professors of the Gospel. But withal it became more open and manifestly
visible upon the Reformation which was made by those worthy and godly
Ministers, whom God raised some hundred years ago, and so has been ever since
more visible and conspicuous: so far is it from being utterly lost and extinct.

Object. But all this while only asealed elect number remained, Rev. 7. 3,
etc. and 9. 4.

Answ. If you mean that there were none that made any visible profession of
true Religion, but those sealed ones; you say that beside the book and without
proof. For those sealed ones were (as you truly say) elect and saved ones. Now
in all ages many more have made profession of Religion then the elect of God,
Many are called few are chosen, Matthew. 20. 16. And so here it is clear, that
during the time especially at the beginning of the defection, as in Jerusalem,
Ezekiel. 9. Besides the godly mourners which were marked in the forehead, there
were sundry that made profession of the Jewish Religion, and were visible
Members, though not living Members of the Church: So during this Apostasy,
beside these sealed ones there were many that did profess the Christian
Religion aright for the substance, and help to make up a visible Church.

Secondly, If there were none else, yet that does not prove, that the visible
Church did utterly fail. For even out of that number visible Churches in sundry
places, and several Ages, in which successively they lived, might well be, and
were constituted, as which were a company sealed in the forehead, and making
open profession of Christ and his Gospel in the Places where, and in the Ages
when they lived: Two things are about them to be taken notice of;

1. That they were a sealed number, which does import thus much, That in that
great defection in which the greatest part of men perished eternally by
wondering after, and worshipping the Beast, Yet there was a chosen number that
were saved, that is, these sealed ones, and none but they, though there were
many besides them which made visible profession of the Gospel.

2. That they were sealed in the forehead, which shows, that while the whole
earth almost did worship the Beast, yet there was a great number in those times
that did not defile themselves with that Idolatry, but did openly maintain and
profess the true faith of Christ and worship of God; among which was found a
visible Church.

For a Conclusion you add, That these latter Ordinances have a being in the
Scripture, and in the mind and desire of the faithful, and that you carry
them along with you, as the Israelites did of old the vessels of the Lord* but
that you dare not officiate with them, as being in the Territories of Babylon,
until you be past Euphrates.

Answ. What Ordinances are instituted and commanded in Scripture (as you say
they are, for how else have they a being there but by institution and command?)
Gods people are bound to practice them in all times and places, unless by some
external violence of persecution, or so, they be let. They must observe all
things which Christ has commanded, Matthew. 28. 20. It will not then serve your
turn, that you carry them along with you in your mind and desire, unless you
officiate with them, as you phrase it. Nor will the example of the Israelites
help here, who used not the vessels of the Lord for any holy service while they
were in the way to Sion. Of which the reason is very plain; for their use was
confined to a certain place, viz. The Temple at Jerusalem, and might not
elsewhere be used. But so are not any Gospel Ordinances, with which God may now
be worshipped in any place, John 4. 21, 23. And if you purpose to forbear the
use of them, until you be past Euphrates, I would gladly learn from you, what
this Euphrates is: How far from it, or near to it we be. As Irenaeus above,
said of Prophecies not fulfilled, That they are dark, and so doubtful Riddles
unto men: so about this, as not accomplished in your own judgment, I find
Interpreters so to vary, that I know not where to fix my foot. Presume not too
much of your own insight into such mystical Prophecies above other godly and
learned men, but whatsoever your conceit be of it, count it but as a
conjecture, and be content with us in sobriety and humility to wait until the
Lord shall accomplish it, and by a clear event reveal to us the meaning of it.

And thus having said somewhat to most of your new conceits, I should here have
ended, but that there comes to mind, an argument of some weight, with the
particulars of it, much making against your new way, which I desire to profer
to your consideration. It is thus, What Way or opinion is contrary to any of
the ten Commandments, any Petition of the Lords-Prayer, any commanded Duty, and
to the furtherance of men's salvation, cannot be of Christ, but may justly be
deemed Antichristian. Such is this of yours, which denies the setting up of
visible Churches in right order, official Ministry, and calling thereunto, and
the exercise of Discipline: and therefore it cannot be of God, but a spirit of
Antichrist is in it.

To make good the Minor, of which only the doubt can be; It is,

First, Contrary to the second Commandment, As the negative of that Commandment
does forbid unto men all false and devised means of Gods worship, so the
affirmative, according to the received rule of interpreting the Commandments,
does command to us the use of all means of worship appointed by the Lord. Now
the Lord has appointed for that purpose two sorts of means, the one more
principal, as directly tending to the exercise and nourishing of Faith, Hope
and Love, viz. Preaching the Word, administration of Sacraments, public
Prayer. The other less principal, as conducing to the right use of the
former, and tending to Gods worship, as their proper end: such are
Church-societies, official-Ministry, and a due Calling to it, exercise of
Discipline, which that Commandment does enjoin as well as the former, and which
cannot be wittingly and commonly omitted without breach of it.

Secondly, It is against the fourth Commandment, which, as it commands the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, so according to the right interpreting of the
Commandments does it withal prescribe and enjoin the use of all means that are
profitable to the better sanctifying of it. And who can deny, who is not
wilfully wedded to his self-conceit, that gathering and ordering Churches in
distinct societies, and an official Ministry rightly called does much avail
hereunto, and that the Lord's Day is much better sanctified in such Societies,
and such a Ministry, then in confused Assemblies that are without order, and
without any orderly Ministry? Now the ten Commandments are moral, perpetual and
bind always.

Secondly, It is against the two first Petitions of the Lords Prayer, wherein
we are taught to pray, That Gods name may be hallowed, Secondly, That his
Kingdom may come. Now what we ought to pray for, it is our duty to pursue the
promoting of it by all Gods means; for to pray for this or that, and not to
apply our selves to the use of all good means to obtain or promote it, is to
dally with God and to mock him: Now the setting up of visible Churches* of an
orderly Ministry and Discipline, do serve very much to the sanctifying of
Gods name, and promoting his Kingdom, for they are Gods Ordinances, in
appointing which his sovereign Power, Wisdom and Goodness are set forth.

Secondly, Particularly in and by a visible Church his Worship is upheld among
men, his Religion is professed, and the Doctrine of the Gospel published. It is
therefore called, The Pillar of Truth, 1 Timothy 3. 15. In and by an orderly
Ministry, the due honor and authority of that calling is maintained, Gods
holy things are ministered with the more assurance of Gods acceptance, and hope
of his blessing of them. By Discipline scandals are prevented or healed, and
licentious living much restrained. To deny therefore these things, as
unseasonable, and so now unlawful, is to hinder the sanctifying of Gods Name,
and advancing of his Kingdom.

Thirdly, It is against the Commandment of Christ, concerning scandals, which
all Christians are bound to do their endeavor to prevent or take away, and
for which Discipline by Christ is ordained the special Remedy, which since you
oppose, what do you but set your self against this command of Christ, and
open a Gate for sinful Liberty in erroneous Doctrine, and looseness of
Conversation?

Lastly, It is prejudicial to man's Salvation, which no rational man can or will
deny, must needs be better furthered in a settled Society of Saints, under a
constant Ministry and due exercise of Discipline, then where none of these
are: But either an utter rejection of them, or confusion in them.

And thus you have my Notions touching your new Revelations, for which I have
made you long to wait. If you impute it to my dullness or sluggishnesse, I will
not deny it. I am, I confess, a man but of a dull apprehension, and slow
motion: But I can more truly ascribe it to my late domestic troubles and
sickness, which I did slowly recover, and to my want of time, who have but
by-times for such studies, my greatest time being taken up with my School: And
to my pains which I have been fain to take in writing out more then one copy.
Now for conclusion, I will only add a saying which Saint Augustine used unto
one with whom he had debated some controversy, by writing, Vbiparit^r haesitas
nobiscum, quaeras nobiscum, ubi pariter certus es nobiscum, pergas nobiscum,
ubi tuum errorem cognoveris, redeas ad nos; ubi nostrum, revoces nos. Where you
are in some doubt with us, enquire with us; where you are alike certain with
us, go on with us; where you shall perceive your error, return to us; where
ours, recall us. And thus hoping that you will not take that with the left hand
of mis-interpretation, which I reach unto you with the right of good affection,
I rest

Your truly loving and much well-wishing Friend in the Lord John Elmestone.

A Postscript.
WHat place of the Apocalypse I have before but touched upon, I think meet again
to propound for further consideration; It is Chap. 15. 23. there John saw a sea
of glass mingled with fire, and multitudes standing by it, which had gotten
the victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the
number of his Name, having Harps of God, and singing the Song of Moses, and of
the Lamb. Now I desire to know, who these can be but the reformed Ministers and
people that at the first Reformation (for John saw them before the Vials began
to be poured out) renounced the Pope and Popery, and set up the pure Worship of
God, and sound Doctrine of the Gospel, meant by the sea of Glass there
mentioned. If this be so (as surely it is) I ask, 1. How those reformed
Churches then, or ours in these times which are more reformed, or their
Ministry can be affirmed to be bestial and Antichristian, when the holy Ghost
does testify for them, that they had gotten the victory over the Beast, his
Image, Mark, and the very number of his Name? 2. Whether it be not a slander
partly coming from ignorance, partly from malice, to brand the Ordination of
our Ministers, though by Bishops, much more when done by preaching Presbyters,
as now is in use with fasting and prayer, as a mark of the Beast, when it is so
plainly said, that all they, i. e. Ministers as well as people had got the
victory over the mark of the Beast in express terms? 3. Whether the reformed
Churches which got such a victory over all these, yea even the number of the
Beast his Name, have not cast off their Babylonish Garments. For what remains
of that Garment where the Beast, his Image, Mark and Number of his Name are
cashiered? 4. Whether it be not a perverse practice to reject singing of Psalms
in Church-meetings for Gods service, whenas that company which was with the
Lamb on Mount Sion, Revel. 14. 3. and this by the sea of Glass, Verse 3. are
praised for giving this Worship to the Lord? Lastly, There are some passages in
your Letter seem to have slipped from you at unwares, as, That Teaching and
Baptism was everlasting, That Prayer was always, That you are in a return
from Babylon, and yet are within the Territories of Babylon; a speech which I
cannot handsomely reconcile, being meant of a spiritual departure from her.

Vive, vale; siquid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; sinon, his utere mecum.
Live and farewell; if any thing you know
Righter then these, friendly do them bestow
On me I pray* if not, then lo with me
Make use of these, which to you offered be.
A Postscript.
Reader,
I Would have thee know that M. Henden has sent me an Answer unto this my last
here printed, large enough in words, if as solid in Truth, to the which I have
begun some Reply, and the Lord affording me strength and life mean to go through
with it. But in this business it much increases my labor, that he has sent
to me a Copy, in many places so closely written, so often interlined, and much
blotted, that in such places mine eyes through age being dim, I cannot make out
his full sense and meaning. I moved himtherefore by Letter, either for a fairer
Copy, on to print it, as sometimes I was told was his intent. To this request
made a month since, I can have no sair answer, but what uncertain report
brings me, that I must content my self with that Copy, as being not like to
have any other from him: This then is one main cause of my publishing these
for^er passages between us, that I may provoke M. Henden in like sort to
publish his last writing, that the Christian world may the better know the
whole mystery of his new way, and I may have a more plain Copy to inform my
self, and ground to proceed on in my intended Answer. This is all, and so I
commend all to their impartial scanning by the word of truth.

J. E.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
COurteom Reader,
Thou art desired to take notice that there are lately come out partly
concerning the same subject, viz.

1, A learned and full Answer to a Treatise, entitled, The Vanity of childish
Baptism; wherein the several Arguments brought to overthrow the lawfulness of
Infants Baptism, together with the Answers to those Arguments maintaining its
lawfulness are duly examined, as also the Question concerning the necessity of
dipping in Baptism is fully discussed. By W. Cook Minister of the Word of God
at Wroxal in Warwickshire.

2. Vindiciae Redemptienis in the fanning and sifting of Sam. Oats, his
Exposition upon Mat. 13. 44. with a faithful search after our Lords meaning in
his two Parables of the Treasure and the Pearl, endeavored in several Sermons
upon Mat. 13. 44, 45. by John Stalham Pastor of the Church at Terling in Essex.

3. The sum of a conference at Terling in Essex, held between three Ministers
John Stalham, John Newton, Enoch Gray, of Terling, of Little. Baddo, of Wickam,
Opponents pleading for Infant Baptism, and two Cata-Baptists Timotheus Bat
Physician, Thomas Lamb Sope-boiler of London Respondents, denying
Infants Baptism.

John Geree's Sifters Sieve broken, or a Reply to D. Boughers sisting my Case
of conscience touching the Kings Coronation oath.

Two Books of his in Defense of Infants Baptism in answer to M. Tombs
Objections, etc. 4^.

M. Nehemiah Rogers a learned and reverend Divine now of New England,
discovering the cause of Gods continuing his wrath against this Nation.

All to be sold at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.


