A SPEECH OF King Henry, IV. OF FRANCE TO HIS PARLIAMENT.

WHEREIN, He Rebukes them for Opposing the Jesuits; AND SHOWS His Disbelief of
their Plots and Attempts against his Person, After the Attemps of Chastel and
Barriers had miscarried, and those Traitors Executed, AND Some time before that
of Ravilliac took Effect.

With other Passages on that Occasion, Communicated in a Letter to Rome by a
Jesuit.

And now Rendered out of the Italian.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane. MDCLXXXI.

THE MOST Christian Kings ANSWER TO THE COURT OF PARLIAMENT About the
Restitution of the JESUITS.
I Take kindly the Care you have of my Person, and of my State, though you
understand very little either of the one or the other.

I have all your Sentiments and Conceits in my Head, but you comprehend not
mine in yours.

You have proposed to me the Difficulties, which to you show Great and
Considerable, And you had not the wit to consider, that whatever you have said,
has already been weighed and considered by me this eight or nine years.

You would fain appear some body by your Knowledge in Matters of State, when in
truth you skill them no more, than I understand to frame a Declaration or
Process at Law.

I would have you therefore recollect what you said in the Conference at Paris.
That it would have been happy for the Catholics, if all had carried themselves
like one or two Jesuits (whom you found there very opportunely;) And if we had
not known their Ambition at this day, as well as their Sufficiency.

Now am I amazed to think whereupon you found this Opinion of Ambition, in
Persons that refuse Dignities and Prelaces when proffered them: Persons that
make a vow never to aspire, nor do they pretend or seek in this World other,
than to serve without Recompense all such as are willing to accept of their
Service.

And if it be this name of Jesuit that offends you, why I pray do not you as
well quarrel with those that call themselves the Religious of the Trinity? And
if you judge those such like as these of the Society of Jesus, why don't you
say that your Daughters are as good as those in Spain that are called the
Daughters of God, and that your selves are as much of the Order of the Holy
Ghost, as my Knights of that Order? for my part I had rather be named a Jesuit,
than a Jacobin or a Benedictin.

Then for the Sorbon, of which you speak, if they have disliked the Jesuits,
the reason was, their want of understanding them. And if the old Doctors out of
a jealousy would not allow them, the younger sort studies amongst them and
Commends them.

What, though they have not hitherto been in France unless by way of
Toleration? God has reserved that Glory for me (and I look upon it as his
special Favor) to establish them. If they have not been in France save with a
Proviso, they shall now be amongst us by an Edict, and by a Decree. The will of
my Predecessors was to receive them, and it is my Pleasure to establish them.

The University is against them, the only Cause is, they do better, as appears
by the great Confluence of Scholars to their College; And because they are not
incorporated into the said University. But they will not now be against them,
when I command that they receive them. And for my Pardoning them you shall be
glad to Petition me.

You say that in your Parliament the most Learned had not their Knowledge from
the Society of Jesus. If the Learned be the oldest, it is very true; because
they got their Learning before the Jesuits were known in France. But I have
heard say, that others will tell you another tale, particularly many of your
Members. And we observe that by their absence, your University is become a
Desert, and the Scholars go after them notwithstanding your Decrees, even out
of the Kingdom.

To call them a company of factious Fellows, because they followed the League,
this was purely the injury of the times: They thought they did well, but were
deceived like many others. And I assure my self that this very thing, together
with the Favors that I will Confer on them, shall make them to me as
affectionate, or more than to the League.

You object that they draw to them young Men of good Parts, And cull out the
best from amongst them. And for this Reason have I the greater Esteem for them,
do not we also make choice of the best Soldiers for the War? And, if Favor took
not place with you, would you ever admit any that was not worthy of your
Company, and fit to sit in Parliament? Should they provide for you ignorant
Teachers or Preachers, would you not laugh at them? Yet, now they are Men of
good Sense, you are angry.

As to the Temporal Goods, you mention, it is a Slander, they had not in all
France more than twelve or fifteen thousand Crowns Revenue in the total. And I
know that, out of their Income, they have maintained at Bruges or at Lions
seven or eight Regents, and there they were themselves to the number of three
hundred and forty. And should there be any Inconvenience in this matter, I
shall provide against it in my Edict.

The Vow of Obedience which they make to the Pope, will not oblige them
farther, or more to follow Strangers, than the Oath of Fidelity which they make
to me, nor will they undertake any Design against their Natural Prince. But the
Vow they make to the Pope is not on all occasions. For they make it when the
Pope would send them to Convert the Infidels. And indeed we see that by their
means God has converted the Indies, and so many heretical Countries. And this
is, what I have often said, if the Spaniard finds a Benefit by them, why shall
not France employ them? are we in a worse Condition than others? is Spain more
taking than France? if they are so in their own Conceit, why should not France
stand as fair in the Opinion of others?

You say they work themselves in as they can get opportunity, do not others
also the same thing? I my self got into a Kingdom as I could gain it. But we
must needs believe, and affirm that their Patience is prodigious; for my part I
admire it. Forasmuch as by Patience, and a good Life, they come to the end of
every thing. Nor have I the worse Opinion of them because they are strict
observers of their Institutions, this is that that will maintain them.
Therefore have not I in any part changed their Rules, but rather will hold them
to them. And if I have limited them under some Conditions which may not please
Strangers, 'twere better that Strangers take Law from us, than we from them.
And take it as they have a mind, I and my Subjects understand one another.

What if the Churchmen are upon their Formalities against the Jesuit? So it
has always been, that Ignorance hated Science. And I have observed, that when I
began to speak of establishing the Jesuits, two sorts of men especially opposed
me, the Hugonots, and the Churchmen, of a scandalous Life. And both the one
and the other have made me have the greater esteem for them.

As for the Opinion they have of the Pope, I know they have a singular Respect
for him, so have I. But you say not that in Rome and elsewhere they stand not
right in that point. On all occasions I assure my self that they say not more
concerning the Popes Authority, than others do. And I Am confident that should
we go about to arraign their Opinions, at the same time we should arraign the
Catholic Church.

Then for their Doctrine to free the Churchmen from my Obedience, and their
teaching Youth to kill Kings, we ought on the one hand to see what they say,
and whether it be true that they indeed so teach Youth. One thing makes me
believe that this is not true, viz. thirty years and more have past since they
taught Scholars in France, and one hundred thousand have gone from their
Colleges, Persons of all Conditions have lived amongst them, and with them
find one out of this great number, that shall maintain he has heard that they
use any such Language, or any other that comes near it, which is objected
against them. Or, which is more, there are Ministers of the Hugonots, which
Ministers have lived many years amongst the Jesuits, let them give Information
of the Jesuits Lives, it is to be presumed they will say the worst they can, if
for no other cause, yet to excuse themselves for having left them. Now I know
that this has been tried, and from them was had this answer, that, truly, as
for the manners of the Jesuits, they saw no cause to speak ill of them. And
then for their Doctrine, that is sufficiently known. In short, few persons
would submit to such a trial, and the Conscience had need be very secure, when
it refers it self to the Testimony of its Enemies.

As to Barrierre who would have murdered me, it is so far, so very far from
truth, that a Jesuit confessed him, as you allege, that on the contrary I was
advised by a Jesuit that such a Design was in hand. And another Jesuit told
Barrierre that he would be damned, if he should dare to undertake such a Fact.

As to Chastel, the Rack could not extort from him any Accusation against
Conerand or any other Jesuit. And if it had not in truth been so, why did you
spare them; and not punish them when you had them in your hands? And that
other, who was executed, was upon another Subject, which was said to be found
amongst his Writings. But, supposing it had been so, that a Jesuit had struck
the blow; must needs all the Apostles suffer for one Judas? or I make
satisfaction for all the Robberies, and Rogueries committed by the Soldiers
that are listed in my Armies? God at this time would humble me, and save me,
and I render him thanks, he teaches me to pardon Offenses, and I do so
willingly for his sake. Moreover I every day pray for my Enemies, so far is it
from me to remember them as you (little like Christians) invite me to do. I
take not this well at your hands, we have all need of Gods Mercy.

As to the Dispensation necessary for my Sisters Marriage, his Holiness has at
length accorded it. And I am very certain the Fathers Jesuits were our friends
in that Affair. And if a Spanish Cardinal Jesuit helped me to obtain the
Blessing of our Holy Father when I turned Catholic; why then would you have me
suspect the French, my natural Subjects! I shall know of them what I shall
judge; that I ought to know; nor shall I communicate to them, save what I have
a mind. Let me alone to the Management and Conduct of this Company, I am now
the Master and Governor of such as are far more headstrong and more hard to be
ruled without more ado, obey my Will.

His Majesty after this Speech retired to the Chapel of Borbon to hear
Vespers, and he was scarce come thither, before the Fame of his mavelous
answer to the Parliament was spread about all the Court, insomuch that Father
Cotton received the Applauses and Congratulations from all quarters, which made
him go to throw himself at his Majesty's feet, and give him thanks in the name
of all the Society of Jesus; after which the King, giving him the kindest
words, began anew to treat with him about the means to fill France, and place
Jesuits in every great City. And thence took into Consideration the founding of
some Schools, and the promoting of this Affair as necessary for the State, and
Welfare of the Kingdom.

Now upon the account of this Establishment of the Company, the King continued
to solicit vigorously, and by the means of Monsieur Baron, and of the
Chancellor to press the Parliament to come to a Conclusion, and not farther
show themselves obstinate against his Majesty's Will. Whereupon Monsieurs
Martine and Servin produced a writing which contained certain strange
Modifications, as for instance, that the Jesuits should not acknowledge their
General in Italy. And that they should be admitted in France with a Proviso,
with other impertinencies of the same stuff. And because they pretended
strongly the good of the Kingdom, and service of the King, his Majesty, (who
was advertised thereof) ordered that for the general satisfaction of all, the
Chancellor, should summon Monsieur Sellier, Castelneauf, de Mesce, the
President Crianine, and Mr. Villeroy, to hear their grievances and second
Remonstrances. Then was all examined, and it was determined that, upon the
forfeiture of their places, they should be silent, and make their Conclusions
conformable to the Kings Will, thereupon they departed discontented. His
Majesty made them be called the next day, and it was the last day of the year;
1^^3. the Eve of the Circumcision of our Savior, the Feast of the Society of
Jesus, appointing them by three several Messages to come to him two hours
before noon; then they came, but an hour later than the appointment.

The King came to them from his Chamber, and in the presence of ten or twelve
reproved them sharply for their Presumption, and Disobedience. Taxing them both
with their natural and their acquired Imperfections, notorious to every body;
Telling them that they had many Books, but had not yet well studied in that of
Experience, nor in that of Obedience; And that therefore his Majesty reserved
to himself that of experience, leaving to them the other of Obedience. Then
turning himself to Monsieur Servine said to him particularly. You think your
self wondrous wise in proposing that the Jesuits should not acknowledge their
General in Italy. And where I pray have you learnt Mr. Wiseacres, that there is
a Body without a Head, or a Company without a Captain. Five or six Orders,
which we have in France, peaceably own their Generals, yea though they be
Spaniards. You after say that the Jesuits hitherto have not been received but
with a Proviso; this is true, but this is a favor God has been pleased to
bestow on me, having reserved for me to admit them and establish them at the
same time, that they may be the more obliged and the more affectionate to me.

Monsieur Servin replied that whatever he had done in this Affair, was for the
service of his Majesty, and thereupon called Heaven and Earth to witness that
he had no other Design but to serve the Kings Family, for whom the King (as his
manner was) had an answer ready. If you manage my Affairs no better than you
have done your own, they will come to no good end, seeing you could have no
quietness with the two Wives, and the Son it pleased God to give you.

Now after many other passages, too long here to be related, the King said to
them, this is Wednesday, to morrow Thursday, if this day you make not your
Conclusions, you shall be none of my Officers to morrow. And if this Court of
Parliament shall think fit, I shall re-imburse the money to those that paid for
their Places. And in the places they held from me, I shall substitute others,
who shall be more useful, and more obedient to me than I find you are.

Monsieur Servine went away in a heat, saying, he should do according to his
Conscience. The King said if so be that you have a Hugonote Conscience, show
it, for I shall force no body. Whilst this past they slunk away one after
another, the King however continued all in anger, and for an hour after ceased
not to complain of the insolence of the aforesaid Officers. And Father Cotton
by chance finding him, endeavored particularly to Excuse the Attorney General
to his Majesty, saying of him, that he was forced for peace sake to temporise
with his Companions. And why, said the King, should not he rather comply and
temporise with me, than with his Companions? I take it ill from him, because he
ought only to demand their Opinions, not to follow their Conclusions, I advised
him of this, and yet he would do nothing.

These words were of such Efficacy, that the very same day, after dinner, the
Parliament met again, and made their Conclusion. The Chancellor would see it in
Writing, and he advised his Majesty to send and command Monsieur de Metz to be
present the next day, when the Court of Parliament sat, there to assist at the
verification of his Edict. Which was done the second of the year, 1604. whereby
we are clearly and simply established, according to the Kings Will, He would
not suffer to be added, that Clause of Violence, Expressimo mandato Regis.

Just upon the nick, as this Edict was verified, came two swinging Slanders
from the Hugonots against us, The one was by the means of an Apostate, lately a
Dominican Friar, who confessed he was such, and who, as he pretended, came Post
from Castres to advise the King that a certain Jesuit came from Perpignon to
murder the King, saying, he knew him by sight.

This news was brought to the King one afternoon, when he kept his Chamber for
a Catarrh, having Father Cotton alone with him at his Beds-head, to whom he
turning and smiling said, it may be that you are he, who stand there ready to
give the Blow. And on this occasion the King was very eloquent and enlarged on
the insolence of these false Reports, and Inventions that are scattered about
and spread over the Kingdom, and proposed Remedies he would have used. And
immediately he ordered the said Apostate to be carried to Monsieur Villeroy by
Monsieur de la Force, who had brought the news. Which Apostate was heard, and
after put into a Goalers hands, who carried him about the Streets all over
Paris to see if he could meet his pretended Jesuit. And now the good man began
to say that he would not be very confident, that 'twas a Jesuit, but that he
supposed him one, because he had seen him walk a kind of a modest gate. And he
used what means he could possibly, by the Hugonots, to get his Liberty, that he
might be gone into his own Country again.

The other Slander was, that the King had word from England, that Father Cotton
had sent Letters into England to exhort the Catholics there, to be all of good
Courage, for that the King of France would be their Protector against all
persons whatsoever. To which his Majesty answered that he believed not a little
of it, that Father Cotton he knew was more wise and cautious, giving order that
his Ambassador should inform the King of England from him to that effect.

But on the other hand as divine Providence always brings about in season, the
means to effect what it has pre-ordained. It pleased God that the Constable of
Castile in those days passed by Paris, and there being with him one of the
Spanish Fathers of the Society of Jesus; This Father desirous to see the face
of the King of France, having heard of the Zeal he professed to have for the
Catholic Religion, and for us: He was introduced by Father Cotton to his
Majesty; who amongst other questions demanded of him how many Jesuits there
were in Spain, he answered there might be three thousand five hundred
comprising those of Peru. I would, said the King, that there were so many in
France, and so after some discourse dismissed him, as also did the Queen, full of
content, and admiration, who could not after a long time be satisfied with his
Discourse, saying to Father Cotton, O quantum beneficium contulisti societati.

It would now be tedious to relate all the King has done toward having the
College opened, which he has founded near Anjou; and how those of our Society,
that go thither, are caressed. The Design, which of himself he has taken, to
have his heart, and that of the Queen buried in a Church, which he is building
there, the Seminaries of Scholars, the University, that he will erect, which
shall altogether be governed by us.

And how graciously he has received the Supplications of several Cities who
have desired Colleges of us.

And for that accident of the wound given to Father Cotton, he has showed
himself so full of Charity, in taking care about him, that his own Physicians
attend him, that he have Diet from his own Table, nor would let him have
Medicines, but from his own Closet, besides the Proclamations, and all the
Diligences used to find out the Malefactor, are above Imagination. But it has
pleased God that Father Cotton is miraculously recovered, without so much as a
Fever, and the Wound had not touched either Tendon or any Instrument of the
Voice, so that within thirteen days he Preached before the King, and continues
Preaching.

As for our College at Paris, his Majesty has a strong Design to enlarge it
with other Colleges.

Things go so well that we have reason to thank God infinitely, and to pray for
this most Christian King, and all his, and truly to acknowledge that Deus est
major Cord nostro, ipsi soli Gloria.

Advertisement.
HIV. had been bred in the reformed Religion, and (for Reasons best known to
himself) turned to the Popish. But that Party, whether suspecting his
Sincerity, or that they were more sure of the Guises, whom they aimed to
succeed him, sought all means to cut him off. Historians reckon in all fifty
Attempts upon his Person.

A Pyramid had been Erected, on which was engraven the Sentence against
Chastel, and the other Causes of the Jesuits Banishment. But Father Cotton
having insinuated, and got in, to be always about the Kings Person, he (whether
inchaunted by Cotton, or what other caprice moved him) caused the Pyramid to be
demolished and the Jesuits to be restored, notwithstanding all the earnest
Remonstrances of his University, and of his Parliament to the contrary.

His Conduct in this Affair showed what great Opinion he had of his own
Sufficiency and King-Craft. And his manner of treating his Parliament passed
for an extraordinary piece of wit, till afterward that Ravilliac came with an
unlucky hand and spoiled the Jest.

This Letter of our Jesuits is Printed in the Tesoro Politico, but left out in
the French and Latin Translations.

FINIS.

