CERTAIN CONCEPTIONS, OR, CONSIDERATIONS OF Sir PERCY HERBERT, UPON THE
Strange change of Peoples Dispositions and Actions in these latter times.

Directed to his Son.

Deus primum bonos proxime.

LONDON, Printed by E.G. and are to be sold by Richard Tomlins at the Sun and
Bible near Piecorner. 1650.



FOR MY SON Mr. WILLIAM HERBERT.
HAving compiled this small Treatise, chiefly for the entertainment of my self
and private family, consisting of moral and divine principles, collected
according to my several conceptions, answerable to the distractions of these
times, that neither gave me convenience of books or liberty for conversation, I
thought it most proper to direct the reading of these Writings more
particularly to your self then to any other: not only in regard you are the
appearing person, that probably must give continuance and succession to our
house, which I heartily wish may be in virtue, or not at all: but also, for
that part of the book was written whilst my imagination was employed in doubts
and fears, concerning your late dangerous sickness, which I must confess did
not a little heighten my troubled apprehension with the consideration of all
humane uncertainties, resolving then your loss, should have buried my
principal felicities in a retired obscurity, that now for your good I am
partly determined shall be further enlarged, according to convenience and
occasion: to which purpose upon the same score of consideration I must conjure
you to reflect often upon the extraordinary mercies of Almighty God, showed in
your behalf, not only in raising you unexpectedly from so hazzardable and
desperate a condition of weakness, to a competent if not a perfect degree of
health and strength of body, but also that he has been pleased to afford you
many other plentiful favors, in some kinds beyond the ordinary sort of men.
Wherefore as you appear by discourse sensible of these blessings I must advise
you to carry always about with you, those very thoughts you were enspired with
all, (according to your own relation) in the greatest extremity of your
sickness, as being freest from earthly passions, and those vain ambitions,
that use to corrupt the manners, if not the very understandings of most people.
However I would have you believe, that I go not about by these expressions to
entangle, muchlesse to compel you to a monastical severity of life, but only
I endeavor by my writings and directions, to persuade and confirm you, in such
a religious morality in your conversation and affairs (necessary to all
Christians) that may the better secure your condition both in this life and the
next. And although I am confident that these general admonitions might serve
for sufficient instructions to your youth, in regard I have been so well
acquainted with your nature and education, yet for that I may be thought
something large in my writings, concerning the extravagancies and vices of this
age, I will not let you pass in this Epistle, without some distinct
advertisments directed unto your self; however do not think I point
personally at you in any of these particulars, only my intention and aims
are, by setting before your consideration the inconveniences of these passions
and absurdities, you may become the more distasted with the practices of them
in others; since most pitiful examples of all sorts are daily presented to
your ears or eyes, especially of childrens disobedience to their parents.

Truly Will: if I should have any just occasion given me, to suspect your
intentionall duty or filial love, I should have cause sufficient, not only to
esteem my endeavors most unfortunate, but exceedingly to doubt of your
discretion, as well as to blame your ingratitude; since, as you cannot but know
how much your mother and my self have strived in your behalf, to the
uttermost of our powers: so is it unpossible in that regard, you can find more
confiding persons then our selves, whereon to place your chief trust and
confidence, either in difficulties or inconveniences. If at all God Almighty
had not added a temporal curse, to that Commandment, and to no other, which
obliges the duty of children to their parents, besides many other fearful
testimonies, I could bring, to show a necessity of performing with all honor
and respect, those filialties of nature: which I only tell you, because many
young people (as I said before) in these days, are grown so extravagantly
preposterous in their courses, that scarce is there family, but has some cause
to complain in this nature, with more then ordinary grief; whereas in times
past children thought it not only a reputation to their own persons, to bear a
respectful honor to their parents, but even with a certain kind of admiring
duty, were most careful and diligent, to imitate their very actions, as well as
to receive their instructions.

Next I must mind you, of that dangerous and swelling disease of vainglory,
that uses to intoxicate in this age, so much the brains of young people, that
as they become altogether void of any good nature at all, so not seldom being
transported with this vanity, they appear in some sort deprived of their wits;
however I am persuaded that you have contracted such an experience by your
being abroad, and having conversed without flattery, that if at any time by
accident you fall into the like errors, you will be soon able to put a bridle
to the humor by some temper and diseretion.

But as this inclination flows from too great an indulgency of nature,
wanting a competent judgment to discern, so is it the occasion often times,
not only of unnecessary and distastful contentions, but also of most desperate
quarrels, proceeding from dispositions too furious, which in this place, I
shall example by one short story not to be questioned for the truth thereof.

Two entirely loving brothers upon occasion of recreation, walking one evening
within the Precints of their ordinary dwelling, and beholding the sky
bespotted all over with stars, one of them of a sudden wished as many fat Oxen
of his own, as there appeared little lights in the Firmament; the other again,
not to be behind hand with his brother as he thought in invention, also desired
Pastorage as large as the whole Element, and then demanded how his Cattle would
be fed? the first apprehending belike indiscreetly some intention of affront to
his vain*glorious conceits; in heat and choler told his brother, that they
should feed in his pasture, whether he would or no: wherefore the other being
also moved with passion, at this seeming intention of compulsion, hastily
replied, that as by right he could not claim any interest in his Field or
Meadow, so was he fully resolved to debar him from all benefit and commodity
therein. But in conclusion, from words they went to blows, until at last both
drawing out their weapons, which they had unfortunately about them, they soon
became each others murderer, before any of the house could come to their
rescue, notwithstanding there wanted not good store of company in that noble
family. Which in my opinion may be taken for a most remarkable example of
transported natures, either by vain glory or anger, especially to be prevented
in matters of gaming, since persons for the most part in loss, are so far from
bridling their passions, that oftentimes they challenge to themselves certain
privileges to be offensive, as reflecting more upon the injury fortune does
them, then at the equality of them that played with them, who will find hardly
temper or civility to be abused by reason of such indulgent conceits, when
there is no other obligation to persuade them to the supposed compliance.

The desire or itching appetite of flattery, may be said also to be a property
of vaineglory, as well as a base effect of that lunacy, which in regard it is
of a dangerous consequence, especially to youth, I think it somewhat
convenient in this place to be remembered: for who are addicted thus to be
delighted, or rather to be laid asleep by such enchantments, must not only
still resolve to converse with fools and knaves, that either for ends, or out
of ignorance, will be ever subject to each fantastical humor of theirs, but
for the most part they shall be kept out of all eminent company, in regard that
those who have gained a powerful influence over their weakness, are obliged
to procure them the greatest distance may be with worth and knowledge, since
indifferent people without any partiality, would be apt to discover true or
false lights. Be assured that this inclination proceeds from a kind of low
disposition, though extremely swollen up with a preposterous and ignorant pride,
that wants sufficient courage to gain estimation by industry; such people at
last will be forced to entertain fearce any thing else but sloth and
sensuality: which is the worst condition man possibly can fall into.

To avoid all these inconveniences, nothing is more proper, then to keep
always the mind and the body employed with some Noble activity; however it is
not sufficient to be continually busied, but it will be found most necessary
also to have some design or period in the imagination; as well to know when to
end, as what to begin; neither to be wearied by difficulties, or altered
through inconstancy, and so by consequence not to leave any prosecution,
unless the judgment upon serious deliberation give a willing and knowing
consent: for no doubt as the Word is most composed of craft and ignorance, so
will there not want perpetually abundance of alluring diversions: in that
people for the most part cannot well brook worth in another, since they are
resolved not to take the pains for it themselves, and therefore will endeavor
rather to undermine reputations by detraction, then hope to equal virtues by
industry. If you do well, you must look rather to be spighted then commended;
and if you do ill, you may only purchase some little compliance with your
perdition.

Last of all, I would not have you too much either to reflect upon our past
felicities, or too feelingly apprehend our present misforfortunes; since both
the one and the other may seem past recovery; yet as we have suffered something
injuriously, though perhaps but equal with others of the same quality and
prosperity, so aparantly have we beheld in all our sufferings, evident signs
of Gods mercies toward us, not only in delivering us from many hazards and
dangers, with a convenient supply always when our necessities were most
pressing; but also has formed your education, out of these troubles; which I
dare be bold to say (in your own thoughts) you value more then a great deal of
worldly fortune. However, it is not sufficient only to have these conceits and
opinions, but with industry and discretion, you are to make use of both what
you have, and what you have not, by pitching upon some laudable settlement for
your future conveniencie and subsistence, in which course, in despite of all
malice and enticements, I would have you to be resolute, and so little ashamed
of the profession and practice of Religion and Honor, that boldly you are not
only to love and cherish those virtues in your self, but publicly to
countenance them wheresoever you shall find them in others, in so doing, you
shall ever oblige me to rest,

Your most affectionate Father PERCIE HERBERT.

To the Reader.
I Must confess, when first I fell upon the determination, to exercise my Pen
in a subject of this nature, I never thought my endeavors should have past
further then the bounds of my own family; but being since persuaded by some
reasons (which I need not express) to make my writings more public; as also
not well knowing what certain habitation I shall be master of in these
distracted times, when as oppression already has dealt so hardly with me, I
have caused these conceptions of mine to be printed, that they may also (if
there be occasion) seek their own fortune in the World, though I fear they
will not find competent entertainment, in regard they seem not much (perhaps
not at all) to suit with the constitution of the age; at least they appear not
any way ambitious, after the customs now chiefly in fashion; although I can
confidently assure the Reader, that as they are not any way painted and
flourished, whereby to procure the better acceptance, so in the inside are they
purely without hypocrisy and ostentation, having no plot at all to deceive the
World. Whereupon I must take so much boldness, as to require those who at any
time shall cast their eyes, if not their intentions upon these lines with some
curious appetite, that they will yet do me so much right (though they should
want thereby their own satisfaction) as to proceed in a methodicall way, in
their passing over the Chapters, lest what I intend for something may prove
nothing to their apprehensions, for want of sufficient order and patience to
consider; and the rather may I expect this courtesy (if you will let it be a
charity) for that the book it self is so extreme short, that if I did not
intend to enlarge it by a second part, I might be something ashamed that the
press under my name and solicitation, has been employed with so small a
Pamphlet, and therefore consequently can give the Reader no excessive trouble,
to take the more deliberation in the truer understanding of my intentions,
which may prove far more satisfactory to us both if this course be observed:
and also do desire that he will be pleased to excuse and rectify those Faults
that have escaped in the printing, by his own judgment, which the sense will
sufficiently direct him unto, without any great difficulty.

THE INTRODUCTION, OR INDUCEMENT Of the whole BOOK.
AS most people in our age do furiously complain of their own sufferings,
rather quarrelling with the Times, then with their Vices: So the late Act of
Confinement, contributing very little benefit or opportunity to the delight of
Conversation, gives me leisure and convenience enough, not only to exercise my
several imaginations in many extravagant Fancies, as well concerning my own
Crosses, as other men's Actions; but other whiles more seriously to recollect
together those Cogitations in a Method, whereby I might pick out of them some
advantages toward my particular Use and Comodity. And to this purpose,
although I would not have any think, that I intend presumptuously to be an
instructor of others (it neither being proper for my Profession, or within the
compass of my Ability, however I must confess my desires therein are
competently charitable;) yet I conceive it most agreeing with my intentions in
some orderly way to put down my conceptions in writing, that they be the better
sixth in my memory when I shall have occasion to put in execution the effects of
this necessary contemplation. Wherefore if any shall demand either why I write
at all, or make election of no meaner a Subject, as it may be thought, beyond
the reach of my seeming Capacity: My reply must be, that as the first part of
the Question is already answered, by my not having for the present any passable
employment, either at home or abroad; so the latter will quickly find this
Reply, by reason of one Principal, grounded strongly in my mind, that slight
and impertinent Discourses are most unfit for this intemperate and licentious
Season; which being allowed me, I must take leave to say, as well as to think,
that notwithstanding there are very many, as I intimated before, extreme
sensible of their sufferings in these days of tribulation, because they feel
the smart of their green Wounds newly made; yet I am confident there are very
few that do absolutely believe the inflammation proceeds from a secret Poison
long time ago ingendered in the heart of this Nation; wherefore if men would
but look back upon the Posture of this Kingdom in the beginning of these Wars,
at what time I may bodly affirm, scarce any Virtue was practiced with
confidence and assurance, those thoughts perhaps would soon find a way to
judge from what Original these misfortunes have proceeded: Again, of the
otherside if we can open our eyes for the present, at the continuance, if not
increase of Sin and Vice, not to be paraleld perchance by former Stories, we
may without over much difficulty be persuaded that in a manner it is
unpossible, God Almighty should yet withdraw his heavy hand of punishment from
off our Country; For as in the general we had experience, the Nobility were
degenerated, the Gentry corrupted, Women grown impudent, and the common People
Atheistical; so may we perceive now, by a strict enquiry, that at present the
very Natures and Dispositions of most Persons are changed into a certain kind
of strange Lunacy, or preposterous Madness in their Actions, as if some ominous
Revolution were yet to be made in this Nation: Which I must confess has not
only oftentimes amazed my own private thoughts, but makes me conclude, that as
these wonderful Insensibilities and Impieties, proceed from some fatal
displeasure of Heaven, so of necessity must the Causes of these Ills arise,
either from the believing there is no God, that Jesus Christ was not the true
Savior of the World; from some high and peremptory presumption of his mercies,
or from too much stupidity in peoples apprehensions, proceeding from the
enchantment of fleshly Appetites. To all which we will speak something in
particular, since my intentions are by this Discourse to remember the
imperfections of the Times, for my Own and Families Admonition.

Against Atheism.
IN the first Place, if any do suppose, that there is no God, or omnipotent
Disposer of all things, with a certain kind of order, but as if by chance
every creature did produce and suffer increase and diminution, without any
further design and intention, the opinion is not only most ridiculous, but
even repugnant to Nature it self, which seems to pretend an orderly Rule in all
her Actions and Effects; for that besides the general confusion it would soon
bring upon each production, in regard Seeds in every Species, could not in a
short time but jar amongst themselves, wanting the true mixture, by the
application of those helps necessary for Increase and Continuance, as Sun and
Rain with the like, without which all generations would quickly perish, it is
evident the ancient Philosophers merely by the compulsion of Reason, without
any manner of Revelation from Heaven, were forced against their Wills and
Appetites not only to confess some Supernatural and Divine Operatour, that
made the World and commanded at first the course of the Heavens, with the
influence of the Planets, that they might be proportionable to the Commodity
and Subsistence of lower Motions; But also acknowledged one single Essence and
Deity, as Master of every Creation, since they knew divided Powers could not be
omnipotent, in respect they might have several Wills which must needs produce
diverse Effects tending to confusion, by which means things would not be
conveniently governed and ordered to Subsistence and Increase: Besides, we may
fall upon this consideration, that there was never yet any people upon earth,
how Barbarous soever in their understanding, and rude and ignorant in their
conversations, though separated from all possibility of Instruction, but by the
very documents of Nature it self, did use a formal Sacrifice, or exterior
Worship to some god or other, whom they did in a sort fear and reverence,
though they had not knowledge sufficient by education, to distinguish rightly
who he was, or what were his Attributes: Again, it has been observed that
scarce any Atheist, how wild and blasphemous soever, in his discourses, and
infamous and dissolute in his course of life, but at the sudden apprehension of
death or some other imminent danger, would seem to cast up his eyes to Heaven,
as demanding a kind of assistance in his necessity, being induced thereunto,
only by a natural instinct of fear, though perhaps in perfect safty, he would
be either of another opinion, or of a different comportment; which shows there
is something supernatural, that compels man to acknowledge and reverence his
Creator, let his will be never so perverse, who must be honored in spite of
all wickedness: Further let us but cast our looks upon the Plants of the Earth,
with their wonderful effects, and we shall see every where, such diversity of
kinds, both in show and operation, and yet proceeding but from one Womb, that
it would amaze our consideration to learn to know how they could be
distinguished in their growth, not having any relation at all to each other,
which certainly cannot be without some Divine providence: In like manner we may
behold every little Bird naturally to have a several way of building its Nest,
according to the same Species he is of, which Form constantly he maintains
though he be never so far distant from others of that kind, however he is not
capable, either of art or imitation, and with all as soon as the young are out
of the shell, they can readily without instruction, provide for their own
safety and commodity, without Practice or Information, whether it be to defend
themselves, against the violence of ravenous creatures, though they never saw
the like before, or to seek those nutriments which their welfare requires: As
for example Ducks presently after they are hatched will covet the water, though
Chickings cannot by any means be induced to enter into a pool, for fear of
being drowned, for that Nature teaches them they may not swim, having no other
experience for that Science, then what their omnipotent Creator has Divinely
infused into them for their preservation: Whereas of the contrary man is not
endued with such timely foresight (though he be of a far more noble making)
because his wise God sees it not necessary for his present being, in that he
has ordained him reasonable creatures for his defense, and to take care of him
whilst he is young, which I say shows a high providence beyond all dispute:
Again, who is it has placed so admirable a property in the Loadstone, and
keeps the Sea within his bounds? notwithstanding the continual course of so
many Rivers, which else would exceed according to the rule of other waters, to
the destruction of the whole World, but he that has designed all things to
work convenient effects, by his omnipotency toward preservation, since no
Schollership or Learning is able to give convincing Testimonies of either: And
last of all it may be considered, that man being the noblest of Creatures
visible, if there were not something above him, he himself should be the orderer
of nature, since all things else we see want Sense or Reason, and man also not
knowing its uttermost bounds, we must conclude he was created by a more
excellent Essence; As for Example, we see this huge Ball of the Earth hangs in
the air, without any support, contrary to the nature of all solid bodies that
ever fall downwards, by the mere compulsion of their weight; so that of
necessity there is something more powerful then Nature, that commands it against
its course, which cannot be man, because he is not only ignorant of this, but
many other mysteries. Again, it is unpossible that Nature can be this
omnipotent Eternity, for that we see her in most things subject to accident,
and apparently decays daily in her productions, which shows she is not Perfect
and Independent, and therefore can be no god; for man being her best piece, is
born infirm, lives a time with trouble, and at last dies by Violence or Age,
all which seems to be to little purpose, for the being of the World, without
any other design or end: Wherefore we may conclude, that something above either
man or nature must needs order all things according to his pleasure, for some
use more then ordinary, since certainly his works can be no more in vain, then
himself can be without eternity, and how his intensions can be less then to an
eternal end: I cannot see the least reason, that ought to administer any
occasion of dispute, however for orders sake, we may discourse in this manner.

For the Immortality of the soul.
That as this mighty omnipotent and all powerful God, has here created a most
large and beautiful World, full of all kind of useful varieties, so must this
world be created to some other effects, then only to produce and consume,
without any other purpose or design: And what could the intention of this
creation be, but to preserve some immortal thing, ordained for Gods own proper
and particular Use and Service, which can never end? neither is it possible
that this thing, or subject of Gods intention, can be any other, then man's
reasonable Soul, in which he has placed so clear an understanding, differing
from all creatures else in a most high measure, since Beasts, Birds, and the
like, are endued only with Life and Sense, whereas man alone enjoys the
fruition of Reason, by which he comes to know, the very nature almost of all
other things: But here perhaps may be alleged, that we give too great a
prerogative to man's Soul, since he does no more exceed other creatures in
knowledge, then one creature seems to pass another in subtilty, which shows
degrees, as they say, of excellency in ordination, though not perfection in
man's Creation: Unto which Objection, I shall briefly make this Answer, That as
it had been an needless or impertinent thing (as I intimated before) for God
Almighty, to have made the World with its Beauties, merely for man's Subsistence
(as being held the best of Creatures) and himself to be created to no other
end, but only to live and dye, and others to succeed him, which is nothing
else, but to go round in a Circle, without either design, intention or purpose;
Which certainly as this cannot stand with the nature of Gods Wisdom, so of the
other side, it may easily be determined, by any reasonable judgment, how far
the capacity of man's soul goes beyond the understanding of all other creatures,
that were ever yet made in the world, since he is able, a knowing way by the
very strength of reason, not only in times of danger and necessity, to call
upon his Maker with some confidence for assistance, (which no other living
thing will be able to do, by all the instruction can be infused into him by
humane Art whatsoever) but even in some sort, can define his Creators very
Nature and Essence, by those Rules given him by Divinity and Philosophy,
allowing and disproving them if there be occasion, by his own natural Reason
and Apprehension: Which is a difference of so high a prerogative, that by it we
resemble Gods own Image, in foreseeing, judging, and distinguishing of good and
evil, right and wrong, as also between ignorance and science, whereas other
creatures carry about with them only Sense and Memory, that serves them but for
subsistence and preservation, being all they need for the end they were made,
which was alone for man's use and commodity: For no person in his right wits
will tell me that an Elephant, or a Fox (they being esteemed the wisest, and
most intelligible of creatures) can be instructed by all the learning in the
world, for never so many years together, to govern a Kingdom, lead an Army, or
give convenient Counsel in matters of difficulty, much less to know the orderly
course of the Planets: Wherefore I must conclude, that as there is no
comparison between man's Understanding, and other Animals, of what excellency
soever, so God Almighty having given man's reasonable soul, so principal a
preheminency above other creatures, it must be that if any thing ordained for
eternity, and eternal something must be (as I said before) for which this great
world was made, since his Wisdom, Goodness, and omnipotency, could not act any
thing in vain, which of necessity must follow, if man should only live to dye
after a while, without enjoying any further happiness or end: As for Example,
it would be esteemed a very great madness (or at leastwise a palpable
indiscretion in humane Actions) for any person to breed and nourish living
creatures, without some intention, either to supply his necessities or please
his senses: Much more ridiculous to think God Almighty (that is not subject at
all to error) should create and preserve what, he did not intend for some
purpose: Wherefore I say this divine Essence, as he cannot be capable of these
or any other Passions and Defects, so would he not have made this world,
without an intention conducing to eternity for their sakes, to whose use the
earth was ordained at the first: Since all his operations can tend to no lower
an end in every of his Works, which must be infinite like to himself: of the
other side, certainly this Object of his, can be no other then the Soul of man;
he only of all other creatures, being endued with a reasonable and noble
Understanding, and therefore pleased it should participate of a Glory (out of
his infinite mercy) that could not be created, because his sublime goodness
never intended any thing directly for destruction, but by way of accident, or
rather provoked thereunto by his necessary Justice for his eternal Honor: But
if man's reasonable Soul should be Mortal, as some Fools perhaps may
ridiculously suppose, what privilege has his excellent creation above other
inferior creatures, over whom he is ordained Lord and Master, nay rather I may
say apparent disadvantages, since not only most living things exceed him in
the Faculties, and Use of their Senses, but also in not being subject to the
unhappiness of the perturbation of the mind, upon the arival of worldly
accidents, which may be esteemed the greatest afflictions of this Life: for
that foreknowledge and apprehension of Death, or Miseries before they come, are
a continual discomforture to all present Delights, and an interruption to that
content, which should render him happy and pleased within himself; Whereas
unreasonable creatures want those perturbations of thought and apprehension, to
afflict them: So that if man had not Immortality to expect, in lieu of such
sufferings, I might truly affirm his Creator had done him much injury in giving
him a reasonable Soul, to his further disquiet and vexation, and might justly
conclude him more unfortunate in his creation, then all those creatures, over
whom he is designed to govern; which certainly his good and wise God never
intended him, since he was pleased to make him so excellent in his
understanding: And so I end with Atheism, though I must again fall upon a new
Dispute, concerning Infidelity, which is no other, then to doubt something of
the Person or Passion of our Savior.

That our Savior was the true Messiah.
WE shall begin with the time of Christ's coming in the Flesh, which apparently
was foretold, should be when the Jews Scepter was to be taken away from the
right Line, and a general Peace proclaimed over the face of the Earth: Both
these, I say, were punctually fulfilled at his Blessed Birth; insomuch as not
only Herod who then wore the Diadem of Jury, was a mere stranger as well by
Extraction as by Nation, but also the Temple of Ianus, was then shut up in
Rome, the accustomed Ceremony belonging to such a Iubily of Pacification: Next
it was plainly Prophesied by many places in Holy Scripture, that the Jews in
time to come, should be discarded for their impiety, and the Gentiles to be
Elected in their Rooms: All which we see at this day so exactly performed, that
they are not only scattered over the Earth without Honor or Dominion (being a
Scandal and Reproach to all other Countries) but have not so much, as either
Temple or Priest, to offer their Sacrifice or exercise their Rights, whilst of
the contrary, we behold the Christian Religion, most gloriously to flourish
amongst the Gentiles, almost over the whole world, to the absolute abolishing
of all the ancient Idols, which in the Primitive times were so generally
esteemed and worshipped, that whosoever refused their adorations, were to
undergo the worst of torments, for their contempt; however, this Faith of ours
had no visible encouragement to humane eyes; but of the contrary, was frighted
by horrid terrors received from the blood of Martyrs, and yet these people
were only persuaded to their constant and admirable belief, by the poor and
simple Preaching of a few unlearned and contemptible Fishermen, insomuch, as
great and wise Doctors in a manner in an instant, gave up their lives
willingly, to most exasperated and cruel Tyranny, in witness and confirmation
of that blessed Truth, notwithstanding the opinions themselves that they were
taught, were against all appetites, and Sense of man, which of necessity must
imply, that these strange and sudden opperationses, could proceed from no
other thing but divine instigation: Besides, we see according to many
Predictions of the Prophets, that Kings and Queens, are become nursing fathers
and mothers to this holy Faith, with so much alacrity, that they are not only
content to submit to the Churches jurisdiction, but in a manner lay down their
glorious Crowns and Scepters, (with the more humility) to prostrate their
persons, at the steps of this Tribunal: which certainly is beyond all humane
apprehension to conceive; since neither honor, profit, nor worldly felicity,
seems to attend the intention of their practices: Neither had the Doctrine at
the first, (as I say) any probability to be believed; for that it taught such
strange and unheard of mysteries, that could not come almost within the compass
of any brain to invent. And surely if man only had been the Author of this
change, he would have devised some more easy way to have pleased flesh and
blood, or to have better satisfied peoples understandings: much less would
Jesus Christ in the very infancy of this belief, have subjected not only
himself, but all his Disciples, to such penurions want, and most intolerable
torments; accompanied with nothing else but contempt and scorn, without any
hope at all, either of benefit, honor, or reward, if as an Impostor only, he
had intended the deceiving of the people, for his own vain glory. Next, if we
consider, the most woeful and lamentable destruction of Jerusalem, to happen so
directly according to our Saviors saying, though that City was then at the
present, in an extraordinary flourishing condition; and in a perfect subjection
to the Romans, whose Emperor the inhabitants professed to serve, love, and
honor, before all the world, we may easily perceive, that no less then a
Divine Spirit could have uttered those Prophesies, as also happening immediately
after his death and passion, it was most apparent, a heavenly hand only
punished their impiety, both for the cruelty used toward his person, as in
regard of their obstinacy in refusing his Doctrine, denying him to be their
spiritual King: which curse also has continued ever since upon their condition
as a remarkable plague for their ingratitude; whilst of the contrary (as we
see) God Almighty has advanced his own glory every where, by striking dumb all
the Oracles of the Devil, notwithstanding they have been violently supported,
by the Art and power of tyrannical Princes over the world: until at last, we
may behold these great Monarchs of the the earth, forced to submit themselves
to the belief and jurisdiction of that seeming contemptible Church in the
beginning, which they had most maliciously persecuted; insomuch, as at this
present, there is not to be found any Nation or persons, of the Pagan Religion
any where; however that opinion was wont to entertain the pens and actions of
multitudes of great and learned Philosophers, for many hundreds of years
together, accompanied with the delusions of their false gods; which now are all
vanished into smoke; and the Christian Faith alone dilated amongst the Gentiles
everywhere, to the wonder of all humane consideration; again, we may reflect
upon that saying of holy Scripture, as a further testimony to this Truth,
against the Jews: I have no will in your offerings, nor gifts will I receive
at your hands, for from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my
Name is great among the Gentiles; and in every place there shall be
sacrificing, and a pure offering offered to my Name: Which intimates no other,
then that the Jews were to be despised and turned off, and the Gentiles
introduced into their places. A Prophecy so plainly verified in these days,
that we do not only see, the Jews and their Religion laid aside, with the
general calling of the Gentiles, but also this oblation every where offered by
the Christians, consisting only in one thing, and performed after one manner,
though in many places; whereas the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Jews were
diverse, both in matter and form, as well as the performing thereof was confined
to one place: besides, we might bring not only the Confessions of the heathen
Oracles themselves, for the Divinity and Godhead of our Savior, but the
ancient prophecies of the Sibyls, allowed, approved, and preserved; with a
great deal of veneration by the Roman Monarchy and other Commonwealths, if
there were any need either to strengthen our Testimonies, or confute other
opinions; to which we may add these considerations, that it is not probable
that so poor a beginning as had first the Christian Religion, against the sense
and appetite of humane nature, persecuted with violence in the very infancy of
the Church, countenanced by none but despicable people, and the belief of it
self grounded only on imaginable fruition, her mysteries in a manner not being
conceiveable almost by the highest capacity, should so suddenly increase, and
so long continue, notwithstanding all the oppositions from time to time
sustained, both from Craft and Tyranny; if this sacred Truth were not supported
by an omnipotency, not to be contended against by all the power of earth and
Hell: Wherefore I must conclude, that as these proofs are sufficient to any
indifferent understanding, whereby to convince all men of Infidelity, touching
the Divinity of our Savior, and the truth of his suffering for our offenses;
so are we obliged to observe his precepts in particular, if we hope to receive
benefit by his death, as they are declared in the same holy Scriptures. And
consequently ought, under the pain of a most terrible condemnation to abate in
us, if not the appetites, yet at leastwise the practice and violence of sin,
that seems in this corrupt age, to take so much possession of our persons and
actions, as if Religion were turned, only to a vast Chaos of confused liberty,
without temper or morality.

In which wild exercise of preposterous sensuality, perhaps many are confirmed
out of some presumptuous hope, that God Almighty does not readily look upon the
transgressions of guilty offenders.

The punishment of the Angels against all vain Presumption.
AGainst which pernicious fancy, may be brought this Discourse, First we will
begin with the Angels before the creation of the world, as it may be believed
according to some opinions, who were the perfectest of all creatures, and in
whom God intended not only to show his power and goodness, but his Justice and
hate of sin, for as he made them in the highest degree of happiness, to express
his Majesty; so he punished their single offense, to show his equity, not in
any kind pardoning them, in regard of the sublimity of their making, since
knowing him best in doing any thing against his Divinity, they could not but
offend him most; wherefore he, as I say, neither put limitation nor condition
to their punishments; for as his omnipotency was by them more clearly
discerned, by reason of their excellent nature, so was the eternity of their
unhappiness to be without redemption, for abusing so much that knowledge, the
more justly inflicted upon them, both for our future examples, that we might
not too much presume and for the declaration of his own glory, who will be
always just: each appearing as well in the blasphemies of the damned, as in the
adoration of the blessed; since all creatures actions are alike to his Godhead,
neither rendering him more nor less then he is: for as by the participation
only of his goodness, we receive benefit according to that obedience we show
in performing his Commandments, so of the contrary, if we do not fulfill his
will, we must not think to escape correction, because he never goes from
himself; for he can no more comply with sin, then he can lay down his Divinity;
being both attributes of his eternal essence: and therefore, as he spared not
these excellent spirits, merely out of his justice, though it were but only in
one single thought of pride, we must not think to be protected by his mercy,
committing daily so many crimes.

In the next place we must reflect upon the punishment of man for his
transgression, The punishment of man for his transgression in Paradise.
who as he had less knowledge of his Creator in his sinning, so was he more
gently used in Gods indignation; for notwithstanding he deserved also a
perpetual condemnation for his offense, in regard of the eternal majesty
against whom he rebelled, yet by reason of the natural frailty of his
condition, by which he was more subject to err in being made of earth, God was
pleased to annex certain conditions, and provisoes to the sentence;
nevertheless, with so high a consideration of his own justice, that he would no
otherwise give him any hope of pardon, then by the assurance of the death of
his only son; having decreed in his eternal wisdom, that no lower a price
could make satisfaction, to appease his divine wrath conceived against man, for
having broken his Commandments, then an omnipotent pawn, since as man had
offended his Creator, no less then a Creator was to redeem the offense; by
reason of his heavenly justice, that necessarily seemed to exact so high a
condition: wherefore, as I say, there was no other way left, but for the Son of
God to take upon him our flesh and blood, because as God in his own nature
could not suffer, so our nature only could not satisfy, without some divine
conjunction; which are most convincing Arguments to show the extreme severity
of God Almighties justice, when he would not fall upon any other means for our
Redemption: however, we see that although the Son of God was designed to
perform this mysterious service to his Father, for our benefit; which goodness
is not to be comprehended by all the mortal thoughts in the world, much less to
be requited by any humane action or endeavor; yet for all this excessive love
expressed to mankind, God was not pleased presently to bring him into Heaven,
or place him again in his earthly Paradise, but on the contrary, enjoined him a
continual penance, which was, to get his living all the days of his life by the
sweat of his brows, and withal ordained his wife to bring forth children with
pain and travail, as temporal punishments designed to each, whereby they might
also in their own persons satisfy Gods justice, in regard of their own first
disobedience, over and besides the sufferings of our Savior: which plainly
demonstrateth, that this great God of ours will not be so easily pacified,
however the presumption and lunatic fancies of many, may suggest to their
overweening appetites, a hope to enter into heaven, accompanied with all the
delights of the world; as if we were here only for our pleasures, and not for
the necessary maintenance of a pilgrimage upon earth, which is to work forth
our salvation with industry, care and trembling.

Again, we may consider Cain, the first man that was born of a woman, The
punishment of Cain.
who however his sin was extraordinary, yet the original proceeded from a kind
of penuriousness in his nature, only to preserve his best things from the
consuming fire of Sacrifice, which notwithstanding was so resented by his Lord
and Maker, that he not only permitted him to fall into those horrid crimes of
envy and murder, but presently chased him from the society of all good people,
with a kind of a loathing terror to himself, laying a general curse upon his
whole posterity, who after were totally destroyed in the universal stood, with
those they had corrupted, for whose punishment that deluge was sent upon the
face of the earth, as an apparent mark of Gods indignation against wicked
persons, who are not always alone chastised for the offenses they commit, but
also oftentimes in their posterity; since it is not to be doubted, but some of
those that perished in the general destruction pleased God in their actions, as
is intimated by the second Epistle of St. Peter.

Next we will remember Cham, The chastisement of Cham.
the unfortunate son of Noah, who only for his irreverence to his fathers
frailty, was eternally punished; upon which occasion receiving his curse, he
was instantly banished from his presence, and for his offense became the father
of a most impious and rebellious Nation, both against God and man: insomuch as
tyrannical Nimrod his grandchild, after he had presumptuously made war against
heaven, in the building of that stupendous Tower of Babel, where his proud
works were confounded by the diversity of languages, he set up the first
Idolatry, causing himself to be worshipped as a God: from whence has proceeded
error, wickedness and damnation ever since to people, until the force of our
blessed Saviors bitter Passion absolutely destroyed all those lying Oracles,
that so long deluded the earth, with the false opinions of that pretended true
Religion.

The affliction of the Jews.
Here we must introduce the story of the Jews: A people particularly elected
out of mankind, to be the objects of Gods love and care, as another example of
his justice: for, however their punishments were but proportionable to their
knowledge of his Divine essence, in regard they were not so perfect as Adam, to
understand his will and pleasure, who in Paradise had absolute power to forbear
sin, and do good; so were their chastisements for the most part but temporary
and worldly; not imposed upon them and their posterity eternally as his was:
yet if we look upon their many sufferings and captivities, we shall find,
notwithstanding that God Almighty did not forget their offenses, permitting but
two of all that numerous Army, that came out of Egypt, to enter into the Land
of Promise, the only hope and desired period of all their tedious travels; in
which number Moses that most excellent servant of God, and indefatigable
Captain, also was included, by reason of some small defect, in the execution of
his Office, which not only shows the impartiality of God Almighties justice,
as well toward those he loves, as to them he hates, but may very clearly
admonish us against the fancy of presumption, in that our Creator can no more
comply with sin, or pardon it without our repentance and satisfaction, then he
can leave off the Attributes of his own Divinity and Omnipotency.

Again, The punishment of Eli the Priest, with Saul and others
we may consider the rigid severity of his justice, in the further progress of
this story, however to avoid prolixity, we shall only name a few examples of
those particular persons, he seemed most to favor: and to this purpose,
passing by many others most exemplar: we will begin with Eli, Samuels master,
who was a man neither of an ill inclination, or visibly much defective in his
Office: yet we read, that by reason of that remissness, he used in not
punishing and reforming his children, and those Priests under his charge (being
admonished thereunto) he not only was chastised with the lamentable news of
the death of both his sons, and the taking of the Ark by the Philistines,
according as it was foretold, but suddenly broke his neck, falling from his
seat, as the report was made unto him of those misfortunes: next we may reflect
upon King Saul, whom God Almighty had only picked out to be the Prince of his
people, though afterward he became the subject of his wrath: for not enduring
to hear the praises of David, whom he seemed to envy, preferring his own
vainglory before the will of God, in a short time he fell to be such a ^^
wards became a also monument of destruction, in only looking back upon that
dreadful spectacle contrary to Gods commandment, perhaps with some repining
appetites, in regard of those pleasures she was unwillingly forced to foregoe.

The children of Isreal's sensuality punished.
Again, it is to be noted, that the children of Israel having freed themselves
from their intolerable slavery of Egypt, by their miraculous passing the Red
Sea, under the conduct of Moses: yet because in their journey (with too much
sensuality) they called to mind the flesh pots they had left behind, were not
only continued wandering in the Deserts of Arabia, for forty years together,
bitten with Serpents, and often times pined with hunger, but at last lost their
lives, and wasted out their days, in that peregrination, insomuch, as but two
persons only of the whole numerous company (as I said before) born in Egypt,
were permitted by the just judgment of Almighty God, to enter into the Land of
Promise, which flowed with milk and honey, notwithstanding God Almighty had
designed them to be his elected people; and whose posterity afterward,
accordingly did supplant other Nations.

From this Discourse, we will proceed to the consideration, of the several
fates of the four great Empires of the world, The fate of the four Monarchies
of the world, and first of the Assyrians.
since they are so largely mentioned in holy Scripture, to be Prophetically
figured by divine revelation. To which purpose, we may begin with the
Assyrians, in order to ancient Histories, as well humane as sacred, wherein it
is recorded, that when as Balthazar the last King, perceived the judgment of
God pronounced both against his life and Dominion, by the dreadful handwriting
upon the Wall, which none could interpret but Daniel; himself and his
Concubines, were then riotously feasting without care or trouble, in the mighty
City of Babylon, which according to the foresaid Prediction, Cyrus that very
night took by surprise, not only to their confused amazement, but in
confirmation of Gods indignation against such sensual stupidity, that leaves
not men any apprehension of their own danger: wherein may be also noted, that
as the fall of this great Empire was probably a stupid sensuality, since the
Monarch himself did not sufficiently apprehend his danger, whereby to be
careful enough, to provide resistance against his enemy, being so near him; so
of the other side, it pleased Almighty God to demonstrate unto him his own
terrible fate, when he was acting the highest expressions of his luxuries and
insensibility, as a more remarkable judgment against that horrid and beastly
sin.

But however the Persians by this fatal and sudden conquest, Of the Persians.
made themselves Masters of the Assyrian Monarchy, which they continued with
property for some generations, yet it was not long, before they also fell into
extreme riots, and carelessness both of their persons and honors; insomuch, as
we read, that certain Ambassadors being sent from Persia into Greece, and
there feasted by a King of Macedon, they became so insolently debauched,
contrary to the customs of that more temperate Country, that they peremptorily
demanded, to have the conversation, and company of the Grecian Ladies at their
entertainment, which they supposed durst not be denied them with a liberal
freedom, as a right appertaining as they thought, to the prerogative of their
calling, in being messengers, sent from the greatest Monarch in the world; but
the young Prince, (though his father at the present was something afraid, to
contradict their humors) disdaining their carriage and insolent demands,
caused both himself, and some other noble men of the Court, to be disguised in
women's apparel; and in this posture again entering the room, when the
Ambassadors began to be rude and lascivious, they suddenly drew out certain
weapons, which to that purpose they had secretly hid under their garments, and
fell upon these companies with so much fury, that their lives quickly paid the
price of their inhumanity; which notwithstanding, engendered such a quarrel
between the two Nations, that never ended until Alexander the great became
absolute master of both, by the overthrow of the last Darius, who also came to
battle against him triumphing, with all his Concubines in a most profuse way of
sensuality; which presently after was punished, not only in the absolute loss
of all his vast Dominions, but by a most lamentable and ignominious death in
his own person.

Which conquest brought the Monarchy of the world to the Grecian power, Of the
Grecian Monarchy.
until their licentiousness also lost it to the Romans: for Percius their last
King, having by his unworthy and false disposition, exasperated the Senate of
Rome, they sent the Consul Paulus Aemylius into Greece, with a strong Army to
chastise him for his baseness; whom being overcome and brought with some
intention of honor (in regard of his quality) to the presence of the General:
yet behaving himself most poorly and ignominiously, unbecoming his person,
though in his prosperity he was both proud and sensual, he was so disdained by
the Consul, and hated by the soldiers, that presently after the triumph, he
was put to a most cruel death in Prison by his keepers, who could not endure
his person: whilst in the interim his eldest son and heir, became a common
Register in Rome, the only means left him to gain his subsistence.

And thus ended also that great and sometimes famous Empire, The fate or
declining of the Roman Empire by reason of luxury.
which continued in the Romans the last of the four, until that Empire became
in process of time also drowned in luxury, according to the report of many
authentical Authors, who affirm that Brutus and Cassius were held to be the
last of the Romans, or only brave persons of the age, endued with noble
Spirits, and free from sloathful sensuality, insomuch, as that once gallant
people within some years, were absolutely captivated again, under a base and
slavish Tyranny, as they had been formerly by licentious Tarquin, though some
gallant men now and then appeared amongst them: which Dominion remained
uncertainly flowing, from one Tyrant to another, till the unlearned Turks (that
at present enjoy the fruitfullest of their Dominions) became Masters of their
chief Country (as namely Greece) that in past ages was esteemed Mistress of the
world, both for Art and Valor, whilst temperance governed her actions: though
now it be become of so base a production, that the people thereof have left
them neither Science nor courage, but of the contrary, are wrought at present
into so unworthy a stupidity, with their continual excesses, that (as it is
observed in their dispositions) they would not be delivered from their slavery
if they might, lest they might be put to the exercise of any laborious industry
in the world, according to the custom of other free Nations; and in this
condition are content to see their children taken from them by force, to be
used at the pleasure of their Lords; either to be sold in the common Markets,
or reserved for the vilest Offices.

As these examples are convincing enough, to show the judgments of God upon
sensual and luxurious Countries in the general, Concerning the change in our
own native Country.
so may we turn our eyes of consideration upon our own kingdom, which no doubt
(as I have said before) abounded with all manner of vice, before these late
troubles began; insomuch as I am most confident, that the sins of the Nation
without limitation, have been the chiefest causes of our misfortune and present
miseries; which certainly requires rather an acknowledgement by sackcloth and
ashes, then an indulgent fancy to flatter our hopes, with amendment of the
times. To this purpose we may call to mind, the flourishing state of our
Country not many years since; when every man seemed in peace with a most quiet
security, to sit under his own Vine-Tree; whereas now we enjoy nothing certain
but troubles and vexations: the Nobility possessed privileges of Princes, that
now are scarce equal to Shoo-makers: the Gentry living in their brave houses
furnished with all kind of varieties both for pleasure and profit, and now
those that are yet left standing, serve them but for more convenient prisons:
the Commonalty that were accustomed to pay nothing out of their estates, are
now constrained to defray the expenses of many Armies, that scarce will let
suffer them one night to lie in their beds quietly: the Clergy that bore
jurisdiction in their several Parishes and Provinces, are now forced to quit
their habitations and livings; the Lawyers that commanded respect and money
from Clyents, know not at present what Law is to be observed: the Universities
filled every where with dainty wits and Learning, are derided for their over
much knowledge: and last of all may be considered the rich City of London, that
seemed to rule over the Ocean, and arbitrate the Trade of the world, is now so
much impoverished, that it dares not set ships to Sea for fear of being robbed;
all which being confessed, we may very well conceive some divine anger and
revenge has caused this sudden change, especially the issue being not yet
determined.

But if these representations be not of sufficient force to move our
considerations in a convenient sense of our own danger, and by consequence to
stir us up to some moderation in our courses, yet let us see whether there be
left any spark of religious honor in our dispositions; so far as to be
persuaded by the extraordinary love of Almighty God always showed to mankind
from his first Creation to more goodness, since it may be supposed no
reasonable creature can be so unworthy, as not by way of humane gratitude, to
be willing to repay some requital for benefits received: at leastwise to
express desires of acknowledgement, though we may want an absolute power to do
what we would in regard of our own frailty: and the rather do I use these just
persuasions, for that it shall appear by the following Discourse, that God
Almighty has taken more care in the preservation and salvation of mankind,
then in conserving the very Angels in heaven.

Considerations of gratitude in regard of Gods goodness and love showed to
mankind.
CErtainly, however we must confess, that those Spirits were created to enjoy a
perpetual and a most sublime blessedness, yet were they not the ordained in so
certain a condition of continuance, but that they were subject to fall, as
afterward multitudes of them did, and the rest were constrained to confirm
their establishment by a most sharp encounter with Lucifer, and his ateendants,
over whom at last they got a most glorious and heavenly victory, through the
constancy of their wills to serve their Lord and Creator by an entire spiritual
obedience. Wherein as I may say, Gods justice appeared something severe to
their adversaries, if we reflect but upon the extraordinary mercies showed unto
our selves upon all occasions: for that he imposed upon the fallen Angels an
eternal condemnation and punishment without revocation or hope of redemption by
the observation of any new injunction: whereas he did not alone at the first
make man with an intention to bestow upon him that happiness which they had
lost, but employed an infinity of love and care to preserve him still in the
same capacity: for when he had placed him in that delitious Garden with an
absolute power and free will to do good or evil, which was plentifully
furnished with all the ornaments of nature, for the commodity of his being and
subsistence, he only imposed upon him one single Commandment no way seeming
difficult to be observed: and notwithstanding he soon broke this easy precept
by the peevish frailty of his nature that overcame his Grace; yet God Almighty
nevertheless, was so far from not having compassion of his person, and taking
commiseration of his offense, that immediately he promised him Redemption by
the death of his Son; as also the more to honor the contemptible substance of
his Creation, being nothing but earth, he obliged our blessed Savior to take
upon him the very clothing of our flesh and blood, because all man might also
be capable of a perfect felicity, and enjoy a privilege and Prerogative beyond
all the Quires of Angels in Heaven: Who not only stood most stupendiously
amazed at the favor bestowed upon mankind, but the very Devils themselves,
that then were also Angels, foreseeing the mystery in regard of the excellency
of their knowledge, became perpetually damned, only for endeavoring to resist
Gods will and pleasure in that intention: which expressed above so much beyond
all humane apprehension, that the consideration of it only is able to confound
all our actions, and astonish our thoughts to the day of judgment, if this
dull sensuality of our natures did not so much entangle our senses, with
worldly concernments, that the clear faculties of our Soul, cannot operate at
all nobly to our advantage. And yet further to show the continuance of God
Almighties affection toward man; although his just wrath had chased Adam out
of Paradise, as from a place only intended for his innocence, yet he did not
presently commit his person to some dark and horrid prison, there to be
deservedly punished according to the nature of his offense, for the breach of
his former injunction, in part of satisfaction until his Salvation could be
effected, by the Passion and death of his dear and only Son, as his Mercy had
determined; but put him into a world created with all manner of convenient
varieties, for his necessary recreations, though to be enjoined with labor and
pains to keep down the stubborn rebellions of his flesh; and in the interim
comforted him with continual hopes of his speedy Redemption with many promises,
to make his posterity by Grace a most glorious Nation above others, until more
particularly Abraham settled both a Church and people in his own family: so that
Jacob his grandchild having many sons, from whence proceeded the twelve
Tribes, though they were by accident brought into Egypt, where they were forced
to confess their sin against their brother Joseph, for which fact, as it may be
supposed, their posterity were detained captives for some hundred of years, to
show that God had not altogether forgot the offense: yet being afterward
released, by the religious and painful conduct of that great and good Captain
Moses, whom God Almighty had specially chosen to put an end to his peoples
miseries, he established them as a particular Nation of his own, whereby to be
worshipped with some form and order, from whence his own Son also and their
Messiah was to come in the flesh; notwithstanding they never left murmuring in
their journey, not only against their Commanders, but even at God himself,
which showed, they carried still with them the former corruptions of nature,
and ingratitude with augmentation: however, he nevertheless bare with their
peevish disobedience, until he brought their posterity into that Land promised
to Abraham and his Seed, as if his whole thoughts had been employed only in
their consideration, since the like rebellious proceeding from such multitudes
of preservations could not probably be imagined, to have almost come from the
damned themselves. And there as I say being arrived, he never left their
protection, until they had absolutely subdued all their enemies to their mercy,
they possessing in the interim their Territories, with so many signal
victories, that those parts of the world began to be terrifyed with their fame:
insomuch, as at last becoming so prosperous in their peace and tranquillity,
that needs they would have a King to govern them, according to the custom of
other Nations: Which also being granted them by God Almighty, he gave them one
amongst the rest, the most glorious and wisest Prince that then lived upon
earth, according to the relation of his greatness and wisdom, particularized
in holy Scripture: who was not only visited and courted by foreign powers at
a very great distance, but built also such a Temple for the Jews service by
the presence and assistance of other Kings, as an additional honor to his own
extraordinary riches and splendor, that the like Fabric was not again to be
seen in the whole world: and thus they continued their reign and glory, until
Solomon's Idolatry and their own sins divided the kingdom into two parts, by
which means they suffered many captivities; however their gracious God never
totally forsook them, still interviewing their chastisements with multitudes of
consolations by holy Prophets and other Revelations concerning his pleasure and
their own Salvation: sometimes sending them home to build up again their
Temple, and other while scourging them for their wickedness; intermixing,
always blessings with punishments, as if his own glory had chiefly consisted
in their good, until at last finding their stubbornness was incorrigible by
ordinary means, he sent amongst them his own Son our most dear Savior, not
only to redeem all mankind, but to teach them new Laws both of Morality and
Divinity; but they now being come to the uttermost period of all wickedness and
ingratitude, were so far from entertaining this sweet guest with love and
wisdom, that they handled him with so much cruelty, that if all the barbarous
Tyrants in the world, had been assembled together in Council, to have performed
acts of inhumanity, they could not have invented more transcendent cruelties
against innocence: so that we may say even God Almighty, was forced to cast
these people out of his favor, who were not to be reformed by any means he
could use; however, because he would not yet forget man, whom he had bought
with the precious pawn of his own blood, according to his gracious assurance
given to Adam after he had chased him out of Paradise, he chose to himself a
new Church of the Gentiles, not in one place, but dispersed over the face the
earth, to render his goodness more general, though much against his will by
reason of those promises he had made to Abraham concerning his paticular Seed,
which is most plainly verified in those sayings of holy Scripture, where it is
affirmed, that often he would have gathered them together, as a hen inviteth
her chickens under her wings and protection, but they would not: But to come
yet more near to our apprehensions, if not to procure in our souls both love
and amazement, let us but consider in particular what our Savior Christ
personally suffered for man kind; which certainly he might have forborne, if it
had not been in regard of his unmeasurable and infinite goodness, since our
salvation cannot any way benefit his majesty, or increase his honor; wherefore
it was merely for our sakes, that he has been willing to do these wonderful
things, to prevent our perpetual damnation, which his divine justice must
otherwise have inflicted necessarily upon our unhappy persons: by which
considerations let us unpartially weigh, what gratitude we owe such a Redeemer,
especially when we are to receive the only good by it our selves.

Christ's particular persecution.
TO this purpose we may begin, first with the persecution of his very infancy,
by that bloody and proud Tyrant Herod, to preserve with greater security (as he
thought) that kingdom which he had unjustly usurped by the Romans power from
another right; notwithstanding his own Conscience told him (by the inquiry he
made of the wise men, and the resolution of the Doctors thereupon) that he was
the true Messiah long expected: which not only caused his most long and
tedious journey into Egypt with his mother, not sufficiently provided, as it
may be believed, of convenient necessaries, but was a cause after their return
that he was constrained a long season to obscure himself to prevent the like
danger, having heard of the murder of so many children, in regard, Herod's son
then reigned in his fathers place: wherein (as it may be supposed) Jesus only
took upon him the ordinary helps of humanity, since it was not needful to make
use of the demonstrates of his divine power toward the conversion of those
people whom he came in the flesh to save: in which affliction it may be
imagined, or rather considered, that he not only underwent the sufferings of
the body, but in some sort the passions of the mind belonging to man, and so
consequently was grieved at exterior accidents, with the rest of his friends,
living in this poor, contemptible and needy manner about thirty years together;
all that while performing such ordinary labors as belonged to the meannesse of
that condition, which for our sakes he was pleased to enter into, whereby the
better to conceal or shade the bright rays of his Divinity from humane eyes,
until the time should come for the declaration of his glory: but at last being
called by the secret decrees of his Almighty father to preach to the Jews, he
continued at least three years, doing such stupendous miracles, and showing
forth such acts of austerity and penance, as were able almost to convert the
Devils to goodness: however, his own people were so far from hearing and
believing him, that instead of following his Doctrine, and obeying his
jurisdiction, that they brought him to a most shameful condemnation before a
heathen Judge, with all the spite, malice, and ingratitude could be imagined;
in the circumstances of which persecution, may be considered these particulars
following.

More particulars of Christ's persecution and sufferings.
First, That he was betrayed by no other, then one of his own chosen Disciples,
with whose loss he could not be but extremely grieved in his thoughts: by
whom, as I say, he was delivered into the cruel hands of his worst enemies,
though until then esteemed his only people; and in whose company he had
conversed for some years, with all the sweetness of behavior could be
practiced, in the interim performing so many acts of charity, both by his
miraculous cures and continual instructions, that it might have taught a new
humanity to all the monsters upon earth, if they had been capable of reason; but
these wretches, notwithstanding, brought him before Pilate, fast bound by
strong cords, with such derision and scorn, as almost could not be exampled,
where they accused him with so much violence, that the Pagan himself was
constrained in regard of their preposterous importunity, finding him altogether
guiltless, furiously to scourge him before their faces, with an intention only
to save his innocence from death, thinking these torments, would have procured
some compassion in their stony hearts: however, they persisting still in their
devilish malice against his person, for no other cause, as I say, but that he
had preached against their luxuries and pride, cried out violently to the
Judge, that unless he crucified him for making himself a King, contrary to the
Laws, he could be no friend to Caesar, which words of theirs so terrified the
unjust and fearful President, that he delivered Barrabas a most notorious
malefactor, and sent our Savior with a company of barbarous soldiers, wearing
a Crown of sharp Thorns upon his sacred head, to the common place of execution;
as also bearing his own Cross upon his bloody shoulders, for his greater
contempt and indignity, where at last being arrived with many a weary and
painful step, he was fastened with rough nails to that Tree, that was ordained,
though for his torment, yet for our comfort, and being after a time lifted up
into the air between two thieves, excessively heated by his intolerable
sufferings, he called for something to allay the outragiousness of his thirst:
but their unexampled and most cruel inhumanity, could afford him no sweeter a
mixture, but Vinegar and Gall, to give him any refreshment, as the uttermost
and last period of all their wickedness and ingratitude: which several torments
certainly being put together by our consideration, cannot be thought but to
exceed the affliction, of all the people that ever suffered persecution: for as
he was more pure and perfect in his constitution then other creatures, so by
consequence must it be thought, those pains he endured were sharper and
livelier tasted by his senses, in regard of the excellency of his making, then
by other men, since obstructions as we know in the Organs and vital parts cause
sometimes a kind of stupefaction or insensibility in the flesh and
apprehension, which he was not subject unto either by nature or accident:
besides we may ad, that as he was free from all the passions of vain glory or
any manner of hope of future reward for his sufferings, being both God and man,
so could he not be eased in his torments by those hopes which do use oftentimes
to abate much of the torture in other people; and on the other side his grief
was increased all the time of his life by his omnipotent foresight, knowing
before hand that he should not only die in the general, but also what
particular cruelies he was to endure, so that as I say, his imagination was
always full of such grievous considerations, both in regard of himself that
was personally to suffer them, as also out of a dear compassion to his most
beloved mother, that he knew would be present at his passion, mournfully
accompanied with his Disciples and the rest of his kindred and friends.

Secondly, If we further reflect upon the parties that used him in this manner,
Other considerations concerning his sufferings.
and the principal occasion of their malice, we shall find ever causes still
for the augmentation of his afflictions in many other particulars.

And to this purpose we must consider, that those who were his chief
persecutors, The circumstances of his sufferings.
were his own particular people, chosen above all other Nations in the world by
himself to be cherished and loved, and from whom in the flesh he was naturally
descended, so that it was no other then their own blood into his veins, which
they sought most lavishly and maliciously to spill, upon no other reason, but
that in a sweet and mild way of conversation, accompanied with miracles and
benefits, he labored to persuade them to their own salvation, that the
Gentiles might not bereave them of their ancient inheritance, possessing
themselves of those places in Heaven that he wished them before others. Next
what a Corrasive was it to his gentle heart and Divine soul, to see them make
use of no other creature to betray his innocent person, but his own Disciple,
instructed with his domestic affairs and expenses, which made him most
bitterly to complain, that he that eat his bread, for a little money had both
unnaturally lifted up his hand against him, and had been won to undertake so
great a treason, contrary to all the rules of friendship, duty, and fidelity,
which almost no heathen would have performed, for any reward could have been
promised.

Thirdly, after he had at his last Supper bequeathed unto his Apostles the
precious Legacy of his body and blood to remain ever amongst them as a most
admirable token of his love, presently going into the Garden, to pray, and
there being in an excessive agony at the remembrance of his approaching
Passion, sufficiently demonstrated by those distilling drops of blood and sweat
that plentifully fell upon the ground from his most blessed body, he could not
obtain from his three chief Disciples, to watch one hour with him,
notwithstanding his earnest entreaty, and the great gift he had a little before
bestowed upon them, which cannot again but be thought extraordinary troubles to
his already afflicted mind.

Fourthly, when he was apprehended by the cruel soldiers with violence and
fury, certainly it could not be but some present horror to his confused
imagination as he was man, to see himself suddenly left by all his friends, who
fled fearfully away to prevent the like danger to their persons; however they
should have rather chosen to have dyed with him, according to their several
professions when he was yet safe amongst them. And most of all that his chief
Apostle, upon whom he had conferred so high a dignity, and in whose special
friendship it is to be supposed, he imposed trust and confidence, should not
only timerously amongst the rest leave him with his enemies; but most cowardly
deny him before a few contemptible servants, with oaths and protestations,
being so transported with the sense of his own danger, that he would not so
much as own his Masters acquaintance, in that assembly, to his further
disgrace, he being at the instant most disdainfully used by all the spectators,
that were present at his examination before the high Priest: which may be added
to the rest of his afflictions.

The cruelty of his persecutors with his sufferings as well in mind as in body.
Fifthly, we may remember that when he was brought before King Herod, who was
inflamed with an earnest desire to see him in regard of the general fame that
was spread abroad of his wonders and miracles, and to this purpose had an
intention no doubt to have honored his person; of the contrary to be sent back
again from his presence, with all the scorn and contempt in the world, clothed
in a white garment, either like a mad man, or a fool, which opinion the rude
and barbarous soldiers prosecuted in so violent a manner, that it was one of
the chiefest causes of his being crowned with Thorns, whereby in derision they
might the more properly salute him as a mock King of the Jews; putting in the
interim a contemptible Reed in his hand in lieu of a Scepter, with other
ornaments of spite and disgrace over his blessed shoulders; which instruments
also they made subjects for the further augmentation of his torments, in
striking him often with the Reeds upon his already wounded head, that the sharp
and pricking Thorns might make the greater impressions, whereby the more to
increase his anguish and pain. And last of all, we may call to mind, that when
he was upon the Cross ready to yield up the Ghost, he most sorrowfully beheld
his ever dear beloved and honored mother, who never could find in her heart
to leave him in all his miseries, though those cruel spectacles abundantly
augmented her inward afflictions, with eyes of no small compassion and grief
standing near him, with heavy looks and most desperate passions, bewailing her
own loss and his suffering, neither being in a condition to assist one
another, but by condoling language and perplexed souls, since our Savior
would not make any use at all of the prerogative of his Divinity, to moderate
the sufferings of his humanity: for as man had offended the Majesty of his
father, that great God could not be satisfied without an extraordinary
pacification: All which, I say, may put a full period to every consideration
that can possibly be imagined by any mortal apprehension; wherein I must
confess, I do not more wonder at his goodness, then at his enemies cruelties
and his friends forgetfulness, wherein would be increased my admiration, if
our hearts should not be touched with something more then ordinary gratitude,
and the rather for that we our are to receive the only benefit of this due and
needful consideration. For let any man take apart these infinite sufferings,
setting aside the multitudes of his other mercies, and but indifferently weigh
the natures of them in every particular circumstance, and I dare be bold to
say, all the stories in the world cannot paint forth the like examples of
cruelty, indignation and spite, either done to, or endured by what Martyrs or
wicked persons soever; much less should it be thought after the believing of
these passions, that we were created for nothing but to be delighted with ease,
quiet, and all the sensual pleasures; our roving and wild fancies can invent or
covet: but that we may not be without all humane testimonies to confirm God
Almighties expectation concerning our duties in suffering, though I intend not
to make any comparison: I shall instance the examples, of some few of his good
servants, who as it should seem, held it necessary upon occasions offered, to
sacrifice all they had to his blessed will and pleasure.

The Virtues of Abraham.
WE shall first speak of Abraham, who was, as I may say, the miraculous father
of all the Jewish Nation, a man exercising so many virtues, that it is a
question, whether his piety, valor, humility, obedience, faith, or good nature
most exceeded: for after that by God Almighties special command he had quitted
his native Country, and all his friends and acquaintance, but his Nephew, Lot,
whom he brought along with him in his Pilgrimage, amongst strangers and
barbarous people, when both their flocks increased so exceedingly, that they
could not possibly longer live together by reason of the daily contention of
their herdsmen, Abraham bad his Nephew choose the best part of the Country for
himself; and by that means Lot inhabited in the Towns, whereas his Uncle still
kept the fields, dwelling only in Tents, wherein appeared both love and
humility. Again, when he had heard that Lot unfortunately was taken prisoner,
with all his substance, he presently with a world of courage and resolution,
armed all his domestic servants for his speedy rescue, and fighting with his
enemies, he delivered his Nephew, and made all his opposers with their wealth
captives to his mercy; however, after this conquest he was so far from
enriching himself by the spoils, or being elated by the victory, that he not
only returned the goods back again to the owners, but with a great deal of
humility presented the tenth part of his own to Melchizedeck the Priest, as a
testimony of his obedience and gratitude to God Almighty; to whose honor also
in every place where he came, he built Altars, circumcising himself and all his
family, according to his commandment. But now growing old, and finding he was
not like to have any posterity by his wife, he was induced by her importunity
to take her handmaid into his bed, by whom he had issue: nevertheless, when it
was the will of God to make him the happy father of his legitimate son Isaac,
in whom all Nations were to be blessed, he drove both Hagar and her son
absolutely out of his Dominions and protection; which however, as it may be
believed, struck the old man to the heart with a most passionate grief, yet he
was so far from being disobedient, that he resolved with a ready willingness
rather to endure any discontent inwardly, then outwardly to displease his wife,
whom he knew had received a particular blessing from God. And now we must come
to the grand masterpiece both of his faith and resignation, when God Almighty
enjoined him to Sacrifice the life of his only son and heir, both spiritually
and temporally: the first, in that he was promised to be made the father of the
people of the Jews; and the other, for that Abraham had no more issue to
inherit his worldly substance: here it will be convenient to reflect upon his
many supposed humane passions, in the prosecution of this action; however as it
appeared he overcame them all by his ready obedience and abundant confidence in
God, in regard of his extraordinary desire to fulfill his will and pleasure in
every thing; first therefore, it may be believed, that he could not but
apprehend greatly the horrid and amazed discontents he should give his wife,
whom he was always so willing to please, when the first report should be made
unto her, not only of the death of her sole child, in whose promising
towardliness, she received daily so much comfort, besides her divine
assurance, of his hopeful prosperity, but to consider him slaughtered by the
cruel hands of his own father, for no known cause could be imagined. Next, what
a perplexity was there amongst his own thoughts, sometimes perhaps a little
staggering in the right understanding of Gods promises, when he supposed it was
unpossible for him to have any more children by reason of her extraordinary
age, and so by consequence had little hope left him of peopling of Nations out
of his loins, much less to propagate the Church of God by his issue; which
until then he never doubted. Thirdly, may be imagined the natural and divine
strife that was within his bosom, by reason of the passions of love, pity,
faith, confidence, obedience, and improbability, joined also with worldly
interests, of which he could not choose out of humanity but be sensible: and yet
notwithstanding all these furious torments and combustions in his mind, this
great and most confident servant of God (as it is related in holy Scripture)
went on to this strange Sacrifice, with a quiet and gentle demeanor, talking
with his innocent son, to the place designed for his execution, where after
some circumstances, and as it may be thought other discourses of patience and
consolation, being ready to lift up his fatal, though pious, hand for the
slaughter, he was suddenly hindered by the administration of an Angel from
Heaven, that not only gladded his heart, but approved his faith by the showing
him another acceptable Sacrifice, ready prepared for the offering. And last of
all, to make a full period of his glorious and most pious life, being prepared
to rest his bones in his wives Sepulcher, constrained thereunto by the
extremity of age, he called his trusty servant unto him, and there taking his
oath between his thighs, conjured him, never to take a wife for his son, but
from his own kindred, however he might have advanced his fortunes with huge
sums of money, as it may be supposed in the place where he then remained, in the
Land of strangers, by reason of the general fame he had personally purchased in
their Country; however, as I say, this good man chose rather to send the hope
of his house far from home, with the loss of all his worldly substance, then
that he should be in danger to mix with the Gentiles, or contract marriage
amongst uncircumcised people: all which testimonies evidently show, how much
Abraham preferred the service of his Creator, before all other considerations;
besides, it is to be noted in his whole life, he never ended or begun any of
his important actions, as is recorded for the most part in holy Scripture, but
either with Thanks, Prayers, Obediences, or other pious devotions performed to
his great and omnipotent Creator, who remains certainly still the same God in
Heaven and earth, and therefore cannot but expect the like duty from our
actions and endeavors, though our corrupt manners, and most slow intentions,
seem at present to put a difference between our own condition and this holy
man's.

The Patience and sufferings of Job.
NOw that we have in some sort past over the perfections of Abraham; for it is
unpossible by humane art sufficiently to describe his excellency, we must
remember Job, the true Patient, as I may say, of God Almighty since he gave
the devil full power to try his goodness, by the very force of all his malice.
It Is true, we cannot well know his extraction, only we are assured, he was a
great Prince dwelling in the Land of Huz, abounding in every worldly
prosperity; however, none of those entisements could any way withdraw his heart
from the service and love of his Creator: For notwithstanding his sons and
daughters continually feasted with delight and satisfaction, yet in the
interim, he offered Sacrifice, and made Prayers, that his children might not
commit sin in their jovialty, until his goodness not only flew up with swift
wings before his Maker into Heaven: but his perfections became objects of envy,
as I said before, to Hell itself, in so much as God Almighty was induced for
the further demonstration of his own glory, by reason of the devils insolent
challenge to heap all earthly afflictions upon him, and to this purpose in one
day received intelligence of the loss of all he possessed, with the lamentable
destruction and death of his numerous children; yet these afflictions only
procured this mild reply from his sad apprehension, that as God had given him
the use of abundance, so might he again dispose of them as he pleased; for not
coming into the world, as he said, with any thing, he could not expect to go
out of it otherwise then naked. But in this patience was not alone showed his
confidence and humility: for being struck with a most loathsome leprosy all
over his body, which forced him for something his better ease to sit upon a
base and vile dunghill, where he was upbraided for his too much mildness and
patience, by his insulting, though perhaps compassionate wife, who bid him,
Curse God and die, rather then endure such ignominy, shame, and sorrow, in
falling from the estate and Dignity of a Prince to so low and miserable a
condition: however, he made her no other answer then this, that she was a
foolish woman; for if good things they had received from Gods hands, why should
they not also participate of bad if it were his will and pleasure? Until at
last there came to his reproof as well as his consolation, his nearest and
dearest friends, though at the first sight they knew not perfectly his person,
by reason of his extraordinary change and deformity, which caused them for some
time with pitiful eyes to stand amazed without opening their mouths to speak
one word according to their first intention: whereupon the good man himself
finding their perplexity, began to make a large discourse not only of his own
miseries, but Gods justice; wherein however he seemed to common understandings,
to have uttered some speeches of too much passion, bitterly complaining of his
Creators dealing with him, and in that particular perhaps over-justifying his
own actions and innocence, yet were his words and discourses all seasoned with
such high mysteries, having such an absolute reference to Gods honor, that by
the sequel of the story we find, he erred not; but of the contrary, confounded
all the Athiestical Arguments of his friends, by his discourses, who in the end
were compelled to beg his Prayers to God, for the pardon of their provocation.

The Virtues of Moses.
NExt we shall mention Moses, that great charitable and indefatigable Captain of
God Almighties, who however he was preserved by Pharoahs daughter, and by that
means adopted her son, and so consequently as it may be believed, made the heir
of most, if not all her wealth and substance, yet was he so far from forgetting
the distressed condition of his miserable Country men, being in a manner
consumed with their hard labor of the Egyptian slavery, that he not only kept
them daily company, whereby the better to honor them with his presence, but
most passionately revenged their injuries upon all just occasions; insomuch, as
to that purpose, he slew an insolent enemy of theirs, with his own hands, to
the provocation of Pharaoh, and all his Court, for which fact he was forced to
fly from all his prosperity and dignity, into a strange Country, where he
remained not only a poor shepherd, but a most diligent servant to his surly
father-in Law for a long season; defending in the mean time, with his personal
valor the causes and rights of simple virgins, that wanted other assistance,
until God Almighty was pleased to call him to the deliverance of his people
with strong conjurations, since his humility was unwilling to accept of so
great an Office, professing himself to be rude of speech, and therefore not
capable of such an employment: but being, as I say, both commanded, and
strengthened by Gods Divine illumination, he went with a bold courage to the
King of Egypt, notwithstanding those multitudes of pernicious Magicians about
his Throne, and resolutely demanded the Restoration of the Jews; however,
being denied his just, and charitable request by the proud Tyrant, after many
miracles showed in confirmation of his absolute Commission from God Almighty,
he invited and persuaded the people to follow him into a land of freedom,
though their jelousies and fears, a long space resisted his intentions, to his
no small vexation and grief, for whose safeties in prosecution of the intended
journey and promised prosperity, he divided the Red Sea, to make their passage.
But nevertheless this stubborn and perverse people, were so little grateful to
him for his wise conduct and most painful endeavor, enduring now and then some
penury in the Deserts, that they never forbore murmuring against his actions,
as upbraibing him, that for his own ambition, he had brought them from the
flesh pots of Egypt, to endure hunger and thirst in the wilderness, which
affronts and contumelies, he always bore with so admirable a patience, that
instead of punishing them for their wild and preposterous disobedience, he
comforted and encouraged them with mild language and good principles, praying
to God upon all occasions for their forgiveness and prosperity; insomuch, as
his two hands were sometimes underpropped by others, to strengthen them toward
the continuance of his supplication, he being altogether weary and tired, by
those devout exercises, which his heart willingly could never let him give over
for his peoples benefit: and when their impious Idolatry and peevish
impatiency, had notwithstanding inflamed the wrath of God, against their wicked
proceedings, insomuch as he seemed to put on an absolute resolution to destroy
them; the charity of Moses was so great, and his love so entire to that
ungrateful multitude, that desired God Almighty also, to blot him out of the
book of life, that he might perish together with his Countrymen, if he would
not be pleased to change his determination: O admirable constancy and
goodness! beyond the capacity of humane nature to apprehend; and the rather
for that it may be conceived, the chief cause of his affection had reference to
Gods honor, in that he supposed those people were ordained, to establish his
more real and formal worship in the Land of Promise. Again, if we look at his
unwearied justice from morning till night in hearing Law suits between party
and party, we shall find such an unparalleled fortitude as cannot be imagined,
wherein notwithstanding his humility was so great, that he submitted himself to
the Counsel of his Father in Law a plain man, who told him he did unwisely, to
over burden his strength and ability, with multitudes of intricated
businesses; and to that purpose wished him to choose able and inferior judges,
to take off from his care some part of the trouble concerning those causes
depending before him, referring the most weightiest only to his own judgment,
and censure; whereas until then he sat alone upon the Tribunal, both for
morality belonging to his subjects more civil conversation toward the
Government of their persons and goods, and also to judge those more divine
things, that belonged particularly to the service of Almighty God, according to
those Revelations, and precepts he had immediately received from Heaven, whose
infallible Oracle he seemed daily to consult, and with such a wonderful fervor
and diligence, that as he never attempted matter of consequence, without
seeking and knowing first the will and pleasure of God, so did he never return
from those extraordinary ecstasies, but with fear horror and trembling both to
himself and people. But as I shall not need, here to number more of his
excellencies, since they are so largely recorded in holy Scripture; so may it
also be considered, that most of those admirable books were written by his own
hand, that treated of the Jews actions in the beginning, for example, to the
stupid world, to learn what they ought to do according to their capacities in
endeavoring the service of God from the bottom of their hearts; since
certainly he cannot be pleased with lukewarm affection, much less for people
only to comply with their own affections, as if for no other end they had been
created, specially when his best servants could not, by what has been said,
expect that privilege and liberty.

The wonderful magnanimity of Jephthe and his daughter.
BUt now we will come to Iephthe that valiant righteous and just judge of
Almighty God in Israel, whose story in short is only thus: He was a bastard
born, though highly legitimated by grace and the favor of his Creator; for
although he was cast out from having any share amongst his brethren in his
fathers possessions, which made him for a while enter into the company of
thieves for his subsistence, yet being presently for his personal valor chosen
their Prince and Governor, he managed his Authority with so much success,
tending to the service of God and his Country, that when Israel was fallen into
most desperate necessity by the prevailing power of their inveterate enemies,
he not only freed them from those dangers by his own courage and his subjects
assistance, but afterward when he was Judge of the Country, recovered them by
his many victories, their Ancient honor; however, as it is written, one time
amongst the rest returning with extraordinary joy and Triumph to his own house,
having won a most signal battle against the Ammonites, after he had pleaded
with them the right and justice of his Countries cause, wherein they would not
be satisfied, he vowed in gratitude to God Almighty to sacrifice the first
thing he should encounter: which proved unfortunately to be his only daughter,
a young and most beautiful virgin, having no more children in all the world,
who out of duty and gladness came out with have before others to salute her
victorious father: by which means, suddenly these Triumphs were turned into
mournings, for presently Iephthe tore his garments instead of more joyful
congratulations, beginning to repent himself of his over rash vow, since either
as he thought, he must displease God, or absolutely confound all his felicity
and hopes in destroying of her that was deerer to him, then every earthly
happiness. But the pious Virgin perceiving her fathers perplexity by reason of
his Oath, only with a lovely and obedient countenance told him, since he had
sworn to God, it was most convenient he should perform his vow; and therefore
wished him, that the consideration of her life might neither hinder his
intention, nor trouble his thoughts; and withal desired two months time,
accompanied with other Virgins of her acquaintance to go privately into the
mountains, there the better to bewail her virginity; it being the custom of
the Jews so to do by reason of their expectance of the Messiah, which being
accordingly performed, she returned into the City, and her sad father in
prosecution of his promise and resolution, acted this unwilling and lamentable
part, both to the grief and astonishment of all Israel. Now having related this
story, I shall wish any man but to consider, how it was possible to express a
more higher zeal toward the service of God, in Iephthe himself, or a more
sweet and comfortable obedience expressed by his noble and religious daughter;
wherefore we must conclude, that although there be made some doubt, concerning
the lawfulness of the fact in this just and magnanimous person, in regard of
the rashness of his vow, which however proceeded from the extraordinary
gratitude he desired to show toward Almighty God, for those favors he had
received by his divine assistance; and especially for that most signal victory,
granted him against the Ammonites, who were cruel and spightful enemies to his
Country and Religion: yet he declared thereby without all question, a most
constant and firm resolution to be ingraffed in his pious soul, not to forbear,
if there were occasion, the exact performance of God Almighties service in
every thing, according to his best skill and knowledge, although he might lose
thereby never so many worldly honors, pleasures, preferments, or what hopes or
comfort could possible delight nature, or destroy sadness in his condition. As
appeared by this act of rigid conformity, according to the vow he had made
after his victory; which in my opinion are most lively examples to instruct our
endeavors, at leastwise, not to be too passionate in our own concernments,
when they may any way endanger our love to God.

The extraordinary goodness of King David.
ANd now we must fall to consider the actions of David, that great and good
King of Israel; who however he fell into some grievous sins by reason of humane
frailty, yet he kept his heart still right in the pure sight of his omnipotent
Creator, as appeared, not only by his extraordinary pennances, mortifications
and continual complaints declared in his prophetical writings, but by the very
testimonies of God himself, who approved him to be a man according to his own
heart; so that boldly we may affirm his perfections, which in this manner we
shall particularize.

First, we may reflect upon his constant valor always showed against the
enemies of his Religion and Country, as well in the death of Goliath that
furious and blasphemous Giant, as in the multitude of victories gotten against
the wicked Philistines, and other tyrannical Nations, wherein the true service
and worship of God was the only object of his thoughts, as appeared by his
bringing home again the Ark with such joy and gladness, that he was even
derided and contemned by his own wife, for those public expressions, for that
his gestures seemed ridiculous to her eyes and apprehension, being performed in
the person of a King.

Next, we may remember not only his wonderful goodness toward his Lord and
Master Saul, though with an envious malice he most wickedly prosecuted his
life, but the extraordinary love and reverence he showed to his person when he
had him twice in his power, only blaming his own presumption, for having cut
off so much as one small piece of his garment, as a cleerer testimony of his
intended fidelity. Again, when the news was brought him of his unfortunate
death, as he conceived, with too much insultation by an officious messenger,
although by that accident he entered presently into the possession of the
Kingdom, yet he punished the author of the intelligence for his too much want
of duty, in rejoicing at the destruction of his King, being his natural
subject; wherein, I must say, appeared a double virtue, the one, in conquering
his own affections, the other, in being just to his dead Master, though always
a bitter enemy to his subsistence. Here also I must remember the constant
affection he showed to the posterity of Jonathan his friend; however, it may be
supposed he never wanted instigations of jealousy from others, that in time
his race might aspire to the Crown in the right of their father, and when this
proved real in his own son Absolon, who not only most traitorously rebelled
against all the rules of duty, good nature, and gratitude, but most wickedly
abused his bed in publik, to take off from the people the apprehension of all
hopes of reconciliation. This pious and indulgent Prince, was so far from
revenge in his nature, especially against his own flesh and blood, that he most
grievously complained at the news of Absolons death, wishing his own life had
paid the ransom of his misfortune: where by the way, it may be also
remembered, that after his quiet restoration to his kingdom, he would never
suffer that man to be punished, that not only in his adversity upbraided him
with most spightful language, calling him dog and the like, but maliciously
flung stones at his person, in testimony of his inveterate hatred conceived
against his condition; neither must be forgotten the tenderness of his
affection he bore to all his children, yet still joined with such a confidence
in Gods mercies, and so much fear to displease or to offend him, that when his
child was sick, he continued in sadness and mourning for many days together,
always hoping to obtain his recovery. But when he found it was Gods pleasure,
he should die, and none almost durst bring him the news, for fear of his
further vexation, yet when he was told it by way of necessity, he presently
rose up from the ground with a seeming joyful countenance, only saying, Gods
will be done; withal declaring by words that as long as the child was living,
he hoped by his supplications to obtain Gods favor. But being dead, he found
it was his pleasure to deprive him of the blessing; and therefore, might offend
more in too much afflicting himself: So called for water and meat according to
the custom of other people: which certainly shows that in all his actions, he
intended always to conform his will to the honor and glory of Almighty God,
against what worldly appetites soever. Again, may we consider, his
extraordinary pious magnanimity, that when water was brought him from the Well
of Bethlehem, by those three valiant soldiers, that so manfully ventured their
lives to quench the Kings thirst, he refused to drink of it; saying, he would
not buy the satisfaction of his Senses at so dear a price, and so ordained it
as a Sacrifice for Gods service, notwithstanding at the present, he endured
most excessive pain, by reason of his extraordinary drought: however, profane
Authors have mentioned some such examples in Alexander the great, and others,
yet certainly this most virtuous Prince only performed this act of
magnanimity, out of the consideration of a religious end, and not induced
thereunto, by any fancy of vainglory whatsoever; which for the most part
accompanied all the actions of the heathens. Amongst the number of his heroical
deeds and heavenly resolutions, may also be remembered this one, that when God
Almighty had resolved to chastise him for numbering the people, for that he
seemed not sufficiently to rely upon the power of Heaven, without joining
thereunto humane assistance and confidence in his thoughts; he chose that
Plague that was most general because his own particular person might not seem
freer from danger then the rest of the people; which showed a most excellent
indifferency and justice in his nature, against the ordinary affections of man,
that use to carry us too violently to our own concernments and particular
interests; And was the more to be admired, in regard that God Almighty had
chosen him from a poor shepherd to be a most great and glorious King, and so
by consequence allowed him to enjoy what felicities could possibly be lawful in
this world; as a testimony to other Nations, that he not only intended him
private favors, but also to honor his fame in strange Countries amongst the
Gentiles, for the greater majesty of his own power; and yet I say, this good
Prince had always so much care to please God, and such a continual remembrance
of his own condition, that as he declares himself, his pennances were
exceeding great, and his afflictions in mind in a manner perpetual, insomuch,
as according to his true writings, he washed by night his Couch with tears, and
eat his bread by day mingled with ashes; professing himself to resemble a
Sparrow solitary upon the house top, or a sad Pelican in the Desert. In fine,
if we consider those vast volums which he wrote of his own sorrows, cares, and
troubles in Spirit, though darkly figuring therein, our Saviors Passion,
Sufferings, and eternal kingdom, we may easily believe, he spent not much time
in the pleasures and delights of this world; however, his youth, condition, and
opportunities, were sufficient enticements to all earthly vanities; and only
his wisdom, temper and goodness, withheld him from those unnecessary and vain
passions, which he knew entertained, would neither secure his own salvation, or
satisfy Gods justice.

The constant Martyrdom of old Eleazer.
NExt we will come to Eleazer, one of the chief of the Scribes, being fourscore
and ten years old in the time of Antiochus, who was not only excellently
learned in holy Scriptures, but extraordinarily versed in all divine and humane
knowledge, and in the cruel persecution of this wicked Tyrant against the
Jewish Religion, suffered a most glorious Martyrdom, because he would not
prejudice his profession, by any manner of seeming hypocrisy: for being
apprehended and brought before the Judge, he absolutely denied to obey that
peremptory command or Injunction of eating Swines-flesh; rather choosing to
undergo the worst of torments, then to displease his God either by act or
example; however, being loved and favored by some of those bloody
executioners, by reason of his age, Nobility, and commendable conversation,
they promised him, that if in private he would but seem to comply with the
Kings desire, they would bring him other lawful flesh to eat, instead of that
which was so strictl y enjoined by public Edicts; and by that means if he
would, he should not only save his life, but obtain honor and reward; unto
which motion he quickly replied, that he would rather choose to suffer death,
since he held it not convenient for a man of his age to dissemble, for a little
time of a corruptible life, whereby many young people might come to be
scandalized and deceived; for although at the present, I may said he, be
delivered from the punishments of men, yet neither alive nor dead, shall I
escape the hand of the Almighty, but in departing manfully out of this life, I
shall appear worthy of my old age, and leave a constant example to youth, if
with a ready and stout mind I suffer an honest death for the most grave and
most holy Law, which being said, he was forthwith drawn to execution, and they
that led him (who had been before more mild and courteous) were turned into
wrath, by reason of those words he had uttered, which they thought proceeded
out of arrogance: so that when he was a killing with strokes, he groaned and
said, O Lord, who has the holy knowledge, thou know manifestly, that
whereas I might have been delivered from death, I do sustain sore pains of the
body, but according to the soul for thy fear, I do willingly suffer these
things: This man certainly in this manner departed this life, leaving not only
to young men, but also to the whole Nation, the memory of his death for an
example of virtue and fortitude. And thus have we the clear relation of this
glorious Martyrdom, drawn out of the second book of the Machabees; which in
some sort may teach duty and resolution to all manner of conditions, since
neither age nor honor can be privileged: much less ought any to give up their
faith, or corrupt their manners, under what pretense soever, either of
pleasure, or convenience, those being nothing else but the Devils golden bait,
to draw people to hell in luxurious Chariots; in testimony of which, we will
relate one of the most remarkable Martyrdoms that ever was recorded either by
divine or profane writer, since not only Sex^s, but very nature it self
seemed to contend for a prerogative in the service of Almighty God, in despite
of horror and all the appetites of flesh, blood, affection, and any other
humane inclination or worldly satisfaction whatsoever, and with so high and
religious a magnanimity, that my own thoughts I must confess are confounded in
the relation, with wonder and admiration: however, I know the same duty of
suffering belongs to every person, if God be pleased to call such to the trial;
though of the otherside, I am again comforted and encouraged with these
sayings, that he will at no time tempt any beyond his strength, and therefore
we may be confident by his divine grace, we shall be able to do all things,
though this grace cannot be procured unless our selves diligently comply with
our best endeavors; which made one say, it was harder for God Almighty to save
a soul, then to Create a new world; for man himself must concur in the one, and
God alone could perfect the other by his omnipotency.

Strange sufferings of a woman and her seven sons.
THere was as the Holy Scripture says, seven brethren with their mother
apprehended by the commandment of King Antiochus to be compelled to eat Swines
flesh, by whips, scourges, and other torments. But the first of them said, What
seek thou, or what will thou learn of us; we are ready to dye rather then to
transgress the laws of God coming from our fathers; Wherewith the King being
enraged, appointed frying pans and brazen pots to be heated, and the tongue of
him that had spoken first, to be cut out, as also the skin of his head to be
drawn of; with his hands and feet to be chopped off, the rest of his brethren
and mother looking on. And now when he was made in all parts unprofitable, he
commanded fire to be put to him; that breathing as yet he might be fried in the
drying pan: wherein when he was long tormented, the rest together with their
mother exhorted one another to die manfully, saying, Our Lord God will behold
the truth, and will take pleasure in us, as Moses declared in the profession of
the Canticle. The first therefore being dead, they brought the next to make him
a mocking stock, where the skin of his head being also drawn off with the
hairs, they asked him if he would yet eat before he were punished through the
whole body in every member. But he answered in his Country language, that he
would not do it, so receiving the torments of the first, and being at the last
gasp said, Thou indeed a most wicked man in this present life destroys us: but
the King of the world w^ll raise up those that dyed for his Laws in the
resurrection of eternal life. After him the third is had in derision, and being
demanded his tongue, he quickly put it forth, and constantly stretched out his
hands saying with confidence: [ From God do I possess these members, but for
the Laws of God I do now contemn the same, because I hope I shall again
receive them of him,] To the amazement both of the King and standers by, by by
reason of the young man's courage, that seemed to esteem the torments as
nothing; who being dead, the fourth they vexed in the same manner, with
tormenting him, and now when he was also ready to die, he said, It is better
for them that are put to death by men to expect hope of God, that they shall be
raised up again by him, for to thee there shall not be Resurrection unto life:
So bringing the fifth, they tormented him; but he looking upon the King said,
Thou having power amongst men, whereas thou art corruptible, do what thou will, but think not that our stock is forsaken of God: wherefore do thou
patiently abide, and thou shall see his great power, in what sort he will
torment thee and thy seed. After him they brought the sixth, who being ready to
dye said thus, Be not deceived vainly, for we suffer this for our own sakes,
sinning against our God, and things worthy of admiration are done in us: for
that thou have attempted to sight against God. But the Mother above measure
mavelous and worthy of good men's memory, which beholding her seven sons
perishing in one days space, bare it with a good heart for the hope that she
had in God, exhorting every one in their Country, language manfully being
replenished with wisdom, and joining a man's heart to a woman's cogitation, she
said unto them, I know not how you appeared in my womb, for neither did I give
you Spirit, soul or life, and the members of every one I framed not: but
indeed the Creator of the world, that has formed the nativity of man, and that
invented the Original of all, he will again restore with mercy unto you Spirit
and life, as now you despise your selves for his Laws. But Antiochus by these
actions thinking himself contemned, and withal disdaining the voice of the
upbraider; when the youngest was yet alive, he did not only exhort with words,
but also withal affirmed, that he would make him rich and happy, and being
turned from the Laws of his fathers, he would account him a friend. But the
young man being not inclined to these things, the king called the Mother and
counseled her to deal with her son for the saving of his life; whereupon she
promised him to advise her child; so bending toward him as mocking the cruel
Tyrant, she said thus in her Country language, My son have pity of me that
have born thee in my womb nine months, and gave thee milk for three years,
nourishing thee and bringing thee to this age; I beseech thee my son look to
heaven and earth, and all things that are in them; and understand that God of
nothing made them and mankind: So it shall come to pass, that thou will not
fear this tormenter, but being made a worthy partaker with thy brethren, take
thou death that I may again receive thee with them: When she was yet delivering
these things, the young man said, For whom stay you, I obey not the commandment
of the King, but the ordination of the Law which was given by Moses, But thou
that art become the inventer of al malice against the Hebrews, shall not escape
the hand of God, though we for our sins do suffer those things: and if the Lord
our God has been angry with us a little for rebuke and correction, yet he will
be reconciled again to his servants; But thou O wicked, and of all men most
flagitious, be not idly extolled with vain hopes, for thou have not escaped the
judgments of Almighty God, who beholds all things: My Brethren having
sustained short pains, are become under the Testament of eternal life: but thou
by the judgment of Almighty God, shall receive punishment for thy pride; And I
also as my brethren, do yield my life and my body for the Laws of our fathers,
invocating God to be propitious to our Nation quickly, and that thou with
torments and stripes may confess that he is only God; but in me and my
brethren shall the wrath of the Almighty cease, which has justly been brought
upon all our stock. Then the King incensed with anger raged against him more
cruelly above all the rest, taking it grievously that he was mocked, so this
also dyed unspotted, wholly trusting in the Lord: where last of all, after the
sons the Mother was consumed, and thus ended these most glorious sufferings,
wherein may be considered these following particulars. Considerations upon
these sufferings.
That seven goodly young men, in the very flower of their age should with such
courage and fortitude, not only willingly deprive themselves of all worldly
honor, merely for the love of God, since the Tyrant offered them what
preferments they could almost desire, quitting their Law, but to endure with
such admirable constancy, the cruellest of torments personally, whilst in the
interim their vettuous and most magnanimous Mother, with religious, though
grieved eyes, stood by like a heavenly rock, to behold her children dismembered
and torn in pieces by the violence of stripes, scourges, and other exquisite
devised tortures, never almost invented before by humane malice and subtility;
wherein appeared not the least sign of wavering or vainglory: But of the
contrary, were so far from justifying either their actions, deservings, or
sanctity, that they professed openly, they suffered those punishments justly
for their own sins; as they hoped in expiation of the general faults of the
whole Nation of the Jews, and to that purpose comforted and confirmed each
other with godly, pious, and valiant exhortations, full of comfortable
assurances in the mercies and goodness of Almighty God, who would raise them
up at the last day, to the comfort of themselves, and the absolute confounding
of all his enemies; where also may be remembered the Pathetical, grave, and wise
conjurations of their most brave and holy Mother, that however she did not
know, how she had framed their members in her natural womb, yet she was
assured, that their supernatural father, if they continued constant to the end,
would again give them new spirit and life, to his honor, and their abundant
felicity, not seeming at all to desire their comfort and conversation in this
world, since that satisfaction could endure but a short time, but only wished
to possess their companies in an eternal and heavenly mansion, where they
might enjoy one another, for ever before the face of God, by way of an infinite
blessedness, and to this purpose, after she had joyfully beheld the last
catastrophe of her sons constancy and most violent sufferings, their dead
bodies being exposed to her view, as bloody sacrifices of humane cruelty, she
offered up her own life most courageously to be consumed also by torments, as a
full period to the Hecatomb, in confirmation of her own faith, and as a worthy
example for her Nation to all eternity; which heavenly Tragedy, I hope, is more
then a sufficient testimony to show, that these people could not have been
drawn away contrary to their duties, by the fond and idle vanities of these
times, that renders so many now careless either of belief or manners. Neither
can we say these only have given patterns to the world of their holy and
admirable constancy, since the Primitive Church, after our Saviors passion,
has produced some stories of the same nature, that were acted also by heroical
persons of the female sex.

The wonderful life of Saint John the Baptist.
LAst of all, we shall mention Saint John the Baptist, whose sins certainly
could no way make him deservedly liable to those austerities he exercised upon
himself, though it should seem God Almighty nevertheless thought it necessary,
that the forerunner of his dear son, should make plain the steps of his
Saviors Passion, with wonderful examples of penance in his person, as a
cleerer testimony that it is unpossible but by such means to please God, or at
leastwise to have an absolute intention so to do, if the occasion be presented
in this humane life; for we must be assured this world was not created for a
Paradise, but for our pilgrimage; neither did ever yet any person go to Heaven,
but either through the fire of tribulation, or by the practice of
mortification, exampled by Jesus Christ himself upon earth, and imitated by all
the glorious Saints and Martyrs of his Church from the very first beginning of
times, and must so continue unto the end of the world; however, less and more
according to the blessed pleasure of Almighty God, who will have such
testimonies from his servants, for more assured marks of their own interior
affection to himself, in regard of the benefits they have received from his
eternal Majesty, not only for their Creation, but preservation and Redemption.
To which purpose as I say, we may consider the life of this great Prophet, who
as it should seem, notwithstanding his supreme privilege of being the
greatest, that was ever born of a woman, could not be exempted from the
mortifications belonging to humane condition, which in his own person, he
performed most rigorously, not only in debarring himself from all youthful
delights, but in abstaining from his necessary acquaintance that should have
administered to his convenience and subsistence: for as we read, he went at
seven years old into the Desert, where he could not have lived, but that he was
supported, and relieved by the special grace and assistance of Almighty God,
beyond the ordinary course of nature. Besides, he was only clothed in Camels
hair, and fed upon Locusts and wild honey, neither drinking wine nor strong
drink; which being in my opinion the highest expressions of a mortified life,
are sufficient examples to show, that this very course was ordained him from
Heaven, to teach the world pregnant documents of voluntary affliction, toward
the fulfilling of that new Law, that was to be established shortly after by our
Savior: since neither his Senses nor his understanding seemed to entertain any
earthly satisfaction, according to the custom of other people; which manner of
living notwithstanding he continued many years, wherein was spent and wasted the
chief flower of his age, as being by a prophetical spirit (no doubt) foretold,
before he came to any seeming or competent years of discretion, that it was not
only most necessary, for his masters service, but absolutely agreeing with
Gods will, that he should exercise the same Authority, which Jesus Christ
determined both to teach and practice in his conversation amongst men; and to
this purpose our Savior was never mentioned by holy Scripture to laugh in all
the time of his being here, though frequently he shed tears for the sins and
miseries of the world; most plain and evident testimonies, that at leastwise he
expects from us a convenient suppression of all inordinate passions and
appetites. Furthermore, when this great Saint came to the full period of that
time for what he was designed, he not only instructed the people without any
manner of flattery or connivency, in those high mysteries belonging to his
calling, but most earnestly preached still penance to their cares and
considerations, as if nothing but a proportionable measure of that wholesome
salve, was to be applied. And did nevertheless maintain his own profound
humility in such an excellent nature, that notwithstanding the largeness of
his Commission and dignity of his office, he would not be brought by all the
admiration, and almost adoration of such persons as came to hear him in the
wilderness, to confess any power or good belonging to himself; though his
words and actions seemed to the vulgar and rude multitude most miraculous, but
always referred the honor and praise to him which was to follow. And to that
purpose sent his own Disciples to be instructed by our blessed Savior, whom
also in the flesh he would not have baptized, merely out of a trembling
reverence at the deep consideration of his divine person, though he was only
sent into the world for that effect, if he had not been urged thereunto by an
absolute necessity, as fearing further to offend, by reason his obedience might
have been brought in question. And last of all may be considered, that whereas
he might probably have received what honor he had pleased from Herod, if he
would any way have complied with his wifes unlawful ambition, and his own
violent lust; yet he was so far from giving of any manner of countenance to
either, that he told the incestuous King publicly, with a most bold courage,
and zealous intention, that he could not by the Laws of God keep his brothers
wife. In prosecution of which admonition, he willingly laid down his life, for
the exact maintenance of Religion and Justice. And thus ended that most
glorious champion and Herald of Christ his happy days, to our example and
benefit, if we concur also with the same supernatural Grace offered from
Heaven, to suppress inordinate passions and fleshly appetites; which only
keep the Soul from acting nobly according to the intention of our Creation.

The small satisfaction of earthly pleasures considered.
NOw we have done with these holy men, we will a little fall upon the
consideration of the small satisfaction or prerogative of earthly felicities or
ambitions, that appear so exceedingly to bewitch our understanding, in so much
as they seem to take from our very hearts all manner of effectual desire to
prosecute not only this obligation of a noble gratitude to God, but hinder us
from procuring the least security to our selves, contrary to the example of
these godly people, mentioned in my Discourse; who certainly enjoyed the same
faculties of nature as we do, and therefore might have possessed the like
appetites of humanity, if Grace had not predominated. In demonstration of which
I am persuaded, nay I am assured, that if all the exquisite Epicures in the
world, and wisest Statesmen, were gathered together in one Council, to consult
and devise a way for a person to enjoy a perfection of happiness upon earth,
and a full power were given to all his Senses in each faculty, to taste every
delight of nature in the superlative degree, not being subject to any natural
restriction, or could be interrupted by accident, yet he would find some
defects in the possession, not answering his expectation; if not otherwhile a
kind of wearisomnesse in the very fruition, by over much satiety; which
apparently would be demonstrated by his coveting something else, which he
supposed he had not, to the new perturbation of his unsatisfied mind. And this
plainly shows, that man's true and perfect content, must be fixed in a higher
Region then in this world, to afford his thoughts rest and quiet. Of the other
side we see, ambition consists wholly upon the matter in nothing but
expectation and opinion, since it is evident, we are more taken with hopes of
honors to come, then absolutely satisfied with those that are present. As for
example, what boy is there at School, that does not heartily desire to be a
man, though youth be esteemed the darling of nature, because he apprehends to
want something of his perfection in his boyish estate? Again, what man is
there, that is arrived to that period of years, that does not as earnestly wish
to be in his former condition? Apprehending the too fast coming on of old age
as a defect, which seems not only to be a vexation, but some horror to his
thoughts if he carry about with him nothing but humane considerations. Also if
we reflect upon the many chances of man's life, we shall find, that the pains
and care we take to pamper our selves, and nourish our ambition, do more then
weigh down the pleasures we can any way hope to obtain; for that all our
delights are most commonly interrupted either by infirmities, or some other
cross accidents, use any industry we may to the contrary. Neither is there any
person of what happy Calling or degree soever, but seems oftentimes even weary
of his own time; insomuch, as when day comes, he wishes for night, and in the
night he longs passionately for day; and so from one posture to another, still
hoping to enjoy new felicity, as if he had not yet tasted sufficiently toward
the fruition of a perfect settlement; being carried only thereunto by his
roving fancy and unsatisfied nature: which argues, that the very disposition of
man cannot be made happy with this world, in what degree soever obtained. And
to this purpose we see, new inventions and delights must be sought hourly, or
multitudes of divertisements of all kinds, the more insensibly to pass away
the hours and days of our life, and yet nothing seems so terrible to our
apprehensions, as to think our time should ever come to an end. So that we
neither can be content to think of leaving this world in any manner, but of the
contrary, hate all remembrance of it; and yet, in effect we do not take any
real pleasure to possess life. Wherefore, I must conclude with this principle;
that since earthly concernments are but at the best mortifications as we make
them, how much better were it, and more agreeing with reason, the contrary
being no other then an impious madness, not to make use of such vexations
(which will come upon us do what we can) toward the obtaining of such a happy
state, as neither admits of defect or suffers termination. So that since it is
apparent, that our thoughts have no circle to walk in but that of Religion to
find out not only divine security, but as I may say humane satisfaction,
according to the very words of the Holy Scripture, that bids us first seek the
kingdom of God, and all other things shall be given unto us; it must needs be
an entire lunacy, to involve our actions and desires in too many sensualities,
and much more to nourish our pride and torment our thoughts, with inconvenient
and violent ambitions, by aiming at that which in a manner nothing can arrive
unto, but vain imaginations, whilst in the mean time we leave the essential
point of our happiness altogether unregarded. O madness of mankind! And yet
we are so foolishly transported beyond all reason, with this violent desire of
earthly satisfaction, that if at any time we enjoy but a smackering of worldly
vanities, we become so passionate to make a further progress therein, that we
cannot rest day nor night without afflicting our minds, as it were destroying
in our selves those very comforts that God Almighty intends barely for humane
consolation. However, I do not say this to take away absolutely from a man, the
appetite of all conscionable and noble affections, for that were totally to
overthrow honest industry and lawful endeavors; seeing it is little less evil
to do it, then aim at nothing; especially for that we are not able always, to
employ our thoughts and actions entirely in the effecting of divine things, or
conversing inwardly with Angels; but my intentions hereby are, to have a body
so to square and regulate his passions, by a discreet rule of moderation in all
his desires and undertakings (considering what any can go about of worldly
concernments, are not only in every respect subject to diversity of accidents,
but in themselves never so well obtained, not worth our chief consideration) as
not to be confounded or overmuch distasted, either by needless vexation, if
they may not be purchased, or to fall into too much desperation, being again
lost after they are once had. And a great deal less ought we to be afflicted
when such transitory things are taken away from our possession, by the
immediate hand of Almighty God, who knows best what diet we need in the whole
course of our frail life. For as we desire earthly acquisitions (especially
superfluities) more out of a vain opinion to be said or thought we have them in
our power, then out of any real benefit we hope for, or enjoy by the
possession; since for the most part our servants are partakers with us alike,
if not oftentimes in a greater measure in the sensual use of them; so of the
other side, if we look only upon the point of reputation and estimation, in
being thought to possess much beyond the capacity of other people, which as I
said before depends merely upon an airy opinion, we may have the same honor by
letting them go patiently, or losing them gallantly; and a great deal more if
no personal fault by careless neglect, be laid deservedly to our charge, then
if we should have possessed them to our selves and heirs for many lasting
generations; witness the late King, who will be more glorious in after times
(according to many men's judgments) for the extraordinary conquests his
constancy and courage got over his oppressions, then if he had quietly and
peaceably dyed in his bed a natural way, after a long and flourishing reign,
possessed of all his humane honors and Dominions. Truly the effect of virtue is
of such a property, that it cannot be taken from us either by time or power;
whereas riches and worldly preferments, are for the most part, more belonging
to fortune and accident then to our selves. Nevertheless I say, this virtuous
benefit cannot be obtained, without some absolute or signal victory purchased
over all base and earthly passions and affections. And to show how much God
Almighty has been ever pleased to honor, and in a manner to eternize in this
world such endeavors, especially when grounded upon Religion and good
intentions; there have been many persons that only have sought Caves and
Deserts for their habitations, to avoid all kind of remembrance, as diverse
holy Saints and Martyrs, who endured in their particulars, as much scorn,
contempt, and neglect, as humane malice could invent, or their own humility
desire; yet both their names and fame live now amongst us with that eminency,
as if their actions had been continually recorded (whilst they were living) by
multitudes of writers, according to the custom of the Meads and Persians; when
as most of those great and glorious Kings (with many other Monarchs of latter
times) I may confidently aver, have wanted Monuments, or at leastwise a true
relation of their actions, notwithstanding the only Heaven they desired after
their deaths was, to be continued fresh in the memory of posterity. So that we
may boldly affirm, there is neither real felicity or certain content to be
hoped for in this world, depending upon any manner of sensuality or ambition,
since all things desired without doubt are but either surfeits or opinion,
although a man should every day in the year, be furnished with varieties
according to his own wishes, and each hour in the day, could gain strength and
vigor to enjoy them; insomuch as it is unpossible a man's mind can be ever
satisfied, without prescribing to himself a moderation in affections: which
truly will not be had unless he place his thoughts chiefly upon the intention
of his Creation; and by that means resolve to use the things of this life with
temper, since as I must say often, they are only given us for our recreation,
and not for our Heaven: which determination and no other, will soon render all
accidents, not only conveniently indifferent and necessary to our present and
future being, but even by such resolutions, accompanied with some proportion of
Grace, (not to be compassed but by this means) we shall be able to make extreme
advantages of crosses and misfortunes, that do what we can with all the
endeavors and power of this world, will still come upon us, and to our further
vexations, if we prevent not the apprehension of such accidents by higher
designs. In conclusion, whosoever can put himself in this happy condition,
whereby he may be master of a discreet temperance in all his actions, probably
in a short time may find out a passage to other virtues, until at last they
bring him to that content, which he can never obtain by his inordinate
passions; since the world will not afford what it was not made for. And
therefore it may be esteemed a maxim of the wisest Philosophy to think, there
is no happiness so great in this life, as to be well able to digest all
unhappiness.

Whether or no when we have gained this victory, there must not be something to
direct us in Gods Worship, of an infallible nature.
BUt now when we have gained this noble victory over our passions, though we
may esteem the greatest part of our work effected, in regard that naturally
flesh and blood are the chiefest obstacles against divine resolutions and self
content; yet nevertheless, we may fail in the observations of those duties,
belonging to the necessary worship of God, whereby our happiness will come
also to be destroyed; if we submit not our selves to some infallible directions,
which certainly can be no where found but in the Church of Christ, framed by
his own hands, and ordained to be the Tribunal of the Conscience, placed here
upon earth, not only to instruct and chastise, but to afford us true
consolation. So that I suppose, it will not be altogether impertinent, to
discourse a little concerning the properties thereof, in that its jurisdiction
and authority, seems to be the very Bases and foundation of all our belief.
To this purpose it must be first considered, whether such an Assembly has been
established or no. Certainly humane experience teaches us, that there was
never yet any Law given to a Nation or a people, but a Tribunal also was
ordained to be a Judge of that Law, as well to inform the Subjects concerning
the doubts of the right interpretation of the injunctions prescribed, as to
determine the due execution of them, that people might neither pretend
ignorance or use malice, without being instructed in the one, and punished for
the other; much less may it be thought that God Almighty, who is wisdom and
justice it self, would have imposed observations of a mystical nature upon his
established subjects, without having instituted as well a way how they might be
instructed in their ignorance, as corrected in their stubbornness: especially
when the truth of those heavenly principles given were impossible to be known
to proceed from him, but by some ordinary information, agreeing with their
capacities and understandings. For however in the beginning those Documents,
might be confirmed by miraculous inducements, to some few particularly
instructed to that purpose, yet could they not well be continued to posterity,
but by usual ways, since every person was not ordained to be a Prophet, or to
talk with God face to face as Moses did, who gave our Ancestors the first
methodical rules, which ever since have been maintained amongst men by
tradition from hand to hand. Neither is it likely that this omnipotent, and as
I may say, most affectionate Providence, would have less care for the
preservation of the unity of Religion with the Christians, that are a people
gathered and extracted from all the parts of the world, differing in tongues
and kindred; and so by consequence have more need of his assistance, then he
had to conserve it in the twelve Tribes of Israel, that were a generation only
confined to one Country, and therefore could not so easily differ in points of
Faith, or be corrupted in manners for want of due information; yet
nevertheless we see God Almighty held it so necessary a thing with those few
people, though united and circumscribed, as I say, into a most narrow and small
circuit of ground and Territory, that he had always his Church and High
Priest amongst them, unto whose Decrees our Savior Christ himself commanded
the Jews to be obedient (however the men at that present that governed were
most corrupt and wicked) only because they sat in Moses chair, and enjoyed of
right a supernatural prerogative, by way of an orderly succession which he
intended should only continue until after his passion, that he might establish
his more lasting and holy Church, which by his own promise is to endure without
interruption, until the end of the world, being invisibly to be always
governed by the Holy Ghost, for the more assuredness of infallibility, which
plainly shows that such a thing must be upon earth; Whereunto are annexed also
these marks of power and perspicuity, Power and perspicuity also annexed to the
condition of this Assembly,
since it is said, he would not only place his Tabernacle in the Son
figuratively, meaning his Church, but we are admonished in holy Scripture from
our Saviors own mouth, that whosoever will not hear his Church shall be
esteemed no better then a Heathen and a Publican; which truly would seem to any
man a most impertinent saying, if there were no such Assembly upon earth to be
heard and listened unto: For it is not to be supposed, we should upon all
occasions mount into Heaven, either to be instructed in our doubts, or to give
information against our neighbor erring, so that of necessity, there must be
some Congregation or Tribunal on earth established to that purpose; besides, by
the very Articles of our Creed, we are to believe the Holy Catholic Church;
which implies a certainty of there being such a thing, before we can believe
what it says. So that we may conclude it a most ridiculous madness, to think
there is no visible and real place or Chair upon earth, where men may go to
receive true and undoubted information concerning matters of Religion;
especially when it is not credible that every particular person should have
sufficient direction by Revelation, since the greatest Prophets that were ever
sent into the world, were constrained to fetch their instructions oftentimes
from others.

In the next place it is as necessary to believe, that this established
Assembly must be infallible, That this Assembly must also be infallible.
as that it is at all; since if it should be otherwise, our directions would
sometimes miss, and so consequently we might ignorantly contract errors in
our ways and endeavors, instead of running surely in the direct path of
Almighty Gods principles and commandments toward our future salvation: For it
is evident by the rules of reason, upon all intended certainties, there ought
to be some means prescribed us, whereby we may be sure we are right. As for the
purpose in all humane matters, we are accustomed, to use the benefit of weight,
measure, or some other experience, before we have sufficient assurance any
thing is just according to our intention: much more are we to believe, that our
Savior Jesus Christ, after having showed such a mystical love in our
redemption, would not have carelessly exposed us to a dark Labyrinth of
confusion and incertainty concerning the knowledge of his Law, of such a
consequence to be observed; nay, rather it is to be supposed, he would have
written it in brass for our better instruction, if he had not ordained an
Assembly only for that effect; but for a greater confirmation of our purpose,
we may remember what the holy Scriptures tell us; that the Church is the pillar
of Truth, and therefore consequently cannot be false; neither could Gods
revealed will and pleasure in an ordinary way and without miracle, come to be
known to our humane understandings, but by the Records delivered unto us, by
the unquestionable Authority of the Churches tradition, that renders them
Authentical to our belief, without which they have no seal of exemplification
or testimony, since it is not enough to say, that one place of Scripture, is
perfectly able to interpret another, without a more assured rule, when as we do
not know by our own reading and particular Science, what places are true
Scripture and which not, having only the letter of the book to look upon; and
as little can we be assured that we do expound those writings right as they
were intended; because it belongs not to any private spirit so to do: of the
contrary, it may be feared according to the words of Saint Peter (especially if
we use too much presumption) that being unlearned and unstable, we may wrest
the Text to our own damnation. So that of necessity there must be something
above our selves, not only to be the interpreter of this Law, but also to tell
and show us the Law it self that was ordained, so that I must leave it to any
common understanding to consider what can be more proper for this then the
Church of God, that he has promised to be withal until the consummation of the
world. We may also extract another assurance, out of the old Testament, which
is that God Almighty said, in time to come he would choose such an Assembly by
orderly succession, whose spirits as it is written should conserve knowledge,
and the true Spirit should be put into their mouths, from generation to
generation for ever. Wherefore I say, as this must needs be meant only by the
universal Church, so of the other side, such persons cannot be but esteemed
most ridiculous in their opinions, that will not allow this Assembly, the
prerogative of knowledge and interpretation, and yet do assume to themselves,
perhaps being ignorant in a high nature, a most infallible way of
understanding, as well what books are Divine Scripture, as also what
interpretation ought truly to be given to every Text, though they are plainly
forewarned of the danger, by those very Epistles that they themselves have
judged to be true Scripture; but as these few proofs may be sufficient, as I
said before, to persuade any reasonable and competent understanding, concerning
the infallibility of this Assembly, instituted by our Savior, and governed by
the Holy Ghost; this being granted, that of necessity we must believe the
Assembly, we cannot by any reason deny our obedience to the Authority.

But here perhaps may come a new question, according to some Athiestical
Tenants of these times, Against the Tenants of the age, that would only have a
Law of nature or Morality for people to follow.
whether or no God Almighty have appointed man any other rules, then the Law of
nature, measured out only by his own private judgment? which certainly are
most gross and absurd opinions; for by these maxims, there should be no
difference between men and beasts in their course of living, since the latter
have a kind of order allowed them to use by the mere instinct of nature,
though they want reason. As for example, they engender seasonably, procure to
themselves competent food and rest, with a certain care also of their own
preservation, and in like manner will defend those of their kind; sometimes
with the desperate hazard of their lives. And man by this rule should do no
more, which not only seems repugnant to Gods wisdom, but is against the
dignity of man's creation; in his not receiving or enjoying some prerogative in
his employment whilst he is here, by reason of his eternal condition hereafter;
so that without doubt God Almighty intended man, some extraordinary work in
this world beyond other creatures that were ordained merely for his use and
subsistence, having placed in him a reasonable and understanding soul. And
certainly this employment can be no other then some immediate and particular
service belonging to his own worship, which other creatures are not able to
perform, as being no way needful for their condition, since they can neither
know God, or are to expect any thing after this life is ended. Whereas man
being capable of both, his Creator has placed him here for some time, that he
may make use of his own faculties, either for his benefit or condemnation; but
for a further confirmation of this Reason, there never was yet any people so
rude and ignorant in their conversation, but used a reverence, if not a real
worship or Sacrifice to some supposed Deity or other, which they not only
counted most sacred, but themselves particularly with a kind of a wonderful
awe were restrained from offending in their conceived rights, as fearing
otherwise they might be punished by a supernatural power; which either shows
that nature it self teaches all people to observe such principles, or that
they had in the general received by tradition some Documents to that purpose,
from the very infancy of the world, though they had lost the perfect use of
them. For it is not to be supposed, that men ever living amongst Rocks and
Mountains, could without any manner of information or instruction, have
invented so much of Divinity as we have declared, without some inducements,
since no mystical profession does seem to agree with their rough kind of
conversation, or wild appetites; and therefore such people could not but
desire to be at the most liberty. So that as it is evident, by all the grounds
of Nature, and Arguments of Reason, that God Almighty has designed himself a
particular worship upon earth, so has he revealed the manner how to be
performed from time to time to his Church, which for the most part put it down
in writing, conserving such Records inviolably without corruption, and
delivered them in that manner to posterity with many other Truths, by way of
verbal Tradition, as the Articles of our Creed, and the like, amongst which
Precepts we have the Ten Commandments, that in effect contain the whole Law
both Divine and Moral; wherefore since it is apparent, that our great Creator,
has appointed his Godhead a real worship in this world from man, answerable to
the dignity of his Creation; and that he has revealed the particulars of his
pleasure by Scripture, the truth of which Records, being to be tried and
approved by the Church, having only the spirit of right interpretation, we are
by an infallible consequence not only to obey, but rely upon this Assembly.

Some general instructions concerning the practice of Gods own proper and
immediate worship.
BUt now that we have found out that God Almighty must have a real worship, we
are as well to be instrcted how it must be effected, which may be reduced to
these particulars. First, that there must be used a holy and divine Sacrifice,
that was instituted by our Savior Jesus Christ, as an essential duty belonging
to his Majesty and Godhead, which cannot appertain by any means to any
creature. Next we are taught also, that it be performed with an outward
reverence and an inward intention, accompanied with love and attentiveness;
however, more particularly to be observed and put in practice, at those times
when we are obliged by the orders and rules of the Church, to give our personal
attendance at this grand duty commanded. And so by consequence not to entermix
our devotions willingly, with any vain or idle cogitations, since if such
distractions be frequent, they are apparent demonstrations, that although God
Almighty has our body in point of Ceremony, yet he does not possess the heart
in matter of love. For when we are transported by diversity of objects, it is
unpossible but that there must be some defect in affection; to prevent which,
when we perceive such distempers, to steal upon our deceived Senses and
wandering appetites, by reason of the frailty of our nature, that ever seeks
the lowest Center, according to the base matter of which our bodies were first
framed, we are obliged by a speedy and discreet correction (upon the least
apprehension) to call in question our omissions, before a Religious judgment.
And this principally, to prevent an ill custom growing upon us, lest it may
soon take so great footing in our manners, that if not resisted within a short
time, will absolutely, though unawares, destroy that Grace in our souls that is
necessary, as well to keep us from being overcome by dangerous temptations, as
to make up capable of doing good instead of evil. It Is true, such a contention
at the first, may prove something irksome to many; especially to youthful
dispositions, that commonly take delight in varieties, who naturally are
distasted and wearied with settled objects; yet certainly the more such a virtue
is practiced with courage and resolution, the greater ease shall a person find
daily in his devotions, until it bring him in the end, not only to obtain an
absolute victory over most of his passions, but even to entertain a singular
delight in every exercise of Religion; which once made a man's chief business,
I am persuaded, their is neither honors, sensualities, or any worldly pleasure
can afford so much content; but for the better obtaining of which benefit, we
ought not at any time to pretermit our daily and ordinary customs of devout
exercises, whether in reading or praying, without urgent occasion, upon any
flatt^ring pretensions of convenience and necessity, that the devil and the
flesh do often suggest to our wavering imaginations, as baits only laid for
diversion, lest by such omissions we contract more slothful inclinations in our
selves concerning the performance of any virtue; when as of the contrary, in
observing punctually times and seasons for our devotions, we shall apparently
find a kind of hearty zeal in our souls toward Gods service in most things.
As for the purpose, there be some people, that will sit in a manner continually
day and night at Cards or the like, without ever seeming to be tired, when as
the least time spent in holy exercises, is a vexation to their thoughts: Whilst
of the other side, such employment to a truly religious man, in a Monastery,
to be enjoined him as a penance, would appear perhaps to be a mortification of
some extraordinary nature. The reason being only this, that the one has
procured such a proportion of Grace, by his frequent and diligent observation
of his duty, that it renders the contrary distastful unto him; whereas worldly
persons have so benumbed their zeal, and deaded their understanding by giveing
way upon all occasions to sensualities, that nothing seems delightful to their
thoughts, that is mixed with any religious observation. Also many new converts
in their first entrance into Religion, appear wonderful zealous in their
profession, because for the most part, they employ their whole time concerning
the business they are about, by reason of the need they have of instruction in
forms and customs; whereas others of a longer standing not seldom are wearied
out with knowing too much, and practicing too little; and so by degrees begin
to slack in their daily and ordinary devotions, until at last they make what is
or ought to be a duty, a mere formal Ceremony and no more; which shows that
intentional diligence procures fervor, and fervor obtains Grace. But
certainly as no cold way of devotion can possibly please God, since he has
declared to spue them out of his mouth, who are only lukewarm in his service;
so have we multitudes of testimonies even amongst the barbarous Gentiles, as if
nature it self taught a man a fervor should be used in his Religion, without
any other instruction. In testimony of which we read, that when Agamemnon and
the other Princes of Greece were to take their journey toward the City of Troy,
it was thought a necessary duty, whereby to make their voyage prosperous, and
to appease the anger of the Goddess Diana, that their Captain and General
should Sacrifice his own daughter; which truly was a sufficient expression of
fear to offend those false deities, as also a most evident argument of the care
those people had, diligently to perform their Rites, and observe those
principles commanded them. In like manner the Romans never came home with
victory obtained against their enemies, but the first thing they did when they
entered the Town, was to visit the Temple of Jupiter in the Capitol with
Triumph, whereby to render thanks to the gods for their success, and this
Ceremony was not to be performed by themselves in person, but being accompanied
with their whole Army, that all might be partakers and join in the common duty
and Sacrifice. In Holy Scripture we find that the Priests of the dumb Idol
Baal, performed their impious devotions in their contentions with righteous
Elias, by strange and wonderful cuttings and mangling of their bodies, to
render the god propitious to their Prayers; which truly were effectual signs of
their earnest thoughts, though pernicious actions. Again, with what
extraordinary want of compassion both to themselves and posterity, did the
deluded people sacrifice their own children by fire to Molech, accompanied with
the noise and sound of many instruments, because their ears should not be won
to any manner of pity, by reason of their fearful shrikes and cries, whilst
their bodies were burning, and consuming in that terrible manner. All which no
doubt could not be done without a great deal of fervor and confidence in their
horrid and barbarous rights, that at least may serve to reprove the cold
practices and customs of these times. Besides if we seriously reflect upon the
intentional devotion of the tyrannical Turks, we may find perhaps occasion
enough (by reason of their frequent example) to condemn our extravagant
thoughts and loose actions in the performance both of our exterior and interior
duties in our sacred and commanded Religion: Since as it is confidently
reported, there are many Santons or Saints, as they call them, living in that
Country, who having made a Pilgrimage to the Tomb of their false Prophet
Mahomet, have put out their own eyes, because they would be no more obliged to
behold any earthly things; as esteeming all other sights (after this supposed
holy journey) most vile and profane, and in this manner resolve; to die
cloystered up in some dark Dungeon, excluded from the conversation of mankind.
O God, if the devil have such power, to infuse these resolutions into the stony
hearts of ignorant Infidels, what infernal madness is it, that not only
obstructs so much divine cogitations of Christians, being present at those
sacred mysteries, But, when they are absent, involves all their thoughts and
actions in a thousand fantastical and dangerous sensualities: to whom I must
proclaim, that their condition in the day of judgment, will be a million of
times worse, then the state of those that ignorantly worship any false deity,
with a hearty zeal: for certainly God Almighty more looks at the intention of
man, then at the capacity he has to do him service, since no humane employment
whatsoever can in its own nature, any way be beneficial to his Godhead or
Divinity, but merely by accident as it tends to our own salvation, wherein his
mercy and goodness does more abundantly appear.

Wherefore as we see, not only by the direction of the Church, but by the
examples of all other people in the world, there is a necessity of a certain
kind of fervor in all manner of acts of devotion; however, more especially in
the essential part of Gods worship; So ought it be esteemed the most highest
Treason against the Majesty of God to deny him publicly, when there is
occasion of such confession, or hypocritically to use this service as a stall
only to compass wordly ends by a seeming though not hearty compliance: and to
this purpose oftentimes perhaps many people come to the Sacraments, bespotted
inwardly with diverse hidden crimes, without having made due examination of
their own Consciences, or putting on any resolution to mend either for the
present, or perchance to quit their sins till they leave them. In which posture
they neither make true confessions, or resolve upon any charitable
satisfaction; whereas we are obliged by the declared principles of this
infallible Church, I have so often mentioned (the very Conduit that conveys
unto us, if not the Grace of God, yet at leastwise the knowledge how we may
obtain it) to clear our Consciences from all fraud and deceit; and with a most
humble and sorrowful reverence, to approach those high and dreadful mysteries,
ordained for man's salvation. Which being impiously perverted, turn into the
worst corruption concerning our manners; however, it self being entirely pure,
can receive no detriment at all. Wherefore I say, let those fantastical
spirits, that either make ends or humor a parcel, if not oftentimes the chief
part of their Religion, take heed, lest not only the judgment of God punish
with rigor their hypocrisies in the next world, which will not be prevented,
but also show some marks of his indignation in this life, against their impious
dissemblings; since many terrible examples might be produced to that effect out
of very approved Authors, if there were any need to strengthen this certainty
by humane relations. For it is sufficient we have admonitions and instructions
out of very Scripture it self, the best warrant of all others, which says,
omitting diverse others, that the flesh profits nothing; to be understood in
my opinion, that the receiving of the blessed Sacrament avails not one jot in
outward Ceremony, unless it be accompanied by a real and pure intention of
the receiver. Which was also apparently verifyed in the last Supper our Savior
made with his Apostles, when as the eleven were strongly confirmed in their
faith and virtue, by their good intentions in that holy institution and
exercise, as bringing love to accompany their duty and service, whereas Judas
that wicked Traitor eat Christ's body with a false heart and a corrupt soul,
which made him not only at that very instant go go forth hastily to perform
his horrible intention, without seeming at all to reflect upon the heinousness
of his crime, but afterward it took from him the least appearance of any
Grace, insomuch as he neither could not repent, or have any confidence in Gods
forgiveness; and therefore, only in a desperate manner returned the money he
had taken, and presently went and hanged himself, who else might have found as
much mercy as the Thief did upon the Cross; Since Gods goodness is beyond all
transgressions of man, provided there be a fitting compliance on his part;
which however as I say, cannot be obtained, being accompanied with any manner
of hypocrisy and dissimulation, in regard God Almighty is only the God of
Truth, and not of deceit, as himself has often declared. Besides, Saint Paul
tells us, that he that takes the Sacrament unworthily, decerneth not the Lords
body, to his further guilt and condemnation. So that we may confidently
conclude, Who does not prepare himself as he should, in the entertaining of
this admirable benefit intended for man's preservation and salvation, does fit
his person the readier for the devils service and possession; since (as I said
before) God Almighty does chiefly aim at the heart and intention, without which
he will not be pleased, by what formality soever; neither can his omnipotent
justice be cousened by any humane hypocrisy, since his divine Science was
able, as you have heard, to sift the subtle thoughts of the very Angels before
they fell; wherefore it is a most ridiculous Chymera to think, that the gross
craft of man can cover or conceal anything from his infinite knowledge, and as
much simplicity accompanied with impiety, to believe, that man has power to
prevent his own punishment, if he offend this omnipotent Science in this
nature. Which being granted, the only way to make this necessary preparation
is, exactly to follow the rules and directions of the Church; that is, entirely
to be sorrowful for our faults, to confess them truly without any manner of
guile or affectation; and lastly (though not least of all) to make full and
willing satisfaction to any we have injured, without all which conditions, as
no seeming absolution that is given, can be valid, so shall the receiving not
only be most horrid, but the greatest sacrilege can be committed upon earth,
since neither long Prayers, exact Fastings, or frequent Alms deeds can profit
anything to purpose, without these punctual or intentional observations: for
its said that God Almighty is a jealous God, and will not be satisfied without
our whole heart and best actions, which being freely bestowed upon him, he is
not only most easy to be pleased, but ready in every occasion to cover and
forgive the frailty of our nature, that at the best has sufficient need of the
assistance of his heavenly Grace, being else able to do nothing. These
considerations may serve to put us in mind as well of our own duty that we owe
our Creator, by an exterior and interior Sacrifice, with other observations
contained (upon the matter) in the first three Commandments belonging
immediately to the proper and particular worship of God; as also ought bring in
like manner into our remembrance other duties, appertaining to humanity and
conversation, numbered, as I may say, in the last seven injunctions delivered to
Moses. Where it may be noted, that God Almighty was pleased to show a most
admirable goodness, in that he took but three Commandments to himself, and
left the rest for our neighbors benefit, whereby the better to conserve
charity in all our intentions. But for that the suppressing of our passions and
appetites is the only way to begin these common duties, without which they
cannot well be performed, I shall discourse chiefly upon two Capital sins,
namely pride and sensuality, which in truth contain or occasion all other
vices; the one seeming to bear greatest domination in the soul, as the other
does in the body. And first I will speak of pride, in regard it makes war with
the noblest part, that we have immediately received from God by way of
infusion, though joined with our earthly substance, or over-powred by it, it
becomes less able to act toward the intention of our Creation.

Of Pride beeng the chief vice belonging to the Soul.
PRide, I may say, not only fools the understanding to error, but involves
our actions with injustice. Being composed of partial self-love, and
extraordinary false opinion, not suffering us to know our selves rightly, or
behold others with indifferency. And was so odious to Almighty God in the
beginning, that he punished the first demonstration thereof in the Angels, by
the greatest effects of his wrath, as of the contrary, he redeemed mankind by
the highest example of humility, condemning them without revocation, because
they had so offended against the Majesty of his glory, with a kind of a
knowing presumption, and saved us by the passion of his only Son, for that our
frailty seemed something to plead our pardon before the Throne of his Mercy.
Pride confounded Pharaoh and all his host in the Red Sea, when as the humility
of Moses conducted the children of Israel safely to the Land of Promise. In
fine, the meekness of the blessed Virgin made her the Mother of God, the
greatest prerogative could be bestowed upon mortality: and insolency turned the
mightiest Monarch of the earth into the nature of a beast, only to feed upon
the herbs of the field. This violent Lunacy, I say, is the more hard to be
perceived, for that however it be lofty in its own proper quality, yet it does
not alone appertain to persons of the highest conditions, which shows it
claims a hidden and secret interest in the Soul, not always appearing
visible; for that there must be some certain concurrency of power to make it
show it self to others; however, it proves to be of a most dangerous
consequence, when it gains too great a liberty of working amongst the common
people, that lack both education and discretion to temper their own rude
appetites; as being not so sensible as nobler persons of honor and humanity,
which renders them altogether barbarous, when eminency as an object of their
envy, comes within the compass of their power and spite, which might be
demonstrated by many sad, bloody, and terrible examples. But as it is
unpossible to judge rightly of this humor in the disposition of any man,
because it consists in so many several expressions, and appears upon diverse and
multitudes of occasions, so is there no better a way to find the disease in a
bodies own person, then strictly to sift the Conscience by the rules of reason
and Religion, with a kind of equal consideration, free from all partiality;
that is to say, whether or no he intend all the honor and esteem he desires,
chiefly for the service of God, accompanied with a due consideration of the
intention of his Creation, whereby he may not exact from another in his mind
some unlawful due, more then appertains unto himself, to some others loss or
derogation; for otherwise I will not call any manner of respect that is desired
pride. Since as naturally we can but covet our own good, and so consequently to
attempt esteem. So when it is demanded and required with moderation, as an
indubitable right belonging to our fortune, merit, and condition, there is no
injury at all done, either to God or a third person. For no doubt every man may
as well conserve his honor as his estate, both being inherent rights to him
and his posterity. And certainly those that deny us those national dues, are
not only themselves injurious, but may be justly taxed of pride, if not of
rude insolency; which I rather say, because in these days there may be noted a
strange kind of injurious intention in most of the inferior sort of people, to
withdraw themselves from observing all ancient decorum in this nature. An
appetite in my opinion that has not only lately distracted exceedingly the
government of this kingdom, but has destroyed already much of the glory of the
Nation, since convenient degrees must be observed to render any Commonwealth
happy, lest confusion at last take away what is necessary for Magistracy and
obedience toward peace and unity. But of the contrary, if we perceive our
inclinations only given to study vaingloriously our own private esteem, without
having either due consideration of others rights, or charitably being willing
to reflect upon meaner conditions, in that they are subordinate to us in the
worlds eye, though equal with us in Creation; without doubt we may conclude,
that some dangerous inflammations does possess our inward parts that will not
long want a subject to work upon. Nevertheless the humor of it self for the
most part is ridiculous, since it is not the vain opinion of our own personal
deserts, that can render us more worthy in the thoughts of others, if we
deserve not the consideration, and if we do merit a particular regard in some
few things, we destroy that estimation we covet oftentimes by expressing too
much violence in the desire. There is another kind of ignoble pride,
proceeding from low and poor thoughts, and not from the inflammation of honor
and courage, which makes people, though insolent in posterity, yet most base
and dejected in adversity, rather courting respect and esteem by way of
flattery, from contemptible persons upon any false terms of injustice, then
industriously endeavoring brave and gallant designs to gain commendations.
This I know to be the custom of many, who seem to desire vulgar peoples
applause, when they appear careless of the knowing approbation of religious
and worthy men, either being perhaps confident of the number of the commenders,
or not having a sufficient capacity to judge of the right value of both.
However, to compass which the better, they will profess a kind of equality
in their actions, with the worst of their companions, as if neither birth nor
virtue were to be esteemed: pretending this to be done out of good nature and
some humility extraordinary in their dispositions, so to level themselves with
others, when I am confident often times, is proceeds from the quintescence of
Pride, as not knowing else how to be so well observed. Thus much I have said,
because I would not have these low humors of the age be taken for humility, or
a constant and laudable bravery in men's thoughts and actions, to be interpreted
pride, since the custom of the one, and the want of practice of the other, not
only made our Ancestors glorious, but have rendered our selves most unhappy.
For where stations are not kept to measure out to people their desert, it is
unpossible with any confidence or alacrity to prosecute to the end the course
of virtue; which Rome, however a Commonwealth, observed most punctually, or
else could never have come to that greatness; and to this purpose all degrees
had their places, to distinguish worth and merit, as marks of political reward,
though now that rule and order, as I may say, is esteemed either folly or
presumption. It Is true, I cannot deny, but there has been showed often times
in the actions of great Monarchs, too great an insolence concerning their
deportments; ignorance certainly being the cause at any time, why pride appears
too much to outward view. But withal, we find Nero the very worst of humane
monsters, was more then besotted in his disposition, with a vain and foolish
ambition of popular praise, that rendered him not only ridiculous to all men
of a noble and worthy conversation, but made him really cruel to all such as
opposed that humor, not being willing to see a mighty Emperor contend with
common fiddlers in the open Theater, for vulgar applause, and in that posture to
wipe away the sweat with his own hand, because the people were delighted with
his observation of their ordinary customs; which certainly he did only because
he was transported with a mad and preposterous desire of praise, proceeding no
doubt, from the highest instigation of pride. And yet this proud man was so
base in his disposition, though foolish in his thoughts, that when his
wickedness had deservedly tumbled him from his Empire, his deluded fancy was
yet bewitched with a ridiculous vainglory, insomuch, as he aimed at nothing but
to be consined into the Country of Egypt, there to exercise his trade of
singing amongst the common people, whose applause he violently coveted (as it
may be imagined) beyond all other greatness. So that we may conclude, as Pride
often times is accompanied with the worst cruelty, so not seldom is it joined
with a contemptible want of courage: witness also the ordinary people of
Holland, who are insolent without measure, and yet cowardly beyond other
Nations; however, they have had always that good fortune, to make other
Countries to fight for their pride, which themselves personally durst not
maintain. Certainly, a noble disposition either hates Pride, or tempers it with
humanity, which at least renders it sufferable, whereas the contrary makes it
barbarous. But for that the effects are diverse, according to accidents and
natures, we shall discourse a little of several parts of this humor.

Many dependencies belonging to this infernal Lady Pride.
THere is no doubt but Pride may be without envy, though envy cannot be without
Pride; therefore may be likened to extracted poison from a dangerous Plant, for
that Pride is not deadly of it self, but by way of use and application,
retaining the capacity, though not always working the effect. But envy of the
contrary, ever hurts either a man's self or others; And remains like a concealed
flame, at the best seeking occasion to burst forth to the destruction of some
good thing, and in the interim consumes where it lies hid. Neither can it at
all be satisfied, because it ayms not only at unreasonable, but unpossible
periods; that is, to darken the Sunshine of virtue, which will now and then
appear in spite of what black clouds soever of malice, for that it is of a
pure and prevailing substance by nature; whereas those of grosser and more
ignoble composures are dispersed by every wind or little rain of discovery;
for although false and counterfeit stones, sometimes with false and
sophisticated art, may show fair to the view of ignorant persons, yet when the
Diamond is produced in competition, they soon lose their luster and belief.
Most commonly this appetite is engendered in those persons, who are defective in
themselves, though they do not sufficiently perceive their own infirmity, and
less the capacity of others to discern; and by that means in a wrong posture
go about to set up their particular esteem, or violently seek to pull down
others to their own level. This humor truly is so much practiced in this age,
as I have heard some say, that shortly it would be esteemed a crime to laugh,
for fear of being held to enjoy too much innocent content, though without other
eminency. Which makes me in my thoughts to cry out for Academies, to instruct
youth in virtue and morality. For if people would but strive by a noble
industry, to render themselves deserved patterns of emulation, and not examples
of envy to others, there would be no time left them, to entertain so
unprofitable a disposition, from whence proceeds nothing but falsenesse in
conversation, distraction in absence, and revenge in actions, without any
benefit at all purchased thereby, either to present content, or future
satisfaction.

The property of Revenge.
As envy may be said to be a corroding mineral, drawn from that huge mountain
Pride, so revenge may be compared to hot and fiery vapors, that often break
from thence, to a kind of ominous destruction. Or rather may be termed Prides
worst executioner and bloody servant. But however, it aims always at dangerous
and unhappy periods, yet certainly the progress it makes for the most part is
sweet and pleasant to depraved natures, since it affords not only delight by
reason of that victory it always hopes for, but prove extremely pleased and
satisfied, being obtained; however, I must confess, the joy indures not long;
for most commonly some kind of despair follows soon after; yet nevertheless,
in the interim during the prosecution, a wicked man is not much tormented in
his thoughts, for that the passion of revenge, does always transcend the
apprehension of danger, which is the reason that so unhappy a resolution is
continued; for notwithstanding it proceeds no further then intention, wanting
time and convenience to execute, yet the determination all the while is so
strongly accompanied, with hope of effecting, and so busied in seeking the best
opportunity, that it never gives a person of a malicious nature, leisure to be
sad or melancholy: Whereas of the contrary, envy seems still to oppress with
a cold despair, that never affords any manner of content or satisfaction.
Although envy be the less dangerous properly, yet certainly revenge is the more
noble humor, for that it is still accompanied with some hazard, whereas the
other seems ever to bark afar off, or whisper privately in the dark; though
perchance neither have hearts good enough to forgive, or great enough to
forget; revenge is justifiable in none but in the supreme power, who is pleased
to call his divine justice by that name; for he may only revenge injuries with
rutribution, whilst we alone can but consider them with an intention of
prevention, since if we go further, we do but usurp his office and condemn our
selves. Nevertheless, we may safely punish, having lawful Commission, derived
from his heavenly sword of Justice, established here upon earth for our more
honest and regular conversation; though this too must be put in execution
without all partiality, lest revenge happen to be increased by hypocrisy under
the pretense of justice.

The next imperfection of the Soul I will mention shall be Vainglory, Of
Vainglory.
which in truth is no other then a certain kind of weak lunacy or fantastical
madness, engendered between pride and want of judgment, for that instead of
persuading our actions to be esteemed by others, thereby we make our own
persons become ridiculous; since for the most part we dream that every
extravagancy, should procure belief and opinion in those, that have no cause to
be partial. Besides, the humor or vanity is accompanied with some species of
ill nature, as well as folly; for they that possess these fancies in their
dispositions, look so much upon their own passions, that they altogether pass
by another deserts, by which means they fall oftentimes to be hated by all,
instead of being valued by any; as it were never seeing but through a
perspective glass, at both ends, where they either behold too much, or
apprehend too little; not being able to judge rightly of their own wants or
others perfections. By which means they appear most commonly like men half
drunk, that are readier for expression, though unfitter for action. Which I may
say again, is a passion so much in fashion in these times, that people seem to
be transported with certain thoughts, as if they had been only their own
creators* scarce allowing God Almighty any share at all in their being and
fortunes. To cure this disease, men ought to look upon God not only as the
Author of every good, but also to conceive each reasonable Creature to be
framed by the same hand, wherein no difference has been made and intended, but
by accident or Grace. For as the Diamond and the Flint are not of equal virtues
in every respect; so each is profitable in its kind: the one bearing price, as
the other produces fire; wherein the latter seems notwithstanding better to
comply with man's commodity, though the former rather procures admiration. So
that if we have parts above others in our own apprehensions, let us make use of
them with modesty, and they will appear more illustrious to the eye of the
world; if we want such abilities, though we may (in some sort) cover our
defects, we ought rather make them up with our goodness, then render our
selves worse by assuming what is none of our own, to the injury of others.

Disobedience is not only another effect of Pride, Disobedience another effect
of Pride.
but was the first sin that ever was committed upon earth by humanity, wherein
God Almighty was so displeased against man, that nothing but the death of his
own Son could assuage his wrath. Besides, the contrary is so necessary a
property to be continued ed in all conditions, that the world cannot subsist
without it. However, I may boldly say, this latter age has not only created
strange thoughts concerning this duty, but almost hourly produces wonderful
examples against the maxim: however we shall set down only three common duties
of this kind, proceeding from the first infancy of the world, which have been
made good eversince, both by the Commandments of God, and all Moral Documents.
We will first begin with that obedience that is due from Children to their
Parents, which (setting aside Gods own immediate Precepts) is an obligation
challenged by way of natural right, for having brought us into the world, that
else should have been nothing; Children are bound to afford their Parents, at
all times, and upon every fitting occasion, an obsequious reverence, though
never so much under another jurisdiction; as also another duty of gratitude
for their education and preservation in their infancy, which nevertheless is
to be esteemed more or less, according to the care was had of their persons,
when they were not able to provide for themselves; insomuch, as no deficiency
of the Parents part (in my opinion) can take away altogether that humane
respect and honor that is due by nature. As for example, When a daughter is
bestowed in marriage, although by that means she becomes under another
jurisdiction, and in that regard, cannot dispose of her self without her
husbands leave, toward their service, yet certainly she is still obliged to
afford them upon all convenient occasions, a dutiful reverence; nevertheless,
I must confess in these times, we hold it sufficient satisfaction, if children
become not wholly reprobates to their own destruction, without having any
consideration of their Parents particular. The next obligation of obedience is
due from servants to their Masters, which however it be limited to time and
contract, is not only to be observed in Conscience according to the conditions
agreed upon; but also there is a civil duty of respect to be observed, after
the time is expired, unless some just cause has been given to the contrary.
But, for that I intend to speak something more hereof in another place, I shall
mention only now the last obedience, which is due from the Subjects to their
Prince, instituted, as I may say, in the beginning of the world, which may be
divided into three kinds. The first was that purchased by Nimrod, being wholly
usurped and therefore might have been cast off again, upon the first
opportunity: however, the continuance did perhaps render it lawful to
posterity. The second was domestic or voluntary, verified in the person af
Abraham, over his pious and godly family, which was approved no doubt by God
Almighty, when he commanded them to fight with those who had taken unjustly Lot
prisoner; again, Abraham's Dominion was justified, when he tied his servant* by
an oath to provide a wife for his son: and the last is that of compact and
agreement, which makes subjects by their own consent become under the power of
rule, as may be testified by Pharaoh and his people; which work was brought
about by Joseph, when his subjects changed their liberty for subsistence and
livelihood. And this being contracted for, and afterward confirmed by
proscription, could not again be cast off, without incurring the penalties
belonging to Rebellion. For the Jews could not have avoided the lawfulness of
the jurisdiction (notwithstanding their cruel persecution and slavery) but that
it was the declared will of God, revealed particularly to Moses, this by that
means they should be freed from their misery, under whose power are rightly
contained, all the governments of the earth.

Of Ingratitude
Ingratitude is not only another effect of Pride, but may be said to be a most
ignoble property, since it does not only defraud goodness of its due, but
seems not willingly to encourage virtue in any kind which was the reason that
the wise and brave Romans, ranked it amongst the worst of vices, and to that
purpose appointed punishments for the offehders. God Almighty first fell out
with Cain for his ingratitude, though he afterward condemned him for his
hypocrisy. Truly I may affirm, this vice appears to have gotten a particular
jurisdiction in this Nation at present, since many of those most obliged prove
the greatest Traitors to their benefactors; neither is this done covertly and
in the dark, but most commonly is owned as a piece of excellent wit; and so
consequently esteemed a kind of virtue, for servants to be unfaithful in their
duty, or friends to deceive trusts committed unto them: and so far has private
interest taken possession of honor, good nature, and conscience, that every
person that walks according to these old maxims, is either esteemed a fool or a
Heretic. Certainly God punished the devils with the greater indignation, for
that in their thoughts they were unwilling to be thankful for his benefits;
whereas man had a condition annexed to his condemnation, because it was frailty
rather then an intention of ingratitude, that caused him to offend; however, he
seemed more really and punctually to have broken his Commandment. For my part I
hold those as worthy that raise monuments to virtue, as those which good
fortune has made famous; since however they may have wanted the opportunity
and convenience of acting, yet nevertheless they retain in their minds a
certain intention of honor.

The next appetite of Pride is ambition, however it is only it but by accident
or intention, Of Ambition and its property.
since nothing renders that name unlawful, but either too much passion in the
prosecution, or over much desire by way of private interest; yet some perhaps
will quarrel with the name only, which I cannot but except against; for as the
too much coveting of honor and preferment out of a personal respect, renders
the desire unjustifiable: and so by consequence proves to be a mere ambition;
so of the other side, a moderate seeking of a just esteem, is no more then a
natural indulgency, warrantable in our humane condition, since without this
hope for the most part, our noble endeavors should want recompense, whereby
men's virtuous intentions would cool in the prosecution, before they could come
to a ripeness fit for use or example. For if our frail natures had no other
object to behold, then barely that reward we are to expect in the next world,
it is to be much feared, that people would grow so slack in endeavoring of
laudable (nay I may say) necessary things, that at last all honor and virtue
would be in danger to be wholly neglected, by which means unworthy persons
should com to be of equal Authority with the best, and no privilege at all
given to industry. As for example; What soldier would expose himself willingly
to the hazard of the Cannon, without some expectation of recompense from his
General; or if a baser man then he were to be esteemed alike. Nay let us but
consider, how many great Scholars or grave Clergymen, notwithstanding they
are sufficiently acquainted with the depth of Conscionable rules and maxims,
would with so much violence follow their studies to gain learning, unless they
thought their Science should advance them above other men in estimation? though
some few may be found altogether mortified in their worldly passions. We see
also Children and youths are induced to learn, by promised honor and
preferment in their studies during their being at School. And certainly their
pious and Religious Masters, would not ingraft in their tender years such
principles, if every kind of ambition in its own nature were unlawful; for
most commonly what inclinations we take when we are young, do very seldom quit
us in our age; and more especially those thoughts, that taste either of ambition
or covetousness. Wherefore we may be satisfied, that it is not the desiring of
any lawful thing that creates an ambition in our minds, but the over desiring
only; and truly in doing so, we do but resemble a bedlam, who violently
catches at a handful of air, supposing he has something in his hand, which
being opened, proves but imagination. Of covetousness as a dependant of Bride.
For the too much desire increases opinion, and that is made less by
experience, until at last it falls into nothing at all, agreeing with our
imaginary expectation. Lastly, we will come to the covetousness of the age, a
mad effect also of the mind, wherein for the most part little reality appears,
in that we desire to be owners more of wealth, then to have the sruition
thereof; since commonly in our own persons we make use but of a small portion
of what we covet; it seems to have the nearest affinity with ambition, for as
the extreme aspiring man gives his thoughts no repose, by reason of his over
aiming desires; so cannot the avaritious person scarce afford his necessities
sufficient, in regard of that craving and unsatisfied humor. Wherefore
properly, they may both be esteemed brothers in folly, as well as in sin. Since
alike they only please the fancy, not reflecting at all, upon the
impossibility of compassing what is desired; for the period will still be
behind do what we can, if there be either a greater or a richer man in the
world then our selves; and though there should not be any to exceed us, yet
certainly our thoughts would run at new Chymera's, either above the clouds, or
under the earth. However, I do not say, that either of these appetites are
unlawful, but in the handling; for as we may desire honor, so may we purchase
wealth; provided it be with the conditions of justice and moderation. But O the
infernal covetousness of the times! When neither kindred, friendship,
gratitude or Religion, are considerations to be put in competition with self
interest. To get wealth we deny our blood; to get wealth we violently break the
strongest bonds of trust: to get wealth we forget all courtesies; to get wealth
we forbear no sacrilege, in justice, or hypocrisy; in conclusion, to obtain
this troublesome we know not what; we slight our parents, we disobey our
Magistrates, we rob Churches, we commit murders, and live in communication
more like ravenous beasts then humane creatures, laughing in wardly at all
considerations of charity, as only a vain and ridiculous opinion; however
ordained as a sacred tie from above, to unite affections in the service of our
great Creator, without which it is unpossible to please him or save our selves.
And thus have I in some sort run through these few passions of the mind, as
representations only of the things we ought to avoid, that properly belonging
to Pride; which is the chief mother of mischief that disquieteth the Soul, and
hinders it from placing her principal felicity in another sphere, where there
is absolute honor, content, and security to be had; the fruition of which, as
I say, for the most part, are hindered by the extraordinary inflammations of
this fantastical humor, being kindled and set on fire by the devils craft, and
nourished and fed by the worlds vanities. So that now we must fall upon a new
discourse, concerning the imperfections of the body, which however, they are of
a more gross and dull nature; yet are they of little less power then the
former to destroy in us, not only the effects, but the very appetites of
virtue. For however perhaps they do not raise our thoughts to the forementioned
whimsies and Chymera's, yet they blunt and stupifie our apprehensions in such a
manner, that we become in time wholly drowned in a Sea of sense and stupidity,
not much caring, and less knowing what we do However it must be granted, that
this Lady and general Queen called Luxury, has in like manner as well as
pride, many attendants, that operate according to several inclinations and
dispositions in our fleshly and more ignoble parts, which in order we shall
briefly touch as we have occasion.

Some kind of description of Sensuality.
SEnsuality may be esteemed either one general corruption proceeding from a
poisoned education, or a whole Magazin of imperfections, demonstrated according
to accidents and opportunity, that for the most part are increased by custom,
and continued in age, which seldom admits of any thought of repentance in a
man until the very last hour; and then too perhaps with so little efficacy,
that it proves more formal then beneficial. In this progress and journey of
luxury, the noble soul appears so to be imprisoned with abundance of
confused obstructions, that it has not sufficient liberty given it to produce
any thing worthy of its dignity and creation, as I may say, like some learned
Philosopher, captivated amongst boores and clownes, that are neither sensible
of honor, or capable of instruction: As the Angels fels fell by pride which is
no other then a lunacy of the mind, so man offended in sensuality that is an
enchantment of the flesh; And God Almighty seemed to balance these two sins
by a certain kind of equality in his heavenly determination; For that, as he
punished the devils for their presumption, with an irrevocable decree, not at
all admitting any condition or hope of satisfaction; so did he redeem man by so
admirable a way, as it seemed to exceed the others condemnation and loss: This
vice of all others in my opinion, proceeds from the poorness of men's spirits,
either that they would not take education when they might have had it, whereby
to have been able better to have employed their minds in noble cogitations, and
honorable actions, or else being overcome by the predomination of their
senses, have sloathfully lost that courage that was necessary to maintain
virtue in their thoughts and intentions. Truly we see it is the very property
of most unreasonable creatures, to conserve with some care and industry the
beauty of their being, though not made for eternity, since they to that purpose
do daily order their natural clothing to the best advantage, avoiding in the
interim all occasions to do themselves injury and disgrace, lest they might
become unusefull in their several kinds; and yet a sensual man is not ashamed
to sully his soul, and bespot his reputation, not only with wicked, but
preposterous vices, almost of all natures and conditions, to gain a little
satisfaction to his appetites, however in effect he continues still
unsatisfied: for I will be bold to say, most commonly such people are so
oppressed either with sad and heavy thoughts, or overviolent longings, as they
are constrained to drive out one vexation after another with new excesses,
which serve for no other end but the more to inflame their desires, until at
last they are brought to such a stupidity, that every appetite whatsoever
becomes even unpleasant. Thus consuming their discontented hours in fancies
instead of realities, like men in dangerous and desperate dropsies, the more
they drink to satisfy their thirst, the less have they ease of their pain:
But however it be not supposed, that all esteemed sensual people are thus
buried alive in a stupidity of viciousness, yet nevertheless give me leave to
say, that I have known some eminent persons in these times, that in their youth
were famed beyond measure, for the excellency both of their natural and
artificial parts and abilities, as well for learning and eloquence, as spirit
and courage: yet at last falling into sensuality, according to the custom of
the age, they did not only cast off from their thoughts all manner of seeming
apprehension of these noble virtues, but in a short space became also most
cowardly and base in their dispositions, in so much as they were content upon
all occasions to submit unto the poorest, fearfullest, and lowest kind of
submission could almost possibly be put upon them, rather then move any way to
action or virtue: which in my conceit are admirable effects of this sordid and
inglorious imperfection, when it gets so great a prerogative in man's nature,
that the soul has lost absolutely her privilege and honor: Witness Mark
Anthony, that once noble Roman, who most contemptuously lost both his Empire
and life, by reason of his sensualities; for in his last expedition that was to
determine the Monarchy of the World, he left his Soldiers fighting, and
shamefully followed Cleopatra to her regal City of Alexandria, where they were
accustomed to spend whole nights and days in several luxuries: As another
example of baseness by reason of this ignoble inclination, we may look upon
the Emperor Vitelius, who having gained the dominion from Otho by the Sword,
he lost it again to Vespasian in sensuality; for which his subjects did so
extremely contemn his person, that being at last taken prisoner in regard of
his adversaries prevailing power, he was so shamefully used by the rabble and
common people, that a Noble man of honor passing by at the same time, was
forced (though not out of compassion to his person, yet out of a respect to
that dignity he had once enjoyed) to run him through with his weapon, because
he should not endure more disgrace of that miserable nature. And in this manner
did this luxurious Prince, (who in his youth notwithstanding was a gallant man,
as appeared by his deportment in Germany) end his wretched days, as a just
reward for his so much degenerating from his former virtues, by his frequent
sensualities and debaucheries; whilst his parcimonious and abstonious enemy in
the mean time reigned with all prosperity and glory could be imagined, not
only accompanied with multitudes of famous conquests, but also left after him
for his eternal memory, most wonderful buildings and monuments; a great part
of which being extant to the amazement of the beholders. Wherefore I must
conclude, that sensuality takes away from a man the noble and reasonable
property of the soul, that should not only clear his understanding, to the
discerning of reputation, but to the practicing of virtue; which being
stupefied and obstructed, as I say, by continual ease and pleasure, the spirit
at last becomes so adulterated, that it is unpossible to entertain any thing
in the disposition, but some base pride or envy, which for the most part never
leaves such people as long as they live; being always maintained and nourished
by those flatteries, that accident or rather a kind of necessity has cast
upon such men, to keep them waking with some entertainments of recreation: And
this is the reason, that no discourses in a manner are heard in their mouths,
but detraction proceeding from the very spirit of malice, because they cannot
be at all confident of any goodness in themselves, whereby to commend laudable
virtues in others. Besides, there may be always noted a kind of cruelty in
their natures, proceeding from that they are apt to suspect every thing but
flattery: notwithstanding that deceives them most of all, being in truth the
greatest sensuality of all others; for that claws the soul with such a
bewitching harmony, that people who are so inclined, become metamorphosed like
Ulysses companions, till at last they become even hoggs instead of men. For
another testimony of what I say, concerning the nature and corruption of
sensuality, let us but look back at the actions of Alexander, who in the
first entrance into his conquest, was merciful, active, and faithful, and yet
after when he began to taste too much of the Persian luxuries, he became cruel,
suspicious and proud, in so much as he neither spared his best friends, nor
regarded the wisest Philosophers, who proved in the end to be so overcome and
enchanted by flattery, that he not only esteemed those people his mortal
enemies, that would not adore him for a God, but destroyed their persons with
as much spite and malice as could be imagined, until he rendered himself to
his own native country hateful, if not in some sort ridiculous; which truly
amongst others are most pregnant examples to show how much a man goes from
himself, when he falls too precipitatly into sensuality; as of the contrary
what noble thoughts and gallant actions people are capable of, as long as they
keep their souls clear from obstructions of this nature. For according to my
observation, I never read of a temperate person, that was not attended upon
with many other eminent virtues, that made him both happy and famous, whilst
of the other side I have observed for the most part, all noted Tyrants to be
branded with a kind of an Infamous opinion of luxury, in the whole course of
their lives. Certainly temperance and activity, are the badges of nobility and
wisdom, when as sloth and sensuality, are only enchantments of flesh and
blood, that work men out of their wits, goodness and honor, to make them
slaves to the devil and misery: But however in some sort this may serve for a
general demonstration of this natural imperfection, or rather deprivation of
grace, by reason of a man's own self, wanting a necessary courage to resist
both weak and strong temptations of this life; yet for that, as I said before,
there are several distempers arising or belonging to this grand stupidity,
though not all appertaining alike to each person and disposition, we shall
mention now the quality and practice of some particular vices, as I conceive,
now adays most in fashion and use, which may be counted mere dependencies upon
sensuality.

Gluttony a chief effect of sensuality, with other vices also belonging
thereunto.
ANd first we will begin with Gluttony, as seeming to have the next affinity
with it. Truly, in this vice man does not only come nearest to the nature of a
beast, since procuring of food is its chief pleasure and property, but by way
of intemperance; when practiced inordinately in this particular, he seems to
exceed unreasonable creatures in dishonor; for however they appear to take
their chief felicity in eating, yet nevertheless they feed with some order,
by instinct and the direction of their kind, thereby to render themselves more
fit for the use they were created; and to that purpose will scarce at any time
go beyond their bounds by any manner of excess, if they be left to their own
dispose; also procuring to themselves being diseased, remedies of nature:
witness the gallant Falcon, that takes frequently stones for casting and
clensing of her body, whereby to avoid all superstuities, to be the better able
to make use of her wings for flight, when she has occasion to show her
courage; neither ordinarily will she covet meat, but when she finds her gorge
absolutely emptied of other food: In like manner, every little and contemptible
cur, after he has sufficiently eaten to fill his belly, with a certain kind of
temperate providence will endeavor to hide the rest, to be reserved for another
repast, without any sign at all of gluttony, as if nature had taught him what
was best to be done for his own preservation; Whilst an intemperate man, of all
other creatures, seems by his continual excesses, neither to be governed by
reason nor nature: insomuch I have heard many say, that provided they had good
meat, they did not care if they were always obliged to eat it in a hogs-stie,
or any other contemptible or dishonorable place; as if the very delight and
happiness of their souls consisted in nothing but eating and drinking: Nay
further, in these latter times this dull satisfaction of men's appetites has
been so taken up by custom, that not only women of the best quality, have not
been ashamed ordinarily to frequent most impudent and confused entertainments,
in base and obscure Tavernes, but also to show the greater and more
extraordinary profuseness in those meetings; feasts of no small expense have
been made without table-cloathes or any other convenient furniture, where
nothing for the most part was to be heard, but a certain confused noise, with
the exercise of burning of dublets, and drinking healths out of shoes, instead
of distinct discourses and commendable recreations: so that I may boldly say,
that God Almighty has found us out in these follies; and certainly will never
leave punishing us until we become more moderate, since in my opinion it is
not to be doubted, but these kinds of debaucheries so frequently practiced have
been the greatest cause of our present miseries that we so much complain of;
for by such courses the noble men not only lost their Honors, but the Gentry
spent their Estates, not leaving themselves sufficient interest in the Country
to govern the people, with any advantage tending to peace and unity; and so by
degrees their own tenants necessarily began to stand more peremptorily upon
their own feet, by which mean men of smallest quality came in play, to the
overthrow of those of the better sort. Besides this general intemperancy, most
violently reigning amongst the Commanders in the late Kings wars, proved of
such an unfortunate consequence to his affairs, by reason of that wild
liberty that every man took to himself, that probably it lost him his
Kingdom: For, by this means order and rule in his Army was turned into
confusion, whereby duties became neglected, trusts corrupted, and men's courages
adulterated, in so much as his Officers instead of giving testimonies of their
valor and conduct, they brought their reputations into nothing but scorn and
contempt, until at last they lost both themselves and cause, to those their
thoughts never esteemed before.

The next attendant that seems to wait upon this swollen lump of sensuality is
lascivious love, that seeks only to satisfy sense, The inconveniences of vain
and idle making of love.
without having the intention of prosecuting the end of Society, according to
the ordination of God Almighty in Paradise. Which appetite I say, although it
be most agreeing with the nature of humanity, and in that regard many brave
persons have erred, yet certainly lust does not only sympathize with the
condition of a beast, that is carried on to that act by a fleshly delight
without other design, but seems in us to taste something more of wild
concupiscence; for however they engender by kind without any regard of
mixture, because they have no rule prescribed for their actions, yet Providence
has ordained such a temper in their proceedings, that for the most part they
observe times and seasons for their copulation. Which shows that nature in
them only intends procreation, that is all the marriage they are appointed to
make, whereby their kind or species may be preserved upon earth, when as man
involved in this sin, does not appear to be restrained either by Nature or
Grace, but runs on violently in the prosecution of his appetites with a more
raging madness then those animals, that have but two things enjoined them by
God and Nature, which is procreation and food. When I reflect upon these
considerations, I cannot but wonder at some people, who having been reproved
for their excessivenesse in this vice, and to this purpose were demanded, why
they having such noble and beautiful wives, did not content themselves rather
with their companies and conversations, then with base women of a far inferior
degree to them in all manner of perfections, they presently returned this
answer, that as they could no way deny the comparison, so was there no other
reason to be given, but that they were their wives, and the other not; wherein
may be noted, the strong temptation and power of the devil in this one vice
only, when he is able so to infatuate our understanding, that we must choose
the less worthy subject for the delight of our Senses, rather then the better,
for no other reason, but because sin belongs to the one and not to the other.
Which belike made Mark Anthony being of the same disposition, leave his
gallant wife Octavia, and cast himself violently into the arms and
embracements of that proud strumpet Cleopatra, notwithstanding she apparently
contemned his person, as she did afterward undo his fortune. But setting aside
these presidents, we may consider many young people of our times, who spend in
a manner their whole lives, in nothing but making of foolish love, and sitting
in women's chambers at unseasonable hours, without any kind of intention of
marriage, which at the best are high provocations of lust, besides other
inconveniences in nourishing of sloth and creating of jealousies.

But for that idleness for the most part not only affords the opportunity,
Idleness the chief nurse not only of this vice, but of many others.
but is the general employment of the age (if properly doing of nothing may be
termed an employment) as another dependant belonging to sensuality, I shall
particular the nature and prejudice thereof. Idleness has been esteemed by
religious and wisest judgments the groundwork and Bases of all
inconveniences in man's vocation, since want of some designed employment in
resolutions, not only brings a certain kind of lazy inclination upon the
body, but also gives too much leisure to the mind, to dwell upon diversities,
of Chymera's, profitable no way but to breed fancies instead of acting nobly.
So that it being unpossible to continue always in imagination without some
diversions and recreations, to sweeten again the over tired spirits, we must of
necessity be satisfied with some delight or other, though never so unlawful for
refreshment, wherein for the most part affections belonging to flesh and blood,
will have the chief interest in our corupt natures. Wherefore nothing being
nearer at hand to please Sense, then eating, drinking, lust, with other
softnesses of the body, as lying in a warm bed, sitting by a fire side,
flattering discourses and the like, necessarily man in a short time must take
his principal fruition in some or all of these; for, that as I said before, he
does not constantly employ himself and thoughts, toward the accomplishing of
any settled thing worthy his consideration. Which may be very well verified by
this common saying, That it is better for a person to rip his garment and sow
it again then to be idle. As much to say, that a man ought ever to have some
design a foot, to employ either his mind or body, and is held so unnecessary a
thing amongst the unlearned Turks, as we esteem them, that there is none of
what quality soever (the Emperor not excepted) but has some certain trade or
other put upon his condition. We find that God Almighty even challenged this
duty from man in his first Creation, when he ordained him to prune and dress
the garden of Paradise. As also being driven from thence he continued him still
that injunction, declaring not only by his works that the earth should not
bring forth fruits, but by man's labor and industry, but also let him know that
he was to gain his living by the sweat of his brows, as also that his wife with
all other women descending from her, were designed to bear children by trouble
and pain. Nay, we may say, that nature her self seems in all things to have
such an intention, when not only every living Creature, but the Plants of the
field have an industrious intention to labor and yearly to renew their
clothing, as if they went in a circle of travail and employment, though to my
no small amazement, I have heard many in this corrupt age, not ashamed to brag
openly, that they were good for nothing, intimating as though industry and
intention were an apparent dishonor. Amongst which number, I have known some
so supinely negligent and lazy, that they could not find a time to perform
any necessary business, by reason of their confused resolutions, that never
designed any certain time when to begin, and so from one hour to another,
deferred the things they were to do, until at last perhaps they lost wholly the
opportunity, though ever had the determination.

In fine, I cannot but conclude with this opinion, that as idleness is a most
dishonorable and unprofitable vice, since it seems to pervert the very
intention both of God and nature, either by false apprehensions or too much
sensuality, so for the most part does it still engender in men's bosoms not
only distracted but discontented thoughts, by reason it drives us from one
imagination to another, without any manner of real satisfaction in any thing
we either long for or desire* however self-interest and extraordinary passion
to be contented, is the true cause of the disease in men's minds and
dispositions.

Of sloth, being another dependant.
But as Idleness may be said to be the bawd that inticeth the virgin-soule to
all manner of sensuality: so sloth must be esteemed the soft bed, whereon
whoredoms of that nature are daily committed. Slothful persons may be
compared to those dead bodies which the Devils are accustomed to carry in the
air full of all putrefaction, that however they be not capable of acting
themselves, yet by accident become instruments of horrid enchantments: such a
creature cannot be better likened, then to a huge mountain of earth, that
contains hid in its bowels rich mines of Gold, which will not appear but by
the violent agitation of some extraordinary earthquakes that display the
concealed treasure. In like manner, the bright faculties of a man's soul do
never appear in a slothful body, but when strange and unexpected chances
cause them to remove by force. Confounded with this inclination, man seems to
have no further a journey to make but to his grave, since he is not only
altogether useless to others, but wholly buried in himself, not seeming any
way to parcipitate of any of the active elements, but of clay only, that is
the last refuge for mortality. If God almighty had not intended man for motion
and exercise, according to his natural capacity, it was to little purpose to
have created a world for his dwelling, furnished with so many diversities of
varieties for the practice of his reason; but might have cast him in some
obscure place of small extent, there to have remained quiet until the day of
judgment, without either trouble or consideration. Certainly the Heathens were
so out of love with this disposition, that the fortunate and wise Commonwealth
of Rome not only appointed a Censor to enquire after men's actions, that they
should be good, but also to seek into their vocations, that the^ might be
always conveniently employed. Truly I may say this is an humor of a most
unhappy nature, since it is not only of all others most unprofitable, but
wonderfully unsafe to a man's future condition, for that every day it draws him
further off from virtue and religion, though it seems to give the best
opportunity for contemplation. If we look at the practice of the age, we shall
find it abounds in most persons, being now the general custom for women, not
as in former times to prevent the Sun rising in their early activity; but
rather to observe his setting, before they can be got out of their beds: and
for young men, they are scarce carried in their thoughts to any manner of
intention at all of activity, but where some persuasion of luxury and
sensuality leads them.

The next imperfection I shall speak of, Of inconstancy another part of
sensuality.
is Inconstancy, that rather proceeds from the weakness of nature, then either
from malice or custom. And however it may be thought only to belong to man's
deceived and embroyled judgment, that makes him so often vary determinations,
according to several objects presented before his fancy; yet we may say it
comes also by reason of a kind of fearfulness in a man's disposition, wanting a
sufficient fortitude to be confirmed against doubts, rising from too much
apprehension; wherein for the most part the devil and the world are principal
actors, for as the one strives to unsettle the understanding, by confused and
bewitching fancies, so the other does entangle peoples imaginations with too
many representations of painted delights, so that oftentimes they make choice
of white for Funerals, and black for Triumphs. Wherefore I say, it is most
necessary for any person, that either pretends to Honor or Religion, not only
to be constant (provided his counsels be grounded upon profitable
deliberations, without obstinacy or precipitation) but to put on such a noble
fortitude in his resolutions, that he may be able to resist all temptations
that are ready daily to make war against his piety and reputation. Yet truly,
I know many so flexible and inconstant in their natures, that they are not
only upon all occasions subject to be changed in their opinions (without any
grounds or reason) by such as speak last with them, but for the most part are
sottishly led by the counsels and persuasions of people of a far less capacity
then their own. Insomuch as in regard of this imperfection, they seem not at
all to have any power over themselves and actions: When of the other side,
perhaps persons of Honor and Religion, whose love they have sufficiently
tried, cannot procure the least confidence and belief in their thoughts: Which
I can attribute but to the strange influence of the Planets in this unfortunate
age, that makes people do what is most against their own good, as it were by a
certain kind of enchantment of their senses and understandings, toward
depraved and preposterous actions.

Last of all, Impatiency depending also upon sensuality
I shall mention impatiency an imperfection also in my opinion which may be
said to belong to sensuality, for that it proceeds from not being able
sufficiently to suffer what he cannot help. The actions of an impatient person
may be likened to those of a drunken man, that in his insensibilities has
conceived some intention of opposition to this humor, and therefore in the
high way begins to quarrel with a bush of thorns; in which foolish contention
he receives many pricks and scratches in his face and hands, without other
revenge or satisfaction; or rather may be resembled to some barking Cur, that
greedily runs after the stone that was cast at him, whereon by reason of his
preposterous violence he prejudiceth his teeth, instead of doing any injury at
all to the subject or motive of his choler. But however this defect of nature
may be charactered and esteemed, yet it is an imperfection of a most
prejudicial condition, since as it advances no man's profit and advantage: so
of the contrary, it augments and increases every man's sufferings, leaving him
for the most part unrelieved in his extremities, by rendering him incapable of
counsel. Besides it is unpossible for any man to live with convenience and
safety in any ordinary conversation of this world, without a competent
proportion of patience; since as the mind is subject to perturbation upon
every slight occasion, so are new accidents and objects daily presented in this
life, whereby there will be necessary occasions given to make use of temper;
since both joy and sorrow are most commonly entertained in our apprehensions
naturally with too much passion. For whosoever is in prosperity, seldom
rests without new ambitions; and they that are in adversity, most commonly
make themselves worse, by not bearing their crosses with sufficient
pacification. However there are not only several degrees in this imperfection,
but diverse kinds of impatiency: As for example, there are some wise and
religious persons, that notwithstanding they would constantly and resolutely
undergo what martyrdom soever, yet are they so above measure precipitate in
their studies, that they can scarce afford themselves leisure for any
recreations, and by that means bring their bodies (if not their minds) into a
most desperate condition of health; which can be interpreted no other then a
want of patience in their natures, in not being able to wait with temper an
ordinary convenience, by reason of their over violent desire of accomplishing
what they intend. Of the contrary again, there be others of a more inferior
courage, that having entered upon any design in their resolutions, give it over
in the half way, merely because they have not a competent patience to
prosecute it to the end or period: which truly oftentimes proves extreme
prejudicial to a man's affairs and reputation, since a man in so doing must be
thought either to have begun unwisely, or to have left off inconstantly. But as
these brief descriptions may be sufficient to bring into our remembrances the
unruly and most dangerous passions of the mind, as well as the more gross and
disdainful appetites of the flesh; from both which not only proceeds the
depravation of heavenly grace, that should keep reasonable man in the whole
course of his life, but also takes from him in a manner all sense of honor and
humanity: So must I again begin a new discourse concerning the nature and duty
of moral conversation, not yet spoken of which seems to be so much neglected
and adulterated in this unfortunate age, that men endeavor nothing but a false
and deceiptfull kind of way in all their words and actions; as if truth were to
be esteemed but a needless and contemptible decorum, only to be observed by
fools living upon earth, or penitents shut up in Monasteries.

Against the pernicious and ignoble custom of Dissimulation.
THe first general corruption I will name shall be Dissimulation; unto which
as I may say people are so inclined, that it is unpossible almost in any
communication to know what another means, by reason whereof there is scarce
any content at all left in society, or almost a necessary confidence to be had
in any thing that is said or done The first war that the devil made with God
Almighty upon earth after his fall, was by dissimulation, whereby he
endeavored to corrupt man, to become a Rebel like himself; and prevailed so
far in this design, that the Son of God was constrained to sacrifice his
own person, to make up again that great and unfortunate breach, whilst in the
mean time, the Serpent had a temporal curse laid upon his condition, which was
to creep all the days of his life on his belly, and to eat dust from the
ground, to signify ever after, he was to be esteemed the worst of creatures,
only because the devil had assumed his shape, to practice and put in
execution his deceit. Wicked Cain in the very infancy of the world used
dissimulation in his accustomed Sacrifices, that drew down Gods anger upon him:
which afterward made him become so impudent a reprobate, that he not only
against the rules of nature and humanity shed the blood of his innocent and
virtuous brother, but was so unfortunately mistaken, that he even thought to
have couzened God himself by his dissimulation, however he was invited to the
acknowledgment of his offense. Whereupon we may conclude, that scarce can
there be any crime of a high nature committed, but for the most part something
of deceit must accompany the action; and to show how much God Almighty does
abhor all manner of falsification, he would not prosper the Jews Army, or
grant them any more Victories against their enemies, until deceiptfull Achan
was brought forth before the people to be stoned to death, and his goods
consumed with fire; because he had concealed part of the Riches gotten in the
City of Jericho, contrary to his commandment. We may also remember what
desperate impieties Saul contracted to himself, after he practiced those
deceipts against David, until at last they brought him to be his own
murderer, whilst in the interim he possessed his Kingdom whom he most hated and
feared of all others. The Scribes and Pharisees, who were designed instruments
for Christ's death and passion (as we read) came to St. John's preaching with
false and dissembling hearts, amongst the rest of the multitude, which was the
cause why he called them a generation of Vipers. Our Savior himself most
earnestly warned the people to take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, as
foreseeing they would prosecute him to the very end, in the spirit of
dissimulation and hypocrisy, not only by often tempting him with deceiptfull
questions, but at the last act of his condemnation, in professing themselves
servants of Caesar's, to obtain greater credit and belief, when as it was well
known, they hated nothing more in the world, then to be under that
jurisdiction; which was afterward verified in their many rebellions. Judas
also began his wicked purpose in dissembling, when he murmured amongst the rest
at the loss of the sweet ointment that was poured upon our Saviors head;
pretending hypocritically, the cost had been better bestowed on the poor;
though his intention was only, to have had the money at his own dispose, being
purs-bearer; which covetous disposition of his sufficiently appeared, by
betraying of his Master for so small a sum: And yet this man was so
transported by the opinion of his own craft and subtilty, that when he was told
particularly he had resolved in his mind to be the Traitor, he had neither
wisdom nor grace to repent or be admonished; but of the contrary, went
presently out of the room to execute his determination; to which purpose, a
while after (being accompanied with a Troop of Soldiers) he bestowed upon his
Master a traiterous kiss by way of salutation, the chief sign agreed between
them, as a distinction for his more certain and easy apprehension: Which
shows that God Almighty in detestation of this manner of sin, is oftentimes
pleased to give over such people to their own perdition, in the very spirit of
ridiculous folly; not suffering them in any kind to reflect upon their own
misery and impiety; as it were being drunk and infatuated by a certain
overweening conceit, that they are by cunning and dissimmulation, able to
deceive not only men, but Heaven it self: Which no doubt was also the opinion
of Ananias and Saphira, when they concealed part of the money from the
Apostles; wherein appeared a most remarkable judgment of God upon their
persons: Yet not because they had no mind to have bestowed so much to
charitable uses, but for that after they had seemed to have given before the
multitude', they endeavored again a dissembling way, to have couzened the
expectation of their gift. For it was plainly told them, that they might have
chosen at the first, whether they would have contributed or no, but they were
undoubtedly punished in that they had lied to the holy Ghost, wherein they
committed sacrilege, by reason of their intentionall deceit. Truly if we
reflect but upon the constancy and suffering of old Eleazer in the Machabees,
we may have by that martyrdom a sufficient example to instruct our belief
concerning this duty; who rather then he would consent to the seeming only of
eating Swines-flesh (though in act he should not have been obliged thereunto)
he chose to die a most cruel and violent death; as fearing else the scandal
that might have risen thereby to young people of his Nation, to whom he desired
to be a worthy and memorable testimony of goodness and piety. Muchlesse
certainly ought we to premeditate dissimulation, as an introduction to all our
actions and designs, which is a custom now adays so much in fashion, that I
have observed it sometimes affected, without any intention at all of compassing
benefits; but as it were only to be esteemed wiser then other persons in
worldly affairs; nevertheless oftentimes it does of the contrary, destroy
what is most coveted and desired, since it ingenders so much distrust between
parties treating, that it is unpossible to have sufficient confidence of one
another to conclude almost in any thing to purpose; which is the reason
generally, that there are so few differences of law and contention compremised;
for each person according to his own secret intention of deceit, believes the
same thoughts are in his adversary, and so consequently fears to be couzened.
O horrid custom, as I may say, and as much bewitched imagination, that thus
perverts the institution of common society, to the depriving us of the greatest
delight of mankind upon earth, in regard we cannot conveniently make use of our
reason and natural knowledge, but must be forced to live with one another like
ravenous beasts, always watching either occasions to entrap, or seeking out
ways to prevent: Whilst in the interim sweetness, affability, and security,
are not to be expected by the good, and as little intended by the bad. But
perhaps it may be thought, that notwithstanding these Scripture examples,
Abraham who was one of God Almighties chief servants, seemed not only
intentionally, but actually to dissemble, when he affirmed Sarah to be his
sister, whereas she was really his wife; unto which I answer, that as he was
not bound to discover himself so far to his enemies, whereby an eminent
prejudice might have befallen his person, so of the other side, I am of
opinion, that if the thing had not been also true which he averred, in regard
(according to the Jews custom) she might be held his sister by reason of the
near kindred and affinity between them, he could not have been altogether
freed from the sin of dissimulation. For if the Text be considered, he did not
deny her to be his wife, only tacitly concealing it, but affirmed her to be
his sister, because she was so to be esteemed also by his Country laws; which
privilege he was content to make use of to say his life, being in the hands
of barbarous Tyrants. Besides there appeared no intention in him to injure a
third person, and therefore was at the more liberty to use his own discretion,
without declaring an apparent untruth, which certainly he could not have done
lawfully, though it had been to have saved his own life. There is no doubt but
a man may in some sort deceive and cousen the expectation of thieves, and
murderers, by seeming sometimes one thing and doing another, in cases of
necessity or convenience, without any manner of danger to his religion and
honesty: however the common practice thereof in trivial things in my opinion
is naught; and not to be used for fear of the habit, that at last may render a
man too insensible of failings in this nature, whereby his nature is in danger
to be brought by degrees to a kind of falsnesse in conversation; that as I
said before is a means to destroy all civil society, or confidence necessary
to be expected in matters of greatest weight and consequence; and at the best
it diminishes love, abates charity, and destroys friendship, which I may say
are the chief ties belonging to humanity: Since there can be no indifferency
in communication, where one party takes upon him a liberty to dissemble, and
the other professes all manner of freedom and integrity, both in words and
intentions. But much more is this falsehood to be abhorred, when it is practiced
with a traiterous heart to the ruin and destruction of innocence.

Of the breaches in conversation proceeding from the falsifying of words and
promises.
AS I have sufficiently demonstrated the inconvenience of this custom of
dissimulation, I must speak of those breaches in conversation, that proceed
from engagements by word; which as I may say are certain religious ties
belonging to honor, whereupon depend for the most part the entrance into
leagues and contracts, before they come to more absolute obligations; however
without them it is unpossible to proceed to periods and conclusions, since
words and promises must first pass, before intended agreements can any way be
finished, depending merely upon a noble faith; which is the reason that the
word of a Prince and a Gentleman, has been held in all ages in a manner
sacred, and far more binding then prisons or writings; in regard it is to be
supposed, that penalties belong unto the one, and nothing but a man's own honor
obliges him to the other, which makes a difference between us and inferior
creatures, who have chains and other means ordained to keep them in order;
whereas we ought to have no constraint but reason, and the freedom of the
soul: wherein holy King David was so punctual, that he would not himself put
to death Shimei, who had most wickedly cursed him in his adversity, because he
had promised the contrary; However no doubt by some prophetical inducement, he
advised his son Solomon to bring him to his grave with blood for his offenses
after his death. We find that Jonathan observed his promises so inviolably to
David before he was King, that neither regarding his fathers present anger, or
the loss of his own inheritance, he could not be brought to falsify the least
word that had passed between them. If we consider the wonderful magnanimity of
Iepthes daughter, we may behold an admirable example left to posterity
concerning this duty; for perceiving her most loving father had engaged
himself (though rashly) to her destruction, whereat he seemed excessively
afflicted, she bid him with constancy perform the execution, since (as she
said) having opened his mouth to God, it was meet he should punctually fulfill
his promise, without any consideration of her particular; and the more was this
invitation to be admired, in regard it was unpossible she should be any way
weary of her own life, being a beautiful young Virgin, and the only child of
the chief Prince of the Country: Neither do I believe the people of that age
would have suffered Iepthe so lamentably to have sacrificed his sole daughter,
without they had conceived it a most necessary thing to have all solemn
promises and words given to be performed in every particular; and however this
may be thought a vow, and therefore the more strictly to be observed, yet
nevertheless it was but merely voluntary at the first, without any obligation
exacted either by right or command: which made it differ no further from a bare
promise, but that it was better attested, in regard it was made before the face
of all the people; by which means it could not be concealed (in respect of the
ceremonial part) though inwardly I conceive it no more binding to Iepthe, then
if he had resolved upon such an action in his private chamber. But however it
may be esteemed a greater obligation, what we promise to God, then what we
assure to men, yet certainly among the very Heathens themselves, we shall find
a most punctual observation of this common duty, which in a manner does unite
and tie together all moral and humane society; as may appear by many examples
in profane Authors. However I do not believe their actions in this point were
regulated by any of our rules of religion, but rather were carried on to the
maintenance of their honor, and the conservation of their faith by a certain
gallantry and nobleness ingrafted in their natures and dispositions, by those
principles given them in their education and breeding, amongst the rest. There
was a Roman General being taken prisoner by the Carthaginians, and having
formerly promised all fidelity to the Senate of Rome, concerning the execution
of his office and charge, for their best advantage: who continuing thus a
Captive for some time amongst his enemies, at last they began to think his
good usage and releasment might produce some beneficial effects toward a
peace, which they earnestly desired to make with their adversaries, by reason
the Wars had exhausted their Treasure, and drawn their Commonwealth low in
many other particulars; however they could not conceal it from the knowledge of
their prisoner. To which purpose having first conjured him to be their friend
toward the obtaining of their wishes, they set him at liberty to return again
to Rome with some Ambassadors they intended to send with certain Propositions
of amity and friendship; though with this Proviso, that if they should not
obtain their desires, he was to promise them upon his honor, to render himself
as before into their hands. The conditions being accepted, he went along with
their Messengers, and being there arrived, contrary to their expectation,
instead of persuading the Senate to hearken to any agreement, he declared it to
be their disadvantage and dishonor, to make any Peace at all with the
Carthaginians, in regard of their enemies disabilitie to make longer war,
assuring them he was sufficienlty informed of his relation, by many reasons and
circumstances. So that this Oration absolutely broke off all manner of Treaty
between the two Commonwealths, whereby either insued a new war, or at leastwise
the continuance of the old; yet nevertelesse this brave and honest General,
though he had exasperated and enflamed his enemies, by the faithful and
profitable Counsel he had given his friends in Rome, returned again to Carthage
according to his promise and word given, there to be used at their discretion,
which he was certain could produce no other effect, then to the taking away of
his life in a most cruel manner: Wherefore being arrived, and a full relation
of all the passages made in the open Senate by their Ambassadors, he was
presently not only seized upon with as much violence as their transported
spleens could hasten their Officers to execution, but presently put to death,
with all the exquisite torments could be devised by enraged and merciless
people, that were deceived and cousened in their expectation. This act
certainly expressed not only a world of magnanimity in his person, but an entire
nobleness and truth in his disposition; as well concerning that faithful
counsel he gave his friends and Country, to whom he conceived himself obliged
for his birth and employment, as in the punctual observation of his words and
promise, which he had given and made to his enemies, who he knew would revenge
it to the uttermost of their power. In this manner did this brave Roman give a
remarkable testimony to all posterity, what obligations are due in point of
honor to words and promises. Now if this part of Morality, was accustomed to
be so strictly observed amongst the Pagans, having little or no Religion to
regulate their actions, what may we conjecture of the duty of Christians, whose
Professions are to serve the only God of Truth, that without doubt can never
be pleased, with any manner of falsifications; nevertheless we see this
miserable age, is so far corrupted in this nature, as I may say, without any
kind of apprehension of honor, that it is almost grown a maxim never to speak
what a man thinks, or do what he says.

But as I have mentioned this one example of a Heathen, I must also remember in
this place another of a Christian, not only of a memorable consequence, but
the more to be regarded, for that it was chiefly grounded upon a religious duty.

Which was that of Lewis King of France, surnamed the Saint, when he made war
in the Holy Land, who being in the like manner as the former taken prisoner by
the Infidels, with most of his Nobility, at last by hard labor and with much
difficulty, he made shift to contract for his Ransom and liberty, though at an
excessive rate, yet esteemed better then to end his days in a miserable and
horrid captivity. But when according to the agreement the money came to be
tendered, which was procured with difficulty from the estates and fortunes of
his people, the Commissioners whom he employed in the service, used such
dexterity in their office and employment, that they overreached the enemy in
the account (though by no fraudulent deceit) whereby they reserved a
considerable sum to the Kings use, of capacity perhaps sufficient, to have
defrayed a great part of the journey homewards; which being related to the
pious Prince, with all the circumstances thereunto belonging. However, he was
upon his departure, yet considering it might prove some scandal to his
Religion, he resolved not to put to Sea until the full of the contract was
performed in every particular. And to that purpose, he not only sent the
residue of the money to his adversaries, but withal commanded his Treasurers in
his name to excuse the Act, as done without his order and privity. Which being
exactly effected, and the Pagans fully satisfied, he joyfully took shipping
with the rest of his company. Now though this pious deed I must confess, was
beyond any obligation, yet in regard the contrary might have bred some
jealousy and suspicion in the thoughts of the Saracens, concerning the actions
and intentions of this good King, whereby his Religion might have been
dishonored, certainly it may seem a most pious and laudable resolution; and
truly cannot be but a worthy and admirable exemple, not only to teach other
Princes their duty, but also may serve in some sort to instruct all people,
what considerations ought to be had in performance of promises; especially when
they are made upon equal and just confidence of both sides. For if this tie be
not observed after a strict manner, there is no possibility left to be assured,
either in contracts or conversation. Which is the reason that in the accidents
and chances of war, soldiers after they are taken, oftentimes are let go upon
their words; however in prisons, the same persons are perhaps kept by strong
guards. Gamesters, who for the most part are men not to be secured by any Bonds
and Writings, concerning the payment of debts, yet when they borrow money of
their companions upon their words only, for the most part will be sure never
to break, as esteeming it a point of honor belonging to Society and
conversation, not to be violated by any means. Nay, very thieves are so
punctual in this observation, that they will scarce deceive a person, whom they
had determined to rob, if they have made any engagement to that purpose; and
yet our poor Country, that was one famed beyond all other Nations in this
particular, is now grown to that infamy, by reason of this false way of
conversation, that the people can neither be trusted by others abroad, or be at
all confident of themselves at home.

Concerning the breaches of trusts upon special confidence and obligation.
THe next and last falsehood I shall mention, is breach of trusts, when others
put confidence in our truth and integrity; which was the crime of Architophel
King David's esteemed Counselor, who betrayed his Masters secrets to his
unnatural son Absolon, in which wickedness and rebellion, they both miserably
perished by the just judgment of Almighty God. Again, we read that as Sampson
was deceived by his wife, whom the Philistians had craftily put upon him for
that effect; so themselves were most remarkably punished by reason of their
being Authors of the Treason; insomuch, as he destroyed most of the Nobility in
his last end: And this was effected no doubt by the mere instigation of Heaven,
as a just reward for so unnatural a treachery, though withal I cannot deny, but
that they were most pernicious people, and enemies to Gods worship. King David
did so abhor this infidelity and breach of trust, that he put to death the
young man, that brought him word of Readiness destruction, only for that he seemed
to rejoice in his Kings fall, notwithstanding he himself was to enjoy thereby
the Kingdom, without obstacle and hinderance. Also he slew the two Thieves
Buana and Rechab, because they had killed trecherously Ishbosheth, however he
was not alone his mortal enemy, but sought the Crown from off his head; which
justice he rather executed upon them, because they had been both Readiness
servants. These certainly were not only religious demonstrations of a noble
disposition, but testimonies of his opinion of this duty, when as he would not
seem to countenance acts of so unworthy a nature, though himself was to reap
the only benefit. Moreover, he was so far in his own person from being
unfaithful to Saul when he lived, that notwithstanding he always persecuted
him most spightfully for his life, he thought it a kind of impiety to have cut
a piece of his garment, though it were but to let him know he had him in his
power, without doing him any other prejudice.

But however Scripture examples are of best Authority for our instructions,
Alexanders detestation of falsehood, and encouraging of loyalty.
yet we may reflect a little upon Heathen practices, as farther testimonies of
morality. Amongst which number, we may consider that Alexander the Great was so
just and noble in his disposition, concerning this duty of trust, that when he
understood Darius after his defeat was cruelly murdered by his chief Commander
Bessus, he never left prosecuting of the wicked Traitor until he delivered him
bound to the brother of the King, who executed him with many torments according
to his deserts. When of the contrary, this generous Prince used those with all
manner of honor and repect, who had proved faithful and constant to their dead
Master until his last end. For example, There was an old Nobleman of special
trust about Darius person, who being brought to his presence, and not able to
light off his horse, by reason of his age and many infirmities, he himself
walked a foot conferring courteously with him in the sight of his whole Army,
until perceiving the man something out of countenance to see the King in that
posture, whilst himself rid, presently Alexander called for his horse to
accompany him with more freedom and convenience.

Another act of magnanimity and justice, I shall mention of a Roman Consul, A
brave example of Justice.
who having besieged a great Town in Italy, whereupon a traiterous and false
Schoolmasters, that had most of the Noble youths of the City under his charge
and care, thinking to make a benefit to himself of their persons, in that
necessity one day leading the boys into the fields, according to his custom,
pretending only their recreation; when he had them at a convenient distance
for an escape, he suddenly (contrary to their expectation) brought them into
the enemies Camp, and presented them with great joy unto the General as an
acceptable service, deserving as he thought, both reward and commendation. But
the Noble Commander reflecting upon the wickedness of the fact, and false
intention of the Master, as also noting the dejectedness of the countenances
of so many youths of principal families, instantly gave order to have the
fellow stripped of his clothes in his presence, causing also his hands to be
bound behind him; and being in this posture, he willed a good rod to be
delivered to every one of the Scholars, commanding them to drive again their
Traiterous Master into the City with whips and scourges, there to receive
further punishment, according to the discretion of their injured parents. This
truly was an act both of extraordinary justice and courage, since as he was
willing to punish Treason, notwithstanding the benefit might have redounded to
himself if he had pleased, so of the other side, did he show a bravery in his
own disposition, that he would not darken the glory of his actions, by any such
base ways and means, though the opportunity was offered unto him.

I shall remember one act more of justice, done by a person of the same Nation,
Another example in the like kind.
not differing much from the former in nature and manner.

There was a certain young woman of birth and quality, who living in a Town
that was besieged by the Romans, promised for a competent sum of gold, to
deliver the place without any further trouble, into the possession of the
enemy, which being effected without any condition in the bargain made for her
own life, she presently went to the General to demand the performance of the
contract, whereupon he commanded so much money and other rich Jewels to be
brought into the place, as had been promised for her recompense, where when she
was ready to receive the possession of the wealth, according to the greediness
of her appetite, who for such a gain had sold her friends, kindred, and
Country, he suddenly caused the soldiers of his Guard, and to cast it all
upon her at an instant, whereby instead of enjoying the benefit of the riches
answerable to her covetous expectation; she became intombed for her wickedness
and Treason, as a memorable sacrifice offered to right and equity. In this
single act appeared a double justice, The one in bestowing upon her what was
promised, punctually to perform the agreement. The other in putting her to
death for her crime, she not being privileged by the Law of Arms from
slaughter, in regard there was no condition made for her safety. These stories
I mention to show how hateful breaches of trust have been always esteemed by
Heathens and Infidels, when as the greatest and worst Tyrants were never
willing to countenance acts of this nature.

Witness in part, our Richard the third of England, who however he promised
the reward of a thousand pounds, Richard the third an enemy to treachery, though
a Tyrant in his other actions.
to that person that should bring forth the Duke of Buckingham, his esteemed
mortal enemy, yet when he understood he was betrayed by Banister, one whose
obligations to his Lord, should have made him trusty against all provokements
by way of gratitude, if not fidelity, he not only refused him the reward
promised, but delivered this opinion of the action; that he that could dispense
with his conscience, to deceive his trust concerning the protection of so good
a Master, flying to his assistance in his necessity, it was unpossible but he
would do the like with his King if it were in his power. Neither did God
Almighty himself forbear the punishment of this unworthy wretch, as appeared by
most remarkable judgments not long after. For presently his eldest son fell
mad, his second was drowned in a puddle of water, his only daughter was struck
with a most loathsome Leprosy, and himself in his declining age, was arraigned
and condemned for Felony; thouh with much ado he was saved by his Clergy. All
which, truly in my opinion, were apparent testimonies of Gods anger against the
nature of this base sin, since it cannot be conceived by any that lived in
those times, that he was so punished in his family for other cause, then that
he had betrayed that trust that was committed to him, grounded upon reasons of
obligation and promise. Wherefore when I consider the strange kind of breaches
of trusts now a days, I know not whether I should more wonder that people are
suffered to live by God Almighty, in regard of their falsehood, or be
scandalized at their so little apprehensivenesse of their own intolerable
baseness in this nature; for it is generally noted, those who have been most
obliged either by courtesies or duty, take the first occasion in these
distracted times to prejudice other men's fortunes and estates.

But however, according to my own opinion, I have spoke sufficiently concerning
this duty in the general, yet I think it not amiss to declare some Divine,
Natural, and Moral examples, belonging to two obligations in particular. Which
are the ties of friendship and service, that have been in all ages held
necessary ties to be observed: For without the first it is unpossible almost to
be secure in any conversation, and being deceived in the latter, no person can
be well assisted in affairs appertaining to every man's condition, though I do
not affirm they are always to be practiced in this high nature I shall
mention; but presidents ought still to be of the best stamp and workmanship,
left they be too slightly imitated, and so consequently prove not profitable
for those that have a mind to do well.

The nature and property of entire friendship.
WE will speak first of friendship contracted either by nature or upon
obligation, such as past between Jonathan and David, in the very infancy of
their acquaintance, which was so in violably maintained and conserved by these
two godly and Noble persons, that it seemed to weigh down all the
considerations of humane and worldly concernments; when as neither the
competition of Crowns nor the loss of Scepters was able to work differences;
but of the contrary, such a Religious sympathy continued always in their
hearts, as if they had coveted more each others happiness and prosperity, then
their own. Neither certainly could this love and friendship proceed from
Jonathan, out of any weakness of nature or want of valor, since he was known
upon all occasions to express courage and show wisdom, in matters of greatest
difficulty and necessity. For however he had in his resolutions so wholly
submitted himself to the will of God, that he was content to transfer his
fathers kingdom to David and his posterity, as appeared by the compact made
between them, wherein it was agreed, that he should have a care of his issue;
yet in the last bat tail that was fought with the Philistines, he most valiantly
sacrificed his own life in defense of his Country and Religion, to show that
notwithstanding he expected no Dominion in his own particular, yet he would
faithfully perform that office in the general, that belonged to his honor and
Conscience, concerning the just defense of the people. But for that it may be
thought these actions proceeded chiefly from the inspirations of Heaven (as no
doubt they did) I shall recount some more humane examples to show, that this
duty has been ever esteemed of a most high nature amongst Heathens and
Philosophers. To which purpose I shall mention this remarkable president of two
Learned friends in the the time of Dionysius the Tyrant. A wonderful friendship
expressed in the time of Dionisius the Tyran.
The one of them being wrongfully accused by the Kings suspicion, had liberty
notwithstanding given him to follow his occasions, upon security undertaken by
the other, that if his friend did not return at the day appointed, to yield his
body to the stroke of the executioner, himself should pay the forfeiture of his
offense, by the same punishment. Whereupon he failing something of the time
appointed for his appearance, his companion was brought out into the
Marketplace, to suffer death according to the agreement; but the other hasting
to the place before the Executioner had done his office, and finding his dear
friend in that posture, being so near his destruction, suddenly cast himself
at the feet of Dionysius, demanding his discharge, in regard he was ready as he
said to be sacrificed to his indignation and cruelty. The other that was
prepared for the slaughter, being desirous to redeem his friends life by his
own loss, seemed not only extremely troubled at his appearance, but more
perplexed a great deal at his offer, telling the Judge that now the limited
time was expired, he conceived that none but himself was liable to the
judgment, and therefore accordingly expected the execution: Whereupon his
companion being transported with the fear of his friends danger, conjured the
tyrannical King to consider, not only with compassion, but some justice, that
himself was the guilty person, and therefore it could not stand with the rules
either of equity or humanity, that an innocent should suffer, when the faulty
appeared ready to satisfy for the offense. The other also being in a manner
beyond his senses, finding the King was inclinable to perform his friends
request, in regard he seemed to have more reason in his pleadings, presently
turned to the people, and desired their assistance in his request, alleging
that his friend could not now justly suffer, for that himself had punctually
contracted for his penalty and redemption. But whilst the strange and
unexampled contention continued, to the no small amazement of the spectators,
who could not but wonder at so rare and excellent a friendship, Dionysius
himself after something a long pause rise from his seat, not only pardoning
them hoth their lives, but with all earnestness entreating them, to take him
also as a third person, into their admirable society and friendship, which he
vowed he would esteem as a principal honor and happiness. In this story may
be noted, not only the wonderful effects of an entire friendship, but the
power of such examples, to soften the stony hearts of the most cruellest
Tyrants in the world. Which shows, that even perversest natures may be overcome
by those noble passions, though according to the practice of this age, these
and the like relations may be esteemed no other then as ridiculous fancies,
proceeding from extravagant inventions; but give me leave to say, that
notwithstanding we are not bound upon all occasions to imitate these high
presidents, yet certainly we are not to abandon all manner of good nature and
friendship, dissolving every obligation only upon interest and commodity
without other consideration; since both divine and moral principles, merely by
the rules of charity and gratitude seem to challenge respects due from us to
others, as well as to our selves.

And our Savior Christ, when he lived here upon earth, was so far from
disdaining this humane passion, that he seemed to love one Disciple above all
the rest with a natural affection. As I have related this remarkable example
of constant friendship, so shall I in this place relate another of admirable
love and affection, acted by a Heathen Prince, wherein he absolutely overcame
his own earthly passions, merely to satisfy his sons desires.

An admirable example of love and friendship in another nature.
There was a King reigning in Persia, who having married a most beautiful young
Lady, it fortuned his son, a gallant and generous Prince, being taken with
her rare and excellent parts, fell of a sudden so excessively in love with his
fair mother in law, that he had no power either to master his own passions, or
to conserve so entirely as he desired, his former approved duty and obedience
to his father; in so much as contending strongly for some time between these
two extremes, at last, being wholly overcome rather by nature then reason he
waxed sick, which by degrees increased so violently upon his constitution, that
being able no longer to support the weight of his distemper, he was forced at
last to yield to the perverseness of his infirmity, and by that means within a
few days became past all hope of recovery, notwithstanding the skill and
diligence of all the best Physicians of the Kingdom; which not only dejected
his father after an extraordinary manner, but put the whole Court into a most
desperate sadness; and the rather was their amazement increased, by the
opinion conceived of the strange fatality of his loss, since no art was able
to dive into the conjecturall knowledge of his disease. However when all men's
thoughts were not only distracted, but at a stand, concerning this miserable
unfortunate accident, one Physician amongst the rest, that was better knowing,
or at least wise more diligent in his service, one day being present, perceived
a wonderful change, and alteration in the beating of his pulse, when the Queen
entered into the room to visit her sick son in law, in so much as at last by
more careful observation he became certainly informed, that only his hidden
and secret love to the Kings wife, was the sole occasion of his violent
distemper; for that his bashful and dutiful nature durst not own an affection
against all laws of humanity: Wherefore retiring himself into his chamber
with these cogitations, to consult more freely with his thoughts, he concluded
that it was unpossible to save the Princes life, without absolute satisfaction
in his desires; and instantly he resolved notwithstanding any hazard could
befall him, to make the King acquainted with the discovery of this mystery,
whom he knew had only power to save his son, since the Chastity of the Queen
was no way to be attempted without his privity.

In this perplexity, as I may say, he went presently unto the King, for that
the least protraction threatened destruction; where being come into his
presence, he fell down at his feet, telling him in particular the condition of
the young Prince, with all the circumstances thereto belonging; and humbly
desired his gracious pardon, if he had any way offended him in the relation,
since it was no other then a duty he conceived he was bound to offer unto his
Majesty, though his life were to satisfy the offense. The King having fully
heard this unexpected discourse, not only pardoned the Physician, according to
his desire, and commended him for his care and affection; but wished him also
to be diligent in other discoveries of the same nature. In this posture he
presently went to the Queen, where after he had informed her (to her no small
amazement) of all these strange passages, he violently conjured her by the duty
of a wife, and the compassion of a woman, as also the affection of a mother in
law, to tender his sons life, who was as he said, both the hope of his
Kingdom, and the comfort of his old age, which in particular was so far to
obey his commands, that she would condescend to promise the Prince a fruition
of her love, upon his recovery. The Queen being something distracted at these
unusual injunctions, not being able perfectly to discover the Kings mind, and
less resolving in any kind to injure her own honor, stood for some time
inwardly disputing with her own thoughts, until finding by the Kings further
discourses, that as he wished her no way to wrong her chastity, but only
seemingly to satisfy his son, whereby he might be freed from the danger of his
present sickness; so was the least delay to the Princes expectation, no less
then personal and present death. Wherefore after some other speeches and
circumstances of the Kings, the Queen in a humble and gracious manner uttered
this language, That as her honor was more belonging to him then to her self,
in regard of the dignity of his: calling, so would she have him to think, she
ever took his commands to be the only rule of her obedienec; however she
hoped he would not enjoin her any thing that should be prejudicial either to
his Crown or her own modesty; with which confidence she promised to use both
charity and diligence toward the recovery of the Prince. In fine, after some
time the King finding by this means, his son not only to have past all hazard
and danger, but to have recovered much of his strength and beauty; though, as
he was informed, he continued still the same violent affection to the Queen, he
caused a general Proclamation to be made through his Dominions, as if he
intended to sacrifice unto the gods for the safety of the young Prince. And to
that purpose gave order, that upon a day appointed his Subjects should
assemble, according to the custom of Persia, before his Palace gate, there to
understand his further will and pleasure. The time being come, he was mounted
upoon a glorious Throne, clothed in all his Royal Robes, his beautiful Queen
sitting of one hand, and the Prince his son of the other: where, after he had
made a long and eloquent Oration in commendation of his Wives chastity, and his
Sons virtues, whereby he put the people in mind of the loss they might have
sustained by his death, he not only in the face of the whole multitude
bestowed his Queen upon the Prince for his wife, but gave him also the present
possession of many Kingdoms, as a Dower toward the better maintenance of
their affections, to the joy and amazement of all the Assembly.

Now, I say, if this high act of magnanimity of a Heathen Prince be well
considered, we shall find a wonderful demonstration both of his natural
goodness, as well as of his perfect friendship. For however it be not to be
supposed, that a man for any pretense whatsoever, should give away his wife to
satisfy another unlawful passion, being against the rules of our Religion,
yet there appeared in the carriage of the business, not only an entire
natural love, but a most constant and friendly affection, which no, doubt the
young man had purchased from his father, by his many merits, and other valuable
considerations, that use to unite hearts; and so, as we may say, was strongly
maintained in the thoughts and resolutions of that Noble Prince: for that he
determined (as has been related) without any manner of reflection upon his own
particular, absolutely to throw away his greatest delights, rather then to
hazard or endanger his son; wherein he expressed more desire of conserving the
made love between them, then to satisfy in any way whatsoever his own
appetites. Since to this purpose, he parted voluntarily with his beautiful and
virtuous wife out of his own bosom, only to be willing still to enjoy his
friends conversation, to be esteemed as he believed above all other happiness.
And however, as I said before, these strange examples are not to be used as
presidents, for the directing of our morality, in that they are against the
principles of our Religion; yet truly they may serve to give some testimonies
reflecting upon the practices of these times, since most people seem to esteem
only private interest without any consideration either of faith, affection or
good nature. But to show that even nature her self seems in unreasonable
creatures to pretend to a certain kind of friendship or gratitude upon many
occasions, I shall make relation of one or two stories to that purpose, which
notwithstanding they may appear in some sort past all belief, yet are they
recorded for truths in authentical and approved Authors. However put the case
they are not true, yet may they serve as figures for instruction.

The story of Androclius the Roman slave.
The first that shall be remembered is that of Androclius the Roman slave, who
being cruelly used by his master, fled into the Desert from his service; which
was a crime almost esteemed of the highest nature in those times: after this
flight he remained in a cave concealed for some days, hoping thereby the
better to avoid the pursuit. However it happened in the interim, that a huge Lion
entered the place where he was, who having by some accident gotten a thorn in
his foot, and perceiving the man there, he presently fell at his feet, as if he
desired relife at his hands; whereupon the fellow after some amazement and
fear, perceiving at last his intention, and glad of the occasion, undertook
cure; which he might more conveniently perform, in regard he had brought along
with him many necessaries fit for such a piece of service, in that he was
accustomed by those instruments to heal his own sores received from the
scourges of his passionate master; by whose care and industry within a short
space the Lion became not only reasonably well recovered of his wound, but
daily went abroad into the Forest, as well for his own sustenance, as to
provide also meat for his Physician; which continued them both in that posture
and society, until the slave either weary of that uncouth conversation, or
desirous to save himself by a further flight, took a resolution to part from
the cave; however in the execution of his purpose he proved so unfortunate,
that he was again taken and brought to Rome, there to be devoured by wild
beasts in the public Theater before all the people, as a judgment conceived
answerable to his crime. But being exposed upon the day appointed to the fury
of a huge Lion, that seemed ready prepared with open mouth to receive him, of a
sudden to the amazement of the spectators, instead of tearing him presently in
pieces (as he had done many before) he cast himself at his feet with a fawning
countenance; whereupon instantly enquiry was made after the reason of such a
sudden change, since lately he had showed himself more furious then all other
beasts of his kind. But the slave being examined in many particulars, as if he
had used some enchantment toward the Lion, he declared the whole story of his
flight, and of his entertainment in the Cave; where he cured, as he said, the
Lion of a hurt he had got in the foot; for which act of gratitude, as was
conceived, the beast had contracted some friendship with his person, that as
yet appeared not to be out of his remembrance; since he had expressed it in as
high a way as could be imagined toward his preservation. All which being
believed of the people, the poor slave was not only pardoned his life, but his
freedom was also granted him by his master, as a fitting reward for so strange
an accident. Another I shall also mention, though not after the same manner,
yet may be esteemed of the like quality, only the difference is, the one
contracted friendship out of gratitude and obligation, the other merely by a
secret instinct of nature.

There was a young boy, A strange relation of a boy and a Dolphin.
who was accustomed often as he went to School, to pass along the Seashore of
Bayea, where there used to frequent a great Dolphin, being esteemed generally
the King of fishes; until at last there became such an acquaintance and
familiarity between these two creatures, that the fish ordinarily would take
bread and other things out of the child's hand, as also come at the sound of his
voice, when he called him; sometimes carrying him a mile or two on the Sea; and
after he had sported and played with him there a while, would set him again on
land, and suffer him to depart. Which custom continued until the boy by some
accident happened to die; however the Dolphin notwithstanding daily resorted to
the place, as it were to enquire after his companion whom he mist; but at last
finding he was absolutely deprived of that society, having (belike) no hope to
see him again, he violently cast himself upon the sands and died, as it was
supposed merely for grief and apprehension of his loss. Which story, however
I cannot affirm for certain, yet Pliny relates it as a truth from many
writers: but nevertheless taken only for Romancy, it may serve sufficiently
for my purpose, which is to convince people by such inducements that the bands
of friendship ought not to be broken upon any condition, without impiety and
dishonor; whenas unreasonable creatures merely by the instinct of nature, have
observed these ties, in so much as men have been amazed at their gratitude and
constancy. But now, since it may be thought I have been something tedious upon
this subject, or rather duty so little esteemed in these days, I will come to
the last fidelity, which in truth is a great deal more necessary to be
observed then then the former, in regard of the daily use thereof upon all
occasions: which is to consider what trust may be thought convenient according
to the practice of other ages, from servants to their patrons.

The nature and obligation of service.
THis tie of service certainly is grounded both upon divine and moral
principles: And our Savior seemed himself to complain most bitterly, that
none but he which had eat his bread should be designed to lift up his hand
against him. As much to say, he of all others should not have been the man
chosen out for the treason. We read in holy Scripture that Abraham not only
conjured his servant by a certain kind of a curse, by reason of those
obligations, which were due from the nature of his condition, being one of his
family to be faithful, when he sent him to seek a wife for his son in the
Country of Mesopotamia; but also this godly and good natured person himself
was so punctual in observing his Lords commands, and fulfilling with
expedition his expectation, that he could not be persuaded (notwithstanding the
occasion was extraordinary, and the entreaty most powerful) to stay any longer
then one night in the house of Bethuell Rebeceas father, in regard of the
special care was in his affectionate heart, to give his Master speedy
satisfaction in his employment, according to his conceived duty. Neither truly
it is to be supposed, that Joseph being entertained only by a Heathen King,
would have been so above measure advantageable in the execution of his office,
in buying of all the Land of Egypt to his Lords proper use, but rather have
made a benefit of his prophesying spirit, toward the enriching of himself and
friend, if he had not thought it at leastwise a moral obligation belonging to
his charge. We read that the Angel that accompanied young Tobit in his journey
promised an extraordinary care and diligence in his behalf, being hired
thereunto; which truly in my opinion may be taken as a figure or example of
service. However there were other high mysteries contained in that special
progress ordained by God Almighty. Furthermore in this moral duty the Turks
are so punctual in conserving all manner of trusts, that the very soldiers
themselves that are accustomed to wait upon travelers for wages, will not in
their own persons do them any manner of injury, but rather defend them with a
most constant violence from all such affronts intended them from others; to
which purpose I shall in this place make relation of a remarkable passage, to
this effect.

A relation of a Turkish soldier.
Some years since there was a company of English men traveling in Turkey, to
inform themselves of the curiosity of those Countries; and to that purpose for
their better defense, they had hired three or four soldiers to be their guard,
whereby to prevent all affronts and injuries that might be offered to their
persons amongst the barbarous Arabians; in which office (as I said before) they
are extreme faithful and diligent. However it so happened, that one of our
Countrymen having belike drunk more then was convenient, either for his
present commodity or appearing safety; and by that means committed many
extravagant and most ridiculous insolences in his journey, until at last he
fell violently upon his own soldier, not only with abusive language; but also
in his madd choler gave him many blows, whereat the company was something
astonished as well as displeased; and the rather for that notwithstanding he
pursued the fellow in a most furious manner: yet the discreet and patient
Janizary was so far from revenging the injury, that he only endeavored to
avoid his strokes by flight. But at last the business being composed, and the
quarrel taken up, the soldier was demanded by some of the company, how he
could possibly endure such affronts and injuries from a stranger; especially
when he was in his power, and under his protection. Whereupon he presently
answered, that however he was abused by another insolency and indiscretion,
yet in regard he had been hired with money to be faithful in his office, he
himself would not commit so great a wickedness, as any way to deceive his
trust by another example; but was resolved rather to suffer more prejudice
personally, then to be injust in his own duty. By which very act we may
perceive, what opinion the Turks have of this obligation of service, being
contracted for in any kind, believing, as it should seem, there depends upon
this duty not only a tie of trust and diligence, but of humility and
sufferance, whilst they remain under that condition. Other examples to this
effect might be brought almost in all ages, to show the nature and practice of
this obligation, when as contemptible slaves have not only oftentimes refused
liberty and preferment, but have bit out their own tongues upon occasions being
tormented, rather then they would accuse their masters; by that means, as it
were depriving themselves of the capacity to reveal their secrets in any kind.
Others again in the wars have exposed their naked bodies to the fury of
weapons and darts, when they perceived their masters person in eminent danger,
only to save them from slaughter and destruction; offering their own lives as
affectionate sacrifices, to express the better their entire love and fidelity.
It is recorded in some stories, that Leeimachus one of Alexanders soldiers
continued so faithful to his master the King, that however falling into his
displeasure, for relieving of the Philosopher Calistines in his necessities,
contrary to his command, he was condemned singly to encounter a Lion; yet when
the King was in danger to be lost, being out of his way in a vast Desert, he
run a foot by his horse side a whole day together, to the hazard of his own
life, until he had brought again him safe unto the Army; which act of courage
and fidelity procured him so much favor from Alexander, that he became at last
of such eminency, that he proved one of those Captains that after the Kings
death had in a manner the World divided between them. Neither can we but wonder
at the strange examples of fidelity that are daily produced amongst the
Indians; which opinion as it should seem has been so ingrafted in their
natures and practices, arising only from their rude principles in religion and
morality, that we know it has been the ancient custom, if not at this day, in
many places, to cast themselves in the fire with the bodies of their dead
Lords, there also to be consumed; as if they thought it either an essential
point belonging to their duty, or an undoubted part of their happiness to
accompany them in another world. But for a more nearer testimony of their
natural trust and affection, we may reflect upon the relation of the business
of Amboyne, wherein some Iapan servants endured most intolerable torments by
the Dutch, because they would not accuse their English masters. All which in my
opinion are apparent evidences, either by the light of nature, or from some
customary principles in religion or morality, even barbarous people conceive a
certain duty belonging to those that tie themselves to such a condition.
However for the most part servants of this age, are so far from performing
their duty in this kind, that they do commonly design themselves under such a
condition, but only for their own pleasures and commomodities; as if there
were no other obligations to be performed, then to be called servants: And yet
perhaps at last will violently press for rewards, when as at best their
service never merited one single years wages: which indeed makes the governing
of families almost intolerable; though I must confess masters also may be
sometimes deficient in their own obligations. But I will conclude this
discourse with a story of a poor woman, notwithstanding her sex might have
been excused, in showing forth such testimonies of magnanimity and fidelity,
which story relates much after this manner.

The strange fidelity and wonderful sufferings of a poor womanservant.
When that most wicked and bloody Tyrant of the World, the Emperor Nero put on
a resolution to marry Popea, it was thought something necessary by his
favorites to forge false accusations against his lawful wife Octavia, not
only in regard of the nobility of her blood, and extraction, but for fear lest
the people might be overmuch scandalized at the action; to which purpose a
mayd-servant of hers being brought to the Rack, before Tygellinus that infamous
and cruel bawd; after many furious and intolerable torments, which she
suffered in defense of her Ladies chastity and honor; at last she was demanded
by that inhumane monster something concerning her mistresses deportment in
uncivil terms, not becoming the modesty of her womanly ears to hear, or
her bashful tongue to answer: however being violently pressed notwithstanding
unto a direct and present reply, she told him in some passion that her Ladies
secret parts were far more chaste, and free from corruption, then his mouth;
and in this conflict yielded up her life to their cruelty, as a testimony of
Octavias innocence. By this magnanimous suffering may be noted the extreme
fidelity of this poor though courageous wench, who was so far from betraying
her mistress, that in the very heat of her torments she rather chose to
exasperate the malice of those Tyrants, to her further punishment, then she
would endure to hear so much as one dishonorable passage to be mentioned, that
concerned the dignity of her Ladies person, as I may say, disdaining that so
much as one uncivil or unbeseeming word, should be spoke that concerned her
honor, though at that time she was forced to entertain such a combat as might
have gained the victory over the stoutest and most courageous men, that ever
yet breathed. Which being considered in each particular, may be thought
extraordinary effects of that love and duty that belong to the condition of
service; for however she could not without some impiety accuse innocence,
though many by mere force of tortures have been constrained to it in their own
cause, yet if she had not been so much transported with her affection to her
Mistress, by which means she apparently exasperated her Judges, she might
probably have obtained more favor or less rigor in her own behalf and
concernment, wherein consisted the chief magnanimity of the action.

But as I have now briefly run through these extravagancies of nature, and
corruptions of manners, from whence probably proceed all humane wickedness,
whereby people are carried on for the most part to be unjust to others, and
injurious to themselves; not only against Religion belonging to God, but even
contrary to morality appertaining to men and conversation. So of the otherside,
ought we to expect by the exact rule of justice, after this life either
punishment or reward, according to our comportments in these particulars, which
however it be a principle most believe in the general, yet perhaps many may not
seriously enough reflect upon the true consideration of their qualities, for if
they did but apprehend the punishment and rewards with a competent
understanding belonging to good and evil, it were impossible upon every slight
occasion, to be carried away so much with preposterous practices, as experience
in this latter age tells us men are. Wherefore, that we may come somethidg
nearer our thoughts, by a collection of some circumstances of these
particulars, as the Church of God tells us there is a Hell and a Heaven, which
must by consequence follow, if there be a God and a Devil; so may we in a sort
measure out their natures and properties, by some humane descriptions and
comparisons, although in no other manner, then the twilight resembles the day,
or the least star in the firmament the bright Sun. And first we will begin with
Hell.

Some kind of demonstrations of the supernatural torments of Hell.
It Is true, as I have intimated already, notwithstanding it be unpossable to
comprehend sufficiently the intolerable torments of this infernal habitation,
by the mere apprehension of man, that proceeds no further then humane capacity,
when as these infinite miseries being instituted by Almighty God in the
greatest fury of his wrath, must needs be spiritual, and consequently
supernatural, to satisfy his judgment, wherefore neither confined to place
nor subject to mitigation, yet being computed with worldly sufferings, we may
in some sort he sensible of their effects, if not of their natures and
qualities. For which purpose let a man but set before his consideration and
apprehension the miserable condition of a person cast into a deep and dark
Dungeon, without hope of redemption, full of nothing but horrid despair and
stinking vapor, there to have his naked body laid upon a broiling Gridiron
over a most sulpherous and scorching fire, whilst his tender flesh by piece
meals, should be continually torn from the bones by hot pincers, with all the
violence and cruelty that could be imagined; whether or no it can be supposed
that this miserable wretch would not redeem his deplorable captivity if it lay
in his power, with the greatest penance and austeritie, that were ever yet
suffered upon earth by any mortal creatures; however, these punishments were
only designed for some few years: so that let what man soever consider but the
shortness of humane life in this world, wherein any thing can be acted or
suffered by an equal estimate, and then tell me whether that person be not a
most intolerable fool that seems so bewitched with momentary and painted
delights, that he cannot in any kind reflect upon those torments that shall
neither be confined to him, or can admit of any manner of comparison; for if
all the tortures that were ever yet invented by the most cruellest and
subtilest Tyrants, were to be laid upon a sufferer, with the greatest art and
violence could be devised, to cause despair and increase affliction, yet were
they no more to be esteemed in regard of the infernal torments then the least
biting of a flea is to be compared to those punishments we have mentioned,
though executed, as I say, with what worldly power soever; or then is the
ordinary fire we use, to be likned to the Suns brightness, or the lightnings
effect that in an instant, procures both fear and amazement; Since we must
expect the torments in the other life, to be so far from being understood, or
comprehended by any humane imagination, that they are created not only by God
Almighties omnipotency, not a natural way as earthly things are, but as it were
in the very spirit of his indignation against sin, that is more opposite to his
Majesty a million of times, then light is to darkness. For as we must suppose
them ordained, only to prosecute a divine vengeance, never more to be pacifyed
by what mediation soever, and as little the Executioners to be won to any
manner of compassion: so ought we to be assured, that both soul and body shall
endure, not only one common and particular torment, but multitudes of every
kind, answerable to each nature. For as the soul shall be continually
tormented with the thought of that loss it has sustained, being debarred from
Heaven, and being brought into a most despairing condition, never to be
redeemed by any care or endeavor, so shall every sense of the body and member
a part be sensible of distinct punishments, as well as of the whole, though
each insufferable in every particular, and yet not withstanding must be endured
altogether without either relaxation or intermission. As for example, our eyes
will be deprived of all light and faculty of seeing, and yet nevertheless must
be continually frighted, with most ugly and horrid visions of all sorts that
can work terror in a bodies apprehension. Our hearing likewise, although
absolutely obstructed and deaf, as to any discourses of pleasure and
consolation with other tones of harmony and delight, yet shall we conceive
always to apprehend in our imaginations, most terrible cursing, howlings, and
other distastful lamentations of tortured persons. The smell in like manner,
however of no use to our benefit and commodity, yet shall remain always
suffocated and choked with stinking corruptions of sufficient power to poison
whole worlds of people. Our taste, though continually glutted with loathsome
superfluities in every kind, yet notwithstanding shall we endure most
outrageous hunger and thirst, to the very appetite and violent desire of eating
and consuming of our own bowels and intrails, for want of food and nourishment.
And for our feeling, we shall need no more comparison, then perfectly to
reflect upon either those torments we have already mentioned in this Discourse,
or seriously to consider what is possible for people to suffer, either by fire,
sword, scourges, or the like; by the cruelty of what Tyranny soever without
intermission. However, as I have said before, all earthly tortures are no more
to be compared with Hell fire, then a man lying warm in his bed furnished with
all delights is to be esteemed miserable, like him who being flead of his skin
is presently cast into a frozen pool to be tormented to death with cold. For
the fire which is to be punishment to the damned, has three properties, as I
may say, infinite in their natures, violently tending unto the unhappiness of
men condemned by the Majesty of God. The first is, that it can never be
extinguished by what art or power soever. The second, that it shall never waste
it self for want of matter to work upon, or at all consume the subject of its
fury. And the third is, that it shall be no way limited in effect, being as may
say, infinitely vigorous. So that we may conclude those flames to be powerful
without resistance, lasting without end, and violent beyond sufferance.

Besides, it has no manner of affinity at all, with any kind of comfort or
consolation, much less is it constituted to delight sense, or please
apprehension. For it burns in darkness, it scorcheth without warmth, and
continues without use. Whereas those fires we have upon earth, are but hurtful
only according to accident and application, for however, they prejudice
sometimes our persons, and hinder our commodity, yet in the interim they afford
a certain kind of content and satisfaction in being perceived, the nature
thereof being of a pleasant aspect at the worst. And notwithstanding they often
destroy and consume with no small violence, yet at that very time, they
contribute something of commodity to the beholders, either by reason of warmth
or light, which are properties delightful naturally to our humane senses;
whereas those black and unperceived flames of Hell, are not made capable at all
of any manner of beneficial quality, as being wholly and infinitely intended by
the exsperated justice of Almighty God, for affliction and punishment* So that
if people would but seriously consider these fearful particulars, and withal
how little able men's bodies are in this world (according to the custom of this
luxurious age) to endure any extraordinary hardness (when for the most part we
seem passionately sensible of the least aching of a tooth, bein ready to confine
our selves to our beds for a small defluction of Khume) me thinks the very
apprehension of what may befall our condition in the other life, should make us
perfectly fick indeed, though I do not say, of despair, yet of profitable
considerations, whereby either to perform austerities, or restrain vices;
Again, if naturally we cannot brook the sight only of tortured persons in this
world chastised for their misdemeanors, by a certain kind of antipathy
against blood and cruelty; how shall we be able to suffer the torments of Hell
both in body and soul, when as God himself is the Judge with a frowning brow,
being an injured Majesty, and the devils the executioners full of unspeakable
malice toward mankind, in being exalted into their places, which they will be
sure ever to remember with advantage, when their power shall be no more
circumscribed and limited in that particular. O stupendous misery without
bounds limits, or end! Which however, by the opinion of most Divines, shall be
increased by the very knowledge and memory we shall retain, in concerning how
unfortunately we were deprived of the sight of God, by reason of nothing but
our own foolish negligences, when we had the happy means so conveniently and
lovingly offered us by the passion of our most blessed Savior; who certainly,
as it may be conceived, would not have dyed and suffered for us, if the
prevention of these horrid torments, had not been of a most infinite
consequence to our avail. Besides, we may in some sort measure the nature of
the torments in Hell, not only by the devils cruelty, but by their ugly shape
and deformity; since as it is believed, if a man could but see one of them in
his proper colors and horror of his Office, it were unpossible to live after
it one minute; much more what an unspeakable terror to be in the company of
many millions of them for multitudes of lasting ages, especially, as I said
before, having obtained an absolute jurisdiction over our persons, neither to
be redeemed by any more industry, or their cruelty to be assuaged by any
compassion or entreaty. And these torments and horrors, no doubt, will be
amplified and augmented in a most high kind, by that terrible and bottom less
despair, that shall continually possess and afflict our thoughts, as well in
conceiving the present miseries we suffer, as in fully apprehending we shall
never enjoy a better condition. And yet notwithstanding, we shall be so far
from procuring any the least consideration from Heaven in our behalfs, that as
the Devils will perpetually insult and triumph over our persons and
afflictions, so shall the justice of Almighty God, always from his Throne of
glory, put us in mind of those faults for which deservedly we endure all our
intolerable punishments, as it were by that means returning our curses and
blasphemies upon our heads, to our greater shame and torment, which our
desperate condition would willingly cast up at the Majesty of Almighty God.
Neither will it be our smallest misery (though all is infinite and boundless)
to behold with the eyes of our tormented soul the strange darkness of the
place, wherein we are imprisoned for ever, being of a most narrow capacity and
extent, and yet filled with so many horrid confusions of all sorts, without any
distinction in the least kind, that can pretend to variety; in so much as it
may be resembled to the worlds Chaos before the creation, though much more ugly
and deformed. All these excessive, boundless and incomprehensible miseries (I
say) we do more then hazard to undergo, only because we cannot find in our
hearts to forbear the violent carreere of all passions and affections in every
thing. However without doubt enjoyed any way in the greatest perfection can be
devised in the world, and most agreeing with natural sense and appetite, yet
in effect they will prove but like the seeming beautiful apples, growing upon
the banks of Sodom, which being gathered contain nothing within them but
dust and ashes. Nay further, I dare boldly and with confidence affirm, that men
for the most part undergo more labor, pains and vexation, both in mind and
body, in procuring their own damnations, then others (that make earthly things
more indifferent in their desires) do in purchasing the joys of Heaven.
Wherefore I must conclude those persons to be wonderful strange creatures,
that continue in so stupid a madness, encompassed about with such infinite
hazzards, only to maintain the possession, or I may say rather an appetite to
purchase those things, which truly in themselves well considered, are not at
all essential to any manner of apprehension or fruition; which infallibly
demonstrateth that man's faith is defective, or his judgment not competent,
since either he must not believe what the Church and Scriptures tell him, or
wants ability in his nature truly to comprehend the value and weight of such
principles; and in this respect may be said to resemble the foot (or rato
exceed him in insensibility) that chose to be a King only for one year, and
afterward all days of his life to endure nothing but hunger, beggary and
misery. For certainly as man's continuance in this world is no more to be
thought of in comparison of eternity, then one year to be valued with the
longest age; so are all the afflictions upon earth that were ever yet endured
by flesh and blood, no more to be esteemed with those torments of Hell, then
dreams are to be reckoned with realities. Neither in truth can they admit of
any manner of humane similitude.

But now that we have brought into our remembrance some kind of representation
of these fearful expectations, from the severe justice of Almighty God, his
Majesty being exasperated against sinners, we will a little endeavor to
sweeten these apprehensions, by some estimats of those blessings which his
mercy has prepared in Heaven for his friends. However they are much more
difficult to be described then the torments of hell, by reason the souls
fruition chiefly consists in speculation, that is in beholding the beatified
vision of God with knowledge and security, which, as I may say, is not at all
to be comprehended by our humane senses, and little more by the conceptions of
our soul, being accompanied with the body unrefined: Which was the cause that
Mahomet only instituted a Paradise of sense, more probably to take the
appetites of his Disciples and followers; craftily conceiving, that if he
should have preached to them such high mysteries, and promised to them rewards
past their capacities naturally to conceive or apprehend, it would have quickly
beat down the new foundation of his wicked building; since the common people
might not have been so ready to have followed his enticements, and entertained
his doctrine: For truly hidden and supernatural things are not so plausible to
humane nature, as such as are more visible to the eyes, ears, and fleshly
senses, which seem better to persuade common and not illuminated
understandings. Neither is it possible to procure a competent proportion of
this illumination necessary to salvation, without some special grace first
purchased from Almighty God; gained, as I may say, by our earnest desires, and
diligent endeavors to serve him both with our hearts and actions, according to
the Churches directions. But now to our purpose concerning our heavenly
representations.

The wonderful properties, and infinite felicities of Heaven in some sort
described, according to humane apprehension.
AS Heaven certainly was ordained by Almighty God, for the comfort and felicity
not only of his good servants, but for the further declaration of his Majesty
and glory, so may it be very well supposed, to be the prime piece of his
creation, when as it is illustrated, as I may say, by his own presence that
could not be created, and he being wonderful and omnipotent in all his works,
no doubt has appointed that celestial mansion, to be fully replenished with
all manner of satisfactory varieties and beauties beyond any kind of
conception: For if we with our natural eyes cannot behold the Sun, without
amazement; especially when we consider and know it to be by evident
demonstration above a hundred times bigger then the whole earth, shining and
casting his light in such an admirable manner, to the benefit of the whole
world, and yet must be at last changed or brought to nothing, as a contemptible
creature, only for a time made for man's use and commodity, without any manner
of intention of eternity, what may we think of that refulgent habitation,
where God himself has placed his Throne, not only to endure for ever and
ever, but where he has designed particularly his glory, goodness and
omnipotency, to be worshipped and adored in a full and open prospect by us
after the clouds of our frail nature are dispersed from before our souls
view, that darken her light and understanding, whilst she walks here upon
earth clothed with flesh and blood. O that it should be possible that people
can be taken with the representations of dainty maskes and the like, where
only fained Gods seem to be drawn in golden Chariots through the air, in
which entertainment oftentimes our senses are so transported, that in our
hearts we could wish to enjoy no other happiness but to be always in such
company, where delicious gardens and fountains might still afford our
appetites varieties of earthly pleasures, and yet when any discourses are
offered to our ears of these supernatural and incomprehensible delights, both
certain and permanent, we appear altogether, as it were dead and insensible of
the least apprehension of such perfections. Alas, how we may perceive our
selves to be overcome but with the reading of idle Romances; or hearing other
stories that tell us with a world of fictions of admirable places of pleasure,
wherein remain nothing but Nymphs and Ganemedes. Yet when we understand these
true beatitudes to be described in Scripture, and set forth by other religious
Authors, they seem not at all either to move our desires, or stir our
appetites. The reason of which I say is nothing but a certain kind of
stupidity, engrafted in our dispositions by custom, in regard we have not
procured so much grace from Almighty God (for want of diligence in his service)
as should clear our mental speculation, and elevate our soul to our proper
sphere, there to converse knowingly: for such religious persons as have in a
manner any way mortified themselves to the world, I dare be bold to affirm,
take more delight and felicity in one heavenly rapture, then we can possibly in
a thousand of these fantastical imaginations that do but leave the soul
darkened in her understanding, without any real satisfaction at all enjoyed.

But let us come as near as we can by sense to the apprehension of these
heavenly excellencies, as I may say, by natural and humane comparisons, since
it is unpossible altogether to shake off the appetites of this gross clay,
that will downward do what we can* especially leading our manner of lives. To
this purpose we will begin first with the wonderful extent of Paradise, being
certainly one of the chief properties belonging to the beauty of any place or
habitation; for which effect we may reflect upon the consideration of the round
ball of the earth, being of no penurious dimension, to be covered over with a
large and vast Canopy of what matter we know not, though most admirably
contrived; and besprinkled clean through with multitudes of bright Stars,
some equalling the whole world in greatness, and yet seem to possess in a
manner no place at all in the firmament; by which comparison we may in some
sort give a roving conjecture of the hugeness and capacity of the Heaven of
Heavens, wherein God Almighties chief glory is placed; which is so far above
all these transitory Spheres both in height and greatness, that we may imagine
it to increase, as one circle does within another from this lower Heaven,
until it come not only unto an unmeasurable, but an unconceivable vastness
and infinity. So that without any more dispute we may very well conclude, that
the Paradise of the blessed is great, without limitation; and so consequently
must exceed all proportion answerable to man's conception. The next benefit that
may be thought to belong to this glorious habitation is Clarity, which
certainly is so exceedingly illustrious in this place beyond expression, that
as we may suppose the whole frame of the Heaven to be made of a transparent and
Chrystalline matter, so is every soul therein remaining qualified or adorned
with a particular light or shining, according to the degree of its happy
estate, which nevertheless in each does exceedingly out-doe the brightness of
the natural Sun in his greatest splendor. For that Planet, however created
with admirable properties for man's commodity, yet being not ordained for
eternity, the effects thereof cannot be perfect in any kind, because it self
wants also an absolute perfection in nature. Wherefore putting together so many
excellent lights, wonderful in brightness, and delightful in aspect, what
may we conceive of the glory of the Celestial habitation? especially when the
refulgent rays, proceeding from the blessed countenance of every Saint and
Angel, can reflect upon nothing (as I said before) but upon a certain
Chrystaline matter, transparent without all comparison beyond all the Diamonds
of the world, reverberating in that manner back again with more Charity
through the whole. And as the period and Crown of this admirable luster
remains eternally the continual presence of the Son of God, in whom all
things are transparently beheld without obstacle, whose Majesty outshines these
created and lesser lights, a million of times more then does the great Candle
of the Element darken the smallest twinkling Star that can be perceived by
any eye; whose aspect is of such an infinite brightness, that the blessed
Spirits themselves were not able to behold his own and fathers Divinity*
unless they were empowered by their goodness to such a perfection, which
renders them not only capable of that happiness; but also of the
understanding and perfect knowledge of what they are permitted to see: so that
there can be no doubt at all made but that the Clarity of Heaven does equal
every way the capacity thereof; and the rather so to be believed, for that by
most expressions in holy Scripture the joys of Paradise are figured by that
denomination of light and brightness. In the third place we may reflect upon
those infinite and innumerable beauties that adorn this mentioned splendor,
the least of which is not only capable to ravish all our worldly senses, if
our natures were capaable to entertain such divine happiness, but also would
be able to create in the very understanding a true taste and fruition of their
excellencies, which our mortal frailty now does not suffer us to possess in
those earthly things we have though they are far from containing the least
perfection whatsoever. If the spacious Ovall room in Neroes Palace, wherein
were placed bright looking-glasses in every Angle that represented some humane
varieties of flourishing gardens, bedeckt with beautifully Flowers and
magnificent fountains; at whose clear streams many sorts of creatures seemed
to take refreshment, could attract every spectators eye to wonder and
amazement, which only was contrived by earthly art and industry: what may we
conceive this heavenly place to be; that had not only a divine Majesty, but
omnipotency for its founder? Besides that, it is designed for a perpetual
habitation of his own glory. Certainly if Tempe in Greece afforded such
plentiful matter for poetical fictions, which was only a small valley of
natural delights, in so much as it almost gave opinion to the rude multitude,
of the station of blessed and happy souls after this life, why should not the
least consideration of these eternal beauties transport our thoughts and
desires beyond all rest and quiet, until we had purchased the possession to
our selves, though bought at never so dear a rate by the crucifying of all
inordinate passions and affections. I must confess it is more then difficulty
to represent however but to the imagination only beauties, when neither the
matter has been seen, or the form is to be comprehended; nevertheless we are
to conceive by faith, that Heaven being God Almighties perfectest building, is
in all parts furnished with infinities of pleasant and delightful objects to
the view; especially if we consider that an Angel is more glorious in his own
proper nature, then all the beauties of the world put together; and those being
in a manner innumerable, and distinct in form and excellencies, (though all to
be beheld at one instant) what a representation must that be to a capacity,
that is not only divinely enabled to distinguish of varieties, but to judge of
perfection; which properties certainly we shall fully enjoy, being there
happily placed; but above all, if we enter into the consideration of God
himself, who is the great maker of every beauty sitting in his Throne of
honor, with all his glorious Courtiers about him, clothed with a ravishing
splendor. O what a sight of satisfaction will that be, to the clear faculty
of our souls, neither dulled by obstructions, nor hindered by interpositions;
and more infinitely taking shall it be, for that, as through a transparent and
admirable glass, in him we shall evidently see not only our own happiness to
the best advantage, but all other beauties that are made by himself, both with
a perfect science and absolute fruition.

Again, if we conceive varieties to be another perfection, we may consider what
a multitude of several degrees of glories there are in that bright and blessed
Palace, when every order of Angels, and each Angel in his own particular seat
and place, is distinguished both in office and luster, though all united in
their wills and obedience, that makes the greater harmony; which number, for
ought I know may be above a million of millions; whom, as I say we shall all
know and see without corruption or impediment, not as we do now people of this
world subject to inconstancy and imperfections, but always united with sweet
countenances and pleasind dispositions, producing variety of new delights to
our imaginations, that cannot be deceived with any false objects. Besides, we
shall behold all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs that ever have
been in the world, bearing about with them the honorable Ensigns of their
sufferings and virtues, to our most unspeakable delight in every particular;
but above all, we shall be more then transported with a heavenly satisfaction
to contemplate the diversity of favors bestowed upon the blessed and
incomparable Virgin, by the love and power of the holy Trinity, who is placed
as we may suppose upon a Throne of one entire Carbuncle, clothed in a garment
wrought all over with such heavenly varieties, that nature never knew, or
Angels can imitate, bearing also upon her head a Crown of stars, interwoven
with rich stones of all colors and beauties, in comparison of which, Diamonds
and Rubies are more base then the roughest pibles are, to the most rarest
Jewels that were ever yet worn by Princes upon earth, with a thousand other
excellencies, no more to be numbered then to be described. Truly, if the
several and variable fancies of this world have so much power to intoxicate
our brains, toward a perpetual confusion and eternal damnation; I see no
reason why these excessive and satisfactory varieties of Heaven well considered
should not oftentimes, if not continually settle our judgments to more
profitable and more necessary considerations; for certainly it is no other
thing then diversity of earthly Chymeras that cousen our appetites to so
disorderly and extreme prejudice, and suggests to our imagination strange and
impossible frutions, both against reason, and contrary to faith. But as
certainly these varieties of Paradise are more then numerous; so may we
conceive the society to be answerably excellent thereunto in every respect: in
regard there is none can be thither admitted, but those who have been
extraordinary, and I may say in some sort admirable for their virtues and
goodness in this world; and being there glorified and refined, their
excellencies of nature and dispositions appear as through a transparent
glass, not only to themselves but to each one of the blessed in particular,
to an infinity of satisfaction in society and conversation; though it be not
exercised by the tongue or senses according to humane practices, but rather in
a concordancy of wills and affections, wherein charity and love principally
predominates; by which means every soul is induced to desire and covet the
good and prosperity of each other equal with his own; so that not only every
appetite of envy is absolutely banished from that glorious and heavenly
society, but the least repining is taken away at any others preferment and
advancement; however it is not to be doubted, but that there are several
degrees of happiness in that blessed mansion; which must needs render the
conversation admirably sweet and delightful, by reason of so absolute an unity
in affections. For as none shall be lead away with any manner of passion of
self-love, and as little will he conceive that he wants an absolute
perfection in his own state and condition; so the chief felicity any soul
shall possess in that heavenly habitation, is to see God, and by that
consequence must accompany her fellows in the honor and worship which is not
only due to his divinity, but shall be thought the greatest increase of her
own glory can possibly be enjoyed, since from that infinite Majesty each
blessed Spirit does extract all pleasure, content, and satisfaction, as from a
vast Ocean of blessedness, resembling our natural Sea here upon earth, that
bestows benefits and virtues upon every great River and little Brook, according
to its property and capacity: whilst in the interim our blessed and all
powerful Savior, resembling also in some sort the resplendent Sun, that
has the domination of every earthly thing, by his influence exhales from his
fathers goodness and luster a convenient proportion of all heavenly graces, to
bestow what quantity he pleases of consolations in every respect, upon those
of his perpetual Kingdom, united as I may say in so harmonious a society, as
can never be severed in the least kind, either by distance or disaffection.

Last of all, we may reflect upon the absolute security of this happy Assembly;
not only so in effect, but also assured in their own knowledges, which
renders any condition satisfied beyond measure; for it seems to be a triumphant
Crown, that makes all endeavors majesticall by reason of the confidence in the
conclusion, since without such an opinion new perturbations will continually
arise, to disquiet the possession of any felicity and delight enjoyed; which,
as I say, is so absolutely purchased in this celestial Paradise, that God
Almighty neither will nor can loose his subjects and friends. And as little is
it possible he should be deficient in his own mercies and goodness; so that
being once placed in his sight, we shall not need to fear either circumvention
or inconstancy; for all actions will be the same, and every thought free from
variation. In like manner as our State will be entirely perfect, so cannot our
wills be any way perverted, since those sensual imperfections of surfeit and
desire, must be all taken from our natures, as dependant only upon earthly and
transitory possessions; for that however there will appear in that glorious
station several degrees of beatitudes, all disposed to nothing but to God
Almighties will and pleasure, though with a reference to each particular
desert; yet none of any degree but will be fully contented with his own
proportion abundantly, without coveting more, or doubting what he has, since
in beholding God, he enjoyes what he can wish, in whom is contained all
knowledge, happiness, and security.

Now if all these particulars be well considered with competent understanding,
not only concerning this celestial being of the blessed, but of the miserable
condition of the damned, sice the principles cannot be denied by any Christian
faith, certainly the thoughts thereof cannot choose but stir up in people
either some sparkles of devotion, or at leastwise procure much abatement of
vice; especially if it be also remembered with any manner of contemplation, that
perpetuity infallibly appertains to both these places.

Certain consideration of Eternity.
A Vast Sea of amazement may eternity be esteemed, that neither can be bounded
for its extent, or fathomed in its depth. For if a man were enjoined but to
drive a Snaile to the furthest part of the Indies, over a thousand interposing
Rocks and Mountains; or should be obliged to dry all the waters upon earth
only by one drop after another, giving to each a years space; yet might there
be some hope in time to accomplish those stupendous labors. But this never to
be ended season carries with it such an incomprehensible extent, that all the
art and knowledge of the world can procure no other definition thereof, but
only to give it a name, whilst the consideration may be said to stupifie all
memories and capacities. So that, I say, miserable man may be the subject of
all compassion, and the very object of every wonder, that to purchase the
possession of some few trifles here upon earth, which in truth are rather
nothing at all, only for one minutes space, or breath of time in consideration
of Eternity, does not only lose the fruition of these excellent and
everlasting benefits so largely mentioned, but also most inconsiderately and
desperately does cast himself headlong into a dark and deep Dungeon, where
there is nothing to be expected but everlasting sorrow, and not any thing to be
felt and endured but infinite torments; and that not for a year or an age, but
for ever and ever, without end. Since the walk of eternity may be said to
resemble a person going round about continually in a circle, wherein is to be
found no termination or hope at any time to finish the journey; for if we could
number every sand of the Sea, and reduce them distinctly by way of Arithmetic
severally into so many ages, yet altogether being computed with Eternity, they
will not admit of so near a comparison as the least grain of mustard seed in
magnitude with the huge circumference of the whole world: Much less are twenty
or forty year of man's life to be valued in consideration of that infinity of
time, or rather that time that is not at all finite, either in effect or
apprehension. Besides, if we had our own wishes, to sit always proudly upon a
commanding Throne, beyond either the reach of envy, or the hazard of accidents
in the interim, pulling down this man, and exalting whom we please, with each
single word; as also accompanied entirely with all other worldly felicities
could be devised: yet a little sleep when it were necessary, (which is no
other then a figure of death) must again retire us into our solitary chamber,
there to converse with privacy; which certainly in that necessity would give us
more content and satisfaction, then the apprehension of our excessive
greatness and power. Wherefore, I say, if all that we can desire will not
prove constantly pleasing upon earth, what may we think of the small time we
have to enjoy any thing here; our lives being but as a flash of Lightning, that
appears for a moment, and afterward goes out for ever. Certainly if that
great Egyptian Monarch were mortified in his thoughts, by the turning only of
his Chariot wheel, reflecting by that motion upon the inconstancy of fortune;
there is no doubt but much more he did consider the shortness of the space,
any thing could be enjoyed in this world. It Is true however time shall never be
finished, yet our selves must be quickly at an end, our lives continually
wasting like a Candle, though with a seeming kind of security we take our rest
and never think upon it; for every day, if we would but seriously consult our
looking-glass to that purpose, we should to our grief no doubt perceive new
gray hairs and wrinkles to increase, both without our privity, and against our
wills. When we look back to our years past, we think them nothing, yet are we
so foolishly transported with the vanity of present possessions, that although
we have not near so many behind to come, yet for that short time only to
enjoy a few painted pleasures, though in our decrepit age, we are persuaded to
hazard, or rather to leave in desperation our eternal condition hereafter. Nay
put case it might be something doubtful, whether there be any Hell or Heaven,
or no: yet certainly it cannot be but an extraordinary madness, to venture
upon such an experience in the future; especially when in the present we gain
so small a benefit to our selves, as are the possessions of all these worldly
vanities we aim at, that have in them neither reality nor continuance; neither
do they so much as assure us here, what part of them we shall be able quietly
to enjoy; for oftentimes we find our state so miserable by reason of some
accidents or other, that not seldom we are provoked to wish our selves dead as
being weary of life; and yet all this while we have not so much wise foresight
as to consider, that probably we are in danger, to enter into such a condition
presently after the breath is out of our body, that is intolerable to be
endured, being alike lasting as violent. Another kind of preposterous and
deplorable vanity I must speak of, which is to see, how many people will
venture through raging flames, with almost no possibility of escaping death,
only to gain a little idle fame in the future, or some small breath of praise
in the present; and yet when they should offer themselves to any manner of
austerity or hardness, for the gaining of eternity, they seem to be either
without courage or motion. O insensible stupidity and weak faith, wholly
directed by sensuality and ignorance, to the greatest confusion and folly can
be imagined; when as after one minute, that the last gasp is past, we shall be
no more mindful of what fame we purchased in this world, then if we had never
been born at all, unless it be to our further punishment; for that in our
lifetime we did not rightly make use of those natural faculties, that God
Almighty had bestowed upon us for our own good and his service, which being
discreetly employed might have been beneficial both to our selves and
posterity: what shall we think also of some men reputed Philosophers, that
have pretended to a certain kind of eternity in show, however they thought of
nothing less in effect: which appetite appeared apparently in the disposition
of Murcus Aurelius, that great and esteemed wise Emperor, who in his life time
and prosperity, seemed to contemn all earthly concernments, as most vain and
idle considerations, and to that purpose often wished for death, as he said to
free him from the accidental miseries of this world, though when he was really
arrested by that unwelcome messenger, his faithful and trusty secretary, had
much labor to persuade him to any convenient fortitude at all: which plainly
shows, he was more vain-gloriously taken with his professed opinion before
men, conceiving it belike for his greater honor to seem to contemn death,
then that either his heart was free from natural affections of living longer
here, or that his thoughts were any way transported with a desire of any other
being at all, as either perhaps not believing any such thing, or else was most
desperately loath to foregoe the possession of what he enjoyed already: In like
manner, there was another Philosopher, who being in a ship ready to be cast
away by a sudden storm, notwithstanding he had preached most violently to the
Mariners, not only of the contempt of death, but of the vanity of life; did
nevertheless express by his countenance an extreme fear and terror:
whereupon after the tempest was past he was reproved with scorn by some for
his hypocrisy and cowardlinesse, in pretending to despise that, which as it
should seem he most desired: to which he quickly made this reply, as having no
other way in part to save his reputation; that however he seemed something
troubled, at the apprehension of his own loss for the present, yet it was not
because he did not in his thoughts really contemn death according to his
profession, but that he considered how much the world should be damnified by
his destruction; when as if a thousand such as themselves had perished, the
matter had not been of any moment at all, in regard of the little commodity was
to be made of their preservation. But however this jest served in some sort to
save his reputation for the present, yet it was plain his professions were
contrary to his thoughts: for that people being out of the right way of
desiring eternity, they cannot possibly reflect upon the consequence of such a
happiness whereby to esteem of life and death indifferently enough; since
their chief end, let them say what they will, is but to purchase some worldly
consideration, notwithstanding all their hypocritical pretensions. It Is true
many great Philosophers in former times appeared to adore no other God but
future and eternal fame; yet give me leave to say, that although they might
have those appetites living and being in prosperity, yet it was chiefly, if not
wholly upon the matter, to reap the benefit of such an opinion here during
their natural lives. As for example, we see many raise stately mountains,
endeavoring thereby to continue and eternize their memories upon earth; yet
the nearer they draw to their deaths, those ambitions become cooler, until at
last perhaps in the perclose, they absolutely quit and forgo all those vain
cogitations, and betake themselves only (if they be not religious) to things
belonging to flesh and blood, which is ease, rest, sleep, and the like, leaving
apparently those hot vanities of fame and ambition to younger people, that have
ability of body to make use of such mental delights, as having longer time to
enjoy them. Which shows evidently, it is not alone eternity they seek, either
in fame, remembrance, or what you will else to that purpose, but rather present
and humane content inwardly, as long as they live in this world, imagining they
shall be thought brave persons hereafter. Which, however it seems to have
reference to the future, yet well considered, it is nothing but a natural
satisfaction, they propose to their own apprehension, how much they shall be
honored after their deaths, supposing also those that converse with them do
believe absolutely the same; which opinion, as I say, they violently desire to
enjoy, as long as they live here. For we find by experience, that such people
as make their last wills and testaments, being in perfect health and strength of
body, design huge matters for their funerals; but those that dispose of their
affairs, being ready to yield up the Ghost, only take care for a convenient
place without much pomp, where they may be buried. All which are but further
testimonies of demonstration, that only the sensualities of this world,
whether they be in mere opinion, or belong to other natural appetites, take
men's desires more then any manner of eternity whatsoever. In so much as all may
be reduced only to the violent coveting of possession, however it be of never
so small a continuance, beyond all future considerations whatsoever. Which
appeared plainly in the actions of Alexander the great, who seemed most
ambitiously to court fame and opinion, with an extraordinary aim to settle his
conquered Empire to perpetuity in all magnificency, whilst he was living in
prosperity; but being upon his deathbed, and asked who should be King after
him, he was so far from any thoughts of future establishment, that as he
designed no Governor at all over his vast Dominions, so did he leave every
thing in a most miserable confusion, notwithstanding he had both probability of
issue and his own kindred to have nominated: insomuch as all his eminent
Captains and Commanders went presently together by the ears amongst
themselves; so that within a very few years there was not one of them remained
alive, or scarce any part of this conquest continued entire: Which humor had
been well represented to this young Princes ambition by the rude Scythians,
when their Ambassadors told him, that however he seemed so violently
transported with victorios land success, yet at last he must be contented with
only ten foot of ground to contain his person, and circumscribe his glory. As
much to say, when his life should be ended, he would be little the better for
his prosperity. And truly, if the carcass of any Prince should be asked, what
felicity it now enjoyes in regard of those past honors; if it could speak,
without doubt it would make answer, none at all. For certainly, men lying upon
their deathbeds, are either not capable of any thoughts whatsoever, or are
busied with more serious considerations, then to trouble themselves to think or
desire what may be the opinion of them and their actions amongst people after
they are gone. However I do not maintain the contrary, but that it is most
necessary, or at leastwise convenient in our humane condition, to endeavor a
lawful reputation, as also a fitting memory to be continued concerning our
comportments in this life, provided a right end thereof be annexed thereunto.
And chiefly for these three respects: In the first place it may be supposed,
that by our noble actions and endeavors we bequeath a lasting legacy of honor
and reputation to our surviving friends and posterity, whereby they may be
benefited in the world after us by the deserved fame of our achievements.
Secondly, by the demonstration of such virtues and perfections, we leave
patterns and examples to all in general, who may the sooner be enduced thereby
to imitate our actions, represented to them as a most worthy object. And lastly
our deservings by that means coming to be known to others, and rewarded with
praise and commendation, they cannot but give encouragement to worthy persons,
to continue in their own designs to that purpose, since themselves may expect
the like benefits, which probably will prove a means to root out wickedness
and baseness out of the world by reason of contrary effects: for without such
principles it is unpossible that any Commonwealth can long remain prosperous.
So that in a word, to sum up all this whole discourse; whosoever seeks any
thing but Heaven for his utmost and eternal period, is either a fool or a mad
man, since as I said before, not only all other things are defective, but the
very time it self when they can be enjoyed in regard of eternity, is not so
much as the least moment compared with a million of ages. Besides I may affirm,
that all worldly actions at the best must be buried in obscurity, and at the
worst they end in misery and confusion: for though honor, fame, riches, and
the like, are convenient benefits to be sought by noble dispositions, as well
for examples to encourage virtue and goodness, as to avoid sloth and
idleness; yet must they notwithstanding be joined with absolute intentions, to
procure something more then either earthly satisfaction during this life, or a
bare hope of a fantastical opinion afterward; since eternity will reach
beyond the worlds dissolution, when all things of flesh and blood must end,
being so ordained by an omnipotend decree, before either nature or time was
created. But now that we have, as I suppose, spoke sufficiently of Hell,
Heaven, and Eternity; Let us a little take a view of this earthly life of ours,
that we seem so exceedingly much to value and esteem in this world, since for
it we hazard all these beforementioned good and evils.

Considerations upon the shortness of man's life upon earth, with many other
inconveniences thereunto belonging.
IN the first place we may consider the shortness of our time here upon earth,
according to the computation of the best knowing judgments; since by way of
purchase in any estate, there is no Lawyer that reckons another persons life at
above ten years, let his complexion and constitution be never so strong and
healthful, considering the diversity of accidents, that belong to our humane
condition so; that dividing this ten years space into three parts, we must
confess one of them is wholly taken up in sleep, wherein we possess no
pleasure at all; however some necessary satisfaction may be reaped thereby to
our tired and wearied nature; for we remain as I may say all that while both
useless to our selves and to others. Another third part of this time we may
give to the crostes and vexations of the world, with other employments that
must be personned, though perhaps we receive neither delight or content by
actions of that nature. All which being indifferently calculated, there will
remain to our own proper share and commodity entirely, but a very few years,
wherein can be fully and totally enjoyed these violent desired felicities of
the earth, that so much contrary to all reason bewitch our souls and senses;
as only for the fruition and possession of them, we in a manner cast away the
very thought of this great and infinite eternity, already so largly described,
accompanied by all those incomprehensible pleasures of heaven; and run
desperately into the danger of enduring such horrid torments, as no Pen can
write or tongue can utter. But put case notwithstanding we have allotted but
ten years to man's life, considering all casualties as I said before of this
world, either by plague, famine, war, feavours, sickness, or the like, we
could enjoy a hundred years of durance, which I will be bold to say, not one
man in an hundred thousand, does arrive unto, by any Physic and temperance
can be practiced; yet dividing this term also into three parts, as we have
done the former, we shall find that very little of it will bring us that
satisfaction we may suppose. As for example, the first season of our infancy,
is wholly spent in ignorance and instruction, wherein for the most part we live
(according to our apprehension) under such subjections, that we receive no
contented satisfaction in our present condition; however I may affirm it to be
the best time of our delight. If we consider the middle of our age, we shall
find it perpetually accompanied with such care, vexations, and troubles, that
they prove continually interruptions and impediments to any content or
satisfaction our souls can entertain; since at the best we are always in
fear to be deprived of what we have, or too much solicitous to gain what we
have not. And for the latter part of our time, we have enough to do instead of
expecting delights, to think of curing our infirmities, and patching up the
breaches and decays of nature, that are daily made in our bodies by age; like
old leaking vessels, who however they may for sometime be preserved with much
care and pains, yet can never be made for any use of long continuance. Truly,
if we well observe our concernments after fifty (which is the age allotted by
that wise Philosopher, Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, for man chiefly to begin
his misery) we shall find it wholly debarred from any manner of constant
felicity; as for example, if we have no children to succeed us in those worldly
fortunes and honor, which we so much labor for in this humane life, certainly
it cannot but be esteemed no small defect to our condition; neither are those
apprehensions to be blamed in us, when as we have for a pattern the example of
that holy man Abraham, who complained, being extremely sensible of such a
cross, that the steward of his house was to be his heir, for want of natural
posterity I; for if this good person apprehended it as a cause of affliction to
his thoughts, much more must our exceeding weak frailty be moved with the
consideration: of the other side, if we have children given us by God Almighty,
according to our wishes, yet want we not daily perturbations in our minds, left
they might miscarry at one time or other by reason of worldly accidents;
considering the many chances that hourly happen to all manner of conditions;
and of the contrary, if they prove untoward and disobedient, answerable to the
customs of the age; what greater cross can possibly afflict our thoughts or
torment our rest; which perpetual vexation at last, may constrain us perhaps
a thousand times to wish they had never been borne to their own destruction
and our grief. Of the other side, if our delights be chiefly in friendship and
conversation, how soon may that esteemed felicity be taken from our
possession, either by sudden jealousies or froward accidents, when we least
expect the unhappiness; if the gaining of riches best please our appetites,
though we have employed many years in the acquisition of golden mountains,
either war, oppression, or some law-suite or other may soon deprive us of
all we have, and cast us into an unrecoverable and desperate poverty, since our
affairs depend upon the will and intentions of men, wicked and uncertain. For
truly either our own servants may betray us corrupt judges undo us, or our
debtors prove banckrupt, all which often happen, and then quickly vanishes
away all our esteem. Besides a hundred other casualties that cannot be
mentioned at present, because not thought upon. Now, I say, if these
perturbations and casualties be incident to the best and most solid time of our
humane condition, when as our bodies and understandings are most in vigor, to
enjoy earthly felicities and content, what may we think of our decaying and
criped age: when as we shall see our teeth daily, to drop one by one from our
hollow jaws and dried gums, until at last we have none at all left, for our
necessary use and commodity. Our eyes in like manner by degrees to grow dim,
having only their faculties preserved a while by spectacles and other means,
until at the length we become stark blind, leaving us in a posture
uncomfortable, since we are sure never more to behold the glorious Sun or the
cheerful days light; and for our legs they will appear rather like small
stalks of withered plants, then convenient or substantial supporters of our
weak bodies, which must necessarily be assisted by crutches or some other
artifice, to help us in our motion from place to place, whereby the best to
give us a little ease and recreation, whilst we are able in any sort to crawle
upon the face of the earth; and however this help may serve for a while to
supply the defects of decaying nature, yet in the end our beds or some solitary
couch being overburthened with Catars and Rhumes must be the only receptacle
of our age and infirmity, where perhaps we shall converse with nothing but
excessive pain and melancholy thoughts, as a near preparation for our graves,
to which station it may be doubted scarce a tear shall accompany us from the
eyes of any of our friends, imagining we have had a sufficient time, of being
in the world, whereupon I must here remember the custom of the Indians, who
used to put to death such people amongst them, that by reason of their
extraordinary age, were thought past action and employment, which testifies
that even Barbarians themselves, apprehend nothing but unhappinesses in our
last continuance. Now I say if this condition appertain, to those that have
been the greatest darling of fortune, and prosperity in this world; what may we
judge of such, that during their lives have had nothing but troublesome
passage, concerning their affairs in the whole course of their time, as it
were still conversing either with want, imprisonment, diseases, or some other
apparent afflictions of this life. Alas if we consider but the poor
husbandman, that does not only continually toil, for a contemptible
subsistence, in heat and cold, in wet and dry, but is oftentimes in danger to
be plundered of all he has, and not seldom loses his own life in defense of
his small family, by the violent oppressions of merciless soldiers; we may
imagine his trouble and vexations give him no great cause of felicity. In what
a miserable and horrid condition is a Galleyslave, however he be endued with
the same nobility of soul, as the greatest and mightiest Prince upon earth.
Certainly the beggars that go from door to door spin out a life in outward
appearance of sufficient misery and vexation, notwithstanding they neither hope
nor expect any other. And truly, however some few persons may seem to be in a
more prosperous condition, yet considering the uncertainty of what they
possess, and the impossibility of coutinuance without change and alteration,
they are not to be esteemed very far from them in unhappiness. For although
perchance we may look with eyes of envy upon many glorious Potentates in the
world, yet if their thoughts perhaps were truly examined, we shall find
multitudes of vexations depending upon their condition, to the destroying of
all certain content: for what Prince was there ever yet, that commanded so
entirely prosperity, that has not often been troubled with natural
infirmities, as the stone, gout, and the like; to free himself from which
pain, perhaps he would willingly have parted with much of his Dominion, if it
had been possible, to have procured such a redemption at any price. How many
people again are born blind, dumb, and deaf, with other notorious
imperfections of nature, that render them contemptible in the world, and yet
are as greedy after the appetite of living long, as those which enjoy most
felicity; which shows, that it is not the real fruition of any earthly
delight, that gives us occasion to value our being here, but merely a
senseless stupidity of flesh and blood, that makes us covet we know not what,
without the souls consideration. Withal, if we but look at the chances,
accidents, and misfortunes of many glorious Monarchs, we shall have cause
little enough to depend upon the certain happiness of any condition
whatsoever. As for example, the Emperor Morisius, being in possession of as
much prosperity as could be devised, of a sudden in his greatest Majesty was
surprised, by the conspiracy of a base and barbarous fellow of his Army, and
presently brought bound before his insulting prefence, where on his knees he
was constrained to behold the cruel slaughter of his dear wife and all his
young children one after another, until at last himself made up the doleful
Catastrophy, as a period to his affliction and misery, whilst his worst enemy
in the interim was proclaimed before his eyes. Again Bagazat King of the Turks
that brought three hundred thousand soldiers into the field against Tamberlin,
was that very day taken prisoner with all his glory, and presently shut up in
an Iron-cage, to be made a spectacle of wonder and contempt to all the world,
where not long after he ended his days violently by his own hands. We may also
in this place remember, the sudden misfortunes of the late Queen of Scots,
that was a young brave and beautiful Princess married to the King of France,
yet notwithstanding, within a few years returning into Scotland, to take
possession of her native Kingdom, she was brought to such confusion, by the
treason of her own natural subjects, that Flying into England for assistance
against their rebellions, she was betrayed and cast into prison, where she
remained until she lost her head upon a Scaffold, in the view of all the
people, without having so much as one sword drawn in her revenge, though she
was allied to most of all the powerful Princes of Christendom.

If we look also at the glories of Herod the great, who seemed fortunate and
prosperous beyond measure in this world, yet we find his life so mixed with
such intolerable crosses and vexations, that he was not only induced to the
slaugher of his most beloved wife and natural children, to maintain his Crown
in safety against his suspicions, but toward his last end was in that fearful
manner tormented with pain and grief, that one time in a certain desperate
humor calling for a knife to pair an apple, he would have killed himself, if
he had not been suddenly prevented, by some of his friends and servants. We
read also of a Duke of Vrben, who was esteemed by all that knew him a Paragon
of nature, for his excellent abilities of mind, and composure of body, and run
on a long space with a most fortunate success in all his actions, both in war
and peace; yet almost in an instant no man knew how, he was so exceedingly cast
down with diseases and infirmities, that he became a subject of pity and
compassion, not being able to stir one foot, but as he was carried from place
to place in a Chair, but for a more ancient and authentical testimony of the
uncertainty of worldly honors and happiness, we may cast our eyes upon the
fate of wicked Haman in the holy Scripture, who notwithstanding he had the
absolute command of a hundred and twenty Provinces, was so tormented in his
thoughts, because a poor Jew would not adore him, that he not only procured
thereby his own shameful death upon a pair of Gallows, but also was an eye or
an ear witness of his childrens slaughter, though himself was forced to worship
in person, that very man whom he most hated and despised.

Last of all, I will mention Charles our late King, who for some years appeared
to be the envy of Europe, not only for his prosperous glory, and happiness,
but in regard also of the numerousnesse of his private family, yet the wheel of
fortune suddenly turning upon him, he was, as I may say, in an instant thrown
from his Throne, separated from his wife, deprived of his children (being the
chief comforts of humanity) and forced to undergo a long, tedious, and harsh
imprisonment, until in the end he lost his life like his Grandmother, before
his own Palace gate, as a greater testimony of the ignominy that was intended
his person and dignity. Which in my opinion, are testimonies with many others,
sufficient to show the little certainty of all temporary felicities; however,
for the most part we are preposterously carried away beyond wisdom, and with
too violent passion, to sacrifice for this brittle possession, not only all
our hopes of eternal happiness, but even as it were desperately, as I said
before, induced to run into those black and terrible flames of fire, that can
never be quenched. Which truly is a stupidity (if rightly considered) of so
transcendent a nature, that nothing but the infinite malice and subtility of
the devil is able to create in peoples desires and understandings. But however
these considerations might persuade man, to some kind of diligent care of
virtue, for his benefit and preservation, yet I find a certain insensibility
ingraffed by these times in many persons imaginations, though in outward moral
conversation, they seem to be competently honest, that they have so laid asleep
their Faith and confidence concerning God Almighty, that they cannot be
confirmed in his goodness, mercy, and justice, so far as to expect with any
manner of patience the end and success of things, for no other reason then
because they see oftentimes many Athiestical people, to prosper a long season
in all worldly honors and glory; whilst of the contrary, those that are
religious and good, undergo nothing but afflictions and miseries, apprehending
as if Gods indignation were against his professed servants in all the course of
their lives: but though to this Argument, I might make a convincing Reply both
from Scripture and other unanswerable reasons grounded upon true piety, by
which principles, all our actions and thoughts should be governed, yet for that
I intend a greater brevity to rectify in some sort such persons beliefs and
settle their judgments; I shall only relate a short story (as I conceive)
something to the purpose, but whether true or figurative makes no matter, since
the application is very proper to show, that Almighty Gods ways and
determinations are not to be understood by us upon all occasions; only I must
aver by this example, it is our duties to observe his Injunctions,
notwithstanding all humane obstacles; in every thing leaving the issue to his
inscrutable decrees, which for the most part, however will be accompanied with
his mercies, if we have humility and patience enough to attend upon his
pleasure that must be performed do what we can.

A most full, though figurative story to show that God Almighties ways and
inscrutable decrees are not to be comprehended by humane fancies.
IT was as we may probably imagine, in the primitive times, that a religious
person living in the Desert, being something unsatisfied concerning the ways
and the judgments of Almighty God, as I said before, in this world, seeing
many wicked men prosper in their affairs, with a certain kind of smiling
felicity, whilst other people of a virtuous life and conformity in their
manners, underwent nothing but crosses (for the most part) in all their actions
and designs, desired in his prayers by reason of these considerations to be
made more particularly acquainted with the mysteries of Heaven concerning these
things that trouble his thoughts. Wherefore, upon a day being at his devotions,
it was revealed unto him, that however he seemed too presumptuous in thus
tempting God, and not resting satisfied with prosecuting the duty of his own
condition, with less curiosity, yet his request notwithstanding was heard and
he should be shortly fully cleared in his doubt, commanding him in the interim
to be patient in his expectation, resting as I may say, in some sort satisfied
with this Revelation and injunction. After some few weeks he became saluted of
a sudden by a beautiful young man, to his no small amazement, who told him he
was come as a divine Messenger to inform his knowledge, and instruct his
belief, wherefore bid him without delay to prepare himself for a journey, that
he was to make in his company and under his conduct; the sequel of which as he
said would fully content his expectation. The aged Father without either any
manner of resistance or much more circumstance, then only taking a staff in
his hand the better to support his weak steps, followed him out of his Cell;
and in this posture they prosecuted a journey, that continued them traveling
the whole day, till at last the shutting in of the evening bringing them into a
small Village, they were entertained in a house for their nights repose, where
they found both kind and competent entertainment, which convenience gave them
satisfaction, until the early Sun the next morning warned them to provide for a
new voyage; so taking leave of the Master of this habitation, they went out of
doors; However, in the interim the young man took up a silver Goblet and put
it up in his Satchel, to the wonder of the old Hermit, since it appeared to him
to be a strange example of justice and gratitude. But nevertheless, for that
he had resigned his will to his conductors discretion, he took no notice
outwardly of the seeming theft. And in this manner again prosecuted their
course for the length of another Summers day. But the night at last as the
former approaching, and they seeming both weary of their tedious march, they
entered into another lodging, wherein their treatment appeared far different in
every respect from their past entertainment, not only in that they wanted the
like accommodation, but were also reviled with harsh and barbarous language, to
their no small vexation and discontent; and yet the young man at his departure
with many kind words bestowed upon the owner of the house the silver Goblet,
that before he had taken from the other party; which probably did not a little
increase the admiration of his aged companion, though he was resolved not to
question any of his proceedings, until a further issue might be had of the
business. And so proceeded on both to a new journey and more experiments,
however these deportments, as I said before, seemed strange examples of justice
and goodness for edification. Which contemplations gave entertainment and
employment to the old man's thoughts, until they found that another retirement
was necessary both for their bodies and minds; and to this purpose entering
into a fair Town, they were soon met by a most courteous Gentleman in the
streets, who perceiving them to be religious persons told them, no place but
his own house should give them reception and welcome, and to this purpose,
accompanied by many of his servants (for he was a person of great quality) he
conducted them to his Palace, where they found such welcome and reception, as
might have befitted Princes of extraordinary dignity and extraction, which
continued them with wonderful satisfaction till the next morning, that their
occasions called them again, to the perfecting of other adventures; wherefore
taking their leaves with many thanks and a great deal of humility, the Nobleman
seemed to commit them to Gods protection and their own intentions, however when
he was parted from them, they continuing still in the Hall, pretending some
other necessary accommodation belonging to their own private affairs, the young
man of a sudden perceiving a child lying in the Cradle asleep, who was the
only son and heir of that noble family, presently stepped to the infant, and
violently strangled him with his hands, and winking upon his fellow traveller
as a testimony of desired silence, he secretly stole out of the house. Which
cruelty raised such storms and fears in the old man's bosom, that he appeared
half distracted with the seeming wickedness of the fact. But though he was
transported with an amazed grief, yet he followed his bloody conductor,
something doubtful of those Revelations he had received from Heaven;
nevertheless, upon better recollection, he resolved neither to question his
guide nor fly from his protection, for that his faith proved stronger then his
passions. Which once again put them into their usual posture of travail, until
going over a narrow Bridge and meeting another passenger in the way, with a
kind of rude and harsh encounter the young man that went a little before,
instead of giving the traveller friendly and courteous passage, tumbled him
into the water, who after some fruitless striving with the waves, at last in
their sight yielded up his life as a testimony of the worst oppression, whereat
the young man only laughed heartily, as if he had beheld some object of
pleasure, when as he had performed an act of most barbarous cruelty, and thus
carelessly went on still his journey to the almost confounding of the old man's
thoughts, notwithstanding his former resolutions. But long they had not
journied in this manner, before they met another person violently prosecuting
his voyage, who desired them for the love of God to direct him toward the
readiest and nearest way to the next Town, for that, as he said, most of all
his worldly fortunes consisted in his safe and speedy arrival before night,
siince the Sun now seemed almost set; yet the young man according to the
appearing effects of his wonted charity, instead of fullfilling the poor man's
pitiful request, directed him a clean contrary way to that he desired, by
which means he was probably endangered never to come to the place he so
earnestly coveted; at which ill-natured falsehood the old father another time
cast up his amazed eyes to Heaven, though without reproof or contradiction, and
followed still his leader, which ere long brought them to another Inn for
their nights repose, though entering the house, they could scarce find out any
lodging at all, by reason the rooms were taken up and filled by multitudes of
debauched rude and barbarous thieves, nevertheless the young man was so far
from having any more care of the aged father, rather seeming weary of his
longer conversation, that he presently addressed himself unto them, and at last
struck into a most intimate acquaintance with those robbers and murderers,
where he continued roaring and drinking all night without intermission or
having, as I said before, the least seeming care of his welfare and
consolation, whilst he poor man was forced to continue in the Chimney-corner,
only comforted with a few Prayers of his own, which earnestly he offered unto
God Almighty to appease his wrath, hearing such blasphemies uttered against his
holy name. However these exercises endured until the next days light summoned
them to a new journey; as also invited, or rather provoked the villainous
thieves, each to seek out some corner or other whereby to take their necessary
rest, although the night before they had all determined to quit the habitation,
for fear of some sudden surprise by the Officers of the Country, in regard of
many wicked robberies they had lately committed, with other murders. And thus
again the old man and his companion fell anew to their travels, having quitted
that hellish habitation, which lasted until they arrived at the walls of a
great and mighty City; where they found, to their amazement, one Devil asleep
at the gate, which proved an object of consideration to the eyes of the old
man, who rather expected a multitude, if any at all, to guard the passage and
entrance of such a proud Town, that seemed to ring with nothing but noise and
confusion the practices being only intolerable luxury. But passing further,
leaving the Devil at his rest, with an intention to find out some convenient
lodging for their repose; at last they came to a most poor and needy
Monastary, where notwithstanding entering, although they could perceive nothing
there professed, but Fasting, Prayers, Mortifications, and the like; yet they
found in every corner multitudes of devils, all extreme wakefull and vigilant,
insomuch as Lucifer seemed there to keep his chief and royal Court, as if
not to be delighted with any other habitation; which truly did again
exceedingly amaze the consideration of the old Hermit beyond belief and
imagination, by reason the sight appeared so wonderfully to outgoe his
expectation.

But however with these extravagant and distracted thoughts, the aged father
was conducted to his Cell, there to be necessarily reposed until the next day,
since his body seemed in a manner to be tired out with his hard and tedious
journey, and his mind no what less wearied by the strange visions he had
beheld in his travail; which may be conceived, gave him not that rest that was
accustomed to refresh his Spirits in the wilderness, being free from such
diversity of imaginations. However after a very little sleep, waking very early
in the morning, he was suddenly saluted by the young man, that had been his
companion with this unexpected language, when his thoughts were preparing for a
new journey: You must know, said he, I am an Angel sent by Almighty God, not
only to show you these mysteries that passed in our travels, but according to
your desires and supplications, to let you see more plainly his divine ways
and inscrutable judgments, sometimes happening against all appearance of humane
sense and reason, though always tending to good and profitable purposes, if
man's unhappy condition could make use of the benefit; which often times he does
not do by reason of the corruption of his depraved nature, and the want of
that competent grace his diligence and religious industry should have purchased
at Gods hands for his advantage. To which effect therefore be advertised, that
this figurative story is thus meant for your better confirmation: The first man
at whose house we happened to lodge, that gave us seeming kind entertainment with
all humanity (from whose possession however I took a Silver Goblet at our
departure) only signifies men competently good in this world; upon whose
condition notwithstanding God Almighty is pleased to lay earthly affliction, by
may considerable losses, whereby the better to retain their actions and
desires in a moderate temper: And therefore not seldom bestows their goods
upon people less deserving, which is plainly demonstrated by the other rough
and harsh personage, unto whom I gave the Goblet, though he could no way claim
any just or deserved right thereunto; it being all the benefit such shall
receive either in this world or the next, by reason of the small portion of
grace their covetous and ill-natured actions have purchased at Gods hands;
notwithstanding they may not be esteemed the wickedst sort of men. Next
concerning the Nobleman, who appeared to our apprehension both rich, religious,
and courteous; by him may be figured those persons, who join devotion with the
glory of this life, without any intention in their minds either to offend God,
or prejudice their neighbors; however lest they may be too much transported by
degrees, with any overviolent desires and objects of this world, as children,
honor, or the like, God Almighty is pleased oftentimes to take away the
occasion, by depriving them of something they most esteem, which is signified
by my private destroying the life of that good man's only son and heir, in
regard he seemed to have placed too much passionate appetite in the
contemplation of his earthly succession; which considerations oftentimes
distracted his thoughts, from the necessary cogitatious belonging to his
salvation. Again, the Traveller we met upon the narrow bridge, that I seemed so
uncharitably and inhumanly to overthrow was at that time going to perform a
wicked action, that would indubitably have cast away his soul, unless it had
been prevented in the interim by his sudden death: wherefore the intention
being foreseen by the providence and mercy of God, I was by his goodness
commanded to that office and execution. And for the other party that so
passionately begged our direction in his journey, I was constrained to turn
him out of his right way, to avoid his falling upon many bloody thieves that
would not only have robbed him of his money, but also have taken away his
life; which only that happy diversion changed into prevention and safety. And
now concerning the mystery of those blasphemous Bandits we met in our last
Inn, in whose company I appeared to take so much complacency and delight, I
did that only to retain their persons the longer in that place (who else
would have quickly departed) as foreseeing the next morning they should be
apprehended by Officers of justice, which else they would avoid, and so
consequently followed their deserved and condign punishment, not only in
recompense of their many heinous wickednesses, but for the more entire
preservation of the honest Country people, that would have suffered by their
escape infinite damage, and many injuries, in regard of their violence and
oppression. But now last of all, to come to the explanation of this great,
riotous and vicious City, confused with noise, and replenished with
extraordinary glory and splendor, at whose gate we found only one Devil
asleep, though the manners and comportment of the inhabitants seemed to be
governed by the directions and instigations of millions of infernal spirits.
You must know that however their multitudes of wickednesses may pretend to all
Hellish conversation, yet Lucifer finding there is so little need of diligence,
to corrupt their conversations, already sufficiently depraved to his purpose,
being drowned also in security, imployeth his chief care and industry for the
perverting of this poor Monastery, which he very well knows is employed night
and day in nothing but Prayers, Fastings, and other extraordinary
mortifications; wherefore, and by reason of which, it continually wars
against the power and deceit of his infernal Kingdom; so that necessarily it
behooveth him to that purpose, to employ all the instruments and subjects he
can possibly to undermine the thoughts and actions of these godly and painful
people, being the only cause that so many Devils in every corner are to be
found in this simple habitation to your wonder and admiration.

And thus according to my duty, since I am commanded thereunto by the will of
Almighty God, have I not only showed you these mysteries in our journey, but
thereby explained and proposed to your condition, henceforth to rest absolutely
satisfied with the Decrees of Heaven concerning his proceedings in humane
affairs, notwithstanding how contrary soever they may appear to your appetite
or conception; for having sufficiently revealed principles of religion, whereon
to ground your faith, and to direct your actions, you need no more for your
salvation and moral conversation. To which purpose I must again tell you, and
conclude with this saying, that as the intention of Almighty God is one thing,
and the ways of man oftentimes another; so are you obliged to leave off your
curiosities in that behalf; and with these words presently vanished from his
sight.

As I suppose this relation well considered may be of sufficient force to
persuade any persons reason, to the conformity with Gods will in all things,
without examining the mysteries of his secret judgments; so of the other side,
however sometimes they appear strange to our apprehensions, yet is he always
merciful and just in the execution of his intentions; which for the most part
are very good and profitable for our condition, if we have grace and confidence
enough to make use of the benefits of such determinations; since he is
accustomed to turn those things that seem most against our desires and
natural appetites, into the greatest blessings that can possibly be imagined.
As of the contrary, the very delights that most please our fancies in this
frail life, though they may seem lawful of themselves if they were not
prevented, not seldom become obstacles to our greatest felicity, or
entertained by overmuch passion prove destructive to our humane and eternal
affairs. But for the better confirmation of these points of duty, and because
examples are the best inducements to instruct any man's belief, and so by
consequence to invite his actions and endeavors, I shall in this place make a
relation of a short story, which however it it may be thought but plain and
simple, yet in my opinion is extremely convincing to our purpose, which I have
read to be after this manner.

There was a principal and wealthy Citizen, having but one son in the world,
Another story much to the same purpose.
had occasion to send him with his only brother by sea, into a far Country,
to make good some necessary traffic. But this Gentleman in the interim
apprehended, as he had good cause, the danger and hazard of the journey,
wherefore presently after his sons departure, he went to the Bishop of the
Town (being a very holy man) and earnestly desired him he would be pleased in
his daily devotions to remember his friends voyage and prosperity; and to this
effect, to render his wishes more pleasing to God, bestowed upon the reverend
father, a very vast sum of Gold, to be employed to what uses he would think
fit concerning charitable deeds, toward the obtaining of his request. The good
Bishop interpreting his inward intentions by his outward bounty, not believing
such a liberality could proceed but from a religious confidence in God
Almighty, not only promised him his best assistance, in his holy exercises, as
he should have occasion continually to perform them, but at that very instant
fell down upon his knees, and earnestly besought God to favor the Gentleman's
request; after which he dismissed him full of assurance and joy. However this
encounter being past, it was not long before the pious Citizen, not only heard
news of his sons death, but also of casting away of the ship, wherein was
contained in a manner all his wealth and subsistence. When these unfortunate
tidings came to the sorrowful ears of the religious Patriarch, who had
received the Gentleman's money, he knew not which way to turn himself both for
shame and grief: Nevertheless putting his chief trust in God Almighty, after
he had continued a long time at his prayers, he resolved again to visit his
benefactor, to try what consolation it was possible for his presence and
persuasions to afford him after so great a loss, which had probably brought
upon his present condition a most wonderful affliction, but notwithstanding he
used what admonitions and other pious instructions were necessary for the
season, yet were they all too little seemingly to ease a heart so much
overwhelmed with despair and sadness, insomuch as the Bishop was forced to
return without that wished satisfaction he desired, being also in a manner
confounded in his own thoughts, considering the unfortunate success of his
endeavors, so little answering the others intentions of piety and goodness.
However he never left soliciting God Almighty daily, according to his custom,
in his behalf; until it fortuned one night, after the distressed Gentleman
had wrought himself into some slumber by the tossing over of many troublesome
and vexatious thoughts in his unquiet bosom, he imagined to see the holy
Bishop to stand before him, uttering these words in distinct terms: Know, said
he, that thy charity and afflictions have not been forgotten in the sight of
God, whose property is always one way or other to look upon his servants in
grief and anguish of mind; to which purpose I am to tell thee, that although
thy son be really dead, yet his miscarriage proved so happy to his condition,
that if he had again returned safe into thy protection, he had been certainly
and eternally damned, whereas now he is placed in heaven amongst the blessed
with all joy and security. But for thy ship, with thy brother, plentifully
laden with abundance of rich commodities, they are so far from being cast
away, that thou shall shortly receive them into thy wished possession, without
any manner of loss or detriment. Whereupon Phelochristus (for so was he
called) waking out of his sleep, found himself not only exceedingly
comforted, but almost cleared of all his grief, and with these thoughts and
cogitations went instantly to the holy Patriarch, and there throwing himself
at his feet, declared his vision in every particular; as also gave infinite
thanks, that God Almighty, who (as he said) had more showed his mercy in his
chastizement and punishment by this very accident, then formerly he had done in
bestowing upon him so many worldly blessings and prosperities, and from that
time forward remained most contentedly satisfied. By which discourse may be
gathered, not only the determination and purposes of Almighty God, though
often kept from our knowledge in a hidden and mysterious way, but shows in
like manner to a confident soul, that it is still in his power when he
pleases to give our hearts content after never so many desperate crosses and
afflictions; for however he does not always grant our desires, since they may
not be convenient oftentimes either for our present or future condition; yet
most commonly if we have sufficient belief and assurance in his goodness, he
does use to change even the nature of our appetites themselves, making that
appear delightful to our apprehensions, that before was terrible and
distasteful: And so by a contrary consequence, in easing the mind he diverteth
the grief, never laying upon our frail natures a greater burden then we are
able to bear, unless we destroy our own strength by over much impatiency, and
respecting against his will and commandments, too violently worldly things,
which in truth is only the occasion of all our misery and inward vexation:
Since it is not the accidents themselves that procure the smart, but only the
want of bearing them rightly, which certainly cannot be well effected but by an
absolute resignation of our wills in every thing, into the hands of Almighty
God, who can and will dispose of our persons and actions to the greatest
advantage for our own good, if we resolve to comply in this manner with his
pleasure, as it fared with holy Tobias, after the end of all his crosses and
miseries; to which purpose we shall make in this place as a most excellent
pattern and example, some relation of his life, sufferings, and patience,
accompanied by his extraordinary confidence in Gods mercies and protection.

The wonderful confidence of old Tobias in the mercies of Almighty God.
AS it is recorded in Scripture, that from his very childhood he served God
with all his heart, not only when he was in freedom and prosperity, but also
when he suffered poverty and oppression, so is it in like manner mentioned,
that he was so far from contaminating himself, when others worshipped Idols,
that in the interim he went to Jerusalem to adore in the Temple; besides in his
captivity he always relieved the necessity of his brethren, and
notwithstanding the fury and violence of the persecution under the King of
Assyria, he could not be induced by any threats, to abstain from burying those
slaughtered persons that lay dead in the streets; in so much as one day being
ready to sit down at a Feast with other company, of a sudden understanding
there was yet one Jew that wanted a Sepulcher, he presently flew from his
dinner with extraordinary zeal, and performed that charitable office, not
only to the wonder of all those that were with him, but even being reproved by
his nearest friends, who apprehended exceedingly the danger of the action, in
regard it was so strictly forbidden by the Kings special command. Though these
testimonies were exemplar, yet afterward when this good man fell into his
excessive poverty, then did his admirable virtue more clearly appear; for not
having wherewithal to relieve his necessity otherwise then by the labor of
his wives hands, and his own industry, becoming also by a most lamentable
accident deprived of his sight. Nevertheless one day when his wife brought him
home a young Kid, which she had procured by that only means for their
provision and sustenance; he hearing it bleate, desired her that if it belonged
to any other, she would again restore it, lest it might bring a curse upon
their poor family, wishing and resolving rather they might put their trust in
God Almighty, concerning their necessities, then any way seek to be relieved
by fraudulent and unlawful ways. Again, being upbrayded by his wife, and
other friends, for his overmuch confidence in God, as they pretended, since his
Alms and Prayers had procured him no more favor, then a world of present
miseries; He returned them only answer of rebuke for their impiety, in regard
they had not more trust and assurance in Gods power and goodness, who as he
said, ever would protect his servants. But now at last being come, as I may
say, to the insupportable period of his crosses and afflictions; and as it were
tired by the upbraidings of his own friends, he made his humble supplications
to heaven to be taken out of this life; whereupon after he had ended his
prayers, imagining his suit was granted, he called unto him his young son,
unto whom he had not only given most pious instructions, wherein he wished him
above all things, and in every difficulty to serve God with his whole heart,
putting his only confidence in his divine mercies, but sent him into a far
Country to seek his fortune, delivering him at the same time a bill in
writing, whereby to require a certain sum of money that had been a long time
owing him by a friend for his better support and subsistence, not being well
able to maintain him at home. And notwithstanding his wife seemed desperately
afflicted at this unexpected resolution and sudden departure of their only
child, he still wished her to put her confidence in heaven, not only for the
assurance of his journey and return, but also for his future prosperity;
wherein may be noted, his faith and suppression of his own passions: for as
indubitably he more trusted in Gods assistance, then in any other probability
whatsoever, so was he willing of the other side, to lay aside his present
comforts for the succeeding good of his child, which was not as he thought to
be obtained, if he had kept him at home, wherein he should have more pleased
his own humane nature, then any way have provided for his sons welfare.
Having declared thus much concerning this holy man, it is now full time to come
to his reward according to his merit, which no doubt was resolved on by a
hidden and an inserutable decree. For God Almighty was so well satisfied with
this good persons actions and intentions, that instantly he designed an Angel
to accompany his son, who not only conducted him safely in his journey, but
at last brought him where was concluded a most happy marriage between him and
his own kinswoman after they had both conquered the devil by their prayers and
other virtues: which being finished, they repaired with much joy and gladness
to the house of old Tobias, where they were received with such expressions of
gladness, as became the nature of so great a happiness. Neither was this all
their felicity, for presently the father by miracle obtained his long lost
sight, in the presence of his family and friends; and after the end of forty
years continued prosperity, the old father having seen a numerous posterity,
between his son and daughter in law, he finished his happy days in the
spirit of Prophecy and virtue, leaving behind him young Tobias to perform his
funeral.

These relations certainly, may give a taste to every good Christian, of God
Almighties mercies intended in one manner or other to those that have a
sufficient trust in his goodness and power. But however, as I say, all our
happiness consists in this absolute resignation of our will, in regard it does
not only assure us of a future benefit, but promises a present content by
quieting our thoughts and passions; though it is unpossible to procure this
necessary confidence, without a lively and entire faith, which is a kind of an
invisible seeing of God, and in some sort knowing his divine goodness in a
particular manner through the dark clouds of our humane nature, that for the
most part whilst we live upon earth, hinders the clear appearance of his
Divinity from the eyes of our soul; however when our bodies are once
glorified, such obstacles shall vanish and disperse, without difficulty by
reason of our happy condition. Our blessed Savior himself has declared, that
if we had but faith as a grain of a mustard seed, we might be able even to
remove mountains; By which figure may be conceived, the excellent nature and
property of an entire belief, toward all joy and happiness; which
nevertheless is more or less purchased, according to that proportion and
measure of grace, we have obtained by our devotions, and practice of virtuous
actions, most apparently demonstrative in the sayings of that glorious King
Lewis of France, who professed he would not go out of his doors, to be a
really eyewitness of any miracle whatsoever; his faith having so absolutely
confirmed him in all principles of religion, and the believing entirely every
thing belonging to Gods omnipotency and goodness, that he had no need of such
motives and inducements to strengthen his faith, or render it more certain and
efficacious. However we may boldly affirm, that this want in the general, is
the main occasion of all men's disorders and excesses in this world. For if
people did sufficiently enough (without any wavering apprehension) rest upon
Gods revealed will and pleasure, and by that means could absolutely apprehend
his promised mercies and judgments, it were unpossible to be so much
transported with the vanities of this life.

As for example, how could it be imagined, that men would be so extremely
senseless, as for the only enjoying and delight of a little meat and drink,
with other sensualities of this world, for a very few years should violently
cast away those eternal and abundantly satisfactory happinesses of Heaven,
unless there were some stupid defect in their belief, concerning either the
certainty of their being, or in the ways and means whereby they were to be
compassed. In like manner, what person would be so sottish in his resolution,
as not rather to undergo all the austerities could be undergone during this
life, then hazard the danger of those terrible torments so often mentioned, as
I must say, to be endured to all eternity, if he were absolutely convinced in
his thoughts and apprehension, that they particularly belonged to his condition
in each circumstance; since it is more then evident, that we forbear no
pains, or scarce omit any care in this world, either to obtain humane
honors, or prevent eminent (though earthly) inconveniences, though we know
they are but to endure for a moment in comparison of eternity; when as perhaps
a far less industry and travel would assure us in the other condition of a
perpetual happiness; and yet we see it so supinely neglected by most, as if
it were not at all worth any manner of consideration. Wherefore I must
conclude, that man's miseries and insensibilitie for the most part proceed from
this defect in this only particular, for that he has not purchased a
competency of grace sufficient to enlighten his understanding, whereby he
becomes overwhelmed, as it were, with nothing but gross sensualities and
tickling imaginations that make him wholly incapable to converse in a higher
Region, which by consequence renders him altogether unwilling to resign
himself entirely into the hands of Almighty God, as blessed Tobias did in all
his actions and adversities. For that holy man's steadfast and undoubted belief
of all the principles of Religion, made him most confident of the promises
thereupon depending, which is unpossible to be effectually compassed or put in
execution but by the same means he used, in the whole course of his life;
whereby, as I say, he obtained such a proportion of supernatural grace, as not
only comforted him in all his extraordinary difficulties, but infused so much
love into his happy soul, as he was able to contend against every temptation
of the Devil, the world, and the flesh, and by that means got such a victory
over all his passions, that he only delighted in every thing that was Gods
will; and of the contrary never seemed distasted with any cross that was sent
him. As for example, it may be supposed when he at any time found an
inclination in his frail nature to rebel against this determination, he used
the power of Prayers, Fasting, and Almesdeeds, to beat down and conquer all his
humane appetites, in so much as God Almighty not only gave him assurance of a
heavenly reward, but crowned his latter days with all the prosperity could be
imagined of earthly happiness, as appeared by the sequel of the story, though
(as it may be conceived) not more for the acts of mercy, which he had used upon
all occasions to his distressed brethren, then for the absolute resignation of
his own will to Gods only pleasure and direction; in which he enjoyed no doubt
a wonderful felicity in his thoughts, notwithstanding his desperate
afflictions: Which agrees very well with the sayings of divine Thomas a Kempis,
who affirms in his book of the imitation of Christ, that it is unpossible to
purchase any manner of real freedom, either humane or spiritual, without an
absolute negation of a man's own self. So that, when a body has brought his
resolutions into this quiet state and condition, he may truly be said to be
happy, and never before; being thereby freed from all occasions of temptation,
that use to swell men's minds into a thousand storms and perplexities; like as
streams that go along with the wind, pass smoothly without any perturbation:
so of the contrary, others that strive by a natural current, with those blasts
have much difficulty to keep their course, being always tossed, thwarted, and
interrupted in their passage. Besides, we see the greatest Monarchs of the
world are oftentimes so wearied with their own wills and command, that
notwithstanding they seem exceedingly to affect glory and ambition, are
persuaded in the interim not only to put the whole government of their
Dominions sometimes into the hands and power of their favorites and Subjects;
but also not seldom will contradict their own very wills, to give their
entrusted Officers more absolute jurisdiction, as conceiving therein a
satisfactory content to themselves, being thereby freed, as they suppose, of
many contentions and troublesome thoughts, that else would happen to their more
disquiet. Wherefore, I say, it may be esteemed a most preposterous
inconsideration in us, not to be willing to abandon our own wills to him, that
we are most certain shall always be not only constant and true to us in all
our affairs, but at last can and will infinitely reward us for that voluntary
resignation. And this no doubt will be the easier effected, if we seriously
add this apprehension to our judgments: That let us do what we can, and
possess what we may, either in ambition of sensuality, as we shall never be
free from contention and trouble in our minds, if not in our persons, so in the
end of necessity we must yield to death, the common plunderer of all these
things; which taking us unprovided, will force us to interchange all our past,
and so much esteemed prerogatives, into a miserable and confused damnation to
all eternity. And although it should take us a little more in order, and in
something a better posture, yet at the best our gone and ended delights, which
we enjoyed according to our opinions with so much felicity, will be so far
from benefitting our present condition, that the very remembrance of those
enticements shall render us more sorrowful and unwilling to quit the world,
however there be an absolute necessity of this separation; and at the worst
they leave us burdened, and almost distracted with many terrible fears, what
account may be required of us toward a full satisfaction, in regard of the
severe justice of Almighty God, who placed us not here to have the fruition of
so many pleasures we once enjoyed above other men, notwithstanding all the
delight and benefit will appear then vanished into smoke and air. Insomuch as
we may say, what has it availed us, to have possessed the whole world, and
foolishly to have neglected the saving of our own souls, when we had the means
and opportunity to have effected it? Wherefore to sum up this discourse in a
word: That man that will be wise, must first purpose well, then prosecute his
resolution with constancy and diligence, which without doubt will procure him
grace, and that grace shall enlighten and strengthen his faith, until in the
end he come to such a perfection of love, that may make him (with an assured
confidence) rely entirely upon God Almighties goodness, by which means he may
never be distasted to make a resignation of himself and actions into his
hands, according to the example of holy Tobias, and other religious persons; in
which determination, I say, and no other, does consist not only all future
happiness, but every present content in the world. But perhaps it may be here
said, that the cause of most men's insensibility does not proceed so much from
any deficiency of faith, as from a certain natural inclination, to covet and
desire present possession of less happiness, rather then future expectations
of far greater consequence. Unto which I answer, that however in part I am of
the same opinion, since this stupidity is incident to humane frailty, having
not obtained a sufficient portion of grace; yet again when I consider how much
affliction people would, and do undergo for many years together, only to
purchase the reversion of some earthly Kingdoms and honors in the world, I
cannot but return to my old belief. As for example, put case a man were
promised after seven years extreme labor, the possession of some great
Country, with other delights that might content his appetites; I make no
question at all, but that he would most readily embrace the offer, and conceive
he had gained exceedingly by his bargain. Though yet we see for the fruition of
Heaven to all eternity, we are hardly drawn by any persuasions whatsoever
either moral or divine, to spend many hours in true consideration of that
unconceivable joy and happiness promised, with so much assurance by God
Almighty himself. And therefore certainly it can be nothing but a mere want
of necessary faith, that renders people so careless of their salvation.

But to conclude this part of my discourse, however we ought not, (as has been
alleged) to be directed concerning our duties in God Almighties service, by
worldly events, but only by those heavenly principles we have received; yet I
shall hereafter make some historical relation of many remarkable passages,
perhaps more satisfactory then may be well conceived, wherein have appeared
Gods apparent judgments in these latter times; though, as I say, they must not
be taken for general rules; notwithstanding they may serve for inducements to
move peoples apprehensions. For indubitably it is our duties without any
curiosity whatsoever, as has been already declared, to cast our selves wholly
upon the will and pleasure of Almighty God, with an entire patience in
expectation of what may happen unto us, since we have sufficient principles
given us to follow proceeding from divine authority; but because patience is
not only a heavenly duty, but a moral virtue necessary to be observed, I
shall in the next and last Chapter discourse a little of the nature and benefit
of such an excellent property appertaining to our humane condition, and then
make an end of the first part of my book.

The necessity of this noble virtue which was practiced by our Savior himself
in a most particular manner during his abode upon earth.
AS this Heroical virtue of Patience is little less necessary then faith to
perfect our condition, at least wise to be used in some convenient measure and
proportion, for that humane frailty cannot easily arrive to the highest
perfections of this nature; so is it more then evident by the sacred writings
and testimony of holy Scripture, that our Savior Jesus Christ in a most exact
way during his being in this world, did offer himself as a divine pattern for
example to instruct our endeavors concerning what we ought to do in this
particular; for when it was his blessed pleasure to join his eternal Divinity
with the mortal substance of our flesh and blood, he took upon him almost the
lowest of all conditions, as I may say, being born of no other then of a simple
Virgin, however extracted from the loins of Kings, because it was determined
that David his beloved servant should have the honor of his birth; and this
holy maid was only married to a poor Carpenter, that got his necessitous
living merely by the sweat of his own brows, though he might have chosen for
his mother the greatest Queen or Empress in the world; which certainly he did
for no other reason, but by this penurious condition to have occasion thereby
the better to exercise visibly his own designed patience for our example and
instruction. Neither did he design his miraculous birth to be in any other
place then in a base and contemptible stable, not furnished with any kind of
commodity, either for himself or company. Again, if we reflect upon his many
persecutions, both under Herod, and by his unnatural Countrymen, we shall
find that he underwent them with a most singular patience, both of mind and
body; never expressing the least passion in his words, notwithhandling all the
injuries and affronts offered unto him; or showed want of courage in enduring
what vexations or tortures soever could be inflicted upon him; insomuch as he
suffered himself to be stroke, spit upon, and used with other unparaleld
indignities, by most base and contemptible creatures; not only without any
manner of opposition, but scarce reproving them in what kind of fashion
soever, either by word or action, until being with these and the like
sufferings brought to the last period of his miseries to endure a most cruel
and ignominious death upon the Cross; he was so far from not expressing an
entire and absolute patience in his extremest agony, that instead of showing
forth any signs of passion or perturbation, he took care for his mothers
future welfare, as a moral obligation belonging to his humanity; he gave
pardon to the Thief that was crucified with him, as an essential property
appertaining to his Divinity; and last of all, as evident testimonies of his
admirable and heavenly charity, he most earnestly prayed for those barbarous
enemies that so earnestly did persecute him at that very instant, as pretending
in their behalf to his Father, they did not understand what they did
concerning his particular. Of the other side, if we cast our thoughts upon
those instructions he gave his Apostles and other followers, they were always
either to persuade humility, or command patience, which are two virtues that
cannot well be separated. As for example, he bid them, when they were
persecuted in one City, to fly to another; without contention, although they
had his heavenly Commission for their better authority. As also, in his
frequent Sermons, for their particular instructions and effectual
edifications, he commanded them as an absolute duty belonging to their
vocation, being his Disciples, to suffer those that used violence to their
persons, notwithstanding to express so much patience, that if they did take
away their cloaks from them, they should permit them to bereave them also of
their coats without resistance. In like manner he told them, that whoever
should injuriously give them a blow upon the ear, rather then return a requital
in the same nature, after the custom of the world, they must offer the other
part of their face, to be abused by their injustice. It Is true as I cannot
affirm, we are obliged to these strict and severe rules of patience in all our
actions, especially since such suffering would probably encourage Tyranny in
wicked dispositions, yet certainly these very examples are sufficient
demonstrations, of God Almighties intentions in the general, concerning this
necessary virtue, to be practiced upon all convenient occasions, in our
ordinary conversation amongst men, as well as to be put in practice in those
afflictions, which accidentally at any time shall be cast upon our condition;
and the rather for that it is evident, that the sins and disorders of the
world, for the most part, proceed from a certain intemperancy or impatiency of
nature, not sufficiently rectified by Grace or wisdom. As for the purpose;
Pride is nothing but an over swelling humor of self esteem, not governed by
Reason, or bounded by Charity; which causes such an unruly and passionate
inflammation in the soul, as we neither know rightly our own state, or
willingly would endure what we should from another. Also envy is a passionate
and malevolent spite against our neighbors prosperity; as fearing left it
might prejudice our estimation. Revenge is a bloody and impatient passion,
because our nature is not passive enough in bearing of injuries; Vainglory may
be termed a lunatic indiscretion, proceeding from too much abundancy of
self-love. Disobediency in like manner, a presumptuous Pride that allows us
not sufficient temper to be under subjection, although it be never so necessary
for our condition. Ingratitude, an unjust intemperancy that renders us
unwilling to acknowledge an others virtues, in regard we doubt too much thereby
to be disvalued our selves; or else to be put to more requitals then seems
convenient for our own interest. Ambition a mad overflowing of the mind
toward those honors, that we conceive might give us luster and esteem in the
eye of the world. Covetousness a certain raging desire without end, to be
possessors of we know not what; since we never enjoy the half of what we cover,
when best obtained. Of the other side, if we turn our consideration upon the
sensuality of the body, we shall find it generally to proceed for want of
sufficient temperance in the suffering part, as the other concerning the mind,
proceeds from the defect of not being able competently to expect the event of
things to come; for when we drown our selves in a vast sea of luxury, against
Reason, Religion, and morality, it is because the consideration of honor or
virtuous actions, carries not our thoughts and resolutions high enough to
contemn such poor and base pleasures, that neither secure our condition or
benefit our persons. As for example, what is gluttony, but an inordinate
striving by the instinct of nature, to satisfy the senses in eating and
drinking? Lust in the same kind an impatient itching after unlawful novelties,
however consisting most in opinion, for that oftentimes our deceived fancy,
makes choice of the far unworthier subject, as I have already instanced in a
part of my Book. Again, Idleness is nothing else but a certain kind of
impatiency, proceeding from a loathnesse to enter upon action and employment.
Sloth in like manner is but a heavy increase of the same humor, toward a more
earthly period, engendered by custom and continuance. Inconstancy another
palpable effect of impatiency, in regard it varies from one fancy to another,
with a restless longing to be yet satisfied in something, that the judgment
cannot reach unto for want of temperance to consider.

For however I am not of the opinion of those fantastical Philosophers, that
esteemed pain little more then imagination, yet when I consider the wonderful
strange lives of many holy people in the primitive times, I may easily be
induced to believe, that a perfect and absolute patience being procured, which
can no otherwise be obtained then by a religious morality, it will not be very
difficult to run through the rough passages of this world, in a manner in an
absolute calm and tranquillity; especially when I reflect upon the actions of
many Heathens, who only out of the spirit of vainglory, seemed in outward
view so to have conquered all their passions, that they appeared careless of
life or death, honor or riches, eating, drinking, or any other earthly
pleasure or pain whatsoever. However I will leave these reports to the
uncertainty of History, or at least wise believe they might proceed from
enchantments of pride and the devils elusions; since we know their Religion
could not procure simply such effects, not being justified either by divine
Revelation or assured principles. Wherefore, for a conclusion, I shall make
some brief mention of a few admirable people in those times, whose courages
never failed in adversity, or any vainglory laid the least hold of their
actions in suffering: To which purpose, we may begin with the consideration of
Paul the Hermit, that lived almost a hundred years without seeing or
conversing with any humane person, in an obscure Cave encompassed with Rocks
and Mountains, his employment being Prayers, his recreation Meditation, and his
practice fasting. Again, we may call to mind the wonderful and admirable
austerities of Simeon Stilitto, that lived in a small pillar of stone many
Cubits from the ground, for thirty seven years together, scarce in all that
time reposing his body, according to the custom of other people; insomuch as it
is written, that multitudes of worms, proceeding from the natural corruption
of the place, bred and engendered under his feet, for want of motion and
agitation; and yet his humility notwithstanding was so great, that when he was
commanded to descend, by the Bishop of Antioch to try his obedience, without
any manner of delay, he yielded himself ready to perform the injunction; as it
were adding the virtue of subjecting his own will to that of patience, which he
so exactly practiced. We read that Mary of Egypt, continued in the wild Deserts
of Syria for seven and twenty years, without any clothing at all, or other
sustenance, then what she could gather from the Sands and Rocks of that
extraordinary solitude, where perchance she found now and then some green herbs
for her necessary food. Last of all, if we reflect upon the horrid torments,
which Lawrence the Deacon endured under Decius the Emperor, we shall find
matter enough to contemplate with admiration, both his patience and courage;
for whilst his body in the night time, for the greater terror to his youth,
was laid upon an Iron Gridiron, over a hot and scorching fire, he cried out to
the Tyrant, being more then half dead, that now he was roasted sufficiently of
one side, he might if he pleased also turn the other to participate in like
manner of his cruelty; which words gained so absolute a victory over all his
persecutors, that the Emperor confounded both with shame and amazement,
quitted the place of his execution. All which I may boldly affirm, were no
other then wonderful effects of a constant and courageous patience. Since of
the other side, many esteemed gallant persons of this world failing in this
virtue, have disgraced their last ends by apparent dejection of their souls. As
for example, Philotus, who was famed in Alexanders Army for one of his prime
Commanders, that followed his fortune and success; yet being by accident
brought upon the torture, notwithstanding his intemperate vainglory, had made
him promise to himself, and pretend to others, that his courage maintained the
Kings greatness in most of his conquests, and victories in Asia, he was
brought to such a lowness of Spirit, by the violence of torments, that he not
only revealed his own intentions, but accused his old Father, to be released
of his punishment, for want of fortitude and patience in his sufferings;
insomuch, as Alexander himself being concealedly present at his Trial,
delivered this opinion of his carriage, that he wondered how such a man had so
much boldness to attempt his life, that had not a heart great enough to
express more courage at his own death. Nero, however he had a nature inflamed
with impatiency, pride and vainglory; joined also with the condition of an
Emperor, that probably, should have raised his soul to an eminency of courage
and magnanimity, yet when the Senate of Rome by reason of his own wickedness,
and his enemies prevailing power, had designed him a most shameful and
ignominious execution, could not by any persuasion be brought to kill himself
to avoid that disgraceful fare, until one of his followers and intimate
friends, showed him the way by acting the like upon his own person before his
face; which shows that intemperate prosperity is rather an impediment to same
and reputation, then a mild and quiet patience; that for the most part enableth
people to suffer any thing can well be inflicted upon their condition, when
either their Religion or honor calls them to such a combat. Also Marshal
Byron of France, being not only one of the great favorites to Harry the
fourth, by reason of his supposed courage, but esteemed of an extraordinary
passionate valor in the wars; yet after his accusation, when he was brought
upon the Scaffold to die by the hands of the common Executioner, he expressed so
much unwillingnesse to leave his life, by a wild and preposterous rage, that
the Hangman was constrained to perform his office when he least thought of the
business, only to avoid a greater indignity to be done to his person in the
last end; whereas if he had put on a mild temperance in his suffering, he would
not only probably have better secured his future condition, but in a far
higher nature have preserved his honor and reputation. Last of all, we have an
example of this kind, in the death and suffering of a noble man of our
Country, who in his life was passionately vainglorious and active beyond
measure, yet at his execution he appeared so passively fearful, that he seemed
more then half dead, before the executioners stroke arrived at his neck. All
which I say, may be brought for testimonies, against those dispositions that
neither resolve or practice patience, seeing that noble property for the most
part renders men absolutely victorious in most things of this world; for who
can style themselves Masters in this beneficial and heavenly virtue, shall
smile at Tyranny, overcome cruelty, suppress passions, contemn accidents,
purchase friends, persuade enemies, live contentedly, and die happily; And in
truth may be said to have made a wise and generous preparation, against all
disasters whatsoever, which either the devil or the world can raise against our
humane condition; for however it be true, that the sensualities of nature
cannot easily be overcome, but by the dominion of Grace, yet since the very
heathens, merely by the instinct and provation of honor, have in many
conflicts obtained wonderful victories by their constant and patient
resolutions, it cannot be but a shame and ignominy to us Christians, not to be
able by the addition of heavenly Grace (which certainly we may compass by our
religious endeavors if we will) to beat down, and suppress both in our
thoughts and actions, those violent passions that deprive us of all reputation
and goodness. Since in doing the contrary, we do participate of the nature of
those unreasonable creatures, that have no other rule for their subsistence but
merely sense, which without doubt, being in us cherished extraordinarily,
totally destroys the nobility of the soul, that ought only, or at leastwise
chiefly to contemplate and be in love with supernatural and divine things, and
by consequence to leave dull cogitations and gross actions, for supplements of
necessity or convenience; which being considered and put in practice, with a
constant and noble resolution, we shall find such a beneficial patience daily
to increase in our natures and dispositions, that will easily gain a signal
victory over all obstacles and difficulties, and render us not only temperate
in expectation, but invincible in suffering. In fine, I am of opinion, that as
want of patience is a deficiency of courage, so was there never yet an
excellent Saint lived in the world, but that he was endued with a great Spirit
by nature, for whosoever is altogether careless in his* thoughts of honor and
reputation, for my part, I shall have no extraordinary confidence either of his
devotion or Religion. In conclusion, a noble patience in to be esteemed
exceedingly; for by it we do not only affront every adversity, but by the
discreet practice of that excellent virtue, we make our selves more capable
upon all occasions of prosperity, since we are not apt at any time to fall from
that temper and understanding that should both warrant and instruct us in our
most beneficial affairs, either belonging to this life or to eternity. Which
certainly is no way so well to be purchased, as by a constant and resolved
activity; for however patience may seem only a passive quality, in regard it
belongs most to suffering, yet if the imagination be too much settled for want
of industry and employment, probably it will engender those thoughts and
desires that taste most of natural sensuality, and so by consequence draw people
to a kind of a bodily indulgency, which of necessity either destroys or
lessens the magnanimity of the soul, and by that means cannot but procure an
impatiency, and irksomenesse in all accidental sufferings whatsoever. But here
perhaps it may be thought too hard a condition imposed upon humane nature to be
to suffer, whereas God Almighty out of his infinite mercy, might have created
man in in such a state, as he should have had no need at all of the use of
patience; unto which I shall only say, that as it does not stand with Gods
heavenly justice, that any creature should eyjoy that perfect happiness
belonging to the blessed, without having first given some testimony of
endeavor in this world. So of the other side, though we had not injunctions
and commands to this purpose, yet it is most evident that a certain kind of
Trial belongs to all manner of creatures, before they can arrive at the
uttermost period of their designed happiness. As for example, the blessed
Angels were constrained to encounter with Lucifer and his adherents, ere they
could be perfectly established in a perpetual Throne of glory with full
security. Also Adam was placed in Paradise, (however in an innocent condition)
to contend with his passions and appetites before he was to have enjoyed
Heaven, who failing in this combat appointed him by the inserutable decrees of
Almighty God, he determined to send his son into the world to expiate the
offense by suffering also; And yet man again was ordered to new Trials in this
pilgrimage of life, ere he could compass the accomplishments of eternal rest
and quietness, constituted for his benefit and felicity. So that we may
indubitably conclude, without a resolved and practiced patience, it is
unpossible either to please God, or almost to satisfy a man's self. For as long
as we live in this habitation of misery, we must always either suffer or
expect. But being so prepared, we may without overmuch difficulty, undergo
persecutions, long Prayers, sharp Fastings continual watchings, with the loss
of what prosperity soever upon earth; since it is only our natural impatiency,
that makes all austerities and afflictions be entertained with so much horror
in our imagination, in regard (as I have said before) they consist chiefly,
though not totally in opinion. For as the apprehension of honor, is no other,
well considered, then an indulgency, created in our natures for want of
judgment; and so consequently we cannot without perturbation in our minds,
bear the deprivation thereof, so may we be confident, that all pain and
suffering whatsoever, is much abated by a constant resolution of patience,
besides the benefit it affords us in judiciously considering ways, either for
the short continuance of our misfortunes, in temporal things, or the happy use
may be made of our afflictions in spiritual matters. Which patience in fine, I
call a discreet and noble fortitude, either in expecting or sustaining.

FINIS.

