HERACLITVS DERISVS, OR, BEN's Monkey Stripped BY SIM AND SAM
Si. YOU Sir, that go as though your Understanding was o're-set with deep
Cogitations, about Cutting a New Road to the Antipodes; Or as if your
Conscience had got a sharp Set of Teeth, and did begin to Bite Home; What they
say you have been to see how Calvin 's Posterity thrive, and to take a Pattern
of that Government, that you may be the more Exact in Cutting out one here,
then you were heretofore; Come, Ben 's Monkey knew well that you were gone to
take one Cup of Presbytery; a late Puppy-dog of his Brains g^ve shrewd Hints at
your going away.


Sa. Why, this it is now, a Sister cannot be absent, but you presently say her
Nature was Gravid, and she is retired to let slip; And a Brother cannot be
absent; but you say he is Run the Country; But I have not been out of this
Nation.


Si. But you have Changed your Lodging; Were you Removed by Habeas Corpus or
Certiorari?


Sa. By neither; for I was in truth led away in one of your Protestant
Wheel-Barrows; But pray shut up that malevolous Skull of yours, and not scatter
so much Sedition as hitherto you have done, to the great disturbance of the
well-affected people, that have now digested all fears of the Horrid Plot; and
may have their Throats cut and not know of it.


Si. Very well; That Is a pretty way of leaving the World; but where have been?
I have diligently sought thee; I have beat all the Bushes in Whetstones Park;
Nay, to be sure I was at all our fine Shows of Religion, sor I did not know but
that thou might have had a Mind to two or three penniworth of Zeal; I was at
the Family of Love, and at Mass too; where I saw such sport, that indeed I
thought I was at the Duke's Playhouse; But I could not have the least smatch
of thee; I have highly wanted thy Company to mince the State a little in our
Discourse, as we were used to do.


Sa. I know well that the Sagacity of your Snout is very excellent, but I think
I was now beyond the Reach of your Nostrils; but pray forbear all Fanatical
Discourse, I have a Garment on called Metamorphosis, that is, to speak
Vulgarly, I am Changed.


Si. What turned Tory, Indeed you smell of Arbitrary power; Tack about as well
as Major Washpot; but where have thou been?


Sa. A Shipboard.


Si. A Shipboard, on some Land-Frigat I Will warrant you; and you presently got
down to her Hold, I believe; You are a divelish Rogue thereabouts, What is she
called?


Sa. Truly she is a Land-Frigat, for she never did yet Sail beyond Paul's
Churchyard, but she has done great Service against the Geneva-Pirates; She is
called, The Loyal Benjamin.


Si. But how is it, that you who have been as deep a Whig as any, should now
become a very handsome Nitid Tory?


Sa. Why, go to the next Tavern, I Will give you an Exact History of the
Reformation of my Members.


Si. Agreed Sir, with all my Heart.


Sa. Here Drawer, Bring us a Bottle of rare Royal Prerogative Wine; such as
will make a Man leap over Sarum-Steeple for the King, and a Chamber Pot that is
well-affected to the Government, for I cannot Vrinate in any Seditious Vessels.


Si. Fine parts indeed, but not Consonant to the Capacities of our Whiggish
Femalites; but pray Sir, draw out your History.


Sa. Well Sir, give Ear; some time since I was at that honest Tavern of yours,
where the Protestant Quintessence of the Town, I mean those Youths of Policy
and Contrivance, that are used to Meet every Night at the Kings Head, to Toss
the Government in a Blanket, where I took a Bottle of Liberty and Property, and
so came away, as I thought, a very high Protestant; but as I was Marching, I
was on a sudden Seized on; now for fear I should be Arnold-liz'd, I began to
vociferate extremely; but the Seizor said, that Exclamation was altogether
superfluous, for there was no other design against me, but only to Cure me of a
Disease, now very Epidemical, called Sedition; then Sir, by I know not what
force I was Mounted up some Seven or Eight Pair of Grades, and there laid at
his VVittiness 's Sir Ridens's Feet, for you must know that he is a Man of a
Pharisaical Scull, and nothing could Gratify his Understanding, but the
uppermost Room in the House; Well, and what is next?


Si. How the Devil should I know, I never kept Company with Pharisees.


Sa. Then he Commanded that I should be Stripped, that he might have a Prospect
of me in puris Naturalibus; And when he had viewed me a while, he did Opine
from the disaffected Spots, and infectious Scabs that were about me, that my
Sanguineous Mass was much Vitiated with the Heterogeneous Particles of Schism
and Sedition, and my Sal, Sulphur and Mercury were falling into Rebellion.


Si. An excellent Quack indeed; pray desire him to feel the Pulse of State too,
and give her a Pill, for she highly wants purging.


Sa. Why he intends it, you shall hear of it a Chapter or two hence; but let me
go on, He bid me open my Mouth, which I did though I told him the Mark was out,
and from under my Tongue he pull^d a great Bag of Poison, which he said was the
cause why I foamed so much Malignity against the State; Afterward I was laid
all along on one-side as if I was going to be served as you do Sows in the
Country when you pull out their Lechery by the Roots, but it seems it was only
to take out my Gall, which he did with so much dexterity, that I think he has
Rode round the Nation with a Horn at his Girdle.


Si. Then it seems you have been Spay'd, and this Spark is Sow-Gelder to the
Government; But this was dangerous.


Sa. Not for a Man of Art, for be hadspread a Plaster of Ecclesiastical
Goose-grease, which he had scraped off from the Fat Quoife of some well-fed
Parson, and closed the Orifice presently, then I was put into Bed, where by the
help of some spiritual Sudorificks, I fell into a great Sweat, and I think I
may now say, I am absterg'd from all Purulency both of Flesh and Spirit.


Si. Now you have seen this famous One, pray is the Figure of the Fool well
imitated in the Draught we had at the Elephant.


Sa. There is a little Resemblance, but some remarkable Parts about him are not
well drawn; As for instance, he had a Nose exceeding big, so that I thought he
might have come Home one Night with an intoxicated Understanding, and have Run
it against the City-Post he told us of, but I was mistaken, for he said he went
on purpose to the Glass-house, to have it blown up to that Magnitude, that the
Ladies might think he had a good Bag of Virility in his Codpist; He had an
immense Heap of Flesh in his Back, so that I did fancy one of his Moles had
been a Working, and raised a Hillock; and that his Congregational Insects would
build a Commonwealth on his Shoulders; I asked him a bold Question or two,
Whether some of his Ancients were not of an African strain? Or whether he was
not descended from the Ancient Family of the Camels? He said, No, but that he
was a Man over-stock'd with Loyalty, and not having Vent for it, it ran up into
that immoderate Protuberancy.


Si. A very well built Beast; But we have had a Change here too, for all our
Protestant News Merchants are all broken or suppressed.


Sa. No, they have Run themselves down, for it seems they would Vent none but
what was highly Protestant, and their Vessels being well Exhausted, it would
not look well to setforth their Lees; What then, no News-Jobbers?


Si. Yes, well-affected Nath. continues still, and comes out twice a Week, with
his Half-sheet of Loyalty; He Tickles the Tails of the dissenting Brethren; He
is Resolved to Whip them into the pale of the Church; He is of the same use to
our Holy Guides as a Dog is to a Shepherd; he brings in the straggling ones to
the Fold.


Sa. Who I pray, is this well affected Nath?


Si. A Fetter-lane Spark, a Haberdasher of small Wares, one that deals in
Letters, Syllables and Words; he has likewise a good store of Bum-fodder by
him, so that he can do your Breech a kindness at any time.


Sa. Is his News true?


Si. As true as the Holy See it self, not a stroke of Falsehoods in his whole
paper.


Sa. I am glad we are served with one honest Man, now no more Noise of horrid
Plots.


Si. Oh, you would think by his News, that there never was a Plot, or that the
Sun had so dried it, that it was turned to some Jesuits powder; besides, he is
a Man of Superfine parts, for he can Raise from the Dead, he lately Raised an
Act of Parliament; Nay Sir, if your Wife has bin dead these twenty years, so
that her Atoms are Transmigrated into other Bodies, and you desire her once
more, Repair but to this Nath. the Necromancer, and he by Virtue of a Catholic
Whistle can Recall all dispersed parts, and unite them in their first pleasant
plump Compositum; Nay, she shall make you as good sport, as she did when you
first joined her Pan of Procreation.


Sa. Very brave, sure he will be a Saint before he goes to Heaven?


Si. We make many, a little without Holbourn; But now you talk of it let us Toss
a Query, Whether it is not high time that Ben's Monkey and Nath's should be
quartered up into Saints? I mean, Whether it would not be handsome for these two
Loyal Loggerheads to Ride Skimmington on Tyburn?


Sa. I Will Answer you the next time, Farewell.


ADVERTISEMENT.
These are to Certisie our Tadpole Tories, That if their Tantivyships are able
to Purchase New Clothes this Spring, they may be Provided with very Fashionable
Buttons, that were made by the Breech of Mr. Observator, alias, R. Runaway Esquire
when the Parliament made him Fly for Flanders; And are to be sold by his Old
Friend de Henrico Bromano, who is to have the Benefit of his Breech, as well as
of his Brain.

LONDON, Printed for T. D. 1681.


