ROYAL DIRECTIONS BOTH TO WHIGS and TORIES: In a famous Speech of King Henry
the VIII. In the Parliament House December. 24. in the 37th year of his Reign,
Anno Dom. 1545.
Tending to Charity and Concord, and therefore Necessary for these Times.
ALthough my Chauncellor for the time being, has before this time used very
eloquently and substantially to make answer to such Orations as have been set
forth in this high Court of Parliament, yet is he not so able to open and set
forth my mind and meaning, and the secrets of my heart in so plain and ample
manner as I my self am and can do.

Wherefore I taking upon me to answer your eloquent Oration, Mr. Speaker, say,
That where you in the name of our welbeloved Commons, have both praised and
extolled me for the notable qualities that you have conceived to be in me, I
most heartily thank you all that you have put me in remembrance of my duty,
which is to endeavor my self to obtain and get such excellent qualities, and
necessary virtues as a Prince or Governor should or ought to have, of which
gifts I recognize my self both bare and barren, but of such small qualities as
God has endowed me withal, I render to his Goodness my most humble thanks,
intending with all my wit and diligence to get and acquire to me such Noble
Virtues and Princely Qualities as you have alleged to be incorporate in my
person.

These thanks for your loving admonition and good counsel first remembered, I
eftsoons thank you again, because that you considering Our great charges (not
for Our pleasure, but for your defense, not for Our gain, but to our great
cost) which We have lately sustained, as well in defense of Our and your
enemies, as for the conquest of that fortress which was to this Realm most
displeasant and noisome, and shall be by Gods grace hereafter to our Nation
most profitable and pleasant, have freely of your own minds granted to Us a
certain Subsidy here in an Act specified, which verily we take in good part,
regarding more your kindness then the profit thereof, as he that sets more
by your loving hearts, then by your substance.

Besides this hearty kindness, I cannot a little rejoice when I consider the
perfect trust and sure confidence which you have put in Me, as men having
undoubted hope, and unfeigned belief in my good doings, and just proceedings for
you, without any desire or request, have committed to mine order and
disposition all Chauntreys, Colleges, Hospitals, and other places specified in
a certain Act, firmly trusting that I will order them to the glory of God, and
the profit of the Commonwealth.

Surely if I contrary to your expectation, should suffer the Ministers of the
Church to decay, or Learning (which is so great a jewel) to be minished, or
poor and miserable people to be unrelieved, you might say that I being put in
so special a trust as I am in this case, were no trusty friend to you, nor
charitable man to any poor Christian, neither a lover of the Publick-wealth,
nor yet one that feared God, to whom account must be rendered of all our doings.
Doubt not I pray you, but your expectation shall be served more godly and
goodly then you will wish or desire, as hereafter you shall plainly perceive.

Now since I find such kindness on your part toward me, I cannot choose but love
and favor you, affirming that no Prince in the world more favors his
subjects then I do you, nor no subjects or Commons more love and obey their
Sovereign Lord then I perceive you do me, for whose defense my treasure shall
not be hidden, nor if necessity require my person shall not be unadventured:
yet although I with you, and you with me, be in this perfect love and concord,
this friendly amity cannot continue, except you my Lords Temporal, and you my
Lords Spiritual, and you my loving Subjects, study and take pains to amend one
thing which surely is amiss, and far out of order, to the which I most heartily
require you, which is, That Charity and Concord is not amongst you, but Discord
and Dissension bears rule in every place.

Saint Paul says in the Corinthians, and in the 13 Chapter, Charity is gentle,
Charity is not envious, Charity is not proud, and so forth in the said Chapter:
Behold then what charity and love is amongst you, when one calls the other
Heretic and Anabaptist, and he calls him again Papist, Hypocrite and
Pharisee! Be these tokens of charity amongst you? Are these signs of fraternal
love between you? No, no, I assure you that this lack of charity among your
selves, will be the hindrance and aswaging of the servent love between us, as I
said before, except this wound be salved and clearly made whole.

I must needs judge the fault and occasion of this discord to be partly by
negligence of you the Fathers and Preachers of the Spirituality, for if I know
a man which lives in adultery, I must judge him a lecherous and carnal person;
if I see a man boast and brag himself, I cannot but deem him a proud man. I see
here daily that you of the Clergy preach one against another, teach one
contrary to anoanother, inveigh one against another, without charity or
discretion. Some be so stiff in their old Mumpsimus, others be so busy and
envious in their new Sumpsimus. Thus all men almost be in variety and discord,
and few or none preach truly and sincerely the word of God, according as they
ought to do.

Shall I judge you charitable persons doing thus? No, no, I cannot do so; alas
how can the poor souls live in concord, when you Preachers sow amongst them in
your Sermons debate and discord? Of you they look for light, and you bring them
to darkness. Amend these crimes I exhort you, and set forth Gods word both by
true preaching and good example giving, or else I whom God has appointed his
Vicar and high Minister here, will see these divisions extinct, and these
enormities corrected according to my very duty, or else I am an unprofitable
Servant, and an untrue Officer.

Although I say the Spiritual men be in some fault, that charity is not kept
amongst you, yet you of the Temporality be not clean and unspotted of malice
and envy, for you rail on Bishops, speak slanderously of Priests, and rebuke
and taunt Preachers, both contrary to good order, and Christian fraternity: If
you know surely that a Bishop or Preacher erreth, or teaches perverse
doctrine, come and declare it to some of our Council, or to us, to whom is
committed by God the high authority to reform and order such causes and
behaviors, and be not judges your selves of your own Fantastical Opinions,
and vain Expositions, for in such high causes ye may lightly err.

And although you be permitted to read holy Scripture, and to have the word of
God in Your mother tongue, you must understand that it is licensed you so to
do, only to enform your own conscience, and to instruct your children and
family, and not to dispute and make Scripture a railing and taunting stock
against Priests and Preachers (as many light persons do) I am very sorry to
know and hear how unreverently that most precious jewel the word of God is
disputed, rimed, sung and jangled in every Alehouse and Tavern, contrary to the
true meaning and Doctrine of the same.

And yet I am even as much sorry that the Readers of the same follow it in
doing so faintly and coldly; for of this I am sure, that charity was never so
faint amongst you, and virtuous and godly living was never less used, nor God
himself amongst Christians never less reverenced, honored and served.
Therefore I said before, be in charity one with another, like brother and
brother; love, dread and fear God, (to the which I, as your supreme head and
Sovereign Lord exhort and require you) and then I doubt not but that love and
league that I spoke of in the beginning shall never be dissolved or broken
between us.

And to the making of Laws which be now made and concluded, I exhort you the
makers to be as diligent in putting them in execution, as you were in making
and furthering the same, or else your labor shall be in vain, and your
Commonwealth nothing relieved. Now to your Petition concerning our Royal
Assent to be given to such Acts as have passed both Houses, They shall be read
openly, that ye may hear them.

LONDON, Printed by George Larkin in Scalding-Alley in the Poultry.


