A SERMON Preached before the KING In his Royal Chapel of Windsor, July the
27th 1684.

By HENRY HESKETH, Chaplain to His MAJESTY.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwicke; at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1684.

A SERMON Preached before the KING In his Royal Chapel of Windsor, July the
27th. 1684.
MAT. 5.17. Think not that I am come to Destroy the Law or the Prophets; I am
not come to Destroy, but to Fulfill.


THat a Religion that is Pure and Undefiled, Holy and all Light should produce
effects so unlike its self in the lives of most of its Votaries. That Men
should so freely indulge themselves in almost all manner of Vice, and yet
profess a Religion that allows none at a cheaper rate then Eternal Damnation;
that they should call upon themselves the name of the Blessed Jesus, and yet
live as if they designed the Disparagement of it, is a reflection that no Man
that honors his God or has a concern for his Religion, or the least respect to
the Souls of Men, can entertain without a very deep and most afflictive
resentment.

I do not come to this place to enter an Idle complaint that it is thus: Nor to
spend this time in fruitless tears, Lamenting its being so, but to try if I
cannot discover the reason of this Monstrous absurdity, and offer something by
way of remedy; and I beseech you that with your wonted Candor and Clemency you
will hear me a few Words.

I can resolve the Reason of this into nothing, (methinks) so charitably, as
into Men's errors and mistakes about their Religion, for I have more Charity
for them that profess the Religion of Christ, than to think they Sin either out
of design, or of malicious wickedness.

Amongst these Errors I know not how to fix upon any of a more mischevous
influence than that Primitive one that debauched this Religion at first, which
was propagated by that filthy Sect of the Gnostics and fixed by Simon the
Sorcerer with such strength of Magic, that it sticks fast in the minds of most
Men to this Day.

And that is an Opinion that the Gospel Supersedes the Law, and discharges
from obedience to it, that it is all promise of Immunities and Privileges to
be enjoyed by the Saints, without any respect to the drudgery of Duty. The
Grace which the Gospel so much magnifieth is Faith, and that Faith nothing
else, but a brisk confidence of being saved by the Righteousness of Christ,
without any necessity of a righteousness of our own.

This is the main Fundamental Error, which lies at the Bottom of a great deal
of that profaneness, which is the reproach and shame of Christian Religion at
this Day. and it is the more Dangerous, because it is strangely charming, and
easily insinuates it self into the minds of carnal Men.

Against this therefore the word of God is so very express; and the Holy Ghost
has taken care to furnish all Men with so many obvious and plain Remedies,
that I must needs count it either Artifice and Design, or brutish Inadvertency
unto things that betrays them into it.

These Words that I have read contain one, and they are so much the more
Considerable, for coming from our Lords own Mouth; who certainly best knew the
reasons of his own coming into the World, and the purpose of that Religion
which he intended to found in it.

And he (we see here) even then when he was promising so many Blessings to all
that should become Votaries to it, and when multitudes flocked to him, in
expectation of some new Religion, or (probably) some great Indulgence to be
granted by him, makes this plain Declaration to them and all the World, that he
did not come to Destroy the Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them.

Which words are an evident Prolepsis, whereby our Lord anticipates an Error
in some, and a Calumny (it is probable) in others, that he came to cancel all
Law, and Discharge his followers from all necessity of obedience thereto; which
Error or Calumny, 1. He forbids all thoughts of in them; think not. 2.
Discliams any intention of in himself; I am not come to destroy. 3. And
Thirdly, Asserts the direct contrary, and some thing more too, I am not come to
Destroy, but to Fulfill.


In speaking to which words I shall endeavor to do these three following
things. 1. Give you the plain sense and purport of the words. 2. Make good the
Truth of what our Savior affirms in them. 3. Draw some useful Deductions and
Inferences from them.


1. A little matter will serve upon the first of these, in such an Audience as
this.

By the Law and the Prophets you are to understand that Rule of Life and
Manners, that God was pleased to deliver to the Jews, by the hand of Moses, and
by the Ministry of the Prophets.

This Rule was so Comprehensive and full, as to reach all Circumstances, and
take in all Instances of Duty, that Men owe to God, themselves, or one another;
and therefore these Laws for our more distinct Apprehension of them, are
Distinguishable, into three Ranks, Moral, Judicial, and Levitical.

The Moral are those which direct Men in the Instances of Piety, Justice, and
Charity, Temperance and Chastity, things of an Eternal Obligation and Goodness.

The Judicial, those that concerned them as a Theocrasie or Kingdom; and the
Levitical, those that concerned them as a Church.

The business of the Prophets with respect to these Laws, was chiefly to give
the true sense and meaning of them, when Men mistook them; and by Promises and
Threatenings to awaken Men into a due observance of them, when they became
careless and negligent.

Now Destroying these is plainly intelligible without a Comment; it means the
loosing the Obligation of these Laws, and discharging Men from any necessity of
being Obedient to them.

And by this you will easily understand what is said in Contraposition to it,
and what Fulfilling of them means. Not only asserting and continuing the force
of them, but something more; and that is one or both of these two things.

1. The adding more strength to them, asserting Obedience upon better
principles, and stronger motives then it was before.

2. Or Secondly setting the Duties, and Instances of Obedience at a Higher
pitch then they were formerly, i. e. in plain Terms, requiring more from a
Christian, then either was, or at least was supposed to be required from a Jew
of Old.

In these two things does the sense of our Saviors Fulfilling the Law and the
Prophets consist, and accordingly I shall undertake to prove, that our Lord
came not only to establish Law, and Obedience to it, but to add strength to the
one, and to sublimate the other.

2. And this is the Second thing proposed, which that I may do as distinctly
and fully as so little a time will give me leave, I shall consider Laws,
according to the forenamed division of them.

1 Beginning with the Moral Laws of God, those Eternal Rules of Piety, Justice,
and Honesty, and whatever is Intrinsically and Essentially good. I must speak
to these in the gross, because I cannot descend to any particulars of them; and
three things I shall endeavor to make good with respect to them.

1. That our Savior has asserted an absolute, indispensable necessity of
Obedience to them.

2. That he has strengthened the Arguments that oblige to this Obedience.

3. That he has set the Instances of Obedience higher, and required a greater
measure of it.

1 Of the first of these, we have first a very good Argument from his own Life,
which was one uniform, constant course of perfect Obedience to the will of God,
never sullied with the least Just Suspicion of any guilt, the Life of one whom
neither Men nor Devils could convince of the least Crime, or Prevarication; one
who not only purposed, but actually Fulfilled all Righteousness as he told his
Forerunner St. John, Mat. 3.15.

This certainly is one good Argument for the truth of what is here affirmed;
for it cannot reasonably be thought, that he who was so perfectly Innocent
himself, so exact in all the Instances of Obedience and Virtue; should ever
design or tolerate the contrary in his followers, especially when he makes his
own Life Presidential, and injoyns their careful imitation of it, as he does,
Mat. 11.29.

We may rather conclude, that he did this, that he might the more successfully
teach Holiness to all upon whom his name should be called (for there is no such
Teaching as by example) and that he might the more effectually engage all to a
cheerful Imitation of him, who enjoined them nothing which he did not do
himself before them, showing them the Practicableness and Possibility of his
own Precepts.

2 Which if in the Second place you please to take account of, you will find
them another Argument of this Truth. It will not be expected I should singly
survey these; and therefore I shall content my self to appeal only to this
great Sermon of his in the Mount, and particularly to three passages of it
instead of many others.

If you please to Read the two Verses immediately following this Text, you will
find these two things asserted plainly in them.

First the Doctrine of the Perpetuity of the Law, and that its Obligation
should remain till the last Expiration of all things.

Secondly the necessity of every Christians care to conform his Life to it, and
this necessity so great, that he that should either purposely in his Life, or
designedly in his Doctrine teach Men to think otherwise, should be called least
(i. e. none at all) in in the Kingdom of Heaven.

If after this you please to Read Cap. 7: 21, 22. You will think he is
purposely designing the Anticipation of all conceits, and possible pleas
against the necessity of real Holiness, telling Men plainly, that neither the
most glittering Profession of his Name, nor the most pompous Faith in his
Power, nor the most surprising effects of that Power, should procure Men a
Dispensation from Holiness here, or a Title to Heaven hereafter.

And if after both these, you will please to Read the Conclusion of the Sermon,
from Verse. 24. to 28. you will find him assuring all the World, that he that
built his hopes of Heaven upon any thing, without an honest, hearty endeavor
to do his Duty, as his Lord had directed him in these sayings, should Dye like
a Fool, and Perish in the Disappointment of his hopes for ever.

2. But Secondly I add, that our Lord has not only thus Established the
necessity of Duty, but added to it, and fixed it upon firmer Principles then it
was before. I mention two of these: Stronger Motives to engage our endeavors,
and better encouragements that those endeavors shall be Successful.

1. Stronger Motives, and more prevailing Arguments, and that of both sorts.
Both as to promises of Blessing to be endearments of Duty, and threatenings of
Punishments to be affrightments from Sin.

If I may not be allowed to say that all the promises and threatenings under the
Law and the Prophets did relate to Temporal Rewards and Punishments only. Yet I
am sure I may safely say, they were worded in such a Phrase as if they did. The
Collecting any thing beyond them required Art, a very close adverting to
things, and great Skill to make Deductions from them. Future Rewards and
Punishments were wrapped up in Clouds and Shades, and expressed in Dark Symbols.

So that a Learned Sect among the Jews not only doubted, but flatly denied any
such things, as the Sadduces we know did. And it is worth observing, that the
Argument which our Savior produces out of the Law to convince them of their
Error, lies something above the Level of a common apprehension. Every Vulgar
Understanding is not able to improve it to its due force, and unanswerable
strength.

But the Blessed Jesus has fully cleared all these things, brought Life and
Immortality to light by his Orient Gospel, and assured the World of the truth
and certainty of them. For which Reason perhaps he is called by the Prophet the
desire of all Nations, because he was to clear the truth and certainty of those
most concerning Matters, which the Virtuous, and the Wise in all Nations had
but some Languishing hopes, and Tremulous expectations of, rather desiring and
wishing, then steddily believing, that there was a future State, and such great
things to be enjoyed by good Men in it.

Our Blessed Lord therefore clears all these Doubts, relieves all these Fears,
cheers these Languishments, assuring the hopes and longings of all good Men,
and this Sun of Righteousness appears with healing under his Wings, for the
Comfort of all those that fear God.

I only add, that he has not only cleared the Truth and certainty of these
Rewards and Punishments, but given such amasing, and startling Accounts of
them, as want only due Consideration to make them effectual upon all Men. Men
must now break through the Horrors of Everlasting Burnings, and resist the
most endearing Charms of Eternal Bliss, before they can dare to Transgress
these Laws. They must think the loss of Heaven a trifle, and suffering Eternal
Tortures in Hell inconsiderable things, before they can be Disobedient; for
they are assured they can be so upon no cheaper Terms.

2. More Cheering and Inspiriting encouragements. First of acceptance upon the
account of Christ's Merits. Secondly of Success by the Assistances of his Holy
Spirit.

It is little less than a Miracle of Mercy, and the thinking upon it is a
mighty surprise to a good Man's Thoughts, that God should not only accept, but
promise so amply to reward so worthless a thing, as the Service of the best Man
Living is. But of this our Lord has cleared the Reason in his Gospel.

And we cannot well desire any thing, but this one beyond it, viz. that we may
be able to do this Duty that is so highly encouraged. For otherwise the
mightiest Arguments will signify nothing.

Our Lord therefore has complied with us in this also, assuring us that our
Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. In respect of the present Success, as
well as future Reward, that we shall be assisted in Duty as well as Rewarded
for it.

St. John observes it as a great preference of the Gospel above the Law, John
1: 17: that the Law was given by Moses, but Grace came by Jesus Christ. All
that Moses did was to deliver a Systeme of Laws to the World, and teach Men
their Duty, but Christ besides this, purchased Grace to enable us to do our
Duty, to be Sufficient for us, and to enable us to do all things, as the
Apostle speaks. Therefore good Men are said to be under Grace, and for that
reason sure to be Victorious in Duty, Romans 6.14. To which I need but add one
thing, that the Spirit of God is made the great Almoner and Bestower of this
Grace, and I beseech you do but see by what an affecting Argument our Lord has
assured us that God will give this Spirit to those that ask him, Mat. 7.9, 10,
11.

But Thirdly I go on to show, that our Lord has not only thus Established the
necessity of Duty, and done it upon better Principles, but he has set the
instances of it at a higher pitch than they were formerly.

And for the Truth of this I appeal only to the following Sermon, and
subsequent particulars of Duty that he Instances in. You may see it clear in
the case of Murder, of Oaths, and Charity, etc. Something is added to the Law
in all these cases, and something taught by our Savior over and above what was
said by them of old time; some things that were indulged the Jew and supposed
Lawful, are made for ever unlawful to a Christian; upon which reason (as well
as others) it is said, v. 20* That unless our Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall not enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. And sure no Christian has any reason to take this ill, or to think
himself hardly dealt with, for if our Encouragements and Helps be so much
greater, it is but reasonable that our returns should be in some measure
proportionable.

This is enough to clear what I undertook as to this first branch of Laws, i.
e. the Laws of God, and Obedience to them.

2. I proceed to consider the Second, i. e. Humane Laws, respecting Civil
matters; and to consider whether Christ came to Destroy these, and not rather
to Fulfill them.

It has been an old Imputation upon Christian Religion, and an Artifice to
Prejudice Kings against it, to represent it an Enemy to Government. Thus our
Blessed Lord must be accused as an Enemy to Caesar, and his Apostles Persecuted
as Factious, Seditious Persons, and those that turned the World upside down.
And upon this the Primitive Christians were mostly Prosecuted, as we Learn from
the Ancient brave Apologists for them.

But how invidiously unjust this Accusation was against our Lord, and is yet
against his Religion, a little pains will suffice to show clearly.

1. For First, I observe that out Lord was so very tender of Laws, and so
mighty careful not to give the least Suspicion of the contrary, that in all
things he showed himself most ready to comply with them, he waved his own
Privilege, when it might Legally have been pleaded in Bar of it, and paid
Tribute as a Stranger, although he was at the Expense of a Miracle to do it.

And when he was convened before Pilate, and Interrogated about his Kingdom, he
so fully satisfied him that it was not of this World, nor in the least an Enemy
to Government in it, that Pilate himself declares him Innocent, and acquits him
from the guilt of that Spightful Accusation, Joh. 18.36.

2. From which in the Second place you may Collect that his Doctrine in this
was accordant to his Practice, for by declaring his Kingdom not to be of this
World, He has sufficiently secured all Kings, that they should never be
rivall'd in their Thrones by him, that neither he, nor his Religion would ever
entrench upon their Rights, or invade their Prerogatives.

And yet besides this, there are many express Doctrines of his to this purpose.
I mention two only, one is his Speech to Peter, Mat. 26.52. with his Reason
anexed to it, Put up thy Sword, for all they that take the Sword shall Perish
by the Sword. Which words are plain, without any Art to improve them, and make
it for ever Unlawful for any private Person to use the Sword against his Lawful
Governors in any Case, no not in the so much pleaded Case of Religion. For if
it be not Lawful to use it in defense of Christ's own Person; it certainly can
be Lawful in none, no not in defense of his Religion.

Another is that known Answer that he gave to the most insidious question that
was ever proposed to him, Mat. 22.22. Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. By which he has happily
adjusted the Rights of God and the King, and Commanded Men to be as careful to
pay one his due, as the other, and if Allegiance be tied upon Men by the same
Bands that Duty is to God, the Obligation is strong enough, and cannot be
stronger.

But this is too little to say in this Case, Truth and Justice to our Holy
Religion will warrant me to say more, viz. that Christ has not only thus
Established the Laws of Government, and the Duty of Subjection to it, but he
has indeed fulfilled it, fixed it upon firmer Principles, and stronger
Reasons, than it was before.

For that Religion that makes Subjection to Caesar as necessary, as Duty to God:

That Religion that ties Subjection immediately upon the Conscience:

That Religion that declares Government to be Gods own Institution, and that
Kings are immediately appointed by him:

That Religion that Interests God in Resistance, as much as the King:

That Religion that presses Men to Subjection, upon Reasons of their Love to
God, and for the Lords Sake:

That Religion that Threatens Damnation as expressly to resistance, as to any
other Sin whatsoever:

That Religion which so strictly forbids, and so severely Threatens all those
Evils, from whence Rebellion and Resistance proceed, such as Pride and
Ambition, Covetousness and Discontent, Faction and a busie-medling in other
Men's Matters, and whatever other causes there are of these things:

That Religion which by Arguments of no less then Eternal Felicity injoyns the
Practice of such Virtues, as make Rebellion impossible; such as Meekness and
Humility, Patience and Contentedness in every Condition, Peaceableness and
keeping within our own calling, Love and an Universal Charity unto all Men:

I say, a Religion that does all this, as it is Notorious the Christian
Religion does, does indeed Fulfill and fix Subjection upon the most steady
Principles that can be: Does Incomparably more to this purpose, then the utmost
Policy, or Power of Man shall ever be able to do; for these can but compel, or
persuade by External Arguments, but this can touch the Heart, and lay the
Reason of Subjection deep upon the Conscience, and oblige not to Loyalty only,
but to the same tender Care, and Hearty Cheerfulness in it, as in Religion and
Duty to God.

So that I say it with some assurance, it is Impossible for a Christian to
become a Rebel, and he cease to be the one, whenever he commenceth the other
upon any reason whatsoever. A Man must be Rebel to himself, and his Religion
too, before he can be so to his Prince, he must break through the Ties of his
own Consience before he can break through the Laws of Subjection, he must turn
Traitor to God, and a Contemner of the Deity, before he can despise Dominion,
or speak Evil of Dignities:

3. And now I have only the Third branch of Laws remaining, and to inquire if
our Lord have not also Established, and Confirmed them. Now this you will find
he has done clearly, both by his own Practice, and Doctrine.

I Instance only in two Practices of Christ, because they render the thing
plain. One was his Observation of a Feast, which was not of Divine, but
Ecclesiastical Institution only, for such the Feast of the Dedication was, at
which he is said to be present, Joh. 10.22.

The other is his Celebrating the Passover in a Posture, and with some
Circumstances contrary to the Primitive Institution, in compliance with the
Jewish Church, which had thought fit to change them.

From which two Instances, the Power of the Church to order the Circumstantials
of Religion, and the Lawfulness of every private Members conforming to the
same, are abundantly cleared; and might be made good against all Opposition.

For either our Lord did well in this compliance, or he did not; if well, then
the Rule is Established, and we can desire no more; if not, then let our
Enemies Answer for his Faithfulness, and Vindicate his Innocence if they can.

To these Practices his Doctrine is clearly Consonant, Commanding us to hear
the Church, and them that sit in Moses Seat, and to account him that refuses
to do so a Heathen and a Publican. But this Argument is sufficiently made good
by Learned Men of late, and therefore I pursue it no further:

3. But hasten to put a Period to this Discourse in two or three short
Inferences from it, which was the third and last thing promised:

1. And First, I desire it may be considered what a Signature of an Age it is,
to teach and Live the reverse to this of our Savior, and what a sad presage it
is to do so.

I need not Fear being deemed Uncharitable, if I charge these things upon the
Men of this Generation, the Doctrines of many, and the Lives of almost all,
will too clearly Vindicate me from that Imputation.

Blessed Lord! when we go to survey the Lives of Men, what a Field of Blood,
what a Black Scene of Vice presents it self to our View? how perfectly have Men
unlearned their Religion? and how do they Live in Contradiction to this Text?
as if Christ came indeed to Destroy all Law, fulfill all Wickedness, and
confute all Prophecy, but only that which predicted the monstrous degeneracy of
the later times.

And truly when we descend to the Consideration of Men's Doctrines, we cannot
well expect, better Consequences from them, I cannot stay to Instance these
singly, it must suffice me to refer you to the Labors of Learned Men, who have
fully showed how the different Doctrines among us at present tend naturally to
debauch Christian Religion, cause it to expire in Noise and Notion, or to
degenerate into Enthusiasm and downright Profaneness, and I durst undertake to
disargue all the Opinions upon which Men differ and separate from us at this
time upon this Reason, that some way or other they either discourage the
Practice of Holiness, or relaxe the necessity of it, or Establish Wickedness
even by a Law.

But then if we Examine Men's Doctrines with respect to Government, in that you
will find them all generally Antichristian; restraining the necessity of
Subjection in so many Cases, and making a Plea of Conscience and Religion a
Dispensation from it in all.

In this the most distant Factions among us conspire, and accord perfectly,
Gebal, and Amon, and Amalek, etc. Rome and Geneva, Leiden and Munster, and
whatever Places have Denominated any of them.

Men that can Plead Religion to hallow Rebellion, and the promoting the
Interest of the Church, and the Kingdom of Christ, for the deposing, and
assassinating of Kings. can place the Bible and the Sword in the same Flag (the
Solecism of our late Scoth Reformers,) Preach and Pray Men into Rebellion and
Treason, and avow the rankest Rebellion and most damnable Schism, under the
pretense of Sanctity and Reformation.

I am not willing to aggravate the guilt, or presage the Effects of such
things, though I think a very little Rhetoric would suffice for the one, and
the meanest Portion of Prophecy for the other.

If Men would Study to Blaspheme the name of the Blessed Jesus, to bring
contempt and infamy upon his Holy Religion, and provoke all the Powers on
Earth, to conspire its Banishment out of the World, they could never take
either a more certain or compendious Course to do so.

And then I ask, as the Prophet did once in a like Case, What will ye do in the
end thereof? And what will the Issue of such things be?

Either First, we shall outlive our Religion, and while we contend so angrily
who are the only good Christians, get this sad assurance that none of us are so.

Or else Secondly, we shall force God to arise and rescue his injured Law and
Religion, Vindicate it from our Profanations, and revenge the Injuries we have
done it upon our selves, and since we would not purchase the Rewards and
Blessings of it by well doing, cause us to Inherit the Curses and Plagues that
it threatens to the contrary.

Thus it was of old, when Men came to those heights of vice as to dare to
Destroy Gods Law, David thought it high time for God to lay to his hand, Ps.
119.126. It is time Lord for thee to lay to thine hand, for they have Destroyed
thy Law, and sure our Destroying his Gospel, superadded to this Destruction of
his Law, will hasten his doing this. And we have nothing to support us in our
hopes of the contrary; unless we can think God so unconcerned and tame a being,
as to permit himself, and every thing that is Sacred to be trampled upon and
profaned, ridiculed and Buffoon'd by foolish and daring Men.

2. But I hasten to a more grateful Reflection, i. e. to consider in the Second
place, what an effectual Course Christian Religion takes, and what a certain
Expedient complying with it is, to assure the Felicity of a Kingdom, of a
Church, yea of the whole World, to reallize the Poeticism of a Golden Age, and
retrieve the Primitive Portions of its happiness.

When I say this, I do not mean it only in a Moral Sense, and because it is the
Insurer of Divine Providence and Blessing, (though methinks that ought to be a
Material consideration with all Christians) but I speak it in a Physical Sense,
and upon the direct Reason of the thing. Yea I dare comply with the Epicurean
Principles in it. Supposing that God did not interest himself in the Government
of the World, but had thought it enough to have put all things into right Order
and Motion at first, and afterward to abandon them to their own Conduct and
Care, yet Religion would in some good measure supply the want of Providence. It
would be an Anima mundi, and a tutelar Spirit that would superintend, and
secure the Felicity of all things:

If Religion were truly Obeyed, Kings, would be as safe, as they are (too
often) secure, and their Crowns as truly pleasant to themselves, as they seem
Glorious to others.

Subjects would be as happy and contented under their Government, as Children
under the Care of the most Provident and Indulgent Parents, there would be no
invading of Prerogative, nor fear of Privileges, there would neither Holy
Leagues, Solemn Covenants, nor Treasonable Associations in Defense of Religion
be entered into; Tyranny and Treason would be words, whose Signification was
known no where but among Devils.

Magistrates might securely and unenvied enjoy their Power, and all rejoice and
Bless God under their shadow.

Courts of Judicature would be clean as the Assemblies of Angels, and all
Determinations of Causes just, as if they had been Established by the decree of
the Watchers.

The Courts of Princes would not be pestered with the Evil Effects of Ambition,
and Envy, and ill Arts to supplant one another: But be as much axalted above
all other Places for Virtue and Purity, as they are above them for Address and
Deportment.

Those to whom God had given Riches, would know how to make them Minister to
their true happiness, and might enjoy them without any anxiety from Thieves or
violence.

And those whom his Providence had confined to poverty and meanness, might rest
contented, considering how many God had charged with the care of them. Yea
might sing as cheerfully as that poor Bird is heard to do, that knows not in
what Bush to lodge at night, nor where to pick up its next meal, and yet is
provided for by an Almighty care in both.

In a word, there would be no leading into captivity; no complaining or
violence in our streets; No cries of Mothers made Childless by War; No tears of
Widows or Orphans oppressed by potent wrong. Religion would secure every man's
Property; and there would be none to suffer wrong, because none could do it.

And (to conclude this Period,) you may challenge all the Machiavels in the
Earth, and all the Leviathans in the Sea too, to contrive so effectually for
our happiness and peace as Christian Religion does by two single Precepts of it.

First that every one mind his own Business, and wherein he is called, therein
abide with God. Secondly, that no Man offer that to another, which he would not
willingly have done to himself in the like Circumstances. This latter is the
Sum of the Law and the Prophets, and were it complied with, what a happy Scene
of things would soon appear? Our Kingdom would become the Transcript of Heaven,
and our Age would antedate the great Millennium.

3. And therefore in the last place I hope it will not be censured as an
Impertinent address, to beg that those above us will think Religion worthy of
their Care, to whom it would be (and may be) so greatly serviceable; and that
all of us would think complying with the Rules of it, our Duty, and our
Interest too.

I press not the First of these, and I thank God I need not, Blessed be God we
have a Defender of the Faith, and one to whom the guarding of Religion is dear,
as his own Crown.

But I would gladly prevail with you all for the Second. Give me leave without
offense to remember you of one thing; you cannot but know what a Character your
Enemies endeavor to fix upon you, and all Faithful Subjects, and at what a
disadvantage they represent Loyalty, while themselves must be accounted the
only Sober and Godly Party of the Nation.

I thank God the charge is not so just, nor the guilt so general, as they
invidiously insinuate, but for Gods sake consider, were it not better that
there were not so much as the shadow of a reason for the one? Nor one single
Instance of the other? How much better were it, that by Temperance and
Sobriety, Chastity and Purity, and all other Instances of Christian well doing
we put to silence the Ignorance and Calumnies of Foolish Men.

That you Live up to the Consequences of this Text, and be always fearful of
Destroying the Law or the Prophets, which your Lord tells you here he came to
Fulfill.

That as you prescribe Rules of Civility and Deportment to us all, so you will
give us our true measures of Religion too.

And (to conclude) that all of you strive to be as exemplary for Piety to a
good God, as you are signal for Loyalty to the best of Kings.

That so Peace may be upon our Israel, and Glory may dwell in our Land, that
the King may still rejoice in the Salvation of God, and in the Mercy of the
most high he may never miscarry:

And that we, and all his good Subjects may Sing under his shadow, rejoicing in
that abundance of Peace which we enjoy under him now, and in hopes of that
Eternal Peace which we look for hereafter, for the sake of our great
Peacemaker the Lord Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and Eternal Spirit,
be Praise Honor and Glory, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

