A Private Peace Offering, FOR THE DISCOVERY AND DISAPPOINTMENT Of the Late
Horrid Conspiracy Against the KING, etc.

IN A SERMON Preached July the 8th. in St. Hellen's-Church London.

By Henry Hesketh Vicar there and Chaplain to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Henry Bonwick at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684.

To my good Friends, the Parishioners of St. Hellens.
Gentlemen.
THIS mean discourse that you were pleased so kindly to entertain at the
hearing of, and so devoutly to join with me in the purpose of; I offer now to
you, as justly your own.

To the end, that amidst the many Honest and Loyal Addresses at present, in
which good Men congratulate the safety of their Prince, and make fresh Vows of
Loyalty and Service to him; we may do something to interest Religion in this
affair. Not only Sacrifice to that God, from whom this safety so signally
derives, but also engage his Providence and blessing, for the continuance of
it, without which the utmost care and Loyalty of Subjects are but feeble things.

It may serve you as a kind of Parasceve to the great and public Eucharist,
that (I am confident) you will shortly be called unto; In which I shall be glad
to do you further Service, and in every thing else, wherein I may approve my
self,

July the 16th. 1683. Your Servant in the Gospel, H^n. Hesketh.

2 Samuel 22.51. He is the Tower of salvation for his King, and shows mercy to
his Anointed, unto David, and to his seed for evermore.


THIS Song that is recorded here, and is the Eighteenth in the number of the
Psalms (as you may see if you please to compare them together) was Old David's
last grateful Recognition, and Song of Praise, toward the latter end of his
days, when he reflected upon the many signal deliverances, and providence of
God toward him.

The truth is my Brethren I can hardly reflect upon David either in the
troubles that befell him before he came to the Crown, or the many remarkable
strange deliverances that he had, both before and after; but I must presently
think of our present Gracious King, and my mind naturally is running a parallel
between them.

As God Almighty chose the one to be an instance of that care and providence
that he has over Kings, to the Old World: So has he been pleased to make the
other as famous an instance of the like care, to the New. And I believe future
Ages will rather admire, than believe those strange and happy occurrences of
his life, which we have so much cause thankfully to adore.

You will easily guess the reason why I step out of my former course and method
of Preaching at this time; it is to offer up a particular sacrifice of Praise,
for the happy preservation of our King, and us all too, from a sad and bloody
Conspiracy, that it seems was formed against him, by unreasonable and bloody
Men, whom no ties of Religion, or Nature, of Humanity or Gratitude could
restrain from the most unworthy and ungrateful conspiracy against him.

We might stay I confess, till Authority went before us, and was pleased to
mark out a time for a public Thanksgiving, as I hope e're long it will.

But certainly a double sacrifice is due now from us, if ever it were; I doubt
not but all good Men have had their private Eucharists and in their closet
paid their devoutest Praise for this mercy; and I would we should give some
public specimen of it at present too.

I cannot but think our hearts are brim full with a great sense of this mercy,
I do therefore by the present discourse only strive to give vent unto them, in
offering them occasion to break out into this joyful recognition: He is the
Tower of salvation to his King, and shows mercy unto his Anointed, unto David
and his seed for evermore.

This Psalm and the occasion of it, will too well suit our present purpose. The
unnatural Rebellion of Absalom had been lately suppressed, which was the last
that ever David was troubled with, unless it were Sheba's conspiracy, which was
but only the remainder and dregs of it.

And our David is now happily delivered from the effects of a Rebellion, either
formed or fomented, by a like unnatural Son too; only so much the worse, and
more Impardonable than Absalom, by how much his endearments have been greater,
and he caressed and obliged by the passionate love, and extraordinary kindness
of the most indulgent Father, from whom he never received the least
displeasure, nor any effects of it, as Absalom before (though deservedly) had
done.

I do not intend to parallel all the circumstances of both the Treasons,
blessed be God, we have a better, and more grateful Theme, the Praising God for
the deliverance from it, who is a Tower of salvation unto his King, and has
showed mercy unto his Anointed: And to Pray that they may correspond in one
circumstance also, as well as in many others, that as that was, so this may be
the last, that our King ever may be disturbed withal.

And that if any Factious and Seditious Sheba's shall blow up any future sparks
of this (I hope I may say, extinguished flame) they may meet with Sheba's fate,
and lose those heads, that dare think an ill thought against the Lords Anointed.

This Text is a grateful acknowledgment of Gods great mercy and providence
toward David his Anointed King over Israel, in which after he had reflected in
the precedent Song upon his many signal deliverances, he comes in this
conclusion of it, to recognize the great efficient and Author of them all, the
great love, and immerited mercy of God, he is the Tower of strength to his
King, it is he that shows mercy to his Anointed. -- In the last verse of the
18th. Psalm, which I hinted before, this Song is put into the number of the
Psalms; there is a little variation in the Phrase though not in the sense,
there instead of, he is a Tower of defense to his King, it is, he gives great
deliverance to his King.

And the truth is, God was pleased to signalize his care and providence over
David, in many great and remarkable deliverances from dangers, which no human
policy could ever see a way for him to escape out of.

My design is not to give you the History at large of David's great and many
troubles, and his wonderful miraculous escapes out of them, though they would
be an excellent foundation for what I purpose to speak to at present.

Snares and dangers awaited him almost in every place, and the Lion and the
Bear that infested his Flock in the Wilderness, were but the too true presages
of those calamities and dangers that should haunt and dog himself afterward.

Sometimes his Enemies, and sometimes his Friends are persecuting and
conspiring against him; sometimes the Camp and sometimes his own house are made
the scenes of his danger. Now an open Enemy invades and assaults him, and now a
Treacherous Confident seeks to betray him; and last of all his own Son forms
and heads a desperate Rebellion against him.

But so many as were his troubles and dangers, so many were the Acts and
instances of the divine providence and interposition for him, and one as
remarkable every way (or more) than the other, till at last you read of his
giving him rest from all his Enemies on every side, and of every kind too, and
giving him leisure to pass his old Age in comfort and safety, attending quietly
the duties of Religion, and his devotion to that God, whose mercies had been so
great and extraordinary toward him, into whose hands at last he resigned his
devout Soul, in comfort and in peace.

But the insisting at large upon these things would prevent me wholly from what
I chiefly purpose at this time, which I intend to dispatch in these three
things.

1. Instance the care and providence of God toward Religious Kings and
Governors, and inquire a little into the reasons of it.

2. Remark this care and providence toward our King.

3. Make some deductions and inferences, by way of application.

1. The 1st. is to assert the care and providence of God over good Kings; for
though it be in the Text in the singular number. He is the Tower of Salvation
to his King, yet we shall find, Ps. 144.10. that it is equally in the Plural
Number; it is he that gives salvation unto Kings, as well as he that
delivers David from the peril of the Sword,

It is piously acknowledged by our Church, in one of the Collects appointed
upon November 5th. that God in all Ages has showed his power and mercy in the
miraculous and gracious Deliverances of his Church, and in the Protection of
Righteous and Religious Kings, from the wicked Conspiracies, and malicious
Practices of their Enemies.

And it is certainly true, and spoken upon very good reasons, and should we
revolve the Stories of all Ages of the World, we should scarce fail of meeting
with many instances of this nature, in every Age of it. It cannot be expected
that I should stay to examine these at present, and to trace these mighty
providence of God, through the several Periods of the World; there are enough
in the sacred History of your Bibles, and there are more in the Histories of
all Religious and Christian Nations, and out of them men may furnish themselves
with instances enough. -- Though the truth is this Generation has seen enough,
to superside its need of looking after any more.

I shall therefore proceed to inquire a little into the great reasons of this
providence, and examine what probably may be the causes, why God is pleased to
give such specimens of his guarding of them, and care over them.

1. And First, this doubtless proceeds from his great care and respect to the
societies of Men, and their happiness in the World.

It is most certain, Government is one of the greatest blessings that can be
enjoyed by Men here, and both the reason of the thing, and the general consent
of Men, prove, and allow it to be so; and in elder times those have been
honored as Gods, that have been happily instrumental in reducing men to it,
all mortal honors have been accounted too mean for them, and too much below the
blessings enjoyed by them.

And it is as certain, that Monarchy is the Best form of Government in it self;
and that Kings are the most regular conservatours of Order and Government, as
has not long since been proved in this place.

So that my Brethren, Kings are really for the good and happiness of the
people, and the good of the one is included in, and greatly dependent upon the
other, and whatever we may think of their grandeur, or how much soever we may
stare at their Pomp and Glory, it is we that really gain by all, and the World
is preserved and kept from Barbarism, and Confusion by their means.

And because God loves the Societies of Men, and delights in the peace and
order of them, therefore he is so tender and careful of Kings, and so seldom
lets violence touch and prevail against them; and indeed we may truly say, he
never does this, but when the wickedness of People and Nations is grown high,
and Clamorous, and even extorts vengance from Heaven, it is the sins of the
People, which are to be punished, that provoke God at any time to pull down his
wall of protection about good Kings.

2. Because Government is his own Institution, and Kings his own immediate
substitutes and delegates.

I do not think it needful to examine the accounts that have been given of the
original of Government, by the great factor for Atheism in this Nation, which
have been so greadily sucked in by so many of the young Gentry of this Age, and
indeed almost all orders of Men, which have tainted the ancient Loyalty of this
People to such a monstrous degree; I have done this also not long ago in this
place.

We that are at all conversant in the Holy Scriptures, or indeed have any
becoming thoughts of the power and providence of God, his care over the World,
and his concern for the welfare and good of it; may be assured, that Government
is Gods own institution and ordinance, as St. Paul calls it; that he has both
instituted the thing, and fitted Men for it; that Government is a Divine gift,
as the same St Paul calls it, and that he teaches Kings and Princes wisdom,
and that by him they Reign, as David, and Solomon both tell us.

So that Kings are immediately constituted by God, they are his Viceroys,
therefore he is called King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and they are often in
the Holy Scripture called Lords and, Gods, because they bear the characters of
his Power and Greatness, are little Images of his Sovereignty, and the
conveighers of blessings to Men, which are not below the greatness of a God to
give.

Therefore they are called the Anointed of the Lord, in this and many other
Texts of Scripture, and we may observe that as the Scriptures entitle God more
especially to a care and regard of them, so they seem to take notice of that
extraordinary awe and veneration to them, that God has implanted Naturally in
the breasts of all Men, to keep them at a due distance from them, and to
restrain all thoughts of violence against them.

And all this to keep up, and to give credit to his own institutions among Men;
yea to hedge up his own honor and keep Men from any intrenching upon it, for
he is concerned in his own Image, and what dishonor or wrong is offered to
them, redounds in some measure to himself, as we have always seen it de facto
true, those never much fear God, that honor not their King, the Church and the
Throne always suffer together, and Traitors and Rebels were never very
Religious, nor can be, though it must be confessed none make greater pretense
to it, that pretense of duty to God may take off the guilt of Disloyalty to the
King, though there is not an instance of more wretched and fulsome hypocresie
in the World.

3. Another cause perhaps may be, the extraordinary and difficult task that God
has laid upon them.

What vain men may think I know not, but certainly to Govern is the most
dificult province in the World. Obedience is a thing easily learned, it lies in
a narrow compass, but to command and order well is extremely hard, Every one
that is in any little measure of Power finds it so, not a Master of a Family
but is sensible of it.

How easily then may we guess, what a task he has upon him, that is to Rule us
all. Man is through his Vices and Debaucheries a very wild ungovernable
creature, and perhaps the most Salvage may better and easier be kept in awe,
though there is difference among Men, and I wish he knew not too well who are
the fiercest.

The multitude has in the Symbolls of all wise Nations been compared to a very
fierce and wild Beast, that is not easily Governed, and that expression in Ps.
65.7. goes higher, where the madness of the People is compared to the raging of
the Sea, and the same Power said to rule the one that stilleth the other, and
if so, we need nothing more to tell us, how difficult Government is.

And therefore as where God gives much he requires more; so where he requires
much he gives more; I mean proportions his care and providence, his grace and
mercy, answerable to the duty that he has Imposed, and because Kings carry
heavier burdens of care and trouble than other Men, therefore is the Divine
care and protection greater over them, and more concerned for them.

4. Especially 4ly., Because they are exposed unto greater dangers than other
Men; the rising Sun exhales and draws up many vapors, and there never were, or
will want those that will look upon Kings with an evil Eye.

As long as there are Devils in Hell, who delight in, and will be contriving
the misery and confusion of Men, so long will they be standing at the hands of
Kings, and endavouring to stir up evil Men against them.

And so long as Pride and Ambition, Covetousness and discontent find places to
harbor in, there will not want Traitors and Rebels, Men that will envy Power
and greatness, and will be contriving means by which to surprise and graspe
them into their own hands; when Men have once given entertainment to such lusts
as these, and committed themselves to the conduct of them; a Crown is a
glittering temptation, and such as they cannot resist, their minds will run
upon greatness, and will ever be beating to find out ways to it, and whatever
appears with a promise or show of success, shall certainly find ready
admittance and be entertained, and persued how unjust or violent, how bloody
and mischievous soever it may be. For a Crown will legitimate all crimes to get
it, and greatness will atone for any evil, that tends to the compassing of it.

This is a sad and evil return I confess, that Kings have for all their labor
and trouble, their watchings and cares, but it is such, as considering the
lusts of Men, they will never miss of.

And therefore the Divine providence is the greatlier concerned for them, and
knowing their dangers does more carefully guard and super-intend them, just as
in the case of just and good Men, if God permit evils to haunt them, or
overtake them, he either doubles his care, or their comforts; as their troubles
abound, so their consolations from God abound also.

So it is that in this case, the more dangerous and hazardous that their
condition is, the more does the Divine Providence take care of them, and the
more signally remark it self, in their protection and preservation.

2. And these reasons now will not only be accounts of the thing in general,
but especially of the preservations of our gracious King, Gods providence to
whom I have promised to remark in the second place.

It is plain how all these reasons concentre in our case, never did a Nation
enjoy more by a King than ours has done by this, and perhaps had one of any
other temper Governed in our times, our case had had a worse Crisis, never were
People more happy, then we might be under him if we please, and were not the
fault our own.

Never was it more remarkably true, that the Powers that are over us, are set
over us by God, then in our case, his Restoration being a Miracle in the sight
of all the World.

Never had a Prince a harder task, then ours has had, coming to Govern a
People, that are not only to their shame, said to be more ungovernable, more
fickle and changeable than other Nations, but being broken into Factions and
Differences, and leven'd with the loose principles of Rebellion and Usurpation
as we were, and we see how close these tinctures and ill principles yet stick
to too many Men's minds, and that length of time heightens and rankles them,
rather then heal and carry them off.

And I would it could not be said as truly too, that never was a Prince exposed
to more dangers, and troubles than he has been.

For should we recollect the past passages of his life, and soberly make
remarks upon the same, I do not well know whether we should more admire his
fate, and wonder that so many dangers and adversities should concenter to spend
their spite against one Man, or that providence and care of almighty God, that
has still brought him through, and delivered him out of them all.

I have a Copious Theme here before me, and should I enter upon it, could not
want matter for a long discourse; should I either play the Historian, or the
Orator, go either to recount the dangers and deliverances, that have befell
him, or to enhanse and heighten the circumstances of Gods extraordinary care
and providence in them; here were a large field before me for both, in which I
should run my self out of breath, sooner then exhaust the subject.

But I must forbear this now, out of a necessary respect to the time, and your
patience, and I do it with the less regret, and the more contentedly, because
it is a known subject, in which every one that hears me can prevent me, and
enlarge it sufficiently himself, and I do not doubt, but we shall have an
occasion e're long, publicly to do the same.

So great a mercy will not pass I hope without a public and solemn
recognition, among those that seem so sensible of the greatness of it; I doubt
not but there would have been mock thanksgivings enough, had these black
designs succeeded, and God would have been entitled to it, and his providence
magnified in it, as we have seen it done in almost as bad instances.

I am sure it is more just in this, the Lords hand has been visibly stretched
out in this deliverance, and in many others, and it ought to be mavelous in
our eyes; to this we may safely entitle this deliverance, and magnify his
mercy in it without any fear of mocking and affronting him to his face, as we
have seen men too often have done.

The truth is, his life has been a continual Scene of providence, and danger
even from his Cradle, and I am apt to think (as I told you before) when future
Ages shall veiw the Acts of it, they will either conclude them some extravagant
Sallies of Historians, or think him to have been a person, whom Providence has
selected out of the Mass of mankind, to be an instance what great things God
can do for those that trust in him, and to show how careful he is of the Lives
and Persons of those Princes, to whom Religion and his honor is dear as their
own Crowns, as it is at present.

These providence and cares have been freshly instanced very lately, in a
deliverance from a Conspiracy and Treason, hatched by those Men, that no Bands,
no kindnesses, no endearments, no Oaths, no pretenses of Protestant Religion,
could restrain from the most Barbarous intendments against him, against us, and
against all, that can be thought Dear and Valuable unto Christian Men.

And therefore our utmost gratitude is due, both upon our love to him, and to
our selves too.

All our dearest interests, are bound up in his life, and next to Gods
Protection and Blessing owe their stabiliment and continuance to it; and it
seems our Enemies think so too, and therefore go to wound us through his sides,
and to enslave us, by his destruction.

Oh! what cause have we then to be as sensible of this deliverance, as if our
own selves had lain bound under the fatal Knife, and our own Throats
immediately rescued from it.

3. But that I intend among the inferences and uses that I purpose to make of
this discourse; which was the 3d. thing proposed.

1. And 1st. I would improve it to the discouragement of all Traitors, and ill
minded persons against him.

To let them see how hopeless and miprobable, all their wicked attempts against
him are like to be.

It may be urged (blessed be God) now upon second causes and considerations, as
well as upon Gods providence.

God be thanked the case is altered from what it was not long ago, -- when one
in Print durst advise him to lay down his Government, as the only expedient to
his safety.

Men's Eyes are opened, and cleared from those mists that cunning Men have been
casting before them, they see into the truth of things in a great measure, and
I hope will in a short time see much more.

There is no rival power now to beard Majesty, and confront it, and hector it
into a consent to them in every thing they please.

The power and strength of the Nation is in his own and his true confidents
hands, and may it ever continue so; and in all probability we are safe, and may
defy all Plots, and Insurrections, especially if Men continue that care, that
(God be thanked) they have of late, almost out done their Enemies in.

But unless God watch the City, the Watchmen watch but in vain; and without his
Protecting the King, all Guards are weak and feeble things.

And therefore I would press the discouragment, upon that account, let Men
consider what a darling of Providence hitherto he has been, and how probably
all attempts against him will be vain, that hitherto have been so, though never
so closely and cunningly and probably contrived.

God has delivered him, and does deliver him, and we have cause to hope, as
well as Pray, that he will still continue to deliver him.

2. Which is a 2d. proper Inferance, and suggests a good Christian Duty to us
at present; not only to Praise his Name, give him our devoutest and most
enlarged thanks for all his Mercies, for his former deliverance, and for this
last almost greatest of all.

But to make it our daily Prayer, that he will still continue his hedge of
Protection about him, depute his Holy Angel still to guard and defend him,
scatter all his Enemies that delight in violence, and Blood, suffer no weapon
that is formed against him to prosper, but still follow him with blessing and
loving kindness.

The Church directs us well in this case, it is a stated part in our Liturgy.
And I pray God, its doing, and teaching us to do this so often, be not one
present (as well as our Royal Martyred Master thought it to be one former)
great exception against it.

3. And lastly that we utterly abhor all such practices, and rid our selves of
all those disloyal Antimonarchical principles, that naturally lead and dispose
to them.

Unless we would be found to be of the Number of those that fight against God,
and go to pull down that, which he has allways showed himself so dear and
tender of.

I hope all honest Men, will begin to be wise, open their Eyes now, and
wilfully shut them no longer against plain and palpable evidences.

Permit themselves to be wheedled no longer into Rebellion and Treason, under
pretenses of Loyalty, nor believe those Men to be the best Subjects that make
such a noise with their Loyalty to, and concern for the King.

That they will not Sully the honor of the Protestant Religion any more, with
Faction against the Church, or Treason against the State.

They have been often to^^ of the danger of such principles, and ^een warned of
the sad effects that they would lead Men into; I hope they will now begin to
consider things truly and not ruin their Souls and Bodies too, their Estates,
Relations, and all that depend upon them, by things that both God and Man abhor.

But hereafter join with us in the Communion of that Church, and Religion, that
teaches truly our duty both to God and Caesar, that establishes Subjection
upon true Christian, firm principles that will not fail, nor will ever be
Tainted with any suspicion of Plotts and Treasons.

By compliance honestly with which, we and our King shall both be safe, live
happily, and piously here, and both be translated to eternal security and
happiness hereafter. To which God of his Infinite Mercies bring us all, for
Christ Jesus sake. Amen.

FINIS.

