A LETTER FROM A JESUIT: OR, THE Mystery of Equivocation.

BEING The Copy of a Letter of Recommendation, seeming much in favor of the
Bearer, but by different Reading, rendered of quite contrary signification.

Lately discovered by the Person who was thereby abused, and now made Public
for General Satisfaction.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for W. W. 1679.

A LETTER From a JESUIT: Or, the MYSTERY of EQUIVOCATION.
THE word of Truth assures us, That the Devil was a Liar from the beginning;
For early he began that Trade, deluding our first Parents with pretensions of
increasing their knowledge, when his design was to rob them both of knowledge
and happiness, overwhelming all the faculties of their souls with dismal clouds
of Ignorance, which to this day sadly obscure the Intellectuals of their
unhappy offspring. Nor was his Oracle, infamously famous at Delphos, wanting
to pursue the same method, only somewhat refined with semblances of verity, and
from thence, it is like, the first practice of Equivocation came into the world,
To keep up the Reputation of his Priests and continue the Idolatry of his
Votaries, returning answers couched in such ambiguous expressions that whatever
happened he might seem to be in the Right; and sometimes giving forth his
fallacies in Writing either unpointed, or dubiously disposed, where the unwary
Reader was trapann'd to destruction by treacherous hopes. Thus one of his
Agents a Magician once answered Albertus Scotus Earl of Placentia, enquiring of
his success against an approaching Foe ready to invade his Territories --
Domine stes securus inimici tui suaviter intrabunt terram and subjicientur
Domni tuae. Which Albert, flattered by his own wishes, interpreted as the words
seemed to import thus: Sir, Rest your self secure, your Enemies shall sweetly
(peaceably or fairly) enter your Land, and shall be made subjects to your
Family; But being vanquished and subdued, the crafty South sayer thus read and
Interpreted his words, Domi ne stes securus, do not rest at home secure;
inimici tui, thy enemies, sua viter intrabunt, by their force shall thrice
enter thy Land, and subjicient, and shall cast, ur, a Chaldee word for Fire,
Domui tuae, on they Palace.

But among all the Scholars to this arch crafts master of falsehood, there are
none that have more unhappily improved the Mystery of deceit in this kind, than
the Jesuits and Romish Seminaries, their very looks and garbs as well as their
words are Equivocations, Wolves in sheeps clothing, and Ghostly fathers that
have by vows abandoned the world, ruffling in Courts, Exchanges, every where,
in huffing habits of Hectoring Gallants. Their discourses capable of as many
Constructions as an Almanac makers prognostications, nor are their writings
less full of crasty obscurity and hidden meanings. Of this sort we have here a
pretty instance, which without doubt was hammered in that Forge. A poor Friar
who it seems was not very fit for their turn, being sent from an eminent man of
that Fraternity on some sleeveless errand, has a Letter of Recommendation given
him to carry by his Superior; and being first read to him, finding the
Contents so much (as he understood them) in his favor, did no doubt, return
his Ghostly Patron abundance of thanks for so signal a kindness, promising
himself what extraordinary welcome the same would procure him with the person
to whom it was directed, and indeed who could suspect a Snake in such verdant
Grass? or a mischievous meaning in words that appeared so plain and hearty?
being as follows.

The Letter.
Sir,
MR. G. an Irish. Friar of the order of Saint Benedict is the bringer unto you
of news from me by means of this letter, he is one of the most Discreet, Wise,
and least Vicious persons that I ever yet (amongst all I have converst with)
knew, and has earnestly desired me to write to you in his favor, and to give
him a Letter for you of Credence on his behalf, and my Recommendation, which I
have granted to his Merit (I assure you) rather than to his Importunity, for
believe me, Sir, he is one that deserves your esteem, and I am sorry you should
be wanting in the least to oblige him by being mistaken in not knowing him: I
should be exceeding sed if you were so as many others have been, upon that
account, who now esteem him, and are of my best friends. Hence Sir, and from no
other motive is it that I desire to advertise you That you are obliged more
than any to take special notice of him, to afford him all imaginable respect,
and to say nothing in his presence that may offend or displease him in any
sort; For I may truly say, I love him as I do my self and assure you there
cannot be a more convincing argument of an unworthy person in the world, than
any way to injure him. I know that your self as soon as you cease to be a
stranger to his virtue, and have occasion to be acquainted with him, will love
him as well as I, and will thank me for this advice. The assurance I have of
your Civility hinders me for to write further of him to you, or to say more
upon this subject.

Your affectionate Friend, Johannes Armondus de Hess, etc.
Paris, Nov. 21. 1678.

Now I dare lay a wager the honest Reader sees no more harm in all this than
the silly Friar did that carried it; but if you please to turn down just a
quarter of the leaf on the outside so as to cover half the Letter and then read
what remains open, you will find it still coherent sense but to a quite
contrary import from that which before it carried. For thus it runs: Sir,
Mr. G. An Irish Friar is the bringer to you of this Letter, he is one of the
most vicious persons that I ever yet knew, etc.




But alas! deceiving a poor Friar with such a neat piece of Gullery is nothing
to the practices of the Ecclesiastical Politicians of the right Roman breed;
their principles delivered by approved Casuists extend to and allow more gross
exploits. Take an instance of it in commerce, To use Lies (says de Graffijs l.
2. ca. 118.) in bargaining to get a good price, is but a venial fault, though
made a daily practice. What think you of forswearing ones self a little? Hear
what their great Doctor Soto in his book de Just. and Jure l. 5. q. 7. says,
Testimonium falsum in favorem proximi, non est mortale. A false Testimony in
favor of my neighbor is no mortal sin. And he gives you (though himself a
Dominican) this true-blew Jesuitical Reason for it; Because, says he, the
Command is, Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, but
forbids not thy doing it for him. Their Navarr delivers it for orthodox Popish
Divinity, That any person being Interrogated unduely, that is, by any that he
thinks not competent Judges in that Case, concerning any thing which if
confessed might endanger him, may answer with a mental reservation, denying
that to be done which (...) in was done, secretly meaning in such a mo^^ or was
not done with an intent to discover it to you, or the like. Their Sylvester, in
his Sums in the wor^ Accusation; speaks freely, that the Accused (in the last
case (...)orementioned) may tell a Lie, which is not any mortal (...)nor so
much as venial, if answering cautious^^ (...) they say sophistically, he speak
that which is false in the Judges sense and true in his own; Since not being
properly under his Jurisdiction, he is not bound to speak Truth in his sense.
Nor is Truth more secure amongst them in the Pulpit than at the Bar; A Preacher
may there Lie, by Gajetans good leave [ Sum. V. Mendactum p. 437.] if he does
it not as a Preacher, and his Lies be not scandalous so the said Sylvester (on
the same word number. 4.) thus resolves the point, Queritur utrum sit peccitum
mortale praedicatori mentiri in Ambono^^ If any enquire whether it be a mortal
sin for a Preacher to tell Lies in the pulpit, Dico quod non, etc. I say no, If
he can do it wittily, he may intermix his Sermons with false Stories provided
they be but jocose, for if they only make his hearers innocently merry, it is
scarce so much as a venial. In a word, Since by their doctrines they may
without danger be false so their friends and dependants, to private persons, to
Magistrates, to their Priests, to their God, where ought they to have Credit?
Since they may practice Lying and deceit in common Conversation, in Commerce;
in Doctrine, in Courts of Justice; and even in Gods Worship; where may they be
trusted*

FINIS.

