THE THREE BOOKS OF Hermas, the Disciple of PAVL the Apostle.

Viz. I. The Church. II. The Sheepherd. III. The Similitudes.



Englished by John Pringle.

LONDON, Printed for John White in Thread-needle Street, behind the Old
Exchange, 1661.

The first Book of Hermas, the Disciple of Paul, which is entitled, the CHURCH.
VISION. I.
HE who had brought me up, sold a certain Girl at Rome; but after many years
her being seen I again knew, and I began to love her as my sister; but some
time being finished, I saw her washed in the River Tyber; And I stretched out
my hand to her, and led her out of the River: and having seen her, I thought in
my heart, saying, Happy should I be, if I could obtain such a Wife both in
beauty and manners. This only, nor any thing else did I think.

2 But after some time passing on with these cogitations, I honored the
Creature of God, thinking how excellent and beautiful it is. And when I had
walked, I fell asleep. And the Spirit caught me, and carried me by a certain
place at the right hand, by which man could not travel; But the place was among
the Rocks, and craggy, and impassable by reason of waters. And when I had past
over that place, I came into a plain, and my knees being bowed, I began to pray
unto the Lord, and to confess my sins.

3 And while I prayed, the Heaven opened, and I see the woman whom I had
desired, saluting me from Heaven, and saying, Hail Hermas. And I looking upon
her, say unto her, Lady, what do thou here? But she answered unto me, I am
received hither, that I may reprove thy sins before the Lord. Lady, said I,
will thou reprove me? No, says she, but hear the words which I am about to say
unto thee.

4 God who dwells in the Heavens, and made out of nothing the things that
are, and multiplied them for his holy Church, is angry with thee, because thou
have offended against me. I answering say unto her, Lady, if against thee I
have offended, where, or in what place, or when did I speak to thee any
unseemly word? Have I not always esteemed thee as my Mistress? Have I not
always respected thee as my Sister? Why do thou imagine those so heinous
[crimes] against me

5 Then she smiling on me says, The concupiscence of wickedness has arisen in
thine heart: seems it not to thee to be an unjust thing to a just man, if evil
concupiscence should arise in his heart? It is a sin to him, and indeed a great
one, for a just man thinks just things; therefore he thinking the things that
are just, and he rightly proceeding, in the Heavens he shall have the Lord
favorable in every business of his; but who so think wicked things in their
hearts, death and captivity do they choose to themselves; chiefly they who love
this world and glory in their riches, and who expect not the good things to
come their souls are emptied; But these things the doubtful ones do, who have
not hope in the Lord, and despise and neglect their LIFE: but pray thou to the
Lord, and he will heal the sins of thee, and of thy whole house, and of all the
Saints.

6 But after she had spoken these words, the Heavens were shut, and I was
altogether in sorrow and fear, and said within me, If this be imputed sin unto
me, how shall I be able to be saved? or how shall I entreat the Lord for my
most abundant sins? with what words shall I beseech the Lord, that he may be
merciful to me?

7 These things I revolving, and discerning in my heart, I see against me a
great chair made of wools, white, as the snow: and an old Woman came, in a
shining Vesture, having a book in her hand, and she sat alone, and saluted me,
Hail Hermas. And I sad and weeping, said, Hail Lady. And she said unto me, Why
art thou sad Hermas, who wast patient and modest, and always cheerful? I
answering say unto her, Lady, a reproach is cast upon me by an excellent woman,
saying, that I have offended against her. But she says unto me, Far be that
thing from a servant of God; but perhaps the concupisence of her has arisen in
thine heart. There is indeed in the Servants of God such a thought, bringing in
sin; for this abominable thought ought not to be in the servant of God, nor a
proved spirit to covet an evil work, and especially Hermas, who contains from
all wicked concupisence, and is full of all simplicity and great innocence.

However not because of thee is the Lord angry, but for thine house which has
committed-a wickedness against the Lord, and against their Parents. And thou
seeing thou art a lover of thy sons, have not stirred up thine house, but have
let them pass to be conversant violently, for because of this is the Lord
angry with thee. But he will heal all the evils which are acted against thee in
thine house; for because of their sins and iniquities, thou art consumed
through worldly employments; for now the loving kindness of God has pitied
thee, and thine house, and has preserved thee in GLORY. Only do not thou
WANDER, but be patient in mind, and strengthen thine house. Even as a worker in
brass producing his work, exposes them to him to whom he will: so also thou
teaching the daily just word, wilt cut off great sin. Cease not therefore to
admonish thy sons, for the Lord knows that they will act repentance from their
whole heart, and he shall write thee in THE BOOK OF LIFE.

9 And when she had finished these words, she says to me, Will thou hear me
reading? I say unto her, Lady I will. Be thou then an hearer. And turning over
the book, she read gloriously and excellently, and wonderfully, which I was not
able to retain in memory; for they were terrifying words, which man was not
able to sustain. Yet the last words I commended to memory, for they were few,
and profitable for us.

10 Behold the God of powers, who by his invisible power and great knowledge
has built the World, and by his honorable Council compassed about his
Creature with comeliness, and by his most strong WORD fixed the Heaven, and
founded the Earth upon the waters, and by his powerful virtue has built his
holy CHURCH, which he has blessed; Behold he will remove the Heavens and
Mountains, Little hills and Seas, and all shall be full with his chosen ones,
that he may render unto them the promise which he re-promised, with much honor
and joy, if they shall keep the statutes of God, which they received in great
faith.

11 And when she had finished in reading, she arose from the chair, and four
young men came and took up likewise the chair to the EAST. And she called me to
her, and touched my breast, and says unto me, did my reading please thee? I
say unto her, Lady, these last pleased me, but the former are cruel and hard;
but she says unto me, these latter to the Just, but the former to the
fugitives and Heathens. And whilst she was speaking with me, two certain men
appeared, and took her up upon their shoulders, and went away, whither also the
chair was toward the EAST; but she departed cheerful, and when she was to go
away, she says to me Be comforted Hermas.

VISION. II.
1 BUt whilst I went on with these [thoughts,] about that time wherein also
the year before walking, I called to memory the former years Vision; And again
the Spirit took me away, and led me into the same place, wherein the first year
[I was] and I honored his Name because he should esteem me worthy, and should
manifest unto me my old sins; and when I had arisen from prayer, I see over
against me that old woman, whom also the former year I had seen walking, and
reading some certain Book; And she says to me, can thou rehearse these
things to the chosen ones of God? I say unto her, Lady, such great words I
cannot retain in memory, but give me the Book and I will write it down. Take it
says she, and restore it unto me.

2 But as soon as I had gotten it, going aside into a certain place of the
field, I wrote down all to a letter, for I found not Syllabs; And when I had
finished the writing of the book, suddenly from my hand the Book was snached,
but by whom I saw not. But after fifteen days when I had fasted, and had much
entreated the Lord, the knowledge of the writing was revealed to me; But the
Writing was this.

3 Thy SEED Hermas has trespast against the Lord, and have betrayed their
Parents in great wickedness; And the betrayers of Parents have heard, and the
subtle have gone on. But also now they have added to their sins lusts, and the
defilements of wickedness; And so have they filled up their iniquities. But
hasten thou these words to all thy Sons, and to thy Wife who is to be thy
Sister; And she therefore may bridle her tongue wherein she curses; And these
words being heard, she shall contain herself, and shall obtain mercy, for she
shall be instructed after that thou shall have imparted unto her these words
which that RVLER Commanded, that they should be revealed to thee.

4 Then shall the sins be remitted to them which long ago they sinned, and to
all the Saints who have sinned, until this very day, if from their whole heart
they shall act repentance, and take away doubtings from their hearts; for that
RULER has sworn by his glory upon his chosen ones, that day being finished,
also now if any one shall sin, that he shall not have Salvation, for the
repentances of the just have ends; The days of repentance are fulfilled to all
the Saints, but to the Gentiles repentance until in the last day.

5 Thou shall therefore speak unto them that are over the Church, that they may
direct their ways in Righteousness, that they may receive in full the
REPROMISSION with much Glory; Continue ye therefore who work righteousness,
and so do ye that your change may be with the holy Angels: Happy ye whosoever
sustain the great pressure coming upon [you,] and whosoever shall not deny HIS
OWN LIFE; For the Lord has sworn by his Son, he who shall deny his Son and
himself, promising themselves his LIFE, they also are about to deny him in the
days approaching, but they who never denied [him] through his exceeding great
mercy is he become propitious to them.

6 But thou Hermas do not thou remember the injuries of thy sons, but neither
may thou neglect thy Sister, but take care that they be amended from their
former sins, for they shall be instructed by that Doctrine, if now thou shall
not be mindful of their injury, for the memory of injuries works death, but
the oblivion of them Life Eternal.

7 But thou Hermas have sustained great worldly Tribulations, because of the
overslippings of thy house, because them thou have neglected, as pertaining
nothing to thee, and in thy malicious businesses have been involved; But that
shall save thee, that thou have not departed from the living God, and thy
simplicity and singular continency they shall save thee, if thou shall
continue, and they shall save all whosoever work the like, and enter in, in
innocence and simplicity.

8 Those who are of this sort, shall prevail against all wickedness, and shall
continue unto life eternal; Happy are all they that work righteousness, they
shall not be taken away until into life eternal; But thou will say, Behold
great Tribulation comes if it seem [good] to to thee again, deny it, NIGH IS
THE LORD TO THOSE THAT TURN, as it is written in HELDAM and MODAL, who did
Prophecy in the Wilderness to the people.

9 But Brethren it was revealed to me sleeping, by a comely youth, and saying
unto me, that old Woman from whom thou have got the Book, whom think thou to
be? And I said SYBILLA. Thou errest quoth he, she is not. Who is she then Lord?
And he said to me, She is the CHVRCH of GOD. And I said to him, why therefore
is she an old Woman? Because quoth he, of all she was first Created, therefore
an old Woman, and for her was the World made.

10 But after these I saw a Vision in mine house, and that old Woman came and
asked me, if already I had given the Book to the Elders; And I answered, as yet
not; But she said, Thou have well done, For I have certain words to command
thee, but when I shall finish all the words, they shall be aptly known by the
Elect; Thou shall therefore write two Books, and thou shall send one to
CLEMENT, and one to GRAPTE; But Clement shall send it into foreign Cities,
for to him it is permitted, but Grapte shall admonish the Widows and Orphans;
But thou shall read it in this City, with the Elders that are over the Church.

VISION. III.
1 THe Vision which I saw Brethren, was such a Vision, when I had frequently
fasted, and had prayed the Lord that to me he would show the Revelation, which
he promised to show by that old Woman; That same night appeared that old Woman
to me, and said unto me,

2 Because thou so languishest and art troubled to know all things, come thou
into the field, where thou will, and about the sixth hour I will manifest me to
thee, and I will show thee what things it behooves thee to see; I asked her
saying, Lady into what place of the field? Where thou will quoth she, choose
out a good place, secret. But before I had begun to speak, and to tell her the
place, she says to me, I will come where thou will.

3 I was therefore Brethren in the field, and I observed the hours, and I came
into the place where I had appointed to her to come, and I see a seat set; It
was a linen pillow, and spread upon a linen sheet; seeing these set, and none
to be in the place, I began to be astonished, and my hairs rose up, and as it
were a horror ceized on me, seeing I was alone; But being returned to my self,
and having remembered the Glory of God, and having taken courage, having bowd my
knees, I confessed to God again the sins which before.

4 Behold she comes thither with six young men, whom also I had seen before,
and she stood behind me, and heard me praying and confessing unto the Lord my
sins, and touching me she said, Leave off now to pray so much for thy sins,
pray also for Righteousness, that thou may receive part of it in thine house.

5 And she raised me up from the place, and took hold of my hand, and led me to
the seat, and she says to these young men, Go ye and build; but after the
youths had departed, and we were alone, she says to me, sit thou here; I say
to her, Lady suffer the Elders before to sit down. What I say to thee quoth
she, Sit thou down; And when I would sit at the right side, she suffered not,
but beckned to me with her hand, that I should sit at the left side.

6 But I bethinking and remaining sad, that she had not suffered me to sit at
the right side, she says to me, Why art thou sad Hermas? The place which is at
the right side is theirs who already have deserved GOD, and have suffered for
the cause of his Name; But to thee there remains much that thou may sit with
them; as thou remainest in thy simplicity, remain thou, and thou shall sit with
them; and whosoever shall have wrought their works, and shall sustain what they
have sustained.

7 I say unto her, Lady I would know what they have sustained; Hear quoth she,
wild Beasts, Whips, Prisons, Crosses for the cause of his Name, for this theirs
are the right sides of Holiness, and whosoever shall suffer for the Name of God;
but the rest's are the left sides, but to both of them, both who at the right
hand, and who at the left do sit, are the gifts and promises, only that, who
sit at the right side have a certain glory; but thou art desirous to sit at the
right hand with them, but thy infirmities are many, but thou shall be purged
from thy failings, but also all who shall not be doubtful shall be made clean
from all their sins unto this day.

8 And when she had said these things she would go away, and falling down
before her at her feet, I besought her by the Lord, that to me she would
demonstrate the fight which she had re-promised; But she again took hold of my
hand and lifted me up, and made me to sit upon the seat at the left hand, and
having lifted up a certain splendent rod, she says to me, See thou a mighty
thing? I say to her, Lady, I see nothing. Behold, See thou not over against
thee a great Tower which is built upon the waters, with four-corner'd stones
shining.

9 For in a Quadrangle was there a Tower builded by these six Youths who had
come with her, but others many thousands of men did bring stones, but some drew
forth stones from the DEEP, others took them up from the EARTH and gave them to
these six Youths, moreover they took them and builded, but those stones which
were extracted out of the deep they did all place so into the structure, for
they were polished, and convenient for commixture with other stones, and so
were they conjoined one to another, so that their commixtures could not appear,
and on this manner did the structure of the Tower appear, as if builded of one
stone.

10 But the rest of the stones which were brought from off the earth, some [of
them] indeed they rejected, but some they fitted for the structure, others they
hewed and did cast far from the Tower; but many other stones were placed about
the Tower, and they did not use them for the structure, for some of them were
RUGGED, but others had RENTS, but others [were] WHITE and ROUND, not agreeing
for the structure of the Tower.

11 But I saw other stones to be cast far from the Tower, and tumbling into the
WAY, and not remaining in the way, but to be rolled from the way into a desert
place, but others falling into the FIRE and burning, others falling beside the
WATER, nor to be able to be rolled into the water, they indeed being willing to
enter into the Water.

12 And when she had demonstrated unto me these things, she would depart, I say
to her, Lady, what does it profit me to have seen these things, and not to know
what these things are? She answering said to me, Thou art a cunning man,
willing to know these things that are about the Tower, Therefore, say I, Lady,
that I may declare it to my Brethren, and they may be made more cheerful, and
hearing these things may honor the Lord with much glory.

13 And she says, many indeed shall hear, and when they shall hear some of
them shall rejoice, but some shall weep, but also they hearing, if they shall
act repentance they also shall rejoice: Hear now concerning the similitude of
the Tower all these [things] and hitherto be thou not more troublesome to me
concerning revelation, for these revelations have an end, for they are
fulfilled, but thou desistest not in asking revelations, for thou art
importunate.

14 The Tower indeed which thou see to be builded, Am I the Church, who have
appeared to thee both now and before? Whatsoever therefore thou would, ask
thou concerning the Tower, and I will reveal it to thee, that thou may
rejoice with the Saints. I say unto her, Lady, because thou have once esteemed
me worthy, that thou may reveal all things to me, reveal [them.] She says
to me, whatsoever must be revealed to thee, so much shall be revealed, that thy
heart may be with the Lord, and doubt thou not whatsoever thou see.

15 I asked her, Why is the Tower built upon the waters, Lady? I had said unto
thee also before thee to be subtle, enquiring diligently about the structures,
therefore thou shall find the Truth: Why therefore the Tower is builded upon
the WATERS, hear thou, because your life is saved by water, and shall be, for
it is founded with the word of [his] omnipotent and honorable Name, for it is
contained by the invisible power of God. I answering say to her, highly do
these things carry themselves.

16 But these six young men that build who are they Lady? These are the Angels
of God, who at first were constitute, to whom the Lord has delivered his
universal Creature of the building, edifying, and ruling over his Creature, for
by them shall the structure of the Tower be consummate.

17 But the rest that bring stones, who are they? They also the holy Angels of
the Lord, but they are more excellent then these, therefore when the building
of the Tower shall be accomplished, they shall altogether feast beside the
Tower, and shall honor the Lord because the structure of the Tower shall be
finished.

18 I asked her saying, I would know the event of the stones, and the force of
them what it is, but she answering said to me, art thou better before all, that
that may be revealed to thee? for others are before thee, and better then thee,
to whom it behoved these visions to be revealed, but that the Name of God may
be honored, to thee it is revealed, and shall be revealed, because of the
doubtful ones, who think in their hearts whether these things be or be not, say
unto them that all these things are true, and nothing is out of the truth, but
all [are] firm, and are surely grounded.

19 Hear now also of the stones that are in the structure, indeed these
four-corner'd-stones, and white, agreeing in their commixtures, these are the
APOSTLES, and Overseers, and Teachers, and MINISTERS, who have entered in in the
clemency of God, and ruled their charge, and taught, and ministered holily and
modestly to the elect of God, who have slept, and who as yet are, and have
always agreed with them, and had peace in themselves, and have heard
themselves mutually, for this also into the structure of the Tower do their
commixtures agree.

20 But these who are drawn out of the deep, and placed into the structure, and
their commixtures agree with the rest of the stones which are already builded,
are these who already have fallen asleep, and have suffered for the cause of
the Name of the Lord.

21 But the rest of the stones that were brought from the earth, I would know
who they are Lady; she says, Those indeed who go in the earth, and are not
polished, those God has proved, because they have entered in into the
Righteousness of the Lord, and have directed their ways in his Commandments.

22 But these that are brought, and are put in the structure of the Tower,
these are the young ones in the faith, and the faithful, but they are
commonished by the Angels to do good, for that cause there is not wickedness
found in them.

23 But those whom they did reject, and placed beside the Tower, who are they?
These are they who have sinned, and would do repentance, for this they are not
cast out far from the Tower; because they shall be profitable in the structure,
if they shall act Repentance. They therefore that are about to act Repentance,
if they shall do Repentance they shall be strong in the faith, if now they
shall act Repentance while the Tower is a building. For if the structure shall
be finished, now any shall not have a place where he may be put, but he shall
be a reprobate: but he only shall have this who already is placed beside the
Tower.

24 But these that were hewed and thrown far from the Tower, will thou know who
they are? These are the SONS OF INIQUITY, and they have believed in
dissimulation, and all wickedness has not departed from them, for this they
have not Salvation, because they are not profitable in the structure, by reason
of their wickednesses. Wherefore they are hewn and thrown far away because of
the anger of the Lord, because they have stired him up.

25 But the rest of the stones whom thou did see very many placed, not going
into the structure, these indeed were rugged. These are they who have known the
Truth, and have neither remained in it nor have been joined to the Saints, for
this cause they are unprofitable.

26 But these that had rents; because they have discord in their hearts one
against another, and have not peace among themselves. In presence indeed having
peace, but when one shall go away from another, their wickedness remains in
their hearts. These therefore are the rents which the stones have.

27 But those that are maimed are they who indeed believed, having the most
part of iniquity, for this cause they are broken, and not entire.

28 But the white and round, and not agreeing into the structure of the Tower,
who are they Lady? She answering to me said, How long hitherto art thou foolish
and senseless, and ask est all things and understandest nothing? These are
they that have indeed faith, but having also the riches of this world.
Therefore when tribulation shall come, for their riches and negotiations they
deny the Lord.

29 I answering say to her, Lady, when therefore shall they be profitable to
the Lord? when their riches, quoth she, shall be circumcised, which delight
them, then shall they be profitable to the Lord unto the building. For as a
round stone, unless it shall be hewn, and cast off somewhat from it, cannot be
made four-corner'd, so also they that are rich in this world, unless their
riches shall be circumcised they cannot be profitable to the Lord.

30 From thee first know it, when thou wast rich, thou wast unprofitable, but
now thou art profitable and fit for thy LIFE, for also thou thy self wast of
these stones.

31 But the rest of the stones which thou did see cast far from the Tower,
and running in the way, and to be rolled from the way into desert places, these
are they who have indeed believed, but with their doubting have left their own
true WAY, thinking themselves to be able to find a better way; but they wander,
and are miserable, entering into desert ways.

32 But these that fell into the fire and did burn, are they who for ever have
departed from the Living God; nor does it any more ascend into their hearts, to
act repentance, because of the desire of their lusts, and wickednesses which
they work.

33 But the rest which fell besides the waters, and could not be rolled into
the waters, who are these? These are they who have heard the WORD, willing to
be baptized in the NAME of the Lord, to whom when the Sanctity of the TRUTH
came into their memory, they draw back themselves, and do again walk after
their wicked desires.

34 Therefore she finished the narration of the Tower; but I, seeing I was
obstinate, asked her, Whether to all these stones which were thrown away, nor
did agree into the structure of the Tower, is there Repentance, and shall they
have a place in this Tower? They have, quoth she, Repentance, but in this Tower
they cannot agree fitly.

35 But they shall be put in another place much inferior to this, when they
shall have been vexed, and have fulfilled the days of their transgressions;
and for this shall they be taken up, because they have received THE JUST WORD;
and then shall it befall them to be released from their punishments, if the
wicked works which they have wrought shall ascend up into their hearts; but if
they shall not ascend into their hearts, they shall not be saved because of the
hardness of their hearts.

36 When therefore I left off to ask her of all these things, she says to me,
will thou see another? and seeing I was desirous to see, I became cheerful in
countenance; she looking back on me smiled, and says to me, See thou seven
women about the Tower? I see them, quoth I, Lady.

37 This Tower is supported by them according to the Precept of the Lord: Hear
now the effects of them; The first indeed of them who takes hold with her hand
is called FAITH, by her shall the chosen of God be saved; but the other who is
guirded about and acts manfully is called ABSTINENCE, she is the Daughter of
Faith; whosoever therefore shall follow her, shall become happy in his LIFE,
because he shall abstain from all evil works, believing that if he shall
contain himself from all Concupiscence, he shall be an heir of Life Eternal.

38 But the other five Lady who are they? They are Daughters mutually, quoth
she, but one is called SIMPLICITY, another INNOCENCE, another MODESTY, another
DISCIPLINE, but another CHARITY: Therefore when thou shall have kept the works
of their Mother, thou shall be able to keep all things.

39 I would know Lady what virtue each of them has; Hear quoth she, They have
equal virtues, but their virtues are mutually connected, and do follow them by
course as they are born; of Faith is born Abstinence, of Abstinence Simplicity,
of Simplicity Innocence, of Innocence Modesty, of Modesty Discipline and
Charity. Therefore their works are holy, chaste, and right; whosoever therefore
shall serve them, and would hold their works, he shall have an habitation in
the Tower with the Saints of God.

40 I asked her of the times, if now is the consummation? But she exclaimed
with a great voice, saying, O senseless man, do thou not see the Tower to be
always builded? Therefore when the Tower shall be consummate and builded it
has an end; but also swiftly shall it be finished, do not thou any more ask me
any thing, let this commemoration suffice thee and all the Saints, and this
renovation of your Spirits.

41 But not to thee alone are these things revealed, but that thou may also
demonstrate them to all, for after three days thou must understand, Hermas,
these words which I begin to say unto thee, that thou may speak them in the
ears of the Saints, that they hearing them when they shall have done them, they
may be cleansed from their wickednesses, and thou with them.

42 Hear me my Sons, I nourished you in much simplicity, and innocence, and
modesty, because of the loving-kindnesse of God which distilled upon you in
Righteousness, that ye may be sanctified and justified from all naughtiness
and wickedness, but ye will not cease from your wickednesses.

43 Now therefore hear me, and have peace one with another, and visit ye one
another, and take ye by course, and do not ye alone take the Creatures of God;
also impart ye more abundantly to the needy, for some with many meats, contract
infirmity of their flesh, and violate their flesh; but of others who have not
meat the flesh of them withers, for that because they have not food
sufficient, and their body is consumed; therefore this intemperance is hurtful
to you that have and do not communicate to the needful, Attend ye the judgment
coming upon [you.]

44 Ye that are more eminent, enquire ye out the hungry, while as yet the Tower
is not consummate, for after the Tower shall be finished, ye will be willing to
do good, and shall not have place; See therefore ye that glory in your riches,
least perhaps they groan who stand in need, and their groan ascend to the Lord,
and ye be excluded with your goods out of the gate of the Tower.

45 Now therefore I say to you who are over the Church, and love the chief
seats, do not ye become like unto witches; and the witches indeed carry their
poisons in boxes, but ye contain your poison and drugs in the heart, and ye
will not purge your hearts, and mix your sense with a pure heart, that you may
have tender mercy from the great KING.

46 See therefore Sons, least perhaps these your dissentions betray your LIFE,
how will ye instruct the elected Ones of God, when your selves have not
Discipline? Commonish therefore your selves mutually, and be ye appeased among
them, that also I before your Father appearing, may render a reason for you to
the Lord.

47 And when she had left off to speak with me, these six young men that
builded came, and took her away to the Tower, and the other four took up the
seat, and they went again into the Tower, their faces I saw not, because they
were averted; I asked her going away, that she would reveal to me concerning
the three shapes in which she had appeared to me; But answering she said to me,
concerning these thou must ask another, that it may be revealed to thee.

48 But Brethren she appeared to me in the first vision a very old woman in the
former year, and sitting in a chair. But in another vision she had indeed a
youthful face, but flesh and hairs ancient, and standing did speak to me, but
she was more cheerful than first. But in the third vision she was all more
youthful, and comely in countenance, only that she had ancient hairs, but she
was cheerful in face, and sitting upon a seat.

49 For these very things I was exceedingly sad, until I should know this
vision; I see that old woman in a vision of the night, saying to me, All [thy]
asking stands in need of humility, fast therefore, and thou shall receive from
the Lord what thou requirest.

50 Therefore I fasted one day, in the same night there appeared to me a youth
and said, Why do thou frequently ask revelations in thy prayer? see, least
seeking many things thou hurt thy flesh: let these revelations suffice thee,
can thou see more strong revelations then what thou have seen?

51 I answering say unto him, Lord, this alone I ask, for the three figures of
that old Womon, that the Revelation may be made complete; He answered me, Ye
are not senseless, but your dubitations make senseless, because that ye have
not your heart to the Lord.

52 I answered to him and said, but from thee we shall know these things more
diligently, hear says he, of the figures which thou inquire; In the first
vision indeed why an old Woman appeared to thee sitting upon a chair, because
your Spirit is more ancient, also is withered, and not having force for your
infirmities and dubitation of heart.

53 For even as Elderly men who have not hope of renewing, and nothing else
expect but their sleep; so also ye infirmed by worldly businesses, have
delivered up your selves unto slothfulness, and have not thrown off solicitude
from you in the Lord, and your sense is confused, and ye have waxed old in your
sadnesses.

54 Why therefore she sat upon a chair I would know Lord; He answered, because
every infirm [man] sits on a chair, because of his infirmity, that his
infirmity may be contained; behold thou have the figure of the first vision.

55 But in the second vision thou did see her standing, and having a youthful
face, and more cheerful then the former, but flesh and hairs ancient; Hear
quoth he also this parable, When any one has now become older, he despairs of
himself, because of his infirmity, and poverty, and he expects nothing else
but the last day of his life: after that suddenly to him there is left an
inheritance, and hearing he rises up, and being become cheerful, he indueth
strength, and now he sits not down, but stands, and is freed from his former
sorrows, and now he sits not, but does manfully.

56 So also ye, hear ye the revelation which God has revealed to you, because
the Lord has had pity on you, and has renewed your Spirit, and ye have put
off your infirmities, strength has come unto you, and ye have grown strong in
Faith, and God having seen your valor has rejoiced, for this cause he has
demonstrated to you the structure of the Tower, and he will show [you] other
things, if from your whole heart ye shall have peace among your selves.

57 But in the third vision thou saw her more youthful, honest, and
cheerful, and her countenance serene, for even as if any good messenger should
come upon any one sad, immediately he forgets his sorrow, and expects nothing
else but the message which he has heard, he is comforted concerning the rest,
and his Spirit is renovated, because of the joy which he has taken; So also ye
have gotten the renovation of your spirits, seeing these good things.

58 And because upon a seat ye saw her sitting, it is a strong position,
because a stool has four feet, and stands strongly; For also the world is
contained by the four Elements, therefore they that shall do Repentance
completely shall be younger, and they that from their whole heart shall act
Repentance shall be grounded: Thou have in full the revelation, seek nothing
more of things to be revealed, but if any thing must, it shall be revealed to
thee.

VISION. IV.
1 BRethren, I saw a vision after twenty days of the former vision, the figure
of tribulation about to come upon [us;] for I was going on in that way to
Campana, but from the public way unto the village are nigh ten furlongs, but
seldom is [any] journey made by that place.

2 And I walking alone, entreated the Lord, that these revelations, which he
showed to me by his holy Church, he would confirm, and would grant Repentance
unto all his Servants that are scandalized, that his Great and Honorable Name
may be honored, and because he esteemed me worthy, that he should show unto me
his wonders, and I should honor him, and give him thanks, as it were a voice
answered unto me, DOUBT NOT HERMAS.

3 I began therefore to think within me, and to say, What have I to doubt so
grounded by the Lord, and who have seen honorable things?

4 I went forward a little, Brethren, and behold I see the dust up to Heaven, I
began to say within me, What? do the Cattle come and stir up the dust, but it
was distant from me as it were a furlong; and behold, I see the dust more and
more arising, so that I suspected it to be something from above.

5 But the Sun shone a little, and behold I see a great beast like unto a
Whale, and out of his mouth proceeded fiery Locusts, but the stature of that
beast was almost an hundred foot, but he had an head like a round urnal vessel;
I began to weep and invoke the Lord that he might deliver me from it: then I
remembered the word which I had heard, DOUBT NOT HERMAS.

6 Therefore brethren, having put on the faith of God, and remembered [him] that
taught me great things, I delivered my self boldly upon the Beast, but so did
that beast come, so that it could in one stroke crush a City; I came near it,
and the beast so huge extended it self upon the Earth, and did show forth
nothing but it is tongue, and at all did not move it self until I had past over
it all.

7 But that beast had upon its head four colors, black, then red and bloody,
then golden, then white; but after I had gone over it, I went forward nigh
thirty foot, and behold, there met me a certain virgin well adorned, as if
coming out of her bed, all in white, and shod with white shoes, and down to her
face having a Mitre, but for a covering she had her neat hairs.

8 I knew therefore by my former visions, because she is the CHURCH, and I
became more cheerful, but she saluted me saying, Hail thou Man. And I saluted
her, saying, Hail Lady; But she answering said to me, Has nothing met thee,
Man? I say to her, Lady, there has met me such a beast as could consume a
people; but by the power of God, and his singular loving kindness, I have
escaped it.

9 Thou have well escaped it, says she, because thou have thrown down thy
solitude and solicitude before the Lord, and have opened thy heart unto him,
believing that by no other thou could be safe, except by his Great and
Honorable Name; for this cause the Lord has sent his Angel, who is over the
BEASTS, whose name is HEGRIN, and he has stopped it is mouth, least it should
slaughter thee. Great tribulation have thou escaped, because of thy faith, and
who have not stood in doubt of such a beast.

10 Go therefore and declare to the elected of God his great things; and thou
shall say unto them, that this beast is the figure of pressure about to come
upon [them;] if therefore ye shall prepare you, ye shall be able to escape it,
if your heart shall be pure, and without spot, and if the rest of your days ye
shall serve God without complaint, cast your solicitudes upon the Lord, and he
shall direct them; Believe God ye who are DOUBTFUL; because he can do all
things, both avert his wrath from you, and send you safeguards.

11 Woe to these doubtful ones who shall hear these words, and shall despise
them, it had been better for them not to have been born.

12 I asked her of these four colors which the Beast had in his head, but she
answered unto me, saying, Again thou art curious, asking concerning things of
this sort; And I said, Lady, demonstrate unto me what these are; Hear says
she, That BLACK is the World in which ye stay; but the FIERY and BLOODY,
because this World must perish by blood and fire.

13 But the GOLDEN part are ye who have escaped this World; for as by fire Gold
is tried, and becomes profitable, so also are ye tried who dwell in them:
Therefore they that shall continue, and shall be tried by them, shall be
purged, and as Gold is made better, and puts off its dross, so also ye shall
cast off all sadness, and anguish, and ye shall be made clean for the
structure of the Tower; but the WHITE part is of the age about to come on, in
which the elected Ones of God shall dwell, because the elect of God shall be
immaculate and pure, into Life Eternal.

14 Thou therefore cease not to speak these things in the ears of the Saints;
ye have also the figure of great tribulation about to come upon you, for if ye
would it shall be nothing. In your mind retain these things that are
prescribed; These things when she had said she departed, but I saw not to what
place she went away; But there was a noise made, and I turned behind me, being
afraid, and did think that beast was approaching.

The End of the first Book.
The second Book of Hermas, the Disciple of Paul, which is entitled, the
SHEEPHERD.
The Proaem.
1. WHen I had prayed at home, and had sat down upon the Bed, there entered a
certain man of a reverend face, in a Pastoral habit, clothed with a white
Cloak, carrying a bag in his shoulders, and a Rod in his hand, and he saluted
me, and I resaluted him, and forthwith he sits down next me.

2 And says to me, I am sent from that venerable Messenger, that I may dwell
with thee the rest of the days of thy life. And I thought him to have come to
tempt me; And I say to him, for who art thou? for I know to whom I am
delivered; He says to me, know thou not me? No quoth I; I am that Sheepherd
to whom thou art delivered.

3 He as yet speaking, his figure was changed, and when I had known it to be
him to whom I was delivered, I was confounded, and forthwith a fear came in
upon me, and I was wholly broken with sorrow, because I had answered to him so
unwisely; He says to me, be not confounded, but receive power in thy mind in
my commandments, which I am about to give thee.

4 For I am sent, quoth he, that what things thou did before see, I may show
thee them all again, chiefly of these which are useful for YOU. First of all my
Commandments, and the figures of similitudes write thou, but the rest, as I
shall show [them thee] so shall thou write them: But therefore I enjoin thee
first to write my Commandments, and the Similitudes; that after that by
reading, thou may more easily keep them.

5 Therefore I wrote the commands and similitudes even as he had enjoined me,
which being heard, if YE shall keep them, and in them shall walk, and shall
exercise them in a PURE MIND, ye shall receive from the Lord what things he
promised you; but if these being heard, ye shall not act Repentance, but shall
add unto your transgressions, ye shall receive the adverse things from the
Lord; all these that Sheepherd, the Messenger of Repentance, commanded me to
write.

COMMAND I.
1 FIrst of all believe thou, that there is one God who created and finished
all things, and made all things of nothing, He capable of all things is alone
great, who can neither with word be defined, nor by the mind conceived.

2 Believe therefore on him, and fear him, and fearing, have ABSTINENCE; These
keep, and cast away from thee all naughtiness, and put on the virtue of
Righteousness, and thou shall LIVE TO GOD, if thou shall keep this Commandment.

COMMAND II.
1 HE said to me, have thou simplicity, and be thou innocent and thou shall be
as the infant who knows not malice, who has lost the life of men. First, of
none speak evilly, nor willingly hear one speaking evilly; But if thou also
shall hear, thou shall be partaker of the sins of the evil speaker, and
believing, thou likewise shall have sin, because thou have believed him that
speaks evilly of thy brother.

2 Detraction is pernicious, it is an unconstant devil(...), it consists
never in peace, but remains always in discord; contain thee from it, and
have always peace with thy brother; Put on holy CONSTANCY in which are no
sins, but all are gladsome, and do good out of thy labors, to all needful ones
give simply, nothing doubting to whom thou may give, give to all; FOR TO ALL
WOULD GOD GIVE OF HIS GOOD THINGS.

3 Therefore they that get shall render account to God, why they received it,
and to what; But they who get, having feigned necessity, shall render a reason,
but he that gives shall be innocent; for as he receives from the Lord he
accomplished his Ministry, in doubting nothing to whom he should give, and to
whom he should not give, and he did this Ministry simply gloriously to God;
Keep therefore this command as I have spoke to thee, that thy repentance may be
found simple, and it may become well to thy house, and have thou A CLEAN HEART.

COMMAND III.
1 A Gain he said to me, love the truth, and let all true speech proceed out of
thy mouth, that THE SPIRIT WHICH THE LORD HAS PLACED IN THY FLESH, may be
found TRUE with all men, and the Lord may be magnified who HAS GIVEN A SPIRIT
IN THEE, because the Lord is true in every word, and there is not a lie in him;
Therefore they that lie deny the Lord, not restoring to God the PLEDGE which
they received.

2 FOR THEY RECEIVED A SPIRIT WITHOUT LIE. This if they render subject to
lying, they do stain the command of the Lord, and become deceivers; I having
heard these things wept vehemently, who when he saw me weeping, he said to me,
why weepest thou? And I said, because Lord I know not if I can be able to be
saved; Why says he?

3 And I said, because never Lord have I spoken a true word in my life, but
have always lived in simulation, and a lie, for the truth I have affirmed to
all, and there has not any one contradicted me, but trust has been had to my
word; how then can I live seeing I have so done? And he said to me, thou indeed
think well and truly, for it became thee as the servant of God, to walk in
the truth, and not to conjoyn an evil conscience with the SPIRIT OF TRUTH, nor
to cause sadness to the holy and true Spirit of God.

4 And I said to him, Never Lord have I heard these words so diligently; And he
said to me, Now thou hear them take care after this, that also these false
things which before thou have spoken for thy employments, with these words
[that] also they may receive faith, for also they can receive faith, if after
this thou shall speak true things, and if thou shall keep the truth, thou shall
be able to attain LIFE; And whosoever shall hear this command, and shall do
it, and shall depart from lying, he shall LIVE TO GOD.

COMMAND IIII.
1 I Command thee quoth he, that thou keep CHASTITY, and let not the thought of
[thine] heart arise to thee of a strange matrimony or of Fornication, for this
begets great sin; but be thou always mindful of the Lord at all hours, and
thou shall NEVER SIN; For if this so evil cogitation ascend into thine heart,
thou commitest a great sin; And they that do these things follow the way of
death; See thou therefore abstain thy self from this cogitation, for where
chastity remains in the heart of a just man, there ought an evil cogitation
never to arise.

2 And I said to him, Lord permit me to speak a few words with thee; Speak
says he; And I said to him, Lord, if any should have a Wife faithful in the
Lord, and should find her in adultery, does the husband sin, if he live
together with her? And he said to me,

3 As long as he knows not her sin, the Husband is without blame, dwelling
together with her; But if the Husband shall know his Wife to have transgressed,
and the Wife shall not do Repentance, and remains in her Fornication, and the
Husband live with her, he shall be guilty of her sin, and partaker of her
Adultery; And I said to him, What then if the Woman shall continue in her
faults? And he said, Let the Husband send her away, and let the Husband remain
by himself; but if he shall send away his Wife, and shall marry another, he
also commits Adultery.

4 And I said to him, What if the woman put away should do repentance, and
would be returned to her Husband, shall she not be received by her Husband? And
he said to me, Yea, if her Husband shall not receive her, he sins, and
admits a great sin to himself; but he ought to receive her a sinner, who
has done repenpentance; But not often; for to the servants of God the
Repentance is one.

5 Because of repentance therefore, the Husband having put away his Wife, ought
not to marry another. Here the act is alike both in the Husband and in the
Wife, not only is it adultery to them who pollute their own flesh, but also
she who makes an Image commits Adultery; But if in these deeds she persevere,
and do not repentance, depart from her, and do not live together with her
otherwise, also thou shall be partaker of her sin.

6 For this cause it is commanded you that ye remain single both the Husband
and the Wife, for there may be repentance in [a deed] of this sort; but also I
give not occasion that these be so done, but that he who has sinned, sin no
more, but of his former sins God who has the power of giving soundness, shall
give a remedy, because it is he that has power of all things.

7 Again, I asked and said, because my Lord has esteemed me to be worthy, that
thou should dwell with me always, declare unto me a few words, because I
understand not any thing, and my heart is stopped by my former conversation,
and open to me my sense, because I am vehemently stupid, and of the the whole I
understand nothing.

8 And answering, he said unto me, I am set over to repentance, and to all that
do repentance I give feeling; Does it not seem to thee to be great wisdom to
do repentance, because he that does repentance obtains great feeling, for he
feels himself to have sinned, and to have done wickedly in the sight of the
Lord, and he is remembered BY THE INTELLECT that he has trespassed, and he does
repentance, and he works not wickedly any more, but works well, and
humbles his Soul and vexes it, because it has sinned.

9 Thou see therefore that repentance is great SENSE, And I said to him, for
this cause Lord I deligently inquire all things, because I am a sinner, that I
may know what things I may work and may live, because many are my sins; And he
said unto me, thou shall live if thou thou shall keep these my commandments,
and whosoever shall hear and do these commands shall LIVE TO GOD.

10 And I said to him, even now Lord, I have heard from certain DOCTORS that
other repentance there is not except that, when we descend into the water, and
receive the remission of our sins, after that not to sin, but to remain in
CHASTITY.

11 And he says to me, Thou have rightly heard, but now because diligently
thou ask all things, also this I demonstrate to thee, not giving occasion to
them who are about to believe, or who have believed the Lord.

12 For they who have already believed, or who are about to believe, the
repentance of sins they have not but the remission; For to those who were
called before these days has the Lord ordained repentantance, because the
cogitations of the heart, God does know, and he knows the infirmity of men, and
the manifold wickedness of the Devil, with which he endeavors some mischief
to the servants of God, and lays wait for them maliciously.

13 Therefore the merciful God has had compassion of his handiwork; And has
placed that repentance, and the power of this repentance has he given to ME;
And therefore I say to thee, that after that calling great and holy, if any one
shall be tempted by the Devil, and shall sin, he has one repentance; But
thenceforth if he sin and does repentance, it shall not be profitable to the
man that does such things, for difficultly shall he LIVE TO GOD.

14. And I said, Lord I have revived whenas so diligently I have heard these
Commandments, for I know that if after this I shall add nothing to my sins, I
shall be saved, And he said, safe, I say and all whosoever shall do these
commands shall be safe; And again I said to him, Lord because thou patiently
hear me, demonstrate unto me this, say it quoth he.

15 If the Husband or Wife of any one shall depart, and any of them shall
marry, what? Does he sin? He that marries, sins not quoth he; but if he
would remain by himself, he acquireth great honor to himself with the Lord;
Keep therefore CHASTITY, and modesty, and thou shall live to God; These things
that I speak with thee, keep thou henceforth from [the time] wherein I was
delivered to thee, and dwell in thine house, and there shall be remission to
thy former sins, if thou shall keep my commandments; But also to all there
shall be remission, who shall keep my commandments.

COMMAND V.
1 BE thou of a poysed mind quoth he, and patient, and thou shall have dominion
over all most wicked works, and shall work ALL righteousness; Because if thou
shall be PATIENT, THE HOLY SPIRIT THAT DWELLS IN THEE, shall be clean, and
shall not be obscured by any most wicked Spirit; But rejoicing it shall be
enlarged, and shall feast in the VESSEL in which it inhabiteth, and it shall
obey the Lord cheerful in great peace.

2 But if any wrath should come over it, immediately the holy Spirit, which is
IN THEE shall be straitened, and shall seek to depart, for it is suffocated by
a most wicked fight, and it has not a place of obeying the Lord, as it would,
for it is tribulated by ANGER; Therefore both Spirits when they inhabit
together, it is pernicious to man.

3 For if any one shall pluck up a little wormwood, and put it into a pot of
honey, shall not all the honey be destroyed? And so much honey by a little
wormwoode perisheh, and loses the sweetnsse of honey; And now it has not
acceptance with its Lord, because all the honey is made bitter, and has lost
its use; but if wormwood be not put into honey, it shall be sweet, and in use
to its Lord.

4 See therefore how much sweeter equal mindednesses is then honey, and he
shall be profitable to the Lord that stays in it, for WRATH is unprofitable;
If therefore anger shall be mixed with AEQUANIMITY, the mind is afflicted, and
its prayer is not profitable to God.

5 And I said to him, I would know Lord the wickedness of anger, that I may
keep me from it; And he said to me, Thou shall know it, and if thou shall not
keep thy self from it, thou shall loose thy hope with thy whole house; But
depart from it, for I am with thee the MESSENGER OF EQUITY. And all that depart
from it, whosoever shall do repentance with all their hearts, they shall LIVE
TO GOD; but also I will be with them, and will preserve them all.

6 For they are all justified who shall do repentance through the most holy
ANGEL. Hear now quoth he, the noughtiness of anger how wicked and how noxious
it is, and by what manner it overthrows the servants of God, for they who are
full in the faith, it cannot hurt them, because the power of God is with them,
for it over-turns the DOUBTFUL and EMPTY ones.

7 But as often as it shall see such men, it injecteth it self into their hearts,
and of NOTHING either a Husband or a Wife takes bitterness, because of the
things which are in use, or for a check, or for any superfluous word (if any
thing by chance should happen,) or for any friend, or debt, or for such like
superfluous things, for these are foolish and superfluous, and vain to the
servants of God.

8 But AEQUANIMITY is valiant and strong, and has great power, and fitteth in
great Majesty, cheerful, rejoicing in peace, and honoring the Lord in every
time meekly; for this equanimity dwells with the firm believers.

9 For ANGER is foolish, and light, and witless; but of foolishness is born
bitterness, and of bitterness wrath, but of wrath madness; This madness
created of so many evils, works great sin, and uncurable, for when all these
are in ONE VESSEL, WHERE also THE HOLY SPIRIT REMAINS; The Vessel endures not
this, but flows over, because the tender Spirit cannot with the evil Spirit
inhabit, it departs and dwells with the MEEK. After that when it shall have
departed from the man, IN WHOM IT DWELLED, the man becomes empty from the holy
Spirit, and afterward is filled with malignant Spirits, and is blinded by evil
cogitation.

10 Depart thou therefore from wrath, and put on AEQUANIMITY, and resist wrath,
and thou shall be found with modesty and chastity with God; See therefore least
perhaps thou neglect this Command, for if to this Commandment thou shall
perform obedience; Also the rest of my commands which I am about to enjoin thee
shall thou be able to keep; Therefore now confirm thy self in these commands,
that thou may live to God, and whosoever shall keep these Commandments,
shall LIVE TO GOD.

COMMAND VI.
1 I Had enjoined thee quoth he in the first command, that thou should keep
FAITH, and FEAR, and PENITENCY; Yea quoth I Lord; But now I will show unto thee
the virtues of these commandments, that thou may know their effects, how they
are placed to the just, likewise, and to the unjust; Thou therefore believe the
just, but believe the unjust [in] nothing, for righteousness has the right
way, but unrighteousness the evil; but keep thou the right way, but the wicked
[way] forsake thou; But the evil way, has not a good end, but has many
offenses.

2 It is rough and thorny and leads to destruction, and it is noxious to the
men that walk in it; but whosoever seek the right way, they walk equally without
offense, because it is not rough, neither thorny; Thou see therefore that
better it is to go by this way, for thou shall go says he, and whosoever from
their whole heart have believed in the Lord, they shall go through it.

3 Hear now says he, first of FAITH, there are two SPIRITS with man, one of
equity, and one of iniquity; And I said to him, how Lord shall I know that
there are two SPIRITS with a man? Hear says he, and understand; The spirit of
righteousness is tender, gentle and bashful, affable and quiet, when
therefore it shall ascend into thine heart, immediately it speaks with thee
of righteousness, of modesty, of chastity, of bountifulness, of pardon, of
charity, of piety; All these when they shall ascend into thine heart, know that
the spirit of equity is with thee; to this GENIUS therefore, and to its works
give thou credit.

4 Take now also the works of the Spirit of iniquity, first it is bitter,
wrathful, and foolish, and its works are pernicious and overthrow the servants
of God; when therefore these things shall ascend into thine heart, thou shall
understand from its works this to be the spirit of INIQUITY.

5 How Lord shall I understand? Hear quoth he, and understand, when wrath shall
happen to thee or bitterness, understand that to be IN THEE; After that the
desire of many works, and of the daintiest meats, and of drunkennesses, and the
desirings of many strange things, and pride and much speaking, and ambition,
and whatsoever things are like these; Thou therefore when thou shall know its
works, depart from them all, and believe it in nothing, because its works are
evil, and do not agree to the servants of God.

6 Thou have therefore the works of both the Spirits, understand now and
believe the Genius, of Righteousness, because its TEACHING is good. For though
a man be most happy, and the cogitation of the other GENIUS ascend into his
heart, that man or woman must needs sin; But also if a man shall be most
wicked, or a woman, and the works of the GENIUS of righteousness ascend up
into his heart, it must needs be that he or she do something of good; Thou see
therefore that it is good to follow the Spirit of equity, if therefore thou
shall follow it, and shall believe its works, thou shall LIVE TO GOD; And they
who shall believe its works shall live to God.

COMMAND VII.
1 FEar the Lord quoth he, and keep his Commandments, for keeping the precepts
of God, thou shall be potent in every act, and every business of thine shall
be incomparable; for fearing the Lord, thou shall work all good things; This is
the FEAR wherewith thou must fear, that thou may be able to be saved; but
the Devil fear thou not, for fearing the Lord thou shall have dominion over
him; Because there is no power in him.

2 But he in whom power is not, he is not so much as to be feared; but in whom
there is glorious power, he also is to be feared; for every one having power is
also to be feared, for he that has not power is contemned by all; fear thou
plainly the fictions of the Devil, because they are malignant; for fearing thou
shall fear the Lord, and the works of the Devil thou shall not do, but shall
abstain thee from them.

3 For fear is twofold; for if thou would work evil, fearing the Lord, that
indeed thou shall not do; but if thou would work good, verily the fear of the
Lord is strong, great, and glorious. Therefore FEAR God, and thou shall live,
and whosoever shall fear him, keeping his Commandments, their LIFE is with the
Lord; but of those that keep them not, neither is life in them.

COMMAND VIII.
1 I Said to thee, quoth he, that the creatures of God are double, and
ABSTINENCE is double; therefore from some things it behooves to abstain, but
from some things not. Manifest, quoth I, to me Lord from what things I must
abstain, and from what not. Hear, says he, from evil abstain, and do not do
it, but from good do thou not abstain, but do it; for if thou shall abstain
from good, and shall not do it, thou shall sin: Abstain therefore from all
evil, and thou shall know all Righteousness.

2 What wicked things are these, quoth I, from which I must abstain? Hear,
says he, from Adulteries, Drunkennesses, and evil Riotings, from too much
meat, from gorgeousness and unhonesty, from pride, from abnegation, from
lying, from defaming, from feigned wickedness, from remembrance of injury, and
from most evil fame, for these are the works of iniquity, from which it is
needful for the servant of God to abstain; for he that cannot abstain in these
cannot LIVE TO GOD.

3 Hear now, quoth he, also the consequences of them, and indeed there are many
things as yet from which the Servant of God ought to abstain, from theft, from
denying, from false testimony, from covetousness, from pride, and whatever are
like to them. These therefore seem to be evil to thee, do they not? Truly they
are very evil to the Servants of God, from all these therefore ought the
servant of God to abstain.

4 Abstain thou therefore from all these, that thou may live to God, and
may be wrote with the ABSTEINERS; Therefore these are they from which thou
ought to abstein; But from which thou ought not to abstein, Hear thou,
from all good works abstein not, but do them; Hear, quoth he, the virtue of the
good works which thou ought to work, that thou may be safe.

5 The first of all is Faith, the fear of the Lord, Charity, Concord, Equity,
Verity, Patience, Chastity, then these there is nothing better in the life of
men, who shall keep these, and do them in their life. Next hear their
consequences, To administer to Widows, not to despise Orphans and poor men, and
to redeem the Servants of God out of necessity, to be apt to entertain, for in
Hospitality oftentimes is found good fruit, not to contradict, to be quiet, to
become most humble of all men, to respect the Elders in birth, to study unto
Righteousness, to preserve brotherhood, to suffer reproaches, to be of a
contented mind.

6 Not to reject those fallen from the Faith, but to make them quiet in mind,
to admonish the sinners, not to press the debtors, and if there be any thing
like these: These seem to thee to be good, do they not? For what say I, is
better then these words; Live thou therefore in these Commandments, and do not
depart from them, for if thou shall keep all these Commandments thou shall
live to God, and all who shall keep these Commandments shall LIVE TO GOD.

COMMAND IX.
1 AGain he said to me, remove from thee DOVBTING, and nothing at all shall
thou doubt, asking any thing from the Lord, say not within thee, But how can I
seek any thing from the Lord, and obtein? Seeing I am a sinner of such great
evils against the Lord; Do not think this, but from thy whole heart be
converted to the Lord; Ask without doubting, and thou shall know the tender
mercy of the Lord, that thee he will not forsake, but shall fulfill the
petition of thy Soul.

2 For God is not, like men mindful of injuries, but he is unmindful of
injuries, and he has compassion on his handiwork; Purge therefore thine heart
from all the vices of this world, and observe the predicted words given to thee
by God, and thou shall receive all the good things which thou ask, and of
all thy petitions nothing shall be wanting to thee, if without doubting thou
shall ask of the Lord.

3 Who therefore are not such, they obtein not at all any thing of these which
they ask; for whosoever are full of Faith, they ask all things believing, and they
receive of the Lord, because without DOVBTING they ask, for every doubting man
if he shall not do repentance, shall difficultly LIVE TO GOD.

4 Purify therefore thine heart from doubting, and put on faith, and believe
God, and all things which thou ask shall thou obtein; but if sometimes thou
ask a petition and do not get it, do not doubt, because thou gettest not
quickly the petition of thy Soul; for perhaps, because of tentation, or for thy
sin, which thou art ignorant of, thou shall more slowly get thy petition; but
do not thou desist in seeking the petition of thy Soul, and thou shall get it;
but if thou ceasest in asking, complain of thy self, and not of God, that he
has not given it thee.

5 See therefore this DOUBTING, how pernicious it is, and fierce, and many by
the roots it plucks up from the Faith, even very faithful and firm [ones;] for
why this doubting is the Daughter of the Devil, and very wickedly deals she
with the Servants of God. Contemn therefore doubting and thou shall rule over
her in every thing, put on firm and potent faith, for faith promises all
things and accomplisheth all things, but doubting does not believe it self
about to obtein any thing in all its works which it does.

6 Thou see therefore, quoth he, That faith is from above, from God, and has
great power; but dubitation is an earthly Spirit, and from the Devil, not
having power; Keep thou therefore the virtue of faith, but from doubting depart
thou which has not virtue, and thou shall live to God, and they shall all LIVE
TO GOD whosoever shall do these things.

COMMAND X.
1 DRive far from thee all SADNESS for she is the sister of doubting, and
wrath; How quoth I Lord, is she the Sister of these? Sadness seems to me one
thing, another wrath, another doubting; And he says, without sense, thou
understandest not, for sadness of all Spirits is the most wicked, and worst to
the Servants of God, and it destroys all their Spirits, and vexes the holy
Spirit, and again makes it whole.

2 I am foolish, quoth I, Lord, and understand not these questions, how it can
vex, and again make whole, I understand not; Hear, quoth he, and understand?
They who never sought out the Truth, nor inquired of [its] Majesty, but only
believed they are involved in the employments and riches of the Heathen men,
and another is a lying Prophet, who destroys the senses of the Servants of God,
(but not of these doubtful ones) who trust in the Lord fully.

3 Therefore these doubtful ones come as to a Divine, and ask him, what is
about to befall them; and that lying Prophet having none of the power of the
divine Spirit in him, speaks to them according to their asking, and fills
their souls with promises, even as they would; but that PROPHET is empty, and
answers empty things to the empty; for whatsoever is asked [him] of vain men,
he will answer them vain things.

4 But some words he speaks true, for the Devil fills him with his Spirit,
that he may cast down some of the just; whosoever therefore are strong in the
faith of the Lord, and are clothed with the TRUTH, to such Spirits they are
not joined, but depart from them, but as many as are doubtful, and thenceforth
act Repentance, they consult even as the Heathens, and heap up very great sin
to themselves, serving IDOLS.

5 Whosoever therefore are such, they ask for any business, they worship
images, and are fools, and empty from the TRUTH, for EVERY SPIRIT GIVEN OF GOD
IS NOT ASKED; but having the virtue of the Divinity, from it self speaks all
things, because it is from above, from the power of the divine Spirit; but
whosoever being asked speaks according to the desire, and of many other things of
this world, they of this sort understand not the questions of the DIVINITY, for
they are darkened by these businesses, and are corrupted, and broken.

6 As good vines that are neglected, by weeds and thorns are pressed and
killed, so also the men who have credited such, they have fallen into many
businesses and actions, and are made empty from their FEELING, and understand
nothing at all, thinking about riches; but if at any time they shall hear of
the Lord, their SENSE is in their businesses, but they that have the fear of
the Lord, and search out from God the Truth, they have every thought unto the
Lord; all things that are spoken to them they perceive, because they have the
fear of the Lord in them; for WHERE THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD IN HABITETH, THERE
also IS adjoined MUCH FEELING; adjoyn thy self therefore to the Lord, and thou
shall understand, and perceive all things.

7 Hear now, O unwise, after what manner SADNESS vexes the holy Spirit, and
how it makes it whole; when a DOUBTFUL one shall fall into any business, and
it does not succeed to him because of dubitation, this sorrow enters into the
man, and MAKES SAD THE HOLY SPIRIT, and vexes it; after that again, when
WRATH shall happen to a man for any business, he is vehemently enraged, and
this wrath enters in into the inward parts of him that is angry, and he is
vexed in his business which he does, and after that repents him that he has
done evilly.

8 Therefore both these things hurt the holy spirit, DOUBTING and SADNESS.
Doubting, because his action succeeded not; and Sadness, because he caused
wrath to his SPIRIT; remove sorrow therefore from thee, AND DO NOT THOU OFFEND
THE HOLY SPIRIT WHICH DWELETH IN THEE, LEAST IT entreat the Lord and DEPART
from thee, for the spirit of the Lord which is given into the FLESH indureth
not sadness.

9 Cloth thee therefore with cheerfulness, which always has favor with the
Lord, and thou shall be joyful in it; for every cheerful man works well and
savoureth good things, and dispiseth unrighteousness; But a sorrowful man does
evilly, because he makes sad the holy Spirit, which is given to the cheerful
man: and again he does evil in that, the sorrowful man entreats the Lord, and
does not before make confession, and he obtains not of God what he asks;
for always the prayer of the sorrowful man has not the force that it may
approach the ALTAR of God.

10 And I said to him, Lord why has not the prayer of the sorrowful man the
power to ascend to the Altar of the Lord? Because heaviness sits in his
heart; Therefore when the prayer of a man shall be mixed with sorrow, it will
not suffer the prayer to ascend pure to the ALTAR of God; for as Wine mixed
with Vinegar has not the same sweetness, so also heaviness mixed with the
holy Spirit, has not the same prayer clean; Therefore cleanse thee from evil
sadness and thou shall live to God, and they shall all LIVE TO GOD who shall
cast away from themselves sadness, and shall put on cheerfulness.

COMMAND XI.
1 HE showed me men sitting on seats, and one sitting in a Chair, and he said
to me, See thou those who sit on benches? I see them Lord, quoth I; These are
the Faithful, and he that sits in the Chair is the TERRESTRIAL SPIRIT: For
into the Church of the men it approaches not but flies away, but it applies
it self to the DOUBTFUL ones, and empty and in corners, and hidden places it
divineth to them, and it delights them in speaking according to all the
desires of their heart.

2 For what is committed to empty vessels does not run over, but they agree one
to another, but when it shall come into the company of just men having the
SPIRIT of the Divinity, and their prayer is to the Lord, that man is frustated
because that Terestrial Spirit flies from him, and he becomes dumb, nor can
speak any thing.

3 As in a CELLAR, if thou shall cover Wine or Oil, and amongst these vessels
shall put an empty vessel, and again would take off the covering, that
vessel which thou did put, thou shall find empty; So also EMPTY PROPHETS when
they shall come among the spirit of just men, such as they come, such are they
found.

4 Thou have the life of both the Prophets, try therefore by life and works,
the man that says himself to have the holy Spirit, but believe thou the Spirit
coming from God, having virtue; but to the earthly empty spirit which is from
the Devil, in which there is not faith, nor power, do not give credit.

5 Hear therefore a Similitude which I am about to tell thee; Take a stone and
cast it toward Heaven; Or again, take a squirt of water and squirt it out
toward Heaven, and see if thou can smite the Heaven. How, quoth I, Lord can
these things be? For both these which thou have spoken cannot be done; even as
therefore these cannot be done, So the Terrestrial spirit is without power, and
without effect.

6 Take now the power coming down from above in this similitude; The hail is
the least grain, and when it falls upon the head of a man, how does it bring
griefs? Or again, look on the drop of rain which from the eaves falls on the
earth and makes hollow the stone: So therefore the least things which from
above fall upon the earth have great power. Adjoyn thee therefore to this man
having the POWER, and from that empty one depart thou.

COMMAND XII.
1 AGain he said to me, remove from thee all evil DESIRE, and put on the good
and holy desire; for having put on the good desire, Thou shall hate the evil
and shall refrain it, even as thou would; For evil desire is to be abhored,
and it is difficultly mitigated, it is very horrible and wild, and with its
wildness consumes men, especially if into it a servant of God shall fall, and
unless he shall be wise, he shall be consumed by it badly.

2 But it consumes such who have not the clothing of the good desire, and it
involves them in the businesses of this World, and delivers them to death. What
are the works Lord, quoth I, of the evil desire which deliver men up to DEATH?
Demonstrate unto me, that I may depart from them; Hear says he, in what works
evil desire delivers the servants of God to death: The spirit of all men is
earthly and light, and has not power at all, and speaks many things; And I
said, how then can any know them?

3 Hear quoth he, of both the VESSELS, and as I say to thee, so shall thou try
the Prophet of God, and the false prophet; First, so prove the man THAT HAS
THE SPIRIT OF GOD, because the spirit which is from above is quiet, and humble,
and it departs from ALL wickedness, and the vain desire of this World, and
makes it self more humble then every man, AND ANSWERS TO NO MAM BEING ASKED,
nor does it answer to all men; NEITHER WHEN MAN WILL, DOES THE SPIRIT OF GOD
SPEAK, but then it speaks when God will.

4 Therefore WHEN A MAN WHO HAS THE SPIRIT OF GOD SHALL COME INTO THE CHURCH
OF JUST MEN having the faith of God, and prayer is made to God; then THE holy
MESSENGER OF the DIVINITY FILLS THAT MAN WITH THE HOLY SPIRIT, AND HE
SPEAKS IN THE THRONG AS GOD WILL

So therefore is the spirit of Divinity known in whomsoever the spirit of
Divinity speaks.

5 Hear now also of the TERRESTRIAL SPIRIT empty and foolish, not having
power; But first a man is conceived to have this spirit, for he exalts
himself, and WILL HAVE THE UPPERMOST CHAIR and he is wicked and talkative, and
converseth in delights, and in many pleasures, and TAKES THE REWARD OF HIS
DIVINATION, WHICH IF HE SHALL NOT GET, HE DOES NOT DIVINE. Can the Spirit of
God take rewards thus and Divine? it does not beseem the Prophet of God to do
these things.

6 But EVIL DESIRE is to covet another wife, or a woman to covet another
husband, and to covet the sumptuousness of riches, and the multitude of
superfluous meats, and much drunkenness, and many pleasures, for many delights
are foolish, and many pleasures are superfluous to the servants of God;
Therefore this evil desire is pernicious, which deadneth the servants of God,
for this desire is of the Devil.

7 Therefore whosoever shall depart from evil desire, they shall LIVE TO GOD,
for whosoever shall be subjected to evil desire, shall die for ever, for this
evil desire is mortiferous.

8 Thou therefore put on the desire of righteousness, and armed with the fear
of the Lord resist the evil desire, for fear dwells in the good desire; and
the evil desire when it shall see thee armed with the fear of the Lord
resisting it, it shall fly far from thee, and shall not appear before thee,
fearing thy weapons, and thou shall obtain the victory, and thou shall be
crowned because of her, and attaining unto the good desire, and thou shall give
the victory to God which thou have gotten, and shall serve him in working as
thou thy self would.

9 But if thou shall serve the good desire, and shall be subject unto it, thou
shall be able to rule over the evil desire, and it shall be subjected to thee,
even as thou would.

10 I would know Lord, how I ought to serve the GOOD DESIRE? Hear quoth he,
have thou the fear of God and faith in God, and love the Truth, and love the
Righteousness, and do good; These things working thou shall be a proved
servant of the Lord, and shall serve to God, and all whosoever shall serve the
Good desire, shall LIVE TO GOD.

11 These twelve Commands being finished, He said to me, Thou have these
Commands, walk in them, and exhort the men that hear them that they do
repentance, and their repentance shall be made pure the rest of the days of
their life And this Ministry which to thee I give, unfold thou diligently, and
thou shall attain much fruit, and shall find favor with all those who shall
Act Repentance, and shall believe thy words, for I am with thee and will
constrain them to believe.

12 And I said to him, Lord these commands are great and excellent, and they
are able to make glad the heart of that man, who shall be able to keep these
Commands. But I know not Lord whether these Commandments can be kept by man; He
says to me, these commands thou shall easily keep, and they shall not be hard.

13 But notwithstanding if thou shall affirm in thine heart, that they cannot
be kept by man, thou shall not keep them. But now I say unto thee, if thou
shall not keep these Commandments and shall omit them, thou shall not be saved,
nor thy sons, nor thine house, because thy self have judged that these Commands
cannot be kept by man.

14 These things he spoke to me vehemently angry, so that he terrified me
greatly, for he had changed his countenance, so that man could not be able to
sustain his wrath; And when he had beheld me all disturbed, and confounded, he
began to speak more moderately and cheerfully, saying,

15 O Foolish and unsensible, Inconstant and ignorant of the Majesty of God,
how great and how admirable is it, who has Created the world for man, and
subjected every Creature to man, and has given him ALL POWER THAT HE MAY HAVE
DOMINION OVER THESE COMMANDMENTS, he can have Dominion quoth he over all these
Commands WHO HAS THE LORD IN HIS HEART, but they who have the Lord in their
lips, and their heart is benumbed, these are far from the Lord, to them these
Commands are hard and difficult.

16 Therefore propose unto your selves ye that are empty, and light in the
faith, TO HAVE THE LORD YOUR GOD IN THE HEART: And ye shall understand that
nothing is more easy then these Commands, nor more sweet, nor more gentle, nor
more holy, and convert you to the Lord God, and forsake the Devil and his
pleasures, because they are evil and bitter, and unclean, and fear ye not the
devil, because in you he has no power, for I am with you, the MESSENGER OF
REPENTANCE who rule over him, but the Devil causes fear, but the fear of him
is vain; Therefore do not ye fear him, and he shall fly from you.

17 And I said to him, Lord hear me, speaking a few words to thee; Speak quoth
he; Man indeed desires to keep the Commands of God, and there is none who does
not ask from the Lord that he may keep his Commandments, but the Devil is hard,
and his power has dominion over the servants of God.

18 And he said, he cannot quoth he have power over Gods sevants, who from
their whole hearts believe on the Lord; But the Devil can strive, but overcome
he cannot, for if ye resist him he shall fly from you confounded, for whosoever
are not full of faith, they fear the Devil, as if having power; for the Devil
tempts the servants of God, and if he shall find them empty, he destroys
them.

19 For even as a man when he has filled vessels with good wine, and among
these vessels has put a few half-full, and comes that he may try and taste
the vessels, he tryes not the full ones, for he knows that they are good, but
the half-ful he tastes least they have become sower: for the half-full
vessels grow soon sower and loose the savor of Wine.

20 So also the Devil comes to men the servants of God that he may tempt them,
but whosoever are full in the faith, they resist him strongly, and he departs
from them, because he has not a place of entering in; Then goes he to them
who are not full in the faith, and because he has a place, thereat he enters
into them, and whatsoever things he will he does with them, and they become his
servants.

21 But I THE MESSENGER OF REPENTANCE say unto you, fear ye not the Devil, for
I am sent that with you I may be; Whosoever from your whole hearts shall act
repentance, that I may confirm you in the faith; Believe ye therefore who
because of your sins have forgot God, and who rejecting your safety, with your
sins DO BURDEN YOUR LIFE, That if ye shall be converted to the Lord from your
whole Hearts, and shall obey him according to his will, he shall give remedy to
your former sins, and ye shall have power of ruling over ALL the works of the
Devil.

22 But his threats fear ye not at all, for they are without power, as the
nerves of a dead man; Therefore hear me and fear the Lord Omnipotent, who can
save you and destroy you, and keep ye his commands that ye may live to God.

23 And I said to him, Lord even now I am confirmed in all the Commands of the
Lord, as long as thou art with me, and I know that thou will break in pieces
all the power of the devil. But also we shall overcome him if we can (the Lord
confirming) keep these Commands which thou have enjoined. Thou shall keep them
quoth he, if thou shall purify thine heart to the Lord; But also all these
shall keep them who shall purify their hearts from the vain desires of this
World, and shall LIVE TO GOD.

The End of the second Book.
The Thirk Bood of Hermas the Disciple of Paul which is Entitled of
SIMILITUDES.
SIMIL. I.
1 ANd he said to me, know ye the Servants of the Lord to be detained in
Pilgrimage? For your City is far from this City; If therefore ye know your City
in which ye are about to dwell, why do ye here buy fields, and prepare
sumptuous things and buildings, and superfluous habitations? For he who gets
these things in this City, does not bethink to return into his own CITY.

2 O foolish, O dubious and wretched man! Who do not understand all these to
be strange, and under the power of another, for the Lord of this City says
unto thee, either make use of my Laws, or depart out of my City.

3 Thou, therefore what will thou do, have a Law in thine own City? What?
willst thou be able for thy fields, or for any of thy furnitures, to deny thy
LAW, which if thou shall deny, and would return into thy City, thou shall
not be received, but shall be excluded thence.

4 See Therefore, that as one living a far off, thou gettest nothing more for
thy self, then may be necessary and sufficient for thee; And be thou prepared
least when the Lord of this City would expel thee, thou contradict his Law,
and thou may go into thine own City, and may use thy Law without injury,
Cheerful.

5 See ye therefore who serve God, AND HAVE HIM IN YOUR HEARTS, work ye the
works of God, mindful of his Commands and Promises which he promised, and
believe him that he will perform [them] to you, if ye shall keep his Commands.

6 For the fields therefore which ye would buy, redeem the souls out of
necessities, even as every one is able, and absolve the Widows, judge for the
Orphans, and in works of this sort spend your riches and wealths; For unto
this has the Lord enriched you, that ye may fulfill such like Ministries; Much
better is it to do these things, then to buy fields and houses, because all
[these] things shall perish in this world.

7 But what things thou shall do for the Name of God, thou shall find in thy
City, and shall have joy without heaviness and fear; Therefore the Riches of
the Nations do not ye desire, for they are pernicious to the Servants of God,
but of your own which ye have, do these things by which ye may attain unto joy;
And do not ye adulterate, nor touch ye the Wife of another, nor covet her,
Covet after thine own work, and thou shall be saved.

SIMIL. II.
1 WHen I walked into the field, and considered the ELM and the VINE, and
thought within me of their fruits; An Angel appeared to me, and said to me,
What do thou think within thee? I said to him, I reason Lord of this Vine and
Elm, because the fruits of them are comely.

2 And he said to me, These two Trees are placed for an example to the Servants
of God. And I said to him, I would know Lord, the exemple of them which thou
speak of; Hear quoth he, See thou this Vine and this Elm? I see them quoth
I, Lord; This Vine says he, is fruitful, But the Elm is a Tree without fruit,
but this Vine unless it should be wrapped about the ELM, and should rest upon
it, it cannot make much fruit.

3 For lying in the earth, it yields bad fruits, because it hangs not upon
the Elm, but if the Vine should be hanged upon the Elm, it gives fruit both
for it self and for the Elm; See therefore that the Elm yields no less fruit
then the Vine, but rather more.

4 How, quoth I Lord, more then the Vine? Being hanged says he on the Elm it
yields much, and good fruit; But lying on the earth, it yields little and
bad fruit; Therefore this Similitude is put to the servants of God; To the poor
and to the rich, I answered, saying Lord demonstrate it to me.

5 Hear, quoth he, the RICH has riches, but from the Lord he is poor for he is
distracted about his riches and has verry little prayer to the Lord, and what
he has he has it sluggish, and not having power, when therefore the rich
affords the POOR what things are needful for him; The poor prays to the Lord
for the Rich, and God gives to the Rich all good things, because the poor is
rich in prayer, and his prayer has great power with the Lord.

6 Then therefore the rich affords all things to the poor, because he
perceives him to be heard by the Lord, and more willingly without dubitation
he gives him all things, and takes care least any thing be wanting to him; The
poor gives thanks to God for the rich, because they do a work before the Lord.

7 With men therefore the Elm is not thought to yield fruit, and they know not,
neither understand that if fellowship shall be adjoined to the Vine, also the
Vine gives double fruit, both for it self and for the Elm: So also the poor
praying for the rich to the Lord are heard, and their riches are augmented,
because they afford to the poor of their riches.

8 They are therefore both consorts of their good works; Therefore whosoever
shall do these things, shall not be deserted by the Lord, and he shall be
written in THE BOOK OF LIFE; Therefore happy they that possess, and perceive
themselves to be enriched, for they who shall perceive this, shall be able to
Minister something.

SIMIL. III.
1 HE showed me many trees with leaves cast off, which to me seemed as if
withered, for they were all alike; And he said to me, see thou these trees? I
see them quoth I, like to withered ones; he answering said to me, these trees
are for a similitude of them who stay in this world.

2 I answered, saying, why are they like unto withered ones? Because quoth he
neither the just nor the unjust are known, but are alike in this world; For
this world is to the just the WINTER, who are not known dwelling with sinners.

3 Even as in Winter all trees having cast their leaves are like unto dry ones,
nor can it be known which are dry or which green; So also in this World neither
the just nor the unjust are known, but they are alike all.

SIMIL. IV.
1 HE showed me again many trees, of which some sent forth leaves, others were
withered; And he said to me, see thou not these trees? I answered, I see
Lord, some withered, others bearing leaves; These trees quoth he that are
green, are the just which are about to dwell in the WORLD TO COME, for that
world to come is the SUMMER to the just, but to the sinners WINTER.

2 Therefore when the tender mercy of the Lord shall shine forth, then shall
they be declared who serve God, and they shall all be perspicuous; For as in
the Summer the fruit of the Tree of what sort soever is declared, and is
manifest; So also the deed of the just shall be declared, and shall be
manifest; And being also cheerful and rejoicing, they shall be restored in
that world.

3 For the other Nations, to wit the sinners, even as the Trees which thou
did see withered, such are found dry and without fruit in that world, and as
dry sticks, shall be burned, and shall become manifest, because they have done
wickedly in all the time of their life; And therefore they shall be burnt up,
because they have sinned, and of their sins have not done repentance. But also
the rest of the Nations shall be burnt, because they have not acknowledged God
their Creator.

4 Do thou therefore good fruit, that in the Summer thy fruit may be known; And
ABSTAIN THEE FROM MANY EMPLOYMENTS, and thou shall omit nothing, for whosoever
do many businesses omit many things, because they are straightened about their
employments, and serve not to God.

5 For how can a man who serves not to God, ask any thing from God and obtain
it? For they that serve God, do ask and obtain their desires; And if any one
meddle with one business, he shall be able to serve to God, because his mind
is not alienated from the Lord, but in a pure mind he serves to God; Therefore
if thou shall do this, thou can have fruit in the World to come; But also all
who shall do these things, shall bear fruit.

SIMIL. V.
1 Whilst I fasted and sat on a certain Mountain, and gave thanks unto God for
all that he had done with me; I see that SHEEPHERD sitting next me, and saying
to me, Why have thou come hither so early in the morning? I answered, because
Lord I have a STATION, what is the Station quoth he? And I said, a FAST; and he
said, what is that fast? As I was wont, quoth I, so fast I.

2 Ye know not quoth he, [how] to fast to God, neither is this a fast which ye
fast, nothing profiting unto God; Why say I, do thou so say Lord? For I say,
this not to be a fast which ye think your selves to fast; But I will teach thee
what is a complete fast, and acceptable to God.

3 Hear quoth he, The Lord does not desire such a superfluous fast, for in so
fasting thou performest nothing to righteousness; For the true fast is such a
fast.

4 Thou must do nothing in thy life wickedly, but with a pure mind serve to
God, keeping his Commands and going in his precepts, nor shall thou admit an
hurtful desire in thy mind, but believe the Lord; These if thou shall do, and
shall have his fear, and shall abstain from every evil business, thou being
about to live to God; These if thou shall do, thou shall accomplish a great
fast, and acceptable to the Lord.

5 Hear the similitude which I am about to tell thee, pertaining to a fast. A
certain man having ground and many servants, in a certain place of his ground
he planted a Vineyard to his Successors: After that going a far journey, he
chused out the most faithful servant whom he had, and aprove'd to him, and to
him he assigned the Vineyard, Commanding that to the Vines he should join
props, which if he should do and should finish his Command, he promised that he
would give to the same man his Liberty.

6 Neither commanded he any other thing besides to him, which he should do in
it, and so he went a far journey; but after that servant had taken care, he did
whatsoever his Lord in joined, and when he had propped that vineyard, and had
taken heed, that it was filled with weeds, he began so to think with himself.

7 I have finished what my Lord had commanded me, I will now dig this vineyard,
and it shall be more beautiful when it shall be dug, and the weeds being
extracted it shall yield greater fruit, and shall not be choakt by weeds.

8 Having gone after that he dug it, and all the weeds which were in it he
drew out, and so the vineyard became most beautiful, and sprightly, not choakt
by weeds. But after a certain time his Lord comes, and he went into his
vineyard, which when he had seen decently propped, and dug about, and the
weeds extracted from it, and the vines to be joyous; for this deed he took joy
of his Servant.

9 Having therefore adjoined his Son whom he esteemed his heir, and most dear,
and his friends whom he assembled in the Council, he declares these things that
he had charged his Servant with to be done, what things he had done besides,
but they forthwith gratulated that Servant, that he had acquired so full a
testimony of his Lord.

10 After that he says to them, I indeed promised to this Servant his liberty
if he should keep my command which I had given, and he has kept it, and
besides has added a good work on the vineyard which has exceedingly pleased
me; for this work therefore that he has done I will make him coheir with my
Son, because when he had perceived what was good, he omitted not but did it.

11 This counsel of the Lord both his Son and his Friends approved of, to wit,
that this Servant should be made coheir with the Son; after that not many
days, the Master of the Family having called together his Friends, sent of his
supper to that Servant many viands.

12 Which when he had got, he took of them what was sufficient to him, but the
rest be distributed to his fellow servants, which being got they became joyful,
and began to wish to him that he should obtein greater favor with the Lord,
for these things which he had done to them.

13 All these when his Lord had heard, he took again exceeding great joy, and
having called again his friends, and his Son, he declares to them the deed of
his Servant of his victuals which he had sent to him; Therefore they so much
the more assented to the Master of the Family, that that servant ought to be
made coheir with his Son.

14 I say to him, Lord, these similitudes I know not, nor can understand,
unless thou expound them unto me; I will expound all things to thee, quoth he,
whatever I shall speak with thee, or shall show thee, keep the commands of the
Lord, and thou shall be approved, and shall be wrote in the number of them that
keep his commands.

15 But besides what the Lord has commanded, if thou shall add something of
good, thou shall acquire greater dignity to thy self, and shall be more
honorable with the Lord then thou wast about to be; Therefore if thou shall
keep the commands of the Lord, and shall also add unto them these STATIONS,
thou shall rejoice, especially if according to my injunction thou shall keep
them.

16 I say to him, whatever thou shall enjoin me Lord, I will keep, for I know
thee to be about to be with me; I will quoth he, be with thee who have such a
purpose. But also I will be with all, whosoever have the same purpose This
FAST, says he, the commands of the Lord being kept, is exceeding good.

17 So therefore thou shall keep it; first of all, beware from every wicked and
filthy word, and from every noxious desire, and purify thy sense from all the
vanity of this world, if thou shall keep these things this shall be a just fast.

18 Therefore so thou shall do, the things above-written being finished, in
that day wherein thou shall fast, thou shall taste nothing at all, except bread
and water, and compute the quantity of food, which the rest of the days thou
would eat, the cost of that day which thou would have made, thou shall lay
up, and shall give it to the widow and pupil, or to the needy, and so shall
thou consummate the humility of thy soul, that he who shall get of it, shall
fill his soul, and for thee his prayer shall go to the Lord God.

19 So therefore, if thou shall accomplish thy fast even as I enjoin thee, thy
sacrifice shall be accepted by the Lord, and this thy fast shall be written.
This station so acted is good, cheerful, and accepted by the Lord. These things
if thou shall keep with thy Children, and thy whole house, having kept them thou
shall be happy; and whosoever shall keep these things heard, they shall be
happy, and whatsoever they shall ask from the Lord they shall obtein it.

20 And I prayed him that to me he would explain this similitude of the ground,
and the Lord, and the vineyard, and of the Servant who had propped the
vineyard, and the herbs which were extracted from the vineyard, and of the Son,
and of the friends which he called into Council; for I understood that to be a
similitude.

21 He says to me, thou art very bold to ask, for thou ought to ask
nothing; for if it shall be fit to be demonstrated, it shall be demonstrated to
thee; I say to him, Lord, what things soever thou shall show me, and shall not
declare them, in vain shall I see them, if I shall not understand what they
are, and if thou shall propose any similitudes, and shall not expound them, in
vain shall I hear them.

22 He answered me again, saying, whosoever is a Servant of God, and HAS THE
LORD IN HIS INWARD PARTS, he asks from him an Intellect, and obteineth it,
and every similitude he unfoldeth, and understands the words of the Lord, which
need inquisition, but whosoever are sluggish and slow to pray, they doubt to ask of
the Lord, seeing he is a Lord of such profound goodness, that he affords all
things without intermission to the askers from him.

23 Thou therefore who art confirmed by his MESSENGER, and have received such a
potent prayer, seeing thou art not sluggish, why now do thou not ask an
Intellect from the Lord, and get it; I say to him, while I may have thee
present, it is necessary that from thee I ask and require, for thou show me
all things, and speak when thou art present.

24 For if without thee I should see these things, or hear them, then I should
ask the Lord that he would show them to me; And he answered, I had said to thee
a little before, thee to be cunning and bold, who ask the solutions of
similitudes; but because thou art so importunate, I will resolve thee this
similitude which thou desire, that thou may make it known to all.

25 Hear now, quoth he, and perceive in thy mind, that GROUND signifies the
world, which is put for a similitude; but the LORD of the ground is
demonstrated to be he who created all things and finished them, and gave them
power; but the SON is the holy Spirit, but that SERVANT is the Son of God, but
the VINEYARD is the people whom he keeps, but the PROPS are the Messengers
who are set over by the Lord to gather in his people.

26 But the WEEDS which were plucked out from the Vineyard, are the trespasses
of the Servants of God; but the VICTUALS which he sent of his Supper, are the
Commandments which by his Son he has given to his people, but these FRIENDS
whom he called in Counsel are the holy Angels whom he at first created; but the
absence of that Master of the family, is the time which remains until his
coming.

27 I say to him, Lord, magnificently and wonderfully, and honestly do all
these things carry themselves; therefore can I be able to understand these
Lord, quoth I? Indeed not any man besides, although he be very prudent, shall
be able to understand these; but even now Lord demonstrate to me what I ask,
ask what thou will, quoth he.

28 Why, quoth I, is the Son of God in this similitude put in a servile place?
Hear, says he, in a servile condition the Son of God is not put, but in great
power and authority; And I said, how say I Lord, I understand not, because
quoth he, to those whom he has delivered to his Son, has his Son set over
MESSENGERS to preserve them all; but he has labored very much, and has
endured very much that he should abolish their trespasses

29 For no Vineyard can be dug without labor and grief; therefore the sins
of his people being blotted out, he himself has showed unto them the JOURNEYS
OF LIFE, having given them the LAW which he had got from the Father; thou see
therefore him to be the Lord of the people, having got from his Father all
power.

30 But why the Lord should add in his counsel the son of his inheritance, and
the good ANGELS? Because the Messenger hears THAT HOLY SPIRIT, WHICH WAS
INFUSED FIRST OF ALL things IN THE BODY IN WHICH GOD SHOULD DWELL, for the
INTELLECT has placed it in the body, as it seemed to him.

31 Therefore this body into which the holy spirit is brought in, has obeyed
that spirit rightly, walking in modesty, and chastely, nor has at all defiled
that spirit, Therefore when that body had obeyed at every time the holy spirit
rightly and chastely, and had labored with it, nor had fainted at any time,
that wearied body conversed servilely, but strongly with the holy spirit
approved to God it was received.

32 Therefore its potent course of this sort pleased God, because it had not
been Maculated in the earth, POSSESSING IN IT SELF THE HOLY SPIRIT IN COUNSEL.
Therefore he called his Son and the good Messengers, to wit, that also to this
body which has served the holy Spirit without complaint, some place of
remaining should be given, least it should seem to have lost the reward of its
servitude.

33 For every Body found pure and without spot shall receive a reward, IN WHICH
TO DWELL IN, THE HOLY SPIRIT WAS CONSTITUTE. Thou have also the exposition of
this similitude. I have perceived quoth I, thy will, Lord, having heard this
exposition. Hear further says he,

34 Keep this thy body pure and clean, that THAT SPIRIT WHICH INHABITETH IN IT
may bear testimony to it, and may be judged to have been with thee. And also
see thou, least at any time thou be persuaded to destroy this body, and do
abuse it in any lust.

35 For if thou shall defile thy body, thou shall defile also at the same time
the HOLY SPIRIT also, and if thou shall maculate thy body thou shall not live.
And I said, What if through any ignorance that has been committed, before that
these words were heard? by what means attaineth he unto safety who has defiled
his body?

36 To the former things, quoth he, which they have committed througe
ignorance, only God can afford a remedy, for his is all power. But now keep thy
self, and seeing the Lord is omnipotent and merciful, he shall grant remedy to
thy former trespasses if for the future thou defile not thy BODY and SPIRIT,
for they are both Comsorts, and ANY OF THE TWO IS NOT TAINTED WITHOUT THE
OTHER. Therefore keep both of them clean, and thou shall LIVE TO GOD.

SIMIL. VI.
1 WHile I sat at home, and glorified the Lord for all that I had seen, and
thought of his Commands, them to be exceeding good, and great and honest and
gladsom, and which can bring the safety of men, within my self these things I
said, Happy shall I be if I shall walk in these Commands, and whosoever shall
walk in these, shall LIVE TO GOD.

2 These things whilst I was speaking with my self, I see him whom also
before, sitting beside me, and saying these things to me, Why doubtest thou of
my Commands which I have in joined thee? they are good, thou shall doubt
nothing at all, but put on the Faith of the Lord, and thou shall walk in them;
for I in them will give thee strength.

3 These Commands are profitable to them who of their fore-done sins are about
to do repentance, if for the future they shall walk in them. Therefore
whosoever do repentance, Cast off from you the naughtiness of this World, but
put ye on all virtue and equity, and ye shall be able to keep these Commands,
neither hereafter sin ye.

4 For if after this ye SIN NOT, very much of the former [sins] shall ye cut
off; in my Commandments walk ye and ye shall live to God. These things by we
are spoken to you.

5 After he had spoke, these things with me, He says to me, let us go into the
field and I will show thee the SHEEPHERDS of the sheep. Let us go, quoth I
Lord, And we came into a certain field, and there he showed me a youthful
sheepherd clothed in an upper scarlet coat, of the color of his clothes.

6 But he fed plentious sheep, and these sheep were as it were in pleasures,
and many delights, and they exulted with Joy, and leaping did run hither and
thither; And the sheepherd himself exceedingly took delight of his flock, and
the countenance of that sheepherd was very cheerful, running among the sheep.

7 The Angel says to me, But see thou this sheepherd? I see him, quoth I,
Lord, And he said to me, He is the Messenger of inticements, sweetness and
pleasure; he therefore corrupts the minds of the servants of God, and turns
them away from the TRUTH, delighting them with lusts, and they perish, for they
forget the Commands of the living God, they converse in luxuries and in vain
delights, and they are corrupted by this evil MESSENGER, some even until death,
but others even until falling back.

8 I say unto him, Lord I understand not what is UNTO DEATH and what, unto
falling back; Hear quoth he, whatever sheep thou saw very joyous and leaping
are they who have for ever departed from God, and have given up themselves to
the desires of this world, to them therefore there is not a returning by
repentance to life, because they have added certain things to their other
transgressions, and have reviled the NAME of the Lord with heinous words; This
sort of men are designed to death.

9 But what sheep thou sawst not exulting, but feeding in one place; These are
they who have indeed delivered themselves to delights and pleasures, but have
spoken nothing heinous against the Lord; Therefore these have fallen away from
the Truth, and therefore they have as yet a hope reserved of life in
Repentance, for defection has some hope of renovation, but death shall be
detained in perpetual destruction.

10 Again, we went forwards a little, and he showed me a great Sheepherd, and
having as it were an agrestick countenance, clothed with a white Goat skin,
carrying a bag in his shoulder, and in his hand a rod knotty and exceeding
hard, and a whip in his hand, but he had a cruel and fierce look, that he
could terrify any one such was his aspect.

11 He therefore did take from that young Sheepherd these sheep which indeed
excercised delights, but did not leap; And he drove them into a certain steep
place, and thorny, and filled with thistles, so much that from the thorns and
thistles they could not unfold themselves; But being involved there they were
fed [among] thorns and thistles.

12 And heavy vexations did they feel from his WORDS, for he tossed them,
neither also did he grant to them a place of standing before a time; Therefore
when I saw them to be so scourged, and to experience miseries, I grieved for
them because they were greatly tormented, nor was any rest granted to them.

13 I say to the Sheepherd who was with me, who is this so implacable Sheepherd
Lord, and so bitter, who by no means is moved with compassion toward these
sheep; This Sheepherd, quoth he, is indeed a messenger for the just, but set
over to punishment; To him therefore are they delivered who have gone astray
from God, and have served the desires and pleasures of this world; Therefore he
punishes them even as every one of them has deserved, with cruel and various
punishments.

14 I would know, quoth I, Lord these various punishments of what sort they
are; Here says he: the various pains, and torments are these which men daily
in their life undergo, for some suffer losses, others poverty, others diverse
diseases, some inconstancy, others suffering injuries from unworthy men, and
many other exercises and discommodities; for very many by unconstant counsel
endeavor many things, nor does any thing conduce to them, and they say
themselves not to have success in their doings, these things which they have
wickedly acted, come into their minds, and do excuse the Lord.

15 Therefore when they shall have suffered every vexation, and every
discommodity, then they are delivered to me for good admonition, and they are
confirmed in the Faith of the Lord, and throughout the rest of the days of
[their] life they serve to God in a pure mind; and when they shall begin to do
repentance of their iniquiries, then their works ascend up in their INWARD
PARTS, in which they have exercised themselves wickedly.

16 And then they give to God the honor, saying him to be a just Judge, and
themselves to have deservedly suffered all things according to their deeds. But
for the remainder, they serve God with a pure mind, and they have success in
all their employments, receiving from the Lord whatsoever they required; and
then they give thanks to the Lord that they are delivered to me, nor do now
endure any cruelty.

17 I say to him, even now Lord demonstrate to me; What inquirest thou, quoth
he, I said to him, Whither for the same time shall they be vexed, who depart
from the Fear of God, how much they shall use the false sweetness and
pleasures? He says to me, for the same time also they are vexed; And I said to
him, A small [time] then are they vexed, but it behoved these who do so enjoy
pleasures that they forget the Lord, to suffer seven times as much of
punishments.

18 He says to me, thou art foolish, nor understandest the power of this
punishment. And I said, for if I understood, Lord, I would not ask that thou
should demonstrate it to me; Hear, quoth he, how great is the force of both
the sweetness and pleasure. One hour of sweetness ends in its own space, but
one hour of punishment retains the force of thirty days.

19 Therefore whosoever in one day receives the fallacious sweetness and
pleasure, and in one day is vexed, the day of his vexation shall have the force
of a years space. Therefore how many days any one shall receive pleasure, by
so many years is he vexed; Thou see therefore, quoth he, the time of worldly
sweetness and pleasure to be small, but of punishment and of torments, more.

20 I said to him, Lord, because I understand not all these TIMES of
sweetness, pleasure, and pain, expound thou more clearly to me of these; He
answered me, saying, Thy foolishness inhereth in thee constantly, will thou
not rather purify thy mind and serve to God; see, least perhaps the time being
finished, thou be found unwise.

21 Hear now even as thou will, whereby thou may more easily understand. He
who one day shall commit himself to delights and pleasures, and shall do
whatsoever his soul desires, he is filled with very much folly, neither
understands he what he commits, and the day succeeding he forgets what he
had done the day before, for sweetness and pleasure have no remembrance,
because of the folly which is rooted in them.

22 But when one day there shall happen to a man vexation and pain, he is
tormented the whole year, for great memory does punishment possess; therefore
the whole year grieving, he remembers, and then he remembers that vain
sweetness and pleasure, and he perceives for that himself to suffer
punishments.

23 Whosoever therefore shall deliver themselves to sweetness and pleasure, so
they are punished; because having LIFE they render themselves obnoxious to
death; I said to him, What Lord are the hurtful pleasures? To every man, quoth
he, that is PLEASURE, whatsoever he does willingly, for the angry man
satisfying his manners, receives his pleasure, and the Adulterer, and
Drunkard, and Defamer, and Liar, and Covetous, and Fraudulent, and who ever
commits ought like to these, obeying his disease, he receives out of that thing
pleasure.

24 All these sweets and pleasures are noxious to the Servants of God, because
of these therefore are they vexed, and suffer punishments; There are also
pleasures bringing safety to men, for many doing the works of goodness, take
pleasure, drawn with their sweetness.

25 Therefore this pleasure is profitable to the Servants of God, and it gets
life to men of this sort, but these evil ones which were spoken before, beget
torments and pains; but whosoever shall remain in them, nor of their trespasses
shall act Repentance, they will acquire to themselves DEATH.

SIMIL. VII.
1 AFter a few days I see him in that field in which I had seen these
Sheepherds before; And he says to me, What inquire thou? I came, quoth I, to
entreat thee, Lord, that thou command that Sheepherd set over to punishment, to
go out of my house, because he vehemently afflicts me; And answering, it is
needful, quoth he, that thou suffer discommodities and vexations, for so that
good Messenger commanded concerning thee, because he will try thee.

2 What so heinous sin, quoth I, Lord, have I committed, that I should be
delivered to this Messenger? Attend, says he: Thou have indeed very many sins,
but not so many that thou ought to be delivered to this Messenger, but many
iniquities and transgressions has thy house committed, and therefore that good
Messenger stirred up with their deeds, has commanded them a certain [space] of
time to experience vexation, that also they of their trespasses may act
Repentance, and may wash themselves from all the lust of this world; Therefore
when they shall have done Repentance, and shall be purified, then that
Messenger shall depart from thee, who is set over to punishment.

3 I say to him, Lord, if they have so carried [themselves] that they have
exasperated the good Messenger, what have I done? He answering says, otherwise
they cannot suffer torment, unless thou who art the HEAD of the whole house
do labor; for whatsoever thou shall suffer, it must needs be that they also
feel it, but as long as thou shall be well established, they can experience no
vexation.

4 And I said, but also behold now Lord they do Repentance with their whole
hearts; And I know, quoth he, them to act Repentance with all their hearts;
do thou therefore forthwith think says he, their transgressions to be
abolished, who do Repentance?

5 Not forthwith immediately, but it becomes him who does Repentance, to
afflict his soul, and make himself humble in mind, in every business, and to
suffer many and various vexations; and when he shall have suffered all things
which shall be appointed him, then perhaps he who created him, and who formed
all things, shall be moved toward him with his clemency, and shall give some
remedy, and that, so if he shall see his heart, who does Repentance to be pure
from every most wicked work.

6 But for thee and for thine house it is expedient now to be vexed, and it is
needful to undergo much vexation, even as the Messenger of the Lord enjoined,
who delivered thee unto me; but rather give thou thanks to the Lord, that
foreknowing the thing to come, he has esteemed thee worthy, to whom he should
foretell the tribulation to be at hand to those that can be able to sustein it.

7 I say to him, and be thou with me, Lord, and I shall easily sustein all
vexation, I quoth he, will be with thee, but also I will entreat that Messenger
who is set over to punishment, that he may more lightly afflict thee, but also
in a little time thou shall undergo the adverse things, and again in thy place
shall be restored; only in the humility of mind persevere thou.

8 Obey the Lord in a pure mind, and thy house, and thy sons, and in his
commands walk thou, which I enjoined thee, and thy repentance shall be able to
be firm, and pure, and if these thou with thy house shall keep, the
discommodities shall depart from thee, but also from all whosoever in these
Commandments shall walk, every vexation shall depart.

SIMIL. VIII.
1 HE showed me a willow covering the fields and mountains, under whose shadow
all these came who were called in the NAME of the Lord; and besides that willow
stood the Messenger of the Lord exceeding illustrious and eminent, and did cut
with a great hook from that willow, branches, and held forth to that people who
was under the shadow of that willow, small, and as it were rods of a cubit
long.

2 But after that they had all gotten them, he laid down the hook, and that
tree remained whole, even as before I had seen it, which thing I admired, and
disputed within me: That Sheepherd says to me, cease to wonder, that that
whole tree, the branches being cut off should remain whole, but expect thou now
it shall be demonstrated to thee what that Angel may signify, which stretched
forth the rods to the people.

3 And asked them from them again, and in what order every one had taken them,
in the same also was he called to him, and restored the rods, which when he had
got, he considered; for from some he received them withered and putrid, as if
touched by the moth; and he commanded these who had delivered this sort of
rods, to be separate, and set by themselves; others offered them withered
indeed, but not touched by the Moth, and these he commanded to be set aside.

4 Others offered half-withered rods, and these also were set by themselves.
But some gave their rods half withered, and having rents, and these were set
aside; others brought their rods, of whom the half part was withered, but the
[other] half green, and these were set aside; others brought their rods of whom
two parts were green, but the third withered, and these were set aside.

5 Others brought their rods of whom two parts were withered, but the third
green, and these were set aside; Some offered their rods a little withered (for
a very little was withered in their rods, that is the very top) but they had
rents, and these were set aside; but in the rods of others there was a little
green, but the rest withered, and these were set aside.

6 Others came bringing their rods as they had got them, green, and the
greatest part of the people brought rods of this sort, and of these this
Messenger took great joy, and these were set aside; others brought their rods
green, and having blossoms, and these were set aside, and these also that
Messenger received with great joy.

7 Others brought their rods green, out of which their blossoms budded forth,
which blossoms bare certain fruits; they that brought this sort of rods were
exceeding cheerful of countenance, but also the Messenger himself indeed took
great delight of them, no less that Sheepherd for the same cause took pleasure.

8 Then the Messenger of the Lord commanded Crowns to be brought, but there
were brought Crowns as if made of Palms, and the Messenger crowned these men in
whose rods he had found blossoms and fruit, and commanded them to go into the
TOWER.

9 But also these men he sent into the Tower, in whose rods without fruit he
had found blossoms, having given them [his] SEAL, for they had the same
vesture, that is white as snow, with which he commanded them to go into the
Tower; no less also these who had restored their rods, even as they had got
them green, having given them a white vesture, and so he sent them away to go
into the Tower.

10 These things being finished he says to that Sheepherd, I go, but send thou
these within the walls in that place wherein every one has merited to dwell;
having first considered their rods diligently, notwithstanding least any
deceive thee, consider thou, but also if any one shall get by, quoth he, I will
try them upon the ALTAR.

11 These things being said to the Sheepherd, he departed, after he had
departed the Sheepherd says to me, Let us take the rods from all, and let us
plant them, if they can flourish again. I say to him, Lord, these that are
withered rods, how can they re-flourish? He says to me, that tree is a WILLOW,
and it always loves Life; Therefore if these rods shall be planted, and should
receive a little of moisture, very many of them will re-flourish; for I will
try, and will pour under them water, and if any of them can live I will
gratulate it, but if not, surely I shall not seem to have been negligent.

12 After that he commanded me to call them, and as every one of them stood
they came in their own order, and delivered their rods, whom having gotten, he
planted every one of them in their orders, and after he had planted them he
poured much water upon them, so that they were covered by the water, nor stood
out of it.

13 After that when he had watered them, he says to me, let us go, and after a
few days let us return, let us visit them, for he who created this Tree WOULD
HAVE ALL THESE TO LIVE who have taken thereof rods; but I hope seeing these
rods are poured upon with water, many [of them] are about to live, having taken
moisture.

14 I say to him, this Tree, Lord, demonstrate to me what it is, for I am
greatly moved, that so many branches being cut off, it seems to be whole, nor
does any thing of it seem to be less, in which I am greatly amazed.

15 Hear, quoth he, this great Tree which covers the fields and the
mountains, and the whole earth, is the LAW of God GIVEN UNTO THE WHOLE WORLD;
But by this law the SON of God is preached in all the ends of the globe of the
Earth, but the PEOPLE standing beneath its shadow, are these who have heard
his Preachings and have BELIEVED.

16 But that MESSENGER magnificent and good, is MICHAEL, who of this people
has power, and governs them, for he INSERTETH THE LAW IN THEIR HEART, who have
believed; Therefore he visits them to whom he has given the law, if they
have kept it; but he sees the rod of every one, and of them many faulty, for
these RODS of the Lord are the LAW.

17 But after that he knows all those who have not kept the Law, knowing the
seat of every one of them; I say unto him, Why, quoth I, Lord, sent he some
into the Tower, others left here to thee? these quoth he, whosoever have
transgressed the law which from him they got, are left in my power, that of
their trespasses they may do Repentance, but who have satisfied the law, and
have kept it, are under his power.

18 Who are they therefore Lord, quoth I, going in CROWNED into the Tower? He
says to me, Whosoever having wrestled with the devil have OVERCOME HIM, these
are crowned. But they are these, who that they might keep the Law, have
suffered iniquous things; But these who delivered their GREEN rods, and having
BLOSSOMS without fruit, have indeed for the same law sustained vexation, but
have not suffered Death, but neither have they denied the Holy Law.

19 But these who delivered them GREEN as they GOT them, are the MODEST and
Just, and they have lived in an exceeding PURE MIND, and have kept the Commands
of God; But the rest thou shall know when I shall consider these rods which I
have planted and watered.

20 But after a few days we returned, and in that same place sat that
Magnificent Messenger, but I stood by him; Then he says to me, Gird thee about
with a girdle, and minister unto me. I girded me about with a clean girdle
which was made of sackcloth, but as soon as he saw me girded, and prepared to
minister unto him, he says,

21 C^ll these men whose rods are planted, every one in his own order, as they
gave them, and he led me into the field, and I called them all, who also all of
them stood in their own orders. After that he said to them, let every one pluck
up his own rod, and bring it to me.

22 And first they delivered them who had withered and putrid ones, and whose
rods were found putrid and withered, he commanded these to stand aside. After
that they gave, who had them withered indeed, but not putrid; some of these
gave green rods, but some withered and putrid ones, as if touched by the moth;
These who had delivered them green he commanded to stand apart, but those that
delivered them arrid and putrid, he commanded to stand with the first.

23 After that these gave who had had them half withered and having rents; many
of these gave them green, nor having rents; but some green having blossoms, and
in the blossoms fruit, even as those who had gone into the Tower crowned.
Others offered them withered and rotten: but some as they were half withered,
and having rents he commanded every one of these to stand apart, some every one
in his own order, others apart.

24 After that they offered, who had their rods indeed green, but having rents.
All these delivered them green, and stood in their own order; But this
sheepherd took delight of them that all of them were polished, and had put off
their rents. After that they offered, who had the half green, and the half
withered, but of some there were found all green, of others half withered, of
others green and having blossoms, all these were sent every one to his own
order.

25 After that they who had two parts of the Rods green and the third withered,
many of these gave them green, many half withered, but the rest withered but
not putrid, all these were sent every one into his own order; Afterward they
gave who had had in their rods two parts withered, and the third green; many
also of them offered half withered ones, but some withered and putrid, but
others half withered and having rents, but few green; Therefore all these stood
every one in his own order.

26 After that they gave who had had the third green, but the rest withered;
the rods of these for the greater part were found green, having little
branches, and in these little branches fruit, and the rest all green; Of these
rods that sheepherd exceedingly took delight, because so he should find them;
and also they went away into their orders

27 But after he had considered all their rods, he says to me, I had said to
thee this tree to love LIFE; Thou see that many have done repentance and have
attained Salvation; I see quoth I, Lord. That thou may know, quoth he, the
goodness and clemency of the Lord to be great and honorable, who has GIVEN
[his] SPIRIT TO THOSE WHO WERE WORTHY to do Repentance.

28 And I said, why therefore Lord have not all done Repentance? He says to
me, whose minds the Lord had seen about to be pure, and they about to serve
him from their whole hearts, to them he has offered Repentance; but them whose
deceit and wickedness he has beheld, and has taken notice that they were
about to return to him deceitfully, he has denied a regresse unto them to
Repentance; least again they should curse the LAW with these heinous words.

29 I say to him, now Lord demonstrate unto me what that place is to every one
of them, who restored their rods, and their seats; that these things being
heard and believed, these who have not kept whole, but have broke in pieces the
SEAL which they have got, having known their deeds, may act Repentance; and
having got from thee a seal, may give the honor to the Lord, that he is moved
with his clemency over them, and has sent thee that thou may renew their
spirits.

30 Hear quoth he, these whose rods were found dry and putrid, and as if
touched by the moth; these are the fugitives, betrayers of the Church, who
amongst their other iniquities, with heinous words, having reviled the Lord,
have denied his NAME, which upon them was invoked; All these therefore are dead
to God; and also thou see none of them to have done Repentance, although they
heard my Commandments, which thou have brought unto them, therefore from this
sort of men life is gone away.

31 Likewise these who delivered them withered and not putrid, were not far
from them, for they were feigned, and brought in evil doctrines and perverted
the servants of God, chiefly those who had sinned, not suffering them to return
to repentance; but detaining them with foolish doctrines, these therefore have
a regress unto hope, and also thou see many to do repentance since thou have
brought forth my commands to them, and as yet they will act Repentance; but
whosoever shall not have acted repentance, they shall loose both repentance,
and their life.

32 But these who have done [Repentance] at first, the wall has begun to be
their seat, even those who have not ascended into the Tower; thou see
therefore quoth he, in the repentance of sinners, life to be inherent; but of
those that do not repentance, death prepared.

33 But of those who offered half withered rods, and [who] had CLEFTS hear
thou; whose rods were only half withered, these are the doubtful, for they were
neither alive nor dead, but these who gave half withered ones, and having
Clefts, are both the DOUBTFUL, and the revilers, backbiting the absent, and
never among themselves having peace; envying among themselves, and to these
indeed is Repentance proposed, for thou see of these some to repent; But
whosoever of them have swiftly done Repentance, these have a seat in the Tower;
but they who have slowly done it, dwell in the Walls: But who have not done
Repentance, but in their own deeds have continued, shall die with Death.

34 But they who delivered indeed green rods, but having clefts, were always
faithful and good; but having among themselves a certain envy and contention of
principality and dignity, notwithstanding all of this sort are unwise and
foolish, who have among themselves emulation concerning Principality, But yet
these seeing they are otherwise good, if having heard these Commands, they
shall amend themselves, and suddenly by (thy) persuasion shall do Repentance,
in the Tower at length they shall begin to dwell, even also as these who have
worthily done Repentance.

25 But if any of them again shall return to dissension, he shall be beaten
back from the Tower, and shall loose his LIFE, for their LIFE who keep the the
Commands of the Lord, CONSISTS IN COMMANDMENTS, NOT IN PRINCIPALITY, OR ANY
DIGNITY, for by patience and humility of soul men attain life; but by sedition
and contempt of the LAW, they acquire death to themselves.

36 But they who in their rods had the half withered, and the half green; these
are those involved in negotiations, and not joined to the Saints, and therefore
also the half of them live, but the [other] half is dead; therefore many of
these having heard the Commandments, have done Repentance, and have begun to
dwell in the Tower, but some of them have wholly fallen away; to these
therefore there is not a place of repentance.

37 For by their negotiation, they have spoken heinous things against the Lord,
and have denied him; Therefore because of this wickedness they have lost LIFE.
But many of these have put on a doubtful mind: As yet also to them is there
returning, who if suddenly they shall do repentance, in the Tower shall have a
seat; but if more slowly they shall do it, they shall dwell in the walls; but
if they shall not do it, they shall purchase Death to themselves.

38 But these who had two parts of their rods green, and the third withered, by
many ways, being depraved, they have denied the Lord; Therefore of these, many
have done repentance, and so have begun to dwell in the Tower. And many have
from God departed for ever; these therefore have wholly lost life.

39 But some, having conceived a dubious mind, have stirred up dissentions, to
them as yet there is regresse, if suddenly they do repentance, nor shall be
delayed by their pleasures; but if in their deeds they shall remain, they shall
acquire death to themselves.

40 But these that gave their rods, of whom two parts were withered, and the
third green, were indeed faithful, but being enriched and filled with goods,
have desired to be more famous in foreign Nations, and have fallen into great
pride, and have begun to exspect high things, and to desert the Truth; neither
have they been adjoined to the just, they have lived with foreign Nations, and
this life, seemed more sweet to them: Notwithstanding, from God they have not
departed, and they have persevered in the faith, but the works of Faith they
have not exercised.

41 Therefore many of them have done repentance, and their seats have begun to
be in the Tower; but others living with foreign Nations, and puffed up with their
vanities, have fallen away for ever from God, serving to the crimes and works of
the Nations; therefore this sort of men are numbered with foreign Nations.

42 Others of these have begun to have a doubtful mind, not hoping, themselves,
because of their deeds, to be able to obtain safety: others become doubtful,
have stired up dissentions: Therefore to these and to them who because of their
deeds have begun to be doubtful, as yet there is returning; but this repentance
ought to be swift, that their seat may be in the Tower: but to those who do not
repentance, but continue in their pleasures, Death is nigh.

43 But these who gave their rods green, except their tops which above were
withered, and had clefts, have been always good and faithful, and honest
toward God, but have a little transgressed for [their] vain pleasures and mean
cogitations, which they have had within themselves; Therefore my words being
heard, very many have done Repentance swiftly, and have begun to dwell in the
Tower; but certain of them have become doubtful, certain have aded to a
doubtful mind, also to stir up dissensions: In these therefore also now is
there hope of returning, because they have been always good, but difficultly
shall they be moved.

44 But they who stretched forth their rods withered, except their tops which
alone were green, these indeed have believed God, but have been conversant in
iniquities, notwithstanding have never departed from God, but always have
willingly born the NAME of the Lord, and willingly in their Hospitalities have
entertained the servants of God; Therefore having heard this, being returned
without delay, they have done Repentance, and have exercised all the
righteousness of virtue; but some of them have died the death, and others
willingly have suffered adverse things, mindful of their deeds.

45 After he had finished the explanations of all the rods, he says to me, Go
and say unto all, that they act Repentance, and they shall LIVE TO GOD, because
the Lord moved with his great clemency, has sent me that I should declare
Repentance to all, also to those who do not deserve because of their deeds to
attain Salvation.

46 But patient is the Lord, and the invitation made by his SON he will keep; I
say to him, I hope Lord it will be, that these things being heard, all will do
Repentance; for I believe every one his deeds being acknowledged, and the fear
of God being accepted, to be about to return to Repentance.

47 He says to me, whosoever with their whole heart shall do Repentance, and
shall purify themselves from ALL the wickedness which is abovesaid, and as
yet shall not add unto their trespasses, every one [of them] shall receive from
the Lord the remedy of their former sins, if they shall nothing doubt of these
Commandments, and they shall LIVE TO GOD.

48 But they who shall add, quoth he, unto their trangressions, and shall be
conversant in the lusts of this World, shall damn themselves unto Death; But
walk thou in these Commands, and thou shall live to God; and whosoever shall
walk in them, and shall rightly exercise them, shall LIVE TO GOD; But after he
had showed me all these, he says to me, the rest after a few days I will show
unto thee.

SIMIL. IX.
1 AFter I had written the Mandat's and Similitudes of that Sheepherd, THE
MESSENGER OF REPENTANCE, he came unto me, and said unto me, I will show to thee
what things soever the SPIRIT has shown thee, which in the figure of the
CHURCH spoke with thee, for the Spirit is the Son of God. And because thou wast
more infirm in body, it was not declared to thee by the Messenger, before that
thou art strengthened by the Spirit, and augmented in forces, that thou may
be able to see the Messenger.

2 For then well indeed, and magnificiently the building of the Tower was shown
to thee by the CHURCH, but thou saw all, as if shown by a Virgin.

But now by a messenger thou art illustrated, indeed by the same Spirit; but
thou must see all these diligently, for therefore into thy house am I sent to
dwell, by that venerable Messenger, that seeing thou see all things potently,
thou may be naught afraid as formerly.

3 And he led me up unto the ascent of a Mountain of ARCADIA, and we sat down
together in the top thereof, and he showed me a great field, and about it
twelve Mountains, of one figure, and of another, of whom the FIRST was black as
soot; the second bare without herbs; the third full of thorns and thistles; the
fourth had herbs half withered, of whom the upper part was green, but that next
to the roots, withered, also some herbs, when the SUN had waxed hot, became
withered.

4 The fifth Mountain was most rough, but it had green herbs; the sixth Mountain
was full of clefts, with some lesser, but with some greater; but in these
clefts there were herbs, not very sprightly indeed, but they seemed as if
flagging; but the seventh Mountain had delectable herbs, and was all fertile,
and every kind of Cattels, and Fowls of Heaven did take food thereof, and how
much they did feed of it, by so much the more joyous did the herbs grow up.

5 The eighth Mountain was filled with Fountains, and out of these Fountains
was watered the whole kind of the Creature of God; The ninth Mountain had no
water at all, and was all destitute, but also it nourished deadly serpents, and
pernicious to men; The tenth Mountain contained high trees, and was all shady,
and under its shade the cattle did ly resting, and chewing the cud.

6 The eleventh Mountain was replenished with most thick set trees, and these
trees were seen laden with diverse fruits, so that whosoever should see, would
desire to eat of the fruits of them; The TWELFTH Mountain was all white, and
had a most delectable aspect, and it self afforded to it self great comeliness.

7 But in the middle of the field he showed me a WHITE and Mighty ROCK, which
had arisen from out the field it self: and that Rock was higher then these
Mountains, and four cornered, so that it could sustain the whole World; but it
seemed to me to be old, but it had a new gate, which seemed lately hewn out,
and that gate had a more bright splendour then the Sun, so that I admired
exceedingly its light.

8 But about that gate stood TWELVE VIRGINS, of whom four who held the corners
of the Port, seemed to me to be more worthy, but also the rest were worthy, but
they stood in the four parts of the gate; moreover that was also for the grace
of these Virgins, that they, two and two were clothed with linen coats, and
decently girded about outwardly in their right arms, as if about to lighten
some burden, so were they prepared; for they were exceedingly cheerful and
prompt.

9 These things when I had seen, I admired with my self, that I should see so
great and eminent things, and again I admired, because of these Virgins, that
they were so comely and delicate, and should stand so constantly and strongly,
as if about to support the whole Heaven.

10 And while I thought these things within me, that sheepherd says to me, why
do thou dispute within thy self, and art perplexed, and do add solicitude
to thy self? What ever things thou can not understand, do not attend them as
if thou be'st wise; but ask the Lord that having received a sense, thou may
understand them.

11 What things soever are behind thee, thou can not see, but what are before
thee, thou see; In these therefore which thou can not see, be not
perplexed, and receive the understanding of these which thou see, leave off
to be curious; But I will demonstrate to thee all whatsoever I ought to show
thee, but now consider the rest.

12 And when he had said these things to me, I looked up, and behold I saw
coming six tall and venerable men, and all al^ke in countenance, and calling a
certain multitude of men, and these that came called by them; they also were
tall and strong. But these six commanded them to build a certain TOWER upon the
Gate; but then began there a great murmuring to be of those that ran too and
fro about the Port, of these men who had come to build the Tower.

13 But these Virgins who stood about the Gate, commanded them to have the
building of the Tower, also they stretched forth their hands, as if about to
receive something from them; then these six commanded that out of a certain
Deep they should take up stones, and should prepare them for the building of
the Tower, and there were lifted up ten stones, white, four cornerd, hewn.

14 But after these six had called these Virgins, they commanded them to carry
all the stones whatsoever were to be put into the Structure of the Tower, and
brought in through the Gate, to deliver them to those who were about to build
that Tower; Immediately these Virgins began among themselves all to lift up
these stones which before were lifted out from the deep.

15 But they who stood about the gate, did also carry so, as what [stones]
seemed to be more strong, should be put at the corners, but the rest of the
stones were put into the sides; and so they brought all the stones, and them
being brought in through the port, they delivered to the builders, as they were
commanded; but they receiving them builded them up, but this building was made
upon that great Rock, and Gate, and by them the whole Tower was sustained.

16 But the structure of these ten stones filled all that gate, which began to
be in the foundation of that Tower; but after these ten stones, other twenty
five were lifted out of the deep, and these were laid into the building of that
same Tower, being lifted up by these Virgins as the former; after these other
thirty five were lifted up, and they likewise were made fit in the same work;
after these forty stones ascended, and all these were added into the structure
of that Tower.

17 Therefore four orders began to be in the foundation of that Tower, for the
stones left off to be extracted from the deep, also they who builded rested a
little while.

18 Again, these six men gave command to the multitude, that from these twelve
Mountains they should bring thither stones unto the building of the same Tower;
but they hewed out from all the Mountains stones of diverse colors, and
carrying them away, gave them to the Virgins, which they receiving, carried
through, and gave unto the building of the Tower, in which when they were
builded, they became white, and speckled, and likewise all the former changed
colors.

19 But some were given by these men, which when they had come into that
building, as they were put, such also they remained, these became nor white,
nor various, because they were not by the virgins translated through the gate;
Therefore these stones were deformed in the building.

20 Whom when these six young men had taken notice of, they commanded to be
taken up, and put in their own place whence they had been taken; and they say
to them, who did bring these stones, Do not ye at all give stones unto us unto
this building, but put ye them beside the Tower, that these Virgins may give
them, being carried through, for unless by these Virgins they shall be
translated through this gate, they cannot change their colors; do not ye
therefore labor in vain.

21 Moreover the structure was effected in that day, but the Tower was not
finished, for it was about to be, that it should be builded; Therefore also now
a certain delay is made, and these six commanded those who builded to go away,
and as it were a certain time to rest; but to these Virgins they laid charge
that they should not depart from the Tower, but therefore they seemed to me to
be left, that they should keep that Tower.

22 But after they were departed, I say to that Sheepherd, Why Lord is not the
building of the Tower finished? for it cannot be finished, quoth he, before
that the Lord thereof come, and prove this structure, that if he should find
any stones not good in it, they may be changed, for at his desire was this
Tower builded.

23 I would know, quoth I, Lord, what the building of this Tower may signify,
and of this Rock, and of this Gate, [I would] know, and of the Mountains, and
of the Virgins, and of the stones which were drawn out of the deep, nor were
hewn about, but as they ascended, so they were put into the structure; and why
first ten stones were placed in the foundation, after that twenty five, after
that thirty five, after that forty; Likewise of these stones which were put
into the structure, and again taken away and carried into their own place
again. Of all these Lord, fulfill the desire of my soul, and demonstrate them
all unto me.

24 And he said to me, if thou shall not be slow thou shall know all, and thou
shall see the rest of the things which are about to be, to this Tower, and all
the similitudes thou shall diligently know. And we came after a few days into
that same place where we had sitten, and he says to me, let us come to the
Tower, for the Lord thereof is about to come, that he may consider it.

25 We came therefore thither, and none other did we find then these Virgins,
and he asked them if the Lord of the Tower had been present; and they answered,
that he would be present immediately, that he may consider that structure.

26 But after a little, I see a great multitude of men coming, and in the
middle of them so tall a man, that with his greatness he surpassed the Tower
it self, and about him these six whom in the building I had seen to command,
and all those who had builded that Tower, and besides very many other men
eminent in dignity.

27 And these Virgins who did keep that Tower, did run, and kissed him, and
began to walk near him; but he so diligently did consider that structure, that
he touched all the stones; Moreover, did smite every one of them with the Rod
which he held in his hand.

28 Of whom some when they had been smitten, became black as soot, but certain
as it were rugged, some having clefts, some broken, some nor black, nor white,
some rough, nor agreeing with the rest of the stones, some having many spots;
these are the varieties of those stones which were not found fit in that
building.

29 The Lord commanded them all to be put out from the Tower, and to be left
beside it, and other stones to be brought, and to be put in their place; and
they that did build asked him out of what Mountain he would have to be brought,
and to be put in the place of these ejected: out of the Mountains indeed he
forbad to be brought, but out of a certain field that was nigh, he commanded to
be brought.

30 For they dug that field, and they found shining stones, four-corner'd,
but some also round, but whatsoever were in that field they were all brought,
and through the gate transported by these Virgins, and these that among them
were four cornered, were formed, and placed into the room of those ejected, but
these which [were] round were not added into the structure, because they were
hard, and it seemed tedious to hew them, but they were placed about the Tower,
as if it were about to be, that they should be hewn and put into the building,
for they were very bright.

31 These things when that man chief in dignity, and Lord of the whole Tower
had seen, he called this Sheepherd, and delivered to him the stones which were
reprobated, and placed about the Tower, and he says to him, Purify thou
diligently these stones, and those, and fit them for the structure of the
Tower, that they may agree with the rest, but those who do not agree thou shall
cast far from the Tower.

32 These things when he had enjoined him, with all these with whom he had come
into the Tower, he went away; but these Virgins stood about the Tower, keeping
it, and I said unto that Sheepherd, by what means can these stones return into
the building of this Tower, seeing they are reprobated? And he said to me, I
will hew the greater part of these stones, and add into the structure, and they
shall agree with the rest.

33 And I said, how Lord can the hewn ones fill up the same place? what
[stones] soever quoth he, shall be found lesser, shall go into the middle
structure, but the greater shall be put without, and shall contemn these.

34 These things when he had said to me, let us go, quoth he, and after three
days let us return; and these cleansed stones I will add into the structure,
for these which are about the Tower ought to be cleansed all of them, least
perhaps suddenly the Master come upon [them] and find these that are about the
Tower unclean, and so despise them, and these stones be not put into the
structure of this Tower, and I seem to have been a negligent Master of the
Family.

35 But after three days when we had come to the same Tower, he says to me,
Let us consider all these stones, and let us see which of them can go into the
building; I say to him, let us consider Lord: first of all we began to consider
those that had been black, for as they were laid aside from the structure, such
were they found, he commanded them to be removed from the Tower, and to be laid
aside.

36 After that he considered those which had been rugged, and many of these he
commanded to be hewn, and by these Virgins to be fitted into the structure of
the Tower; so they fitted them being taken away, in the middle of the
structure, but the rest he commanded to be laid with these black ones, for they
also became black.

37 After that he considered these who had clefts, and of them he commanded
many to be hewn, and by these Virgins to be added into the structure, these
were placed outmost, because they were found entire; but the rest, because of
the multitude of clefts could not be conformed, therefore they were cast from
the building of the Tower.

38 After that he had considered those who had become broken, many of them had
clefts, and became black, but others had great clefts whom he commanded to be
put with these that were rejected; but the rest being purified, and conformed,
he commanded to be added into the structure, whom being taken up, these Virgins
fitted in the middle of the structure, for they were more infirm.

39 After that he considered them who had been found half indeed white, but
half black, and many of them were found black, he commanded also these to be
carried unto these which had been rejected, but the rest were found all white,
and these were taken up by the Virgins, and fitted in the same Tower, but these
were placed more outward which were found entire, so that they might contain
them which were builded in the middle, for nothing was cut off from them.

40 After that he considered these which were hard and rough, few of these were
added, because they could not be hewn, for they were found exceeding hard, but
the rest were formed and fitted by the Virgins in the middle of the structure,
for they were more infirm.

41 After that he considered those that had spots, and of these a few were
found black, and these were added to the rest, but these that were remaining
were found white and entire, and these were by the Virgins fitted, and placed
outmost because of their strength.

42 After that he came that he should consider these stones which were white
and round, and he says to me, what shall we do concerning these stones? And I
said, Lord, I know not; Do thou then think nothing, quoth he, concerning
them? I, said I, know not this Art, nor am a Lapidary, nor can I understand any
thing; and he said, see thou not them to be very round? that if I would bring
them [to be] four-corner'd, there is very much to be cut off them by me, but it
is necessary that some of these go into the structure of the Tower.

43 And I said if it must needs be, why therefore do thou cumber thy self,
and do not choose, if thou have any to choose, and fittest them into this
structure? And he chused whom he saw greatest and most splendid, and conformed
them, whom being taken up, these Virgins placed in the outmost parts of the
building, but the rest which remained were put again into that same field
whence they were taken, but thrown away they were not; because, quoth he, as
yet a little is wanting to this Tower which shall be to be builded, and perhaps
the Lord will fit these stones in that structure, because they are very white.

44 After that were called twelve most beautiful women clothed in black
clothing ungirded, and with bare shoulders, and hairs loosned, but these women
seemed to me to be rustic, and that Sheepherd commanded them to take up these
stones which were ejected from the structure, and them to be carried into the
Mountains whence they had been brought.

45 But after that no stone lay about the Tower, He says to me, Let us go
round this Tower, and let us see if any thing be wanting to it; We began
therefore to go about it, and as soon as he saw it decently builded, he began
to be exceeding cheerful.

46 For it was so decently builded, that he who had seen it, should have
coveted its fructure, because it seemed to be as of one stone, nor did a
commixture any where appear, but of one Rock it seemed exculpted; But I
attentively considering this Tower was exceeding joyful.

47 And he says to me, bring lime and small shells that I may fill up the
forms of these stones which were taken away from the structure and again
placed; For all these which are about the Tower ought to be equalled. And I did
as he commanded me, and I brought [them] to him, and he says to me, be reddily
present to me quoth he, and suddenly this work shall be perfected.

48 He filled up therefore the forms of those stones, and he commanded the
place to be made clean about the Tower; Then these Virgins took beesoms, and
made it all clean, and took away the rubbish, and sprinkled water, which being
fulfilled, the place was made delectable, and the Tower comely.

49 After that he says to me, all are made clean; If the Lord shall come to
consummate this Tower, he shall find nothing which he may complain of us for;
These [words] when he had said he would be gone, but I took hold of his bag,
and began to entreat him by the Lord, that he would unfold all things which he
had shown me.

50 He says to me, I have a little business, but I will unfold all things unto
thee, But expect thou me here, while I come; I say to him, Lord what shall I do
here alone? He answered, thou art not alone, for all the Virgins are with thee;
And I said, deliver me then Lord to them; So he called them, and said to them,
I commend unto you this man until I come.

51 Therefore I remained with these Virgins, but they were cheerful, and
affable to me, but chiefly four who excelled the rest in dignity; After that
these Virgins say unto me, that Sheepherd is not to come here to day, And I
said, what then shall I do? And they say to me, expect him until the evening
if perhaps he will come, and will speak with thee, but if not, thou shall stay
with us till he come.

52 I said to them, I will wait for him until the evening, but if he shall not
come, I will go home, and return in the morning, they answered me, to us thou
art assigned, thou can not depart from us, and I said where shall I stay?
They say unto me, thou shall sleep with us as a Brother, not as a husband, for
thou art our Brother, and hencefore we are prepared to dwell with thee, for
very dear do we hold thee.

53 But I was ashamed to stay with them; But she who seemed to be the chief of
them, embraced me, and began to kiss me, and the rest when they had seen me to
be embraced by her, also they began to kiss me as a Brother, and to lead me
about the Tower, and to play with me; But some of them sung hymns, some led
dances, but I walked with them about that Tower IN SILENCE joyful, and did seem
to my self to be made more young.

54 But after it began to be night, suddenly I would go home, but they
retained me, and suffered me not to go away; I stayed therefore that night with
them besides that same Tower; But they spread their linen coats upon the
ground, and placed me in the middle, nor did they do any thing else, but that
they prayed; But also I with them prayed without intermission, and no less then
they, who when they had seen me so praying, they took great delight.

55 And there I was with them until the next day, and when we had prayed to
the Lord, then came that Sheepherd, and said unto them, have ye done no injury
to him? And they said to him, ask himself; I say to him, Lord great joy has
taken me that I have stayed with them; And he said to me, what have thou supped
[on]? And I said I have supped Lord, all the night [on] the WORDS of the Lord;
have they entertained thee well? says he, And I said, well Lord.

56 Will thou now hear? And I said, I will Lord, and first as I shall ask thee,
I beseech that so thou demonstrate to me, even as thou will says he, so I will
explain the thing unto thee, nor will I conceal any thing from thee.

57 First of all, Lord quoth I, demonstrate this to me, This ROCK and GATE what
are they? Hear says he, It Is Rock and Gate is the SON of God; Wherefore said I,
Lord is the Rock old and the Port new? Hear says he, thou unwise and
understand, indeed the Son of God is more ancient then every creature, so that
in Counsel he was present with his Father, to frame the Creature; But the Gate
is therefore new, because in the consummation in the last days he appeared,
that they who are about to attain salvation, may through him enter into the
Kingdom of God.

58 Saw thou, quoth he, these stones which through the port were translated
placed in the structure of the Tower; But these who were not translated through
the Gate, cast way into their own place? And I said I saw them Lord, so quoth
he, none shall enter into the Kingdom of God, except he who shall get the Name
of the Son of God, for if thou would enter into any City, and that City be
compast with a Wall, and have only one Gate, what? Can thou otherwise enter
that City, then by the Gate which it has?

59 And by what way said I Lord, can it otherwise be done? Therefore quoth he,
as into that City he cannot be entered, but through its gate; So neither into
the Kingdom of God can otherwise [any] be entered, then by the Name of his
Son, who is to him most dear.

60 And he said to me, Saw thou the troup of them that builded that Tower? I
saw them quoth I Lord, and he said, all these are Messengers honorable in
dignity; Therefore with these as with a Wall is the Lord encompassed, but the
port is the son of God which alone is the access unto God, for otherwise shall
no man enter into God, except through his Son.

61 Sawst thou quoth he these six men, and in the midest that great and tall
man, who walked about the Tower, and reprobated the stones from the structure?
I saw them Lord said I, that tall one quoth he is the Son of God; And these six
messengers are eminent in dignity, on the right and left hand standing about
him. Of these excellent messengers says he, none without him shall enter in to
God; And he said, whosoever therefore shall not get his Name, he shall not
enter into the Kingdom of God.

62 And I said, What then is this TOWER? This says he, is the CHURCH and these
VIRGINS who are they Lord? and he said to me, these quoth he are the HOLY
SPIRITS; For no otherwise can a man enter into the Kingdom of God, unless
these shall cloth him with their vesture, for why it shall profit thee nothing
to get the Name of the Son of God, except also thou shall get their garment
from them; for these Virgins are the POWERS of the Son of God, so in vain shall
any one bear his Name, except also he shall bear his Powers.

63 And he said to me, saw thou these stones which were thrown away? for
they indeed have born the name, but have not put on their garment. And I said,
what is their garmenr, Lord? Their very names quoth he, is their Garment;
Whosoever therefore quoth he, does bear the Name of the Son of God, ought also
to carry the names of them, for also the Son bears their names.

64 Whatsoever stones, quoth he, thou saw to have remained in the structure,
delivered by their hands, have been clothed with the power of them; And
therefore thou see the whole Tower agreeing with the Rock, and made as it
were out of one stone.

65 So likewise they who have believed God through his Son, have put on this
spirit, behold there shall be one spirit, and one body and one color of their
garments; But also they shall attain these, who shall carry the names of these
Virgins.

66 And I said, why therefore Lord are the stones thrown away which were
reprobated, seeing also they were translated through the Gate, and delivered by
the hands of these Virgins, into the structure of this Tower? Because quoth he,
thou take care to inquire all things diligently; Here concerning these stones
which were cast away.

67 All these have got the name of the son of God, but also and the power of
these Virgins; Therefore having got these spirits they were perfected, and
brought in the number of the servants of God, and one body of them began to be,
and one vesture: For the same righteousness did they feel, which they did alike
exercise.

68 But after that they had seen these women, whom thou perceivedst first
clothed with a black garment, with naked shoulders, and loosned hair, they
lusted to solicit them, because of their beauty, and they were endued with
their power; but the cloathings of the Virgins they have cast off; These
therefore are thrown out from the house of God, and delivered to these women,
but these that are not corrupted through their beauty have remained in the
house of God. Thou have quoth he, the explication of these stones which were
abjected.

69 And I said, if therefore Lord any of the men which are of this sort shall
do repentance, and shall throw away the desire of these women, and being
converted shall return to the Virgins, and shall put on their power, shall they
not enter into the house of the Lord? They shall enter quoth he, if they shall
cast off all the works of these women, and shall resume the power of these
Virgins, and in their works shall walk; And therefore is there made an
intermission of building, that if these shall do repentance, they may be added
into the structure of the Tower, but if they shall not do repentance, others
shall be builded in their place, and then they shall be thrown away together.

70 For all these things I gave thanks to the Lord, that over all in whom his
Name was invo'kt, being moved with clemency he should send the President
Messenger of Repentance, unto us who have offended him; and that he should
renew our Spirits now surely decaying, nor having hope of Salvation, but now he
recreateth [them] unto the renewing of life.

71 And I said, now Lord demonstrate to me why this Tower is builded not upon
on the Earth, but upon the Rock and Gate; Because, quoth he, thou art unwise,
and without understanding, therefore thou ask; And I said, I have need Lord
to ask thee all things, because I understand nothing at all, for all [thy]
answers are great and excellent, and which men can scarcely understand.

72 Here, says he, the Name of the Son of God is great and mighty, and by it
the WHOLE WORLD IS SUSTAINED; if then, quoth I, every Creature of God is
sustained by his Son, why does he not also sustein those who are invited by
him, and bear his Name, and in his Commandments do walk? See thou not also,
quoth he, that he susteineth those, who from their whole hearts carry his NAME?
Therefore he is their foundation, and willingly does bear them who deny not his
Name, but willingly sustein him.

73 And I said, demonstrate to me, Lord, the names of these Virgins, and of
these women who were clothed with a black vesture; Hear, quoth he, the names
of the Virgins that are more powerful, who obtained the corners of the gate,
are these; The first is called FAITH, the second ABSTINENCE, the third POWER,
the fourth PATIENCE; but the rest which consist below these, are called by
these names, Simplicity, Innocence, Chastity, Cheerfulness, Truth, Wisdom,
Concord, Charity; Therefore whosoever bear these names, and the Name of the Son
of God, they shall be able to enter into Gods Kingdom.

74 Hear now the names of the women who are clothed with black clothing, and
of these, four are more powerful, of whom the first is called TREACHERY, the
second INTEMPERANCE, the third UNBELIEF, the fourth VOLUPTUOUSNESS, but the
followers of these are so called, Sadness, Malice, Lust, Wrath, Lying, Folly,
Puffing up, Hatred. The Servant of God that bears these Spirits, shall indeed
see the Kingdom of God, but shall not enter into it.

75 But these stones, Lord, which from the deep were fitted in the structure,
who are they? The TEN quoth he, which were placed in the foundations, is the
first age; The following TWENTY FIVE, is the second age of just men, but these
THIRTY are the Prophets of the Lord, and Ministers, but the FORTY, are the
Apostles and teachers of the Preaching of the Son of God.

76 And I said, why therefore Lord did these Virgins also hold forth these
stones unto the structure of the Tower, translated through the Port? And he
said, for these first have born these spirits, and they have not at all
departed, one from another, nor the spirits from the men, nor the men from the
spirits, but these spirits have been joined to them, even until the day of
[their] rest, who except they had had these spirits with them, they had not
been profitable to the structure of this Tower.

77 And I said, also now Lord demonstrate to me, what seek thou, says he,
why quoth I, ascended these stones out of the deep, and were placed into the
building of this Tower? Seeing long ago they carried the just spirits. It must
needs be quoth he, that by WATER they have to ascend, that they may rest, for
they could not otherwise enter into the Kingdom of God, then that they should
lay down the mortality of the former life.

78 Therefore they being dead, were sealed with the SEAL of the Son of God, and
have entered into the Kingdom of God; For before that a man get the name of the
Son of God, he is designed for death, but as soon as he has got the Seal, he
is freed from death, and delivered to life; But that seal is WATER, into which
men descend being bound unto death, but they ascend, assigned to life; And to
them therefore is preached that seal, and they have used it, that they might
enter into the Kingdom of God.

79 And I said Therefore why Lord did these forty stones ascend with them from
the deep, having already that seal? And he said because these Apostles and
Teachers, who have preached the name of the Son of God, when having his faith
and power, they had died; They preached to these who had died before [them] and
they gave to them that Seal; Therefore they descended into the water with them,
and again they ascended; But these ascended alive, but they who were deceased
before, descended indeed dead, but ascended alive.

80 Therefore by them they received life, and knew the Son of God, and
therefore they ascended with them, and agreed into the structure of the Tower,
neither hewed, but they were builded entire, because being full of
righteousness, they deceased with great chastity, but only this seal was
wanting to them; Thou have the explanation of these.

81 And I said, now again Lord, also demonstrate to me concerning these
Mountains, why they are diverse, and of one, and of another figure? Hear quoth
he, These TWELVE MOUNTAINS whom thou see, are twelve Nations which obtain
the whole world; Therefore the Son of God was preached in them, by those whom
he sent unto them; But why they are various, and of one, and of another figure,
Hear thou.

82 These twelve generations which obtain the whole world are twelve Nations;
And as thou saw all the Mountains diverse, so also these Nations; The senses
likewise, and the acts of every Mountain I will teach thee.

83 First quoth I, Lord demonstrate this to me, since these Mountains are so
various, by what manner shall they agree into the structure of this Tower, and
be brought to one color, and be no less shining, then these that ascended out
of the deep? Because says he, all the Nations which are under Heaven, have
heard and believed, and are called by the one Name of the Son of God. Therefore
having gotten his Seal, they have all got the same prudence and the same
understanding, and the faith and charity of them is one, and the spirits of
these Virgins, with his Name did they bear.

84 And therefore the structure of this Tower, did seem alike in color, and
did shine even unto the Suns clearness; But after they have so understood,
there began to be one body of them all; Notwithstanding certain of them stained
themselves, and have been cast from the generation of the just, and again have
returned to their former stare, and also have become worse then before.

85 How, quoth I, Lord, worse, who have known the Lord? And he said, he indeed
who knows not the Lord, if he live wickedly, he remains in that punishment of
his wickedness; but he who knows the Lord, ought altogether to abstein from
all wickedness, and more and mor serve unto goodness, seems not he therefore,
who ought to follow goodness, if he esteem parts of wickedness, to sin more,
than he who has failed, being ignorant of the power of God?

86 And therefore these indeed are destinate to death; but these who have known
the Lord, and his wonders, and works have seen; if they live wickedly they
shall be punished more by the double, and they shall dye for ever. As therefore
thou did see, after the stones were cast out from the Tower, which were
reprobated, they were delivered to pernicious and evil Spirits; and so thou
saw the Tower purified, so that it would have been believed to be all of one
stone.

87 So also the Church of God, when it shall be purified, the evil, and the
feigned, the wicked and dubious, being cast out of it, and whosoever have
carried themselves wickedly in it, and the diverse kinds of the wickedness of
sinners, it is body shall be one, intellect one, sense one, one faith, and
charity the same, and then the Son of God shall be joyful among them, and shall
receive with a pure desire, his people.

88 And I said, Lord, magnificently, and honorably all [these] things carry
themselves; now demonstrate to me the effect and force of every sort of
mountain, that every soul trusting in the Lord, these being heard, may honor
his great and admirable, and holy NAME; Hear quoth he, the truth of these
Mountains, that is, of TWELVE NATIONS.

89 In the FIRST black Mountain, they who have believed, are the fugitives, and
those that speak heinous things against the Lord, and the betrayers of the
Servants of God; to them is appointed death, repentance is not; and therefore
they are black, because their kind is wicked.

90 But of the SECOND rough Mountain, are the feigned, who have believed, and
are the Teachers of wickedness, and these are next to the former, not having
among themselves the fruit of equity; for as their Mountain is barren, and
without fruit, so also this sort of men have indeed a name, but from faith are
empty, nor is there in them any fruit of the Truth; yet to these is given
Repentance, if swiftly they follow it, but if they delay, they also shall be
consorts of the death of the former.

91 Why quoth I, Lord, is there indeed an access for them unto Repentance, but
to the former not? for the trespasses of them are almost the same; Therefore
quoth he, is there to these returning through Repentance, to Life, because they
have spoken nothing hanous against their Lord, nor have been betrayers of the
Servants of God, but through a certain covetousness of having, have deceived
men, leading them according to the lusts of those that sin, therefore shall
they give a certain payment of that thing, but yet to them is offered
Repentance, who have spoken nothing heinous against the Lord.

92 But of the THIRD Mountain which had thorns and thistles, are such who have
believed, some rich, but some hindered by many employments, for the thistles are
riches, but the thorns, they who are cumbred with many businesses; These
therefore who are hindered by many businesses, and various affairs, do not
adjoyn themselves to the Servants of God, but wander away, being called back by
these employments by which they are choked.

93 Also and these who are rich, they do with difficulty give themselves unto
the conversation of Gods Servants, fearing least any thing be required of them;
these therefore difficultly shall enter into the Kingdom of God; for as with
unshod feet men walk difficultly in thistles, so also it is difficult for this
sort of men to enter into the Kingdom of God.

94 But also to all these is regresse granted unto Repentance, if swiftly they
shall return unto it; that because in their former days they have ceased from
work, having renewed the time they may be able to do something of good;
therefore repentance being acted, if they shall do the works of goodness, they
shall live, but if in their transgressions they shall remain, they shall be
delivered to these women, who will take away life from them.

95 But of the FOURTH Mountain having very much herbs, whose upper part was
green, but the very roots withered, also some touched by the heat of the Sun
did wither, of this sort are certain doubtful ones, who have believed, and
certain others carrying the Lord in their lips, NOT IN THEIR HEART, and
therefore they are withered, and their herbs having no foundation, for only in
words they live, but their works are dead; These therefore are nor dead, nor
alive, and they are likewise doubtful, for these doubtful ones are neither
green nor withered; that is, nor alive, nor dead.

96 For as their herbs having seen the Sun, withered, so also the doubtful, as
soon as they have heard of persecution, fearing discommodities they have
returned to images, and again have served them, and have been ashamed to bear
the Name of the Lord; Therefore this sort of men are nor alive, nor dead, but
also they may live, if suddenly they shall do Repentance, but if not, already
are they delivered to these women who will take away their LIFE.

97 But of the FIFTH rough Mountain, and having green herbs, are of this sort
who have believed, faithful indeed but difficultly believing, and bold, and
pleasing themselves, willing to be seen to know all things, and knowing nothing
at all; Therefore because of this boldness, sense has departed from them, and
rash arrogance has entered into them, but they have carried themselves high,
and as if wise, and whilst they are fools, they covet to seem Teachers, because
of this folly, while they magnify themselves, many of them are emptied.

98 For a great Devil is audaciousnesse, and vain confidence; Therefore of
these many are abjected, but others, having acknowledged their error, have
done Repentance, and have subjected themselves to those that have a perceiving;
But also to the rest, the like of these, is Repentance held forth, for neither
were they evil, but rather unwise, and fools; Therefore these, if they shall do
Repentance, shall LIVE TO GOD, but if not, they shall dwell with these women,
who shall exercise their wickednesses IN THEM.

99 Of the SIXTH Mountain, having clefts more and less, are of this sort who
have believed, and these in whom the clefts were less, these are they who have
strived among themselves, and because of their complaints languish in the
faith; But many of them have done Repentance, and the rest shall do the same,
having heard my Commandments, for their contentions are small, and easily do
they return to Repentance.

100 But these who have greater, as stones will be stubborn, they are mindful
of grudges and offenses, excercising wrath among themselves; These therefore
are thrown away from the Tower, and reprobated from its Structure; therefore
these sort of men shall hardly LIVE.

101 Our God and Lord, who has Dominion over all things, and has power of his
universal Creature, will not remember offenses, but by those that confess
their sins, is he easily pleased. But man seeing he is languishing, Mortal,
Infirm, and filled with sins, is perseveringly angry with man, as if he could
preserve or destroy him.

102 But I, THE MESSENGER and SET OVER TO REPENTANCE do admonish you, that
whosoever [of you] have such a purpose, lay it by and run again to Repentance;
and the Lord shall heal your former failings, if from this Devil ye shall
purify your selves, but if not, ye shall be delivered to him unto Death.

103 But of the SEVENTH Mountain, in which the herbs were green and sprightly,
and the whole Mountain was fertile, and all kind of cattle took pasture of the
herbs of that Mountain, and how much the more these herbs were plucked, by so
much the more joyous did they reflourish; These are of this sort, who have
believed, simple, and good always.

104 And having no dissentions among themselves, but always being joyful of the
Servants of God, having endued the Spirit of these Virgins, and always prompt
to do loving kindness on all men, and of their labors affording easily to all
men, without upbraiding, and deliberation; the Lord therefore having seen their
simplicity, and all their child-likenesse, has increased them in the labors
of their hands, and has given them in every work favor.

105 But I exhort you the Messenger set over to Repentance, to remain in the
same purpose, whosoever are of this sort, LEAST YOUR SEED BE ROOTED OUT FOR
EVER; for the Lord has tried you, and has written [you] into our number, and
all your SEED with the Son of God he has enriched, for of his Spirit are ye
all.

106 But of the EIGHT Mountain, in which were many Fountains, in whom was
watered every kind of the Creature of God; are such who have believed the
APOSTLES, whom the Lord has sent over the whole World to preach; and some
Teachers who have chastely and sincerely preached, and tought, nor have
subscribed any thing at all evilly to lust, but daily in equity and truth have
walked; These therefore have their conversation among the ANGELS.

107 But of the NINTH deserted Mountain, and having serpents are of this sort,
who have believed, but also had blots; these are the MINISTERS doing their
Ministry badly, SNATCHING AWAY THE GOODS OF WIDOWS AND PUPILS, PROFFERING
OTHERS IN THEIR STEAD, WITH THESE [GOODS] WHICH THEY HAVE GOT; These if they
shall continue in the same coveteousnesse, have delivered themselves to death,
nor was any hope of life in them; but if they shall be converted and shall
chastely finish their Ministry, they may live.

108 But these who were found rugged, are they who have denied the Name of the
Lord, nor to the Lord again have returned, but have become wild and deserted,
not applying themselves to Gods servants, but separate from them, for a little
solicitude have let go THEIR LIFE; for as a vine left in a hedge, to whom there
happens no dressing does perish, and is choked by weeds, and in time becomes
wild (for it cease to be profitable to its Lord.)

109 So also this sort of men dispairing of themselves, becoming imbittered,
have begun to be unprofitable to their Lord; to these therefore is Repentance
committed. If from his heart, he shall not be found to have denied [it] whither
he can attain life, I am ignorant.

110 And therefore I say, that in these days if any has denied [it] he may
return to Repentance, for it cannot be, that any one now denying his Lord, can
afterward attain unto salvation; but to them is the proposed Repentance
reputed, who in times past have denied [it] for he that is about to act
Repentance, ought to hasten before the structure of this Tower is finished; but
if not, by these WOMEN he shall be dragged unto Death.

111 But they who being maimed are deceitful, and threatening one against an
other; These are the serpents mixed in that Mountain; for as the poison of
serpents is destructive to men, so also the words of such infect men and
destroy them; therefore they are maimed from their faith, because of this kind
of their life in which they linger; but some of them having received
Repentance, have attained salvation; but also the rest of this sort of men
shall equally attain [it] if they shall do Repentance, but if not, they shall
die with these Women, whose force and power they possess.

112 But of the TENTH Mountain, in which there were trees covering the Cattle,
are such who have believed, some overseers, that is Presidents of Churches; but
others, these stones, who not with a feigned but with a cheerful mind, always
into their houses have received the servants of God; And after that they who
are overseers of Ministrings, who have both protected the Poor and the Widows,
and have perpetually had a chaste conversation; therefore these men are
protected by the Lord, these things whosoever shall do, are honored with the
Lord; and among the MESSENGERS is their place, if they shall persevere, even
until the Consummation, to obey the Lord.

113 Of the ELEVENTH Mountain, in which were trees laden with diverse fruits,
are these who have believed, and for the Name of the Lord have undergone Death,
and with a ready mind have suffered, and with their whole heart have delivered
up their souls.

114 And I said, why then Lord have all these trees certain fruits, but of them
some more fair? Hear quoth he, whosoever for the Name of the Lord have
suffered, are esteemed honored, with the Lord, and the failings of them all
are blotted our, because for the Name of the Son of God, they have undergone
Death.

115 But why the fruits of them are unlike, and some among them excel, Hear
thou, for whosoever being led to the POWERS, being asked, have not denied the
Lord, but with a ready mind have suffered, are more honored with God,
therefore the fruits that excel are theirs; But they who have been timorous and
doubtful, and have deliberated in their heart, whether they should confess or
deny, and have suffered, their fruits are smaller.

116 Therefore beware ye who have such cogitations, least this mind remain in
you, and YE DIE TO GOD; ye therefore whosoever for this names sake do undergo
death, ought to honor the Lord, that the Lord esteems you worthy, that ye may
bear his Name, and all your sins may be redeemed.

117 Therefore do ye not rather esteem your selves happy? Think ye rather, if
any of you suffers; [him] to accomplish a great work, for to you the Lord
gives life; nor do you understand, for your failings did burden you; and
unless ye should have suffered for the cause of this Name, for your sins ye
had surely been dead to God; These things therefore I say to you, whosoever do
deliberate of confessing or of denying.

118 Confess ye therefore your selves TO HAVE THE LORD GOD, least perhaps
denying, ye be delivered into bonds; for if all the Nations punish their
Servants, whosoever have denied their Lord. What think ye the Lord about to do
to you, who has power of all things? Remove therefore from your hearts these
disputations, that for ever ye may LIVE TO GOD.

119 But of the TWELVTH white Mountain, are such who have believed even as
INFANTS sincere, to whom no malice ascended over their sense, nor have they
known what is malice, but always have remained in sincerity; Therefore this
sort of men without any dubitation, shall inhabit the Kingdom of God; because
in no business have they stained the commands of God, but with sincerity have
remained all the days of their life in the same tenor of sense.

120 Whosoever therefore quoth he, shall remain as Infants, not having malice,
shall be more honorable then all those whom I have already spoken of, FOR ALL
INFANTS ARE HONORED WITH THE LORD, AND ARE ESTEEMED FIRST; happy therefore ye,
whosoever shall remove from you malice, and shall put on innocence; because,
first, ye shall see God.

121 After he had finished the explanation of all the Mountains, I say to him;
Lord, now expound unto me concerning these stones, who being brought out of the
field, into the place of the Reprobate ones, were put unto the Structure of the
Tower: Likewise of these round stones which were added unto the Structure of
the Tower; and of these who as yet remained round.

122 Hear quoth he, of the stones, these which being brought from off the
field, were placed into the Structure of the Tower, in their place which had
been reprobate, are the ROOTS of that white Mountain; when therefore they who
of that Mountain have believed, are become innocent, the Lord of that Tower
has commanded these which were of the Roots of the Mountain, to be put into
the Structure.

123 For he has understood, if they had gone to the building, that they would
remain shining, nor would any whit of them grow black any more; but if he had
so added of the rest of the Mountains, he had not needed again to visit that
Tower and purge it; But these are all white who have believed, and who are
about to believe, for they are of the same kind, happy this kind, because it is
innocent.

124 Hear now also of these round and splendid stones, all these are of this
white Mountain; but why they are found round, the cause is, because their
riches have a little obscured them from the Truth, and have darkened them; But
from God they have never departed, nor has any evil word proceeded out of
their mouth, but all Equity, Virtue, and Truth.

125 The MIND therefore of these when the Lord had seen, and them to be able
to favor the Truth; he commanded them likewise to remain good, and their
riches to be circumcised, for he would not have them to be for altogether taken
away, that they might do something of good, of that which was left to them, and
LIVE TO GOD, because also they are of the good kind; Therefore for that cause
are they hewn a little, and put into the structure of this Tower.

126 But the rest who have as yet continued round, nor are found fit unto that
structure, because they have not yet got the SEAL, are put again in their own
place, for they are found very round; but this World must be hew'n from them,
and the vanities of their riches, and then they shall be fit in the Kingdom of
God.

127 For it must needs be that they enter into the Kingdom of God, for this
harmless kind has the Lord blessed; Therefore out of this kind shall not any
one perish, yea even although any one of them, tempted by the most wicked
Devil, should somewhat fail, he will suddenly run back to the Lord his God.

128 But happy do I the Messenger of Repentance, judge you, whosoever are
innocent as Infants, because your part is good, and honored with God; but I
say unto you all, whosoever have got this SEAL, have ye simplicity, neither be
ye mindful of offenses, nor remain ye in malice, neither let bitternesses
become in the Spirit of any one of you, in the memory of offenses; but to these
evil rents procure ye remedy, and remove them from you, that the Lord of the
sheep may rejoice concerning you.

129 For he shall rejoice if he shall find all things sound, but if he shall
find of such any sheep scattered, woe shall be to the sheepherds; but if the
sheepherds themselves shall be scuttered, what shall they answer to him for the
sheep? What? will they say themselves to have been smitten by the sheep? it
will not be believed to them; for IT IS AN INCREDIBLE THING THAT THE SHEEPHERD
CAN SUFFER BY THE SHEEP, and he is the rather punished for his lie.

130 And I am a Sheepherd, and I must strongly render an account of you;
therefore provide for your selves while as yet the Tower is building; THE LORD
DWELLET IN THE MEN THAT LOVE PEACE, for true peace is dear; but from the
contentious, and destroyed with malice, he is far away. RENDER therefore to him
YOUR SPIRIT ENTIRE AS YE RECEIVED IT.

131 For if thou should give to a FULLER a whole garment, and would
lastly receive it whole, but the Fuller restores it to thee rent, would thou
receive it? Will thou not immediately wax angry, and pursue him with rebukes?
Saying, I gave my Garment to thee entire, why have thou torn it, and made it
useless? Now because of the rent which thou have made in it, it cannot be of
use; Will thou not therefore speak all these words to the Fuller, and [that] of
the rent which he makes in thy garment?

132 If therefore thou grievest for thy garment, and complainest that thou
receivest it not entire, what think thou THE LORD about to do to thee, who
HAS GIVEN THEE AN ENTIRE SPIRIT, and thou have renderd it all unprofitable; so
that it can be of no use to its Lord? for its use has begun to be useless,
when it is corrupted by thee; will not therefore the Lord do the same
concerning his spirit, for this deed? Plainly I say, to all these whomsoever he
shall find to remain in the memory of offenses, he will do the same.

133 His clemency, quoth he, do not ye spurn, but rather honor ye him, that he
is so patient at your trespasses, and is not like you; Do ye repentance, for
that is profitable to you. All these things which are above written, have I,
the Sheepherd, the Messenger of Repentance, shown, and spoken to the servants
of God.

134 If therefore ye shall believe, and shall hear my words, and shall walk in
them, and shall correct your walkings, ye shall be able to live; But if ye
shall remain in malice, and in the memory of offenses, none of this sort of
sinners shall LIVE TO GGD, all these things to be spoken by me, are spoken to
you.

135 That Sheepherd says to me, have thou asked all things of me? And I said,
yea Lord; why therefore have thou not asked me of the form of the stones placed
in the structure, that to thee I should explain their forms? And I said I
forgot Lord; Hear now therefore quoth he, also of these.

136 These are they who have now heard these commands, and from their whole
hearts have done repentance; and when the Lord had seen their repentance good
and pure, and them to be able to remain in it, he commanded their former sins
to be blotted out; For these forms were their sins, and they are made even,
least they should appear.

SIMIL. X.
1 AFter I had written out this book, that Messenger who had delivered me to
that Sheepherd, came into the house, in which I was, and sat down upon the bed,
and that Sheepherd stood at his right hand. After that he called me, and said
these things to me, I have delivered thee quoth he, and thy house to this
Sheepherd, that by him thou may be protected.

2 Yea quoth I, Lord: if thou will therefore be protected, quoth he, from all
vexation, and from all cruelty, or have success in EVERY good work, and word,
and all the virtue of Righteousness: walk thou in these commandments which I
have given to thee, and thou shall be able to rule over ALL wickedness: For to
thee keeping these Commands, shall ALL the lust and sweetness of this world be
subjected, also success shall follow thee in every good employment.

3 The maturity of him, and the modesty receive thou in thee, and say to all,
him to be in great honor and dignity with God, and him to be the president of
great power, and potent in his office. To him alone, through the whole world
the power of Repentance is given; seems he not to thee to be potent? But YE
despise the perfection and modesty of him, which he has over YOU.

4 I say to him, ask him Lord, from the [time] wherein he is in my house,
whether I have done any thing-out of order, or in any thing have offended him;
And I, quoth he, know thee to have done nothing out of order, neither to be
about to do, and therefore these speak I with thee, that thou may persevere,
for he has esteemed well of thee with me, but thou shall tell these words to
the rest, that also they who have done, or are about to do Repentance, may
perceive the same things which thou [feelest] and he with me may interpret
concerning them, and I with the Lord.

5 And I, quoth I, Lord, to every man do declare the great things of God, but I
hope, those all who love them, and before have sinned, having heard these, to
be about to do Repentance, recovering LIFE; Remain therefore, quoth he in this
Ministry, and consummate the same, but whosoever obey this [mans] commands,
shall have life, also here, and with the Lord, great honor.

6 But whosoever keep not his commands, fly from their own LIFE, and oppose it,
and they who follow not his commandments, deliver themselves to DEATH, and
every one of them shall be GUILTY OF HIS OWN BLOOD; but to thee I say, that
thou keep these commands, and thou shall have remedy of all thy sins, but I
have sent thee these VIRGINS, that they may dwell with thee, for I have seen
them to be very affable to thee; Therefore thou shall have them helpers, that
by so much the rather thou may keep his commands.

7 For it cannot be done, that these commands be kept without these Virgins,
but thou see them to be willingly with thee; but also I will enjoin them,
that at all from thy house they depart not, only do thou make clean thy house,
for in a clean house they will willingly dwell, for they are clean, and chaste,
and industrious, and all having favor with the Lord.

8 If therefore thou shall have thine house pure, they will remain with thee,
but if any little of pollution shall happen, forthwith they will depart from
thy HOUSE, for these Virgins love no pollution at all; I say to him, I hope,
Lord, me to be about to please them, so that in my house they may willingly
inhabit always; And as he to whom thou have delivered me, complains nothing of
me, so neither shall they complain.

9 He says to that Sheepherd, I see the Servant of God would be willing to
see, and to keep these commands, and to be about to place these Virgins in a
clean habitation; These when he had said, again to that Sheepherd he delivered
me, and called the Virgins, and said to them, Because I perceive you to dwell
willingly in this man's house, I commend him to you, and his house, that from
his house ye depart not at all; and they willingly heard these words.

10 After that he says to me, Converse thou manfully in this Ministry, to
every man declare thou the great things of God, and thou shall have acceptance
in this Ministry; therefore whosoever shall walk in these commands, he shall
live, and shall be happy in his life, but whosoever shall neglect them, shall
not live, and shall be unhappy in his life. Say to all, that they cease not,
whosoever can do rightly, to exercise good works, it is profitable for them.

11 But I say that every man must be delivered out of discommodities, for he
that needs, and in his daily life suffers discommodities, is in great torment
and necessity; who so therefore delivers such a soul out of necessity,
acquireth great joy to himself, for he who is vexed with this discommodity, is
vexed with like torment and tortures himself as he who is in fetters.

12 For many because of this sort of calamities, when they cannot stustein
them, they bring death to themselves; Therefore he who knows the calamity of
such a man, and plucks him not out, he admits great sin, and becomes GUILTY OF
HIS BLOOD; Therefore do ye good works, whosoever have gotten from the Lord,
least while ye delay to do, the structure of the TOWER be consummate.

13 For because of you is the work of its building left off for a time, unless
therefore ye shall hasten to do rightly, the Tower shall be finished, and ye
shall be excluded. But after he had spoken with me, he arose from the bed, and
having taken the SHEEPHERD, and the VIRGINS, he went away, but he said to me,
that he would send back that Sheepherd and these Virgins into mine HOUSE.

THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 10. l. 19 r. words, p. 11. l. 8. r. Repentances, p. 26. l. 8. r. there,
p. 44. l. 8. r. Devil, p. 45. l. 21. r. become, p. 51. l. 6. r. remission p.
54. l. 4. r. equal mindedness, p. 57. l. 17. r. noxious, p. 59. l. 13. r.
Genius, p. 78. l. 29. r. have p. 88. l. 3. r. perceive, p. 103. l. 6. r.
consorts, p. 123. l. 15. r. their rods, p. 131. l. 23. r. there hope, p. 157.
l. 7. r. hear.


